Papers Relating to the Foreign Relations of the United States, Transmitted to Congress, With the Annual Message of the President, December 1, 1879 (U.S. Department of State, Office of the Historian, 1879)
Public domain. Sourced from the U.S. Department of State, Office of the Historian: Foreign Relations of the United States (https://history.state.gov/historicaldocuments/frus1879).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

================================================================================

(Papers Relating to the Foreign Relations of the United States, 1879)

Title pagePapers Relating to the Foreign Relations of the United States, 1879,

United States Government Printing Office
Washington

U.S. Department of State
Office of the Historian
Bureau of Public Affairs

This ebook was generated on May 28, 2018.
Please visit the Office of the Historian ebooks web page to access updates.

About the Electronic Edition About the Electronic Edition

The Office of the Historian at the U.S. Department of State has embarked on a program to release an ebook edition of the Foreign Relations of the United States (FRUS) series, which was established in 1861. Far lighter and more portable than printed editions of FRUS, the ebook edition offers the full content of each volume and makes use of the full-text search and other reading features of most ebook devices and applications, including bookmarking and note-taking. Unlike the web-based edition of FRUS, the ebook edition, once downloaded, can be accessed even without internet connectivity.

In creating the FRUS ebook edition, we endeavored to maintain fidelity with the original printed edition. One challenge in this respect is representing original page numbers from printed editions in ebooks. For readers who need to cite material in this ebook, we recommend citing document numbers instead of page numbers, since document numbers are persistent, media-neutral identifiers. In older FRUS volumes (before the subseries covering the Johnson administration), where cross references use page numbers rather than document numbers, we append to each page number a bracketed list of the document numbers that correspond to it.

The Office of the Historian has worked to ensure that this ebook is error-free and works on a broad range of devices. Please email history_ebooks@state.gov with any feedback.

To learn about updates to this ebook, other ebooks, and the ebook initiative in general, visit our ebooks homepage, and follow us on Twitter at @HistoryAtState and Tumblr at HistoryAtState.

Office of the Historian
Bureau of Public Affairs
U.S. Department of State
May 2018

(Papers Relating to the Foreign Relations of the United States, 1879)Contents

Message.

Foreign relations.

List of papers, with their subjects.

Circulars. (Documents 1-11)

Correspondence. Argentine Republic. (Documents 12-27)Austria-Hungary. (Documents 28-55)

Belgium. (Documents 56-73)

Bolivia. (Documents 74-79)

Brazil. (Documents 80-92)

Central America. (Documents 93-95)

Chili. (Documents 96-112)

China. (Documents 113-139)

Colombia. (Documents 140-162)

Denmark. (Documents 163-170)

France. (Documents 171-183)

Germany. (Documents 184-208)

Great Britain. (Documents 209-258)

Hawaiian Islands. (Documents 259-259)Addenda. (Documents 260-266)

Hayti. (Documents 267-293)

Italy. (Documents 294-300)

Japan. (Documents 301-338)Imperial government telegraphs. (Documents 339-346)

Liberia. (Documents 347-357)

Mexico. (Documents 358-398)

Morocco. (Documents 399-403)

Netherlands. (Documents 404-410)

Peru. (Documents 411-437)

Portugal. (Documents 438-445)

Russia. (Documents 446-465)

Siam. (Documents 466-470)

Spain. (Documents 471-471)Circular. (Documents 472-484)

Sweden and Norway. (Documents 485-489)

Switzerland. (Documents 490-495)

Turkish Empire.Turkey. (Documents 496-521)

Tunis. (Documents 522-524)

Uruguay. (Documents 525-525)

Venezuela. (Documents 526-535)

Alphabetical Index.

Message. Message.

Fellow-Citizens of the Senate and House of Representatives:

The members of the Forty-sixth Congress have assembled in their first regular session under circumstances calling for mutual congratulation and grateful acknowledgment to the Giver of all good for the large and unusual measure of national prosperity which we now enjoy.

The most interesting events which have occurred in our public affairs since my last annual message to Congress are connected with the financial operations of the government directly affecting the business interests of the country. I congratulate Congress on the successful execution of the resumption act. At the time fixed, and in the manner contemplated by law, United States notes began to be redeemed in coin. Since the 1st of January last they have been promptly redeemed on presentation, and in all business transactions, public and private, in all parts of the country, they are received and paid out as the equivalent of coin. The demand upon the Treasury for gold and silver in exchange for United States notes has been comparatively small, and the voluntary deposit of coin and bullion in exchange for notes has been very large. The excess of the precious metals deposited or exchanged for United States notes over the amount of United States notes redeemed is about $40,000,000.

The resumption of specie payments has been followed by a very great revival of business. With a currency equivalent in value to the money of the commercial world, we are enabled to enter upon an equal competition with other nations in trade and production. The increasing foreign demand for our manufactures and agricultural products has caused a large balance of trade in our favor, which has been paid in gold, from the 1st of July last to November 15, to the amount of about $59,000,000. Since the resumption of specie payments there has also been a marked and gratifying improvement of the public credit. The bonds of the government bearing only 4 per cent. interest have been sold at or above par, sufficient in amount to pay off all of the national debt which was redeemable under present laws. The amount of interest saved annually by the process of refunding the debt, since March 1, 1877, is $14,297,177. The bonds sold were largely in small sums, and the number of our citizens now holding the public securities is much greater than ever before. The amount of the national debt which matures within less than two years is $792,121,700, of which $500,000,000 bear interest at the rate of 5 per cent., and the balance is in bonds bearing 6 per cent. interest. It is believed that this part of the public debt can be refunded by the issue of 4 per cent. bonds, and, by the reduction of interest which will thus be effected, about eleven millions of dollars can be annually saved to the Treasury. To secure this important reduction of interest to be paid by the United States, further legislation is required, which, it is hoped, will be provided by Congress during its present session.

The coinage of gold by the mints of the United States during the last fiscal year was $40,986,912. The coinage of silver dollars, since the passage of the act for that purpose, up to November 1,1879, was $45,000,850, of which $12,700,344 have been issued from the Treasury and are now in circulation, and $32,300,506 are still in the possession of the government.

The pendency of the proposition for unity of action between the United States and the principal commercial nations of Europe, to effect a permanent system for the equality of gold and silver in the recognized money of the world, leads me to recommend that Congress refrain from new legislation on the general subject. The great revival of trade, intern and foreign will supply during the coming year its own instructions, which may well be awaited before attempting further experimental measures with the coinage. I would, however, strongly urge upon Congress the importance of authorizing the Secretary of the Treasury to suspend the coinage of silver dollars upon the present legal ratio. The market value of the silver dollar being uniformly and largely less than the market value of the gold dollar, it is obviously impracticable to maintain them at par with each other if both are coined without limit. If the cheaper coin is forced into circulation it will, if coined without limit, soon become the sole standard of value, and thus defeat the desired object, which is a currency of both gold and silver, which shall be of equivalent value, dollar for dollar, with the universally recognized money of the world.

The retirement from circulation of United States notes, with the capacity of legal-tender in private contracts, is a step to be taken in our progress towards a safe and stable currency, which should be accepted as the policy and duty of the government, and the interest and security of the people. It is my firm conviction that the issue of legal-tender paper money based wholly upon the authority and credit of the government, except in extreme emergency, is without warrant in the Constitution, and a violation of sound financial principles. The issue of United States notes during the late civil war with the capacity of legal-tender between private individuals was not authorized except as a means of rescuing the country from imminent peril. The circulation of these notes as paper money, for any protracted period of time after the accomplishment of this purpose, was not contemplated by the framers of the law under which they were issued. They anticipated the redemption and withdrawal of these notes at the earliest practicable period consistent with the attainment of the object for which they were provided.

The policy of the United States, steadily adhered to from the adoption of the Consitution, has been to avoid the creation of a national debt, and when, from necessity in time of war, debts have been created, they have been paid off on the return of peace as rapidly as possible. With this view, and for this purpose, it is recommended that the existing laws for the accumulation of a sinking-fund sufficient to extinguish the public debt within a limited period be maintained. If any change of the objects or rates of taxation is deemed necessary by Congress, it is suggested that experience has shown that a duty can be placed on tea and coffee, which will not enhance the price of those articles to the consumer, and which will add several millions of dollars annually to the Treasury.

The continued deliberate violation by a large number of the prominent and influential citizens of the Territory of Utah of the laws of the United States for the prosecution and punishment of polygamy demands the attention of every department of the government. This Territory has a population sufficient to entitle it to admission as a State, and the general interests of the nation, as well as the welfare of the citizens of the Territory, require its advance from the Territorial form of government to the responsibilities and privileges of a State. This important change will not, however, be approved by the country while the citizens of Utah in very considerable number uphold a practice which is condemned as a crime by the laws of all civilized communities throughout the world.

The law for the suppression of this offense was enacted with great unanimity by Congress more than seventeen years ago, but has remained until recently a dead letter in the Territory of Utah, because of the peculiar difficulties attending its enforcement. The opinion widely prevailed among the citizens of Utah that the law was in contravention of the Constitutional guarantee of religious freedom. This objection is now removed. The Supreme Court of the United States has decided the law to be within the legislative power of Congress, and binding as a rule of action for all who reside within the Territories. There is no longer any reason for delay or hesitation in its enforcement. It should be firmly and effectively executed. If not sufficiently stringent in its provisions it should be amended; and, in aid of the purpose in view, I recommend that more comprehensive and more searching methods for preventing as well as punishing this crime be provided. If necessary to secure obedience to the law, the enjoyment and exercise of the rights and privileges of citizenship in the Territories of the United States may be withheld or withdrawn from those who violate or oppose the enforcement of the law on this subject.

The elections of the past year, though occupied only with State officers, have not failed to elicit in the political discussions which attended them all over the country new and decisive evidence of the deep interest which the great body of citizens take in the progress of the country towards a more general and complete establishment, at whatever cost, of universal security and freedom in the exercise of the elective franchise. While many topics of political concern demand great attention from our people, both in the sphere of national and State authority, I find no reason to qualify the opinion I expressed in my last annual message, that no temporary or administrative interests of government, however urgent or weighty, will ever displace the zeal of our people in defense of the primary rights of citizenship, and that the power of public opinion will override all political prejudices, and all sectional and State attachments, in demanding that all over our wide territory the name and character of citizen of the United States shall mean one and the same thing, and carry with them unchallenged security and respect. I earnestly appeal to the intelligence and patriotism of all good citizens of every part of the country, however much they may be divided in opinions on other political subjects, to unite in compelling obedience to existing laws aimed at the protection of the right of suffrage. I respectfully urge upon Congress to supply any defects in these laws which experience has shown and which it is within its power to remedy. I again invoke the co-operation of the executive and legislative authorities of the States in this great purpose. I am fully convinced, that if the public mind can be set at rest on this paramount question of popular rights no serious obstacle will thwart or delay the complete pacification of the country or retard the general diffusion of prosperity.

In a former message I invited the attention of Congress to the subject of the reformation of the civil service of the government, and expressed the intention of transmitting to Congress as early as practicable a report upon this subject by the chairman of the civil-service commission.

In view of the facts that, during a considerable period, the Government of Great Britain has been dealing with administrative problems and abuses in various particulars analogous to those presented in this country, and that in recent years the measures adopted were understood to have been effective and in every respect highly satisfactory, I thought it desirable to have fuller information upon the subject, and accordingly requested the chairman of the civil-service commission to make a thorough investigation for this purpose. The result has been an elaborate and comprehensive report.

The report sets forth the history of the partisan-spoils system in Great Britain, and of the rise and fall of the parliamentary patronage, and of official interference with the freedom of elections. It shows that after long trials of various kinds of examinations those which are competitive and open on equal terms to all, and which are carried on under the superintendence of a single commission, have, with great advantage, been established as conditions of admission to almost every official place in the subordinate administration of that country and of British India. The completion of the report, owing to the extent of the labor involved in its preparation and the omission of Congress to make any provision either for the compensation or the expenses of the commission, has been postponed until the present time. It is herewith transmitted to Congress.

While the reform measures of another government are of no authority for us, they are entitled to influence to the extent to which their intrinsic wisdom and their adaptation to our institutions and social life may commend them to our consideration. The views I have heretofore expressed concerning the defects and abuses in our civil administration remain unchanged, except in so far as an enlarged experience has deepened my sense of the duty both of officers and of the people themselves to co-operate for their removal. The grave evils and perils of a partisan-spoils system of appointment to office and of office tenure are now generally recognized. In the resolutions of the great parties, in the reports of departments, in the debates and proceedings of Congress, in the messages of executives, the gravity of these evils has been pointed out and the need of their reform has been admitted.

To command the necessary support, every measure of reform must be based on common right and justice, and must be compatible with the healthy existence of great parties, which are inevitable and essential in a free State.

When the people have approved a policy at a national election, confidence on the part of the officers they have selected and of the advisers who, in accordance with our political institutions, should be consulted in the policy which it is their duty to carry into effect, is indispensable. It is eminently proper that they should explain it before the people, as well as illustrate its spirit in the performance of their official duties.

Very different considerations apply to the greater number of those who fill the subordinate places in the civil service. Their responsibility is to their superiors in official position. It is their duty to obey the legal instructions of those upon whom that authority is devolved, and their best public service consists in the discharge of their functions, irrespective of partisan politics. Their duties are the same, whatever party is in power and whatever policy prevails. As a consequence, it follows that their tenure of office should not depend on the prevalence of any policy or the supremacy of any party, but should be determined by their capacity to serve the people most usefully quite irrespective of partisan interests. The same considerations that should govern the tenure should also prevail in the appointment, discipline, and removal of these subordinates. The authority of appointment and removal is not a perquisite, which may be used to aid a friend or reward a partisan, but is a trust, to be exercised in the public interest under all the sanctions which attend the obligation to apply the public funds, only for public purposes.

Every citizen has an equal right to the honor and profit of entering the public service of his country. The only just ground of discrimination is the measure of character and capacity he has to make that service most useful to the people. Except in cases where, upon just and recognized principles—as upon the theory of pensions—offices and promotions are bestowed as rewards for past services, their bestowal upon any theory which disregards personal merit, is an act of injustice to the citizen, as well as a breach of that trust subject to which the appointing power is held.

In the light of these principles, it becomes of great importance to provide just and adequate means, especially for every department and large administrative office, where personal discrimination on the part of its head is not practicable, for ascertaining those qualifications to which appointments and removals should have reference. To fail to provide such means is not only to deny the opportunity of ascertaining the facts upon which the most righteous claim to office depends, but, of necessity, to discourage all worthy aspirants by handing over appointments and removals to mere influence and favoritism. If it is the right of the worthiest claimant to gain the appointment, and the interest of the people to bestow it upon him, it would seem clear that a wise and just method of ascertaining personal fitness for office must be an important to permanent function of every just and wise government. It has long since become impossible, in the great offices, for those having the duty of nomination and appointment, to personally examine into the individual qualifications of more than a small proportion of those seeking office; and, with the enlargement of the civil service, that proportion must continue to become less.

In the earlier years of the government, the subordinate offices were so few in number that it was quite easy for those making appointments and promotions to personally ascertain the merits of candidates. Party managers and methods had not then become powerful agencies of coercion, hostile to the free and just exercise of the appointing power.

A large and responsible part of the duty of restoring the civil service to the desired purity and efficiency rests upon the President, and it is my purpose to do what is within my power to advance such prudent and gradual measures of reform as will most surely and rapidly bring about that radical change of system essential to make our administrative methods satisfactory to a free and intelligent people. By a proper exercise of authority, it is in the power of the Executive to do much to promote such a reform. But it cannot be too clearly understood that nothing adequate can be accomplished without co-operation on the part of Congress and considerate and intelligent support among the people. Reforms which challenge the generally accepted theories of parties, and demand changes in the methods of departments, are not the work of a day. Their permanent foundations must be laid in sound principles, and in an experience which demonstrates their wisdom and exposes the errors of their adversaries. Every worthy officer desires to make his official action a gain and an honor to his country, but the people themselves, far more than their officers in public station, are interested in a pure, economical, and vigorous administration.

By laws enacted in 1853 and 1855, and now in substance incorporated in the Revised Statutes, the practice of arbitrary appointments to the several subordinate grades in the great departments was condemned, and examinations as to capacity, to be conducted by departmental boards of examiners, were provided for and made conditions of admission to the public service. These statutes are a decision by Congress that examinations of some sort as to attainments and capacity are essential to the well-being of the public service. The important questions since the enactment of these laws have been as to the character of these examinations, and whether official favor and partisan influence, or common right and merit, were to control the access to the examinations. In practice, these examinations have not always been open to worthy persons generally, who might wish to be examined. Official favoritism and partisan influence, as a rule; appear to have designated those who alone were permitted to go before the examining boards, subjecting even the examiners to a pressure from the friends of the candidates very difficult to resist. As a consequence, the standard of admission fell below that which the public interest demanded. It was also almost inevitable that a system which provided for various separate boards of examiners, with no common supervision or uniform method of procedure, should result in confusion, inconsistency, and inadequate tests of capacity, highly detrimental to the public interests. A further and more radical change was obviously required.

In the annual message of December, 1870, my predecessor declared that “there is no duty which so much embarrasses the Executive and heads of departments as that of appointments; nor is there any such arduous and thankless labor imposed on Senators and Representatives as that of finding places for constituents. The present system does not secure the best men, and often not even fit men for the public places. The elevation and purification of the civil service of the government will be hailed with approval by the whole people of the United States.” Congress, accordingly, passed the act approved March 3, 1871, “to regulate the civil service of the United States and promote the efficiency thereof,” giving the necessary authority to the Executive to inaugurate a civil-service reform.

Acting under this statute, which was interpreted as intended to secure a system of just and effectual examinations under uniform supervision, a number of eminently competent persons were selected for the purpose, who entered with zeal upon the discharge of their duties, prepared, with an intelligent appreciation of the requirements of the service, the regulations contemplated, and took charge of the examinations, and who, in their capacity as a board, have been known as the “Civil-Service Commission.” Congress for two years appropriated the money needed for the compensation and for the expense of carrying on the work of the commission.”

It appears from the report of the commission, submitted to the President in April, 1874, that examinations had been held in various sections of the country, and that an appropriation of about $25,000 would be required to meet the annual expenses, including salaries, involved in discharging the duties of the commission. The report was transmitted to Congress by special message of April 18, 1874, with the following favorable comment upon the labors of the commission: “If sustained by Congress, I have no doubt the rules can, after the experience gained, be so improved and enforced as to still more materially benefit the public service and relieve the Executive, members of Congress, and the heads of departments from influences prejudicial to good administration. The rules, as they have hitherto been enforced, have resulted beneficially, as is shown by the opinions of the members of the Cabinet and their subordinates in the departments, and in that opinion I concur.” And in the annual message of December of the same year similar views are expressed, and an appropriation for continuing the work of the commission again advised.

The appropriation was not made, and, as a consequence, the active work of the commission was suspended, leaving the commission itself still in existence. Without the means, therefore, of causing qualifications to be tested in any systematic manner, or of securing for the public service the advantages of competition upon any extensive plan, I recommended in my annual message of December, 1877, the making of an appropriation for the resumption of the work of the commission.

In the mean time, however, competitive examinations under many embarrassments have been conducted within limited spheres in the Executive Departments in Washington and in a number of the custom-houses and post-offices of the principal cities of the country, with a view to further test their effects, and in every instance they have been found to be as salutary as they are stated to have been under the administration of my predecessor. I think the economy, purity, and efficiency of the public service would be greatly promoted by their systematic introduction, wherever practicable, throughout the entire civil service of the government, together with ample provision for their general supervision, in order to secure consistency and uniform justice.

Reports from the Secretary of the Interior, from the Postmaster-General, from the postmaster in the city of New York, where such examinations have been some time on trial, and also from the collector of the port, the naval officer, and the surveyor in that city, and from the postmasters and collectors in several of the other large cities, show that the competitive system, where applied, has in various ways contributed to improve the public service.

The reports show that the results have been salutary in a marked degree, and that the general application of similar rules cannot fail to be of decided benefit to the service.

The reports of the government officers, in the city of New York especially, bear decided testimony to the utility of open competitive examinations in their respective offices, showing that “these examinations, and the excellent qualifications of those admitted to the service through them, have had a marked incidental effect upon the persons previously in the service, and particularly upon those aspiring to promotion. There has been, on the part of these latter, an increased interest in the work, and a desire to extend acquaintance with it beyond the particular desk occupied, and thus the morale of the entire force has been raised. * * * The examinations have been attended by many citizens, who have had an opportunity to thoroughly investigate the scope and character of the tests and the method of determining the results, and those visitors have, without exception, approved the methods employed, and several of them have publicly attested their favorable opinion.”

Upon such considerations, I deem it my duty to renew the recommendation contained in my annual message of December, 1877, requesting Congress to make the necessary appropriation for the resumption of the work of the Civil-Service Commission. Economy will be promoted by authorizing a moderate compensation to persons in the public service who may perform extra labor upon or under the commission, as the Executive may direct.

I am convinced that if a just and adequate test of merit is enforced for admission to the public service and in making promotions, such abuses as removals without good cause and partisan and official interference with the proper exercise of the appointing power will in large measure disappear.

There are other administrative abuses to which the attention of Congress should be asked in this connection. Mere partisan appointments and the constant peril of removal without cause very naturally lead to an absorbing and mischievous political activity on the part of those thus appointed, which not only interferes with the due discharge of official duty, but is incompatible with the freedom of elections. Not without warrant, in the views of several of my predecessors in the Presidential office, and directly within the law of 1871, already cited, I endeavored, by regulation, made on the 22d day of June, 1877, to put some reasonable limits to such abuses. It may not be easy, and it may never perhaps be necessary, to define with precision the proper limit of political action on the part of Federal officers. But while their right to hold and freely express their opinions cannot be questioned, it is very plain that they should neither be allowed to devote to other subjects the time needed for the proper discharge of their official duties, nor to use the authority of their office to enforce their own opinions or to coerce the political action of those who hold different opinions.

Reasons of justice and public policy, quite analogous to those which forbid the use of official power for the oppression of the private citizen, impose upon the government the duty of protecting its officers and agents from arbitrary exactions. In whatever aspect considered, the practice of making levies, for party purposes, upon the salaries of officers is highly demoralizing to the public service and discreditable to the country. Though an officer should be as free as any other citizen to give his own money in aid of his opinions or his party, he should also be as free as any other citizen to refuse to make such gifts. If salaries are but a fair compensation for the time and labor of the officer, it is gross injustice to levy a tax upon them. If they are made excessive, in order that they may bear the tax, the excess is an indirect robbery of the public funds.

I recommend, therefore, such a revision and extension of present statutes as shall secure to those in every grade of official life or public employment the protection with which a great and enlightened nation should guard those who are faithful in its service.

Our relations with foreign countries have continued peaceful.

With Great Britain there are still unsettled questions, growing out of the local laws of the maritime provinces and the action of provincial authorities deemed to be in derogation of rights secured by treaty to American fishermen. The United States minister in London has been instructed to present a demand for $105,305.02 in view of the damages received by American citizens at Fortune Bay, on the 6th day of January, 1878. The subject has been taken into consideration by the British Government, and an early reply is anticipated.

Upon the completion of the necessary preliminary examinations, the subject of our participation in the provincial fisheries, as regulated by treaty, will at once be brought to the attention of the British Government, with a view to an early and permanent settlement of the whole question, which was only temporarily adjusted by the treaty of Washington.

Efforts have been made to obtain the removal of restrictions found injurious to the exportation of cattle to the United Kingdom.

Some correspondence has also occurred with regard to the rescue and saving of life and property upon the lakes, which has resulted in important modifications of the previous regulations of the Dominion Government on the subject in the interest of humanity and commerce.

In accordance with the joint resolution of the last session of Congress, commissioners were appointed to represent the United States at the two International Exhibitions in Australia, one of which is now in progress at Sydney, and the other to be held next year at Melbourne. A desire has been expressed by our merchants and manufacturers interested in the important and growing trade with Australia, that an increased provision should be made by Congress for the representation of our industries at the Melbourne Exhibition of next year, and the subject is respectfully submitted to your favorable consideration.

The assent of the government has been given to the landing, on the coast of Massachusetts, of a new and independent transatlantic cable between France, by way of the French island of St. Pierre and this country, subject to any future legislation of Congress on the subject. The conditions imposed, before allowing this connection with our shores to be established, are such as to secure its competition with any existing or future lines of marine cable, and preclude amalgamation therewith, to provide for entire equality of rights to our government and people with those of France in the use of the cable, and prevent any exclusive possession of the privilege as accorded by France to the disadvantage of any future cable communication between France and the United States which may be projected and accomplished by our citizens. An important reduction of the present rates of cable communication with Europe, felt to be too burdensome to the interests of our commerce must necessarily flow from the establishment of this competing line.

The attention of Congress was drawn to the propriety of some general regulation by Congress of the whole subject of transmarine cables by my predecessor in his message of December 7, 1875, and I respectfully submit to your consideration the importance of Congressional action in this matter.

The questions of grave importance with Spain, growing out of the incidents of the Cuban insurrection, have been, for the most part, happily and honorably settled. It may reasonably be anticipated that the commission now sitting in Washington for the decision of private cases in this connection will soon be able to bring its labors to a conclusion.

The long-standing question of East Florida claims has lately been renewed as a subject of correspondence, and may possibly require Congressional action for its final disposition.

A treaty with the Netherlands, with respect to consular rights and privileges, similar to those with other powers, has been signed and ratified, and the ratifications were exchanged on the 31st of July last. Negotiations for extradition treaties with the Netherlands and with; Denmark are now in progress.

Some questions with Switzerland, in regard to pauper and convict emigrants, have arisen, but it is not doubted that they will be arranged upon a just and satisfactory basis. A question has also occurred with respect to an asserted claim by Swiss municipal authorities to exercise tutelage over persons and property of Swiss citizens naturalized in this country. It is possible this may require adjustment by treaty.

With the German Empire frequent questions arise in connection with the subjects of naturalization and expatriation; but the imperial government has constantly manifested a desire to strictly maintain and comply with all treaty stipulations in regard to them.

In consequence of the omission of Congress to provide for a diplomatic representative at Athens, the legation to Greece has been with drawn. There is now no channel of diplomatic communication between the two countries, and the expediency of providing for one, in some form, is submitted to Congress.

Relations with Austria, Russia, Italy, Portugal, Turkey, and Belgium continue amicable, and marked by no incident of especial importance.

A change of the personal head of the Government of Egypt has taken place. No change, however, has occurred in the relations between Egypt and the United States. The action of the Egyptian Government in presenting to the city of New York one of the ancient obelisks, which possess such historic interest, is highly appreciated as a generous mark of international regard. If prosperity should attend the enterprise of its transportation across the Atlantic, its erection in a conspicuous position in the chief commercial city of the nation will soon be accomplished.

The treaty recently made between Japan and the United States in regard to the revision of former commercial treaties, it is now believed will be followed by similar action on the part of other treaty powers. The attention of Congress is again invited to the subject of the indemnity funds received some years since from Japan and China, which, with their accumulated interest, now amount to considerable sums. If any part of these funds is justly due to American citizens they should receive it promptly; and whatever may have been received by this government in excess of strictly just demands, should in some form be returned to the nations to whom it equitably belongs.

The Government of China has signified its willingness to consider the question of the emigration of its subjects to the United States with a dispassionate fairness, and to co-operate in such measures as may tend to prevent injurious consequences to the United States. The negotiations are still proceeding, and will be pressed with diligence.

A question having arisen between China and Japan about the Lew Chew Islands, the United States Government has taken measures to inform those powers of its readiness to extend its good offices for the maintenance of peace, if they shall mutually deem it desirable, and find it practicable to avail themselves of the proffer.

It is a gratification to be able to announce that, through the judicious and energetic action of the military commanders of the two nations on each side of the Rio Grande, under the instructions of their respective governments, raids and depredations have greatly decreased, and, in the localities where formerly most destructive, have now almost wholly ceased. In view of this result, I entertain a confident expectation that the prevalence of quiet on the border will soon become so assured as to justify a modification of the present orders to our military commanders as to crossing the border, without encouraging such disturbances as would endanger the peace of the two countries.

The third installment of the award against Mexico under the claims commission of July 4, 1868, was duly-paid, and has been put in course of distribution in pursuance of the act of Congress providing for the same. This satisfactory situation between the two countries leads me to anticipate an expansion of our trade with Mexico and an increased contribution of capital and industry by our people to the development of the great resources of that country. I earnestly commend to the wisdom of Congress the provision of suitable legislation looking to this result.

Diplomatic intercourse with Colombia is again fully restored by the arrival of a minister from that country to the United States. This is especially fortunate in view of the fact that the question of an interoceanic canal has recently assumed a new and important aspect, and is now under discussion with the Central American countries through whose territory the canal, by the Nicaragua route, would have to pass. It is trusted that enlightened statesmanship on their part will see that the early prosecution of such a work will largely enure to the benefit, not only of their own citizens and those of the United States, but of the commerce of the civilized world. It is not doubted that should the work be undertaken under the protective auspices of the United States and upon satisfactory concessions for the right of way, and its security, by the Central American Governments, the capital for its completion would be readily furnished from this country and Europe, which might, failing such guarantees, prove inaccessible.

Diplomatic relations with Chili have also been strengthened by the reception of a minister from that country.

The war between Peru, Bolivia, and Chili still continues. The United States have not deemed it proper to interpose in the matter further than to convey to all the governments concerned the assurance that the friendly offices of the Government of the United States for the restoration of peace upon an honorable basis will be extended, in case the belligerents shall exhibit a readiness to accept them.

Cordial relations continue with Brazil and the Argentine Republic, and trade with those countries is improving. A provision for regular and more frequent mail communication, in our own ships, between the ports of this country and the nations of South America, seems to me to deserve the attention of Congress as an essential precursor of an enlargement of our commerce with them and an extension of our carrying trade.

A recent revolution in Venezuela has been followed by the establishment of a provisional government. This government has not yet been formally recognized, and it is deemed desirable to await the proposed action of the people, which is expected to give it the sanction of constitutional forms.

A naval vessel has been sent to the Samoan Islands, to make surveys and take possession of the privileges ceded to the United States by Samoa in the harbor of Pago Pago. A coaling-station is to be established there, which will be convenient and useful to United States vessels.

The subject of opening diplomatic relations with Roumania and Servia, now become independent sovereignties, is at present under consideration, and is the subject of diplomatic correspondence.

There is a gratifying increase of trade with nearly all European and American countries, and it is believed that, with judicious action in regard to its development, it can and will be still more enhanced, and that American products and manufactures will find new and expanding markets. The reports of diplomatic and consular officers upon this subject, under the system now adopted, have resulted in obtaining much-valuable information, which has been and will continue to be laid before Congress and the public from time to time.

The third article of the treaty with Russia of March 30, 1887, by which, Alaska was ceded to the United States, provides that the inhabitants of the ceded territory, with the exception of the uncivilized native tribes shall be admitted to the enjoyment of all the rights of citizens of the United States, and shall be maintained and protected in the free enjoyment of their liberty, property, and religion. The uncivilized tribes are subject to such laws and regulations as the United States may from time to time adopt in regard to the aboriginal tribes of that country.

Both the obligations of this treaty and the necessities of the people require that some organized form of government over the Territory of Alaska be adopted.

There appears to be no law for the arrest of persons charged with common-law offenses, such as assault, robbery, and murder, and no magistrate authorized to issue or execute process in such cases. Serious difficulties have already arisen from offenses of this character, not only among the original inhabitants, but among citizens of the United States and other countries, who have engaged in mining, fishing, and other business operations within the Territory. A bill authorizing the appointment of justices of the peace and constables, and the arrest and detention of persons charged with criminal offenses, and providing for an appeal to United States courts for the district of Oregon, in suitable cases, will, at a proper time, be submitted to Congress.

The attention of Congress is called to the annual report of the Secretary of the Treasury on the condition of the public finances.

The ordinary revenues from all sources for the fiscal year ended June 30, 1879, were $273,827,184.46; the ordinary expenditures for the same period were $266,947,883.53, leaving a surplus revenue for the year of $6,879,300.93.

The receipts for the present fiscal year, ending June 30, 1880, actual and estimated, are as follows: Actual receipts for the first quarter, commencing July 1, 1879, $79,843,663.61; estimated receipts for the remaining three-quarters of the year, $208,156,336.39; total receipts for the current fiscal year, actual and estimated, $288,000,000.

The expenditures for the same period will be, actual and estimated, as follows: For the quarter commencing July 1, 1879, actual expenditures, $91,683,385.10; and for the remaining three-quarters of the year the expenditures are estimated at $172,316,614.90, making the total expenditures $264,000,000, and leaving an estimated surplus revenue for the year ending June 30, 1880, of $24,000,000. The total receipts during the next fiscal year, ending June 30, 1881, estimated according to existing laws, will be $288,000,000, and the estimated ordinary expenditures for the same period will be $278,097,364.39, leaving a surplus of $9,902,635.61 for that year.

The large amount expended for arrears of pensions during the last and the present fiscal year, amounting to $21,747,249.60, has prevented the application of the full amount required by law to the sinking-fund for the current year; but these arrears having been substantially paid, it is believed that the sinking-fund can hereafter be maintained without any change of existing law.

The Secretary of War reports that the War Department estimates for the fiscal year ending June 30, 1881, are $40,380,428.93, the same being for a less sum of money than any annual estimate rendered to Congress from that department during a period of at least twelve years.

He concurs with the General of the Army in recommending such legislation as will authorize the enlistment of the full number of twenty-five thousand men for the line of the Army, exclusive of the three thousand four hundred and sixty-three men required for detached duty, and, therefore, not available for service in the field.

He also recommends that Congress be asked to provide by law for the disposition of a large number of abandoned military posts and reservations, which, though very valuable in themselves, have been rendered useless for military purposes by the advance of civilization and settlement.

He unites with the Quartermaster-General in recommending that an appropriation be made for the construction of a cheap and perfectly fire-proof building for the safe storage of a vast amount of money accounts, vouchers, claims, and other valuable records now in the Quartermaster-General’s Office, and exposed to great risk of total destruction by fire.

He also recommends, in conformity with the views of the Judge-Advocate-General, some declaratory legislation in reference to the military statute of limitations as applied to the crime of desertion.

In these several recommendations I concur.

The Secretary of War further reports that the work for the improvement of the South Pass of the Mississippi River, under contract with Mr. James B. Eads, made in pursuance of an act of Congress, has been prosecuted during the past year with a greater measure of success in the attainment of results than during any previous year. The channel through the South Pass, which at the beginning of operations in June, 1875, had a depth of only seven and one-half feet of water, had, on the 8th of July, 1879, a minimum depth of twenty-six feet, having a width of not less than two hundred feet, and a central depth of thirty feet. Payments have been made in accordance with the statute, as the work progressed, amounting, in the aggregate, to $4,250,000; and further payments will become due, as provided by the statute, in the event of success, in maintaining the channel now secured.

The reports of the General of the Army and of his subordinates present a full and detailed account of the military operations for the suppression of hostilities among the Indians of the Ute and Apache tribes, and praise is justly awarded to the officers and troops engaged, for promptness, skill, and courage displayed.

The past year has been one of almost unbroken peace and quiet on the Mexican frontier, and there is reason to believe that the efforts of this government and of Mexico to maintain order in that region will prove permanently successful.

This department was enabled during the past year to find temporary, though crowded, accommodations, and a safe depository for a portion of its records, in the completed east wing of the building designed for the State, War, and Navy Departments. The construction of the north wing of the building, a part of the structure intended for the use of the War Department, is being carried forward with all possible dispatch, and the work should receive from Congress such liberal appropriations as will secure its speedy completion.

The report of the Secretary of the Navy shows continued improvement in that branch of the service during the last fiscal year. Extensive repairs have been made upon vessels, and two new ships have been completed and made ready for sea.

The total expenditures of the year ended June 30, 1879, including specific appropriations not estimated for by the department, were $13,555,710.09. The expenses chargeable to the year, after deducting the amount of these specific appropriations, were $13,343,317.79; but this is subject to a reduction of $283,725.99, that amount having been drawn upon warrants, but not paid out during the year. The amount of appropriations applicable to the last fiscal year was $14,538,646.17. There was, therefore, a balance of $1,479,054.37 remaining unexpended, and to the credit of the department, on June 30,1879. The estimates for the fiscal year ending June 30, 1881, are $14,864,147.95, which exceeds the appropriations for the present fiscal year $361,897.28. The reason for this increase is explained in the Secretary’s report. The appropriations available for the present fiscal year are $14,502,250.67, which will, in the opinion of the Secretary, answer all the ordinary demands of the service. The amount drawn from the Treasury from July 1 to November 1, 1879, was $5,770,404.12, of which $1,095,440.33 has been refunded, leaving as the expenditure for that period $4,674,963.79. If the expenditures of the remaining two-thirds of the year do not exceed the proportion for these four months, there will remain unexpended at the end of the year $477,359.30 of the current appropriations. The report of the Secretary shows the gratifying fact that among all the disbursing officers of the pay corps of the Navy there is not one who is a defaulter to the extent of a single dollar. I unite with him in recommending the removal of the Observatory to a more healthful location. That institution reflects credit upon the nation, and has obtained the approbation of scientific men in all parts of the world. Its removal from its present location would not only be conducive to the health of its officers and professors, but would greatly increase its usefulness.

The appropriation for judicial expenses, which has heretofore been made for the Department of Justice, in gross, was subdivided at the last session of Congress, and no appropriation whatever was made for the payment of the fees of marshals and their deputies, either in the service of process or for the discharge of other duties; and, since June 30, these officers have continued the performance of their duties without compensation from the government, taking upon themselves the necessary incidental outlays, as well as rendering their own services. In only a few unavoidable instances has the proper execution of the process of the United States failed by reason of the absence of the requisite appropriation. This course of official conduct on the part of these officers, highly creditable to their fidelity, was advised by the Attorney-General, who informed them, however, that they would necessarily have to rely for their compensation upon the prospect of future legislation by Congress. I therefore especially recommend that immediate appropriation be made by Congress for this purpose.

The act making the principal appropriation for the Department of Justice at previous sessions has uniformly contained the following clause: “And for defraying the expenses which may be incurred in the enforcement of the act approved February 28, 1871, entitled “An act to amend an act approved May 30, 1870, entitled “An act to enforce the rights of citizens of the United States to vote in the several States of the Union, and for other purposes,” or any acts amendatory thereof or supplementary thereto.’”

No appropriation was made for this purpose for the current year. As no general election for members of Congress occurred, the omission was a matter of little practical importance. Such election will, however, take place during the ensuing year, and the appropriation made for the pay of marshals and deputies should be sufficient to embrace compensation for the services they may be required to perform at such elections.

The business of the Supreme Court is, at present, largely in arrears. It cannot be expected that more causes can be decided than are now disposed of in its annual session, or that by any assiduity the distinguished magistrates who compose the court can accomplish more than is now done. In the courts of many of the circuits, also, the business has increased to such an extent that the delay of justice will call the attention of Congress to an appropriate remedy. It is believed that all is done in each circuit which can fairly be expected from its judicial force. The evils arising from delay are less heavily felt by the United States than by private suitors, as its causes are advanced by the courts when it is seen that they involve the discussion of questions of a public character.

The remedy suggested by the Attorney-General is the appointment of additional circuit judges and the creation of an intermediate court of errors and appeals, which shall relieve the Supreme Court of a part of its jurisdiction, while a larger force is also obtained for the performance of circuit duties.

I commend this suggestion to the consideration of Congress. It would seem to afford a complete remedy, and would involve, if ten additional circuit judges are appointed, an expenditure, at the present rate of salaries, of not more than sixty thousand dollars a year, which would certainly be small in comparison with the objects to be attained.

The report of the Postmaster-General bears testimony to the general revival of business throughout the country. The receipts of the Post-Office Department for the fiscal year ended June 30, 1879, were $30,011,982.86, being $764,465.91 more than the revenues of the preceding year. The amount realized from the sale of postage-stamps, stamped envelopes, and postal cards was $764,465.91 more than in the preceding year, and $2,387,559.23 more than in 1877. The expenditures of the department were $33,449,899.45, of which the sum of $376,461.63 was paid on liabilities incurred in preceding years.

The expenditures during the year were $801,209.77 less than in the preceding year. This reduction is to be attributed mainly to the operation of the law passed June 17, 1878, changing the compensation of postmasters from a commission on the value of stamps sold to a commission on stamps canceled.

The amount drawn from the Treasury on appropriations in addition to the revenues of the department was $3,031,454.96, being $2,276,197.86 less than in the preceding year.

The expenditures for the fiscal year ending June 30, 1881, are estimated at $39,920,900, and the receipts from all sources at $32,210,000, leaving a deficiency to be appropriated for out of the Treasury of $7,710,900.

The relations of the department with railroad companies have been harmonized, notwithstanding the general reduction by Congress of their compensation by the appropriation for special facilities, and the railway post-office lines have been greatly extended, especially in the Southern States. The interests of the railway mail service and of the public would be greatly promoted and the expenditures could be more readily controlled by the classification of the employés of the railway mail service as recommended by the Postmaster-General; the appropriation for salaries, with respect to which the maximum limit is already fixed by law, to be made in gross.

The Postmaster-General recommends an amendment of the law regulating the increase of compensation for increased service and increased speed on star routes, so as to enable him to advertise for proposals for such increased service and speed. He also suggests the advantages to accrue to the commerce of the country from the enactment of a general law authorizing contracts with American-built steamers, carrying the American flag, for transporting the mail between ports of the United States and ports of the West Indies and South America, at a fixed maximum price per mile, the amount to be expended being regulated by annual appropriations, in like manner with the amount paid for the domestic star service.

The arrangement made by the Postmaster-General and the Secretary of the Treasury for the collection of duty upon books received in the mail from foreign countries has proved so satisfactory in its practical operation, that the recommendation is now made that Congress shall extend the provisions of the act of March 3, 1879, under which this, arrangement was made, so as to apply to all other dutiable articles received in the mails from foreign countries.

The reports of the Secretary of the Interior and of the Commissioner of Indian Affairs, setting forth the present state of our relations with the Indian tribes on our territory, the measures taken to advance their civilization and prosperity, and the progress already achieved by them, will be found of more than ordinary interest. The general conduct of our Indian population has been so satisfactory, that the occurrence of two disturbances, which resulted in bloodshed and destruction of property, is all the more to be lamented.

The history of the outbreak on the White River Ute Reservation, in Western Colorado, has become so familiar by elaborate reports in the public press, that its remarkable incidents need not be stated here in detail. It is expected that the settlement of this difficulty will lead to such arrangements as will prevent further hostile contact between the Indians and the border settlements in Western Colorado.

The other disturbance occurred at the Mescalero Agency, in New Mexico, where Victoria, at the head of a small band of marauders, after committing many atrocities, being vigorously chased by a military force; made his way across the Mexican border and is now on foreign soil.

While these occurrences, in which a comparatively small number of Indians were engaged, are most deplorable, a vast majority of our Indian population have fully justified the expectations of those who believe that by humane and peaceful influences the Indian can be led to abandon the habits of savage life and to develop a capacity for useful and civilized occupations. What they have already accomplished in the pursuit of agricultural and mechanical work, the remarkable success which has attended the experiment of employing as freighters a class of Indians hitherto counted among the wildest and most intractable, and the general and urgent desire expressed by them for the education of their children, may be taken as sufficient proof that they will be found capable of accomplishing much more if they continue to be wisely and fairly guided. The “Indian policy” sketched in the report of the Secretary of the Interior, the object of which is to make liberal provision for the education of Indian youth, to settle the Indians upon farm-lots in severalty, to give them title in fee to their farms, inalienable for a certain number of years, and when their wants are thus provided, for to dispose by sale of the lands on their reservations not occupied and used by them, a fund to be formed out of the proceeds for the benefit of the Indians, which will gradually relieve the government of the expenses now provided for by annual appropriations, must commend itself as just and beneficial to the Indians, and as also calculated to remove those obstructions which the existence of large reservations presents to the settlement and development of the country. I therefore earnestly recommend the enactment of a law enabling the government to give Indians a title in fee, inalienable for twenty-five years, to the farm-lands assigned to them by allotment. I also repeat the recommendation made in my first annual message, that a law be passed admitting Indians who can give satisfactory proof of having by their own labor supported their families for a number of years, and who are willing to detach themselves from their tribal relations, to the benefit of the homestead act, and to grant them patents containing the same provision of inalienability for a certain period.

The experiment of sending a number of Indian children of both sexes to the Hampton Normal and Agricultural Institute, in Virginia, to receive an elementary English education and practical instruction in farming and other useful industries, has led to results so promising, that it was thought expedient to turn over the cavalry barracks at Carlisle, in Pennsylvania, to the Interior Department for the establishment of an Indian school on a larger scale. This school has now one hundred and fifty-eight pupils, selected from various tribes, and is in full operation. Arrangements are also made for the education of a number of Indian boys and girls belonging to tribes on the Pacific slope in a similar manner, at Forest Grove, in Oregon. These institutions will commend themselves to the liberality of Congress and to the philanthropic munificence of the American people.

Last spring information was received of the organization of an extensive movement in the Western States, the object of which was the occupation by unauthorized persons of certain lands in the Indian Territory ceded by the Cherokees to the government for the purpose of settlement by other Indian tribes.

On the 29th of April I issued a proclamation, warning all persons against participation in such an attempt; and, by the co-operation of a military force, the invasion was promptly checked. It is my purpose to protect the rights of the Indian inhabitants of that Territory to the full extent of the executive power. But it would be unwise to ignore the fact that a territory so large and so fertile, with a population so sparse, and with so great a wealth of unused resourced, will be found more exposed to the repetition of such attempts as happened this year when the surrounding States are more densely settled and the westward movement of our population looks still more eagerly for fresh lands to occupy. Under such circumstances, the difficulty of maintaining the Indian Territory in its present state will greatly increase, and the Indian tribes inhabiting it would do well to prepare for such a contingency. I therefore fully approve of the advice given to them by the Secretary of the Interior on a recent occasion, to divide among themselves in severalty as large a quantity of their lands as they can cultivate; to acquire individual title in fee instead of their present tribal ownership in common, and to consider in what manner the balance of their lands may be disposed of by the government for their benefit. By adopting such a policy they would more certainly secure for themselves the value of their possessions, and at the same time promote their progress in civilization and prosperity, than by endeavoring to perpetuate the present state of things in the Territory.

The question whether a change in the control of the Indian service should be made was in the Forty-fifth Congress referred to a joint committee of both Houses for inquiry and report. In my last annual message I expressed the hope that the decision of that question, then in prospect, would arrest further agitation of this subject, such agitation being apt to produce a disturbing effect upon the service as well as the Indians themselves.” Since then, the committee having reported, the question has been decided in the negative by a vote in the House of Representatives.

For the reasons here stated, and in view of the fact that further uncertainty on this point will be calculated to obstruct other much-needed legislation, to weaken the discipline of the service, and to unsettle salutary measures now in progress for the government and improvement of the Indians, I respectfully recommend that the decision arrived at by Congress at its last session be permitted to stand.

The efforts made by the Department of the Interior to arrest the depredations on the timber-lands of the United States have been continued, and have met with considerable success. A large number of cases of trespass have been prosecuted in the courts, of the United States; others have been settled, the trespassers offering to make payment to the government for the value of the timber taken by them. The proceeds of these prosecutions and settlements turned into the Treasury far exceed in amount the sums appropriated by Congress for this purpose. A more important result, however, consists in the fact that the destruction of our public forests by depredation, although such cases still occur, has been greatly reduced in extent, and it is probable that if the present policy is vigorously pursued, and sufficient provision to that end is made by Congress, such trespasses, at least those on a large scale, can be entirely suppressed, except in the Territories, where timber for the daily requirements of the population cannot, under the present state of the law, be otherwise obtained. I therefore earnestly invite the attention of Congress to the recommendation made by the Secretary of the Interior, that a law be enacted enabling the government to sell timber from the public lands without conveying the fee, where such lands are principally valuable for the timber thereon, such sales to be so regulated as to conform to domestic wants and business requirements, while at the same time guarding against a sweeping destruction of the forests. The enactment of such a law appears to become a more pressing necessity every day.

My recommendations in former messages are renewed in favor of enlarging the facilities of the Department of Agriculture. Agriculture is the leading interest and the permanent industry of our people. It is to the abundance of agricultural production, as compared with our home consumption, and the largely increased and highly profitable market abroad which we have enjoyed in recent years, that we are mainly indebted for our present prosperity as a people. We must look for its continued maintenance to the same substantial resource. There is no branch of industry in which labor, directed by scientific knowledge, yields such increased production in comparison with unskilled labor, and no branch of the public service to which the encouragement of liberal appropriations can be more appropriately extended. The omission to render such aid is not a wise economy; but, on the contrary, undoubtedly results in losses of immense sums annually that might be saved through well-directed efforts by the government to promote this vital interest.

The results already accomplished with the very limited means heretofore placed at the command of the Department of Agriculture is an earnest of what may be expected with increased appropriations for the several purposes indicated in the report of the Commissioner, with a view to placing the department upon a footing which will enable it to prosecute more effectively the objects for which it is established.

Appropriations are needed for a more complete laboratory, for the establishment of a veterinary division, and a division of forestry, and for an increase of force.

The requirements for these and other purposes, indicated in the report of the Commissioner under the head of the immediate necessities of the department, will not involve any expenditure of money that the country cannot with propriety now undertake in the interests of agriculture.

It is gratifying to learn from the Bureau of Education the extent to which educational privileges throughout the United States have been advanced during the year. No more fundamental responsibility rests upon Congress than that of devising appropriate measures of financial aid to education, supplemental to local action in the States and Territories and in the District of Columbia. The wise forethought of the founders of our government has not only furnished the basis for the support of the common-school systems of the newer States, but laid the foundations for the maintenance of their universities and colleges of agriculture and the mechanic arts. Measures in accordance with this traditional policy for the further benefit of all these interests and the extension of the same advantages to every portion of the country it is hoped will receive your favorable consideration.

To preserve and perpetuate the national literature should be among the foremost cares of the National Legislature. The library gathered at the Capitol still remains unprovided with any suitable accommodations for its rapidly increasing stores. The magnitude and importance of the collection, increased as it is by the deposits made under the law of copyright, by domestic and foreign exchanges, and by the scientific library of the Smithsonian Institution, call for building accommodations which shall be at once adequate and fire-proof. The location of such a public building, which should provide for the pressing necessities of the present, and for the vast increase of the nation’s books in the future, is a matter which addresses itself to the discretion of Congress. It is earnestly recommended as a measure which should unite all suffrages, and which should no longer be delayed.

The joint commission created by the act of Congress of August 2, 1876, for the purpose of supervising and directing the completion of the Washington National Monument, of which commission the President is a member, has given careful attention to this subject, and already the strengthening of the foundation has so far progressed as to insure the entire success of this part of the work. A massive layer of masonry has been introduced below the original foundation, widening the base, increasing the stability of the structure, and rendering it possible to carry the shaft to completion. It is earnestly recommended that such further appropriations be made for the continued prosecution of the work as may be necessary for the completion of this national monument at an early day.

In former messages, impressed with the importance of the subject, I have taken occasion to commend to Congress the adoption of a generous policy towards the District of Columbia. The report of the Commissioners of the District, herewith transmitted, contains suggestions and recommendations, to all of which I earnestly invite your careful attention. I ask your early and favorable consideration of the views which they express as to the urgent need of legislation for the reclamation of the marshes of the Potomac and its Eastern Branch, within the limits of the city, and for the repair of the streets of the capital, heretofore laid with wooden blocks, and now by decay rendered almost impassable, and a source of imminent danger to the health of its citizens. The means at the disposal of the Commissioners are wholly inadequate for the accomplishment of these important works, and should be supplemented by timely appropriations from the Federal Treasury.

The filling of the flats in front of the city will add to the adjacent lands and parks now owned by the United States a large and valuable domain, sufficient, it is thought, to reimburse its entire cost, and will also, as an incidental result, secure the permanent improvement of the river for the purposes of navigation.

The Constitution having invested Congress with supreme and exclusive jurisdiction over the District of Columbia, its citizens must of necessity look to Congress alone for all needful legislation affecting their interests; and as the territory of this District is the common property of the people of the United States, who, equally with its resident citizens, are interested in the prosperity of their capital, I cannot doubt that you will be amply sustained by the general voice of the country in any measures you may adopt for this purpose.

I also invite the favorable consideration of Congress to the wants of the public schools of this District, as exhibited in the report of the Commissioners. While the number of pupils is rapidly increasing, no adequate provision exists for a corresponding increase of school accommodation, and the Commissioners are without the means to meet this urgent need. A number of the buildings now used for school purposes are rented, and are, in important particulars, unsuited for the purpose. The cause of popular education in the District of Columbia is surely entitled to the same consideration at the hands of the National Government as in the several States and Territories, to which munificent grants of the public lands have been made for the endowment of schools and universities.

RUTHERFORD B. HAYES.
Executive Mansion,
December 1, 1879.

Foreign relations. Foreign relations.

List of papers, with their subjects. List of papers, with their subjects.

circulars.

No. From whom and to whom. Date. Subject. Page.

1 Mr. Seward to the consular officers of the United States. 1879. Feb. 13 When shipping, packing, and other charges are not expressly specified in an invoice of imported goods, and such goods are not therein described as being free of charges, customs-officers are required to add all charges, for the purpose of ascertaining the dutiable value of the merchandise. Requirement of Treasury to this effect of October 4, 1878, to go into force April 1, 1879. Purport of instructions to be brought, by consular officers, to attention of manufacturers, owners, and shippers of goods to be imported into the United States. (See circulars of June 10 and July 9, 1879.) 1 [Pg. 1 includes portions of Doc. 1 and Doc. 2]

2 do Mar. 8 Requiring that prices-current of goods to be exported from consular districts to the United States, shall be sent to appraising officers at ports in the United States to which invoices show that such goods are to be shipped. 2 [Pg. 2 includes portions of Doc. 2 and Doc. 3]

3 Mr. Seward to consular officers in Europe. Apr. 3 Requiring that the annual report of consular officers in Europe, shall contain a table showing the humidity of each month of the year, at those places within their districts where meteorological observations are taken. 3 [Pg. 3 includes portions of Doc. 4 and Doc. 5]

4 Mr. Evarts to the diplomatic officers of the United States. May 23 Requiring report as to amount of gold and silver coin and bullion, and paper currency in the treasury, in the banks, and in circulation; also, amount of gold and silver annually produced and coined. 3 [Pg. 3 includes portions of Doc. 4 and Doc. 5]

5 do May 28 Directing the submission of an international system of fog signals, prepared by Commodore Beaumont, under orders of the Navy Department, for consideration and adoption by the nations. 4 [Pg. 4 is part of Doc. 6]

6 Mr. Seward to the consular officers of the United States. June 10 Directing that a note of true market value be made upon invoices, when consul has reason to believe that an under-valuation is being attempted. (See circulars of February 13 and July 9, 1879.) 6 [Pg. 6 includes portions of Doc. 6 and Doc. 7]

7 do June 10 Directing compliance with Treasury circular No. 82, of May 26, 1879, relating to the presentation to, and acceptance by, collectors of customs of landing certificates covering merchandise exported under internal-revenue laws. Form of certificates required as to fact of landing, from consignee and foreign revenue officer; form of oath of master and mate, or purser or other landing officer; form of consular authentication; and memorandum of evidence of landing when such certificates cannot be procured, or of loss at sea. 7 [Pg. 7 is part of Doc. 8]

8 do June 24 Directing weekly reports as to the sanitary condition of consular districts, to be made by consular officers to the National Board of Health. 10 [Pg. 10 includes portions of Doc. 8, Doc. 9, and Doc. 10]

9 do July 9 Requiring that shipping and other charges in respect of goods to be exported to the United States shall be expressed in the invoice, unless such charges have been included in the price of the goods, when such fact shall be noted. (See circulars of February 13 and June 10, 1879.) 10 [Pg. 10 includes portions of Doc. 8, Doc. 9, and Doc. 10]

10 Mr. Evarts to the diplomatic officers of the United States in Europe. (A similar circular to the consular officers in Europe.) Aug. 9 Calling attention to the recent decision of the Supreme Court, sustaining the constitutionality of section 5352 of the Revised Statutes, defining the crime of bigamy and prescribing the punishment for the same; directing attention to the growth of Mormonism in Utah through recruitment from Europe; and ordering diplomatic officers to bring to the attention of the governments to which they are accredited the subject of the prevention of such emigration to the United States from Europe. 11 [Pg. 11 includes portions of Doc. 10 and Doc. 11]

DIPLOMATIC CORRESPONDENCE.

argentine republic.

No. From whom and to whom. Date. Subject. Page.

1 Mr. Thomas O. Osborn to Mr. Evarts. 1878. Nov. 18 Reporting surrender, by Chilian authorities, of American bark Devonshire, to master, on December 2: Question of surrender complicated by unsettled relations between the Argentine Republic and Chili as to boundary; vessel seized by Chilian authorities in disputed waters; status of the question at issue between the two countries. (See dispatch of December 12, 1878; instruction, January 18, 1879, pages 14 [Pg. 14 includes portions of Doc. 12 and Doc. 13] and 15 [Pg. 15 includes portions of Doc. 13 and Doc. 14], and dispatch from Mr. T. A. Osborn (Chili). November l5, 1878, page, 147.) 13 [Pg. [13] is part of Doc. 12]

2 do Dec. 12 Questions at issue between Argentine Republic and Chili temporarily settled: Provisional jurisdiction established in disputed territory; questions at issue to be submitted to arbitration; good effect of settlement of case of American bark Devonshire; report of negotiations in case. (See dispatch No. 227, from Mr. Osborn. Page 20 [Pg. 20 includes portions of Doc. 17 and Doc. 18].) 14 [Pg. 14 includes portions of Doc. 12 and Doc. 13]

3 Mr. Evarts to Mr. Osborn 1879. Jan. 18 Gratification, to a certain extent, expressed at settlement of case of the Devonshire. Instructions given to urge upon Government of Argentine Republic the earnest hope of the United States that their disagreement with Chili may be honorably and peacefully accommodated. 15 [Pg. 15 includes portions of Doc. 13 and Doc. 14]

4 Mr. Osborn to Mr. Evarts Mar. 4 Banda Oriental light-dues question: Dues demanded by agent of Uruguay in Buenos Ayres; protest of American minister against such exaction upon American vessels; report of negotiations; American vessels to be dispatched without payment of dues; history of question. 16 [Pg. 16 includes portions of Doc. 14 and Doc. 15]

5 do Mar. 25 Banda Oriental light-dues question: Vessels only required to pay light-dues for East Point and English Banks lights; no objection to such payment; regulations as to clearance of vessels from port of Buenos Ayres. 19 [Pg. 19 includes portions of Doc. 15, Doc. 16, and Doc. 17]

6 Mr. Evarts to Mr. Osborn Apr. 30 Course of minister in respect of Banda Oriental light-dues approved: American vessels entitled to same exemption as vessels of other nationalities. 19 [Pg. 19 includes portions of Doc. 15, Doc. 16, and Doc. 17]

7 Mr. Osborn to Mr. Evarts May 3 Effect of the war between Chili and Bolivia and Peru upon the settlement of the boundary question between the former and the Argentine Republic: Popular feeling against Chili; doubt of ratification of treaty by Argentine Congress. 20 [Pg. 20 includes portions of Doc. 17 and Doc. 18]

8 do May 8 Argentine Congress opened by President: Message read; growth of influence of national government commented upon; $2,066,000 of foreign debt and $694,000 of home debt paid during year; foreign debt amounts to $31,022,500, and home debt $21,567,000; national revenue amounted to $18,451,897; value of imports and exports $77,658,278; 35,876 immigrants arrived; postal receipts cover 95 per cent. of expenses; Chilian question discussed; case of the bark Devon shire referred to; peace with other nations assured. 21 [Pg. 21 includes portions of Doc. 18 and Doc. 19]

9 do June 12 Convention signed between Chili and the Argentine Republic establishing the status quo for ten years: Argentine Government to have provisional jurisdiction over Patagonia up to eastern entrance of Strait of Magellan; Chili to maintain jurisdiction over portion now in her possession; Strait of Magellan neutral, and open to flags of all nations; public opinion divided as to convention. 23 [Pg. 23 includes portions of Doc. 20 and Doc. 21]

10 Mr. Evarts to Mr. Osborn June 20 Expression of the hope that wise statesmanship will restrain within its original bounds the unhappy struggle now convulsing the South American people, and that the boundary question between the Argentine Republic and Chili may be amicably settled. 23 [Pg. 23 includes portions of Doc. 20 and Doc. 21]

11 Mr. Osborn to Mr. Evarts July 30 General Roca and Dr. Tejedor announced as presidential candidates at the October election; possible candidature of ex-President Sarmiento; his services to his, country recounted. 24 [Pg. 24 includes portions of Doc. 21 and Doc. 22]

12 Mr. Osborn to Mr. Evarts July 31 The status quo treaty with Chili rejected by Argentine Senate; Mr. Balmaceda leaves Buenos Ayres to become minister for foreign affairs at Santiago; new propositions for arbitration to be submitted by Argentine minister, Dr. Montes de Oca; popular sympathy with Bolivia and Peru in this war with Chili; president Avellaneda is averse to a war with Chili. (See dispatch June 12. 1879.) 25 [Pg. 25 includes portions of Doc. 23 and Doc. 24]

13 do Aug. 29 Assassination of General Roca attempted; attack made upon the carriage containing the finance minister, Dr. Plaza; political feeling running high; the chief of the cabinet resigns; ex-President Sarmiento appointed to the post of minister of the interior. 25 [Pg. 25 includes portions of Doc. 23 and Doc. 24]

14 do Sept. 4 Conflict between state and national authorities apprehended: State troops of Buenos Ayres ordered out by Governor Tejedor; decree produces depressing effect in business circles; circular from Senor Sarmiento, the premier, concerning the approaching presidential election, and counseling obedience to law and general acquiescence in the result. 27 [Pg. 27 is part of Doc. 25]

15 do Sept. 8 Situation critical: Disagreement between the state and the national authorities intensifying; Senor Sarmiento’s note to Governor Tejedor denying his authority to call out the state troops; answer of governor; illy-defined relations of state and national authority; the national will in danger of being neutralized by the assertion of s tate sovereignty; message of President Avellaveda to congress; national troops ordered to Buenos Ayres; subject of disagreement fully discussed by Senors Sarmiento and Tejedor; draft of bill to regulate the calling out of the national guard. 28 [Pg. 28 includes portions of Doc. 25 and Doc. 26]

16 do Sept. 20 Bill touching mobilization of national guard presented to congress by President Avellaneda, rejected by that body: Substitute passed prohibiting mobilization within eight months preceding a presidential election; state legislature of Buenos Ayres passed bill prohibiting governor from mobilizing national guard without its assent; governor unsupported except by his own party; his position thought to lead to secession. 34 [Pg. 34 includes portions of Doc. 26 and Doc. 27]

austria-hungary.

No. From whom and to whom. Date. Subject. Page.

17 Mr. Kasson to Mr. Evarts 1878. Oct. 27 Difficulty of forming ministry for Austria, due to dualism in the government of the empire: The ministry of the empire rests upon the “delegations” from Austria and Hungary, which are elected by the parliaments of those countries; the ministries of Austria and of Hungary are dependent upon majorities in their respective parliaments; the common ministry, or that of the empire, rests upon the support of the two parliaments, or of the ministries which control majorities in them; local questions complicated by national interests; foreign policy of Count Andrassy directed to territorial acquisitions to the southward toward the Mediterranean; objections to Bosnian occupation, and to expenses of such foreign policy. 35 [Pg. 35 includes portions of Doc. 27 and Doc. 28]

18 do Oct. 29 Austrian paper florin originally redeemable in silver: Specie payments suspended in 1848; since 1848 paper florin not redeemable; silver florin not in circulation; trade transactions based upon values in paper; gold, not being legal standard, is dealt in as merchandise; 8-florin gold piece equivalent to 9 florins 40 kreutzers silver; no ratio fixed by law or treaty between gold and silver; under new Austro-Hungarian tariff law, after January 1, 1879, all duties must be paid in gold; such action necessitated by requirement of a reserve of gold to meet interest upon debt, and to equalize tariff dues under special commercial treaties (See Mr. Kasson’s dispatches of November 10, 1877, No. 24, and February 21, 1878, No. 46, at pages 19 and 30, Foreign Relations for 1878.) 36 [Pg. 36 includes portions of Doc. 28 and Doc. 29]

19 Mr. Kasson to Mr. Evarts Nov. 12 Roumanian nationality recognized by Austria, Germany, Russia, and other governments, by sending ministers to Bucharest: minister also to be accredited to Servia. Jurisdiction of questions affecting American citizens in those countries assumed by Mr. Kasson. 38 [Pg. 38 includes portions of Doc. 30 and Doc. 31]

20 do Nov. 20 Estimates for expenses of Bosnian occupation submitted to the delegations, amounting to $67,000,000: Losses in army of occupation in killed, wounded, and missing reported at 5,000 men. 38 [Pg. 38 includes portions of Doc. 30 and Doc. 31]

21 do 1879. Jan. 3 Fluctuating values of silver and paper. Adoption of a common international unit of values recommended; the adoption by the treasury of the 8-florin gold piece as the standard of value for certification of money by consuls in Austria-Hungary thought to have been wise; the 8-florin gold piece of common value with the 20-franc and 20-lira gold pieces, and equal to 20 Spanish pesetas and 8 Dutch florins. (See Mr. Kasson’s dispatch No. 120 of October 29, 1878, page 36 of this volume, and his No. 53 of March 8, 1878, page 34, Foreign Relations, 1878.) 39 [Pg. 39 includes portions of Doc. 31 and Doc. 32]

22 do Jan. 11 Rapidly increasing strength of the theory of protection, illustrated by the legislation of Austria, and by the tenor of negotiations for commercial treaties with nearly the whole of Enrope: New Austro-Hungarian tariff protective; special tariff treaties denounced; commercial treaties negotiated with Germany and with Italy, to go into effect January 1 and February 1, 1879, upon basis of equivalent concessions; the autonomic tariffs of Austria-Hungary and France regulate imports into the respective countries. (See Mr. Kasson’s dispatch No. 24 of November 10, 1877, and No. 51 of March 4, 1878, pages 19 and 32, Foreign Relations, 1878.) 40 [Pg. 40 includes portions of Doc. 32 and Doc. 33]

23 do Jan. 17 Suspension of purchase of silver by Austro-Hungarian Bank (national): Apprehension excited on account of the fluctuating silver market; a determination of silver to Austria occasioned by the character of the standard; amount of silver held by German, government unknown; a like restrictive action against silver to that of Austria discovered in other countries of Europe. 41 [Pg. 41 includes portions of Doc. 33 and Doc. 34]

24 do Jan. 29 Retaliatory character of French tariff indicated: Her policy to force nations to conclude commercial treaties upon her terms; duties advanced from 30 to 60 per cent. upon imports from Austria-Hungary upon determination of commercial treaty; to avoid this advance treaty negotiated upon “most favored native” basis; chaotic condition of public sentiment and action in Europe respecting tariffs and commercial treaties. The organization of a commission, under the presidency of the Secretary of the Treasury, to consider the effect of these and other changes, upon American interests, recommended by Mr. Kasson. 42 [Pg. 42 includes portions of Doc. 34 and Doc. 35]

25 do Feb. 7 Resolute measures taken by Russia to prevent extension of plague: Sanitary precautions adapted by Austria, Hungary, Germany, Servia, and Roumania; certain articles of export from Russia prohibited admission to the Empire. 43 [Pg. 43 includes portions of Doc. 35 and Doc. 36]

26 do Feb. 10 Austro-German commercial treaty of December 16, 1878: Liberal regulations for government of commerce between the two countries; Mr. Kasson suggests its examination in connection with trade relations between the United States and Canada, and Mexico. Text of treaty: Art. 1. Mutual traffic not to be interrupted by import, export, or transit prohibitions, except as to tobacco, salt, gunpowder, war materials under extraordinary circumstances, and for sanitary reasons. Art. 2. “Most favored nation clause.” (See Arts. 18 and 21.) Art. 3. Drawbacks allowed upon exports to extent of duties on internal taxes, but not to extent of bonuses. (See Arts. 9, 14, and 15.) Art. 4. No transit dues to be collected. Art. 5. Goods under control of customs authorities, and unsold samples of commercial travelers, may be imported, and then exported without payment of duties, conditioned however, upon such payment when withdrawn for sale or consumption, or sold. Art. 6. Exemptions from import and export dues respecting products to be used in the preparation or finishing of goods to be re-exported. Art. 7. Pass or transit certificates regulations. Art. 8. Frontier custom-houses to be situated in same locality. Art. 9. Reciprocal regulations as to internal duties. Art. 10. Regulations in prevention of smuggling. (See art. 23.) Art. 11. Reciprocal admission of merchant vessels to ports, and to benefits of coast navigation; certificates of admeasurement of vessels to be mutually accepted. Art. 12. No duties to be collected upon vessels entering port in distress. Art. 13. Navigation of natural and artificial watercourses mutually opened. Art. 14. High roads and other ways of transport, &c., mutually opened to subjects of contracting parties. Art. 15. Reciprocity in rates of transport, and as to methods and vehicles of transport established; publication of railway tariffs required; currency of payment of rates. Art. 16. Rail connections between systems of two countries to be perfected. Art. 17. Protection of railway transport service; exemption of rolling stock from legal seizure in country of neighboring nation; disinfection of cattle-cars provided for. Art. 18. Transportation of goods in bond; goods may be transported in closed carriages through either country without customs examinations. Art. 19. Recriprocity as to trades and commercial pursuits, and equality of taxation accorded to subjects of either in territory of other nation. Art. 20. Reciprocal protection of trade-marks, patents, and samples or models, upon compliance with local regulations Art. 21. Appointment of consuls in respective countries. Art. 22. Consul of either to afford protection to subjects of other when called upon. Art. 23. Customs officials of either to be received for revenue purposes in customs-houses of other nation. Art. 24 Treaty extended to Liechtenstein, and conditionally to Luxemburg. Art. 26. Treaty to go into effect January 1, 1879. Art. 27. Ratifications, &c. 44 [Pg. 44 includes portions of Doc. 36 and Doc. 37]

27 Mr. Kasson to Mr. Evarts Feb. 16 Roumania, through her minister at Vienna, expresses the wish to enter into diplomatic relations with the United States. Position of the Jews in Roumania discussed; they number 600, 000, of whom less than one-tenth are native born. 49 [Pg. 49 includes portions of Doc. 37 and Doc. 38]

28 do Feb. 18 Silver accumulating in Austro-Hungarian Bank: Disinclination of the people to accept it; effort to substitute 10,000,000 silver florins, for the one-florin paper notes in circulation. 50 [Pg. 50 includes portions of Doc. 39 and Doc. 40]

29 do Mar. 10 Precautions respecting correspondence, taken by Austrian Government to exclude the plague: All correspondence from Russia to be fumigated at frontier; rules governing same. 50 [Pg. 50 includes portions of Doc. 39 and Doc. 40]

30 do Mar. 11 Trade returns of empire for 1878: Imports, 579, 547, 828 florins, equal to $278, 000, 000; exports, 698, 302, 513 florins, equal to $335, 000, 000; balance in favor of Austria-Hungary about $57, 000, 000; increase of imports over 1877, 24, 320, 780 florins; increase of exports, 36, 270, 309 florins. 52 [Pg. 52 includes portions of Doc. 41 and Doc. 42]

31 do Mar. 15 Report upon system of taxation upon railroads in Austria: Answer to series of questions prepared by Mr. Charles Francis Adams, jr.: I. Assimilation to system of taxation applied to individuals. II. All realty taxed. III. Not considered as having personalty except it be represented by franchise, income, or net earnings; these taxed as in case of individuals. IV. Franchise tax same as in case of individuals; tax insignificant in amount. V. Shares of stock taxed by stamp-tax, 1.25 florins for each 200 florins of nominal value; priority bonds taxed in same way; the coupons of bonds or shares calling for 20 florins or less, taxed by 7 kreutzer (3½ cents) stamp; no annual tax on snares as such. VI. Definition of gross and net receipts; annual income tax of 5 per cent. on net receipts imposed; temporarily increased to 10 per cent.

The foregoing system applied to prosperous roads; special exceptions made by law. (See instruction to minister to Great Britain, dated February 18, 1879, calling for information as to railway taxation.)

52 [Pg. 52 includes portions of Doc. 41 and Doc. 42]

32 Mr. Kasson to Mr. Evarts Mar. 20 Report upon the system of railway taxation in Hungary: I. Principle of taxation that transportation shall pay the taxes; i.e., that passengers and owners of goods transported, shall pay the taxes. II. Realty exempt from taxation. III. Personalty exempt from taxation. IV. No franchise tax. V. Shares not taxed. VI. No tax on gross or net receipts; principle of authorization of construction that the state shall ultimately acquire ownership of railway; concessions granted for 90 years; sinking fund for yearly purchase of shares provided; interest at rate of 5 per cent. guaranteed by Government of Hungary. As the government would, by imposing taxes on railway plant and property, virtually tax government interests, it collects its railways tax in the nature of a surcharge upon transportation rates. (See preceding: dispatch.) 54 [Pg. 54 includes portions of Doc. 42 and Doc. 43]

33 do Mar. 22 Disaster at Szegedin, in Hungary, by flood: Estimated loss 6,000,000 florin, or’about $3,000,000; details of the disaster. 57 [Pg. 57 is part of Doc. 44]

34 do Mar. 31 Statistics as to Roumania: Strength of the army; debt, 500, 000, 000 francs; receipts of treasury, 93, 372, 000 francs; disbursements about same sum; yearly deficits for 1875, 1877, and 1878; great part of public debt incurred in construction of railways; imports for last year, 100, 834, 000 francs; exports, 144, 962,000francs; trade chiefly with Austria; subject of possible extension of American trade with, should be studied by consuls in Roumania. 58 [Pg. 58 includes portions of Doc. 44 and Doc. 45]

35 do Mar. 31 Commercial treaty concluded by Great Britain with Servia; British chargé d’affaires appointed at Belgrade; Austria attempting to establish customs union with Servia; Jewish question in Servia discussed; military organization; population, 1, 725, 000; land fertile but badly cultivated; national debt small; estimated value of exports, 39, 000, 000 francs; imports, 32, 000, 000 francs; revenue, according to budged of 1877–’8, 15, 000, 000 francs; France moving for a commercial treaty. 59 [Pg. 59 includes portions of Doc. 45 and Doc. 46]

36 do May 3 Conversation between Mr. Kasson and Mr. Teisserence de Bort, French ambassador at Vienna, relative to commercial relations between the United States and France; protectionist policy of the United States ably explained by Mr. Kasson; no probability of success of Chotteau project of special tariff arrangement exclusively applicable to the two countries. General principles of American treaty relations: 1st. To treat all nations alike. 2d. To keep the legislative discretion unbound. 3d. Desire of the United States for independence respecting manufactured products. The result of this policy the establishment of a strong manufacturing interest in the United States, and the introduction of diversified industry. 4th. The permanent object of the tariff policy of the United States the production of revenue to be derived from luxuries; wines, silks, &c. French products, being luxuries, are charged with heavy duties under this principle. The French ambassador hinted at possibility of France imposing high duties on breadstuff’s, provisions, &c., in retaliation for our duties on French products. Mr. Kasson replied that if France imposed duties not for the interests of her own people, but against the interests of another people, it would be the initiation of a war of tariffs, the end of which could not be foreseen. Present condition of government sentiment upon tariff questions in Europe matter of grave interest to the United States. The surprising development of our commerce, and of the financial strength of our government and country, awakening the attention of European statesmen. 61 [Pg. 61 includes portions of Doc. 46 and Doc. 47]

37 Mr. Kasson to Mr. Evarts May 7 Information touching railway system of Austria: Regulations as to concession; extent of government supervision; public mails to be transported free; telegraph regulations; maximum tariff for passengers and freight fixed by concession; military transportation rates, &c., fixed; certain net profit guaranteed by government for ninety years, equal to 5 per cent. on share and bonded capital; after ninety years, the roads, through operation of sinking fund, are to pass into hands of government. (See Mr. Kasson’s dispatches, March 15 and 20, 1879, pages 52 [Pg. 52 includes portions of Doc. 41 and Doc. 42] and 54 [Pg. 54 includes portions of Doc. 42 and Doc. 43].) 63 [Pg. 63 includes portions of Doc. 47 and Doc. 48]

38 do May 14 Report by Mr. Kasson upon the municipal government of Vienna: I. Municipal theory. II. Electors and their classification. III. Organization of the city council and mayoralty. IV. Limitations of the powers of the city government. V. The organization and distribution of executive functions. VI. Sanitary organization. VII. Management of the poor and the sick. VIII. System of cleaning streets. IX. System of paving streets. X. Reference to authorities, &c. 64 [Pg. 64 includes portions of Doc. 48 and Doc. 49]

39 Mr. Delaplaine to Mr. Kasson July 5 Report by Mr. Delaplaine upon the police system and administration of Vienna; record of police supervision during the current year; report of Chevalier von Marx, president of the police of Vienna; police statistics as to passports, hackney-coaches, public amusements, railways and steamers, accidents, casualties, crimes, and mendicancy. 74 [Pg. 74 includes portions of Doc. 49 and Doc. 50]

40 Mr. Evarts to Mr. Kasson July 30 Instructions to respond to the diplomatic advance of Roumania respecting recognition, and the conclusion of a commercial treaty. Directed to visit Belgrade and Bucharest for the purpose of negotiating treaties with Servia and Roumania. 79 [Pg. 79 includes portions of Doc. 50 and Doc. 51]

41 do July 30 Directing the preparation of a report upon the commercial relations and possibilities of Servia and Roumania. 81 [Pg. 81 includes portions of Doc. 52 and Doc. 53]

42 Mr. Kasson to Mr. Evarts Sept. 1 Statistics of production and consumption of beer in Austria-Hungary: Number of breweries, 2, 332; production, 11, 323, 414 hectoliters; ex-portations, 214, 422 hectoliters; consumption, 11, 101, 796 hectoliters; government revenue, 21,041,631 florins, or about $10, 500, 000. Population of the empire, 36, 000, 000. 81 [Pg. 81 includes portions of Doc. 52 and Doc. 53]

43 do Oct. 18 Military statistics of Austria-Hungary. Strength of the armies of the principal European states. 82 [Pg. 82 includes portions of Doc. 54 and Doc. 55]

44 do Nov. 19 Report upon condition and resources of Servia: I. The organization of the government. II. Financial condition; public debt, 30, 314, 221 francs, contracted for military expenses; receipts sufficient to meet ordinary expenses of government. III. Condition of the industries of the country. IV. Agriculture. V. Education and intelligence. VI. Ways of communication; trade chiefly with Austria and Hungary, by railway and by the Danube. Necessity for consular representation in Servia urged. 82 [Pg. 82 includes portions of Doc. 54 and Doc. 55]

belgium.

No. From whom and to whom. Date. Subject. Page.

45 Mr. Goodloe to Mr. Evarts 1879. Jan. 2 Reception by the King; kind expressions of His Majesty respecting the United States. 86 [Pg. 86 includes portions of Doc. 55 and Doc. 56]

46 do Mar. 10 Remarks upon the enlargement of the trade of the United States with Belgium: Difficulty of introducing new processes, or new articles of production in Belgium; necessity of studying the needs, tastes, habits, and customs of the people on the part of our merchants and manufacturers; patient and intelligent agents of American producers acquainted with the language needed. 87 [Pg. 87 is part of Doc. 57]

47 Mr. Groodloe to Mr. Evarts Apr. 9 Restoration of diplomatic relations between Mexico and Belgium. Appointment of a minister from Belgium to Mexico gazetted. 89 [Pg. 89 includes portions of Doc. 57 and Doc. 58]

48 do Apr. 16 Relations of Belgium to the Holy See: Excitement concerning the question; people Catholics, but the liberal party advocates a separation of church and state; the proposed school bill of the liberal party giving rise to bitter discussion; question as to whether the Belgian legation to the Vatican shall be maintained. 90 [Pg. 90 includes portions of Doc. 58 and Doc. 59]

49 do May 5 Proposed industrial exhibition to be held in Brussels June 15, 1880: National, not international; suggestion that American manufacturers should send goods to Brussels for exhibition at the same time, although not under the auspices of the exhibition commission. 92 [Pg. 92 includes portions of Doc. 60 and Doc. 61]

50 do May 7 Report upon railway taxation in Belgium: Railways owned by the state and by private corporations; state, lines untaxed, under distinct organization, with a separate budget; railway concessions to private corporations granted for ninety years; tariff of charges regulated by the stateland and buildings belong to the state, but may be used by the company during life of concession; mails carried free; military transportation at reduced rates; right of purchase by government reserved; provisions concerning; personalty and working materials exempt from taxation; stocks and bonds subject to stamp duty; railways subject to the land tax, to assessed, taxes, and to licenses; taxation regulated by amount of net profit; land tax imposed on surplus land outside of road-bed, &c.; no franchise tax. (See instructions to Mr. Welsh, February 18, 1879, calling for information touching railway taxation.) 92 [Pg. 92 includes portions of Doc. 60 and Doc. 61]

51 do June 18 Agitation concerning the public instruction act, amendatory of the school act of 1842: Discussion takes a religious turn; object of bill to secularize education; extent of supervision of the priests under law of 1842 indicated; all teachers under new system to come from the state normal school; no scholar to be required to attend during presence of priests if he object to doing so; bill passed by the Chamber of Representatives by vote of 67 to 60; synopsis of debate in the Chamber of Representatives. 97 [Pg. 97 includes portions of Doc. 61 and Doc. 62]

52 do July 17 Report upon gold, silver, and currency in Belgium: The national bank the state depository; bank held June 12, 1879, gold, 74, 630, 000 francs; silver (5-franc pieces), 13, 650, 000 francs; divisional coins, 12, 350, 000 francs; no means of ascertaining actual amounts in private banks and in circulation; divisional silver coin limited to six francs for each inhabitant, equal to 32, 000, 000 francs; bank-note circulation, 300, 000, 000 francs; mint returns. (See circular of May 23, page 3 [Pg. 3 includes portions of Doc. 4 and Doc. 5].) 109 [Pg. 109 includes portions of Doc. 62 and Doc. 63]

53 Mr. Delfosse to Mr. Evarts. 1878. Aug. 12 Conversion of Antwerp port dues under stipulations for redemption of the Scheldt dues. Regulations touching the admeasurement of vessels; practical adoption of Moorsom system; circular of Belgian Government. 112 [Pg. 112 is part of Doc. 64]

54 Mr. Evarts to Mr. Deliosse Sept. 19 Views of the Secretary of the Treasury upon subject of the conversion of the Antwerp port dues, and upon admeasurement of vessels: Belgian registry can only be accepted as to tonnage in American ports after complete adoption of Moorsom system of admeasurement. 114 [Pg. 114 is part of Doc. 65]

55 Mr. Van den Bossche to Mr. Evarts. 1879. Jan. 6 Same subject: Belgian Government, although informally adopting the Moorsom system of admeasurement, with modifications from the practices of Great Britain, France, and Germany, has not yet secured its adoption by the Parliament of the kingdom; calls attention to Mr. Delfosse’s note of August 12, 1878, as to conversion of Antwerp port dues. 115 [Pg. 115 is part of Doc. 66]

56 Mr. Evarts to Mr. Van den Bossche. Jan. 31 Reply of Mr. Evarts touching admeasurement of Belgian vessels: Copy of note from the Secretary of the Treasury upon the subject; effect of proposed conversion of local dues at Antwerp analyzed; slight increase of tonnage dues found to be the result; Moorsom system explained to be method of ascertaining cubic capacities; the United States rules include in the tonnage, not only the capacity of the hold and between-decks, but the capacity of all permanently closed-in spaces on the upper decks available for cargo, stores, passengers, or crew; no net tonnage recognized. 116 [Pg. 116 is part of Doc. 67]

57 Mr. Van den Bossche to Mr. Evarts. May 7 Reply to above: Explanation that proposed conversion of Antwerp dues will not increase tonnage dues; further discussion of admeasurement question. 117 [Pg. 117 includes portions of Doc. 67 and Doc. 68]

58 Mr. Evarts to Mr. Van den Bossche. June 23 Same subject: Substance of reply of the Secretary of the Treasury, communicated for information of Belgian Government. 119 [Pg. 119 includes portions of Doc. 68 and Doc. 69]

59 Mr. Van den Bossche to Mr. Evarts. June 26 Requesting information as to the marriage laws in force in the United States, for the use of his government. 120 [Pg. 120 includes portions of Doc. 70 and Doc. 71]

60 Mr. Seward to Mr. Van den Bossche. July 3 Reply to above, to the effect that the subject is under the jurisdiction of the individual States, but that inquiry will be instituted by Department to obtain the latest information upon the subject, if desired; refers to circulars issued by the Department upon the subject. 120 [Pg. 120 includes portions of Doc. 70 and Doc. 71]

61 Mr. Van den Bossche to Mr. Evarts. July 7 The object of the Belgian Government to ascertain general practices in the United States respecting marriage; copy of Department circulars on the subject requested. 121 [Pg. 121 includes portions of Doc. 71, Doc. 72, and Doc. 73]

62 Mr. Evarts to Mr. Van den Bossche. July 12 Same subject: Text of Department circulars of February 16, 1872, giving substance of State and Territorial laws as to the age at which males and females attain majority, and as to laws concerning births and marriages. 121 [Pg. 121 includes portions of Doc. 71, Doc. 72, and Doc. 73]

bolivia.

No. From whom and to whom. Date. Subject. Page.

63 Mr. Evarts to Mr. Pettis 1879. June 23 War between Peru and Bolivia, and Chili: Report current that Bolivia intends to issue letters of marque; attention of Bolivian Government to be called to treaty of 1858, and especially to Article XVI; the United States will not permit the fitting out of Bolivian privateers in its ports. (See following instructions.) 125 [Pg. 125 includes portions of Doc. 73 and Doc. 74]

64 do June 25 Text of Treasury circular of date June 21, 1879, to collectors of customs, warning them against allowing the equipment of Bolivian privateers in the ports of the United States; attention of Bolivian Government to be called to the circular. (See instruction from Mr. Evarts to Mr. Christiancy of June 26, page 886 [Pg. 886 includes portions of Doc. 430 and Doc. 431].) 126 [Pg. 126 includes portions of Doc. 74, Doc. 75, Doc. 76, and Doc. 77]

65 Mr. Pettis to Mr. Evarts Aug. 25 The views of the United States as to the issuance of letters of marque by Bolivia brought to the attention of the Bolivian Government. 127 [Pg. 127 includes portions of Doc. 77 and Doc. 78]

66 do Aug. 25 Treasury order of June 21, 1879, communicated to Bolivian Government. 128 [Pg. 128 includes portions of Doc. 78, Doc. 79, and Doc. 80]

brazil.

No. From whom and to whom. Date. Subject. Page.

67 Mr. Hilliard to Mr. Evarts 1878. Oct. 1 Trade-marks convention with Brazil concluded: Citizens or subjects of either nation to enjoy the same rights in the other as are enjoyed by the citizens or subjects thereof. 129 [Pg. 129 is part of Doc. 80]

68 do Nov. 4 Public sentiment in Brazil favorable to the cultivation of friendly relations with the United States. 130 [Pg. 130 is part of Doc. 81]

69 Mr. White to Mr. Evarts 1879. Jan. 16 Cautioning Americans against going to Brazil unless acquainted with the Portuguese language; no opening for clerks. 132 [Pg. 132 includes portions of Doc. 82 and Doc. 83]

70 Mr. White to Mr. Evarts Feb. 26 Cabinet crisis: Disagreement as to changes in electoral system; political emancipation of non-Catholios discussed; opposition to proposition. 132 [Pg. 132 includes portions of Doc. 82 and Doc. 83]

71 do Feb. 27 Business depression in Brazil: British influence in mercantile affairs paramount; American trade with Brazil can only be increased by the establishment of branches of solid American houses, and by maintaining a high quality in the goods imported from the United States; Americans going to Brazil to engage in business should have ample capital to enable them to withstand British competition. 133 [Pg. 133 includes portions of Doc. 83 and Doc. 84]

72 do Mar. 25 Need of the establishment of solid American houses in Brazil enforced; visit of leading merchants suggested. (See dispatches 55 and 65 from Mr. White, pages 132 [Pg. 132 includes portions of Doc. 82 and Doc. 83] and 133 [Pg. 133 includes portions of Doc. 83 and Doc. 84].) 134 [Pg. 134 includes portions of Doc. 84 and Doc. 85]

73 Mr. Hilliard to Mr. Evarts May 3 Change in electoral law proposed by the ministry: Direct vote by qualified electors for candidates proposed, coupled with a raising of the electoral qualification; suffrage to be limited to those who can read and write, and who possess an income of $200 and upward; the measure looked upon as restrictive in its tendency. 135 [Pg. 135 includes portions of Doc. 85 and Doc. 86]

74 do June 4 Debate in Parliament upon the electoral bill: Defeat of amendment to render eligible, to seats in chamber of deputies, non-Catholics and naturalized Brazilians probable passage of the bill. 136 [Pg. 136 includes portions of Doc. 86 and Doc. 87]

Mr. Borges to Mr. Evarts 1878. Feb. 23 Laws of the United States against counterfeiting inapplicable to notes issued by foreign governments; requests that steps may be taken to secure their amendment. (See notes of Mr. Borges of November 8, 1878, and from Mr. Evarts of March 3 and June 20, 1879, pages 140 [Pg. 140 includes portions of Doc. 89, Doc. 90, and Doc. 91], 141 [Pg. 141 includes portions of Doc. 91, Doc. 92, and Doc. 93].) 138 [Pg. 138 includes portions of Doc. 87 and Doc. 88]

76 do Sept. 24 Case of the bark Annie Mark: Regulation of Brazilian Government as to manifests of cargo; vessels taking on cargo at several ports before clearing for Brazilian ports, must have manifests of cargo from each port at which cargo was taken on board. (See Foreign Relations, 1878, page 71, note to Mr. Borges.) 139 [Pg. 139 includes portions of Doc. 88 and Doc. 89]

77 do Nov. 8 Brazilian criminal code makes provision for punishment of counterfeiting foreign government notes; Brazil guarantees reciprocity for similar legislation on part of the United States. 140 [Pg. 140 includes portions of Doc. 89, Doc. 90, and Doc. 91]

78 Mr. Evarts to Mr. Borges 1879. Mar. 3 Same subject: Note from Senator Edmunds; disagreement in the Judiciary Committee as to constitutional power of the United States to reach such cases of counterfeiting by national law; further consideration of question promised. 140 [Pg. 140 includes portions of Doc. 89, Doc. 90, and Doc. 91]

79 do June 20 Same subject: The Secretary of State to recall subject to attention of Congress at next session. 141 [Pg. 141 includes portions of Doc. 91, Doc. 92, and Doc. 93]

central america.

No. From whom and to whom. Date. Subject. Page.

80 Mr. Williamson to Mr. Evarts 1879. Jan. 4 Guatemala: Constitutional convention called by President Barrios; his dictatorship to terminate upon organization of new government; convention thought to have been called in his interest, and with the intention of conferring upon him the executive power for life. 140 [Pg. 140 includes portions of Doc. 89, Doc. 90, and Doc. 91]

81 Mr. Logan to Mr. Evarts June 14 Report of his reception by the President of Guatemala upon presenting his credentials: Friendly expressions on the part of Mr. Logan and President Barrios; the latter suggests the negotiation of a reciprocity treaty between the United States and Guatemala. 142 [Pg. 142 includes portions of Doc. 93 and Doc. 94]

82 do Aug. 20 Cases in which improper applications for American protection are made: Such cases numerous throughout the Spanish-American countries; point illustrated by reference to the case of Anton Joseph Maassen; Maassen was born in Germany, acquired citizenship in California, drifted to Guatemala, declared himself to be a German subject and sought registration in German consulate; subsequently, after signal misbehavior, he claimed American citizenship, exhibiting his naturalization papers. Mr. Minister Logan suggests the necessity for, first, a declaration by the government of conditions under which citizens of the United States, native and naturalized, shall be deemed to have expatriated themselves; and, second, the requirement of more substantial evidence on the part of applicants for protection in foreign countries, of American citizenship, before the protection of the United States shall be accorded. 143 [Pg. 143 is part of Doc. 95]

chili.

No. From whom and to whom. Date. Subject. Page.

83 Mr. Thomas A. Osborn to Mr. Evarts. 1878. Nov. 15 Case of the American bark Devonshire in its relationship to the boundary dispute between Chili and the Argentine Republic; release of the vessel ordered by the Chilian authorities. (See Mr. T. O. Osbom’s dispatches, Nov. 18 and Dec. 12, 1878, and Mr. Evarts’ instruction to Mr. Osborn of January 18 1879 pages 13 [Pg. [13] is part of Doc. 12], 14 [Pg. 14 includes portions of Doc. 12 and Doc. 13], 15 [Pg. 15 includes portions of Doc. 13 and Doc. 14].) 147 [Pg. 147 includes portions of Doc. 96 and Doc. 97]

84 Mr. Evarts to Mr. Osborn 1879. Jan. 29 Gratification of the United States at prospect of settlement by arbitration of boundary dispute with Argentine Republic, to be expressed to Chili. 147 [Pg. 147 includes portions of Doc. 96 and Doc. 97]

85 Mr. Osborn to Mr. Evarts Feb. 20 Origin of boundary dispute between Chili and Bolivia: Prior to 1866, jurisdiction over disputed territory claimed by both parties; attempted settlement, by treaty, of boundary-line in that year; second boundary treaty concluded in 1874; twenty-fourth degree of latitude established as boundary; disputed territory contains vast guano and nitrate deposits; their development by Chilian capitalists; the immediate conflict occasioned by project of Bolivian Government to tax nitrate exports from that part of territory set apart as her share by treaty of 1874; the attempt to enforce this law leads to withdrawal of Chilian minister from La Paz, and the movement of Chilian troops to disputed territory. Chilian forces occupy Antofagasta; course of Government of Chili approved by the people of that country; probability of an alliance between Bolivia and Peru. 148 [Pg. 148 includes portions of Doc. 97 and Doc. 98]

86 do Mar. 31 Question as to right of foreign-built vessels, wholly owned by citizens of the United States, to American protection, and to fly the flag of the United States: Case of three vessels said to have been bought by Mr. Henry L. Stevens, an American citizen, domiciled in Chili, from the South American Steamship Company of Chili; bill of sale of vessels recorded in consulate at Valparaiso in accordance with paragraphs 220 and 221 of the Consular Regulations; correspondence between Admiral Rodgers, Minister Osborn, and Vice-Consul McKellar respecting the transfer; action of Consul Clayton, at Callao, respecting the “Itata,” one of the vessels said to have been bought by Stevens, requiring, under instructions from Mr. Minister Gibbs, that vessel to haul down the flag; Mr. Osborn holds right to protection to be clear when sale and transfer have been made in good faith; refers to Attorney-General Cushing’s opinion as to purchase of ships of belligerents by neutrals, of August 7, 1854. (See page 638, Vol. VI, Opinions of Attorneys-General; dispatch from Mr. Osborne of April 26, p. 174 [Pg. 174 includes portions of Doc. 104 and Doc. 105]; instructions from Mr. Evarts to Mr. Osborn, of June 9, p. 177 [Pg. 177 is part of Doc. 109]; and from Mr. Hunter to Mr. McKellar, of June 2, and to Mr. Foote, of October 23, page 180 [Pg. 180 includes portions of Doc. 110, Doc. 111, and Doc. 112]; and dispatches from Mr. Gibbs, minister to Peru, of March 19, March 25, and April 7, pages 861 [Pg. 861 is part of Doc. 413] and 865 [Pg. 865 includes portions of Doc. 413, Doc. 414, and Doc. 415]; instructions from Mr. Evarts to Mr. Christiancy, of April 24, May 8, June 20, and December 28, pages 867 [Pg. 867 includes portions of Doc. 416, Doc. 417, and Doc. 418], 874 [Pg. 864 is part of Doc. 413], 884 [Pg. 884 includes portions of Doc. 428 and Doc. 429], 894 [Pg. 894 includes portions of Doc. 435, Doc. 436, and Doc. 437]; and dispatches from Mr. Christiancy, of May 20, June 1, and June 3, pages 877 [Pg. 877 includes portions of Doc. 421 and Doc. 422], 881 [Pg. 881 includes portions of Doc. 423, Doc. 424, and Doc. 425], and 882 [Pg. 882 includes portions of Doc. 426 and Doc. 427].) 150 [Pg. 150 includes portions of Doc. 98 and Doc. 99]

87 Mr. Osborn to Mr. Evarts Apr. 3 Bolivia declares war against Chili: Property of Chilians to be confiscated; Chilian forces advance; attitude of Peru unfriendly; secret alliance between Peru and Bolivia acknowledged by the former; war between Peru and Chili inevitable; Mr. Asta Buruaga appointed Chilian minister at Washington; account of the “Desert of Atacama” and its resources; its possession one of the causes of the war. 160 [Pg. 160 includes portions of Doc. 101 and Doc. 102]

88 do Apr. 10 War declared by Chili against Peru: Iquique, the great niter depot of Peru, blockaded by the Chilian fleet; Chilian army increased. (See next dispatch.) 167 [Pg. 167 includes portions of Doc. 102 and Doc. 103]

89 do Apr. 19 Manifesto of Chilian Government to friendly powers in reference to its declaration of war against Peru. (See Mr. Christiancy’s dispatch of April 29, page 867 [Pg. 867 includes portions of Doc. 416, Doc. 417, and Doc. 418].) 168 [Pg. 168 includes portions of Doc. 103 and Doc. 104]

90 do Apr. 26 Status of foreign-built vessels sold to citizens of the United States; letter from Mr. Osborn to Mr. Christiancy. 174 [Pg. 174 includes portions of Doc. 104 and Doc. 105]

91 Mr. Seward to Mr. Osborn May 29 Expression of the regret of the United States at the unhappy breaking out of war between Chili, Peru, and Bolivia. 175 [Pg. 175 includes portions of Doc. 106 and Doc. 107]

92 Mr. Osborn to Mr. Evarts June 5 Conflict between the Chilian wooden vessels Esmeralda and Covadonga and the Peruvian ironclads Huascar and Independencia: The Esmeralda and Independencia sunk; excitement of Chilians at news of the bravery of the officers and crew of the Esmeralda. (See Mr. Christiancy’s dispatch of May 27, page 879 [Pg. 879 includes portions of Doc. 422 and Doc. 423].) 176 [Pg. 176 is part of Doc. 108]

93 Mr. Evarts to Mr. Osborn June 9 Status of foreign-built vessels transferred by purchase to citizens of the United States: The practice of purchasing foreign-built vessels by citizens of the United States has been pursued since the origin of the government; good faith the essence of the question of right to protection; such vessels entitled to national protection as all American property is entitled to such protection; they may fly the flag as a manifestation of ownership, but they are not entitled to registry nor to participation in the home trade. (See sections 4131 to 4134, inclusive, and section 4190, Revised Statutes, and paragraphs 219 to 225, inclusive, Consular Regulations; see, also, dispatch No. 85, March 31, 1879, from Mr. Osborn, page 150 [Pg. 150 includes portions of Doc. 98 and Doc. 99].) 177 [Pg. 177 is part of Doc. 109]

94 Mr. Osborn to Mr. Evarts July 24 Peru and Bolivia propose arbitration based upon the status quo ante bellum; Ecuador sends special envoy in the interest of peace; Chilians favor vigorous prosecution of the war; business at a stand-still; Chilian Government issues six millions in paper notes; Chilian press opposed to European intervention in American affairs. 178 [Pg. 178 includes portions of Doc. 109 and Doc. 110]

95 Mr. Hunter to Mr. McKellar. June 2 An essential element of the validity of the sale of a foreign vessel to an American citizen is the bona-fide character of the sale; his action respecting the sale of the vessels of the South American Steamship Company to Mr. H. L. Stevens will receive consideration. 180 [Pg. 180 includes portions of Doc. 110, Doc. 111, and Doc. 112]

96 Mr. Hunter to Mr. Foote Oct. 23 Directing the nomination of a new vice-consul for the post of Valparaiso, in place of Mr. McKellar.

Note.—For instruction of December 26, 1879, to Mr. Osborn as to status of foreign-built ships owned by citizens of the United States, see instruction No. 53, of that date, to Mr. Christiancy, page 894 [Pg. 894 includes portions of Doc. 435, Doc. 436, and Doc. 437]. Same instruction sent to both ministers.

180 [Pg. 180 includes portions of Doc. 110, Doc. 111, and Doc. 112]

china.

No. From whom and to whom. Date. Subject. Page.

97 Mr. Holcombe to Mr. Evarts 1878. July 6 Transit passes: Refusal of intendent of customs at Hankow to issue same in favor of Szchuen produce, because Ichang is a nearer open port to that province; correspondence between Mr. Seward and Prince Kung; modification of order of Hankow intendant by Prince Kung. (See Mr. Holcombe’s dispatches of November 23 and December 12, 1878, and January 18, March 12, and Mr. Seward’s dispatch of June 26, 1879, pages 200 [Pg. 200 includes portions of Doc. 117 and Doc. 118], 208 [Pg. 208 includes portions of Doc. 123 and Doc. 124], 211 [Pg. 211 includes portions of Doc. 124 and Doc. 125], 215 [Pg. 215 includes portions of Doc. 126 and Doc. 127], and 219 [Pg. 219 includes portions of Doc. 128, Doc. 129, and Doc. 130].) 181 [Pg. 181 is part of Doc. 113]

98 Mr. Holcombe to Mr. Evarts. Oct. 28 Destruction by Chinese mob of English missionary premises at Foochow: The property destroyed had been in possession of missionaries upward of twenty years; hostility evinced by populace; Chinese authorities propose an exchange of property, and the removal of mission-houses to foreign settlement; an American war vessel sent to Foochow. 183 [Pg. 183 includes portions of Doc. 113 and Doc. 114]

99 do Nov. 4 Question between Chinese and British authorities as to the right of the Chinese Government to order removal of a hulk at Chinkiang from its moorings: agreement of diplomatic body that China has the right to order the removal; correspondence in the case. 189 [Pg. 189 includes portions of Doc. 114 and Doc. 115]

100 do Nov. 12 shanghai harbor-protection rules: Consular corps appoint committee to supervise their execution; their extension, to include the whole harbor, and the river to Woosung, proposed; opposition of Chinese authorities; correspondence. (See Mr. Seward’s dispatches No. 402 and 411, February 9 and 23, and No. 412, March 4, 1878, pages 103–108, F. R., 1878, and Mr. Holcombe’s No. 123, February 20. 1879. page 213, F. R., 1879 [Pg. 213 is part of Doc. 126].) 192 [Pg. 192 includes portions of Doc. 116 and Doc. 117]

101 do Nov. 23 Transit passes: Refusal of authorities of Szchuen to recognize those issued at Hankow; case of Mr. M. A. Jenkins; illustration of inattention of local authorities to engagements of the Imperial Government; correspondence between the legation and the Chinese foreign office. 200 [Pg. 200 includes portions of Doc. 117 and Doc. 118]

102 do Dec. 3 Interpreters to consulates: Insufficiency of salaries; in many consulates native interpreters or merchant interpreters must be employed because Americans, solely engaged in interpretation, cannot be employed for the compensation allowed; importance of American interpreters; bad character of most of the Chinese interpreters; temptations to misuse their offices; all the great powers pay good salaries, and employ interpreters of their own nationality; disinclination of Chinese authorities to communicate with merchant interpreters; the propriety of appointing consuls acquainted with the Chinese language suggested; an educated American interpreter can easily earn in China $3,000 per annum in private employment. (See dispatch from Mr. Knight, July 14, 1879, page 234 [Pg. 234 includes portions of Doc. 134 and Doc. 135].) 203 [Pg. 203 includes portions of Doc. 120 and Doc. 121]

103 do Dec. 5 Changes in the Chinese foreign office, Mao Changhsi and Li Hungtsao having retired, and Wang Wenchao and Chow Chia Mei have been appointed in their places; the Yamen numbers eleven members, and contains all the privy council of state. 207 [Pg. 207 includes portions of Doc. 121 and Doc. 122]

104 do Dec. 5 The Marquis Tseng appointed Chinese minister to Great Britain: The marquis, one of the ablest men in public life in China, is of liberal ideas; he speaks and reads English. 208 [Pg. 208 includes portions of Doc. 123 and Doc. 124]

105 do Dec. 12 Transit passes: Further correspondence in respect of the refusal of the Szchuen authorities to recognize Mr. Jenkins’s transit passes issued at Hankow; order of Prince Kung that the passes should be regarded if regular. 208 [Pg. 208 includes portions of Doc. 123 and Doc. 124]

106 do 1879. Jan. 18 Transit passes: Viceroy of Szchuen disapproves action of subordinate officials in respect of Mr. Jenkins’s Hankow passes; communication from Prince Kung. 211 [Pg. 211 includes portions of Doc. 124 and Doc. 125]

107 do Feb. 20 Shanghai harbor protection rules: Correspondence with foreign office; disposition of Chinese authorities to restrict their execution to the foreign concessions; right of China to amend rules advanced. (See dispatch No. 69, November 12, 1878. page 192.) 213 [Pg. 213 is part of Doc. 126]

108 do Mar. 12 Transit passes: Further complication in this case; disobedience of orders of foreign office on the part of the Lekin tax-officers at Kwei Chow; merchandise in transit under Mr. Jenkins’s Hankow passes detained at Kwei Chow; correspondence between Mr. Consul Shepard and Mr. Holcombe, and the latter and Prince Kung. 215 [Pg. 215 includes portions of Doc. 126 and Doc. 127]

109 Mr. Evarts to Mr. Holcombe. Mar. 13 Reply to request of Chinese Government that consuls of the United States in Cuba should be instructed to extend their good offices to Chinese subjects engaged as laborers in that island. 219 [Pg. 219 includes portions of Doc. 128, Doc. 129, and Doc. 130]

110 Mr. Seward to Mr. Evarts June 26 Transit passes: Remonstrance of Mr. Holcombe results in release of produce detained at Kwei Chow. 219 [Pg. 219 includes portions of Doc. 128, Doc. 129, and Doc. 130]

111 do July 29 Circular to consuls in China calling for information as to course heretofore followed in civil cases between Americans and Chinese; views as to mixed courts requested. (See Mr. Seward’s dispatches of September 18 and October 7, pages 221 [Pg. 221 is part of Doc. 132], 229 [Pg. 229 is part of Doc. 133].) 220 [Pg. 220 is part of Doc. 131]

112 do Sept. 18 Answers of Consuls Lincoln, Scruggs, De Lano, Shepard, and Lord to above circular: Reports of procedure in mixed cases; drift of sentiment in favor of trial in court of defendant. 221 [Pg. 221 is part of Doc. 132]

113 do Oct. 7 Answers of Consul-General Baily and Vice-Consul Bandinel to above circular: Tribunal the court of the defendant; the consul-general advocates establishment of mixed courts, and presents scheme of organization of mixed courts in Egypt. 229 [Pg. 229 is part of Doc. 133]

114 do Oct. 11 The consul at Foochow reports that the local authorities at that post are dealing promptly and satisfactorily with missionary cases without requiring consular intervention. 234 [Pg. 234 includes portions of Doc. 134 and Doc. 135]

115 Mr. Knight to Mr. Evarts July 14 American interpreters at our Chinese consulates imperatively necessary: Correspondence between Mr. Knight and President Eliot as to establishment of a Chinese professorship at Harvard. (See Mr. Holcombe’s dispatch No. 82, Dec. 3, 1878, page 203 [Pg. 203 includes portions of Doc. 120 and Doc. 121].) 234 [Pg. 234 includes portions of Doc. 134 and Doc. 135]

116 Mr. Wing to Mr. Evarts Oct. 10 Remonstrates against recent ruling of collector of internal revenue at San Francisco requiring the possession of real estate by bondsmen for tobacco manufacturers: Requirements work a hardship against Chinese manufacturers, as but few Chinese are owners of real estate; custom for twenty years past has been to accept persons possessed of the requisite personalty. 237 [Pg. 237 is part of Doc. 137]

117 Mr. Evarts to Mr. Wing Oct. 13 Above note submitted to Secretary of the Treasury. 241 [Pg. 241 includes portions of Doc. 137, Doc. 138, and Doc. 139]

118 do Oct. 24 Collector of internal revenue at San Francisco instructed to accept as surety on a tobacco manufacturer’s bond any good and solvent person, whether the owner of real estate or not. 241 [Pg. 241 includes portions of Doc. 137, Doc. 138, and Doc. 139]

colombia.

No. From whom and to whom. Date. Subject. Page.

119 Mr. Dichman to Mr. Evarts 1878. Aug. 14 Inclosing a translation of the interoceanic canal contract between the Colombian Government and Lieut. L. N. B. Wyse, known as the Wyse contract, and now the property of the de Lesseps company. Analysis of concession: Article I. Exclusive privilege to construct canal granted; duration of concession 99 years from completion of canal; right to construct railway conceded; Colombia restricted from granting another concession; grantees to determine line of canal, and to have two years in which to organize their company, and twelve in which to build the canal; size of canal agreed upon; public land required for canal granted; private property to be condemned; telegraph line authorized. Article II. Deposit by company of 750, 000 francs as guarantee fund, required. Article III. Relations of Panama Railroad to enterprise; provisions as to Atrato route. Article IV. 500, 000 hectares of public land granted in aid of the company. Article V. Neutrality of the canal and ports of termini; free navigation to merchant ships of all nations; passage of troops of foreign nations under control of Colombian Congress. Article VI. Canal closed to war vessels of nations at war, or to those destined to take part in hostilities. Article VII. No import duties to be collected except upon goods introduced for consumption in the country; custom-houses may be established in respect of such goods. Article VIII. Steps may be taken by Colombia to guard against smuggling; free transportation of Colombian officials; the company to support force necessary for protection of transit. Articles IX and X. Exemption from duties or taxes of materials, &c., used in canal construction. Article XI. Goods and passengers in transit exempt from duties or taxes. Article XII. Deposit of ship’s papers during transit. Article XIII. Free immigration of employés of canal allowed. Article XIV. Right to collect light-house, port, or transit dues granted to company; regulations as to tariff of charges. Article XV. Colombia to receive 5 per cent. of gross earnings of canal. Article XVI. Payment of dues to be in advance, and in specie. Article XVII. Fines for infringement of regulations. Article XVIII. Joint stock company for financing canal project may be organized under protection of Colombia; company shall take the name of “The Universal Interoceanic Canal Association;” office of company may be in Bogota, New York, London, or Paris; bonds and stock not to be taxed by Colombia. Article XIX. A fund of 10 per cent. of the shares to be organized for the profit of the founders and promoters of the enterprise; provisions for distribution of revenue of canal. Article XX. Colombia to name commissioner in board of directors, and resident agent on line of canal; grantees to appoint delegate to reside at Bogota; questions at issue between Colombia and the company to be settled by arbitration. Article XXI. Concession may be sold to another company, but absolute prohibition against transfer to foreign nations. Articles XXII and XXIII. Conditions of forfeiture of rights of company; supreme court of Colombia to determine questions of forfeiture. Article XXIV. Provisions for acquisition of canal by Government of Colombia at expiration of period of concession. Articles XXV and XXVI. Public character of enterprise, and provision for submission of contract to.Congress for approval.

Decree approving contract with certain modifications; modifications made by articles; above analysis of contract will serve as guide to modifications.

243 [Pg. 243 includes portions of Doc. 139, Doc. 140, and Doc. 141]

120 Mr. Dichman to Mr. Evarts. Oct. 30 Extradition, and right of transit for criminals in charge of United States officers across the Isthmus of Panama, discussed with minister for foreign affairs of Colombia: Questions separate and distinct; right of transit secured by treaty of 1846; views of Mr. Dichman and Mr. Arosemena; power of executing treaty of extradition on part of Colombia limited by want of federal judiciary, and necessity of relying on State authorities. (See case of C. G. Scrafford, Mr. Evarts to Mr. Dichman, November 12, 1878, F. R., 1878, page 151; report of royal commission upon extradition, Mr. Welsh’s’ dispatch, June 22, 1878, F. R., 1878, page 268; case of Angell, Mr. Lowell’s dispatch of February 11, 1879, page 936 [Pg. 936 includes portions of Doc. 473 and Doc. 474], and Mr. Evarts’s reply of March 5, 1879, page 941 [Pg. 941 includes portions of Doc. 476, Doc. 477, and Doc. 478], and dispatches 48, February 15, page 271 [Pg. 271 is part of Doc. 149], and 58, March 17, 1879, page 273 [Pg. 273 includes portions of Doc. 150 and Doc. 151], from Mr. Dichman.) 251 [Pg. 251 includes portions of Doc. 141 and Doc. 142]

121 do Nov. 7 Project of a reciprocity treaty between Colombia and the United States suggested: Colombia to grant free admission to American beer, and to reduce tariff charges on American dry-goods 25 per cent., in consideration of a special tariff reduction by the United States in favor of Colombian tobacco; letter from Mr. Minister Camacho and remarks by Mr. Dichman upon extension of American trade with Colombia. 254 [Pg. 254 includes portions of Doc. 142 and Doc. 143]

122 Mr. Dichman to Mr. Evarts. Nov. 16 Submitting letter from Dr. Camacho upon the revenues; imports and exports, and tariff rates of Colombia: Population of Colombia, 3,500,000; revenue, $4,200,000; exports, $12,000,000; imports, $10,000,000; tariff, general, 36 per cent. ad valorem; value of tobacco exported to the United States in 1860 about $300,000. This commerce disappeared with the high tariff of 1863. 256 [Pg. 256 is part of Doc. 144]

123 do Nov. 29 Correspondence touching the establishment of steam communication between New Orleans and Colombia: Present imports from the United States not over 15 per cent. of total imports of Colombia; direct steam communication needed to develop trade; Colombia favorable to establishment of such communication; trade statistics: letter from Mr. Minister Camacho. 258 [Pg. 258 includes portions of Doc. 144 and Doc. 145]

124 do Dec. 14 Deposit of ships’ papers: Colombian law requirin deposit of ships’ papers of foreign ships with her customs officers in opposition to international usage; argument of question by Mr. Dichman; position assumed that ships’ papers should be deposited with consul of ships’ nation while vessel is in port, said papers to be returned upon presentation of port clearance by master of vessel to consul; identity in spirit of Colombian and American law respecting the deposit of their ships’ papers with their respective consuls in the ports of the other; violation of this principle by Colombia in demanding for her customs officers custody of papers of American vessels in her ports while directing her con suls in American ports to take charge of papers of Colombian vessels. (See Mr. Dichman’s dispatches, No. 34, page 266 [Pg. 266 includes portions of Doc. 146 and Doc. 147]; No. 62, page 280 [Pg. 280 includes portions of Doc. 152 and Doc. 153]; No. 104, page 289 [Pg. 289 includes portions of Doc. 158 and Doc. 159], and instructions from Mr. Evarts, No. 26, page 270 [Pg. 270 includes portions of Doc. 147 and Doc. 148], and 31, page 273 [Pg. 273 includes portions of Doc. 150 and Doc. 151].) 260 [Pg. 260 includes portions of Doc. 145 and Doc. 146]

125 do 1879. Jan. 15 Deposit of ships’ papers: Protocol entered into between the United States and Colombian ministers on the 7th January, 1879, prescribing form of proceeding upon entry of vessel into port: 1st. Papers to be produced to collector of customs or inspector of port; within forty-eight hours of arrival, papers to be deposited by master with consul; his receipt taken, and it transferred to the collector. 2d. Ships’ papers only to be returned to master by consul upon exhibition of port clearance. 3d. Exequatur may be canceled if papers be returned to master’before issuance of clearance. 266 [Pg. 266 includes portions of Doc. 146 and Doc. 147]

126 Mr. Evarts to Mr. Dichman. Feb. 4 Inclosing correspondence with British minister at Washington respecting the deposit of ships’ papers with the consul of the ship’s nation in Colombian ports. 270 [Pg. 270 includes portions of Doc. 147 and Doc. 148]

127 Mr. Dichman to Mr. Evarts. Feb. 15 Right of transit across the Isthmus of Panama under article 35, treaty of 1846: Case of C. G. Scrafford, released by authorities of Panama while in custody of a United States official, on his way to the United States from Peru; action of authorities of Panama in contravention of rights secured by treaty; inclosing correspondence on subject with foreign minister of Colombia. 271 [Pg. 271 is part of Doc. 149]

128 Mr. Evarts to Mr. Dichman. Feb. 20 Deposit of ships’ papers: Satisfaction of the United States at adjustment of question. 273 [Pg. 273 includes portions of Doc. 150 and Doc. 151]

129 Mr. Dichman to Mr. Evarts. Mar. 17 Right of transit across the Isthmus of Panama: Protocol signed 22d February, 1879, prescribing procedure in case of transit of criminals in charge of officers of the United States across the isthmus: 1st. Recognition of right of transit accorded to the United States by article 35, treaty of 1846, to include the transit of the troops of the government, and criminals in charge of officers of the United States. 2d. Exhibition of documents of extradition in case of extradited prisoners, (to Colombian authorities on isthmus. 3d. Prisoners while in transit to be under guard of Colombian forces. Correspondence between Mr. Dichman and Colombian foreign minister illustrating protocol. 273 [Pg. 273 includes portions of Doc. 150 and Doc. 151]

130 Mr. Dichman to Mr. Evarts. Mar. 24 Commercial relations with Colombia discussed: Trade at present largely in the hands of Great Britain. The position of Colombia; similarity of her institutions to ours; character of her products and of her imports; all indicate that under a wise commercial policy the bulk of her trade might be transferred from Great Britain to the United States. To this end Mr. Dichman proposes a reciprocity treaty, and, to enable the United States to negotiate one to advantage, the reimposition of the tax upon coffee, with the allowance of a rebate or cancellation of duties in favor of such coffee-producing countries as shall accord equivalent trade advantages to the United States. 278 [Pg. 278 is part of Doc. 152]

131 do Mar. 31 Deposit of ships’ papers: Correspondence between Mr. Dichman and the British minister to Colombia; Colombian law of 1875, in conflict with international usage, should be repealed; executive power to ask Congress to enact a law in the line of the protocol of 7th January, 1879. 280 [Pg. 280 includes portions of Doc. 152 and Doc. 153]

132 do April 14 Right of transit across the Isthmus of Panama: Acquiescence of the Senate in the protocol upon this subject of February 22, 1879. (See Mr. Dichman’s No. 58. of March 17. page 273 [Pg. 273 includes portions of Doc. 150 and Doc. 151].) 284 [Pg. 284 includes portions of Doc. 153, Doc. 154, and Doc. 155]

133 Mr. Evarts to Mr. Dichman. May 12 Protocol of February 22, 1879, respecting right of the United States to transport troops, and criminals in custody of its officers, across the Isthmus of Panama armroved. 284 [Pg. 284 includes portions of Doc. 153, Doc. 154, and Doc. 155]

134 Mr. Dichman to Mr. Evarts. June 1 Congratulations on behalf of the United States at the peaceful solution of recent political troubles in Colombia. 285 [Pg. 285 includes portions of Doc. 155 and Doc. 156]

135 do June 14 Forced loans: Exemption of Americans from same by operation of most-favored-nation clause of treaty, France having treaty with Colombia expressly exempting French citizens from such exactions. 287 [Pg. 287 is part of Doc. 157]

136 do June 28 Colombian foreign debt about $10,000,000; interest 4¾ per cent. per annum; settlement of 1874 based upon contract of 1861; default in the obligations of the settlement of 1874 revives the contract of 1861; public sentiment in favor of payment of debt. 289 [Pg. 289 includes portions of Doc. 158 and Doc. 159]

137 do July 2 Deposit of ships’ papers: Text of law passed by Colombian Congress touching same; Colombian law substantially the same as the law of the United States. (See Mr. Dichman’s dispatches 34, page, 266 [Pg. 266 includes portions of Doc. 146 and Doc. 147], and 62 [Pg. 62 is part of Doc. 47], page 280 [Pg. 280 includes portions of Doc. 152 and Doc. 153].) 289 [Pg. 289 includes portions of Doc. 158 and Doc. 159]

138 do July 19 Panama interoceanic canal: Wyse-de Lesseps contract discussed; national and international character of the enterprise; the Wyse-de Lesseps contract deemed to be unworthy of the support of the United States; dangerous principle of action sought to be established by Article 5, respecting the use of the canal by vessels of war of belligerents, and by the military and naval forces of Colombia and her allies; supreme interest of the United States in an interoceanic canal. (For text of the Wyse-de Lesseps contract, see Mr. Dichman’s dispatch dated August 14, 1878, page 243 [Pg. 243 includes portions of Doc. 139, Doc. 140, and Doc. 141].) 290 [Pg. 290 includes portions of Doc. 159 and Doc. 160]

139 do Aug. 1 Radically defective nature of the Wyse-de Lesseps canal contract: Insuperable objection that it is a mere contract between private individuals and the Government of Colombia; insecurity of property rights in Colombia in time of domestic convulsion; advisability of placing any enterprise for the building of an interoceanic canal under the protection of a treaty stipulation; paramount interests of the United States in an interoceanic canal; international agreement as to neutrality of canal suggested; prominence given by Colombia to the question of revenue to be derived from the canal, and to its ownership after 99 years. 295 [Pg. 295 includes portions of Doc. 160 and Doc. 161]

140 do Oct. 17 History of the steps taken by succeeding Governments of Colombia to secure enlistment of capital in the building of an interoceanic canal: Record of the various concessions granted; account of the Wyse-de Lesseps contract. Contract signed 28th May, 1876, by A. de Gorgoza, for himself and Gen. Stephen Türr, of France. Contract then transferred to the “Civil International Society of the Interoceanic Canal,” or the Türr Society. Under the auspices of this society Lieutenant Wyse, one of its members, visited the isthmus in 1876. In 1878 he asked for a modification of the Türr contract, the result being the present Wyse-de Lesseps contract. Account of the transfer of the Türr-Wyse contract to the de Lesseps company: Conditions of transfer; one million francs to be paid fifteen days after the organization of the company; 4,000,000 francs to be paid one month after half of the stock subscriptions shall have been paid, and 5,000,000 francs in the fully paid-up stock of the company—in all 10,000,000 francs. Reasons why the United States should discourage the de Lesseps enterprise: The company essentially French; inevitable intervention of the European government or governments whose citizens may be interested in the canal; Colombia powerless against such intervention; the good offices of the United States would then be invoked and a serious complication occasioned; such complications may be avoided by making the completion of the canal under the present contract impossible; same objections apply to any attempt to construct a canal under auspices of any European government; dangers to American commerce from such an organized enterprise; question of the court in which disagreements between the company and the shipping using the canal, are to be adjudicated. (For the De Gorgoza contract, see Mr. Scruggs’s dispatches 163, of May 7, and 170, of June 5, 1876.) 297 [Pg. 297 includes portions of Doc. 161 and Doc. 162]

denmark.

No. From whom and to whom. Date. Subject. Page.

141 Mr. Cramer to Mr. Evarts 1878. Nov. 27 Commercial depression: Bulk of the trade of Denmark with Germany and Great Britain; exports to the United States in 1874, 380, 571 crowns, in 1876 but 15, 141 crowns; imports from the United States in 1874, 4, 478, 826 crowns, and in 1876, 6, 730, 000 crowns; suggestions for increase of trade with the United States. 303 [Pg. 303 includes portions of Doc. 162 and Doc. 163]

142 Mr. Evarts to Mr. Cramer Dec. 10 The negotiation of a treaty of extradition to be suggested to the government of the King; treaties exist with all but five of the powers of Europe. 306 [Pg. 306 includes portions of Doc. 164 and Doc. 165]

143 Mr. Cramer to Mr. Evarts 1879. Jan. 4 Same subject: Denmark willing to enter upon negotiations. 306 [Pg. 306 includes portions of Doc. 164 and Doc. 165]

144 do May 20 Report of commission to inquire into cause of riot in the island of Santa Cruz; aid to be furnished to the sufferers. (See dispatch No. 487, of November 4, 1878. page 160. F. R., 1878.) 307 [Pg. 307 includes portions of Doc. 165, Doc. 166, and Doc. 167]

145 do May 27 A general European tariff league against the United States suggested in the Rigsdag; the idea said to find favor among German agricultural and manufacturing classes; adulterated cotton goods of English make sold as American goods; trade-mark conventions suggested as a measure of protection; further suggestions as to extension of American commerce. 307 [Pg. 307 includes portions of Doc. 165, Doc. 166, and Doc. 167]

146 do Aug 11 Rumored negotiations on the part of Demark for the sale of St. Thomas said by the Danish foreign minister to be untrue. (See dispatch No. 550, from Mr. Cramer, dated August 29, page 310 [Pg. 310 includes portions of Doc. 169 and Doc. 170].) 308 [Pg. 308 includes portions of Doc. 167 and Doc. 168]

147 Mr. Seward to Mr. Cramer Aug 11 Extradition negotiation: Instructing as to conduct of. General rather than minute and specific definitions of offenses desirable; the treaty with Spain thought to afford the best example of an extradition treaty; drafts exchanged during progress of negotiation to be dated, and copies sent to Department. 309 [Pg. 309 includes portions of Doc. 168 and Doc. 169]

148 Mr. Cramer to Mr. Evarts Aug. 29 Rumored disposition on the part of Denmark to sell the Island of St. Thomas to some foreign government; suggestion advanced that possibly Great Britain may entertain design of acquiring the island. 310 [Pg. 310 includes portions of Doc. 169 and Doc. 170]

france.

No. From whom and to whom. Date. Subject. Page.

149 Mr. Noyes to Mr. Evarts 1879. Jan. 11 Circular from the International Bureau of Weights and Measures to the effect that the bureau is prepared to make comparisons of old with new standards. 311 [Pg. 311 includes portions of Doc. 170 and Doc. 171]

150 do Jan. 24 Copy of second annual report or the international Bureau of Weights and Measures; report for the year 1878. 312 [Pg. 312 includes portions of Doc. 171 and Doc. 172]

151 do Jan. 31 Resignation of President MacMahon; election of Mr. Jules Grévy as President of France; text of message of President MacMahon resigning the Presidency; details of the election of his successor. 332 [Pg. 332 includes portions of Doc. 172 and Doc. 173]

152 do Feb. 7 The organization of the administration of President Grévy: Mr. Waddington appointed premier; personnel of the administration; text of message from the President to the Chambers; speech of Mr. Gambetta upon assuming the presidency of the Chamber of Deputies. 334 [Pg. 334 is part of Doc. 174]

154 do Mar. 14 Proposition to impeach the de Broglie and Rocheboüet ministries defeated; by French custom, impeachments for political acts must be directed against the whole cabinet; account of the debate. 336 [Pg. 336 includes portions of Doc. 174 and Doc. 175]

155 do Mar. 28 Report of audience with the President of France to deliver letter from the President of the United States in reply to one announcing M. Grévy’s accession to the presidency. 339 [Pg. 339 includes portions of Doc. 176 and Doc. 177]

156 do Apr. 25 Appointment of Admiral Ammen and Mr. Monocal as representatives of the United States to the Interoceanic Canal Conference, to meet at Paris; their presence at the conference in no way to bind the United States to its conclusions. 339 [Pg. 339 includes portions of Doc. 176 and Doc. 177]

157 do May 30 Report of conclusion of labors of the Paris interoceanic canal conference. 340 [Pg. 340 includes portions of Doc. 177 and Doc. 178]

158 Mr. Hunter to Mr. Noyes July 11 Mr. Noyes instructed to ascertain if there be any truth in the report that France has offered to establish a protectorate over Liberia; deep interest of the United States in Liberia expressed. (See Mr. Noyes’dispatch of August 20; Mr. Smyth’s dispatch of May 30; and Mr. Hunter’s instruction to Mr. Smyth of September 8, pages 341 [Pg. 341 includes portions of Doc. 179 and Doc. 180], 718 [Pg. 718 includes portions of Doc. 351, Doc. 352, and Doc. 353], and 727 [Pg. 727 includes portions of Doc. 356, Doc. 357, and Doc. 358].) 341 [Pg. 341 includes portions of Doc. 179 and Doc. 180]

159 Mr. Noyes to Mr. Evarts Aug. 20 French protectorate over Liberia: Proposition made by thoroughly irresponsible persons; French Government does not entertain the idea. 341 [Pg. 341 includes portions of Doc. 179 and Doc. 180]

160 Mr. Seward to Mr. Noyes Aug. 29 Mr. Noyes directed to visit North Africa, and the countries about the head of the Mediterranean with reference to the extension of American trade with those countries; efforts now making by France to extend her trade with the African countries. 342 [Pg. 342 includes portions of Doc. 180 and Doc. 181]

161 Mr. Noyes to Mr. Evarts Sept. 3 Report upon the system of railway taxation in France; notes from the ministry of finance citing laws and rates of taxation. 345 [Pg. 345 is part of Doc. 182]

162 Mr. Hitt to Mr. Evarts Nov. 1 Mormon proselyting practically unknown in France; the French disinclined to emigrate; no means of prohibiting emigration if the requirements of the military law have been complied with; polygamy a crime under French law; arrest will follow its advocacy. 349 [Pg. 349 includes portions of Doc. 182 and Doc. 183]

163 Mr. Taylor to Mr. Evarts Nov. 8 Text of law for suppression of social democratic movement, passed by Imperial Parliament after long debate; vote 220 to 149; period of operation limited to March 31, 1881. 351 [Pg. 351 is part of Doc. 184]

164 do Nov. 18 International exposition of products and utensils of sea and inland fisheries, to be held at Berlin in 1880, under auspices of German Fisheries Society; programme of exposition. 354 [Pg. 354 includes portions of Doc. 184 and Doc. 185]

165 Mr. Everett to Mr. Evarts Dec. 21 Report of the death of Mr. Bayard Taylor; the cause of his death dropsy; note from Mr. Von Bulow conveying the sentiments of regret of the German Government. 357 [Pg. 357 includes portions of Doc. 185 and Doc. 186]

166 do 1879. Jan. 6 Resolutions in memory of Mr. Bayard Taylor, passed at a meeting of Americans in Berlin. 358 [Pg. 358 includes portions of Doc. 186 and Doc. 187]

167 do Jan. 9 Cases of naturalized citizens arrested in Germany for alleged offenses against the military laws of the empire, or of the states of the empire; instances, those of Wilhelm Steffan, Frank Lutz, Iver Iverson; complications as to citizenship growing out of annexation of Schleswig-Holstein. 359 [Pg. 359 includes portions of Doc. 187 and Doc. 188]

168 do Feb. 15 Reichstag opened by the Emperor: Text of the Emperor’s speech; questions relating to increased taxation and protective duties the most difficult which the Reichstag will have to deal with; sentiment growing in favor of a protectionist policy; reasons for the abrogation of the 5th clause of the Treaty of Prague of 1866. 360 [Pg. 360 includes portions of Doc. 188 and Doc. 189]

169 do Feb. 17 Counterfeiting United States money punishable under German law by imprisonment at hard labor; an open question whether the counterfeiting of foreign postage-stamps is punishable under German law. 364 [Pg. 364 is part of Doc. 190]

170 do Mar. 13 Debates in the Reichstag upon the commercial treaty with Austria, and the parliamentary discipline bill; opposition to the latter; course of the financial discussion; the protectionist views of Prince, Bismarck attacked. 365 [Pg. 365 includes portions of Doc. 190 and Doc. 191]

171 do Mar. 21 Report of cases of naturalized citizens of the United States which have required intervention of legation from October 3, 1877, to December 3, 1878, 24 in all; list of cases: 1. Martin Zimmer; 2. Benjamin Becker; 3. C. A.F. Weibezahl; 4. Hermann Labischinsky; 5. Ernst Eggers; 6. Jacob Kowalski; 7. Frank Kiagges; 8. Philip Flatar; 9. Karl Ganzenmüller; 10. Albert Kokott; 11. Julius Baumer; 12. Joseph Wackermann; 13. John Gottfried Berude; 14. Gustavo Weil; 15. Christian Henkes; 16. Alex. F. Wallner; 17. Gustav Folte; 18. F. E. O. Klein; 19. Emil David; 20. George Wehrung; 21. Johannes Kehr; 22. Elie Bloch; 23. William Krotz: 24. William Steffan. 367 [Pg. 367 includes portions of Doc. 191 and Doc. 192]

172 do Apr. 23 Question as to exemption from military duty of the employés of the legation; case of the messenger of the legation, William Knoth, a German subject; question of exterritoriality of legation involved; notes from Mr. Everett to Mr. Von Bülow. (See dispatches 107 and 114, pages 375 [Pg. 375 includes portions of Doc. 193 and Doc. 194] and 384 [Pg. 384 is part of Doc. 197].) 374 [Pg. 374 includes portions of Doc. 192 and Doc. 193]

173 do May 5 Same subject: Statement of case, and citations from Wheaton, Phillimore, Heffter, Bluntschii, and Vattel; notes from Mr. Von Bülow; the position assumed by Mr. Everett as to Knoth’s rights to exemption on account of services in the legation sustained by above authorities. 375 [Pg. 375 includes portions of Doc. 193 and Doc. 194]

174 do May 5 No uniform regulations as to railroad taxation as yet established in the German Empire; railroads of Prussia divided into state and private lines; private lines taxed by the state upon their net receipts, and their bonds subject to a stamp-tax; excepting road-beds, railroad realty is subject to taxation; railroads not taxed as owners of personalty; stock, and dividends from stock and bonds in the hands Of private holders taxed as their personalty; gross receipts not taxed; definition of net receipts; question as to extent of municipal taxation of railroads and railroad bonds, not settled in Prussia by legislative provisions. 379 [Pg. 379 includes portions of Doc. 194 and Doc. 195]

175 Mr. Everett to Mr. Evarts May 19 Text of treaty between Germany and the Samoan Islands, concluded January 24, 1879: Article I. Peace and friendship clause. Art. II. Reciprocal exemption of subjects from war contributions, military requisitions, or military service: Houses, lands, and plantations of Germans in Samoa exempt from occupation by war parties. Art. III. Freedom of worship accorded—right of sepulture mutually granted. Art. IV. German subjects accorded “complete liberty of commerce” in Samoa, and right of free entry into “all places, ports, and waters with their ships and cargoes,” and “to sell, land, and store their ladings “as well as to ship native produce; no duties or restrictions to be imposed upon Germans by Samoa except same be agreed upon between the two governments; first “most favored nation” clause. Art. V. May establish naval station and hoist flag in harbor of Saluafata; German war vessels may enter all Samoan harbors. Art. VI. Right to travel, trade, and buy lands and build houses mutually accorded; taxes and regulations in Samoa, affecting Germans, to be matter of agreement between the two parties; second “most favored nation” clause; Germans to enjoy, in Samoa, same rights as Samoans; guarantee by Samoa of peaceful possession of all lands heretofore purchased by Germans. Art. VII. Germans subject to German jurisdiction respecting legal disputes and crimes and offenses arising or committed among themselves; jurisdiction, where Samoan subject is a party, reserved for further consideration. Art. VIII. All Samoan laws respecting taxes and duties, as well as those regulating conduct, to receive the sanction of the German Government before being enforced; municipal regulations of Apia agreed upon between Samoan and German officials may be lawful unless vetoed by Germany; third “most favored nation” clause. Art. IX. All questions not settled by this treaty reserved for subsequent agreement. Art. X. Samoa may do nothing to the injury of Germans. Art. XI. Fourth “most favored nation” clause. Arts. XII, XIII. Ratifications, &c. (See dispatch of June 30. page 388 [Pg. 388 includes portions of Doc. 198 and Doc. 199].) 381 [Pg. 381 includes portions of Doc. 195 and Doc. 196]

176 do June 2 Exterritoriality accorded legations by German law only to extend to non-Germans; translation of law. 384 [Pg. 384 is part of Doc. 197]

177 Mr. White to Mr. Evarts June 25 Debate in the Reichstag upon the question of suspending the sale of silver, and the restoration of the double standard: Speech of Prince Bismarck; his position a tentative one; the sale of silver suspended—the policy not absolutely abandoned; no immediate intention of changing the basis of coinage. Speech of Herr von Dechen, president of the Reichs Bank; results of the sales of government silver stated; net loss on sales 72, 000, 000 marks; in 1873, when the sales began, the price of silver in London was between 60¼ and 62 pence, when sales were discontinued it had sunk to 48⅞ pence; the loss on the present stock of German silver, if it should be sold, is estimated at 90, 000, 000 marks. 385 [Pg. 385 includes portions of Doc. 197 and Doc. 198]

178 do June 30 Debate in the Reichstag upon the treaty between Germany and Samoa: Treaty explained by the minister of foreign affairs, von Bulow; German position in the South Pacific; her trade relations. 388 [Pg. 388 includes portions of Doc. 198 and Doc. 199]

179 do July 3 Tariff debate in the Reichstag: New tariff law in the direction of protection of home industries; augmentation of duties upon American lard. 392 [Pg. 392 includes portions of Doc. 199 and Doc. 200]

180 do July 12 Germany not likely to sell any more silver; prospect of reissue. 394 [Pg. 394 includes portions of Doc. 200, Doc. 201, and Doc. 202]

181 do Aug. 15 Résumé of the work of the session of the Reichstag which closed on the 12th of August: Decision respecting the Parliament discipline bill; tariff debates, and passage of the bill by a coalition between the Ultramontane and the Imperial and Conservative parties; its protective tendencies; increase of revenue anticipated; resignation of Dr. Falk, Herr Hobrecht, and Dr. Friedenthal; labors of Dr. Falk as minister of instruction; great increase in school efficiency under his administration; con stitution of Alsace and Lorraine, a state of the empire with a parliament; discussion upon the silver question and the Samoan treaty; contemplated purchase of railroads by the government, and establishment of a separate department for their control; operation of the anti-socialist law; tariff policy discussed. 394 [Pg. 394 includes portions of Doc. 200, Doc. 201, and Doc. 202]

182 Mr. White to Mr. Evarts Sept. 9 Report upon the amount of the gold and silver coin and bullion and paper currency in Germany; memorial containing tables of statistics upon the subjects submitted by the German foreign office. (See circular of May 23, 1879, page 3 [Pg. 3 includes portions of Doc. 4 and Doc. 5].) 398 [Pg. 398 includes portions of Doc. 202 and Doc. 203]

183 do Oct. 15 Success ot the conservatives m the elections to the Prussian Landtag; majority with that party; the elections indicate the powerful influence of Prince Bismarck. 402 [Pg. 402 includes portions of Doc. 203 and Doc. 204]

184 Mr. Schlözer to Mr. Evarts. 1878. Dec. 8 Requesting information as to whether a drawback of duties paid upon goods imported into the United States is allowed unon their exportation. 403 [Pg. 403 includes portions of Doc. 204 and Doc. 205]

185 Mr. Evarts to Mr. Schlözer. Dec. 17 Answer to above: Drawbacks of duties, less 1 per cent., are allowed on such goods when exported, provided they have not been out of the custody of the government; inclosing a letter from the Secretary of the Treasury. 404 [Pg. 404 includes portions of Doc. 205, Doc. 206, and Doc. 207]

186 Mr. Schlözer to Mr. Evarts 1879. Mar. 2 Case of Carl Weinrebe, cook on board the steamer Mosel, a German vessel, arrested for smuggling: Question whether under Article XII, paragraphs 2 and 3, consular convention between the United States and Germany, the arrest and search of Weinrebe’s effects, made without notification of German oonsul, was regular. 404 [Pg. 404 includes portions of Doc. 205, Doc. 206, and Doc. 207]

187 Mr. Evarts to Mr. Schlözer. Apr. 17 Answer to above: No such search as contemplated by treaty made; arrest of Weinrebe not a violation of treaty. 406 [Pg. 406 is part of Doc. 208]

great britain.

No. From whom and to whom. Date. Subject. Page.

188 Mr. Welsh to Mr. Evarts 1878. Dec. 6 British circular prohibiting government officers from acting: as consuls for foreign countries. 407 [Pg. 407 includes portions of Doc. 208, Doc. 209, and Doc. 210]

189 do 1879. Jan. 31 Frigate Constitution: Case of tug Admiral against the Constitution; claim for salvage; service rendered in hauling the frigate off the shore; case tried before Sir R. Phillimore; judgment in favor of the Constitution; motion of plaintiffs dismissed; report of proceedings. 407 [Pg. 407 includes portions of Doc. 208, Doc. 209, and Doc. 210]

190 Mr. Evarts to Mr. Welsh Feb. 18 Directing a report upon the system of railroad taxation in force in Great Britain. Questions submitted by Mr. Charles Francis Adams, jr.: 1st. On what general recognized principles, if any, is the railroad taxation of Great Britain based? 2d. Are railroads taxed as holders of realty? 3d. Or as holders of personalty? 4th. Are they subject to a franchise tax? 5th. Is their stock taxed as personalty? 6th. Are the receipts of the companies taxed; and, if so, whether net or gross receipts? (See Mr. Welsh’s dispatch of April 15, page 429 [Pg. 429 includes portions of Doc. 217 and Doc. 218]. Similar instructions sent to ministers to Austria-Hungary, Belgium, Franee, Germany, Italy, and Switzerland. See answers from all countries but Italy.) 413 [Pg. 413 includes portions of Doc. 210 and Doc. 211]

191 Mr. Welsh to Mr. Evarts Mar. 18 The gold medal of the Royal Astronomical Society conferred upon. Professor Asaph Hall, of the National Observatory. 414 [Pg. 414 includes portions of Doc. 211 and Doc. 212]

192 do Mar. 19 Question as to liability to arrest at suit of British subject, of Belgian Government vessel engaged in the mail and package service. The vessel not being a vessel of war, nor the yacht of a sovereign, decided by Sir R. Phillimore affirmatively; case of the Parlement Beige. 415 [Pg. 415 includes portions of Doc. 213 and Doc. 214]

193 Mr. Evarts to Mr. Welsh Mar. 25 Case of the American bark Laconia: Improper search of said vessel by order of Captain Earle, of Her Britannic Majesty’s naval service, in the port of Zanzibar, ostensibly in pursuit of slaves. Violation of provisions of the first article of the Treaty of 1862; case to be brought to attention of British Government; report of Consul Hathorne. (See dispatch of June 17 from Mr. Welsh, page 431 [Pg. 431 includes portions of Doc. 218 and Doc. 219].) 415 [Pg. 415 includes portions of Doc. 213 and Doc. 214]

194 do Apr. 2 The character and growth of the cattle export trade of the United States: Exports of cattle on the hoof in 1871, amounted to $403, 491; in 1878 to $3, 896, 818; and of the shipment of 1878, $2, 408, 843 in value went to Great Britain. Exports of slaughtered cattle in 1874, when the trade began, amounted to $12, 661; in 1878, to $5, 009, 856; proportion to Great Britain, $4, 966, 152. Ample provisionmade at Leavenworth and Omaha, points of collection, and at Chicago and New York, points of shipment, for inspection of cattle. 423 [Pg. 423 includes portions of Doc. 214 and Doc. 215]

195 Mr. Welsh to Mr. Evarts Apr. 10 Terms of admission of private students to Royal Naval College at Greenwich. 427 [Pg. 427 includes portions of Doc. 215 and Doc. 216]

196 do Apr. 15 Railroad taxation in England: 1st, a tax of 5 per cent. on gross receipts from passengers, except on fares of not exceeding a penny a mile by trains stopping at every station; 2d and 3d, railways subject to stamp duties on dealings in real or personal property; 4, no franchise tax; 5th, stock and debentures not taxed as such; 6th, liable to income tax on net annual profits; such tax precedes dividends. (See instruction of February 18 from Mr. Evarts. page 413 [Pg. 413 includes portions of Doc. 210 and Doc. 211].) 429 [Pg. 429 includes portions of Doc. 217 and Doc. 218]

197 do June 10 Letter from Mr. Thomas Brassey upon “a naval reserve of ships”: Project for the creation of an auxiliary navy by granting bounties to constructors of merchant vessels to build them with reference to their ultimate transfer to the regular Navy. Remarks upon the United States steamer Trenton. 429 [Pg. 429 includes portions of Doc. 217 and Doc. 218]

198 do June 17 Regret expressed by the British Government at the unwarranted proceedings of Captain Earle, of Her Britannic Majesty’s naval service, in ordering the search of the American bark Laconia in the harbor of Zanzibar. (See instructions No. 258, dated March 25, from Mr. Evarts to Mr. Wesh, page 415 [Pg. 415 includes portions of Doc. 213 and Doc. 214]). 431 [Pg. 431 includes portions of Doc. 218 and Doc. 219]

199 do July 11 Transmitting communication from Mr. George McHenry, in reply to circular of May 23, 1879 (page 3 [Pg. 3 includes portions of Doc. 4 and Doc. 5]), calling for information as to the amount of gold and silver coin and bullion and paper currency in Great Britain. 432 [Pg. 432 includes portions of Doc. 219 and Doc. 220]

200 Mr. Evarts to Mr, Welsh July 11 Unwarranted assumption of jurisdiction by the high court of Calcutta, in the case of John Anderson, a seaman on board the American bark “C. O. Whitmore,” charged with having killed the first officer while the ship was upon the high seas, the ship being on her voyage from New York to Calcutta; his trial by the high court. The well-settled principle of international law, that a merchant-vessel upon the high seas is under the jurisdiction of the nation to which she belongs, and that the tribunals of the ship’s nation have exclusive jurisdiction of offenses committed upon such vessel upon the high seas, violated in this case; detailed report from the consul-general at Calcutta. (See Mr. Evarts’ instruction of date July 29. page 446 [Pg. 446 is part of Doc. 223].) 435 [Pg. 435 includes portions of Doc. 220 and Doc. 221]

201 Mr. Welsh to Mr. Evarts July 18 Transmitting two articles written by Mr. George McHenry, “on bi-metallism. (See Mr. McHenry’s article on the gold and silver coin and bullion and paper currency in Great Britain, inclosed in Mr. Welsh’s dispatch of July 11, pase 432.) 441 [Pg. 441 is part of Doc. 222]

202 Mr. Evarts to Mr. Welsh July 29 The unwarranted assumption of jurisdiction by the high court of Calcutta, in the case of John Anderson, seaman of the American bark “C. O. Whitmore,” charged with murder upon the high seas, aggravated by the character of the trial, and the utter insufficiency of the sentence. Dispatch from Consul-General Litchfield, with details of trial. (See Mr. Evarts’s instruction of date July 11, 1879, page 435 [Pg. 435 includes portions of Doc. 220 and Doc. 221].) 446 [Pg. 446 is part of Doc. 223]

203 Mr. Welsh to Mr. Evarts Aug. 5 Memorial from Lord Salisbury as to amount of gold and silver coin and bullion and paper currency in Great Britain. (See Mr. Welsh’s dispatches of date July 11 and 18, pages 432 [Pg. 432 includes portions of Doc. 219 and Doc. 220] and 441 [Pg. 441 is part of Doc. 222].) 449 [Pg. 449 is part of Doc. 224]

204 Mr. Hoppin to Mr. Evarts Sept. 4 Text of Mr. Hoppin’s note to Lord Salisbury, communicating substance of Mr. Evarts’s circular upon Mormon immigration. (For Lord Salisbury’s answer, see page 465 [Pg. 465 includes portions of Doc. 228 and Doc. 229].) 450 [Pg. 450 includes portions of Doc. 224 and Doc. 225]

205 do Sept. 5 Editorial from the Daily News upon our claim for damages arising out of the transactions at Fortune Bay. (See Foreign Relations, 1878, pages 284, 314, 318, 323, 346, 349.) 451 [Pg. 451 includes portions of Doc. 225 and Doc. 226]

206 do Sept. 19 Speeches of Lords Beaconsfield and Derby, Mr. Cross and others, upon the prevalent agricultural and commercial distress in Great Britain. 453 [Pg. 453 includes portions of Doc. 226 and Doc. 227]

207 do Sept. 20 Report from Mr. Hoppin; owing to general depression in trade and industry, a large emigration to the United States of a higher class of laborers, and of many from the class of small proprietors, may be anticipated: Necessity for an authentic government publication respecting the advantages for settlement afforded by the new States and Territories of the West and Southwest. 463 [Pg. 463 includes portions of Doc. 227 and Doc. 228]

208 do Oct. 8 Answer of Lord Salisbury to Mr. Hoppin’s note on the subject of Mormon immigration: British Government can do nothing in the premises. 465 [Pg. 465 includes portions of Doc. 228 and Doc. 229]

209 do Oct. 11 Editorial from the London Times of October 8 upon American agriculture. (See dispatch of date October 25, page 478 [Pg. 478 includes portions of Doc. 231 and Doc. 232].) 466 [Pg. 466 is part of Doc. 230]

210 do Oct. 18 Speeches of Lord Salisbury at Manchester in defense of the policy of the government. 468 [Pg. 468 is part of Doc. 231]

211 do Oct. 25 Letter from Mr. Andrews, late United States minister to Sweden, upon land in the United States, published in the Times of October 24. (See editorial from the Times upon American agriculture, page 466 [Pg. 466 is part of Doc. 230].) 478 [Pg. 478 includes portions of Doc. 231 and Doc. 232]

212 Mr. Evarts to Sir Edward Thornton. 1878. Dec. 17 The Canadian Government denies to American vessels the right to aid wrecked or disabled vessels in Canadian waters, while the United States is ready to grant this right to Canadian vessels in American waters, (see act of Congress approved June 19, 1878): Necessity for change of policy illustrated by cases of the tug Champion, the tug Winston, the tug J. H. Martin, the schooner Augustus Ford, and others. (See notes from Mr. Seward of July 15 and August 26, 1878, Foreign Relations, 1878, pages 251, 252, and notes from Mr. Evarts of June 13, 1879, page 498 [Pg. 498 includes portions of Doc. 245 and Doc. 246], and Mr. Seward of August 11, 1879, page 505 [Pg. 505 includes portions of Doc. 252 and Doc. 253], and from Sir Edward Thornton of June 18, 1879, page 498 [Pg. 498 includes portions of Doc. 245 and Doc. 246].) 481 [Pg. 481 includes portions of Doc. 232 and Doc. 233]

213 Mr.Drummond to Mr. Evarts. 1879. Jan. 13 Transmitting copy of dispatch from Lord Odo Russell upon the death of Mr. Bayard Taylor. 484 [Pg. 484 includes portions of Doc. 233 and Doc. 234]

214 Sir Edward Thornton to Mr. Evarts. Jan. 23 Case of steam-tug Crusader amicably arranged by American and Canadian officials of Detroit and Port Sarnia. 485 [Pg. 485 is part of Doc. 235]

215 Mr. Evarts to Sir Edward Thornton. Jan. 30 Deposit of ship’s papers with consul of ship’s nation: British minister at Bogota instructed to bring question to attention of Colombian Government; the United States minister, Mr. Dichman, has already moved in the matter; copy of Lord Salisbury’s intructions will be sent to Mr. Dichman and his co-operation suggested. (See correspondence between the Department and Mr. Minister Dichman for the record of the negotiation, and the plan of settlement.) 486 [Pg. 486 includes portions of Doc. 235 and Doc. 236]

216 Sir Edward Thornton to Mr. Evarts. Feb. 3 The Suez Canal Company to extend to vessels of all flags the rules as to tonnage-measurement recently determined upon respecting British vessels 487 [Pg. 487 includes portions of Doc. 236 and Doc. 237]

217 Mr. Evarts to Sir Edward Thornton. Mar. 15 Bands of hostile Indians from Sitting Bull’s force cross the frontier: Sitting Bull said to have sent emissaries to affiliated tribes; attention of Canada called to threatened invasion of Canadian Indians. 488 [Pg. 488 includes portions of Doc. 237, Doc. 238, Doc. 239, and Doc. 240]

218 Sir Edward Thornton to Mr. Evarts. Mar. 25 Respecting concentration of British Indians in Bear Paw Mountains, with intent to cross the frontier: Memorandum of Canadian minister of the interior upon the Indian question; the return of refugee Indians to the United States advocated. 488 [Pg. 488 includes portions of Doc. 237, Doc. 238, Doc. 239, and Doc. 240]

219 Mr. Evarts to Sir Edward Thornton. Apr. 10 The thanks of the United States conveyed to Commander A’ Court, of Her Britannic Majesty’s ship “Osprey,” for his efficient service in protecting the town of Sitka from hostile Indians. (See Sir Edward Thornton’s note of May 15, page 492 [Pg. 492 includes portions of Doc. 242 and Doc. 243].) 490 [Pg. 490 includes portions of Doc. 240 and Doc. 241]

20 do Apr. 19 Calling attention to large shipments of ammunition to Manitoba, which may find a market with the hostile Sioux: Report of General Terry. 491 [Pg. 491 includes portions of Doc. 241 and Doc. 242]

221 Sir Edward Thornton to Mr. Evarts. May 15 Commander A’Court’s report upon affairs in Alaska, and upon the unprotected condition of Sitka: The withdrawal of the troops exposed the town to the mercy of the savages; the inhabitants only saved by the arrival of the Osprey; the necessity of a, permanent, fore, at Sitka shown. 492 [Pg. 492 includes portions of Doc. 242 and Doc. 243]

222 Mr. Evarts to Sir Edward Thornton. May 27 Sitting Bull and his bands regarded by the United States as British Indians: The British Government responsible for the peace of the frontier respecting his operations; if it shall become necessary for the United States to repulse an invasion of its territory by Sitting Bull, the situation will be a grave one, and will require that the British Government shall be prepared on the frontier with a sufficient force either to compel their surrender to our forces as prisoners of war, or to disarm and disable them from again disturbing the Peace of the frontier. 496 [Pg. 496 is part of Doc. 244]

223 do June 13 Necessity for some agreement touching the aid which American vessels may render to vessels of their own nationality when wrecked or disabled in Canadian waters: The United States ready to accord to Canadian vessels the right to aid vessels of their own nationality when wrecked or disabled in American waters, provided a reciprocal right in favor of our vessels be accorded; case of the tug John Owen and her tow. 498 [Pg. 498 includes portions of Doc. 245 and Doc. 246]

224 Sir Edward Thornton to Mr. Evarts. June 18 Report of a committee of the privy council of Canada upon the question of accordance of right of relief in the case of wrecked and disabled vessels in Canadian waters to vessels of the United States: Canada ready to negotiate touching mutual concessions upon this point. 498 [Pg. 498 includes portions of Doc. 245 and Doc. 246]

225 Mr. Seward to Sir Edward Thornton. July 3 Attention of Canadian Government called to the invasion of the territory of the United States by bands of British Indians and half-breeds. 500 [Pg. 500 includes portions of Doc. 246 and Doc. 247]

226 Mr. Evarts to Sir Edward Thornton. July 14 Position of the United States stated respecting the Haytian consular authentication tax: The tax looked upon as an indirect export duty on goods shipped from the United States to Hayti. (See correspondence with minister to Hayti, Foreign Relations, 1878 and 1879.) 501 [Pg. 501 includes portions of Doc. 247 and Doc. 248]

227 Sir Edward Thornton to Mr. Evarts. July 14 Shipments of ammunition to Manitoba not deemed by Canadian Government to be in sufficient amount to occasion uneasiness respecting the supplying of hostile Indians. 502 [Pg. 502 includes portions of Doc. 248 and Doc. 249]

228 Mr. Evarts to Sir Edward Thornton. July 30 Restrictions placed by Canadian officials upon the navigation of the Red River within the province of Manitoba, by American vessels: Canadian regulation in conflict with Article XXX of the treaty of Washington, and opposed to the spirit of section 3102 of the Revised Statutes. 503 [Pg. 503 includes portions of Doc. 249 and Doc. 250]

229 do Aug. 5 Visit of the Kearsarge to the fishing grounds off the British North American Provinces with government agent to examine pending questions between the United States and Great Britain. 504 [Pg. 504 includes portions of Doc. 250, Doc. 251, and Doc. 252]

230 Mr. Seward to Sir Edward Thornton. Aug. 9 Attention of Canadian Government called to new inroad of hostile Indians: Report of depredations committed; request for the return to the United States for punishment of the Indians charged with the commission of murder. 504 [Pg. 504 includes portions of Doc. 250, Doc. 251, and Doc. 252]

231 Mr. Seward to Sir Edward Thornton. Aug. 11 Transmitting a copy of the act of Congress, approved June 19, 1878, in relation to the aiding of wrecked and disabled vessels in the waters of the United States contiguous to the Dominion of Canada, and calling attention to the fact that it rests with Canada to take such steps in the direction of reciprocity as shall bring that act into operation. 505 [Pg. 505 includes portions of Doc. 252 and Doc. 253]

232 Sir Edward Thornton to Mr. Evarts. Aug. 12 Note from Mr. Evarts touching the navigation of the Red River of the North to be communicated to the Canadian Government. 506 [Pg. 506 includes portions of Doc. 253 and Doc. 254]

233 Mr. Seward to Sir Edward Thornton. Aug. 16 Hope expressed that an understanding may be reached between the United States and Canada as to the navigation of the Red River of the North. 507 [Pg. 507 includes portions of Doc. 254 and Doc. 255]

234 Sir Edward Thornton to Mr. Seward. Sept. 8 Admission by Canadian Government that British Indians have crossed the frontier, but not with hostile intent; they have only done so in pursuit of the buffalo. 508 [Pg. 508 includes portions of Doc. 256 and Doc. 257]

235 Sir Edward Thornton to Mr. Hunter. Sept. 9 Memorandum, from the Canadian Government respecting the Sioux Indians: Request that the United States will take steps to secure their return to American territory. 508 [Pg. 508 includes portions of Doc. 256 and Doc. 257]

236 Sir Edward Thornton to Mr. Evarts. Sept. 30 Memorandum from the Canadian Government renewing request that the United States will take steps to secure the return of the Sioux to American Territory. Attention asked to Canadian regulations touching crossing of frontier by British Indians. 510 [Pg. 510 includes portions of Doc. 257 and Doc. 258]

hawaiian islands.

No. From whom and to whom. Date. Subject. Page.

237 Mr. Comly to Mr Evarts 1878. Aug. 5 Report of special committee of Hawaiian Assembly upon the reciprocity treaty with the United States, and the international relations of Hawaii in consequence thereof. Copy of tariff law approved August 1, 1878. 512 [Pg. 512 is part of Doc. 259]

238 do 1879. June 9 Instructions asked as to whether the Hawaiian tariff upon American cotton goods made up into clothing is not in contravention of Article II of the reciprocity treaty. Correspondence with Hawaiian Government. (See Mr. Evarts’ instruction of September 23, page 544 [Pg. 544 includes portions of Doc. 264 and Doc. 265].) 527 [Pg. 527 is part of Doc. 261]

239 do June 9 Report upon alleged frauds in exportation of sugars to the United States under reciprocity treaty: Unlikelihood of such frauds; account of the process of landing and receiving cargo at various ports of the islands; report of the consul at Honolulu upon the subject; correspondence with Hawaiian foreign office; interest of Hawaiian Government to guard against such frauds upon our customs revenue. 529 [Pg. 529 includes portions of Doc. 261 and Doc. 262]

240 do June 9 Failure of American merchants and. manufacturers to avail themselves of benefits of reciprocity treaty. British manufacturers supplying the Hawaiian market, notwithstsnding the fact that Hawaiian produce is almost exclusively exported to and sold in the United States. 542 [Pg. 542 includes portions of Doc. 262 and Doc. 263]

241 Mr. Morton to Mr. Seward Sept. 1 Amount of gold and silver coin and bullion and paper currency in the Hawaiian Islands. 543 [Pg. 543 includes portions of Doc. 263 and Doc. 264]

242 Mr. Evarts to Mr. Comly Sept. 23 The Hawaiian tariff respecting American cotton goods made up into clothing in violation of Article II of the reciprocity treaty. (See Mr. Comly’s dispatch of June 9, 1879, page 527 [Pg. 527 is part of Doc. 261].) 544 [Pg. 544 includes portions of Doc. 264 and Doc. 265]

hayti.

No. From whom and to whom. Date. Subject. Page.

243 Mr. Langston to Mr. Evarts 1879. Jan. 24 Consular authentication tax: Note from Mr. Etheart and reply from Mr. Langston; restatement of the objection to the tax; question to be removed by Hayti to Washington; joint remonstrance against tax by the ministers of Great Britain, France, and Germany. (See instructions from Mr. Evarts, of November 7, 1877, and April 12, 1878, Foreign Relations, 1878, pages 411 and 445, and dispatches from Mr. Langston, of December 6 and 26, 1877, and January 9 and 24, 1878, Foreign Relations for 1878, pages 415, 416, 427, and 428; and in Foreign Relations for 1879, dispatches from Mr. Langston, of January 24, and March 12, 1879, pages 546 [Pg. 546 includes portions of Doc. 266 and Doc. 267], 553 [Pg. 553 includes portions of Doc. 268 and Doc. 269], and 554 [Pg. 554 includes portions of Doc. 269 and Doc. 270]; and notes from Mr. Preston, of January 16, Februruary 4, and May 28, 1879, pages 583 [Pg. 583 includes portions of Doc. 286 and Doc. 287], 587 [Pg. 587 includes portions of Doc. 288 and Doc. 289], and 594 [Pg. 594 includes portions of Doc. 291 and Doc. 292]; and. from Mr. Evarts, of January 22 and June 13, pages 586 [Pg. 586 includes portions of Doc. 287 and Doc. 288] and 595 [Pg. 595 includes portions of Doc. 292 and Doc. 293]; and note from Mr. Evarts to Sir Edward Thornton, of July 14, page 501 [Pg. 501 includes portions of Doc. 247 and Doc. 248].) 546 [Pg. 546 includes portions of Doc. 266 and Doc. 267]

244 Mr. Langston to Mr. Evarts. Jan. 24 Discriminating license law against foreigners engaged in business in Hayti: In contravention of treaty of 1864; correspondence between Mr. Langston and Mr. Ethéart. (See notes from Mr. Preston, of April 4 and May 28, pages 591 [Pg. 591 includes portions of Doc. 289 and Doc. 290] and 594 [Pg. 594 includes portions of Doc. 291 and Doc. 292]; and from Mr. Evarts, April 19, page 593 [Pg. 593 includes portions of Doc. 290 and Doc. 291].) 550 [Pg. 550 includes portions of Doc. 267 and Doc. 268]

245 do Jan. 24 Text of identic note of Great Britain, France, and Germany, protesting against Haytian consular authentication tax. 553 [Pg. 553 includes portions of Doc. 268 and Doc. 269]

246 do Mar. 12 Translation of reply of Haytian Government to the identic note above referred to Position of Hayti. 554 [Pg. 554 includes portions of Doc. 269 and Doc. 270]

247 do June 7 National assembly opened: Speeches of the President of the Republic and of the president of the Senate; unsatisfactory relationship of parties. 556 [Pg. 556 includes portions of Doc. 270 and Doc. 271]

248 do June 21 Disagreement between the Senate and the Chamber of Deputies: Refusal of the Senate to confirm the election of General Peophete; efforts at reconciliation attempted by President Canal. 558 [Pg. 558 includes portions of Doc. 271 and Doc. 272]

249 do June 30 Insurrection at Cape Haytien, June 20, under the leadership of General Theophile Parisien: Success of the government forces. 559 [Pg. 559 includes portions of Doc. 272 and Doc. 273]

250 do June 30 Industrial condition of Hayti discussed: Deplorable condition of her agriculture; absence of capital; disposition of the people to serve in the army rather than engage in productive labor; extract from an article in Le Peuple, advocating the repeal of the constitutional prohibition against the acquisition of citizenship by whites. 560 [Pg. 560 includes portions of Doc. 273 and Doc. 274]

251 do June 30 Constitution Of the Haytian Assembly: The Senate elected by the Chamber of Deputies; at present, the majority in each body held by political antagonists; the Senate refuses to recognize the organization of the Chamber as legal; bitter feeling engendered; an absolute dead-lock imminent: great danger of revolution. 562 [Pg. 562 includes portions of Doc. 274 and Doc. 275]

252 do July 7 The revolution, under the leadership of Boyer Bazelais and Edmond Paul, breaks out in Port au Prince on the 30th of June. The scene of the conflict the center of the city; the government forces attack the insurgents, the heart of the city, containing many of the public buildings, destroyed by fire; loss upward of half a million dollars; the insurrection suppressed; fighting reported at Gonaives. 564 [Pg. 564 includes portions of Doc. 275 and Doc. 276]

253 do July 17 The revolution extends throughout the country: Little energy shown by the government; the President resigns, and will leave Hayti; many of the defeated revolutionists of Port au Prince quietly embarked on board the British man-of-war Boxer. 569 [Pg. 569 includes portions of Doc. 276 and Doc. 277]

254 do July 17 Question of asylum m consulates and legations: The practice an inducement to revolution, as it insures practical immunity to the revolutionists; gravity of the issue. (See Mr. Langston’s dispatch of July 25, page 576 [Pg. 576 includes portions of Doc. 280 and Doc. 281], and Mr. Evarts’ instruction of August 6, page 582 [Pg. 582 includes portions of Doc. 285 and Doc. 286].) 570 [Pg. 570 includes portions of Doc. 277 and Doc. 278]

255 do July 18 Resignation and withdrawal of President Canal accomplished; respect shown him by the people of Port au Prince; government in the hands of the revolutionists. 572 [Pg. 572 includes portions of Doc. 279 and Doc. 280]

256 do July 25 Course of events: Ineffectual efforts of the diplomatic body resident in Port au Prince to secure a suspension of hostilities. 572 [Pg. 572 includes portions of Doc. 279 and Doc. 280]

257 do July 25 Correspondence touching the right of asylum 576 [Pg. 576 includes portions of Doc. 280 and Doc. 281]

258 Mr. Langston to Mr. Evarts. July 26 Entry of tbe revolutionary army into Port au Prince: Establishment of a provisional government. 578 [Pg. 578 includes portions of Doc. 281 and Doc. 282]

259 do July 28 Constitution of the provisional government under the presidency of General Hérrissé. 579 [Pg. 579 includes portions of Doc. 282 and Doc. 283]

260 do Aug. 1 Same subject: Formal announcement of the organization of the government. 581 [Pg. 581 is part of Doc. 284]

261 Mr. Evarts to Mr. Langston Aug. 6 The United States not tenacious in maintaining for its legations the so-called right of asylum: Where conceded, no communication between the refugees and their associates in arms should be allowed; it would be as intolerable as reprehensible, were not the refugees supposed to be kept, of mischief as wall as out of danger. 582 [Pg. 582 includes portions of Doc. 285 and Doc. 286]

262 Mr. Langston to Mr. Evarts. Oct. 24 Election of General L. Salomon as President of the Republic. 582 [Pg. 582 includes portions of Doc. 285 and Doc. 286]

263 Mr. Preston to Mr. Evarts Jan. 16 Restates the position of Hayti upon the consular authentication tax question: Text of the law authorizing tax. (See For. Rel., 1878, pages 411, 415, 416, 427, 428, 445; and For. Rel., 1879, pages 501 [Pg. 501 includes portions of Doc. 247 and Doc. 248], 546 [Pg. 546 includes portions of Doc. 266 and Doc. 267], 553 [Pg. 553 includes portions of Doc. 268 and Doc. 269], 554 [Pg. 554 includes portions of Doc. 269 and Doc. 270], 583 [Pg. 583 includes portions of Doc. 286 and Doc. 287], 586 [Pg. 586 includes portions of Doc. 287 and Doc. 288], 587 [Pg. 587 includes portions of Doc. 288 and Doc. 289], 594 [Pg. 594 includes portions of Doc. 291 and Doc. 292] and 595 [Pg. 595 includes portions of Doc. 292 and Doc. 293].) 583 [Pg. 583 includes portions of Doc. 286 and Doc. 287]

264 Mr. Evarts to Mr. Preston Jan. 22 The consular authentication tax of Hayti of 1 per cent. exacted in the ports of the United States, in the nature of an export tax upon United States produce; the United States is prohibited by the Constitution to collect an export duty in its ports, and it cannot concede a right to a foreign nation which is denied to itself. 586 [Pg. 586 includes portions of Doc. 287 and Doc. 288]

265 Mr. Preston to Mr. Evarts.. Feb. 4 The position of the Secretary of State controverted: The fee claimed to be relatively no higher than many fees exacted by consuls of the United States for similar services; nor is it thought to be in contravention of the treaty of amity and commerce between the two countries; the agreement that it is an export tax upon other produce is not accepted. 587 [Pg. 587 includes portions of Doc. 288 and Doc. 289]

266 do Apr. 4 Restatement of the position of the Haytian Government upon the question of discrimination against Americans engaged in commercial and other pursuits in Hayti. in respect of license taxes, under the Haytian laws of October 30, 1876, and August 11, 1877. 591 [Pg. 591 includes portions of Doc. 289 and Doc. 290]

267 Mr. Evarts to Mr. Preston Apr. 19 Reply to above: The tax shown to be in contravention of Article Y of the Treaty of 1864, which insures to Americans, engaged in trade in Hayti, exemption from discriminating taxation. 593 [Pg. 593 includes portions of Doc. 290 and Doc. 291]

268 Mr. Preston to Mr. Evarts May 28 Further discussion of the question of the Haytian consular authentication tax. 594 [Pg. 594 includes portions of Doc. 291 and Doc. 292]

269 Mr. Evarts to Mr. Preston June 13 Reply of Mr. Evarts: The tax believed to be unduly exorbitant and tantamount to an export tax, which it does not comport with the dignity of this government to allow to be exacted by any foreign authority in the United States. 595 [Pg. 595 includes portions of Doc. 292 and Doc. 293]

italy.

No. From whom and to whom. Date. Subject. Page.

270 Mr. Marsh to Mr. Evarts 1878. Oct. 27 Retirement of Count Corti from the ministry. Questions to be brought before Parliament, the extension of the elective francise, and the abolition of the grist tax. 596 [Pg. 596 includes portions of Doc. 293 and Doc. 294]

271 do Nov. 19 Congratulations upon the escape of the King from assassination: Internationalism making itself felt in Italy; the incessant attacks of the enemies of the House of Savoy, lay and ecclesiastical, upon the Government of Italy, impede the growth of a sentiment of loyalty. 597 [Pg. 597 is part of Doc. 295]

272 do Nov. 30 Return of the King and Queen to Rome: Received with demonstrations of enthusiasm by a vast concourse of people; socialistic movements; depression in some of the large cities of the kingdom; the financial condition of Florence. 598 [Pg. 598 is part of Doc. 296]

273 do Dec. 10 Defeat of the ministry: Questions leading to this result, the extension of the suffrage, the abolition of the grist tax, and the right of suppression of political meetings of a seditious character; the ministry held responsible for public discontent. 599 [Pg. 599 includes portions of Doc. 296 and Doc. 297]

274 Mr. Marsh to Mr. Evarts 1879. Mar. 31 Case of Largomarsino: Soon to he discharged from the army by expiration of term of service. (See Foreign Relations for 1878, pages 458, 459, 460, 461, and 464.) 600 [Pg. 600 is part of Doc. 298]

275 do July 16 Mr. Cairoli forms new Ministry 601 [Pg. 601 includes portions of Doc. 299 and Doc. 300]

276 Mr. Wurts to Mr. Evarts Sept. 14 Department circular concerning Mormon emigration brought to attention of Italian Government. No prospect of Mormonism making headway in Italy. Singular and instructive career of Davide Lazzaretti, first a devoted servant of the church, and then her opponent, and the attempted founder of an antagonistic religious system; his death. 601 [Pg. 601 includes portions of Doc. 299 and Doc. 300]

japan.

No. From whom and to whom. Date. Subject. Page.

277 Mr. Bingham to Mr. Evarts 1878. Oct. 21 Proposed institution of quarantine inspection at Kanagawa by Japanese Government. Refusal of foreign consuls to recognize proceeding under the Japanese regulations unless approved by officers of their own selection. This position thought to be untenable by Mr. Bingham. (See dispatches from Mr. Stevens of Nov. 9, 1878, page 608, and from Mr. Bingham of July 16 and 26; August 8, 11, 18, 29; October 6, pages 647, 657, 663, 665, 667, 668, 670, 680, 681, 695.) 604 [Pg. 604 includes portions of Doc. 300 and Doc. 301]

278 do Oct. 21 Memorial of the Chinese ministry in the matter of their contest with Japan concerning the Lew Chew Islands. The good offices of the United States requested. 606 [Pg. 606 includes portions of Doc. 301 and Doc. 302]

279 Mr. Stevens to Mr. Evarts Nov. 9 Text of quarantine regulations for the port of Kanagawa, approved by Mr. Bingham. Cholera prevails at Nagasaki. 608 [Pg. 608 includes portions of Doc. 302 and Doc. 303]

280 do Sept. 9 Regulations of the Japanese Government for the suppression of the sale of opium: Opposition of foreign press on the ground that the regulations infringe the exterritorial rights of foreigners. 609 [Pg. 609 includes portions of Doc. 303 and Doc. 304]

281 do Nov. 21 Progress of the Emperor: Its political significance; the presence of the Emperor to manifest to the people his personal liberty, and his inter est in the reforms instituted by the existing Government of Japan. 610 [Pg. 610 includes portions of Doc. 304 and Doc. 305]

282 do Nov. 23 Visit of Mr. Hanabusa to Corea, in respect of restriction placed upon trade between Japan and the Corean town of Fusan. Wreck of the “Barbara Taylor,” a British vessel, upon the island of Quelpart; aid rendered by the Coreans. 612 [Pg. 612 includes portions of Doc. 306 and Doc. 307]

283 Do Dec. 7 Visit of Mr. Satow, Japanese secretary to British legation, to island of Quelpart. The press upon so-called Russian designs upon Corea. The Japanese difficulty with Corea likely to be settled by diplomacy. 612 [Pg. 612 includes portions of Doc. 306 and Doc. 307]

284 do Dec. 19 Report of the Osaka mint: Total coinage, 82, 785, 397.63 yen; coinage during current year: gold, 357, 578 yen; silver, 4, 031, 345.75yen; copper, 959, 406.43 yen; the copper coinage to take the place of the rude coinage of the old regime; the foreign staff under whom the mint was organized has been reduced to two members; introduction into general circulation of the 1-yen silver piece of 416 grains; its ready acceptance. 616 [Pg. 616 is part of Doc. 308]

285 do 1879. Jan. 15 Regulations for licensing pilots issued by Japanese Government: American consuls to aid in their enforcement. 617 [Pg. 617 includes portions of Doc. 308 and Doc. 309]

286 do Jan. 24 Satisfactory arrangement of the difficulties between Japan and Corea. 619 [Pg. 619 includes portions of Doc. 309 and Doc. 310]

287 do Feb. 5 Statement of imports and exports of Japan. (See Mr. Bingham’s dispatch of October 6, page 694 [Pg. 694 includes portions of Doc. 339, Doc. 340, and Doc. 341].) 620 [Pg. 620 includes portions of Doc. 311, Doc. 312, and Doc. 313]

288 Mr. Evarts to Mr. Stevens Mar. 1 Satisfaction expressed at the settlement of the disagreements between Japan and Corea: The hope entertained that the influence of Japan may lead to the opening of Corea to the commerce of the world. 620 [Pg. 620 includes portions of Doc. 311, Doc. 312, and Doc. 313]

289 Mr. Stevens to Mr. Evarts Mar. 25 Japanese record of the reception of Mr. Townsend Harris in 1857: Mr. Harris the first foreign minister who had ever visited the capital, or been accorded an audience by the Taikun. 621 [Pg. 621 is part of Doc. 313]

290 Mr. Stevens to Mr. Evarts Apr. 9 General Grant invited by the Japanese Government to visit Japan. (See dispatches of July 19 from Mr. Stevens, and September 2 and 18 from Mr. Bingham, page 643 [Pg. 643 includes portions of Doc. 317 and Doc. 318], 685 [Pg. 685 includes portions of Doc. 335 and Doc. 336], and 694 [Pg. 694 includes portions of Doc. 339, Doc. 340, and Doc. 341].) 636 [Pg. 636 includes portions of Doc. 313 and Doc. 314]

291 do May 13 Arrival of the prince of Lew Chew: Reorganization of the administration of the islands. 637 [Pg. 637 includes portions of Doc. 314 and Doc. 315]

292 Mr. Bingham to Mr. Evarts. June 16 Export duties upon certain articles removed: Text of notification. 638 [Pg. 638 includes portions of Doc. 315 and Doc. 316]

293 do June 17 Visit of Governor Hennessy, of Hong Kong, to Tokio: Copy of his address before the Chamber of Commerce of Tokio. 639 [Pg. 639 includes portions of Doc. 316 and Doc. 317]

294 do July 15 General Grant: Reception in Japan; audience with the Emperor, and a review of troops in his honor; official and other fêtes; press accounts. 643 [Pg. 643 includes portions of Doc. 317 and Doc. 318]

295 do July 16 Quarantine regulations against cholera of Japanese Government: Correspondence between Mr. Bingham and Mr. Terashima, and Mr. Bingham and Mr. Van Buren; proclamation of the latter of the regulations as binding upon Americans and upon American vessels; notice of Sir Harry S. Parkes; position of Great Britain and Germany respecting right of Japan to issue such regulations. The German merchant vessel “Hesperia” withdrawn from quarantine by the German consul, aided by a man-of-war. (See Mr. Bingam’s dispatch of August, 11 page 665 [Pg. 665 includes portions of Doc. 324 and Doc. 325].) 647 [Pg. 647 includes portions of Doc. 318 and Doc. 319]

296 do July 23 Letter in the London Times, from Mr. E. J. Reed, M. P., upon Japan, and his recent visit to that country. 652 [Pg. 652 includes portions of Doc. 319 and Doc. 320]

297 do July 24 Japanese finances: Estimates for expenditures for current fiscal year, 55, 651, 379.03 yen; revenue from land tax, 41, 000, 950 yen; constitution of a famine-relief fund by appropriation of 1, 200, 000 yen to fund; decrease in paper circulation, 7, 499, 217; decrease in debts, 21, 200, 280.26 yen. 656 [Pg. 656 includes portions of Doc. 320 and Doc. 321]

298 do July 26 Quarantine regulations of Japanese Government for the open ports: Correspondence and notification of Mr. Bingham ordering their observance by all American vessels; notification by the British minister. 657 [Pg. 657 includes portions of Doc. 321 and Doc. 322]

299 do Aug. 8 Report upon the ravages of cholera: 18, 017 deaths up to July 25. 663 [Pg. 663 includes portions of Doc. 322 and Doc. 323]

300 do Aug. 11 Same subject, further statistics: 23, 380 deaths up to August 4. 665 [Pg. 665 includes portions of Doc. 324 and Doc. 325]

301 do Aug. 11 Correspondence between Mr. Terashima and the German minister, Mr. Von Eisendecker, as to the right of the Japanese Government to issue quarantine regulations for the open ports: Germany holds that no such right exists under the treaties. (See dispatch of August 18, page 670 [Pg. 670 includes portions of Doc. 327 and Doc. 328].) 665 [Pg. 665 includes portions of Doc. 324 and Doc. 325]

302 do Aug. 18 Report upon the extent of the cholera epidemic: 29, 722 deaths up to August 9. 667 [Pg. 667 includes portions of Doc. 325 and Doc. 326]

303 do Aug. 18 A history of cholera in Japan, translated from the Osaka Nippo. 668 [Pg. 668 includes portions of Doc. 326 and Doc. 327]

304 do Aug. 18 Correspondence between Mr. Terashima and the ministers of Great Britain and Germany upon the subject of the right of the Japanese Government to establsh quarantine regulations. 670 [Pg. 670 includes portions of Doc. 327 and Doc. 328]

305 do Aug. 18 Theory as to the origin of the cholera epidemic 680 [Pg. 680 includes portions of Doc. 332 and Doc. 333]

306 do Aug. 29 Further cholera statistics: 54, 615 deaths up to August 26. 681 [Pg. 681 includes portions of Doc. 333 and Doc. 334]

307 do Sept. 2 Account of a fête by the people of Japan to the Emperor: A striking event in the history of Japan; the fête held in a public park, and attended by the Emperor, the princes, and the ministry of the empire. General Grant present at the fête. 682 [Pg. 682 includes portions of Doc. 334 and Doc. 335]

308 do Sept. 2 Farewell audience of General Grant with the Emperor: Appropriate arrangements for his departure from Japan. 685 [Pg. 685 includes portions of Doc. 335 and Doc. 336]

309 do Sept. 15 Remarks upon the notification that the silver yen of 416 grains will be received in payment of customs and at par with the Mexican dollar. 687 [Pg. 687 includes portions of Doc. 336 and Doc. 337]

310 do Sept. 15 Report of the director-general of telegraphs: Record of the operations of the same; receipts and disbursements. 688 [Pg. 688 includes portions of Doc. 337, Doc. 338, and Doc. 339]

311 do Sept. 18 Departure of General Grant from Japan: Ceremonies of leave-taking. 694 [Pg. 694 includes portions of Doc. 339, Doc. 340, and Doc. 341]

312 do Oct. 6 Table of imports and exports in ten years. (See page 620 [Pg. 620 includes portions of Doc. 311, Doc. 312, and Doc. 313].) 694 [Pg. 694 includes portions of Doc. 339, Doc. 340, and Doc. 341]

313 Mr. Bingham to Mr. Evarts Oct. 6 Cholera statistics: Whole number of cases up to the 30th of September, 148, 038; deaths, 83, 012; death-rate, 56.07. 695 [Pg. 695 includes portions of Doc. 341, Doc. 342, and Doc. 343]

314 do Oct. 9 Record of coinage of the silver yen: The Mexican dollar being driven from circulation. 695 [Pg. 695 includes portions of Doc. 341, Doc. 342, and Doc. 343]

315 do Oct. 10 Text of notification issued by Japanese Government abolishing trial by torture. 696 [Pg. 696 includes portions of Doc. 343, Doc. 344, and Doc. 345]

316 do Oct. 22 Text of a treaty between Japan and Corea opening a new port to Japanese trade: Article I. Gensan to be opened to trade; Japan to have light to establish a settlement. Articles XI, III, and IV. Ground rent and preparation of ground for settlement. Article V. Corea to build a pier and keep it in repair; rights of Corean, vessels reserved; rights of travel of Coreans by Japanese vessels insured. Article VI. Customhouse to be built. Article VII. Treaty limits. 696 [Pg. 696 includes portions of Doc. 343, Doc. 344, and Doc. 345]

317 Mr. Payson to Mr. Van Buren 1878. Nov. 23 Deportation of Thomas Glass from Japan: Forcible deportation contrary to the principles of American law; the sentence of the consul-general in the case not approved. (See dispatch of October 9, 1878, from Consul-General Van Buren, F. R. 1878, page 518.) 697 [Pg. 697 includes portions of Doc. 345 and Doc. 346]

liberia.

No. From whom and to whom. Date. Subject. Page.

318 Mr. Turner to Mr. Evarts 1878. Apr. 3 Report upon Liberian coffee: Its commercial value; the character and extent of the soil capable of its production; its excellence; large exportation of plants to Brazil. 699 [Pg. 699 is part of Doc. 347]

319 Mr. Smyth to Mr. Evarts 1879. Jan. 9 Legislature in session: Message of the President, Mr. A. W. Gardner; discussion of the boundary question with Sierra Leone; the railway project of Messrs. Crisswich & Burnell, of England, to build from Monrovia interiorward;. the finances and foreign relations of the republic; receipts during fiscal year, $119, 889.60, disbursements $124, 166.63, deficit $4, 277.03. 701 [Pg. 701 includes portions of Doc. 347 and Doc. 348]

320 do Mar. 24 Meeting of the farmers: Speeches of the secretary of state, and of Dr. Blyden, Liberian minister to England; appreciation of the interest which the United States entertains for Liberia; the aid of the United States in respect of a railway to the interior urged; the trade of Liberia in the hands of the English and the Germans, although the sympathy of the people is with the United States; resources of the interior. (See Mr. Smyth’s dispatches of August 7 and 28, pages 722 [Pg. 722 includes portions of Doc. 354 and Doc. 355] and 723 [Pg. 723 includes portions of Doc. 355 and Doc. 356].) 712 [Pg. 712 is part of Doc. 349]

321 do Apr. 26 Relations of the colonial and republican governments to the aboriginal inhabitants of the country: The question of color in its bearing upon the future of Liberia; the influence of the republic in the civilization of Africa; the necessity for the absolute equality of the colored and the black men in the administration of affairs, and in the social relations of the country. 713 [Pg. 713 includes portions of Doc. 349 and Doc. 350]

322 do Apr. 26 Adjournment oi the boundary commission without settling the question submitted. Revolt of the Greaboes and Kroos attributed to the machinations of British traders. (See Mr. Smyth’s dispatch of June 17 page 718 [Pg. 718 includes portions of Doc. 351, Doc. 352, and Doc. 353].) 717 [Pg. 717 includes portions of Doc. 350 and Doc. 351]

323 do May 30 France said to be contemplating the establishment of a protectorate over Liberia: Unequivocal hostility to such a policy on the part of the government and people of Liberia. (See Mr. Hunter’s instruction to Mr. Noyes, of July 11, and Mr. Noyes’s dispatch of August 20, page 341 [Pg. 341 includes portions of Doc. 179 and Doc. 180]; and Mr. Hunter’s instruction to Mr. Smyth, of September 8 page 727 [Pg. 727 includes portions of Doc. 356, Doc. 357, and Doc. 358].) 718 [Pg. 718 includes portions of Doc. 351, Doc. 352, and Doc. 353]

324 do June 17 Manifesto of the rebellious Greaboes and Kroos 718 [Pg. 718 includes portions of Doc. 351, Doc. 352, and Doc. 353]

325 do July 17 Text of letter of the secretary of Liberia to the rebellious chiefs: The title of Liberia to their territory and allegiance clearly shown; measures to be taken to reduce them to subjection if necessary. 719 [Pg. 719 includes portions of Doc. 353 and Doc. 354]

326 Mr. Smyth to Mr. Seward Aug. 7 The commercial possibilities of Central Africa. Efforts of Great Britain, France, and Belgium to establish trade relations: M. de Freycinet’s prospect of a trans-Saharian railway from Algeria to Soudan; estimated population of the Soudan upward of 100, 000, 000; traversed by the Niger; the inhabitants industrious; necessity for action on the part of the United States to insure the possession of a part of the trade of this section of Africa. (See Mr. Smyth’s dispatches of March 24 and August 28, pages 712 [Pg. 712 is part of Doc. 349] and 723 [Pg. 723 includes portions of Doc. 355 and Doc. 356].) 722 [Pg. 722 includes portions of Doc. 354 and Doc. 355]

327 do Aug. 28 Report of M. de Freycinet upon the railway from Algeria to the Soudan. The prospects of success of the route set forth; European enterprise in the Soudan; activity of the European powers to establish intimate commercial relations with Central Africa. 723 [Pg. 723 includes portions of Doc. 355 and Doc. 356]

328 Mr. Hunter to Mr. Smyth Sept. 8 The French Government has never expressed a desire to establish a protectorate over Liberia. 727 [Pg. 727 includes portions of Doc. 356, Doc. 357, and Doc. 358]

mexico.

No. From whom and to whom. Date. Subject. Page.

329 Mr. Foster to Ms. Evarts 1878. Nov. 2 Forced loans imposed upon Mr. Walter Henry in Chihuahua: Mexico holds that the remedy lies in an appeal to the courts, and that such claims belong to the interior debt; Mr. Foster replies, showing the exactions committed upon Americans in Chihuahua; the futility of attempting to obtain redress through the courts, and the necessity for diplomatic intervention; correspondence between Mr. Avila and Mr. Foster. (See Mr. Foster’s dispatches October 6, 1877, September 11 and 14, 1878: F. R., 1878, pages 527, 603, 606, and December 10, 1878 page 750.) 727 [Pg. 727 includes portions of Doc. 356, Doc. 357, and Doc. 358]

330 do Nov. 4 Frontier relations: Correspondence touching the operations of Areola and his band; the ground of American complaint is that the frontier districts of Mexico are made a base of operations against the United States. The object of their remonstrance is to secure the prevention of such practices. (See F. R., 1878, pages 612 and 622, and dispatches of December 14 and 23, 1878, pages 750 and 771.) 730 [Pg. 730 includes portions of Doc. 358 and Doc. 359]

331 do Nov. 22 Mexican debt held in the United States: “Corlis-Carbajal” bonds; neither the interest nor the principal of these bonds paid; some bonds bought by the Mexican Government at 18¾ cents on the dollar. (See dispatch of October 8, F. R., 1878. p. 624.) 733 [Pg. 733 includes portions of Doc. 359 and Doc. 360]

332 do Nov. 29 Mexican depredations in Arizona. A refuge sought in Sonora: several arrests made; extradition declined because prisoners are Mexican. Mexico proposes two remedies: first, reciprocal agreement to extradite citizens of either for offenses committed in the territory of the other; second, the reciprocal enactment of laws punishing offenses committed in the territory of the other by citizens fleeing for protection to their own country. Dispatches from Mr. Willard, consul at Guaymas, as to attacks upon stages of the Wells-Fargo line. 734 [Pg. 734 includes portions of Doc. 360 and Doc. 361]

333 do Dec. 4 Case of Emilio Boig, an American citizen impressed into the Mexican army; protest of Mr. Foster, and subsequent release of Boig. Untenable position of Mexican Government as to the requirement of matriculation; Mr. Foster holds that failure to matriculate in no way prejudices rights of Americans. (See Mr. Foster’s dispatch September 20, 1878, F. R., 1878, page 613. and July 28, 1879, page 819.) 741 [Pg. 741 includes portions of Doc. 361 and Doc. 362]

334 do Dec. 9 Forced loan imposed upon American citizens by the governor of Jalisco (case of F. A. Newton): Mr. Foster recommends a resort to the courts; similar exactions in San Louis Patosi. The tax unconstitutional (see decision of the supreme court of Mexico in the Goribar case). Disreregard by Mexican Government of claims for reimbursement of losses on account of forced loans. Case of Mr. Blumenkron. (See Mr. Foster’s dispatches of November 2, and December 10, 1878, pages 727 and 750, and Mr. Seward’s instruction of January 15, 1879, page 772 [Pg. 772 includes portions of Doc. 368 and Doc. 369].) 746 [Pg. 746 includes portions of Doc. 362 and Doc. 363]

335 Mr. Foster to Mr. Evarts Dec. 10 Case of Walter Henry: Note from Mr. Avila as to forced loans; assertion of the right to impose same; denial of the right of diplomatic intervention; Mr. Foster regards the question as second only to that of the frontier relations. 750 [Pg. 750 is part of Doc. 364]

336 do Dec. 14 Discussion of frontier relations by Mr. Avila: Points of the discussion; first, is Mexico the base of operations for depredators upon the United States? second, if Mexico has not quite succeeded in suppressing depredations is she therefore impotent to maintain order upon her frontier? His argument is that Mexico is neither the base of operations, nor that her government is unable to maintain order upon the frontier; complaint as to the existence of the order; the case of Areola adverted to, and the claim advanced that the United States has not furnished sufficient evidence to insure the conviction of the marauders. Mr. Foster’s reply shows the insufficiency of the Mexican argument, and that the animus of the action of Mexico upon the Rio Grande is illustrated by other and grave causes of complaint advanced by the United States, vet unsettled. 754 [Pg. 754 includes portions of Doc. 364 and Doc. 365]

337 do Dec. 16 Mexican debt: Contract for the funding of the debt, and the building of a system of railroads, entered into between the minister of finance and Messrs. Edward J. Perry and Pedro del Valle on behalf of the bondholders, submitted to Congress; only such bondholders as may agree to the contract to become parties thereto; the capital and accrued, interest of the bonds to be funded at 50 per cent. of their value with issue of new bonds; the agreeing bondholders to form company to build the road; the government agreeing to pay off $8, 000 of funded debt for each kilometer of road built; bondholders not agreeing not to be prejudiced in present status; the practicability of the scheme, and the ability of the Mexican Government to carry out it’s share of the undertaking, discussed by Mr. Foster; as holders of the Carbajal bonds, citizens of the United States interested in the contract; text of contract. (See Mr. Foster’s dispatch of April 3, 1879. page 799 [Pg. 799 includes portions of Doc. 375 and Doc. 376].) 764 [Pg. 764 includes portions of Doc. 365 and Doc. 366]

338 do Dec. 18 Finances of Mexico: Estimated receipts, $16, 303, 455.05; estimated expenses, $23, 334, 636.94; Congress called upon to equalize receipts and expenditures by either cutting down expenses or increasing; the revenue. 770 [Pg. 770 includes portions of Doc. 366 and Doc. 367]

339 do Dec. 23 Arrest of Areola. Information as to his depredations requested. 771 [Pg. 771 includes portions of Doc. 367 and Doc. 368]

340 Mr. Seward to Mr. Foster 1879. Jan. 15 Mr. Foster’s action in respect to the forced loan castes approved. Whenever the guarantees of the treaty are ignored through the acts of subordinate military authorities, and the judgments of the highest tribunals are unheeded, the situation demands diplomatic intervention. (See Mr. Foster’s dispatch of December 9, 1878, page 746.) 772 [Pg. 772 includes portions of Doc. 368 and Doc. 369]

341 do Jan. 15 Mr. Foster’s answer to Mr. Avila’s note of November 11, 1878, respecting frontier affairs approved. Depredators from the Mexican side of the frontier, whether natives or foreigners, should be punished by Mexican laws. 773 [Pg. 773 includes portions of Doc. 369 and Doc. 370]

342 Mr. Foster to Mr. Evarts. Jan. 28 The railway question discussed: Attitude of the present government; the contracts of the preceding governments declared null and of no effect; the Plumb & Barron contracts; case of the Mexican Railway Company (from Vera Cruz to the city of Mexico); subsidy due and unpaid this road, $1, 800, 000; the N. J. Palmer contract for a system of roads from Mexico to the Pacific and to the Rio Grande; the contractors to be regarded, in respect of their contract, as Mexicans; opposition to railroad connection with the United States; speech of Mr. Chevaro in the Mexican Congress; Congressional action defeated; adverse reports of a joint committee of Congress upon railway concessions; no connection with the American system favored; the Guaymas and Frontier Railroad; the Tehuantepec Railway; the debt-funding railway scheme (see p. 764 [Pg. 764 includes portions of Doc. 365 and Doc. 366]); hostility awakened in Mexico by Senator Morgan’s resolution of May 8, 1878, respecting treaty negotiations for railway connections between the two countries. The foreign debt of Mexico, $130, 000, 000; present receipts only 70 per cent. of expenses; the available receipts from the custom-houses pledged, and a part repledged to pay interest and principal of debt; ten in closures illustrating the points in the dispatch. (See Mr. Foster’s dispatch October 9, 1878, F. R., 1878, page 636.) 774 [Pg. 774 includes portions of Doc. 370 and Doc. 371]

343 Mr. Foster to Mr. Evarts Feb. 7 Reception accorded the Chicago excurson party. 796 [Pg. 796 includes portions of Doc. 372 and Doc. 373]

344 do Feb. 11 Yucatan discriminating bounty in favor of hemp exported to Europe: Protest of the United States against the law recognized by Mexico as well taken; expiration of the law granting the bounty. (See Mr. Foster’s dispatch of October 28, 1878. F. R.. 1878. page 661.) 796 [Pg. 796 includes portions of Doc. 372 and Doc. 373]

345 do Feb. 18 Prohibition against the settlement of Americans upon the island of Ciare, in the Gulf of Mexico. Construction given to law prohibiting Americans from purchasing land in the frontier States of the republic. (See Mr. Foster’s dispatches of August 15, 1878, F. R., 1878, page 575; of May 27 and August 20, 1879, pages 809 [Pg. 809 includes portions of Doc. 382 and Doc. 383] and 833 [Pg. 833 includes portions of Doc. 393 and Doc. 394].) 798 [Pg. 798 includes portions of Doc. 373 and Doc. 374]

346 Mr. Evarts to Mr. Foster Feb. 20 Gratification expressed at reception accorded the Chicago excursionists. Little to be accomplished, however, by such enterprises; the insurance of safety to life and property alone capable of producing an enlargement of trade relations between the two countries. 799 [Pg. 799 includes portions of Doc. 375 and Doc. 376]

347 Mr. Foster to Mr. Evarts Apr. 3 Rejection by the English bondholders of the Perry-del Valle funding contract. (See Mr. Foster’s dispatch of December 16, 1878, page 764.) 799 [Pg. 799 includes portions of Doc. 375 and Doc. 376]

348 do Apr. 4 Difficulty experienced by foreigners in securing employment in Mexico. 800 [Pg. 800 includes portions of Doc. 376 and Doc. 377]

349 do Apr. 11 Indian affairs upon the frontier: Campaign against the Lipans; removal of Indians from the frontier. 801 [Pg. 801 is part of Doc. 378]

350 do Apr. 12 The firing upon the flag of Consul Sutter at Aca-pulco, May, 1877; officer in command of fort at time condemned to loss of commission. (See Mr. Foster’s dispatch of September 3, 1878, Foreign Relations, 1878, page 580.) 802 [Pg. 802 includes portions of Doc. 378 and Doc. 379]

351 do Apr. 14 Resignation of Señor J. H. Ramirez, secretary of the treasury of Mexico. Text of letter of resignation. 803 [Pg. 803 includes portions of Doc. 379 and Doc. 380]

352 do May 21 Visit to the hacienda of Chualta in the valley of San Martin: Exhibition of American agricultural implements; owing to cost of production and transportation, although much of the land is suitable to its production, wheat and wheat flour sell at a high price, wheat averaging $1.70 per bushel; implements of cultivation of a primitive character; results to be anticipated from the introduction of improved American machinery. 804 [Pg. 804 includes portions of Doc. 380 and Doc. 381]

353 do May 24 Official table of exports: Aggregate, $28,777,508; silver, coined and in bullion, $20,493,129; gold, $1,265,199; total of other exports does not reach $7,000,000. 808 [Pg. 808 includes portions of Doc. 381 and Doc. 382]

354 do May 27 Question of American ownership of realty in the frontier provinces: Note from Senor Ruelas; position of Mexico due to apprehension of annexation designs on the part of settlers. (See Mr. Foster’s dispatches of August 15, 1878, Foreign Relations, 1878, page 575, and of February 15 and August 20, 1879, pages 798 [Pg. 798 includes portions of Doc. 373 and Doc. 374] and 833 [Pg. 833 includes portions of Doc. 393 and Doc. 394].) 809 [Pg. 809 includes portions of Doc. 382 and Doc. 383]

355 do May 31 Adjournment of Congress. Effort to reduce expenses, and to increase revenue by increased taxation; smuggling made a penal offense; approval of the H. H. Hall Tehuantepec railway contract; Congress unfriendly to railroads connecting with the American system. 811 [Pg. 811 includes portions of Doc. 383 and Doc. 384]

356 Mr. Foster to Mr. Evarts June 7 Text of laws imposing penalties on smuggling, and taxes oh certain domestic manufactures: The sum of this tax being added to the tariff duties upon these articles; remarks upon the Mexican tariff policy. 812 [Pg. 812 includes portions of Doc. 384 and Doc. 385]

357 Mr. Seward to Mr. Evarts July 2 A passport may be issued to a minor of discreet age unaccompanied by his parents: Until coming of age, a child born abroad of American parents, and continuing abroad, is an American citizen. (See Mr. Seward’s instruction of August 13, page 824 [Pg. 824 includes portions of Doc. 390 and Doc. 391].) 814 [Pg. 814 includes portions of Doc. 385 and Doc. 386]

358 Mr. Foster to Mr. Evarts July 18 The case of James W. Smith, deceased, and query as to the political status of his minor children: Smith entered the Mexican army as colonel, and by that act, under Mexican law, became a citizen of Mexico; instructions asked as to status of such Mexican employés. (See Mr. Seward’s instructions of August 13, page 824 [Pg. 824 includes portions of Doc. 390 and Doc. 391].) 815 [Pg. 815 includes portions of Doc. 386 and Doc. 387]

359 do July 23 Report of General Ord respecting rumored crossing of American Indians into Mexico communicated to Mr. Ruelas; rumor unfounded; note from Mexican minister, calling attention to recent depredations of American Indians. 816 [Pg. 816 includes portions of Doc. 387 and Doc. 388]

360 do July 28 Matriculation of American citizens through the legation resumed by Mexico: Case of Gustave Sommer; his matriculation, heretofore refused, now conceded; matriculation granted upon request of legation based upon a State Department passport. (See Mr. Foster’s dispatches of September 20, 1878, Foreign Relations, 1878,. page 613; and December 4, F. R., 1879, page 741 [Pg. 741 includes portions of Doc. 361 and Doc. 362].) 819 [Pg. 819 includes portions of Doc. 388 and Doc. 389]

361 do Aug. 2 Report upon the gold and silver com and bullion and paper currency in Mexico: Owing to silver being unlimited legal-tender, gold has ceased to circulate, and is exported as soon as it is produced. 822 [Pg. 822 includes portions of Doc. 389 and Doc. 390]

362 Mr. Seward to Mr. Foster Aug. 13 The right of expatriation fully recognized by the United States: The question of acquiring Mexican citizenship to be determined by Mexican law; by taking service in the Mexican army Mr. James W. Smith is thought to have acquired Mexican citizenship; the American citizenship of his minor children, born while yet he was a citizen of the United States, recognized. (See Mr. Seward’s instructions of July 2, page 814 [Pg. 814 includes portions of Doc. 385 and Doc. 386], and Mr. Foster’s dispatch of July 18, page 815 [Pg. 815 includes portions of Doc. 386 and Doc. 387].) 824 [Pg. 824 includes portions of Doc. 390 and Doc. 391]

363 Mr. Foster to Mr. Evarts Aug. 15 Comments by Hon. J. M. Vigil upon Mr. Felix Gibert’s report upon the administration of affairs in Lower California. 825 [Pg. 825 includes portions of Doc. 391 and Doc. 392]

364 do Aug. 16 Hostility to railway connection with the American system of railroads manifested in the matter of the Guaymas and frontier road: Report of Gen. P. Sanchez Ochos, chief of engineers, upon the impolicy of any but a Mexican railway, and in favor of building a Mexican interoceanic railway; criticisms of the report by Hon. Antonio Moreno, senator from Sonora; the necessity of taking action to develop the frontier States pointed out. 826 [Pg. 826 includes portions of Doc. 392 and Doc. 393]

365 do Aug. 20 Restrictions upon ownership of realty in the frontier States of the republic by Americans extended to mines: Extract from the Minitor Republicano of August 6, 1879, upon the mines of Sonora. (See Mr. Foster’s dispatches of August 15, 1878, Foreign Relations, 1878, page 575, and of February 15 and May 27, 1879. pages 798 [Pg. 798 includes portions of Doc. 373 and Doc. 374] and 800 [Pg. 800 includes portions of Doc. 376 and Doc. 377].) 833 [Pg. 833 includes portions of Doc. 393 and Doc. 394]

366 do Sept. 13 Statistical data as to area, population, congressional representation, taxable property, State revenues, schools, &c.; the taxable value of property returned at $344, 979, 490; data as to military expenses of the States: 834 [Pg. 834 includes portions of Doc. 394 and Doc. 395]

367 do Sept. 19 Receipts of the federal treasury for the year ending June 30, $17, 350, 867: Detailed statement of: decrease, $2, 136, 602; deficit, $4, 378, 000; decrease in the customs item, $3, 214, 933; slight increase in some of the other items. 836 [Pg. 836 includes portions of Doc. 395 and Doc. 396]

368 Mr. Foster to Mr. Evarts Sept. 24 Favorable comment upon the President’s message; general success of General Diaz’s administration; the success mainly attributable to the personal qualities of President Diaz; hopeful signs for the future discovered; the greatest embarrassment the government has had to suffer has been occasioned by the poverty of the treasury. 837 [Pg. 837 includes portions of Doc. 396 and Doc. 397]

369 Mr. Strother to Mr. Hunter Oct. 4 Review of affairs in Mexico from the standpoint of the consular correspondence: Manifest concern lest by cordially welcoming Americans and American capital steps may be taken which shall lead to absorption; the record of the progress which Mexico is making. 838 [Pg. 838 includes portions of Doc. 397 and Doc. 398]

morocco.

No. From whom and to whom. Date. Subject. Page.

370 Mr. Mathews to Mr. Evarts 1879. Mar. 24 Report upon the malignant typhus fever raging in Morocco: Great loss of life; Europeans suffering alike with the natives; business paralysis. 840 [Pg. 840 includes portions of Doc. 398 and Doc. 399]

371 do June 5 The rebellion of the Berber tribes suppressed: The Sultan, with his army, encamped near Rabat; the heads of thirty-four rebels sent to Rabat to be exhibited upon the walls of the town. 842 [Pg. 842 includes portions of Doc. 399, Doc. 400, and Doc. 401]

372 do July 9 Report upon the gold and silver coin and bullion and paper currency in Morocco. 842 [Pg. 842 includes portions of Doc. 399, Doc. 400, and Doc. 401]

373 do July 20 The kabyle of Benimteer reduced to subjection; sickness in the Sultan’s army. 843 [Pg. 843 includes portions of Doc. 401 and Doc. 402]

374 do July 21 Report upon the prison system of Morocco: System of punishment for crime and care of criminals; letter to the Rev. E. C. Wines. 844 [Pg. 844 includes portions of Doc. 402 and Doc. 403]

netherlands.

No. From whom and to whom. Date. Subject. Page.

375 Mr. Birney to Mr. Evarts 1879. Mar. 27 System of railway taxation: Laws general not special to railways, and directed to deriving revenue from the products or avails of labor and property through a license or income tax; double ownership of railways, part national and part individual; government roads leased to private corporations; concessions granted upon condition of a deposit, which is forfeited to the government if the company fails to build the road; no franchise tax; realty of roads taxed as other realty in respect to its estimated yield as such; no tax on personalty as such; stamp tax on bonds and shares. 846.

376 do Apr. 21 Same subject: Note of Mr. Heeckeren van Kell, minister for foreign affairs; answers to Mr. Adams’s six inquiries. 847 [Pg. 847 includes portions of Doc. 404 and Doc. 405]

377 do Aug. 26 Change of ministry: Baron van Lynden van Sanden burg forms new cabinet and holds the portfolio of foreign affairs; the present a fusionist cabinet. 848 [Pg. 848 includes portions of Doc. 405 and Doc. 406]

378 do Sept. 17 The Staats General opened by the King: Copy of his speech; three points worthy of note: 1st, the ministry will not depart from the present free-trade policy; 2d, the secularization of education law will be enforced; 3d, the island of Curaçoa will not be held. 849 [Pg. 849 includes portions of Doc. 406 and Doc. 407]

379 do Sept. 19 Report upon the gold and silver coin and bullion and paper currency in the Netherlands: Memorandum of the minister of finance upon the subject. 851 [Pg. 851 is part of Doc. 408]

380 do Sept. 30 The Mormon circular brought to the attention of the Netherlands Government: So far as may be effective, the co-operation of the government will be secured to the discouragement of Mormon emigration. 852 [Pg. 852 includes portions of Doc. 408 and Doc. 409]

381 Mr. Birney to Mr. Evarts Oct. 30 Same subject: Note from Mr. van Lynden van Sandenburg; but few Mormons go from the Netherlands; the commissioners at Rotterdam to do all in their power to discourage such emigrants from going to the United States. 854 [Pg. 854 is part of Doc. 410]

peru.

No. From whom and to whom. Date. Subject. Page.

382 Mr. Gibbs to Mr. Evarts 1878. Nov. 20 Assassination of Don Manuel Pardo, president of I the Senate and leader of the Civilist party, by a soldier of the guard at the door of the Senate chamber; profound sensation; the deed condemned by the most intelligent and best section of the Peruvian people; the assassin arrested; details of the crime. 855 [Pg. 855 is part of Doc. 411]

383 do 1879. Feb. 10 Increase of duties on exports and imports to j create a fund for the amortization of the treasury notes; text of law. 859 [Pg. 859 includes portions of Doc. 411 and Doc. 412]

384 do Mar. 19 Question of the right of foreign-built vessels owned by American citizens to fly the American flag and to claim protection: Case of the “Itata,” a vessel said to have been bought by Henry L. Stevens, an American citizen resident in Chili, from the South American Steamship Company of Chili; the “Itata” entered the port of Callao under the American flag, with a regular clearance from Valparaiso; Mr. Gibbs directed the consul to return the ship’s papers to the captain and to cause him to haul down the flag; correspondence in the case. (See dispatches from Mr. Gibbs of March 25 and April 7, page 865 [Pg. 865 includes portions of Doc. 413, Doc. 414, and Doc. 415]; instructions from Mr. Evarts to Mr. Christiancy of April 24, May 8, June 20, and December 26, pages 867 [Pg. 867 includes portions of Doc. 416, Doc. 417, and Doc. 418], 874 [Pg. 874 includes portions of Doc. 419, Doc. 420, and Doc. 421], 884 [Pg. 884 includes portions of Doc. 428 and Doc. 429], 894 [Pg. 894 includes portions of Doc. 435, Doc. 436, and Doc. 437]; dispatches from Mr. Christiancy of May 20, June 1, June 3, pages 877 [Pg. 877 includes portions of Doc. 421 and Doc. 422], 881 [Pg. 881 includes portions of Doc. 423, Doc. 424, and Doc. 425], and 882 [Pg. 882 includes portions of Doc. 426 and Doc. 427]; and dispatches from Mr. T. A. Osborn, minister to Chili, March 31, April 26, pages 150 [Pg. 150 includes portions of Doc. 98 and Doc. 99] and 174 [Pg. 174 includes portions of Doc. 104 and Doc. 105]; and instructions from Mr. Evarts to Mr. Osborn of June 9, page 177 [Pg. 177 is part of Doc. 109], and from Mr. Hunter to Mr. McKellar of June 2; and to Mr. Foote of October 23, page 180 [Pg. 180 includes portions of Doc. 110, Doc. 111, and Doc. 112].) 861 [Pg. 861 is part of Doc. 413]

385 do Mar. 25 Same subject: Case of the “Loa,” a sister ship of the “Itata;’ entered Callao March 23 under the Chilian flag, having exchanged the American I flag for that of Chili at Arica. 865 [Pg. 865 includes portions of Doc. 413, Doc. 414, and Doc. 415]

386 do Apr. 7 Same subject: Note from Mr. Gibbs to the minister for foreign affairs informing him that there is no law that permits foreign vessels to use the American flag. (See Mr. Evarts’ instruction to Mr. Christiancy of May 8. page 874 [Pg. 874 includes portions of Doc. 419, Doc. 420, and Doc. 421].) 865 [Pg. 865 includes portions of Doc. 413, Doc. 414, and Doc. 415]

387 Mr. Evarts to Mr. Christiancy. Apr. 9 The hope expressed that Peru will remain neutral in the approaching contest between Bolivia and Chili. 867 [Pg. 867 includes portions of Doc. 416, Doc. 417, and Doc. 418]

388 do Apr. 24 Case of the “Itata”: Under the circumstances the right of the “Itata” to fly our flag was properly challenged. 867 [Pg. 867 includes portions of Doc. 416, Doc. 417, and Doc. 418]

389 Mr. Christiancy to Mr. Evarts. Apr. 29 Official documents bearing upon the war between Peru and Chili, and explaining the causes which induced Peru to go to war; text of treaty of alliance with Bolivia; note from Chilian Government terminating the Peruvian mission to that country; message of President Prado and reply of the president of Congress. (See Mr. Osborn’s dispatches of April 10 and 19, pages 167 [Pg. 167 includes portions of Doc. 102 and Doc. 103] and 168 [Pg. 168 includes portions of Doc. 103 and Doc. 104].) 867 [Pg. 867 includes portions of Doc. 416, Doc. 417, and Doc. 418]

390 do Apr. 29 Joint note from the ministers of the United States, France, Great Britain. Italy, and Germany to the commander of the Chilian blockading squadron, protesting, in the name of the neutral nations, against the bombardment of open, purely commercial, towns without notice to neutrals; instances the bombardment of Mollendo and Pisagua. (See Mr. Evarts’ instruction of June 18, page 883 [Pg. 883 is part of Doc. 428].) 872 [Pg. 872 includes portions of Doc. 418 and Doc. 419]

391 Mr. Evarts to Mr. Christiancy. May 8 Right of foreign-built vessels wholly owned by American citizens to national protection, and to the national flag; the flag allowed to such vessels as an indication of her ownership and as an emblem of owner’s nationality. 874 [Pg. 874 includes portions of Doc. 419, Doc. 420, and Doc. 421]

392 Mr. Christiancy to Mr. Evarts. May 12 Causes of the war between Chili and Peru traced to traditional hostility; Chilian success at sea; difficult country for the armies to operate in; need of transports by Peru; disastrous effect of the war upon the finances; liberality of private individuals; depreciation of the paper money; the suffering of neutral shipping; the coasting trade of Peru opened to neutrals. 874 [Pg. 874 includes portions of Doc. 419, Doc. 420, and Doc. 421]

393 do May 20 Copies of correspondence between Mr. Osborn and Mr. Christiancy as to the right of foreign-built vessels owned’ by citizens of the United States to fly the American flag. 877 [Pg. 877 includes portions of Doc. 421 and Doc. 422]

394 do May 27 Chilian fleet appears off Callao; progress of the war; concentration of the military forces of Peru and Bolivia; effect of the war upon Peruvian finances; loss of the Chilian corvette Esmeralda, and of the Peruvian iron-clad Independencia. Loan bill passed by Peruvian Congress. 879 [Pg. 879 includes portions of Doc. 422 and Doc. 423]

395 do June 1 The substance of Mr. Evarts s instruction of May 8 (see page 874 [Pg. 874 includes portions of Doc. 419, Doc. 420, and Doc. 421]) respecting the right of foreign-built vessels owned by American citizens to fly the American flag, communicated to the minister for foreign affairs. 881 [Pg. 881 includes portions of Doc. 423, Doc. 424, and Doc. 425]

396 do June 3 Copy of a letter from Mr. Christiancy to Minister Osborn respecting the right of foreign-built vessels owned by Americans to fly the American flag. 882 [Pg. 882 includes portions of Doc. 426 and Doc. 427]

397 Mr. Evarts to Mr. Christiancy June 18 Mr. Christiancy’s action respecting the Chilian bom bardment of Mollendo and Pisagua approved. The rule of international law respecting foreigners domiciled in the country of a belligerent is that they must share with the citizens of that country in the fortunes of war. (Copy of Mr. Attorney-General Stanbery’s opinion of August 31, 1866. respecting the bombardment of Valparaiso by the Spanish. See Mr. Christiancy’s dispatch of April 29, page 872 [Pg. 872 includes portions of Doc. 418 and Doc. 419].) 883 [Pg. 883 is part of Doc. 428]

398 do June 20 Right of foreign-built vessels owned by citizens of the United States to fly the American flag; as a citizen is not prohibited from purchasing and employing abroad a foreign-built ship, when such purchase is made in good faith, there is no reason why he should not fly the flag of his country as an indication of ownership. 884 [Pg. 884 includes portions of Doc. 428 and Doc. 429]

399 do June 26 Treasury circular respecting the proposed issuance of letters of marque, by Bolivia, to Americans; the neutrality of the United States to be maintained. (See instructions from Mr. Evarts to Mr. Pettis, of June 23 and 25, pages 125 [Pg. 125 includes portions of Doc. 73 and Doc. 74], 126 [Pg. 126 includes portions of Doc. 74, Doc. 75, Doc. 76, and Doc. 77].) 886 [Pg. 886 includes portions of Doc. 430 and Doc. 431]

400 Mr. Christiancy to Mr. Evarts July 15 Question of the effectiveness of the Chilian blockade of Iquique, and of the effect upon the blockade of the withdrawal at night of the blockading squadron to a distance of from four to five miles; unsuccessful attempt to raise the blockade by the Peruvian iron-clad Huascar; letter from Mr. Christiancy to Mr. Merriam, consul at Iquique. (See Mr. Evarts’s instruction of August 8, page 893 [Pg. 893 includes portions of Doc. 433, Doc. 434, and Doc. 435].) 886 [Pg. 886 includes portions of Doc. 430 and Doc. 431]

401 do July 23 Letter from Mr. Christiancy to Mr. Merriam respecting the right of the Chilian fleet to prevent the shipping of nitrates from Pisagua; questions touching contraband of war and blockade. 888 [Pg. 888 includes portions of Doc. 431 and Doc. 432]

402 do July 30 Correspondence as to the bombardment of Iquique by the Chilian fleet; question touching the right to bombard without notice discussed by Mr. Christiancy; protests of the consular body and answer of the Chilian commander. 889 [Pg. 889 includes portions of Doc. 432 and Doc. 433]

403 do Aug. 8 Telegram from President Prado announcing the raising of the blockade of Iquique. 893 [Pg. 893 includes portions of Doc. 433, Doc. 434, and Doc. 435]

404 Mr. Evarts to Mr. Christiancy Aug. 8 The views expressed by Mr. Christiancy respectting the blockade of Iquique approved. (See Mr. Christiancy’s dispatch of July 15. page 886 [Pg. 886 includes portions of Doc. 430 and Doc. 431].) 893 [Pg. 893 includes portions of Doc. 433, Doc. 434, and Doc. 435]

405 Mr. Christiancy to Mr. Evarts Sept. 24 Increase of the British squadron in the Paficic 894 [Pg. 894 includes portions of Doc. 435, Doc. 436, and Doc. 437]

406 Mr. Evarts to Mr. Christiancy Dec. 26 The right of Americans to buy foreign-built vessels, and to carry on commerce with them, exists independently of statute law, and such vessels may properly fly the flag of the owner’s country as an indication of such ownership, and as an emblem of the owner’s nationality; consuls before recording bills of sale under paragraphs 220 and 221 of the Consular Regulations must satisfy themselves of the good faith of the transaction; unless so satisfied, they need not record or authenticate the bill of sale; such paper so recorded and authenticated becomes prima facie evidence of American ownership, and should be so regarded by all officers of the government, unless there be reason to believe that the authenticating consul was misled in his conclusions; the question of ownership may be inquired into by any competent court, such as a prize court of a belligerent, after capture of the vessel in proper course of naval operations. (See instructions to Mr. Christiancy of April 24, May 8, and June 20, pages 867 [Pg. 867 includes portions of Doc. 416, Doc. 417, and Doc. 418], 874 [Pg. 874 includes portions of Doc. 419, Doc. 420, and Doc. 421], and 884 [Pg. 884 includes portions of Doc. 428 and Doc. 429], and to Mr. T. A. Osborn of June 9, page 177 [Pg. 177 is part of Doc. 109].)

Note.—An identic instruction sent to the minister to Chili.

894 [Pg. 894 includes portions of Doc. 435, Doc. 436, and Doc. 437]

portugal.

No. From whom and to whom. Date. Subject. Page.

407 Mr. Moran to Mr. Evarts. 1879. Jan. 6 Cortes opened by the King: Speech from the throne; friendly relations with foreign nations; colonial relations; educational measures; military duty and recruiting; railways; harbors; finances discussed. 897 [Pg. 897 includes portions of Doc. 437 and Doc. 438]

408 do Mar. 20 Captains of American whaling ships in Cape Verde Islands in shipping crews evade local law, and ship men under obligation of military duty: Request that such ships may not be allowed to receive on board seamen without necessary papers. (See Mr. Moran’s dispatch of May 19, page 903 [Pg. 903 includes portions of Doc. 443 and Doc. 444].) 899 [Pg. 899 is part of Doc. 439]

409 do Apr. 9 Tobacco duties advanced: Details of the measure 900 [Pg. 900 includes portions of Doc. 439 and Doc. 440]

410 do Apr. 11 Signal assistance rendered to the frigate Constitution by the Portuguese Government: The thanks of Mr. Moran and Captain Badger conveyed to the minister for foreign affairs. 901 [Pg. 901 includes portions of Doc. 440 and Doc. 441]

411 do May 1 Naval cemetery at Cape Saint Vincent: Preparation for the transfer of the dead from the old to the new cemetery; the walls to be built by Portuguese Government; need of an annual appropriation to keep the cemetery in order. (See Mr. Moran’s dispatch of December 22, 1877, Foreign Relations, 1878, page 737.) 902 [Pg. 902 includes portions of Doc. 441, Doc. 442, and Doc. 443]

412 do May 1 Same subject: The satisfaction of the United States expressed at the action of the Portuguese authorities respecting the naval cemetery at Cape Saint Vincent. 902 [Pg. 902 includes portions of Doc. 441, Doc. 442, and Doc. 443]

413 do May 19 No specific charge has been made against American whaling ships in the matter of the improper enlistment of seamen; precautions taken by consul to cause observance of local laws. 903 [Pg. 903 includes portions of Doc. 443 and Doc. 444]

414 do June 18 The thanks of the United States conveyed to the Government of Portugal on account of the courtesy and assistance rendered to the frigate Constitution. 905 [Pg. 905 includes portions of Doc. 444 and Doc. 445]

russia.

No. From whom and to whom. Date. Subject. Page.

415 Mr. Stoughton to Mr. Evarts. 1878. Dec. 28 Transmitting a report from Lieut. F. V. Greene, U. S. A., recommending the appointment of military and naval attaches to several of the legations in Europe; memorandum concerning the position and duties of military attachés. 906 [Pg. 906 includes portions of Doc. 445 and Doc. 446]

416 Mr. Edwards to Mr. Evarts 1879. Mar. 20 System of railway taxation: Companies free from taxation as holders of realty or personalty; stockholders exempt from taxation upon their stock; tax levied January 1, 1879, upon passenger traffic; with this exception no tax on gross or net receipts; railroad companies under control of the government, and subject to a franchise tax; conditions upon which companies may be organized; with the exception of three companies, the government pays a guarantee to all the others, ranging from 1½ to 4 per cent. per annum upon the share and bonded capital. 910 [Pg. 910 includes portions of Doc. 446 and Doc. 447]

417 Mr. Hoffman to Mr. Evarts. Apr. 4 Russian plague: Exaggerated accounts; not the plague, but rather a virulent form of typhus confined to a small district; precautions of Germany abated. 912 [Pg. 912 includes portions of Doc. 447 and Doc. 448]

418 do Apr. 14 Attempt to assassinate the Emperor: The assassin seized; the city greatly agitated; the Emperor unhurt; drives out and is enthusiastically received by the people. 913 [Pg. 913 includes portions of Doc. 449 and Doc. 450]

419 do Apr. 14 Case of Mr. Calvocoressi’s (an American citizen resident in Turkey) claim for compensation for losses sustained at the hands of the Russian army during their occupation of Turkey: The case brought to the attention of the Russian Government; the right of a foreigner domesticated in the territory of a belligerent to claim I compensation for losses sustained at the hands of the other belligerent, discussed. (See Mr. Evarts’ instructions to Mr. Hoffman of July 18, and Mr. Hoffman’s two dispatches of November 3 and 4, pages 924 [Pg. 924 includes portions of Doc. 460 and Doc. 461], 926 [Pg. 926 includes portions of Doc. 463 and Doc. 464], and 927 [Pg. 927 includes portions of Doc. 464 and Doc. 465].) 913 [Pg. 913 includes portions of Doc. 449 and Doc. 450]

420 do Apr. 15 The congratulations of the President and people of the United States upon the escape of the Emperor from assassination communicated to him. 915 [Pg. 915 includes portions of Doc. 450 and Doc. 451]

421 do Apr. 15 Response of Prince Gortchakoff to Mr. Hoffman’s note conveying the congratulations of the President upon the escape of the Emneror. 916 [Pg. 916 includes portions of Doc. 451 and Doc. 452]

422 do Apr. 16 Stringent regulations as to passports and residence have been enforced since the attempt upon the life of the Emperor. New law regulating interest upon loans. 917 [Pg. 917 includes portions of Doc. 453 and Doc. 454]

423 Mr. Evarts to Mr. Hoffman. Apr. 19 Congratulations of the President upon the escape of the Emperor, the wise and firm Mend and protector of the great Russian people, from assassination. 917 [Pg. 917 includes portions of Doc. 453 and Doc. 454]

424 Mr. Hoffman to Mr. Evarts,. May 5 Trial and execution of Lieutenant Dombrovine, a member of the Nihilist society. Exaggerated statements in the English and New York papers as to the state of affairs in Russia. 918 [Pg. 918 includes portions of Doc. 454 and Doc. 455]

425 do May 12 Mr. Evarts’s dispatch conveying the congratulations of the President upon the escape of the Emperor communicated to his highness Prince Gortchakoff. 919 [Pg. 919 includes portions of Doc. 455 and Doc. 456]

426 do May 13 Regulations to guard against the spread oi the cattle plague. 920 [Pg. 920 includes portions of Doc. 457 and Doc. 458]

427 do May 26 Condition of affairs in Russia: Political executions; incendiary fires; grasshoppers; and restrictions upon the migration of people from one section of Russia to another. 920 [Pg. 920 includes portions of Doc. 457 and Doc. 458]

428 do May 29 Position of Jews in Russia: Case of Mr. H. Rosenstraus, a naturalized citizen of the United States; foreign Jews restricted by law from settling in Russia exceptions in favor of British Jews; the exception further extended to other foreign Jews; restrictions upon the holding of real estate; the classification of Jews in guilds; taxes upon, &c. 921 [Pg. 921 includes portions of Doc. 458 and Doc. 459]

429 do June 17 Report upon the gold and silver coin and bullion and paper currency in circulation in Russia. 923 [Pg. 923 includes portions of Doc. 459 and Doc. 460]

430 Mr. Evarts to Mr. Hoffman July 18 Case of John Calvocoressi: Not one to be pressed as of right; to be commended to the favorable consideration of the Russian Government; San Stefano was not the scene of active hostilities, and the occupation of his property was rather for the convenience of Russian officers than on account of purely military exigencies or requirements. (See Mr. Hoffman’s dispatches of April 14 and November 4 and 5, pages 913 [Pg. 913 includes portions of Doc. 449 and Doc. 450], 926 [Pg. 926 includes portions of Doc. 463 and Doc. 464], and 927 [Pg. 927 includes portions of Doc. 464 and Doc. 465].) 924 [Pg. 924 includes portions of Doc. 460 and Doc. 461]

431 Mr. Hoffman to Mr. Evarts Aug. 1 Visit to the three naval vessels built upon the Delaware for the Russian Government: The government said to be pleased with the vessels; the officers of the navy seem to take pride in them. 925 [Pg. 925 includes portions of Doc. 462 and Doc. 463]

432 do Sept. 16 Extracts from the Journal de St. Petersburg upon the locust in Southern Russia: Report of Mr. Portcbinsky. secretary of the Russian Society of Entomology. 925 [Pg. 925 includes portions of Doc. 462 and Doc. 463]

433 do Nov. 3 Note from Baron Jomini rejecting the claim of Mr. John Calvocoressi: No liability recognized by the Imperial Government on account of damage done to private property during the occupancy of an enemy’s country. 926 [Pg. 926 includes portions of Doc. 463 and Doc. 464]

434 do Nov. 4 Note representing the equities of the Calvocoressi case, and urging it upon the favorable consideration of the Russian Government. 927 [Pg. 927 includes portions of Doc. 464 and Doc. 465]

siam.

No. From whom and to whom. Date. Subject. Page.

435 Mr. Sickels to Mr. Payson 1879. Feb. 19 General Giant invited by the King to visit Siam; the Siamese Government thinking of sending an embassy to the United States. 928 [Pg. 928 includes portions of Doc. 465, Doc. 466, and Doc. 467]

436 do July. 10 The government ready to send an embassy to the United States whenever it is officially informed from Washington that it would be agreeable to the government to receive the embassy. 928 [Pg. 928 includes portions of Doc. 465, Doc. 466, and Doc. 467]

437 do Aug. 25 Same subject: History of former Siamese embassies; the embassy to the United States designed to study American industry; an opportunity will be afforded through the embassy to extend American trade relations with Siam. 929 [Pg. 929 includes portions of Doc. 467 and Doc. 468]

438 Mr. Evarts to Mr. Sickels Aug. 29 Mr. Sickels instructed to assure the Siamese Goveminent that it will give the Government of the United States great satisfaction to receive the embassy; the belief entertained thatit will tend to develop international commerce; the President will call the attention of Congress to the subject, in order that suitable arrangements may be made to receive the embassy. 930 [Pg. 930 includes portions of Doc. 468 and Doc. 469]

439 Mr. Sickels to Mr. Payson Oct. 6 Congratulatory address of Americans to the King of Siam upon the occasion of his birthday. 931 [Pg. 931 includes portions of Doc. 469 and Doc. 470]

spain.

No. From whom and to whom. Date. Subject. Page.

440 Mr. Evarts to Mr. Lowell. 1878. Sept. 24 Certain packages of “La Ilustracion Espanola” and “La Moda Elegante,” sent by mail to the United States, were returned to Spain, because, under the construction given the postal union treaty by the international bureau at Berne, duties may not be collected upon dutiable matter sent by mail within the limits of the union; letters and circulars from the Treasury and Post-Office Departments upon the subject. (See Mr, Lowell’s dispatch of August 30, 1878, Foreign Relations, 1878, page 798.) 932 [Pg. 932 includes portions of Doc. 470 and Doc. 471]

441 Mr. Lowell to Mr. Evarts Oct. 29 Account of the visit of General Grant to Spam: At Vitoria he dined with the King and rode by his side during the reviews; his reception in Madrid; every possible attention and courtesy shown him during his stay by the Spanish government. 935 [Pg. 935 includes portions of Doc. 472 and Doc. 473]

442 do 1879. Feb. 11 Extradition of Charles W. Angell: Arrested in Portugal; permission granted by Spanish Government to transport him across Spanish territory. (For discussion of extradition and transit questions see case of C. G. Scrafford; Mr. Evarts to Mr. Dichman, Nov. 12, 1878, F. R., 1878, p. 151: Report of Royal British Commission upon Extradition; Mr. Welsh’s dispatch of June 22, 1878, F. R., 1878, p. 268: dispatches from Mr. Dichman of February 15 and March, 17, 1879, pp. 271 [Pg. 271 is part of Doc. 149] and 273, F. R., 1879 [Pg. 273 includes portions of Doc. 150 and Doc. 151], and Mr. Evarts’ instruction to Mr. Lowell of February 11, 1879, p. 941 [Pg. 941 includes portions of Doc. 476, Doc. 477, and Doc. 478].) 936 [Pg. 936 includes portions of Doc. 473 and Doc. 474]

443 Mr. Lowell to Mr. Evarts Feb. 14 Importation into Spain of American wheat: It is sold at a profit; question of a commercial treaty between Spain and the United States discussed; protection and free trade influences in the Cortes. 938 [Pg. 938 includes portions of Doc. 474 and Doc. 475]

444 do Feb. 20 The question of a commercial treaty between Spain and the United States; article from La Epoca; conflict of sectional interests; Spanish agriculture; need of improved agricultural machinery; steam communication with foreign countries. 939 [Pg. 939 is part of Doc. 476]

445 Mr. Evarts to Mr. Lowell Mar. 5 The question of the right of transit of an extradited criminal in custody across the territory of a foreign state, now attracting the attention of the department: Satisfaction of the United States at the courteous accordance of that right by Spain in the case of Angell. (See Mr. Lowell’s dispatch of February 11, page 936 [Pg. 936 includes portions of Doc. 473 and Doc. 474].) 941 [Pg. 941 includes portions of Doc. 476, Doc. 477, and Doc. 478]

446 Mr Lowell to Mr. Evarts June 2 Opening of the Cortes by the King in person: Judicial reforms proposed; Cuban questions discussed; measures looking to the assimilation of the administration in the Antilles and in the Peninsula; Cuban representatives in the Cortes; project looking to the extinction of slavery; reformation of taxes; ministerial crisis impending. 941 [Pg. 941 includes portions of Doc. 476, Doc. 477, and Doc. 478]

447 do Aug. 19 Report of General Martinez Campos in relation to the pacification of Cuba: His position at the head of the ministry; the Cuban question the most important one before the Cortes. 943 [Pg. 943 includes portions of Doc. 478 and Doc. 479]

448 do Aug. 20 Report of the minister of ultramar upon Cuban reforms: Royal decree appointing a commission to formulate measures of reform. 952 [Pg. 952 is part of Doc. 480]

449 do Aug. 22 Question of extraordinary taxes imposed upon Americans in the Island of Cuba: The subject referred to the governor-general for consideration. (See page 800, Foreign Relations. 1878.) 954 [Pg. 954 includes portions of Doc. 480 and Doc. 481]

450 do Aug. 22 Excessive tonnage dues exacted from American vessels at Manilla returned. 955 [Pg. 955 includes portions of Doc. 481 and Doc. 482]

451 Senor Mendez de Vigo to Mr. Evarts. Mar. 29 Transmitting a draft for $10,000 in payment of the indemnity on account of the American barks Ellen Rizpah and Rising Sun. (See Foreign Relalations: 1878. pages 769, 775, 777, 784, 786.) 956 [Pg. 956 includes portions of Doc. 483, Doc. 484, and Doc. 485]

452 Mr. Evarts to Senor Mendez de Vigo. Apr. 1 Same subject: Acknowledging receipt of the indemnity. 956 [Pg. 956 includes portions of Doc. 483, Doc. 484, and Doc. 485]

sweden and norway.

No. From whom and to whom. Date. Subject. Page.

453 Mr. Stevens to Mr. Evarts 1879. Jan. 20 Parliament opened by the King: Text of the speech; an increase of duties recommended; business relations discussed. 956 [Pg. 956 includes portions of Doc. 483, Doc. 484, and Doc. 485]

454 do May 19 New tariff law in force: Duties increased; rate of duties. 958 [Pg. 958 includes portions of Doc. 485 and Doc. 486]

455 do May 20 The government authorized to issue its bonds to the amount of 23,000,000 crowns in aid of the railways and banks of the country, taking mortages upon completed railways as security, and to buy one line of railway for 4,000,000 crowns; government advances to railways since 1855, 190, 000, 000 crowns; the state owns about half the railways. 959 [Pg. 959 includes portions of Doc. 486 and Doc. 487]

456 do Aug. 26 Railways of Sweden and Norway: Their construction of recent date, owing to the admirable system of water communication, artificial and natural, throughout the two kingdoms; first Swedish railway built by the government in 1856; 1, 005 miles of state railway, cost $41, 400, 000; 1,240 miles of private railways, cost $61, 000, 000; state aid to private roads; first Norway railroad built in 1854; miles in operation 656, in construction 362; total cost $30, 000, 000, of which $22, 500, 000 has been paid by the government. 960 [Pg. 960 includes portions of Doc. 487 and Doc. 488]

457 do Sept. 23 The Mormon emigration question brought to the attention of the Swedish Government: Difficulty of direct government action pointed out; so far as may be consistent with law, the government will assist in discouraging Mormon emigration. 964 [Pg. 964 includes portions of Doc. 488 and Doc. 489]

switzerland.

No. From whom and to whom. Date. Subject. Page.

458 Mr. Fish to Mr. Evarts 1878. Dec. 2 Socialistic movements: Switzerland’s attitude respecting the question of political asylum; rumored dissatisfaction of neighboring nations in respect to the accordance of asylum by Switzerland to political prescripts; utterances of the Swiss press upon the subject. (See discussion of subject of asylum in Haytien correspondence, pages 570 [Pg. 570 includes portions of Doc. 277 and Doc. 278], 576 [Pg. 576 includes portions of Doc. 280 and Doc. 281], 582 [Pg. 582 includes portions of Doc. 285 and Doc. 286].) 965 [Pg. 965 includes portions of Doc. 489 and Doc. 490]

459 do 1879. Mar. 13 Abuse of American citizenship: Case of William Dietze; naturalized in 1855; twenty-four years away from the United States; twenty years in Switzerland; correspondence between Mr. Fish and the consul at Zurich in respect to the case. 968 [Pg. 968 includes portions of Doc. 490 and Doc. 491]

460 do Mar. 31 Railway taxation in Switzerland: No direct taxes imposed by national government; right of free transportation of mails, mail cars, and employes of mail service reserved; other government transportation to be paid for; disagreement as to rates to be determined by the judicial tribunals; an annual concession tax at the rate of 50 francs for each kilometer in operation if income of road be at the rate of 4 per cent. on capital; 100 francs, if income be at the rate of 5 per cent.; and 200 francs, if income be at rate of 6 per cent; right of taxation reserved to cantons. 970 [Pg. 970 includes portions of Doc. 491 and Doc. 492]

461 do May 19 Capital punishment: By recent vote the right to resort to, restored to the cantons, except in respect of political offenses; corporeal punishment abolished. 971 [Pg. 971 includes portions of Doc. 492 and Doc. 493]

462 do June 9 Pauper emigration to the United States: Case of the family Brugger, sent by the communal authorities of Graben; the man unfit to work, and the woman half blind. 972 [Pg. 972 includes portions of Doc. 493 and Doc. 494]

463 do Oct. 18 Difficulties attending Swiss expatriation: Action of communal and cantonal authorities in withholding property belonging to Swiss naturalized in the United States; report of Mr. Consul Byers upon the subject; for Swiss law regulating expatriation see F. R. 1876, page 567. 973 [Pg. 973 is part of Doc. 495]

turkish empire.

1. turkey.

No. From whom and to whom. Date. Subject. Page.

464 Mr. Maynard to Mr. Evarts 1878. Nov. 20 Notable visit of the Japanese corvette Seiki to Constantinople: Ceremonies of reception. 976 [Pg. 976 includes portions of Doc. 495 and Doc. 496]

465 do Dec. 25 Proceedings necessary to validate a marriage between American citizens in a Mohammedan country in which there is no consular representative; suggestions as to the amendment of section 4082, Revised Statutes, to include diplomatic officers as well as consular officers. 977 [Pg. 977 includes portions of Doc. 496 and Doc. 497]

466 Mr. Heap to Mr. Evarts 1879. Feb. 11 Abstract of treaty of peace between Turkey and Russia, signed 8th February, relating to the execution of so much of the treaty of San Stefano as remains unaffected by the treaty of Berlin: Payment of the indemnity; payment of losses of Russian subjects; status of the inhabitants of ceded provinces. 978 [Pg. 978 includes portions of Doc. 497 and Doc. 498]

467 Mr. Maynard to Mr. Evarts. June 28 Deposition of Ismail Pasha, the Khedive of Egypt, by imperial irade of the Sultan of June 26, 1879, and the appointment of his son, Tewfik Pasha, as Khedive: Papers relating to his deposition. (See dispatches from Mr. Maynard of July 11, page 982 [Pg. 982 is part of Doc. 501], from Mr. Farman March 18, June 27, pages 996 [Pg. 996 includes portions of Doc. 508 and Doc. 509], 1005 [Pg. 1005 includes portions of Doc. 510 and Doc. 511], and from Mr. Comanos of July 16, August 8. August 19, pages 1008 [Pg. 1008 includes portions of Doc. 511 and Doc. 512], 1013 [Pg. 1013 includes portions of Doc. 515 and Doc. 516].) 979 [Pg. 979 includes portions of Doc. 498 and Doc. 499]

468 do July 10 Note from Turkish minister for foreign affairs requesting the sanction of the United States to the increase of customs duties in Crete, to raise funds for the support of schools. 931 [Pg. 931 includes portions of Doc. 469 and Doc. 470]

469 do July 11 Review of the establishment of the khedivate of Egypt and of the reign of Ismail Pasha: The reason of his downfall; the practical withdrawal of the autonomous character heretofore accorded to the Government of Egypt; henceforth Egypt to be regarded as a province of the empire. (See Mr. Farman’s dispatch of June 27, page 1005 [Pg. 1005 includes portions of Doc. 510 and Doc. 511].) 932 [Pg. 932 includes portions of Doc. 470 and Doc. 471]

470 Mr. Maynard to Mr. Evarts July 12 Affairs in Eastern Roumelia: The administration of Aleko Pasha Vogorides as governor-general; manifestations of hostility to Turkish rule by the Bulgarian part of the population; article from the London Spectator, attributed to the Marquis of Bath, upon Roumelian affairs. 984 [Pg. 984 is part of Doc. 502]

471 do Aug. 29 Case of Etienne P. Mirzan, a naturalized citizen, charged with the murder of Dr. Alexander Dahan in Alexandria, Egypt: Question of jurisdiction of court of consul-general; correspondence between Mr. Maynard and Mr. Comanos. (See Mr. Evarts’s instructions to Mr. Maynard of October 9, and to Mr. Comanos of July 22, pages 990 [Pg. 990 includes portions of Doc. 503, Doc. 504, and Doc. 505] and 1010 [Pg. 1010 includes portions of Doc. 512 and Doc. 513], and dispatch from Mr. Comanos of July 30, page 1012 [Pg. 1012 is part of Doc. 514].) 987 [Pg. 987 includes portions of Doc. 502 and Doc. 503]

472 Mr. Hunter to Mr. Maynard. Oct. 9 Same subject: Mr. Maynard’s letter to Mr. Comanos as to jurisdiction of the court of the consul-general approved; the court has jurisdiction of the Mirzan trial. 990 [Pg. 990 includes portions of Doc. 503, Doc. 504, and Doc. 505]

473 Mr. Maynard to Mr. Evarts. Oct. 13 Account of the visit of the British ambassador to Syria: Letters from the consuls at Beirut and Jerusalem. 990 [Pg. 990 includes portions of Doc. 503, Doc. 504, and Doc. 505]

474 do Oct. 15 Reawakening of religious zeal a g ong the Mohammedans: An incident in illustration. 993 [Pg. 993 includes portions of Doc. 505, Doc. 506, and Doc. 507]

2. egypt.

No. From whom and to whom. Date. Subject. Page.

475 Mr. Farman to Mr. Evarts 1879. Feb. 3 Report upon the Suez canal: The canal a complete financial success. Total cost of the canal up to 1877, 472, 921, 799 francs; adding estimated value of labor furnished by Egyptian government at $38, 000, 000, and cost of fresh-water canal and connections built by Egyptian government and the company 50, 000, 000 francs, the total cost would be 560, 000, 000 francs, deducting all aid of whatsoever kind received from Egypt, and the actual cost to the company would be 358, 921, 799 francs. The stock of the company consists of 400, 000 shares at 500 francs each; Great Britain holds by purchase from Egypt 176, 602 shares, bought at the rate of 568 francs per share; the bulk of the balance of the stock held in France; present market price of shares 717 francs. Total debt of the company, 116, 000, 000 francs. Revenue of the canal in 1870, $995, 752; in 1877, $6, 325, 448. Interest at the rate of 5 per cent. has been regularly paid since the first issue of the stock. (See Mr. Van Dyck’s dispatch of October 17, p. 1034 [Pg. 1034 includes portions of Doc. 519 and Doc. 520]). 993 [Pg. 993 includes portions of Doc. 505, Doc. 506, and Doc. 507]

476 do Mar. 18 Progress of the interference of Great Britain and France in Egyptian affairs: Demand of the two powers for the restoration of Nubar Pasha to the ministry, or in default thereof that the two European ministers should have the power of veto respecting all measures presented to the council; notes from the Khedive and the representatives of France and Great Britain; debate in the House of Commons upon Egyptian finances. 996 [Pg. 996 includes portions of Doc. 508 and Doc. 509]

477 do May 22 Negotiations respecting the transfer of Cleopatra’s needle to New York: Notes from Mr. Farman and from the minister for foreign affairs of Egypt. 1003 [Pg. 1003 is part of Doc. 510]

478 do June 27 The deposition of the Khedive: Proceedings upon the proclamation of Prince Tewfik; the attitude of the two powers, France and Great Britain; review by Mr. Farman of the incidents of Ismail Pasha’s reign. (See Mr. Maynard’s dispatch of July 11 page 982 [Pg. 982 is part of Doc. 501].) 1005 [Pg. 1005 includes portions of Doc. 510 and Doc. 511]

479 Mr. Comanos to Mr. Evarts. July 16 Same subject: Copies of official telegrams touching the deposition of the Khedive. 1008 [Pg. 1008 includes portions of Doc. 511 and Doc. 512]

480 Mr.Evarts to Mr. Comanos. July 22 Case of the naturalized citizen Mirzan charged with murder: Vice consul-general, in absence of consul-general, has jurisdiction of case. 1010 [Pg. 1010 includes portions of Doc. 512 and Doc. 513]

481 Mr. Comanos to Mr. Evarts. July 30 Same subject: Incidents of the murder in Alexandria of Dr. Dahan by Mirzan. 1012 [Pg. 1012 is part of Doc. 514]

482 do Aug. 8 Copy of telegram from Prince Tewfik to Grand Vizier upon receipt of notification of his accession to the khedivate of Egypt. 1013 [Pg. 1013 includes portions of Doc. 515 and Doc. 516]

483 Mr. Comanos to Mr. Evarts Aug. 19 Ceremonies upon the reception of the firman of the Sultan constituting Tewfik Pasha Khedive of Egypt: Translation of the firman; description of the divisions of Egypt. 1013 [Pg. 1013 includes portions of Doc. 515 and Doc. 516]

484 do Sept. 1 The Khedive willing to appoint an American member upon the commission of liquidation; foreign intervention in the government. 1017 [Pg. 1017 includes portions of Doc. 516 and Doc. 517]

485 do Sept. 2 Fifteen official documents showing the proceedings of Great Britain, Russia, Prussia, and Austria, in concert with Turkey, in 1840 and 1841, in relation to the “pacification of the Levant:” In 1839 Muhammed Ali, Pasha of Egypt, was in victorious possession of Syria, and threatened the destruction of the Turkish Empire; the great powers, in co-operation with Turkey, restored the Turkish power. 1018 [Pg. 1018 includes portions of Doc. 517 and Doc. 518]

486 do Sept. 6 Re-establishment of the controller-generalship of receipts and expenses, and the appointment of Messrs. Baring and de Blignieres as controllers-general. 1033 [Pg. 1033 includes portions of Doc. 518 and Doc. 519]

487 Mr. Van Dyck to Mr. Hunter. Oct. 17 Statistics as to the Suez Canal: Transit of vessels; tonnage, receipts, expenses, profits; nationality of vessels. (See Mr. Farman’s dispatch of February 3, 1879, page 993 [Pg. 993 includes portions of Doc. 505, Doc. 506, and Doc. 507].) 1034 [Pg. 1034 includes portions of Doc. 519 and Doc. 520]

488 do Oct. 23 Revenues and expenses of Egyptian Government: Receipts, £8, 500, 000 (Egyptian); interest on bonded debt, £4, 648, 200; interest on other debt, £300, 000; total interest, £5, 000, 000; balance for expenses, £3, 500, 000; ordinary expenses, £4, 500, 000; probable deficit, £1, 000, 000. 1035 [Pg. 1035 is part of Doc. 521]

3. tunis.

No. From whom and to whom. Date. Subject. Page.

489 Mr. Fish to Mr. Hunter 1878. Nov. 26 Tax for maintenance of light-houses on the coast of Tunis: The United States consents to the imposition of a moderate tax upon shipping. (See Mr. Heap’s dispatches of August 2 and 13, and Mr. Evarts’s reply of October 23, F. R., 1878. pages 931, 932, 933.) 1036 [Pg. 1036 includes portions of Doc. 521, Doc. 522, and Doc. 523]

490 do 1879. Apr. 16 Opening of the Tunisian section of the French Railway of Algeria: Ceremonies upon the occasion. 1037 [Pg. 1037 includes portions of Doc. 523 and Doc. 524]

uruguay.

No. From whom and to whom. Date. Subject. Page.

491 Mr. Caldwell to Mr. Evarts. 1879. Mar. 10 Constitutional form of government restored: Colonel Lorenzo Latorre elected President; composition of the ministry. 1038 [Pg. 1038 includes portions of Doc. 525 and Doc. 526]

venezuela.

No. From whom and to whom. Date. Subject. Page.

492 Mr. Baker to Mr. Evarts 1879. Jan. 24 Attempt of Venezuela to prevent the entry of American vessels into Puerto Cabello, that port being: in the hands of insurgents, without establishing a blockade: Protest of Mr. Baker. 1038 [Pg. 1038 includes portions of Doc. 525 and Doc. 526]

493 Mr. Evarts to Mr. Baker Feb. 24 Same subject: Approval of the protest and course of Mr. Baker respecting the attempt of Venezuela to restrict the entry of American vessels into Puerto Cabello. 1040 [Pg. 1040 includes portions of Doc. 527 and Doc. 528]

494 Mr. Baker to Mr. Evarts Feb. 26 Entry of the revolutionary army under General Cedeno into Caracas. 1040 [Pg. 1040 includes portions of Doc. 527 and Doc. 528]

495 do Feb. 27 Arrival of General Guzman Blanco, the head of the revolution, in Caracas. 1041 [Pg. 1041 includes portions of Doc. 528, Doc. 529, and Doc. 530]

496 do Mar. 17 Decree of General Guzman Blanco, assembling a congress of plenipotentiaries to deliberate upon the condition of the nation. 1041 [Pg. 1041 includes portions of Doc. 528, Doc. 529, and Doc. 530]

497 Mr. Baker to Mr. Evarts Apr. 14 Decree of General Guzman Blanco, constituting the department of Maracay a federal district. 1042 [Pg. 1042 includes portions of Doc. 530 and Doc. 531]

498 do May 14 Proceedings of the congress of plenipotentiaries: Redaction of the number of States from twenty to seven; election of Guzman Blanco as provisional president; his proposed visit to Europe sanctioned. 1043 [Pg. 1043 includes portions of Doc. 532 and Doc. 533]

499 do June 10 Programme of General Guzman’s visit to Europe, to negotiate for the reduction of the debt; to negotiate treaties to insure the development of the resources of Venezuela, and to formalize the purchase of Curaçoa. 1043 [Pg. 1043 includes portions of Doc. 532 and Doc. 533]

500 do Aug. 25 Report upon the trade relations of Venezuela: Transportation in the hands of French, English, German steamship companies; no American steamers engaged; table of distances from ports of Venezuela to those of the United States and of Europe respectively; no profit made of advantages in fayor of the United States; conditions favorable for enlarged commercial intercourse between Venezuela and the United States. 1044 [Pg. 1044 includes portions of Doc. 533 and Doc. 534]

501 do Oct. 28 Translation of contract, approved by Gen. Guzman Blanco, between the minister of Venezuela at Paris and M. Eugenio Pereire, under Which the latter agrees to organize a commercial company to undertake the development of the resources of Venezuela, in consideration of Venezuela’s granting to him exclusive and general rights respecting the building of railroads, roads, canals, the entry and working of mines, the establishing of manufactories, the creation of banks, the issue of certificates of indebtedness, &c. 1045 [Pg. 1045 includes portions of Doc. 534 and Doc. 535]

Circulars.Circulars.

[1] . To the consular officers of the United States.

Department of State, Washington, February 13, 1879.

[2] (3735.) invoice value—additions for charges.

Treasury Department, October 4, 1878.

[3] . To the consular officers of the United States.

Department of State, Washington, March 8, 1879.

[4] . To the consuls-general, consuls, and commercial agents of the United States in Europe.

Department of State, Washington, April 3, 1879.

[5] . Sent to the diplomatic officers of the United States.

Department of State, Washington, May 23, 1879.

[6] . Sent to the diplomatic officers of the United States.

Department of State, Washington, May 28, 1879.

[7] . To the consular officers of the United States.

Department of State, Washington, June 10, 1879.

[8] . To the consular officers of the United States.

Department of State, Washington, June 10, 1879.

[9] . To the consular officers of the United States.

Department of State, Washington, June 24, 1879.

[10] . To the consular officers of the United States.

Department of State, Washington, July 9, 1879.

[11] . Sent to the diplomatic officers of the United States.

Department of State, Washington, August 9, 1879.

No. 1. To the consular officers of the United States. [Circular No. 12.]

Department of State,
Washington, February 13, 1879.

No. 1.
To the consular officers of the United States.

Gentlemen: The Secretary of the Treasury, under date of the 1st instant, has requested the Department to acquaint you that, since the promulgation of the instructions, of the 4th of October, 1878, which required that when charges are not expressly specified in an invoice of imported goods, and such goods are not therein described as being free of charges, it is the duty of the customs officer to add such charges for the purpose of ascertaining the dutiable value of the merchandise, it has been represented to that Department that their immediate strict enforcement would impose a hardship upon the merchants concerned. Further instructions have therefore been given to the collectors in the principal ports of the United States that such enforcement will not be insisted upon until the 1st of April next.

In the mean time, however, it is considered desirable that the purport of the instructions of October 4, 1878, should be brought to the notice of manufacturers, owners, and shippers of goods to be imported into the United States, and I therefore append hereto a copy of the decision referred to for that purpose. You are requested, therefore to take such measures in the premises as may seem to you to be required to accomplish the desired object.

I am, gentlemen, your obedient servant,

F. W. Seward,
Acting Secretary.

(3735.) invoice value—additions for charges. [Document 2]

(3735.)
invoice value—additions for charges.

Treasury Department,
October 4, 1878.

Sir: The department duly received your letter of the 20th ultimo, in which you call attention to its decision of April 25, 1878 (Synopsis 3550), in relation to additions for charges on invoice when such charges are not specified therein.

You state that it lias heretofore been the custom to regard as included in the invoice value charges for cartons, and packing of various descriptions of merchandise, such as leather gloves, German hosiery, and toys, and that the collector recently returned to you a number of invoices of German hosiery, because charges for cases and packing were not specified in such invoices, either as separate items or as being included in the invoice value, and for which no addition was made by you.

In reply to your request for instructions, I have to state that the principle laid down in decision No. 3550 is, that when charges are not separately specified in the invoice, and the goods are not therein described as being free of charges, it is the duty of customs officers to add such charges for the purpose of assessment of duty.

The reason of the rule was that the insertion in the invoice of separate items, or declaration therein that the goods Were free of charges, would make the matter free from doubt, and compel a practice which would be an aid in securing uniformity at the various ports.

In view of the statements, however, made by you, that the charges for packing and carting are always merged in the invoice-price description of the classes of goods before named, I have to state that the department does not desire to adopt summarily a practice contrary thereto without giving parties concerned a notice thereof. You will, therefore, continue to accept invoices as correct where you shall be satisfied that the price paid includes charges for packing and cartons, until January 1, 1879, and on and after that date it will be required that invoices shall separately specify such charges, or declare that the price includes such charges; otherwise, additions for such charges shall be made.

A copy hereof will be furnished to the collector.

Very respectfully,

H. F. FRENCH,
Assistant Secretary.

United States Appraiser, New York.

No. 2. To the consular officers of the United States. [Document 3]

No. 2.
To the consular officers of the United States.

Department of State,
Washington, March 8, 1879.

Gentlemen: The act approved June 4, 1878, making appropriations for the consular and diplomatic service of the United States for the year ending June 30, 1879, provides that every consular officer shall furnish to the Secretary “of the Treasury, or to such officers of the customs as he may direct, as often as may be required, the prices-current of all articles of merchandise usually exported, to the United States from the port or place in which the consular officer is stationed.

In view of this provision of law, you are requested to forward to the appraising officers at the ports in the United States to Which invoices presented to you for certification show that goods are to be shipped from your district, prices-current of such goods, together with such information relating to the matters mentioned therein as, in your opinion, may be pertinent and important.

It is not required that such prices-current sliall be forwarded in all cases whenever issued, but only when, from changes in the prices of merchandise shipped, or from other causes, the consular officer may be of opinion that they will be of use as an aid to the appraising officer in ascertaining the true dutiable value of merchandise. They should, however, be sent at the end of each half year, whether changes have occurred in the prices or not. In some instances special requests have been made for the forwarding, at stated periods, of the prices-current of certain classes of merchandise to particular ports, and this circular will not be construed as revoking these requests, but such prices-current will be forwarded as heretofore.

I am, gentlemen, your obedient servant,

F. W. SEWARD.
Assistant Secretary.

No. 3. To the consuls-general, consuls, and commercial agents of the United States in Europe. [Document 4]

No. 3.
To the consuls-general, consuls, and commercial agents of the United States in Europe.

Department of State,
Washington, April 3, 1879.

Gentlemen: In view of representations made to the Department, it is deemed desirable that the next annual report of consular officers in Europe should contain a table showing the humidity of each month of the year at those places within their respective districts where meteorological observations are taken. For the purposes of these reports the year will be understood to be the fiscal year.

I am, gentlemen, vour obedient servant,

F. W. SEWARD,
Assistant Secretary.

No. 4. Sent to the diplomatic officers of the United States. [Document 5]

No. 4.
Sent to the diplomatic officers of the United States.

Department of State,
Washington, May 23, 1879.

Sir: I have been requested by the Secretary of the Treasury to obtain through you the following desired information respecting the amount of gold and silver coin and bullion and paper currency in————.

1st. What is the amount of gold coin and bullion in the treasury, in the banks, and in circulation in the country to which you are accredited?

2d. What is the amount of silver coin and bullion in the treasury, in the banks, and in circulation?

3d. What is the amount of outstanding paper currency?

4th. What is the amount of gold produced annually from the mines?

5th. What is the amount of silver produced annually?

6th. What is the amount of gold annually coined, imported, exported, and consumed in the arts and manufactures?

7th. What is the amount of silver annually coined, imported, exported, and consumed in the arts and manufactures?

You are instructed to present these interrogatories to the minister of foreign affairs of —— ——, and to request that as full and detailed information of the character sought by the Government of the United States may be furnished to you as it is possible to obtain, or as the minister may deem proper to furnish. It is desired that these statistics may be not only those of the past year, but also those for as many previous years as may be procurable.

Any information on this important subject which you may be able to obtain through any other quarter than government or official sources will also be acceptable.

The Secretary of the Treasury would like to receive this matter at the very earliest moment practicable.

I am, sir, your obedient servant,

WM. M. EVARTS.

No. 5. Sent to the diplomatic officers of the United States. [Document 6]

No. 5.
Sent to the diplomatic officers of the United States.

Department of State,
Washington, May 28, 1879.

Sir: The Navy Department having experienced for a long time the advantages of, not to say the necessity for, an international system of fog-signals, and lamenting the loss of life and property that has occurred through the lack of an adequate system, the Secretary of the Navy has proposed to me that there be submitted to the various maritime powers of the world, through this Department, for consideration, with a view to adoption, a code, of which a copy is herein inclosed, the plan of Commodore Beaumont, which is regarded as effective from its perfect simplicity and capacity to communicate what is intended.

Blasts of steam-whistles and horns have been used for a number of years to indicate the proximity of vessels in times of fog; and since the general introduction of steamers in the merchant marine, it has become necessary that not only the proximity of vessels but, also, that the course they are steering should be indicated with some degree of accuracy so as to be able to avoid collisions.

In the proposed system two signals are employed—the initial and secondary signal. The initial signal indicates the quadrant, and the secondary the point in the quadrant steered. One blast indicates the first quadrant, or from N. to E.; two blasts (with an interval of one-half second between) the second quadrant, or from E. to S.; three blasts, the third quadrant, or from S. to W.; four blasts, the fourth quadrant, or from W. to N., &c.

Between the initial and secondary signals there should be an interval of not less than four seconds. In making the secondary signals an interval of one-half second is made between each sound or blast.

These compass signals are not to be repeated oftener than at intervals of not more than one minute when made by steam-whistle, and at intervals of not more than five minutes when made by fog-horn, which does not conflict with existing laws.

When by these signals or other indications the presence of other vessels is made known, each vessel mus’t be brought up to the exact point as per first column, “Course,” in the accompanying table, and not steer between the points, as per second column, until they have passed each other; due regard being paid to the dangers of navigation. When the vessels sight each other, the Rules of the Road, established by law, must be followed.

A system of signals for use by vessels not having the regular international code is herewith inclosed. It is very simple, and every vessel afloat could use it with but the slight additional expense of the inclosed card.

The present international code of signals is not only cumbersome, but very expensive, and is, consequently, not in general use by mercantile vessels.

At present there is no provision for vessels to communicate with each other at night. By the proposed system this difficulty is obviated, as vessels are enabled to communicate not only by day, but also by night.

The adoption of this system, as it requires no expenditure of money, would be brought about, I infer, by the mere expression of a wish on the part of the governments interested and a dissemination of the means employed in its execution.

You are instructed to present the codes transmitted to you with this instruction to the minister of foreign affairs of —— —— for the consideration of the —— —— government, and to request an expression of its views thereon.

I am, sir, your obedient servant,

WM. M. EVARTS.

[Inclosures.]

Proposed international alphabet.

Proposed general fog-signals.

proposed international alphabet.

A 12 J 1222 S 111

B 2111 K 212 T 2

C 2121 L 1211 U 112

D 211 M 22 V 1112

E 1 N 21 W 122

F 1121 O 222 X 2112

G 221 P 1221 Y 2122

H 1111 Q 2212 Z 2211

I 11 R 121

numerals.

1 12222 6 21111

2 11222 7 2211

3 11122 8 22211

4 11112 9 22221

5 11111 0 22222

Note.—In the American Naval Code the colors Red will be used for 1, White for 2, both together, 3.

In answering a message, 3—“I understand;” 33—“I do not understand.”

End of word, 3. End of sentence, 33. End of message, 333. Error, 3333.

rule for establishing the code.

A vessel or station (A) desiring to communicate any message or intelligence to a stranger may hoist a flag or other object, which will be known as A’s number 1. After this is seen and noted, the vessel or station signaled (B) will answer by showing a flag or object, which will be recognized as B’s number 1, and noted by A accordingly. A will then hoist a flag of another color or different object, which will indicate A’s number 2, which will again be answered by a flag or other object from B, which flag or object will indicate B’s number 2.

When these preliminaries have been completed both A and B will know the values of the flags or objects, and can then proceed to communicate intelligently with each other by the above international alphabet.

For example: A wishes to communicate with B and has adopted a red flag as his number 1, a white flag as his number 2. He then displays the red, hauls it down, and replaces it with the white flag, thereby communicating the combination 12—equivalent to the letter “A,” and so on throughout the alphabet.

For night signaling the flags will be replaced by different-colored lanterns, and be used in the same manner as the flags.

The ensign hoisted at the fore or main-mast head will indicate that the International Signal Code Book will be referred to.

U. S. Naval Signal Office,
Navy Department, January 1, 1879.

PROPOSED GENERAL FOG-SIGNALS TO INDICATE THE COURSE STEERED.

Course. Between what points. Sounds. Explanatory remarks.

North N. by W. and N. by E O O indicates a sound or blast of horn or whistle.

* indicates an interval of one-half second between sounds or blasts.

— indicates an interval of not less than four seconds between sounds or blasts.

These Compass Signals are not to be repeated oftener than at intervals of not more than one (1) minute when made by steam-whistle, and at intervals of not more than five (5) minutes when made by fog-horn. (Revised Stats., sec. 4233, Rule 15, Rules for Preventing Collisions.)

When, by these signals or other indications, the presence of another vessel is made known, each vessel must be brought up to the exact point, as per first column, “Course,” and not steer between the points, as per second column, until they have passed each other, due regard being paid to the dangers of navigation.

When the vessels sight each other the Rules of the Road must be followed.

NNE N. by E. and NE. by N O — O * O

NE NE. by N. and NE. by E O — O * O * O

ENE NE. by E. and E. by N O — O * O * O * O

East E. by N. and E. by S O * O

ESE E. by S. and SE. by E O * O — O

SE SE. by E. and SE. by S O * O — O * O *O

SSE SE. by S. and S. by E O * O — O * O * O * O

South S. by E. and S. by W O * O * O

SSW S. by W. and SW. by S O * O * O — O

SW SW. by S. and SW. by W O * O * O — O * O

WSW SW. by W. and W. by S O * O * O — O * O * O * O

West W. by S. and W. by N O * O * O * O

WNW W. by N. and NW. by W O * O * O * O — O

NW NW. by W. and NW. by N O * O * O * O — O * O * O

NNW NW. by N. by W O * O * O * O — O * O * O

Hove to, or lying still O — O * O * O — O

Towing, or being towed O * O — O * O * O — O * O

U. S. Naval Signal Office,
Navy Department, January 1, 1879.

No. 6. To the consular officers of the United States. [Circular No. 13.]

[Document 7]

No. 6.
To the consular officers of the United States.

Department of State,
Washington, June 10, 1879.

Gentlemen: In transmitting to the Department invoices verified by you, with a statement indicating wherein you believe that the values set forth in the invoice are too low, as referred to in paragraphs 469 and 470 of the Revised Regulations of 1874, and giving your reasons for the opinion, the Secretary of the Treasury has stated that in many cases where the foregoing regulation has been applied the information has been received too late to be of any value in the appraisement, as the goods have been entered and delivered prior to the receipt of the dispatch to this Department on the subject. It is desired, therefore, when you are of the opinion that the values expressed in the invoices are too low that you should note on the invoice what in your judgment is the true market value of the goods contained therein, and advise this Department of the grounds on which you base your judgment.

A careful compliance with and observance of the terms of this circular instruction will greatly facilitate the appraisers in the execution of their duties.

I am, gentlemen, your obedient servant,

F. W. SEWARD,
Assistant Secretary.

No. 7. To the consular officers of the United States. [Circular No. 14.]

[Document 8]

No. 7.
To the consular officers of the United States.

Department of State,
Washington, June 10, 1879.

Gentlemen: I inclose herein a copy of a circular, dated the 26th ultimo, from the Secretary of the Treasury, in reference to the presentation and acceptance by collectors of customs of landing certificates covering merchandise exported under internal-revenue laws. The circular is transmitted for your information on that subject, and with instructions to comply with its provisions in all cases to which they are applicable.

I am, gentlemen, your obedient servant,

F. W. SEWARD,
Assistant Secretary.

Inclosure, Treasury Department Circular, No. 82.

Regulations relating to the presentation and acceptance by collectors of customs of landing certificates covering merchandise exported under internal–revenue laws.

Treasury Department,
Washington, D. C., May 26, 1879.

[1879.—Department No. 82.—Secretary’s Office.]

The following regulations, modifying the regulations of the department on this subject, issued December 23, 1878, are published for the information of parties exporting merchandise under internal-revenue laws, and for the guidance of customs officers accepting landing certificates in such cases:

Int. Rev. Regs., Series 6, No. 7, Sup’t No. 1, p. 10.
Do. No. 2, p. 13.
Do. No. 3, p. 27.
Series 7, Xo. 8, pp. 67–8.
Series 7, Xo. 7, p. 113, (Appen. dix.)
Series 7, Xo. 13, Revised p. 9. For the cancellation of export bonds taken under the provisions of sections 3329 and 3330, Revised Statutes of the United States, and sections 3244, 3386, and 3441, Revised Statutes, as amended by the act of March 1, 1879; the act of June 9,1874, as amended; section 24 of the act of February 8, 1875 (18 Stat., p. 312), and sections 5 and 6 of the act of March 3, 1877 (19 Stat., p. 394), and for the allowance of drawback under the provisions of sections 3244 and 3441, Revised Statutes, as amended, where no bond is filed, the following evidence of landing, or loss at sea, is required:

I.

Certificate of consignee of landing of merchandise at foreign ports.

Treasury Regulations, 1874, Art. 706, Form No. 173.
Dep’t of State: Consular Instructions, 1874, ¶¶ 496–7, Forms Nos. 152, 154. I,_____ _____, of the ___ ___ of ____, merchant, do hereby certify that the goods or merchandise hereinafter described have been landed in this [city, town, or port] between the____and____days of____, from on board the ____, of ____, whereof ———— ———— is at present master, viz: [Here describe the merchandise, giving the marks and numbers, kind of merchandise, number of pounds, (gross, tare, and net), gallons (wine and proof), or packages, upon which tax is imposed,] which, according to the bills of lading for the same, were shipped on board the ____ at the port of ____, in the United States of America, on or about the ____ day of ____, 18—, and consigned to [me or to us] by ____ ____ of ____ ____ aforesaid merchant [or by the master of said ————.]*

Given under my hand, at ____, this ____ day of ____, 18—.

____ ____

II.

Oath of master and mate of exporting vessels.

Port of ____, ____, 18—.

Treasury Regulations, Art. 706, Form No. 174.
Dep’t of State: Consular Instructions, ¶ 497, Forms Nos. 153 and 156. We, ____ ____ master, and ____ ____, mate, of the ____, lately arrived from the port of ____, in the United States of America, do solemnly swear [or affirm] that the goods or merchandise enumerated and described in the foregoing certificate, dated the ____ day of ____, 18—, and signed by ____, of the city of ____, merchant, were actually delivered at the said port on board the within the time specified in the said certificate, and, as to the tobacco and snuff described therein, that the weight stated was ascertained by actual weighing at the time of delivery.

____, Master.

____, ____,* ____

Sworn [or affirmed] at the port of ____, before me, this ____ day of ____,18–.

____ ____. [seal.]

III.

Certificate of foreign revenue officer.

Treasury Regulations.
1877. Dep’t No. 6, Internal Revenue (Int. Rev. Circular No. 160.) I, ____ ____ , do hereby certify that the goods [or merchandise] described in the foregoing declaration and below, imported into this country [or province] from ____, were landed at this port, duly entered at the custom-house at this port on the ____ day of ____, 18—,* and their value ascertained to be ____, and that the’ duties imposed by the law in force in this [country or province] upon said gooods have been paid, or secured to be paid:

Dep’t Circular (1877) No. 46.
Dep’t of State Consular Instructions, ¶ 497, Form No. 155.
Circular No. 6 Aug. 22, 1876.
Circular No. 6 (amended Nov. 4 1876.)
Circular No. 9 March 6, 1877. Marks. Number. Description of goods. Date when entered.

In witness whereof I have hereunto set my hand and seal of office this ____ day of ____,18—.

____ ____, [seal.]
Collector or Chief Revenue Officer.

IV.

Consular verification of consignee’s certificate.

Treasury Regulation, Art. 706, Form No. 175.
Dep’t of State: Consular Instructions, ¶¶ 495-6-7, Forms Nos. 150, 157.
Circluar No. 6, Aug. 22, 1876. I, ____ ____, consul [or agent] of the United States of America, at the city of ____, do declare that the facts set forth in the foregoing ____ day of ____, 18—, are, to my knowledge, true and correct, and deserving of full faith and credit; and correct, and deserving of full faith and credit; and I further certify that the signature thereto is in the handwriting of said ____ ____.

In testimony whereof I have hereunto subscribed my name and affixed the seal of my office, at ____, this ____ day of ____, 18.

____ ____, [seal.]
Consul.

Verification by American or foreign merchants where there is no consul.

Treasury Regulations, Art. 706, Form No. 176.
Dep’t of State Consular Instructions, ¶¶ 495–6–8, Forms Nos. 151, 158. We, ____ and ____ , merchants residing at the city of ____, do declare that the statements made in the preceding certificate, signed by ____, of the said city, merchant, on the ____ day of ____, 18–, are, to our knowledge (or in our opinion), correct and true, and worthy of full faith and credit.

We also declare that there is no [consul or other public agent ol the United States of America, or American merchants, as the case may require] now residing at this place.

Given under our hands, at the ——— aforesaid, this ____ day of ____, 18–.

____ ____

____ ____

Collateral evidence.

Treasury Regulations, Arts. 802, 803, and 807.
Int. Rev. Regs., Series 7, No. 8, p. 69. When, by reason of inability to produce the evidence of landing here prescribed, application for relief may be made to the Secretary of the Treasury, through the collector of customs, with whom such evidence is, by regulation, required to be lodged, to be transmitted by him through the Commissioner of Internal Revenue, supported by such collateral evidence as the exporter may be able to submit.

The application in such cases must be under oath, and must recite the facts connected with the alleged exportation; setting forth the date of shipment, the kind, quantity, and value of the merchandise shipped, the name of the consignee, and the name of the vessel by and the port to which the shipment was made, and the date and amount of the bond (if one be filed) covering such shipment. The applicant will also state in what particular the regulations of the department respecting the proofs of landing have not been complied with, and the cause of failure to produce such proofs; that such failure was not occasioned by any lack of diligence on his part or that of his agents, and that he is unable to procure any other or better evidence than that submitted with his application.

The evidence submitted in such cases may embrace original bills of lading and verified original or verified copies of letters from consignees advising the shipper of the arrival or sale of the goods, with such other statements respecting the failure to furnish the prescribed evidence of landing as may be obtained from the consignees or any other person having knowledge thereof.

When any letters or other documents submitted are in a foreign language, they must be accompanied by sworn translations, and when the letters fail to sufficiently identify the goods, the original account-sales must be produced.

Proofs of loss at sea.

Treasury Regulations, Arts. 805–6.
Int. Rev. Regs., Series 6, No. 7, Supplement No. 1, p. 11.
Supplement No. 2, p. 13.
Series 7, No. 8, pp. 69, 70.
Series 7, No. 13, Revised, p. 16. When the exporter is unable to furnish any proof of landing in consequence of loss at sea, the application for relief should set forth the extent of the loss, and, if possible, the location and manner of shipwreck, or other casualty at sea, and the time of its occurrence. The application in such cases will be transmitted to the Commissioner of Internal Revenue, and by him to the Secretary, and must be accompanied by the affidavits of two or more credible and disinterested persons as to the loss or destruction aforesaid. When the, goods have been insured, the certificates of the insurance companies or board of underwriters that the insurance has, been paid, and that to the best of their knowledge and belief the goods were actually destroyed at sea, will be required; and, when obtainable, the oath of the master and mate of the vessel, detailing the manner and extent of the loss, and the time and location of the disaster.

In forwarding applications in the cases above provided for, collectors will state any facts within their knowledge bearing upon the case presented, and will indorse upon the application their opinion as to the character of the proof offered, and as to the propriety of granting such application.

If, upon examination, the proof of exportation or loss at “sea is established to the satisfaction of the Secretary of the Treasury, the papers in the case will be returned to the collector, with authority to accept the evidence furnished, and to cancel the exporter’s bond.

In drawback shipments, under sections 3244 and 3441, Revised Statutes, as amended, where no export bond has been riled, the proofs of loss at sea will be transmitted by the collector of customs to the collector of internal revenue in charge of drawbacks, together with the claim for drawback, as provided in Internal-Revenue Regulations, (Series 7, No, 13, Revised, p. 16).

The attention of collectors of customs is especially called to the requirements in Internal-Revenue Regulations (Series 7, No. 13, Revised, p. 9), respecting uncanceled bonds turned over to district attorneys for suit, and they will, in forwarding applications in the cases above provided for, state whether there is any existing liability of the applicant on any bonds so placed in suit.

JOHN SHERMAN,
Secretary.

* In cases of shipment of tobacco or snuff in bond, under section 24 of the act of February 8, 1875, the following will be added: “And I further certify that the weight, as above stated, was correctly ascertained by actual weighing after landing” In all such cases the foregoing certificate must be sworn to before a United States consul, vice-consul, or agent at the port, or, in their absence, before an officer qualified to administer oaths and having a seal, by the consignee to whom the merchandise is actually addressed. The columns for marks, numbers, weight, gallons, serial number of stamps, &c., as the case may require, must accord with the regulations governing the particular exportation.

* Note.—In all cases, the oath of the master, and of the mate, purser, or other discharging officer must he obtained.

In case of failure to execute the foregoing at the port of delivery of the goods, the same may, upon the return of the vessel at the port of shipment, be subscribed to before the collector of the port.

* In shipments of tobacco or snuff, under the act of February 18, 1875, the following will be added: ‘And their weight ascertained to be ____.”

Note.—The value stated should be that of the goods in the foreign country to which they werft exported. Such value need not be specified if the consignee chooses to pay the maximum fee for the consular authentication of the landing certificate.

No. 8. To the consular officers of the United States. [Document 9]

No. 8.
To the consular officers of the United States.

Department of State,
Washington, June 24, 1879.

Gentlemen: In view of the application that has been made to the Department by the president of the National Board of Health, now in session in this city, it becomes extremely desirable to secure your aid and co-operation in making the, weekly returns of that board as complete and valuable as possible. To facilitate this result, and to assist the board in carrying out the provisions of section 4 of the act approved June 2, 1879, to prevent the introduction and spread of Contagious or infectious diseases into the United States, the forms for such weekly reports, showing the kind of information specially desired, are being printed and will be sent to you. It is expected, however, that you will not confine yourselves merely to filling out these forms, but that you will, from time to time, furnish such data, documents, and reports relating to the vital statistics and sanitary condition of your respective consular districts so far as may be practicable.

As the Department regards this matter as of the highest importance to the welfare of the citizens of the United States, and to the country generally, it is earnestly requested that you will give prompt and regular attention to the requirements here set forth.

The forms will be furnished and the expense of postage, &c., will be reimbursed to you by the president of the board. You are requested to acknowledge the receipt of this instruction.

I am, gentlemen, your obedient servant,

F. W. SEWARD,
Assistant Secretary.

No. 9. To the consular officers of the United States. [Circular No. 15.]

[Document 10]

No. 9.
To the consular officers of the United States.

Department of State,
Washington, July 9, 1879.

Gentlemen: The Secretary of the Treasury has addressed a letter to the Department, of the 28th ultimo, in which he adverts to his letter of the 1st of February last, which formed the subject of Circular No. 12, of the 13th of that month, in reference to charges not expressly specified in invoices of imported goods, where such goods are not described therein as being free of charges, and now submits, in reference to the subject, that the appraiser at New York has reported to him that in many instances invoices have contained a clause, approved by the consul, that the invoice price included the shipping and other charges, when such was not the case; and suggests that consular officers may be laboring under an impression that under their instructions they are to require shippers to state in their invoices in all cases that the invoice charges, include the shipping and other charges.

It is hardly necessary to state that it was the intention of the Treasury Department to require the insertion in invoices of a clause showing that the invoice prices include the charges only when such is actually the case. Where the invoice does not properly include charges, a specification in detail of the charges is to be given in the invoice in all cases.

I am, gentlemen, your obedient servant,

F. W. SEWARD,
Assistant Secretary.

No. 10. Sent to the diplomatic officers of the United States. [Document 11]

No. 10.
Sent to the diplomatic officers of the United States.

Department of State,
Washington, August 9, 1879.

Sir: The annual statistics of immigration into the United States show that large numbers of immigrants come to our shores every year from the various countries of Europe for the avowed purpose of joining the Mormon community at Salt Lake, in the Territory of Utah, under the auspices and guidance of the emissaries and agents of that community in foreign parts. This representation of the interests of Mormonism abroad, which has been carried on for years, is understood to have developed unusual activity of late, especially in ——, among other countries, where it has unfortunately obtained a greater or less foothold.

The system of polygamy, which is prevalent in the community of Utah, is largely based upon and promoted by these accessions from Europe, drawn mainly from the ignorant classes, who are easily influenced by the double appeal to their passions and their poverty, held out in the flattering picture of a home in the fertile and prosperous region where Mormonism has established its material seat.

Inasmuch as the practice of polygamy is based on a form of marriage, by which additional wives are “sealed” to the men of that community, these so-called “marriages” are pronounced by the laws of the United States to be crimes against the statutes of the country, and punishable as such.

On the 1st of July, 1862, the Congress of the United States passed an act (Chap. XXXVI) expressly designed, as appears from its title, “to punish and prevent the practice of polygamy in the Territories of the United States, and other places,” &c. That act remains the law of the land as to its continuing provisions, which, in the revision of the statutes of the United States, made in 1874, reads as follows: Sec. 5352. Every person having a husband or wife living, who marries another, whether married or single, in a Territory or other place over which the United States have exclusive jurisdiction, is guilty of bigamy, and shall be punished by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars, and by imprisonment tor a term not more than five years; but this section shall not extend to any person by reason of any former marriage whose husband or wife by such marriage is absent for five successive years, and is not known to such person to be living; nor to any person by reason of any former marriag 9 which has been dissolved by decree of a competent court; nor to any person by reason of any former marriage which has been pronounced void by decree of a competent court on the ground of nullity of the marriage contract.

Whatever doubt, if any, has heretofore existed as to the efficiency of the law above cited, and the intent of the general government to enforce it, has now been terminated by the recent decision of the Supreme Court, the highest judicial tribunal of the land, sustaining the constitutionality of this legislation and affirming the conviction and punishment of offenders against that law.

Under whatever specious guise the subject may be presented by those engaged in instigating the European movement to swell the numbers of the law-defying Mormons of Utah, the bands and organizations which are got together in foreign lands as recruits cannot be regarded as otherwise than a deliberate and systematic attempt to bring persons to the United States with the intent of violating their laws and committing crimes expressly punishable under the statute as penitentiary offenses.

No friendly power will, of course, knowingly lend its aid, even indirectly, to attempts made within its borders against the laws and government of a country wherewith it is at peace with established terms of amity and reciprocal relations of treaty between them; while, even were there no question involved of open and penal infraction of the laws of the land, every consideration of comity should prevail to prevent the territory of a friendly state from becoming a resort or refuge for the crowds of misguided men and women whose offenses against morality and decency would be intolerable in the land from whence they come.

It is not doubted, therefore, that when the subject is brought to its attention, the government of —— —— will take such steps as may be compatible with its laws and usages to check the organization of these criminal enterprises by agents who are thus operating beyond the reach of the law of the United States and to prevent the departure of those proposing to come hither as violators of the law by engaging; in such criminal enterprises by whomsoever instigated.

You are instructed, therefore, to present the matter to the government of —— —— through the minister of foreign affairs, and to urge earnest attention to it, in the interest not merely of a faithful execution of the laws of the United States, but of the peace, good order, and morality which are cultivated and sought to be promoted by all civilized countries. You will fortify your representations on the subject by citation of any facts which may come to your notice concerning emigration of this character from —— ——; and to this end the consular officers in your jurisdiction have been instructed to communicate to you what information with regard thereto may come to their knowledge. Your timely protest in cases where the probable departure of Mormon emigrants is reported or known to you would probably prove a weighty auxiliary to the general representations you are now instructed to make. You are also authorized, in your discretion, to call attention to this subject and the determined purpose of this government to enforce this law and eradicate this institution, through the public press of the principal cities or ports of the country, as you may find useful towards the end in view.

I desire to be informed of the steps taken by you under these instructions and of the disposition shown in reference to the same by the government to which you are accredited.

I am, sir, your obedient servant,

[Note.—A similar instruction was sent to consular officers directing them to cooperate with the diplomatic officers of the United States in the premises.]

Correspondence. Argentine Republic.Correspondence.
Argentine Republic.

[12] . Mr. Osborn to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Buenos Ayres, November 18, 1878. (Received December 30.)

[13] . Mr. Osborn to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Buenos Ayres, December 12, 1878. (Received January 28, 1879.)

[14] . Mr. Evarts to Mr. Thomas O. Osborn.

Department of State, Washington, January 18, 1879.

[15] . Mr. Osborn to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Buenos Ayres, March 4, 1879. (Received April 26.)

[16] . Mr. Osborn to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Buenos Ayres, March 25, 1879. (Received June 14.)

[17] . Mr. Evarts to Mr. Thomas O. Osborn.

Department of State, Washington, April 30, 1879.

[18] . Mr. Osborn to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Buenos Ayres, May 3, 1879. (Received June 16.)

[19] . Mr. Osborn to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Buenos Ayres, May 8, 1879. (Received June 21.)

[20] . Mr. Osborn to Mr. Evarts

Legation of the United States, Buenos Ayres, June 12, 1879. (Received August 4.)

[21] . Mr. Evarts to Mr. Thomas O. Osborn.

Department of State, Washington, June 20, 1879.

[22] . Mr. Osborn to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Buenos Ayres, July 30, 1879. (Received September 16.)

[23] . Mr. Osborn to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Buenos Ayres, July 31, 1879.

[24] . Mr. Osborn to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Buenos Ayres, August 29, 1879.

[25] . Mr. Osborn to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Buenos Ayres, September 4, 1879. (Received October 8.)

[26] . Mr. Osborn to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Buenos Ayres, September 8, 1879. (Received October 8.)

[27] . Mr. Osborn to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Buenos Ayres, September 20, 1879. (Received November 1.)

Contents

No. 1. Mr. Osborn to Mr. Evarts. [Document 12]

No. 1.
Mr. Osborn to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Buenos Ayres, November 18, 1878. (Received December 30.) No. 207.]

Sir: A telegram from our minister at Santiago, Chili, under date of 19th instant, informs us that the American bark Devonshire has been, delivered up without conditions to the master of the vessel, who reached Punta Arenas, or Sandy Point, about the 2d instant, after traveling some three hundred miles on horseback across a desolate country.

The first proposition made by Chili to deliver up the vessel on condition that the master of the vessel and the owner of the cargo would give their personal bonds to abide the decision of the Chilian court, was not accepted by the owner of the cargo; and I so informed Minister Osborn at Santiago, Chili, and that we had at the time no communication with the master of the Devonshire.

The President and his ministers with a few of the leading men of the country are in secret conference almost daily in reference to the Chilian troubles. The press has been requested to publish nothing in relation to the movements of the Argentine fleet. Two of the iron-clads have already sailed under secret orders for Santa Cruz River, and three other war vessels will follow as soon as they can be put in readiness.

Reports are here, and are believed, that Chili has sent some two or three gunboats to Patagonia with engineers on board to fortify the Strait of Magellan.

Since the surrender of the Devonshire to the master, I think this government is not disposed to press the issue with Chili to a final settlement by war if it can be avoided with honor; but there is a war party which appears to want war at any price, if the immediate settlement of the question cannot be obtained by peaceful means, and this party is led by the president of the lower house of Congress, a former Argentine minister to Chili, and who, it appears, was badly treated while there by that government.

In an interview with the minister of foreign affairs, at his request, in answer to his question as to how the United States would feel, &c., in case his government should come to an open rupture with Chili, I said to him that our government, and our people, took a deep interest, not only in the progress and prosperity of the Argentine Republic, but of all the republics of South America, and would very much regret to see the question of limits between his country and Chili brought to the arbitrament of war. He replied that his government did not want war; that everything had been offered and done to avoid it; that arbitration had been offered, was accepted, and then refused by Chili; was still willing to arbitrate if Chili would accept; that Chili had been and was aggressive; had planted colonies on Argentine territory, and had assumed jurisdiction by the capture of vessels of other nationalities in Argentine waters; and a surrender by the Argentines of the territory in dispute without a fair settlement, involves the Argentine honor, and that war would be more acceptable than peace obtained at such a price.

The population of the Argentine Republic and of Chili are about the same; the people are of the same origin and of the same characteristics; and the question which is now troubling both republics appears to me to be one more of honor than one of solid real estate or territorial value.

In case war should break out between the two countries, it might benefit this country by harmonizing and consolidating all interests and parties, and save her from internal struggles. The same may be said of Chili; but a struggle between the two would, in the end, prove disastrous to both, and in view of that fact, I am inclined to think it might be a proper question for the consideration of our government whether as the Devonshire, the captain of which has brought on this fresh trouble between the two countries, is an American vessel, the tender of the kind offices of the United States to both governments would not bring the question to a peaceful solution.

I am quite sure this government would gladly accept the good offices so tendered.

I have, &c.,

THOS. O. OSBORN.

No. 2. Mr. Osborn to Mr. Evarts. [Document 13]

No. 2.
Mr. Osborn to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Buenos Ayres, December 12, 1878. (Received January 28, 1879.) 207.]

Sir: By request of the minister of foreign affairs I called at 3 p.m. on the 9th instant at the foreign office, when he showed me a dispatch just received from the Argentine consul-general at Santiago, Chili, stating that all the questions pending between Chili and the Argentine Republic had been arranged upon the basis of Article 39 of the Treaty of Amity of 1856.

This arrangement puts the parties in statu quo for 18 months. A provisional jurisdiction has been established, by which no rights are conferred on the Argentine Republic on the coast of the South Atlantic Ocean, and by which none are conceded to the Republic of Chili in the Strait of Magellan.

In the mean time all the questions pending are to be submitted to two persons selected by these respective governments as arbitrators, and at the expiration of the 18 months, if they cannot agree upon the settlement of all questions submitted, “an umpire” is to be named.

This arrangement seems to be perfectly satisfactory to the Argentine authorities, and they hope by this arrangement and agreement to obtain all they claim as a result without a war with Chili, which this government and that of Chili doubtless are not prepared for.

For this amicable arrangement and agreement between the two republics very much credit is due to Mr. Lowe, a citizen of the United States and editor of the Buenos Ayres Herald, and our minister, Mr. Thomas A. Osborn, at Santiago. When it became known here that the American bark Devonshire had been seized by the Chilian authorities, at the suggestion and request of the ex-minister to Chili, and now president of the house of the Argentine Congress, and of other leading men of this country, Mr. Lowe proceeded to Santiago, carrying with him dispatches from this legation to our minister, Mr. Osborn, informing Mm of the seizure of the Devonshire, and furnishing him with a copy of the protest of the owner of the cargo.

On the 4th instant Mr. Lowe returned to Buenos Ay res, and informed me that on his arrival at Santiago he found that the Chilian authorities had resolved not to release the Devonshire or her cargo, but to hold them subject to the decision of the Chilian courts.

In the first interview with the Chilian minister for foreign affairs and Mr. Osborn, Mr. Lowe stated that he had arrived at Santiago as the representative of no government or party, and with no instructions from any one; that he was simply a citizen of the United States; but as editor-in-chief of the Buenos Ayres Herald he was in such a position as to know and understand well the disposition of the Argentine Government, and the Argentine people in relation to the seizure by Chili of a vessel of a friendly power in Patagonian waters claimed by her, and that the release of the Devonshire and her cargo, without conditions, was indispensable to a friendly settlement of the question of limits between Chili and this republic.

This conference took place at 2 p.m. on the 12th of November, and at 4 p.m. the same day the Chilian authorities resolved to deliver the Devonshire unconditionally to our minister, Mr. Osborn, of all the details of which he doubtless has informed you. This cleared the way, and gave rise to fresh efforts toward a friendly settlement, the result of which is as noted above.

I have, &c.,

THOS. O. OSBORN.

No. 3. Mr. Evarts to Mr. Thomas O. Osborn. [Document 14]

No. 3.
Mr. Evarts to Mr. Thomas O. Osborn.

Department of State,
Washington, January 18, 1879. No. 100.]

Sir: Your dispatch, No. 207, of the 11th of November last, relative to the case of the bark Devonshire, has been received. It announces the unconditional restitution of that vessel by order of the Chilian Government, by whose authority it had been seized at the Ils de. Leones, while trespassing, as is alleged, on the territory of Chili. Intelligence of the release of the vessel has also been confirmed from other quarters.

Although this may to a certain extent be regarded as a gratifying result, it is unsatisfactory on the whole, for, while the boundary dispute between the Argentine Republic and Chili remains unsettled, similar seizures of vessels, whether our own or of other nations, may occur at anytime. It is, consequently, deemed important for the well-being of those republics, and for the maintenance of friendly relations them with maritime powers, that they should diligently endeavor to settle the question on a solid foundation.

You will urge this view on the Argentine Government with all the address which you can command.

It is not supposed that the dispute is beyond the reach of an honorable adjustment between the parties directly; but in the contrary case, and should it be desired by them, the United States would not withhold any proper exercise of their good offices.

In this case, and in others which must happen, if the controversy between these governments shall not be concluded, no sufficient reason is seen why either should not be held accountable for any injury which may have been occasioned or may result to vessels and citizens of the United States. We necessarily feel great solicitude lest the dispute should be inflamed, by accident or delay in its settlement, into an open rupture between the parties. This could not fail, more or less, to inflict disaster upon the mercantile marine of those countries to whose vessels the Straits of Magellan are a thoroughfare. We trust, therefore, that the Argentine Government will give a proof of its regard for the general tranquillity by honestly endeavoring speedily and finally to settle the dangerous question.

I am, &c.,

WM. M. EVARTS.

No. 4. Mr. Osborn to Mr. Evarts. [Document 15]

No. 4.
Mr. Osborn to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Buenos Ayres, March 4, 1879. (Received April 26.) No. 218.]

Sir: Capt. A. A. Duncan, master of the American schooner George V. Jordan, on the 4th of August, 1876, reported to me that he had just cleared his vessel from this port for the United States; that before he was able to obtain his papers from the captain of this port, he was compelled to pay the agent of the Government of Uruguay, in Buenos Ayres, fourteen cents per ton on the tonnage of his vessel for light dues, claimed to be owing and due to that government notwithstanding that on his voyage to this port he did not touch at any point or part of Uruguay, or use the lights on her coast.

He further stated that it had been the custom for many years to demand and collect these Uruguay light dues from vessels of any nationality that came to this port.

At my request, Captain Duncan put his statement in writing, when I at once addressed a note to the minister of foreign affairs, respectfully requesting the information by what authority dues for lights on the coast of Uruguay were demanded and paid by American vessels to the agent of that government in this port.

A few days after sending the note, I received an invitation from the minister to call at the foreign office, where the under secretary informed me that my note was passed to the captain of the port, and an answer had been received, which he read to me, stating that the collection of Uruguayan light does by the agent of that government in the port of Buenos Ayres was simply by sufferance.

The secretary further stated that the government had no knowledge or intimation of such demands or payments until the receipt of my note.

Instructions were at once sent to the captain of the port to put a stop to such demands and collections.

From the date of those instructions no attempt was made to collect the “Banda Oriental light dues” until the 24th of August, 1878, when the President issued a decree authorizing the agent of the Government of Uruguay in Buenos Ayres to collect the “light dues”, fourteen cents per ton on the tonnage of the vessels, for the lights on the Uruguayan coast (known as the Banda Oriental light dues), and instructing the captain of the port to deliver, papers to no vessels without the presentation of receipt of payment. As soon as I learned of this decree from publication in the press, I addressed a note to the minister of foreign affairs, respectfully protesting against the decree, so far as it referred to American vessels, and delivered it in person; when I stated to the minister that I did not question the propriety of the decree, so far as it affected Argentine and Paraguayan vessels, but so far as it applied to American vessels coming direct to this port without calling or touching at any Uruguayan port, or even passing within the waters of that country—and imposed a tax upon them for the benefit of another nation—in my opinion it was unusual, unjust, illegal, and contrary to international law and custom; and if the decree should be enforced against American vessels, and such payment required, in each and every case the masters of American vessels would be instructed to file their protest against such demand and payment in the United States consulate, and that in all probability for the moneys so paid, the Argentine Government would be held responsible.

The minister intimated that he agreed with me that the decree could not be maintained, at least without an act of Congress, and stated that he did not know of its existence until he saw it that morning published by the press, and asked me to wait, as he intended to call it up in cabinet meeting for consideration that afternoon.

The next day, September 13, I received a note from the minister, saying that he had the satisfaction of informing me that in virtue of my note of the 13th instant, the decree was suspended until the definite resolution of the government was known, on the condition that the consignees or the agents of the vessels would become responsible for the payments should the government resolve to sustain and enforce the decree.

* * * * * * *

About the 1st of February last it became known to Mr. E. L. Baker, the United States consul, as well as to the masters of our vessels and their agents and consignees, that the British and German consuls were dispatching their vessels without reference to the payment, or giving of securities for the payment, of “Banda Oriental” light dues. Mr. Baker, United States consul, called the attention of the captain of the port to these facts, and demanded that American vessels be placed upon the same footing, or that the order should be impartially enforced, and received the reply that the captain of the port had no power to prevent them from leaving the port without payment.

At my request, the United States consul put in writing a statement of the facts, that the vessels of other nationalities were leaving this port, and that the British and German consuls gave shipmasters their papers upon receiving their clearance from the custom-house.

The same day I called at the foreign office and presented these facts to the minister, and stated to him that they were known to the masters of American vessels and their agents in this port; that their agents or consignees declined to become further bound for the payment of “Banda Oriental light dues” unless the masters first deposited with them the money; that most of the American vessels were not in the regular trade with this port; that some did not return for years, and others not at all; that the masters of such vessels looked upon their money so deposited as lost to them; that the decree suspended on conditions had become as onerous to American shipmasters as the decree in full force; that justice requires that the decree should be enforced against all vessels entering Argentine ports, or revoked; and that, in my judgment, sufficient time since September 13 last had elapsed for his government to arrive at a definite resolution in the matter; and if the decree were not revoked within twenty-four hours, or enforced against all vessels alike, that in the future American vessels would be dispatched without the payment of “Banda Oriental” light dues, or giving the bonds for the same.

On the next day, February 15, the United States consul informed me that a vessel was ready to clear, that the master had presented his clearance from the custom house, had paid all port dues, but declined to pay light-dues claimed to be owing to the Government of Uruguay, or to give bonds therefor, and that he, the consul, asked for instructions in the case. In reply, I advised him that in the future, or until further advised, as I had called the attention of the minister of foreign affairs to the matter of “Banda Oriental” light dues, &c., in person the day before, and up to 3 p.m. of that date I had received no information from him in regard to the matter, and as vessels of other nationalities were permitted to leave port without payment of the light dues mentioned, that it might be assumed that that part of the port regulations which has reference to such payments was not in force, and to dispatch his vessel without any reference to the payment of light dues claimed to be owing to other nations than this, and in the same manner that the consuls of other nationalities were doing.

I respectfully submit this statement for your consideration, in reference to the course pursued by the United States consul Baker and myself in the matter, and respectfully ask for instructions in view of the fact that it is quite probable that an attempt may be made in the future to collect the “Banda Oriental” light dues, under an act or law of the next Argentine Congress.

In the year 1860, August 31, a concession was given by the Argentine Confederation and approved by President Durqui, to a private company for the term of twenty years, the right to collect in the ports of the confederation a tax of seven and a half cents per ton on the tonnage of all vessels which came into the Rio de la Plata, if the tax had not already been paid at Montevideo for the lights established by the company on the “English Bank” and the “Island of Lobos,” by contract with the Oriental Government. The Argentine Government at the date of this concession had no light-houses, and has none now except in her own harbors. The “English Bank” (it might be called an island) is in the mouth of the Rio de la Plata, but on the “Banda Oriental” side of the channel. The “Island of Lobos “is north of the “English Bank,” and near the oriental coast at Maldonado.

The masters of vessels inform me that the light on the “English Bank” is very important and useful to all vessels entering or leaving the river, and in fact it would be difficult to get along without it, and dangerous if dispensed with.

The light on the Island of Lobos is of little or no importance to vessels not coasters.

No attempt was made to avoid the payment of the dues for these two lights, until it was ascertained that in the port of Buenos Ayres seven and a half cents per ton on vessels, and at the same time three cents per ton in the port of Montevideo, were taxed and collected, when the agent and collector of dues in this port for these two lights received notice that if the tax on vessels coming to this port were not reduced to the same as that at Montevideo, American vessels would probably decline to pay any portion of it, and it was so reduced to three cents per ton.

Three cents a ton for the use of these two lights masters of vessels say they do not object to, and are perfectly willing to pay; but the lights are on the territory of another nation.

The concession by this government has nearly two years yet to run, and in the demand of any payment of the light dues, it appears to me, the same question is involved as in the decree of the President, should it receive the approval of the Argentine Congress.

I have, &c.,

THOS. O. OSBORN.

No. 5. Mr. Osborn to Mr. Evarts. [Document 16]

No. 5.
Mr. Osborn to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Buenos Ayres, March 25, 1879. (Received June 14.) No. 222.]

Sir: With reference to the collection of “Banda Oriental” light dues from foreign vessels in Argentine ports, under authority of a decree of the President of this republic dated September 15, 1878, and referred to in my dispatch No. 218, I have the honor to state that the President has informed the captain-general of the port that the decree has been revoked, and directed that no vessel would be cleared at the custom-house without having been previously dispatched at the office of the captain of the port There appears to be no objection on the part of masters of vessels to the payment of light dues of East Point and the “English Bank,” and it may be considered that all obstacles to foreign vessels entering and leaving Argentine ports, so far as the demand and payment of light dues are concerned, are removed.

I inclose herewith a copy of the order revoking the decree as published in the “National,” official organ, and translated and published by the Herald, marked A.

I have, &c.,

THOS. O. OSBORN.

[Inclosure A in Mr. Osborn’s No. 222.—Extract from the Herald, March 25, 1879.]

Government has just issued a decree in virtue of which no vessels can he cleared at the custom-house without having been previously dispatched at the captain of the port office. By this measure it is affirmed that frequent abuses will be avoided, of which foreign captains are guilty who sail “without their bill of health and the necessary dispatch from the port captain.”

The Nacional mentions that in consequence of a representation made by the United States minister the government has ordained that the decree of September 15, 1878, be considered void, and that vessels be henceforth only called upon to pay the Punta del Este and Banco Ingles light dues.

No. 6. Mr. Evarts to Mr. Thomas O. Osborn. [Document 17]

No. 6.
Mr. Evarts to Mr. Thomas O. Osborn.

Department of State,
Washington, April 30, 1879. No. 104.]

Sir: Your dispatch No. 218, of the 4th ultimo, has been received. It relates to what are called the “Banda Oriental” light dues.

In answer to your request for instructions upon the subject, I have to state that your course and that of Mr. Baker, the consul, in advising masters of vessels to decline to pay the charge so long as it was not exacted from vessels of other nations, is approved.

The treaty secures us entire equality in that respect with other foreign nations.

It appears, however, that the light on the “English Bank,” so called, though within the jurisdiction of the “Banda Oriental,” is useful, if not necessary, to vessels bound to and from Buenos Ayres. If this be so, a fair compensation for the advantage might be expected from foreign vessels.

This, however, should be moderate in amount, and should be impartially collected. How far the Argentine Government can properly act as the agent for that collection will be reserved for consideration when their Congress shall have authorized the President for that purpose, of which you say there is a probability.

I am, &c.,

WM. M. EVARTS.

No. 7. Mr. Osborn to Mr. Evarts. [Document 18]

No. 7.
Mr. Osborn to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Buenos Ayres, May 3, 1879. (Received June 16.) No. 227.]

Sir: The war on the west coast, between Chili on the one side, and Bolivia and Peru on the other, appears to have produced a “change of front” by the party friends of the treaty, entered into between this government and Chili, in relation to the limits question in Patagonia.

The Congress of Chili approved of the treaty and the Chilian minister, Mr. Balmaceda, arrived here some two weeks ago, with instructions to proceed to carry out the agreements entered into by Chili so soon as the Argentine Congress shall have approved the treaty.

Dr. Montes de Oco, minister of foreign affairs, was appointed to represent the Argentine Government.

It is understood that the Chilian minister has had several interviews with the Argentine minister, and has already met the proposition from the latter to treat the question of limits outside of the treaty, which he declined to do.

The Argentine Congress convenes on Monday next; the treaty will doubtless be submitted, but there is little or no prospect that it will receive the approval of Congress at once, if at all.

This view may be taken of the matter, from the fact, that from the first, a strong party in Congress, led by the speaker of the house, has opposed the treaty; that its early friends seem to have almost at least abandoned it, and that so far as the war is concerned between Chili, and Bolivia and Peru, Argentine sympathy is very strongly in favor of the latter.

The popular feeling against Chili was shown by the demonstration made on the arrival of the Bolivian minister, Mr. Quijarro on Monday last. Thousands of the people assembled at the railroad station to receive and escort him to the hotel, where the Peruvian minister has his legation, from the balcony of which speeches were made, not only by the two ministers, but by leading Argentines.

It is reported that the Chilian minister has addressed a note to the government, asking satisfaction for the insulting cries against Chili at the manifestation.

Should the treaty break down in the Argentine Congress, it would so complicate matters between this country and Chili that war may result between them.

I am inclined to believe that the policy that will be adopted for the present by this government is the “do nothing policy,” so long at least as it is in doubt, if Chili is to win or lose in the struggle with Bolivia and Peru.

As Congress convenes so soon, it cannot be long before the policy adopted will become fully developed, and the country will know if it is to be peace or war with Chili.

I have, &c., &c.,

THOS. O. OSBORN.

No. 8. Mr. Osborn to Mr. Evarts. [Document 19]

No. 8.
Mr. Osborn to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Buenos Ayres, May 8, 1879. (Received June 21.) No. 228.]

Sir: The Argentine Congress was opened the 5th instant by the reading of his message by the President of the republic, to both houses assembled.

The President and his ministers were escorted from the “Red House” to the capitol by a regiment of the line. The diplomatic corps was present by invitation.

The message is considered one of the best ever delivered to Congress, and a very fair statement of the condition of the country. The President, after congratulating Congress and the country that the republic is in the enjoyment of peace, claims that the most important fact is the great growth of the national government influence throughout the republic; and it says its orders are obeyed without delay, and its advice is received with deference; and that this respect is the basis of public order.

In treating of the finances of the country he states that the consolidated debt, both home and foreign, has been scrupulously attended to; and during the last year was paid off: of the foreign debt the sum of $2,066,000, and on the home debt $694,000, leaving on the 31st of December, 1878, the foreign debt reduced to $31,022,500, and the home debt $21,567,000.

The national revenue for 1878 amounted to the sum of $18,451,897, when it had been only estimated to reach $16,459,029, which figures show that for the first time in the history of the budgets the revenues far surpassed the estimates.

The official value of the imports and exports, for the year 1878, amounted to $77,658,278.

The budget fixed the expenditure of the government at $17,068,794, and the sum ordered to be expended by special law amounted to $6,528,615; amounting in all to $23,597,409, while the expenditure has only amounted to $20,840,118, which shows how materially the financial situation of the country has improved.

In the message the President next takes up the subject of immigration and colonization, and says that during 1878, 35,876 immigrants arrived, being an excess of 7,000 over the previous year; that the office of the immigration department had in the last year placed 15,079 immigrants in the fourteen provinces. That the national colonies, with their towns, number twelve, with a population of 9,000 to 10,000, while the colonies of Santa Fé—not national colonies—which tend so much to the natural wealth, have at present a population of 31,000 to 32,000 inhabitants, and that their harvest represents from two and a half to three millions dollars.

Under the head of post-office and telegraphs, it is stated that the government has ratified the Paris postal treaty, which is much better than that of Berne, and reduces the postage. That in the year 1874 the revenue, of the-post-office only covered 42 per cent. of the expenses, while in the year 1878 it covered 95 percent. That the telegraph in 1878 yielded $133,000, and disbursed $116,000, leaving a surplus of $17,000, and while up to 1876 it gave only 63 per cent. of its expenses, now yields a revenue.

The President, under the head of war office, states that this government has no war save with the Indians, and gives as the results of the expeditions against them in the last year in killed and prisoners, besides 4 chiefs and 300 captives retaken, 8,000, including warriors, women, and children, and says.: “While the establishment of Indian colonies has proved difficult in the United States, we, however, find facilities in the spirit of Christianity that prevails, among the Indians, and their ambition of an improved way of living.”

In referring to marine matters the executive says that when the Devonshire question arose it was necessary to send a division of the squadron to the Atlantic coast to defend the rights of the government; and then, for the first time, the nation showed its maritime power in the South Sea.

In speaking of foreign affairs, the President refers to the President of the United States as having decided the limits question with Paraguay, declaring Villa Occidental and its territory to belong to the latter, and says it shall be given over.

Under the same head he refers to the “limits question” with Chili, and the treaty of December last, and says that the treaty was a treaty of peace, but contained also some clauses for the decision of the “limits question”; that the negotiations now going on here are tending to complete it, and the results will be submitted to Congress.

He then speaks of the war on the West Coast and says, “We are not judges or actors in this mournful tragedy, but we are and shall be moved spectators at the sight of blood spilt, and the ruins accumulating on three sister nations,” and expresses the opinion that it will soon become the duty of this government to try all conciliating means to suppress it, if the negotiations with Chili assume a definite shape and the reciprocal relations of the government with the belligerents permit the offer of such amicable mediation.

The President closes his message by referring to political parties and the presidential campaign, and says that even yet the political parties have not sufficient education; they, do not know how to respect the peace of the country, the rights of others, and the law; and that he sincerely and firmly reiterates the solemn declaration that he has before pronounced, that he will connect himself with no candidate because, between candidature, which is simple ambition, and the strict duties imposed by government, there is no possible affinity.

I have, &c.,

THOS. O. OSBORN.

No. 9. Mr. Osborn to Mr. Evarts [Document 20]

No. 9.
Mr. Osborn to Mr. Evarts

Legation of the United States,
Buenos Ayres, June 12, 1879. (Received August 4.) No. 230.]

Sir: On the 3d instant Dr. Monies de Oca, Argentine minister, and Mr. Balmaceda, Chilian minister, signed a convention postponing for ten years the ratification of the treaty of the limits question of December last, leaving existing disputes to arbitration.

The convention, before going into operation, must receive the approval of the Argentine Congress and that of Chili.

The matter is now being considered and discussed, and has been for several days, by the Argentine Congress in secret sessions, and as yet without result.

The convention establishes the “status quo” for ten years.

Meanwhile, or during the period of ten years, it gives the Argentine Government provisional jurisdiction over Patagonia up to the eastern entrance of the Strait of Magellan, and on the islands and shores of the Atlantic up to the same latitude.

Chili is to hold possession and exercise provisional jurisdiction over that portion of Patagonia now in her possession.

The Strait of Magellan is to be considered neutral and open to the flags of all nations, and neither government is to exercise jurisdiction in its waters, which are to be considered an open or free sea.

Should this convention be ratified by the Argentine Congress and that of Chili, it would not prevent the final settlement of the “limits question” within the ten years, if the two governments should so agree.

The Argentine press and public opinion are divided in reference to the matter. Mr. Frias and his partisans claim that this arrangement is no settlement of the disputed question; that this government should take advantage of the fact that Chili has a war on her hands, and that Chili would be more disposed to yield to the just demands of this country than at any future time, and that if the “status quo” should be agreed to, the time may come, not in the far future, when Chili, extricated from her present difficulties, would under some pretext demand an immediate and final settlement of the question in a mode for which this government might not be prepared.

On the other side, those who have more interest in local affairs, commerce, peace, and the presidential election, are friendly to the convention and desire its ratification.

I do not think that the Argentine Congress will ratify the convention of the 3d, or the treaty of December last, if submitted.

I have, &c.,

THOS. O. OSBORN.

No. 10. Mr. Evarts to Mr. Thomas O. Osborn. [Document 21]

No. 10.
Mr. Evarts to Mr. Thomas O. Osborn.

Department of State,
Washington, June 20, 1879. No. 109.]

Sir: Your interesting dispatch (No. 227) of May 3 last has been received and read with the attention bestowed on all matters having relation to the unhappy struggle which is convulsing the South American people, and which, I trust, a wise statesmanship may at least restrain within its original bounds. It was hoped that the boundary question between Chili and the Argentine Republic, to which your dispatch more especially relates, was in a fair way of settlement.

I am, &c., &c.,

WM. M. EVARTS.

No. 11. Mr. Osborn to Mr. Evarts. [Document 22]

No. 11.
Mr. Osborn to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Buenos Ayres, July 30, 1879. (Received September 16.) No. 235.]

Sir: General Roca, minister of war and marine, having returned from the military expedition—which proved successful—to the Rio Negro, referred to in my dispatch No. 220, was proclaimed a presidential candidate by his party on the 27th instant.

Dr. Charles Tejedor, governor of this province, had previously been formally proclaimed a candidate by the “party of reconciliation.”

The election for presidential electors takes place in the month of October next. The campaign is already hot and the partisan press bitter. Both parties accuse each other of the intention to resort to fraud and force, doubtless without grounds, to obtain a victory. Neither party has laid down any platform or declared for any line of policy, but the campaign is being made on the personal merits of their respective candidates.

General Roca is comparatively a young man; was educated in France, and is now not only minister of war and marine, but general of the Argentine army.

Dr. Tejedor is more advanced in years, a lawyer of considerable distinction, was minister of foreign affairs under the administration of President Sarmiento, and is now governor of this province.

Both candidates are respectable, talented, representative men, and either would be a good chief executive of the government. It is quite possible, however, that the campaign may become so sharp and bitter that both candidates will be withdrawn, and that Ex-President Sarmiento may become the compromise candidate, and the next President of the republic.

Ex-President Sarmiento, notwithstanding his advanced years, is still vigorous, active, and is now the editor of the daily paper El Nacional. Daring his administration he did much for the future of his country in inaugurating railroads and telegraph lines, and for the building up, true practical republicanism, by establishing on a firm basis our common and graded school system in this country. The corps of teachers, which he introduced from the United States now has charge of the graded schools in the different provinces, and the results which have already been accomplished are being felt and appreciated throughout the land.

I have, &c.,

THOS. O. OSBORN.

No. 12. Mr. Osborn to Mr. Evarts. [Document 23]

No. 12.
Mr. Osborn to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Buenos Ayres, July 31, 1879. No. 236.]

Sir: The “status quo” treaty, referred to in my No. 230, after a debate of eight days in the Argentine Senate, was rejected by a large majority.

Had the treaty been accepted by the Senate, doubtless it would have been overwhelmingly defeated in the House of Deputies.

If one may judge from the speeches made in the Senate against the treaty, it was rejected with no desire to cause a rupture between this country and Chili, but with the determination that the questions in dispute shall be now and finally settled.

After the rejection of the “status quo” treaty by the Senate, the President submitted the treaty of December last, known as the “Fierro-Sarratea” treaty, to Congress, and it was also rejected with but one vote in its favor.

Mr. Balmaceda, the Chilian minister, leaves Buenos Ayres August 1 for Chili, to become minister of foreign affairs. The secretary of the Chilian legation here remains as chargé, and it is understood that negotiations are to be kept open.

It is said that the Chilian minister will take with him new propositions for arbitration, submitted by the Argentine minister, Dr. Montes de Oca.

The Argentine iron-clads, the Andes and Plata, now in this harbor, are being put in good fighting trim by the removal of their wooden decks.

These preparations for battle may indicate, and it is quite possible, that the Argentine fleet, as soon as it is ready, will be ordered to the Strait of Magellan.

In the contest on the west coast the sympathy here is almost general in favor of Bolivia and Peru and against Chili, and the feeling is almost universal that Chili should accept the views of this government in reference to the boundary question, or that force should be used.

President Avellaneda is averse to a war with Chili; as I have it on very good authority that during the consideration of the “status quo” treaty by Congress he stated that he would resign as President before he would declare War against Chili. But, notwithstanding the adverse feelings of the President to anything like war, unless the Chilian Government accepts the proposal submitted by the Argentine minister, the Argentine Congress may adopt such extreme measures as will be equivalent to a declaration of war.

I have, &c.,

THOS. O. OSBORN.

No. 13. Mr. Osborn to Mr. Evarts. [Document 24]

No. 13.
Mr. Osborn to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Buenos Ayres, August 29, 1879. No. 239.]

Sir: The political situation in this republic is very critical.

The presidential campaign has become so bitter, the worst state of affairs may be anticipated.

A riot occurred in the street and plaza, before the halls of Congress, on the night of the 28th instant, and the assassination of General Roca, minister of war and marine, and candidate for presidential honors, was attempted.

The House of Deputies had held a night session for the interpellation of the ministers, and at the adjournment (11½ p.m.) the members found a mob in the street and plaza in front shouting, “Viva Tejedor” and “Death to Roca.”

After Dr. Plaza, minister of finance, had passed out of the hall and stepped into his carriage with a Mr. Cambaceres, his carriage was surrounded, one of the horses was stabbed, and as one of the ruffians mounted on top of the carriage to stab the coachman, the frightened horses dashed off, throwing the assassin from the vehicle, breaking through the dense mob, and carried the occupants out of the danger which threatened them. Neither of the two gentlemen was injured, although several bullets struck the carriage.

The minister of finance was undoubtedly mistaken by the assassins for the minister of war, who, after the attack began, was quietly placed in a carriage and taken to his home. For some time rumors have been current of coming party strife. Threats of revolution have appeared in some of the journals, and one announced that the life of the minister of war was in danger; another, that Governor Tejedor’s life was not worth an hour’s purchase. It is understood that troops of the line, from the other provinces, are on the way to the capital.

The cabinet crisis which has been threatened for some weeks past, it is believed, culminated with the resignation of Don Laspur, minister of the interior and chief of the cabinet, the 27th instant.

Ex-President Sarmiento was called by the President to the post; he accepted, and to-day he entered upon its duties.

As chief of the cabinet, it is believed the counsel of the ex-President will prevail, and the hope of all who wish well to the country is revived that peace will be maintained.

I have, &c.,

THOS. O. OSBORN.

No. 14. Mr. Osborn to Mr. Evarts. [Document 25]

No. 14.
Mr. Osborn to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Buenos Ayres, September 4, 1879. (Received October 8.) No. 240.]

Sir: This city was taken by surprise and much excitement produced by the publication on the 3d instant of a decree issued by Mr. Tejedor, governor of this province, calling out the national guards (state troops), and ordering 600 to be drilled every Sunday and feast-day.

There are in the province 20 battalions of infantry and 50 of cavalry enrolled, and two new regiments, according to the decree, will be formed.

The decree has a depressing effect in business circles, and it is stated that many of the importing houses have telegraphed their foreign agents to send no more goods for the present.

It is reported that the national government will issue a decree ordering the disarmament of the provincial troops of all the provinces. If this report should prove correct the most serious results may be anticipated.

In a political sense Governor Tejedor and bis friends claim this province and Corrientes, and that only one other province is wanted to make him the next President. This province is not conceded to Tejedor by General Roca and his friends, and should an armed struggle take place between the parties it will be over this province and in this city.

On the 1st instant ex-President Sarmiento, minister of the interior, issued a circular letter to the governors of the different provinces, a copy of which I have the honor to inclose herewith, marked A.

I have, &c.,

THOS. O. OSBORN.

[Inclosure A in No. 240.]

the prime minister’s circular.

Buenos Ayres, September 1, 1879.

To His Excellency the Governor of the Province of ———:

With pleasure I remit to your excellency the decree of the President of the republic, naming me minister of the interior, which would be incomplete did I not also send you the excellent letter of His Excellency to me inclosing the decree of my appointment, to the language of which I call your excellency’s especial attention, that it may instruct you, as agent of the national government, how to enforce the laws of Congress and decrees of the executive within the jurisdiction of your province.

A presidential election draws near; public excitement naturally enough is felt; but on the present occasion this excitement, due to accidental circumstances, is all the more alarming and pregnant with greater dangers.

Our country is not sufficiently advanced to be quoted as a model for the expression of public opinion by means of election. There are many monarchies before us in this regard; but the duty of our representatives, elected by the people to public stations, is to labor for the improvement of electoral rights, giving to the voters the most perfect liberty without allowing public order to be disturbed.

Your excellency will have noted that, due to the reciprocal newspaper recriminations for months past, the opinion is general that the coming presidential election will be less an expression of public opinion than of government intrigue.

The idea of the government, in whose name I have the honor to make these remarks, is entirely different; and we think that the country is too much advanced to admit of such doctrines; and the bitterness of this reciprocal abuse proves that the public is more alive to the importance of the matter than hitherto.

I need not point out that, all the candidates for the presidency being honorable men, and all republicans, differing only as to how their opinions should be carried out, it is east to decide which of them would be best for the country; but the result often defeats expectation, either through the country’s own fault, or circumstances over which we have no control.

I make this observation to show that in no case is it worth while to disturb the public peace in an election of honorable citizens; if the results disappoint the people, they will know it was their own doing, and history will not have to record that they were subjected to outward pressure. This is the way to educate public opinion, which profits by its own errors, and in modern times is itself the government, under the constitutional restrictions which the people have imposed on themselves.

Only misdirected zeal, therefore, would seek to interfere in the national elections; political partisans would approve, but the high functionaries encharged to maintain liberty of suffrage in the only constituent act which the people perform (the election of President and Vice-President) would strongly disapprove of such interference.

The election of national functionaries is a national act, under national jurisdiction, in which the provincial authorities only take part as agents of the national government. The federal law declares that whatever tends to disturb such election is sedition, and subject to the penalties attached to this offense. I remind your excellency of this to show you the right which the President of the republic possesses to point out to you the course he wishes the governors of provinces to pursue before the elections, as also their subordinates, a course of simple abstention as agitators for any candidate, or employing official influence on his behalf.

In addition to such a line of conduct being strictly just, it will, as I have already shown, dissipate public anxiety by deeds instead of words, and while adding to the dignity of the governors, will restore their moral authority to use the means which the law gives them for repressing electoral offenses.

Such are the objects of His Excellency the President on calling me to office, in the belief that both the public and their excellencies the governors, whom I now have the honor of addressing, will bear in mind that during my long public career I have never ceased to advocate full liberty of suffrage and to make the government, respect it.

The republic has progressed notably within these last few years, and won a high place among nations, higher perhaps than its limited number of inhabitants would lead to expect; but this high reputation is seriously damaged at every general election, in consequence of the disorders which occur; and abroad, in Europe especially, they wonder how we have made so little progress in the peaceable use of electoral liberty, which all nations, even monarchies, now enjoy, as even under the French Empire—an absolute government—the people voted freely. Why cannot we approach this state of public morality? Because, as we see by our press, which is more than free, it is not the ignorant masses who practice fraud, intimidation, or other electoral offenses, but distinguished party leaders, and even, according to daily complaints, the very authorities themselves.

The system of a representative government cannot be made to work in one day in countries so recently called upon to govern themselves. Rooted traditions, distances, the ignorance of the masses, the disorders that preceded the adoption of this system, have opposed difficulties and impediments. It is the duty of every citizen, the inspiration of patriotism, to work incessantly to improve and support these institutions, correcting abuses without appealing to destructive means; and, as experience has taught us and all other countries, rebellions are a useless resort, only distancing us from the ends desired.

To secure the free expression of the will of the people in the elections and maintain public peace, as the note of the President of the republic indicates, is the highest and noblest duty of a governor of a province, and which I confidently expect from your excellency, to the satisfaction of your citizens and the national government, of which you are the worthy agent in the electoral laws, and in the repression of acts against federal justice.

Considerations in an economical point necessitate the maintenance of peace. Next April the plow will furrow hundreds of leagues of land, to furnish the people of other lands with bread; next October a new President will ascend, whilst our lands, burdened with cereals, will whiten at the first symptoms of maturity in the ears. During this period the breezes must smile on the growing vegetation, and the storms of civil war, which widow it of its fruits, must be avoided.

To conclude, I inform your excellency that when announcing this line of policy as the expression of the wishes of the President, public opinion here, the sentiments of approval from traders, and the telegrams from the interior, have induced the agents of great banks in Europe to transmit by cable the favorable impression made thereby, and auguring peaceful elections; for commerce fears such crises as mock all calculations.

As regards the men in government, as your excellency, these signs prove that the opinion of the true people is tired of barren agitations, and seeks security beneath the authority of the laws.

D. F. SARMIENTO.

No. 15. Mr. Osborn to Mr. Evarts. [Document 26]

No. 15.
Mr. Osborn to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Buenos Ayres, September 8, 1879. (Received October 8.) No. 241.]

Sir: The situation has not improved since the date of my dispatch numbered 240, but has rather assumed the shape of a quarrel between the national government and the government-—or more properly the governor—of this province.

In relation to the decree issued by Governor Tejedor, mentioned in my last note, calling out the “guardia national,” Ex-President Sarmiento, minister of the interior, passed a note to the governor, a copy of which I inclose herewith, marked A, putting some pertinent questions to him, and disputing his right to interfere with or to call out the national guards without the authority of the national government.

To this note of the minister of the interior the governor replied, and, at the same time, issued an address to the people of Buenos Ayres, copies of which are inclosed, marked B and C.

On the 5th instant, President Avellaneda sent to Congress a message, accompanied by a bill, for consideration in reference to the mobilization of the national guards, a copy of which is also inclosed herewith, marked D.

In the consideration and on the adoption of the proposed law by a majority of the cabinet, a rupture of the cabinet took place, and Dr. Montes de Oca, minister of foreign affairs, and Dr. Leastra, minister of worship, tendered their resignations and retired from the cabinet chamber. Their resignations were at once accepted by the President.

It is probable that the bill will become a law as proposed, and should the governor press his policy, this province will be put under martial law.

Two regiments of the line arrived in this city to-day, and it is said that two steamers loaded with troops are on the way from the province of Santa Fé.

Perhaps the best assurance that peace will be preserved is the fact that the people throughout the republic are seriously alarmed and alive to the situation, and while both sides are getting ready to maintain it, the contest may be fought out with notes between the chiefs, and all end in words.

I have, &c.,

THOS. O. OSBORN.

A.
minister sarmiento’s note to the governor.

[Standard, September 6, 1879.]

To His Excellency the Governor of Buenos Ayres:

The President of the republic has been informed of the contents of various decrees published in the papers organizing the national guards of this province on a new footing, on the plea that the executive “finds itself in the necessity of guarding the public peace, and it being opportune to anticipate in case these elements at its disposal should be increased.” The President, therefore, orders me to ask of you information, as soon as possible, regarding the motives you have for anticipating that the public peace may be disturbed, and your reasons for not notifying these motives to the national government in Buenos Ayres, which disposes of forces of the line, besides numerous bodies of officials and police.

The organization of the national guard and their disposal belong to Congress, and only the appointment of their officers and their discipline are under the jurisdiction of the provinces.

The President orders me to notify your excellency that the two battalions you call “volunteers” in one of the decrees, the retired veterans of the Paraguayan war, and many other singularities of that reorganization, are not comprised in the forms received and adopted in the national guard, the qualification of which excludes the word “volunteer,” since this body admits of no separation, and the obligation of enrolling at 18 years of age, in virtue of Argentine citizenship (as there is no provincial), is compulsory.

The national guards that served in the Paraguayan war are exempted by provincial law for all further service for ten years, and this term has not expired yet; besides, there is a national law exempting also those who crushed the September revolution.

But the national government will not allow any distinction between the officers and commanders who have served in the national armies without the due separation of those who have been removed on account of acts or other causes punishable, lest an asylum be given to delinquents.

As the province of Buenos Ayres has been freed of all frontier enemies and its towns are superabundantly guarded, it is hard to believe that there is a danger necessitating the reorganization of the national guards under your excellency’s proposed system.

It is not form me to explain to your excellency the considerations that make it necessary to propose to Congress, which alone has the faculty, the reorganization of the national guards, in conformity with the reforms the experience of late years has taught us in the distribution of the forces of a nation, considering the innovations introduced in the art of war by arms of precision, and the long practice required for their efficacious use.

The national government, with a view to facilitate the work of Congress, is adopting all the measures proposed for a plan of reform in harmony with that necessity.

This reorganization must take place all over the republic, in order to avoid any variety of reform a single province might introduce.

Happily we have no enemies to fear, neither at home nor abroad; so for the moment, things must remain as they are, and no select bodies of volunteers may be created, not being allowed by the law.

Should it be necessary to organize the national guards, with authorization of the national government, your excellency must proceed by means of the lists of review of each body, organized as they are by neighborhoods and quarters; as regards the battalions and squadrons, they must be classified by regiments, according to the partidos, &c. If it were allowed to separate “corps d’élite,” under the pretext of mobilizing the national guards, the better classes would be exempted and the poor and ignorant ones burdened with the service, offering no security whatever to the government.

A door being opened to this distinction between the common mass of the citizens, they would act under the belief that not all were subject to the government, and form free corps, as the word “volunteer indicates, to guard or oppress the rest.

The decrees published under yesterday’s date coincide with the circulars issued a few hours afterwards, and which reached your hands, explaining the policy the President of the republic recommends your excellency to follow in the national elections: and it is quite certain your excellency would not carry out the project of reorganization of the national guards, for fear that it would be believed it tended to secure the vote of the citizens turned into soldiers, with the influence of so large a staff of officers and commanders.

I therefore beg of you to give me information as to the motives you have for supposing an imminent danger, necessitating an increase of the elements you dispose of, besides the numerous civil and rural police forces and the irregular battalion known as guardia provincial. Meanwhile the President of the republic has ordered that, pending the decision of Congress on the reorganization of the national guards in the Republic, the project I refer to be suspended No “corps d’élite” are allowed, as not belonging to the national guards system created by the constitution, since not even troops of the line, bearing the name of volunteers, have the faculty of naming commanders and officers granted in general terms to the provinces.

The 600 men of the capital called out in said decrees must be taken from the body or bodies in which they are enrolled, without distinction or exclusion of persons. The capital has a numerous civil police (unhappily turned into soldiers) to prevent attacks against life and property, besides national forces to protect the dignity of the national government and preserve order should it be threatened by political factions.

Therefore, those non-motived military exercises would turn the capital into a military encampment, disturbing the peace and confidence of the inhabitants by the continual sound of arms.

I must advise your excellency that the interests of the country and the economy of our revenues counsel a reduction in the force of the national troops, limiting them to an indispensable number, to protect our frontiers of little importance and enforce the laws of the nation. But this cannot be proposed to Congress as long as the municipal forces are increased in an exaggerated manner (only intended to capture criminals and protect life and property) and conglomerating armed bodies besides the national guards created by the constitution of the nation.

The fear arises that while the national forces are being reduced the provinces will erect themselves, at the discretion of their governors, into armed states, constituting as many armies as there are provinces, and engendering civil war amongst each other.

Such is the situation created by Buenos Ayres giving the example followed by Santa Fé, Corrientes, and Enter Rios, especially creating battalions of the line under the illegal name of Provincial Guards, which are not municipal, as the local police nor national guards of citizens, as designed by the constitution, nor troops of the line, since the provinces have no right to wage war or keep soldiers and marines.

It is now opportune to draw your attention to the monstrous fact that there are at present quartered in the edifices of the Retiro, which were formerly the old battery (formerly royal, now national), dominating the navigation of the Rio de la Plata, one of these nameless battalions, without banner, and the artillery corps of the national government; they daily run the risk of colliding—handing an unexempled fact to history—of two troops of the line under different authorities fighting as if they belonged to two different nations.

Common sense counsels the separation of these forces, which do not guard the fort, since the place is a fortress, to avoid disagreeable and shameful incidents.

The government will soon adopt measures to put a stop to all these disorders in the provinces, and ask Congress to legislate in the matter, ordering also the police to depose its military character and become again what it is supposed to be in all civilized nations—guardian of towns, under municipal regime, with no other arms than the ones its station needs. The citizens have not remarked that of late these municipal officials have been transformed into regular troops of the line, subject to military regime and headed by officers of the line, on the same system as that in Russia.

The police of a city is an institution purely civil and local, depending on its municipality, and independent of the political changes as far as removing it from its local jurisdiction. It would certainly be an anomaly if the political power of a state could call out all the police forces of the towns, concentrate them in one point, and put them under the orders of an officer.

Should such a thing occur it would be necesssary to create another municipal force to guard each town, whilst the former body would form troops of the line, since they cannot be called national guards, the only form in which citizens can be armed and militarily organized.

By a deplorable corruption this purely municipal institution has been turned into a military corps, with the appointment, first, of Col. Viejo Bueno; second, by that of a chief of an irregular battallion of the line, Colonel Garmendia, of the national army.

The fidelity of these military men, who with the honors of their rank wear the sword confided to them by the nation, cannot be doubted for the moment, and deliver us from the fear of any such abuse as might arise from the fact of an armed body stationed in front of Congress and not recognizing its supreme authority, as not dependent on it.

The President of the republic will issue the decrees relating to the officers, with military grades and swords accorded by the nation, that they may not join this unnecessary and unauthorized movement of forces, which are not required even in our most distant frontiers, thanks to the gigantic treasures spent by the nation to give security to the province of Buenos Ayres before all others.

God preserve, &c.

D. F. SARMIENTO.

[Standard, September 7, 1879.]

B.
the governor’s reply.

To the National Minister of the Interior:

Mr. Minister: This government has received your excellency’s note requesting information relating to the decrees on the organization of the national guards. In issuing those decrees, this government has made use of its rights, and does not believe said decrees liable to the suppression ordered by the national government. The contrary opinion of your excellency can only be explained by confounding organization with mobilization, and ignoring the position this government is in.

National guards are only mobilized for active service in the army, in order to suppress a local disturbance or maintain order in sedition. In the first case the raising of the militia in all the provinces or part of them is authorized by Congress, disposing also of the organization, armament, and discipline of this militia, and the administration and government of that portion of them employed in the service of the “nation,” leaving to the provinces the faculty of appointing their corresponding officers and commanders and establishing the discipline prescribed by Congress.

In the second case, the mobilization of the militia, or part of it, when necessitated for the public peace of the province, without infringing the rights of the national government, corresponds to the legislature of the province, and to the executive oft same, in case of an internal disturbance threatening the peace of the province, with authorization of the legislature, and to the executive alone in the recess, accounting for same in the ensuing sessions (Art. 142, clau. 11, Prov. Con.), and informing the national authorities at once.

The governor is, besides, commander-in-chief of the military forces of the province, excepting those which may have been mobilized for national purposes (clan. 10); he confers commissions on the officers he appoints to organize the militia of the province, and, in virtue of the powers conferred by the clauses referred to (clan. 3), can even commission war vessels and raise armies in case of foreign invasion or other pressing danger which admits of no delay in dealing with it, subsequently accounting for such steps to the federal government (see Art. 108, Nat. Con.). The governor of the province can only be considered the agent of the national government in mobilizing the militia in the cases laid down in clause 24, Art. 67, of the national constitution (clan, 12, Art. 142, Prov. Con.).

This is the law, and I leave it, without comment, to your excellency’s consideration. But accomplished facts are still more eloquent. Since the national constitution was first framed the provinces have always enjoyed this right, and no national government has ever said a word.

The present cabinet, of which your excellency is now a member, has witnessed similar measures not only without objection, but generously supplying arms and clothing.

In this way the provinces of Santa Fé and Entre Rios, through the officious help of the national government, have armies at command with which they could coerce the nation if, instead of being partisan of the war minister, they happened to be hostile to him. Meanwhile, the city of Buenos Ayres, with 300,000 inhabitants, has only its provincial guards to watch the prisons and its police to guard the city. It has not even one piece of artillery. It has no arms for the national guard, nor can it henceforward procure them without first paying customs duty.

The 400,000 people in the camp districts, with numerous towns and vast plains, have only a rural police of 300 men, and the police of the Juzgados which only does duty in the towns. Such is the position of the province of Buenos Ayres at a moment when disorder is more or less natural in democratic countries, and we have already seen it occur on several occasions; what is worse, we now see it in the guise of a military candidate with the army at his back, with divisions of this same army all over the provinces, with battalions in this city and on the frontiers of this province; with sham fights in the streets, turning the capital, as your excellency so appropriately remarks, into a military encampment calculated to disturb the peace and confidence of the citizens.

In face of this disagreeable state of things and the formidable aspect the electoral struggle is assuming, the Government of Buenos Ayres considers it both its duty and its right to call on the inhabitants to protect their own liberties.

The people of Buenos Ayres, although unarmed, are brave and great, and up to the present have been accustomed to achieve by force of union and public opinion what others can only expect to obtain by the cannon and the Remington. Can anyone affect to doubt that this unity of opinion exists? It would be worse than folly, bad policy, so to doubt. Should Argentine nationality be ever again imperilled the ark of safety will find a haven in this unity.

Mr. Minister, the government of Buenos Ayres considers this note of importance enough to justify it in briefly correcting your excellency in some points, viz:

That the provincial governments do not “report” or “petition” but speak and decide in virtue of attributes which even the national government lacks. (Art. 104, Nat. Con.)

That the government of Buenos Ayres does not consider that the troops of the line now in this city are those to be charged with maintaining order in case of internal disorder, except by special request of the provincial authorities when their own means for doing so are insufficient, otherwise it would be intervention outside the extreme cases provided for by the national constitution.

That the “volunteers,” who have so greatly alarmed your excellency, are not foreigners (as was the case with France in her war with Germany), but citizens who patriotically offer to help the small forces of the province in keeping order, and previously submit to the necessary drill.

That the monstrous fact of the prison guard and the artillery corps being quartered in the same barracks at the Retiro has arisen through the national government having no capital seat of its own, or, at least, buildings of its own in the capital of the province; and if either corps must move out, it should certainly be the artillery, as it can hardly be claimed that the fact of their being quartered there makes the building their own, or converts it into a fort.

That the military organization of the police is necessary in a country where, as yet, the public have not the same respect for such a force as they have in London and Paris, the step being rendered still more expedient by the insolence of the soldiers of the line, and which is winked at by their officers.

That the duty of guarding Congress, like other police duty performed in the name of the national government, and at its request, is so performed merely in deference and without acknowledging any authority but that of the province, although your excellency erroneously thinks otherwise.

C. TEJEDOR.

Santiago Alcorta.

C.
message of the federal executive—mobilization of the national guard.

Buenos Ayres, September 5, 1879.

[Herald, September 7, 1879.]

To the Honorable Congress of the Nation:

The executive has the honor to submit to your houses the annexed bill, doubly called for by the decrees that the provincial executive of Buenos Ayres has lately issued and published, modifying in an arbitrary manner the system of composition of the national guard, and by the necessity of reforming the improper practices of some of the other provincial governments in connection with the battalions that go by the name of national guard.

The executive begs to earnestly recommend the^ urgent need of its being sanctioned, with a view to thus calming the alarm that has been produced by said decrees, and to prevent the governor of a province from arrogating faculties to himself which belong exclusively to the nation.

The federal system does not admit of the co-existence in the territory of the republic of other forces than such as meet under the national flag; and, inasmuch as the states or provinces that form the nation cannot make war, their governments cannot have either armament or troops of their own; otherwise there would be as many armies as there are provinces.

The national constitution has created an institution called the national guard, composed of all the citizens, from 18 to 45 years of age, and severely punishing such as should pretend to avoid such duty; but its organization and regulation are reserved to Congress, which has fixed both from the outset, either accepting such as already existed or dictating special laws. The provinces appoint the commanding and other officers, and provide for the discipline.

The republic is on the eve of offering the brightest spectacle of its history, as there are no Indians to cause alarm, and as the people do not want either war or disturbances to affect its tranquillity and stay the development of its prosperity.

The decrees of the governor of Buenos Ayres would subvert everything; but you will not consent to their compassing these fatal consequences.

There will be nothing but respect for the laws, for Congress, for the national authorities, and for the freedom of voting.

The executive, counting on your support, can safely assert that the country will have the glory of carrying out a free election instead of the bloody licentiousness to which it would be carried but for intervention of the national authority.

N. AVELLANEDA.

D. F. Sarmiento.

bill.

The Senate and House of Representatives, &c.: Article 1. Until such time as Congress shall enact a law for the reorganization and discipline of the national guard, its organization at the time of last enrollment will hold.

Art. 2. The national guard cannot be called together by the provincial authorities even for training purposes, except by order of the federal executive.

Art. 3. The provincial battalions, whatever name they may go by, will be immediately discharged, and after the promulgation of this law no penalty of any kind can be inflicted on such soldiers as should refuse to continue in the service. But the authorities who should order such penalties, and the persons who should carry out the orders, will be liable for the indemnifications for damages, and a line of $1,000 or one year’s imprisonment.

Art. 4. The executive is authorized to summon the national guard when it may deem expedient in order to the carrying out of this law, or any of the existing ones (troops of the line to be preferred), and to incur the expenses that said law may call for.

Art 5. After the date of this law, it is forbidden to give a military organization to the agents destined to the special police service of the provinces.

Art. 6. The executive will report to Congress on the use it may have made of this law during the first part of the session of next year.

D. F. SARMIENTO.

D.
the governor’s proclamation.

[Standard, September 7, 1879.]

To his Fellow Citizens:

Recent events, exaggerated by political partisans, are made to assume the appearance of the opening of a revolutionary era.

Intemperate documents issued by the national authorities lead to a belief that there is, at the very least, a design to drive the Government of Buenos Ayres to armed resistance, and the very forces raised to preserve order between friends and foes are designated as the means to be employed for such purpose.

Nothing of the kind shall happen. The people themselves rise in revolt when their rights are grotesquely outraged and their patience is exhausted. Those animated by petty ambition to rise also bring about revolt.

The governor of Buenos Ayres has offered to resign if those other governors who are the “natural agents” of a candidate whom the people reject do likewise. He has also offered to resign if the other candidate follow the same course.

Let him be taken at his word and all is over.

But in any case it is my duty to state that revolt will never meet with sanction from the provincial authorities.

The families of the city may sleep in peace and traders carry on their operations with every confidence.

Doubtless between the extreme tendencies of the national government and the exigencies of public opinion it is not easy to maintain a calm spirit, but I will lay myself to the task, and if I fail the fault will not be mine.

CARLOS TEJEDOR.

No. 16. Mr. Osborn to Mr. Evarts. [Document 27]

No. 16.
Mr. Osborn to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Buenos Ayres, September 20, 1879. (Received November 1.) No. 244.]

Sir: The bill submitted to Congress by the President, mentioned in my dispatch No. 241, in reference to the mobilization of the national guard, and claiming that the national government alone has the right to mobilize that force, was rejected by the House, and a substitute was reported by the committee on federal relations, and has passed the House and will doubtless pass the Senate, prohibiting the mobilization of the force within eight months preceding a presidential election.

The provincial legislature took up the decree of the governor in reference to the mobilization of the troops, and after a long discussion passed a resolution, or law, prohibiting the governor from mobilizing the national guards without the previous consent of the legislature, which the governor will probably veto, at the same time asserting his absolute and undivided right over the control of that force.

As the matter now stands, it is believed that the storm that for a time threatened the peace of the country and the union of the provinces, for the present, at least, is passed.

Outside of his own party, I am inclined to think that the governor has but few sympathizers, as it was generally believed that the policy adopted by the governor involves the principle of secession and the separation of this province from the other provinces, which was finally settled by a negative, as it was supposed, at the battle of Pavou, in which General Urquiza, the president of the other provinces, was defeated by General Mitre, the governor of this province, who became the provincial President of all the provinces united.

This question, and the jealousies of Buenos Ayres against the other provinces, is at the bottom of almost all the trouble attending a presidential campaign.

Since the presidency of General Mitre all of the Presidents have been selected from one of the other provinces, and as General Roca is a native of the province of Tucuman, his candidature has aroused all of that old jealousy and bitter feeling which separated Buenos Ayres in other days from the other provinces.

As the idea that Paris is France, so the sentiment in this province up to the present has obtained that Buenos Ayres is the Argentine Republic.

It is true that this province has borne and now bears the greater part of the burthen and expenses of government, but this feeling that Buenos Ayres is the Argentine Republic must soon die out, as the Argentine Republic, with its variety of climate, soil, and extent of territory, with her provinces rapidly filling up by immigration and otherwise, must soon become the United States of South America, and her power to control will soon find its center removed to the interior.

I have, &c.,

THOS. O. OSBORN.

Austria-Hungary.Austria-Hungary.

[28] . Mr. Kasson to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Vienna, October 27, 1878. (Received November 12.)

[29] . Mr. Kasson to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Vienna, October 29, 1878. (Received November 14.)

[30] . Mr. Kasson to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Vienna, November 12, 1878. (Received November 29.)

[31] . Mr. Kasson to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Vienna, November 20, 1878. (Received December 7.)

[32] . Mr. Kasson to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Vienna, January 3, 1879. (Received January 20.)

[33] . Mr. Kasson to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Vienna, January 11, 1879. (Received January 29.)

[34] . Mr. Kasson to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Vienna, January 17, 1879. (Received February 1.)

[35] . Mr. Kasson to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Vienna, January 29, 1879. (Received February 17.)

[36] . Mr. Kasson to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Vienna, February 7, 1879. (Received February 24.)

[37] . Mr. Kasson to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Vienna, February 10, 1879. (Received March 1.)

[38] . Mr. Kasson to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Vienna, February 16, 1879. (Received March. 5.)

[39] . Mr. Kasson to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Vienna, February 18, 1879. (Received March. 5.)

[40] . Mr. Kasson to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Vienna, March 10, 1879. (Received March 27.)

[41] . Mr. Kasson to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Vienna, March 11, 1879. (Received March 27.)

[42] . Mr. Kasson to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Vienna, March 15, 1879. (Received March 29.)

[43] . Mr. Kasson to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Vienna, March 20, 1879. (Received April 5.)

[44] . Mr. Kasson to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Vienna, March 22, 1879. (Received April 8.)

[45] . Mr. Kasson to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Vienna, March 31, 1879. (Received April 16.)

[46] . Mr. Kasson to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Vienna, March 31, 1879. (Received April 16.)

[47] . Mr. Kasson to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Vienna, May 3, 1879. (Received May 20.)

[48] . Mr. Kasson to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Vienna, May 7, 1879. (Received May 26.)

[49] . Mr. Kasson to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Vienna, May 14, 1879. (Received May 29.)

[50] . Mr. Delaplaine to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Vienna, July 5, 1879. (Received July 23.)

[51] . Mr. Evarts to Mr. Kasson.

Department of State, Washington, July 30, 1879.

[52] . Mr. Evarts to Mr. Kasson.

Department of State, Washington, July 30, 1879.

[53] . Mr. Kasson to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Vienna, September 1, 1879. (Received September 17.)

[54] . Mr. Kasson to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Vienna, October 18, 1879.

[55] . Mr. Kasson to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Vienna, November 19, 1879. (Received December 6.)

No. 17. Mr. Kasson to Mr. Evarts. [Document 28]

No. 17.
Mr. Kasson to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Vienna, October 27, 1878. (Received November 12.) No. 119.]

Sir: It still appears impracticable to form a ministry for Austria to replace that of Prince Auersperg, whose resignation, long pending, was finally accepted by the Emperor some three weeks ago. The chief causes of difficulty are the following:

First, the dualism of the system of government. The Austro-Hungarian common government, composed of only three chiefs of department, leans for its supplies and its security upon the “delegations” which are chosen by the respective legislatures of the two halves of the empire, each selecting one-half of the total number out of its own body, and each delegation sitting in a chamber apart from the other, as a representation exclusively of its own constituent body. Thus the budget of the common ministry must undergo two independent scrutinies, and receive two independent sanctions, from two almost independent nationalities.

Practically, therefore, the common ministry must have the support of two separate parliaments. To secure this support it must be in accord with the separate ministries of Austria and of Hungary, each of which is dependent for its existence on the support of its own parliament, and must be the interpreter to it of the policy of the central government. If either ministry fails to support the common ministry, the latter loses its representative and its interpreter in the parliament to which that local ministry is responsible. Such failure also would imply a “delegation” hostile to the common ministry, which therefore would fall.

Thus each local ministry, in addition to its own legitimate interests and responsibilities, is obliged to bear those of the central government. This renders the situation at times embarrassing to the last degree; and in case of an unpopular external policy puts an almost intolerable weight upon the local ministry.

* * * * * * *.

The foreign policy of Count Andrassy is considered as concentrated upon acquisitions to the south, perhaps ultimately leading to the Mediterranean Sea, as I have before advised you. A local ministry must provide ways and means for those expenditures, already large.

The last effort of the Emperor to form a ministry for Austria designated Baron de Pretis, now financial minister, for its chief. The latter called together the leaders of the parliamentary clubs to ascertain what support he could have should he form a ministry. To them he disclosed his programme. Its difficult point was the foreign policy. Upon this he said that after 1880 the occupation must cease to be a charge upon the treasury, and its expenses must be defrayed out of Bosnian revenues. Upon the duration of the occupation, he said it must be until the empire had sufficient guarantees that order and tranquillity would no longer be disturbed on its frontiers, and until the empire should be reimbursed for the expenditures incurred in securing this result. As one of the deputies remarked, this would probably enable their grandchildren to witness its conclusion.

The constitutional party which supported the Auersperg ministry is very much divided, and in large part hostile to this programme. The other clubs are either positively hostile, or broken into fractions on the subject.

* * * * * * *

In Hungary the finance minister, an able and popular man, refused to undertake the work of providing for the additional expenses resulting from the occupation of Bosnia, and resigned. The vacancy is temporarily supplied; but it is yet an open question if Count Andrassy’s policy will receive sufficient support from the new Reichstag to enable the friendly Tirja ministry to live. It is proposed to bridge over an interval by passing immediately to an election of the “delegations” prior to a discussion of that policy in the new Reichstag; on the theory that before such discussion they should receive the benefit of Count Andrassy’s explanations, which can only be made to the constituent bodies through their “delegations,” to which he is responsible.

If in this way he draws a favorable “delegation” from Hungary, before a show of hands in the Reichstag, he might continue another year, even though the friendly Hungarian ministry should afterwards fall in the effort to execute the votes of the delegations. In the mean time the Hungarian Government has won the first victory over its opponents by the election of its candidate for president of the popular house, with a majority of sixty-two votes.

* * * * * * *

I have, &c.,

JOHN A. KASSON.

No. 18. Mr. Kasson to Mr. Evarts. [Document 29]

No. 18.
Mr. Kasson to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Vienna, October 29, 1878. (Received November 14.) No. 120.]

Sir: In order to reply to your No. 59, received on the 25th instant, I propounded the inquiries contained in your note to Baron Hofmann, the Austro-Hungarian minister of finance, at the earliest practicable moment.

I have now the honor to reply, in accordance with information furnished by him, as follows:

I. “Whether the Austrian paper florin is redeemable in any metallic currency, and, if so, in what?”

Originally it was redeemable in silver, which has been the legal standard in Austria to the exclusion of gold. But the events of 1848 compelled the suspension of specie payments in that year, and this practical suspension was afterwards maintained by a law authorizing and continuing it, which law is still in force. The Austrian paper florin is, therefore, not in fact redeemable in any metallic currency, and has a daily fluctuating value.

II. “Whether the Austrian silver florin is a coin in actual circulation at the present time on which trade transactions are based?”

The transactions of trade in Austria since the suspension of specie payments are based on paper, not on silver. The silver florin is not in circulation. I have not seen during my residence in Austria a single silver florin piece, nor any Austrian coin in circulation of higher value than 20 kreutzers (10 cents). Within the last few days, however, silver is quoted as at par with paper in Vienna, and it is reported that small amounts have been shown in private hands. The relation between silver and paper is always fluctuating, and is a mere affair of market rates.

III. —“with a statement of its (the silver florin’s) accepted value in Austria as compared with that of the 8-florin gold piece.”

The 8 florin gold piece is not in circulation, and has no fixed value in relation to the silver florin. Gold never having been the legal standard of money in Austria, this piece if it appears is bought and sold as merchandise. To-day its ratio to the silver florin is given as 8 gold to 9.40 silver; that is, it requires 9 florins and 40 kreutzers in silver to buy an 8 florin gold piece. It is held equivalent in value to a 20-franc gold piece, and is so treated in the market. Austria has not fixed by law or treaty the ratio between gold and silver.

Perhaps I ought to repeat in this connection what I have before written to the Department (see No. 24, Inclosure B, Article XIII), that by the new Austro-Hungarian tariff law, which will take effect on the 1st of January next, all duties are payable in gold instead of silver as heretofore. Two needs of the government have compelled this action: 1st, To secure the loans which it required, it was obliged to issue a gold rente, the annual interest of which they were compelled to provide for by buying gold in the market at a high premium for silver, entailing a double loss; 2d, in their international commercial treaties the equality of tariff dues was destroyed as between this silver-standard empire and the gold-standard countries, like Germany, to the great injury of Austrian producing interests.

Gold must therefore be bought by Austrian importers after the 1st of January to cover the duties on their goods, unless the government allows the option to pay equivalent silver, the ratio of which in that case is to be fixed from time to time by its officers.

I trust the foregoing fully responds to the request of the Secretary of the Treasury, as communicated by you. Further information, if desired, will be found in my No. 40, relating to the same subject.

I have, &c.,

JOHN A. KASSON.

No. 19. Mr. Kasson to Mr. Evarts. [Document 30]

No. 19.
Mr. Kasson to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Vienna, November 12, 1878. (Received November 29.) No. 126.]

Sir: Besides Austria, whose minister plenipotentiary is already in Roumania, Italy has appointed a minister of the same rank at Bucharest; and Germany, it is understood, will do the same. Russia has so far appointed only a minister resident, and it is not yet known what action the other powers will take in this respect. They all concede the title of “Royal Highness” to Prince Charles.

For Servia, it is understood that only ministers resident will be appointed at Belgrade.

It was reported in the journals here that the United States Government had by special envoy acknowleged the independence of one or both these principalities. As this legation had no official advice on the subject, I could neither affirm nor deny it, but was disposed to doubt the authenticity of the report.

During the war, when all direct communications between these principalities and Constantinople were interrupted, I felt bound to accept jurisdiction of the questions affecting American citizens who found themselves in those principalities, and who appealed to this legation. Such correspondence still takes place occasionally, because Vienna is the most easily and the most regularly accessible diplomatic post for all the countries bordering the Danube. But I hesitate to continue this assumed jurisdiction longer without the sanction of the Department, and beg the Secretary to give me instructions on this subject.

It seems the time has come to annex those now independent principalities to some jurisdiction for United States diplomatic purposes, at least temporarily, and to adjust the right of intervention for the interests of American citizens when necessary.

Unless otherwise instructed, I should feel bound to consider Bosnia and Herzegovina (now occupied by Austria), as within my diplomatic jurisdiction—so far as American citizens are concerned.

A further question of the same sort may arise touching Montenegro. I had supposed the relations of that little independency would be rather with Italy than with Austria. But by the treaty of Berlin (Articles 24–30) Austria assumes the representation of the Montenegrine commercial flag abroad; and so presents a novel question of representation and responsibility in respect to other governments.

I have, &c.,

JOHN A. KASSON.

No. 20. Mr. Kasson to Mr. Evarts. [Document 31]

No. 20.
Mr. Kasson to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Vienna, November 20, 1878. (Received December 7.) No. 129.]

Sir: The government has completed its special budget for the expenses of the Bosnian occupation, to be submitted to the “delegations” now assembled at Buda-Pesth.

Florins.

They demand as a supplementary credit for the current year, 1878, the sum of 41,720,000

For the service of the Bosnian occupation for the year 1879, they ask 33,000,000

Add the extraordinary credit for possible emergencies or the government voted just prior to the congress at Berlin 60,000,000

And it appears that the cost of the first eighteen months in which Austria occupies and administers Bosnia-Herzegovina reachesthe sum of 134,720,000

Or about $67,000,000

The estimate for the year 1879 is so large that it must be supposed to include a large sum for military works, the construction of new lines for transportation or other permanent structures, or that it looks to a possible extension of the occupation to Novi-Bazar.

The government organs represent the total loss of the military forces up to the close of the lighting at only 5,000, including killed, wounded, and missing. The general opinion considerably increases that estimate. The number of the sick and of those dying from sickness is not published, and would probably largely swell the figures representing the total loss.

Although the ministry seems inclined to procrastinate, still withholding necessary papers from the delegations, yet the conviction is now entertained very generally that no action will be taken in either delegation which will disturb Count Andrassy’s tenure of office. It is believed that in all this Bosnian affair he has had the personal approval, if not the inspiration, of the Emperor. This goes far in Austria to check the aggressive movement of the partisans of parlimentary government. There remains the difficulty of a hostile house of representatives in Austria, on which an Austrian ministry depends.

It is hoped to solve this difficulty also after the delegations shall have decided their action.

I have, &c.,

JOHN A. KASSON.

No. 21. Mr. Kasson to Mr. Evarts. [Document 32]

No. 21.
Mr. Kasson to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Vienna, January 3, 1879. (Received January 20.) No. 145.]

Sir: In acknowledging your dispatch No. 74, advising the adoption by the Treasury Department at Washington of the 8-florin gold piece of Austria as the standard of value for the certification of invoices by the United States consuls in this empire, I wish to express my conviction of the wisdom of the rule thus established by the Secretary of the Treasury.

The daily quotations in the journals of the fluctuating values of silver and paper, shown especially in the irregular price of exchange on London, indicate the inequality to which importers of the same goods, purchased at different times, would be subjected by a fluctuating invoice value, and the embarrassments it might create at the custom-house. Besides this practical inconvenience and possible injustice, which will now be avoided, there is the advantage of equality in value between the 8-florin and the 20-franc and the 20-lira gold pieces, also equal to 20 Spanish pesetas and 8 Dutch florins, and so would facilitate the judgment of the appraisers at the various ports of the United States when ascertaining the correctness of invoice values, not only when the articles are imported from the same country, but when they are imported from competing countries. This advantage will be appreciated if you imagine the existence of a single international coin universally adopted in which all values should be expressed for international use. I hope the day is not distant when such a coin will be adopted by common consent of civilized nations as recommended by the Committee on “Coinage, Weights and Measures “of the House of Representatives in their report of 1866.

In this connection I venture to ask the attention of the Treasury Department and of the government to the propriety of seeking such a standard, or of adopting an existing one, in which all invoice values should be expressed in a single denomination and its decimals. The most convenient, because the most universal, existing coin would, perhaps, be one of the same value with the standard above mentioned. The United States have no coin closely approximating the value of the 20-franc piece. If a new gold coin were authorized by Congress, to be of the exact value of this gold piece, already better known throughout Europe and the East than any other single coin, and this to be issued in substitution for the three-dollar gold pieces, which should be withdrawn, we should have a standard of money in which not only all custom-house accounts might be accurately kept, but which might gradually become the standard for all international commercial transactions, and even for the settlement of values of our home commerce in articles which are largely exported.

One important effect would be to constantly enlighten our producers of grain, tobacco, cotton, petroleum, &c., upon the fluctuations of the foreign market, which are now so much obscured by unknown values of foreign denominations.

Knowing the enlightened interest of the Secretary of the Treasury in this question of a common international standard, I take the liberty to submit these views to the government.

I have, &c.,

JOHN A. KASSON.

No. 22. Mr. Kasson to Mr. Evarts. [Document 33]

No. 22.
Mr. Kasson to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Vienna, January 11, 1879. (Received January 29.) No. 150.]

Sir: On several occasions during the past year I have had the honor to advise you of the rapidly increasing strength of the theory of protection, not only as indicated by the legislative movement in Austria, but by the tenor of negotiations for commercial treaties with nearly the whole of Europe. In summing up the results as they appear in the commercial relations of this empire at the beginning of the new year, I report them briefly as follows:

The new tariff contains not only a nominal increase of charges for the better protection of home manufactures and in other directions for increase of revenue, but also a horizontal advance of rates by about 20 per cent., effected by the change of the standard for duties from silver to gold. It went into operation with the first day of this year. The old special tariff treaties, having been duly denounced, expired with the last day of the old year, some of them after two or three short renewals, pending negotiations.

The most important of the international commercial relations of this empire were with its two immediate neighbors, Germany and Italy. With each of these governments the negotiations were prolonged and at times heated. The border commerce of each of them with Austria was mutually important, and demanded special consideration in the sense of free trade for the benefit of this local traffic, by rail and otherwise, which was unwilling to be cut off or interrupted by a mere boundary line. In the case, therefore, of these two countries, after frequent suspensions of the negotiations from despair of a satisfactory conclusion, the commissioners in December agreed upon a convention with Germany, to take effect January 1, and with Italy to take effect February 1, nominally upon the principle of the “most favored nation,” but really modified in important particulars into a treaty of reciprocity, or equivalent concessions. So sharp was the contest with Italy (toward whom Austria still appears to retain some feeling of offended superiority), that it was only on the last day of December that a provisorium for the single month of January, before the new treaty comes into force, could be settled and signed. The alarm was so great lest the whole border and coasting trade should be thrown into confusion for this month, that the imperial government obtained from the legislature, on short notice, authority to establish provisional arrangements by special executive decrees.

To France was offered a commercial treaty upon the “most-favored-nation” principle. After a period of rather earnest negotiation, the French Government resolutely declined the proposition, alleging the necessity of legislative authorization before entering upon such negotiations. Between Austro-Hungary and France, therefore, from the 1st of January the autonomic tariff of each country is in force upon imports from the other. Hitherto France, owing perhaps to the superior training and commercial intelligence of her negotiators, has usually had the best of international commercial bargaining with the rest of the world, and she is very reluctant to abandon her advantages.

With England continues in force the treaty of 1876, upon the “most-favored-nation” principle.

The Austro-Hugarian commercial relations with other countries in Europe, Asia, and Africa remain unchanged.

I have, &c.,

JOHN A. KASSON.

No. 23. Mr. Kasson to Mr. Evarts. [Document 34]

No. 23.
Mr. Kasson to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Vienna, January 17, 1879. (Received February 1.) No. 154.]

Sir: I learned last evening that in yesterday’s session of the administrative council of the Austro-Hungarian Bank (national), a resolution was adopted to suspend for the present all purchases of silver. Inasmuch as each successive diminution of the category of national silver-consumers produces a new influence tending to the depreciation of that money standard, and is likely to affect American interests, I deemed it desirable to learn-the motive of this action. To that end I this morning paid a visit to a great banking-house here, holding intimate relations with the government, and had a long conversation with its chief, from him I learned the following facts relating to the silver question:

The nominal motive for this action of the Austro-Hungarian Bank is that the mint has now on hand all the silver it can coin from this time to the month of June, and will take no more for the present. The real motive is that both the government and private business circles have become alarmed about the 11 actuating silver-market and its effect upon the future of the country. Under the laws of Austria, establishing and regulating silver as their standard of money, foreign speculators have been sending here the surplus silver of other countries, and disposing of it at rates which gave them a profit of between two and four per cent. In the aggregate, it inflicted a serious loss on the people of this empire. Austria could not refuse to accept silver payments, but she could refuse to store up silver in the mint; and so the banks and dealers would have reason to also refuse its acceptance when offered in bulk. This would stop the speculation in it, which has been going on to the disadvantage of Austria. In a word, Austria will for the present cease to furnish a market for bulk silver; and is hot obliged to increase her silver coinage by any definite amount annually. She is free to act according to the varying circumstances.

From the same personal authority I learn that the German Government has admirably succeeded in keeping secret the amount of its stock of silver remaining on hand. Even with his special means for gaining financial information, he has been unable to procure official data for an estimate of the amount. From such general information as he has gathered, however, he estimates that not more than two thirds of the original stock of Germany has been sold, and that they are managing the remaining third on the basis of a sale at about 50d.

You have doubtless been advised from other legations of the like restrictive action against silver in some other countries of Europe. This is becoming so general a movement on the Continent, almost in proportion to the financial credit and authority of the nations concerned, that it may reasonably raise a question of the propriety of some American legislation which shall increase the liberty of action at the mint of the United States.

I have, &c.,

JOHN A. KASSON.

No. 24. Mr. Kasson to Mr. Evarts. [Document 35]

No. 24.
Mr. Kasson to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Vienna, January 29, 1879. (Received February 17.) No. 159.]

Sir: The serious commercial embarrassments which resulted from the suspension of treaty arrangements between Austria and France presented themselves very promptly to both governments. Contracts for future delivery made at the Paris Exhibition by Vienna houses, for example, would be rendered ruinous by the application of the old tariff of France, which would increase duties from 30 to 60 per cent. This tariff has long stood as a menace to force commercial treaties on French terms. The new tariff of Austria, on the other hand, allows an addition of only 10 per cent. to the duties on articles coming from countries having no treaty with this empire. This would be applied to various important imports from France. In both countries the commercial interests raised an outcry; and the two governments promptly concluded a treaty (which has just been ratified here) on the basis of the “most favored nation.”

This gives to Austria throughout the year 1879—at the end of which the French denunciation of the treaties takes effect—the benefit of the existing treaties between France on the one part, and England and Belgium on the other. It gives to France, on the other hand, the benefit of the arrangements just concluded between Austria and Italy for the same period of time.

From this, and from my previous reports, you will rightly conclude that for many years there has not been in Europe such a chaotic condition of public sentiment and action upon tariffs and commercial treaties as that now existing. Under such circumstances, it seems to me very desirable to create a commission in the United States, under the presidency of the Secretary of Treasury, and wholly outside of political affiliations, composed largely of known representatives of the producing, manufacturing, and trading interests, to consider the effect of these and other imminent changes upon American exports and commerce generally; and whether any of our interests suffer disadvantage in comparison with the like interests of other nations owing to any infirmity in our existing treaties. This inquiry ought, in fact, to be always pending under the conduct of our chambers of commerce so long as we have no government board of trade

But these chambers seem to have lost all initiative. The effect of the “most-favored-nation principle” often surprises the merchant who thinks himself uninterested in a commercial treaty between two foreign governments. For example, the new treaty between Austria and Italy is understood to secure on Austrian steel the same duty as on iron. This effects a reduction of some 9 francs per quintal on the Italian general tariff rates on steel, and this, it would seem, under our treaty with Italy, inures to the benefit also of American manufactures of steel.

I have, &c.,

JOHN A. KASSON.

No. 25. Mr. Kasson to Mr. Evarts. [Document 36]

No. 25.
Mr. Kasson to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Vienna, February 7, 1879. (Received February 24.) No. 165.]

Sir: The alarm arising from the extension and fatality of the pest in Russia is somewhat diminished in presence of the more resolute and forcible measures lately adopted by Russia to prevent its extension within her own territory. The partial and threatened universal establishment of quarantine against her people and her commerce has already injuriously affected her trade. To save herself from further damages, she has herself instituted very strong measures for self-protection.

Nevertheless, the sanitary precautions proposed at this capital have been in the main adopted by Germany, Hungary, Servia, and Roumania, with special appropriations of money in some cases for the establishment of a close military cordon along the Russian frontier should the pest extend itself.

By order of the Austrian as well as of the Hungarian ministry, the transit of travelers from Russia across the frontier is only allowed when it shall appear that for 20 days previous they have not been in the Astrachan or other infected districts of Russia.

The following suspected articles of Russian commerce are also refused admission into Austria: Linen cloths, rags, furs, skins, leather, hair, bristles, feathers, caviar, fish, sarepta balsam, felt, and waste paper. Railway carriages from Russia and the elects of passengers are to be disinfected at the frontier.

The Hungarian ministry of commerce has also ordered that all letters coming from the infected districts shall be subjected to disinfection by steam of carbonic (carbolic?) acid (vapeur d’acide carbonique) at 130 degrees Celsius; or, as another report puts it, by the use of the steam of phenic acid (vapeur d’acide phenique).

It is now hoped by the authorities here that the energetic measures of Russia will render unnecessary further measures of precaution in this empire. Fears are entertained, however, that with the cessation of the cold weather, which is adverse to the propagation of the plague, the pest may revive with new vigor. In view of this possibility, the inquiry naturally presents itself whether the government of Washington has now sufficient warrant of law to take the unquestionably strong measures which will be required should the plague revive and extend itself in the spring so as to affect the lines of American commercial intercourse. In such an event, the isolated and incomplete action of State authority or city governments will prove utterly inadequate.

I have, &c.,

JOHN A. KASSON.

No. 26. Mr. Kasson to Mr. Evarts. [Document 37]

No. 26.
Mr. Kasson to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Vienna, February 10, 1879. (Received March 1.) No. 166.]

Sir: After ten years of trial of a liberal system of regulations for trade across the Austro-German frontier, the two governments concerned have condensed the fruits of this experience in the commercial treaty of the 16th December, 1878. Some of its provisions seem to me especially applicable to our commercial relations with Canada and with Mexico, and some appear quite new. The stipulations are thoroughly reciprocal; and the principle of the “most favored nation” is further extended in this treaty than in any other which has fallen under my observation. Should new commercial arrangements be contemplated by the United States Government, especially with contiguous territories, I venture to believe that a previous examination of these provisions will be advantageous to our negotiations. I therefore transmit to you by this mail an officially published copy of this treaty, and herewith inclose a translation of the same made at this legation.

I take the liberty to call your attention especially to the following provisions:

Touching the wide application of the “most favored nation” principle. (Articles 2, 18, 21.)

Touching premiums and drawbacks, and railway preferences, and other efforts at priority. (Articles 3, 9, 14, 15.)

Touching the free introduction and reproduction of incomplete manufactures to be finished, or advanced, and then returned, a trade which has been very profitable to Germany. (Article 6.)

Touching the prevention of smuggling, and effective arrangements indicated. (Articles 10, 23.)

Disinfection of live-stock railway-wagons. (Article 17.)

Responsibility, of railway direction for violation of locks, seals, &c., covering goods in transit to destination with duties unpaid. (Article 18.)

The reciprocal service of consuls in places where only one nation is represented. (Article 22.)

I also transmit by this mail a copy of the late Austro-Italian commercial treaty for the files of the Department, the same being in French as well as German text.

I have, &c.,

JOHN A. KASSON.

[Inclosure.]
[December 10, 1878]

Translation of the Austro-German commercial treaty of the 10th December, 1878.

Sent by same mail the original printed text of same; and double text of Austro-Italian treaty of the 27th December, 1878.

[Inclosure in dispatch No. 166.]

Commercial treaty of December 16, 1878, between Austria–Hungary and the German empire.

(Concluded at Berlin the 18th December, 1878; ratified at Godollo, by His I. and R. Apostolic Majesty, the 29th December, 1878, and exchanged in reciprocal ratifications at Berlin the 31st December, 1878.)

We, Francis Joseph the First, by the grace of God Emperor of Austria, Apostolic King of Hungary, &c., &c., herewith announce and declare:

Inasmuch as our plenipotentiary on one side, and the plenipotentiary of His Majesty the German Emperor, King of Prussia, on the other side, have, for the purpose of a new organization of the commercial and trading intercourse between the respective territories, concluded and subscribed on the 16th of December, 1878, the following commercial treaty, consisting of 27 articles and an appendix, which, word for word, is as following:

His Majesty the Emperor of Austria, King of Bohemia, &c., and Apostolic King of Hungary, on one side, and His Majesty the German Emperor, King of Prussia, on the other side, induced by the wish to advance the commerce and traffic between the respective territories, have, after due denunciation of the commercial and customs treaty of the 9th March, 1868, determined to conclude a new treaty to this intent, and have appointed as their plenipotentiaries, His Majesty the Emperor of Austria, King of Bohemia, &c., and Apostolic King of Hungary, his chargé d’affaires, Anthony Count von Wolkenstein-Trostburg; His Majesty the German Emperor, King of Prussia, his secretary of state of the foreign office, minister of state, Bernard Ernest von Bulow; who have, after reciprocal communication of their full powers, found in good and due form, agreed upon and concluded the following commercial treaty: Article 1. The contracting parties engage not to interrupt the mutual traffic between their countries by any import, export, or transit prohibitions. Exceptions hereto may only take place: (a) with tobacco, salt, and gunpowder; (b) for sanitary reasons; (c) in relation to war material under extraordinary circumstances.

Art. 2. With regard to the amount, assuring and collecting of the import and export duties as well as with regard to transit, no third nation may, by either of the contracting parties, be more favorably treated than the other contracting party. Every favor in these matters accorded to a third nation is, therefore, without equivalent, to be forthwith accorded to the other contracting party. Exceptions to this are: 1. Those favors which are accorded by one of the contracting parties to a neighboring country for facilitating the traffic in articles of food and objects of domestic industry for certain frontier districts and for the inhabitants of single territorial localities; 2. The favors admitted by one of the two contracting parties under a customs union already or hereafter to be concluded.

Art. 3. In the territories of the contracting parties the drawbacks allowed upon export of certain productions shall simply replace the duties, or internal taxes, which are levied upon these productions or the stuffs from which they are manufactured. They shall not possess any further export premium. Changes in the amount of these privileges or in their relation to the duties or to the internal taxes, shall be followed by a mutual communication to that effect.

Art. 4. Transit duties shall not be levied upon goods which shall be conveyed through the territory of one of the contracting parties out of or through the territory of the other contracting party. This arrangement applies as well to goods after previous loading or storage as to the goods, directly conveyed through.

Art. 5. For increased facility of reciprocal traffic there shall be allowed, so far as the identity of the exported and reimported goods shall exist without doubt, mutual exemptions from export and import duties: (a) for goods (excepting objects of consumption) which from the open traffic in the territory of one of the contracting parties shall be introduced into the territory of the other for the object of sale at markets or fairs, or sent in uncertain expectation of finding sale, apart from fair or market traffic, into the the territory of the other party, yet not put into, open traffic but, under the control of the customs authorities, stored in public warehouses (packing courts, retail stalls, &c.) for samples introduced by commercial travelers, all objects, if they, within a period to be previously determined, shall be brought back unsold; (b) for cattle which may be brought to market in the territory of the other contracting party and returned unsold.

Art. 6. For regulation of the neighbor traffic, for the purpose of improvement of goods, between the territories of the contracting parties, it is agreed that the following shall be exempt from import and export dues: (a) Yarns and textures of domestic manufacture, which may be introduced into the territory of the other party for preparation or finishing, and, after completion of the work, returned; such as yarns and textures for washing, bleaching, dyeing, fulling, dressing, printing, and embroidering, yarns in clipped (also milled) chains, together with the requisite mule-twists for manufacture of textures as well as webs (including the requisite accessories) for production of lace and fringe goods; (b) objects of every kind exported for the purpose of being repaired and then reimported; (c) other goods and objects which for the purpose of manipulation or elaboration in the frontier district, shall be exported, and, without having changed their material character and usual commercial appellation, shall be reimported. The traffic in all these cases is, however^ united to the condition that the identity of the exported and reimported goods and articles can be satisfactorily proven.

Art. 7. In respect to the treatment at the custom-house of such goods as are subject to pass certificates, a mode of facilitating the passage of the same will be reciprocally admitted in this way: that upon the immediate transit of such goods out of the territory of one of the contracting parties into the territory of the other, the removal of plumbing, the affixing of another plumbing, and the unpacking of the goods is discontinued so far as suffices under the requisitions agreed upon on the subject. On all occasions the customs entry shall be accelerated as much as possible.

Art. 8. It shall also further receive the attention of the contracting parties, that their opposite frontier custom-houses, so far as practicable, shall be situated in one locality, in order that the official acts on the passage of goods from one custom domain into the other may take place simultaneously.

Art. 9. Internal duties which in one of the contracting parties, whether imposed, in the interest of the nation, or in the interest of communities, or of corporations, upon the production, preparation, or consumption of any product, may, under no pretext, be higher and more onerously affect products of the other party than the same products in the country of their origin.

Art. 10. The contracting parties engage also further for the prevention and punishment of smuggling to or from their territories to co-operate with appropriate measures and to maintain the penal laws promulgated for this purpose, to afford legal aid, to allow to the supervising officials of one party the pursuit of transgressors into their territory, and to permit all requisite information to be communicated, and assistance rendered to them by tax customs and police officials, as well as by the local authorities; the general enactments on this subject expressed in the Customs Cartel are contained in Appendix A. The regulations agreed upon for reciprocal aid in the coastguard service will be maintained upon frontier streams and for such frontier tracts where the territories of the contracting parties are contiguous to those of foreign states.

Art. 11. Each of the contracting parties shall admit the merchant vessels of the other and their cargoes upon the same conditions and on payment of the same charges as its own merchant vessels. This rule is also applicable to coast navigation; the nationality of vessels is to be decided by each of the contracting parties according to the legislative provisions of the country to which the vessel belongs. The bills of admeasurement which may be valid according to the legislative provisions of their country, shall suffice as evidence of the tonnage of merchant vessels in determining the navigation and port dues; and a reduction of the tonnage will not take place as long as the rules upon reciprocal equalization of hills of measurement, established in the correspondence on that subject in the year 1872, remain in force.

Art. 12. No navigation or port dues shall be exacted from vessels of one of the contracting parties which, from distress or from necessity, may enter the seaports of the other, unless their stay may be unnecessarily delayed or be used for trading purposes. In the case of average and wrecked goods with which a vessel of one of the contracting parties may be loaded, a duty may only then be exacted by the other, with reserve of possible salvage, when such goods shall be introduced into consumption.

Art. 13. In the navigation of all natural and artificial water communications in the territories of the contracting parties, the captains and vessels which belong to one of them shall be admitted under the same conditions and upon payment of the same dues for vessel and cargo as the captains and vessels of their own country.

Art. 14. The use of high-roads and other ways, canals, locks, ferries, bridges, bridge-openings, of the harbors and landing-places, of the indicating and lighting of navigable channels; of the pilot institutions; of cranes and weighing establishments; of storage depositories; of institutions for saving and shelter of cargoes, and the like, so far as the depositories or establishments are intended for public traffic, shall alike, whether the same be managed by the state or by private persons, be allowed to the subjects of the other contracting party under similar conditions, and upon payment of the same dues as to the subjects of the state where the same are situated. The dues may, under reservation of the admitted varying enactments in the light-house and pilot system, only be exacted on the actual use of such depositories or establishments. Toils for traffic passing over the frontier upon highways which serve to unite the contracting parties either together or with foreign countries, may not be higher, according to the relative distance, than the tolls for the traffic limited to the territory of the state in which those highways are situated.

Art. 15. With respect to the rates of transport on railways as well as to the time and manner of expedition, there shall exist no discrimination between the inhabitants of the territories of the contracting parties. Especially the conveyances passing out of the territories of one party into the territory of the other party, or in transit through the latter, shall, neither in respect to the expedition nor in regard to the rates of transportation, be less favorably treated than the conveyances passing out of the territory of the respective party, or remaining therein. For the traffic from the territory of one party to the territory of the other, as well as for the through transit to or out of the territory of the other party, the use of railway tariffs which have not been published is prohibited. The published tariff rates are, everywhere and for everybody, to be uniformly applied, with the exception of the return compensations (rebates, abatements, and the like). The contracting parties will endeavor to cause, that violation of this enactment on the part of the railway administrations shall be subjected to appropriate penalties. For the passenger and goods traffic which takes place between the railway-stations that are situated in the territory of one contracting party within these territories by means of uninterrupted railway communication, the tariffs shall be exhibited in the lawful provincial currency of these territories, even in the case when the railway connection employed for the traffic exists wholly or partially within the management of a railway corporation which has its seat in the territory of the other party. At junctions, and so far as it exclusively regards the traffic between the mutual stations situated near the frontier, on the collection of the dues payable for passenger and goods traffic, the acceptance of the medium of payment allowed by the laws of the country in which the place of payment is situated, with due consideration of the existing change-value at the time, shall not be refused, even in the case when the tariff is not expressed in the lawful currency of the province wherein the place of collection is situated. This here regulated acceptance of medium of payment shall in no manner forestall the agreements of the railway directions interested relative to their settlement of accounts.

Art. 16. The contracting parties will endeavor to effect that the reciprocal railway traffic in their territories shall be facilitated as much as possible through construction of immediate rail connections between the railways meeting in one place, and by transport of the rolling stock from one railway to the other. The contracting parties engage to endeavor to effect that direct expeditions or direct tariffs in passenger or goods traffic shall be introduced by the reciprocal railway directions, so soon and to such extent as the same shall be indicated as desirable by both parties. For the direct traffic the appointment of separate transport enactments, especially in regard to periods of delivery, continues to be reserved through direct agreement of the competent supreme supervising authorities of both sides.

Art. 17. The contracting parties engage to protect the railway traffic between the reciprocal territories against interruptions and obstacles. In respect to the railway rolling stock, which may have crossed in way of traffic from the territories of one of the contracting parties into those of the other, there shall not be allowed in these latter territories any attachment, embargo, seizure, or other measures in execution, even when only for provisional security in judicial or administrative way on account of claims or demands of any sort whatever against the railway company which may be the owner of such rolling stock. Railway carriages in which horses, mules, asses, cattle, sheep, goats, or swine have been conveyed, must, when they shall be afterwards employed for the transport of animals of the said species from the territory of one party into that of the other, be previously submitted to a purifying (disinfecting) process, to be stipulated by mutual agreement, which maybe adopted to completely annihilate any infecting stuff which may exist in the carriages.

Art. 18. The contracting parties will in such places where on their frontiers direct rail connections exist and a crossing of rolling stock occurs, release from declaration, unloading, and revision on the frontier, as well as from plumbing, goods which are conveyed in closed carriages, as prescribed, and are forwarded in the same carriages to a place in the interior, at which there exists a customs and tax bureau duly authorized to admit entry, so far as these goods through delivery of bills of lading and invoices are noted for’ entrance. Goods which are conveyed without unloading in the prescribed closed railway carriages through the territory of one of the contracting parties out or to the territories of the other, shall remain free from declaration, reloading, and revision, as also from plumbing, both in the interior and on the frontier, so far as the same by delivery of the bills of lading and invoices are noted for transit. The realization of the above enactments is, however, upon the condition that the railway directions interested be under obligations for the punctual arrival of the carriages without violation of the fastening, at the bureau of entry in the interior, or at the bureau at the frontier. So far as facilities for passing the custom-houses may have been agreed upon by one of the contracting parties with third states and which may exceed those here mentioned, said facilities shall be applicable also to the traffic of the other party, reciprocity being presupposed.

Art. 19. The subjects of the contracting parties shall reciprocally be placed upon a full equality with the native subjects in regard to the entrance into the exercise of and the taxes upon commerce and trade. In visits to markets and fairs the subjects, of the other party shall be treated just as the actual subjects. To the trade of apothecary, to the business of commercial broker (sensal), and to the exercise of the trade of peddler, including the occupation of hawking, the foregoing enactments are not applicable. Manufacturers and others engaged in trade, who offer satisfactory proof that they pay in the state in which they reside the lawful imposts for the business exercised by them, shall, when they personally or through traveling agents in their service, make purchases or seek orders, but only when provided with samples, not be obliged to pay in the territory of the other contracting party any further impost. The subjects of one of the contracting parties who exercise the trade of carriers of marine or river navigation between places of different states, shall not be subjected to a trade impost for the exercise of this trade in the territory of the other party. The joint stock companies, commandit associations in shares, and insurance associations of every kind, will in the territory of the other party, in accordance with the legal and regulated enactments there prevailing, be admitted to the exercise of their business and to the prosecution of their rights before the tribunals.

Art. 20. With regard to the indication of goods, or their packing, as well as with regard to the fabric or trade marks, the samples and models, moreover the patents for invention, the subjects of one of the contracting parties shall enjoy the same protection in the territory of the other as its own subjects. The subjects of each of the contracting parties must, however, comply with the conditions and formalities prescribed by laws or ordinances in the territory of the other party. The protection of fabric and trade marks will be accorded to the subjects of the other party only so far and for so long a time as they are protected in the use of the marks in the state where they have their home.

Art. 21. The contracting parties reciprocally accord to each other the right to appoint consuls in all those ports and commercial places of the other party in which consuls of any third nation shall be admitted. These consuls of one of the contracting parties shall, under the condition of reciprocity, enjoy in the territory of the other party the same privileges, advantages, and immunities which those of any third nation possess or shall possess.

Art. 22. Each of the contracting parties will engage its consuls abroad to afford to the subjects of the other party, whenever the latter at the place in question is not represented by a consul, protection and aid in the same manner, without demanding higher fees than to its own subjects.

Art. 23. The contracting parties reciprocally concede the right of sending officials to their respective custom stations for the purpose of becoming acquainted with the transaction of business at the same in regard to the, customs system, and the watch on the frontier. The contracting parties will reciprocally communicate to each other every desired explanation in regard to the conducting of accounts and statistical matters in both customs territories.

Art. 24. The present commercial treaty will, in conformity with the existing customs and tax union between the Austro-Hungarian monarchy and the principality of Liechtenstein, also extend to the latter. This treaty will farther extend to the Grand Duchy of Luxemburg, so long as the same belongs to the German customs territory.

Art. 25. In those separate districts of the contracting parties which are excluded from their customs territory, the agreement in Articles 5 and 6 of the present treaty does not apply so long as their exclusion continues.

Art. 26. The present treaty shall enter into effect from the 1st of January, 1879, and replace the commercial and customs treaty of the 9th of March, 1868. The same shall continue in force up to December the 31st, 1879.

Art. 27. The ratifications of the present treaty shall be exchanged in Berlin as soon as possible. In testimony of which the plenipotentiaries of both sides have subscribed the present treaty and affixed their seals.

Done at Berlin, the 16th of December, in the year one thousand eight hundred and seventy-eight.
WOLKENSTEIN.

BULOW.

No. 27. Mr. Kasson to Mr. Evarts. [Document 38]

No. 27.
Mr. Kasson to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Vienna, February 16, 1879. (Received March. 5.) No. 167.]

Sir: Mr. Balatshano, the envoy and minister of Roumania, who is accredited to this court and has already been received, yesterday verbally communicated to me the wish of his government to enter into diplomatic relations with the Government of the United States. Whether the representative of the American Government should be an envoy of the first rank or of any inferior diplomatic grade, his royal highness Prince Charles would commission one of the same grade to represent his government at Washington. He wished this communication to be considered as “official.”

So accepting it, I have now the honor to advise you of the same, and to await instructions from you touching the fitting response to be made.

In the course of conversation, I alluded to the preliminary requirements of the Berlin treaty in respect to the Jews. He replied that the necessary changes would be made in their laws to give satisfaction on this point, and to establish for the Jews the basis of absolute equality with other races. He estimated the number of Jews in Roumania at 600,000, of whom less than one-tenth were native-born, and he thought Roumania had a right to protect her own native race from being overwhelmed by a foreign incursion of this character which did not wish to submit to the duties and responsibilities which are borne by natives of the Roumanian race. He referred with politeness, and not without a point which I appreciated, to the law just passed by one House of our Congress for the suppression of Chinese immigration to the United States, although the proportion of that race present in the United States to the native population is minute in comparison with that of the Jewish immigrants to native Roumanians. He, however, repeated the assurance that they would be placed on a basis of equality before the law.

I have, &c.,

JOHN A. KASSON.

No. 28. Mr. Kasson to Mr. Evarts. [Document 39]

No. 28.
Mr. Kasson to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Vienna, February 18, 1879. (Received March. 5.) No. 169.]

Sir: The Austro-Hungarian Bank, a national institution, has accumulated a large and troublesome mass of silver in its vaults. It desires to be relieved of it. For some weeks past, owing to the relative discredit of silver, the silver florin has been slipped into circulation from the hands which had heretofore hoarded it. But there appeared to be no eagerness for it on the part of the people; and they, as soon as the fact of the equivalent value of the paper was firmly established, seemed to prefer the paper as more convenient. The bank has therefore sought the aid of the government, and has put at the disposition of the Austrian and Hungarian ministers the sum of 10,000,000 of silver florins to hasten the surrender of the one-florin paper notes, for which they desire to substitute the silver piece. An amount up to 10,000 florins is offered to any one applicant in-exchange for the paper.

I have, &c.,

JOHN A. KASSON.

No. 29. Mr. Kasson to Mr. Evarts. [Document 40]

No. 29.
Mr. Kasson to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Vienna, March 10, 1879. (Received March 27.) No. 172.]

Sir: The foreign office has just communicated to the various missions at this capital a circular note, advising them of the possible brief detention of letters at the frontier, and the possible injury to their seals in the process of disinfection. The application of this process is limited, of course, to letters from suspected countries, and is confined to certain designated offices on the frontier. Recommendations are made respecting the mode of sealing in order to preserve the inviolability of the letters.

By the regulations of 1837 a simple fumigation only was allowed in the case of correspondence addressed to diplomatic missions. It is now announced that this correspondence will no longer be treated exceptionally, but will undergo the same complete disinfection to which other correspondence is subjected.

Accompanying this note are the original texts of the circular above mentioned, addressed to this legation, and of the announcement of the ministry of commerce, and the English translations of the same.

I have, &c.,

JOHN A. KASSON.

[Inclosure I in No. 172.—Translation.]

circular to the foreign missions at vienna.

Among the measures adopted by Austria-Hungary against the danger of the invasion of the pest appears equally the disinfection of letters and transmissions by post, coming from the infected provinces of Russia.

The ordinance of the minister of commerce at Vienna of the 28th of last month regulates this question.

The disinfection with which the post-office at the frontier at Podwoloczyska and at Szakowa are charged is made in the following manner:

The letters will not be opened, however, as the seals, if of Wax, will suffer by this proceeding whether by being softened or effaced; the said offices will apply to the letters before the disinfection gummed vignettes with the insignia of the government in order to secure the inviolability of the fastening. The vignettes offer the same advantages as wafers, since they do not suffer or detach by reason of the heat and the evaporation of carbolic acid.

For disinfecting completely single letters, that is to say such as have but half an inch thickness (1 cent. 3.2 mm.), it is necessary to expose them in the apparatus for three hours to the increasing effects of heat. The letters of greater thickness are subjected to this proceeding during four hours, which may sometimes cause a delay in their dispatch.

The regulation of 1837 which was in force until now in Austria-Hungary required for the correspondence of the foreign missions at Vienna the disinfection by means of simple fumigation. The experiments made since by science have demonstrated the insufficiency of this means, and intense heating as the only proper proceeding to obtain a radical disinfection.

The imperial and royal government could therefore not hesitate in causing to be applied equally to the correspondence of the foreign missions at Vienna, and to that which might be destined for transit through Austria-Hungary to foreign governments, the process of heating, and to cause the fastening of the letters to be assured by the official vignettes in question.

However, in order to increase the precautions taken by the post administration, it would be well that the said correspondence from the provinces of Russia should be closed exclusively by means of wafers and of gummed vignettes, and that in the interest of a prompt dispatch the packages of letters should not exceed half an inch in thickness, as is stated above.

The imperial and royal ministry for foreign affairs hasten to inform the missions of these measures, adopted in the common interest, and has the honor to request that the government may be advised of the same.

Vienna, March 6, 1879.

[Inclosure 2 in No. 172.—Translation.]

notification of the imperial and royal ministry of commerce of the 28th february, 1879.

[No. 5729. For the official portion of the Wiener Zeitung.]

The correspondence coming from the localities in Russia infected with the pest disease will be subjected to disinfection, not only by the Russian authorities at the respective cordon-posts, but also at the Austrian frontier by the post-offices in Podwoloczycka and Szezakowa.

This disinfection will be conducted on the part of the last-named post establishments so, that the single ordinary letters, postal cards, newspapers (freight letters) will be exposed in a disinfecting apparatus with evolution of carbolic-acid steam to an elevated heat during several hours.

Inasmuch as the procedure causes, in letters sealed with hard wax, a softening of the sealing-wax and effacement of the seal impression, therefore the assurance of the inviolability of that class of correspondence will be effected in this way: that before the disinfection of the letters fastened with hard wax, official sealing vignettes (guard seals), which are not affected by the carbolic-acid steam and do not detach, will be applied to the envelopes.

Transmissions of money from Russia will, for the purpose of similar disinfection, be opened at the indicated post establishments by persons commissioned thereto.

The contents (paper and metallic money), as well as the envelope, will therefore be-subjected to disinfection in the prescribed manner, the remittance provided with a new inclosure and address, and the post-office seal.

Sample transmissions and pieces of goods (packages and freight transmissions) out of the infected provinces will be treated like the baggage of travelers coming from these localities.

After performance of the disinfection, the letters and post transmissions will be forthwith forwarded by the next opportunity to the place of destination.

No. 30. Mr. Kasson to Mr. Evarts. [Document 41]

No. 30.
Mr. Kasson to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Vienna, March 11, 1879. (Received March 27.) No. 173.]

Sir: An official summary of the commercial movement for the year 1878 has been published. It shows a total value of imports of 579,547,828 florins, or in round numbers $278,000,000, and a total value of exports of 698,302,513 florins, or in round numbers of $335,000,000, Thus the balance of trade appears to have been in favor of Austria-Hungary by about $57,000,000 for the year 1878.

The increase of imports over the amount reported for the year 1877 is 24,320,780 florins. The increase of exports is 36,270,309 florins.

These results indicate an amelioration of the financial condition of the empire and of its people.

I have, &c.,

JOHN A. KASSON.

No. 31. Mr. Kasson to Mr. Evarts. [Document 42]

No. 31.
Mr. Kasson to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Vienna, March 15, 1879. (Received March 29.) No. 174.]

Sir: In obedience to your instructions, under date of February 18, 1879, requesting information touching the system of taxation of railroads in this empire, I have now the honor to make the following report. The systems of the two halves of the empire being established independently, as of two independent states, I give first that of—

austria.

I. On what general recognized “principle, if any, is the railroad taxation of Austria-Hungary based?”

Answer. On that of absolute assimilation to the system of taxation applied to individuals. The corporation is treated as if it were an individual owning the same property.

II. “In how far are the railroad companies taxed as owners of realty?”

Answer. All their realty is taxed. Their land, which is taken for the time from the adjoining agricultural lands, continues to be taxed as land, at the same rate as the lands adjoining it. Their town real estate is taxed in the same manner as the neighboring private real estate is taxed. There is for all owners of realty a “ground tax” and a separate “house tax,” so distinguishing between the value of the land and of the buildings erected thereon. The same rule and rate apply to railroad real property in the town.

III. “In how far as holders of personalty?”

Answer. They are considered as having no personalty which is not either produced or represented by franchise or income or net earnings of the same sort. And all these are taxed on the same principle as those of individuals. In Austria, all enterprises (Erwerbe), business undertakings, are taxed, whether undertaken by an individual or a share company, from that of shoemaker to that of construction of a great railroad. All are regarded in a certain sense as franchises, and so are annually taxed, but usually to a very small amount.

IV. “In how far are they subject to a franchise tax?”

Answer. They are subject to no franchise tax differing in principle from that applied, as above stated, to individuals (Erwerbstener). The amount of the original concession or franchise tax in the case of share railroads is 15.75 florins, or about $7.55 per annum, a trifling amount, of little significance, except as maintaining the principle of a franchise tax. But there is also by law an additional annual tax on the enterprise (Erwerbstener), regulated according to its capital and extent, and reaching at the highest 1,575 florins in the case of the largest enterprise, and as the ordinary tax.

V. “In how far is their stock taxed as personalty to its owners?”

Answer. Each share usually represents the nominal value of 200 florins, with the exception (I believe) of the Nordbahn, where they are issued at the rate of 1,000 florins per share. The issue of shares and of provincial certificates is subject to a stamp duty of 1.25 florins for each 200 florins of nominal value. At the same rate is taxed the issue of priority bonds issued by the company to their purchasers, except that where the bonds are temporary, having less than ten years to run and are issued in a particular name, the rate of tax is reduced to 1.25 florins for each 400 florins of nominal value, that is to say, is reduced one-half.

Where the bonds or shares bear coupons calling for 20 florins or less, each coupon bears a stamp tax of 7 kreuzers (3½ cents). When the coupon calls for larger sums, this stamp duty amounts to about 3⅛ per mille. These stamp duties properly affect the owner of the coupon, but are in fact usually assumed and paid by the company.

There appears to be no annual tax upon shares as such. But income from them is fully taxed to the owner at the income rate fixed by law.

VI. “What taxes are levied on the receipts of the companies, whether net or gross?”

Answer. Net receipts are ascertained as follows: All collections of money for transport, whether of passengers, luggage, freight, express goods, or other transport charges, and all sums derived from the letting, or rent, or other usufruct of property, which is not subject to other taxation—as to the land and house tax, for example—constitute the gross receipts. From this aggregate may be deducted the sums disbursed: (a) For expenses of the administration of the company;

(b) For current running expenses;

(c) For maintenance of the road, including repairs, replacement of perishable property, of rails, bridges;

(d) All stamps and taxes paid in the course of their business, and, generally, all expenses incurred for conducting their enterprise and for maintaining an efficient condition of all its parts.

On the other hand, there may not be deducted from the gross income: (a) Their payments of interest;

(b) The annual quotas paid for the liquidation of the capital or of the bonded debt of the enterprise, nor any repayment of capital;

(c) The fees paid to the directors for their services;

(d) The contributions made by the company to the pension fund for their employés.

The balance thus ascertained constitutes the net income of the enterprise. The average of these net sums for three years is taken as the net annual taxable income of the enterprise. From this the franchise taxes (Erwerbstener) are deducted. Upon the residue, an income tax of 5 per cent. is fixed as the regular annual tax for the next tax period of three years.

The taxes above mentioned are the regular legal rates, the ordinarium. But in late years the necessities of the treasury have increased. The annual finance law now establishes the additional levy to be made on this property; so that, in fact, the present taxes ar$ the double of the ordinarium, or income and franchise that is to say, amount to 10 per cent. on the net income, and in the case of the highest franchise to 3, 150 florins (Erwerbstener).

N. B.—The foregoing system is applied to the established and prosperous roads. Exceptions are made by law in favor of young and unprofitable enterprises, which are sometimes relieved from some of these burdens by special enactment.

Owing to the difficulty of obtaining here the facts touching the system in force in Hungary, I am not able at this time to respond to your inquiries so far as they relate to that kingdom. If it shall be possible to procure the requisite information from Buda-Pesth, I will transmit it to the Department in a subsequent dispatch. I shall also be able to forward some further and interesting explanations of the railroad system of Austria so soon as I receive some documents which have been promised to me by the kindness of Bitter von Chlumechi, the Austrian minister of commerce, in whose jurisdiction the railroads are comprised.

I have, &c.,

JOHN A. KASSON.

No. 32. Mr. Kasson to Mr. Evarts. [Document 43]

No. 32.
Mr. Kasson to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Vienna, March 20, 1879. (Received April 5.) No. 175.]

Sir: Referring to my dispatch No. 174, giving the information respecting Austrian railroad taxation, as desired by your dispatch No. 87, I now submit the following report touching the system adopted by the Government of Hungary:

I. “On what general recognized principle, if any, is the railroad taxation of Hungary based?”

Answer. On the principle that the transportation should pay the taxes, these being levied upon the passengers and owners of the property transported. The particulars appear in the analysis of the Hungarian law, hereto appended. (Inclosure 1.)

II. “In how far are the railroad companies taxed as holders of realty?”

Answer. All the realty is exempt from taxation.

III. “In how far as holders of personalty?”

Answer. The personalty is also exempt from taxation.

IV. “In how far are they subject to a franchise tax?”

Answer. There is no tax on this franchise.

V. “In how far is their stock taxed as personalty to its owners?”

Answer. The shares are not subject to taxation.

VI. “What taxes are levied on the receipts of the companies, whether net or gross?”

Answer. There is no tax upon either gross or net receipts in Hungary.

explanations.

With one or two exceptions, in both Austria and Hungary the plan was early adopted of providing for the ultimate acquisition of the railroads by the government. To this end the concessions were granted for 90 years, with the condition that at the end of that period the whole franchise and property, with an equipment equal to the original amount, should revert absolutely to the state. To save the builders and owners from loss, a system of amortization was established, in pursuance of which a certain portion of the capital in shares and bonds was to be refunded in each year, by which the reimbursement would be completed in 90 years. In principle it is a sinking fund. In Hungary, the government guarantees the amortization fund and an interest of 5 per cent. on capital and bonded debts, in silver; and if the net earnings are not sufficient, the deficiency is made good out of the national treasury, but to be refunded if subsequent net receipts are sufficient. In point of fact, in the aggregate there is each year a deficiency of several millions charged upon the state treasury of Hungary. Under such circumstances it is evident that taxes upon the corporation would involve the paying in of money with one hand only to be paid back by the other.

Hence the state levies its revenue upon passengers and freighters as a surtax upon the regular tariff charges of the railroads, these latter being the agents to collect it and to account to the government.

In effect, it is a tax on the gross receipts, while in law it is a tax on private business

This explanation, together with the summary of the legal provisions hereto appended, will fully answer the inquiries so far as they relate to Hungary.

Some further elucidation of the railroad system is reserved for a subsequent dispatch, when some expected documents shall have been received at the legation, showing more completely the legal provisions for Austrian railroads.

I have, &c.,

JOHN. A. KASSON.

[Inclosure 1 in No. 175.]

on taxing the use of railways and steamship transportation.

[XX. Law articles of the year 1875.]

(Sanctioned the 6fch May, 1875; promulgated in the House of Deputies the 14th May, 1875; in the Upper House the 18th May, 1875.)

Within the frontiers of the countries belonging to the Hungarian Crown, passengers, consignees, and receivers of goods must, for the use of railway and steamship conveyances, pay the tax rates enumerated in the ensuing paragraphs.

§ 1. The following taxes have to be paid on railways as well as on steamships: (a) For conveyance of passengers, 10 per cent. of the fare.

(b) For forwarding passengers’ baggage, 10 per cent. of the amount paid for overfreight: on excess of weight over free allowance.

(c) Ten per cent. of the whole fare for special trains and steamships.

(d) Five per cent. of the transportation charges on goods conveyed by the mail trains and 2 per cent. on that conveyed by freight trains.

(e) Ten per cent. on fare paid for a special cabin on board a steamship and for a carriage sleeping compartment on railways.

In settling the accounts of these rates, the manipulation fees (cost of tickets, stamps, &c.), and the agio (exchange) for metallic money must be added to the dues and amounts enumerated above. So far as such additional payments are not collected through some company or for some transportation, the tax will only be levied on the dues, charges, and manipulation fees collected.

§ 2. All these tax rates are collected from the passengers, consignees, and receivers of goods by the railway and steamship administrations, and then remitted to the proper state treasury.

§ 3. The tax rates laid down in § 1 must be added to the fare and conveyance dues fixed in the tariffs of charges of the respective enterprises and to their manipulation fees; and they must be brought to public notice in these tariff tables, and be reckoned as one sum, and must be paid in together with the metallic agio mentioned in § 1. Tariffs prepared in this manner must be submitted to the government.

§ 4. Small fractions, resulting from the calculation of the tax rates to be paid according to the present law, are to be omitted if they do not exceed half a kreuzer on the fare and half-a-tenth kreuzer in the conveyance taxes. If these fractions exceed the sums mentioned, they must be accounted for as a whole or as one-tenth kreuzer.

§ 5. Those who enjoy the privilege of a reduction of tax rates pay only the amount of tax resulting from the reduced rate, the manipulation fee, and the agio on metallic money.

§ 6. The following are exempt from the tax established by this law: (a) The royal court.

(b) The conveyance of passengers and freight for the common army and the militia, if these transports are furnished with the usual military documents.

(c) The railway and steamship companies are exempt in regard to those goods which they convey for their own use from one of their stations to another, for their own constructions, and for the completion of the objects of the undertaking or pertaining to their business.

(d.) The street railways.

(e) Steamers and railways conveying passengers between the capital and adjoining localities.

§ 7. The stamp dues to be paid upon the railway and steamship traffic according to the present laws will continue in force.

§ 8. The steamship and railway companies are at the end of each month obliged to pay into the state treasury (without detriment to the right of a future co rectification within a fortnight, thereafter) the amount of taxes corresponding to the passenger, luggage, express, and freight traffic of the same month of the preceding year. The regular monthly exhibits of traffic, in which the taxable transportation, the revenue derived therefrom, and the taxes levied according to this law must be clearly exhibited; and the passenger, luggage, express goods, and freight rubrics, recorded as one sum, must within three months be sent to the financial direction as designated by the minister of finance. The companies that extend their business transactions to the Austrian territory or to foreign countries are required to show all these sums in their exhibits, as well as exhibiting the tax laid thereon, and paid in the before-mentioned countries for the use of the conveyances by railway or steamer in Hungary. If this exhibit of traffic shows the sum previously paid in to be excessive, the difference forthwith must be returned to such company. A deficiency, on the other hand, must be made good by it.

The rubricated exhibit must correspond with the company’s original entries or books; the companies and their manager are responsible for its correctness, and the financial direction is empowered to have it compared with the company’s books or entries by authorized agents.

§ 9. The tax-rates that may not have been paid by the respective companies in the time mentioned in§ 8 will, with 8 per cent. interest for delay, be collected in the manner prescribed for the direct taxes.

§ 10. This law will on the first of the following month come into force at all the stations in the territory of the Hungarian Crown, excluding such portions of the railway and steamship traffic as are situated outside the frontiers. With respect to all its enactments, however, it will only be in operation on the first day of the fourth month after its promulgation.

§ 11. Until the entry into operation of all the enactments mentioned in the present law, the minister of finance will appoint by ordinance the time and manner of accounting and paying the tax to the State treasury, resulting from the traffic exclusively within the frontiers.

§ 12. The minister of finance and the minister for public works and communications are empowered to carry this present law into effect.

No. 33. Mr. Kasson to Mr. Evarts. [Document 44]

No. 33.
Mr. Kasson to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Vienna, March 22, 1879. (Received April 8.) No. 177.]

Sir: The press of this and other countries has given such full details of the disaster at Szegedin, in Hungary, that it did not appear to mo necessary to send information on the subject to the Department. But the telegraph announces that in some American cities contributions are offered for the relief of the unhappy population of that town. It is possible, therefore, that inquiries may be made at the Department for more precise information. In that view I report the following facts:

Szegedin was a town of about 6,500 houses, and of about 60,000 inhabitants, of whom perhaps one-half belonged to families engaged as proprietors or farmers of neighboring lands, having homes in the town. The number of dwellings in the town has been variously stated; but I give this number on the authority of a member of the government. Of these buildings not more than two or three hundred were solidly built, or of much value. The great majority were small in size, and built of sun-dried clay, and situated on ground actually lower than the usual water-level of the sluggish river Theiss, against the overflow of which the city was defended by dikes. The value of the houses which furnished homes to the great majority of the population was, as I am informed by a Hungarian gentleman, who recently visited the place, from $75 to perhaps $300 each. The movables were of a proportionate value. A gentleman in the suite of the Emperor on the occasion of his visit to Szegedin estimates the loss at not less than 6,000,000 florins (about $3,000,000).

When the storm at high-water forced a passage for the collected floods through one of the dikes, it found nearly the whole population asleep in their usual abodes, and most of their movable property in its usual place. Means of rescue for the people had been provided by the government. But the rapidity and violence of the flood in the dead of night were almost equal to the promptitude and energy of the alarm. The streets were soon running with water, and the low houses filled rapidly. Few movables were saved. Many of the population escaped to the high ground or to the embankments, or took temporary refuge on the roofs of the houses. Most of those left in the houses were rescued by boats. Sometimes, however, the dried-clay walls of their dwellings, quickly saturated with the water, crumbled under them iii this night of storm and flood, while they were waiting for rescue. The best information so far obtained indicates a loss of not more than from 50 to 60 human lives. This number may be increased as the waters recede and disclose the ruins beneath.

The response to the demands for, relief has been prompt and generous, not only in Austria-Hungary, but in Germany, France, and England. The accumulation of supplies in the first few days was so rapid that the transmission was stopped by order, for want of room for deposit. The minister president of the Hungarian Government was able to declare, on his return from the scene of the flood, that the free contributions at home and abroad were so great that no assistance was required from the state. The surrounding villages and towns have hospitably afforded shelter to the refugees.

It is proposed to rebuild the town of other materials, chiefly brick. The region is almost destitute of stone. The dikes inclosing the town are to be increased in height and strength and completeness.

There is no apprehension of further suffering, beyond that arising from sickness induced by past exposures.

I have the honor, &c.,

JOHN A. KASSON.

No. 34. Mr. Kasson to Mr. Evarts. [Document 45]

No. 34.
Mr. Kasson to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Vienna, March 31, 1879. (Received April 16.) No. 180.]

Sir: There are no recent trustworthy statistics of the population of Roumania. The restoration of Bessarabia to Russia, and the acquisition of the Dobrudscha instead, have introduced new elements of calculation. But it is probably safe to put the estimate between five and one-fourth and five and one-half millions of people.

The dominant religious confession is the Greek Orthodox. Of the minority, the Israelites are the most numerous, while about 14,000 belong to the Protestant confessions.

The army is composed of four classes of military service. All Roumanians between twenty-one and forty-six years of age are liable to at least four years of active service in one of the classes, besides subsequent reserve service, making eight years in all the classes of the military force. In time of peace the effective of the standing army reckons 880 officers, 69 cannons, 16,300 men, and 2,700 horses. In time of war it is something over 42,000 men besides the train. The territorial army counts over 54,000 men and 192 cannon. After this comes a militia of 47,000 men and upward.

The public debt, drawing rates of interest varying from 5 to 10 per cent., amounts (according to statements made of the 1st January, 1879), in the aggregate, to a little under 500,000,000 francs. Several of the loans are repaid by annuities, and so the total is annually reduced. The ordinary receipts of the public treasury, as stated for the budget of 1878, would be 93,372,000 francs (round numbers), while the disbursements would amount to the same sum. In the years 1874 and 1875, however, the definitive accounts showed in these two years, respectively, deficits of (in round numbers) 7,400,000 francs, and of 12,300,000 francs; while the budget of 1877 acknowledged a probable deficit of 5,800,000 francs. But there is no reckless action in financial affairs on the part of the government, and it is probable the equilibrium will soon be restored. A considerable part of the public debt was created for the construction of railroads by the state.

The movements of commerce for the last year reported (1875) give the round figures following:

Imports, 100,834,000–francs; exports, 144,962,000 francs.

As compared with 1874 this shows a decrease of imports by about 22,000,000 francs, and an increase of exports by about 10,000,000 francs. According to the last detailed statement accessible to me, of the imports, about 40 per cent. came from Austria, about 25 per cent. came from England, about 15 per cent. came from France. The remainder came chiefly from Turkey, Germany, and Russia. Of the exports Austria and Turkey receive nearly equal amounts, followed, in the order of value, by France and Great Britain. In 1875 Roumania exported grain of the value of 105,000,000 francs; animals of the value of 13,000,000 francs; various other merchandise of 26,000,000 francs.

The effect of the exchange of Bessarabia for the Dobrudscha, and of the acquisitions of a port on the Black Sea, with a railroad connecting the Danube with this port, remains to be seen.

Our English authority shows a steady decrease of the exports to Great Britain from 1871 to 1875, falling from £1,150,000 in 1871 to £594,000 in 1875. In like manner it shows a steady increase of imports from Great Britain to 1874, when it reached £1,244,000, but falling off in the year 1875 to £1,054,000. The decrease of the exports to England is to be attributed in part to American competition in grain in the English market. The cheap article of import from Great Britain was English cottons, which in 1875 was of the value of £677,000, or more than $3,000,000. England has also undertaken to furnish them with some agricultural machinery and with some manufactures of steel. In these, as doubtless in other articles which are also products of American industry, the American competition ought to be successful. The official returns for 1873 showed that of the plows in use 185,000 were of native and 37,000 of foreign make. The latter were chiefly from Germany and Austria. Of steam and horse threshing machines there were about 1,400. Agriculture being their great industry, it would seem there was wide scope for the introduction of the American perfected instruments for its profitable development.

But the whole subject of the trade of Roumania, and its capacity as a market for American products and manufactures, should be studied in the country itself by consular officers of the government who know what the United States can furnish to aid in the development of the country, or to satisfy its existing demands.

I have, &c.,

JOHN A. KASSON.

No. 35. Mr. Kasson to Mr. Evarts. [Document 46]

No. 35.
Mr. Kasson to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Vienna, March 31, 1879. (Received April 16.) No. 181.]

Sir: The English Government has just concluded a commercial treaty with Servia, by which are secured to the British the privileges of the “most favored nation.” An English chargé d’affaires had already been appointed to reside at Belgrade. Through this officer the treaty was promptly effected with that foresight which characterizes the English Government in all commercial questions.

The Government of Austria has been exercising pressure to draw Servia into the same customs jurisdiction with Austria-Hungary. The Vienna cabinet claims that Servia enters into the sphere of their special interests, and is strongly induced to exercise a more than paternal influence upon her external relations. The establishment of commercial treaties on the part of Servia with other nations therefore arouses the opposition of the Austrian Government, and interferes with its plans. Nevertheless, the English convention has been signed, but was limited to a period of fourteen months, at the end of which it may be renewed for a longer term; but if not renewed it expires by force of its own provisions, without denunciation.

* * * * * * *

It is to be hoped that other governments besides England will press for that equality of right which the British treaty has secured for the trade of that country.

The Jewish question in Servia presents no longer a reason for delay in the full diplomatic recognition of her independence. Prior to the annexation of territory, secured to her by the congress of Berlin, the number of Jews in Servia was about 1,200. The annexations brought in about 800 more. The former Jewish population (1,200) was chiefly composed of the descendants of an old colony of Spanish Jews, who still preserve the Spanish language among themselves. They have long enjoyed full political rights; but their right of residence has always been confined to four towns along the Danube; and they were not allowed to hold real estate. The new Jewish population (say 800), coming with the annexed Turkish territory, were, on the contrary, free from this restriction. It was easy, therefore, for the Servians to determine that their old population of this race must not have less right than the aliens just brought into their jurisdiction. Pursuant to the provisions of their constitution, an amendment of that instrument requires the sanction of two ordinary skuptschinas, and final adoption by the grand skuptschina, specially assembled therefor. The first two sanctions have already been given, and for the third the grand skuptschina will be summoned probably in the early summer. This body is four times as numerous as the ordinary legislative body; and there is said to be in Servia no building large enough to serve them as a hall for meeting. So the government must, atleast, accommodate them in the open air with a favorable season. No doubt at all is entertained of their ratification of the act abolishing the discriminations against the Jews.

The military organization of Servia comprises nearly the whole manly population. After the age of twenty every young man must serve, his period as recruit for the active army. After three years he goes into the militia (or reserve) and there remains, liable to be called until fifty years of age, into active service, at need. Their small-arms are of old Russian pattern; but they are changing them in their own arsenal, after Peabody’s pattern. Their active army in time of peace is small. They have for their whole army 30 batteries of artillery. The active and reserve forces together number about 135,000 men on paper.

The population has been increased by the annexation of territory from about 1,350,000 (in 1874) to 1,725,000 at this time. The agricultural conditions are good and the land fertile; but the largest part is wholly uncultivated, and the population is not well disposed to manual labor. Instead of the cultivation of the soil, they prefer the raising of cattle, pigs, and other live stock, whose subsistence is provided by nature in the grasses and the forests, and which, with their skins, form the chief staples of export.

The Servian revenues, according to the budget of 1877–’78, would amount to something over $3,000,000; their expenditures to nearly the same sum. Prior to the last war the principality had no public debt. It has now a small national debt. The finances are carefully managed, and the government is very economically administered.

Their trade sheet (believed to be imperfect) estimates the value of exports in the year 1874, the last statement which I have seen, at 39,000,000 francs and of their imports at 32,000,000 francs in round numbers.

Austria is making an earnest effort to secure improved ways of communication into and through Servia. These in turn will greatly ameliorate the local conditions of production and commerce. The next few years will doubtless show a marked progress in financial and commercial resources, and a largely increased demand for certain classes of manufactures.

* * * * * * *

France is preparing for a treaty like that with England.

I have, &c.,

JOHN A. KASSON.

No. 36. Mr. Kasson to Mr. Evarts. [Document 47]

No. 36.
Mr. Kasson to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Vienna, May 3, 1879. (Received May 20.) No. 194.]

Sir: Yesterday the recently installed French ambassador, M. Teisserene de Bort, made me a long visit, accompanied by his son, who is his private secretary.

He opened the, conversation by inquiries respecting the success of the voluntary French effort, still continuing, to secure a commercial treaty between the United States and France, by which mutual special tariff concessions should be secured.

Supposing at the time that it was a chance topic of conversation, I spoke fully of what I believed to be the sentiments of my countrymen, and of my personal opinions on the subject; but in no way attempted to express the opinion of my government. Nor did I at first imagine that he might be expressing the views or displaying the arguments of Ms own. But information which I have since received renders it probable that he was sounding my opinions with a view to ascertain (officially) the chances, so far as my declarations would indicate them, of including the United States within, the sphere of the system of tariffs by bargain.

It seems proper, therefore, that I should communicate to you a summary of the conversation. As it was conducted in the French language, I will only give the general purport:

Referring, as I believed, to the Chotteau propositions, he inquired touching the probable issue of that scheme to establish a special tariff exclusively applicable to the commerce between the two countries. I answered bluntly that it would not succeed. In the course of the interview, he elicited from me the following reasons for that opinion: (1st) That it had been the traditional policy of my country to treat all nations with equal fairness, giving preference to none, applying the “most favored nation” rule and levying duties upon merchandise itself, not upon the place of its production; (2d) that it had long been the dominant policy in the United States to keep the legislative discretion unbound, and free to change commercial duties according to the interior circumstances of the country; (3d) that the United States, at the beginning, were largely dependent for manufactures upon foreign countries, and desired to be delivered from this dependence by producing at home all articles of consumption to which our soil, climate, and conditions were adaptable; and to this end had protected incipient industries by tariffs, in the hope that, with limited protection, they would, later, grow strong enough for independence—a result which had already in various manufactures been attained; and for this object, also, they kept themselves free from conflicting engagements to other nations; (4th) that a most important and permanent object of the tariff policy of the United States was revenue to be derived as largely as possible from luxuries; and in this respect, also, they preferred to be free from embarrassing engagements.

Naturally he objected to the protective system that it tended to increase the cost to the consumer, to which I, also naturally, replied that while that seemed to be its first effect, we observed its ultimate effect to be that successful home manufacture produced domestic rivalry and competition which fully replaced for the consumer the lost benefit of the foreign competition—of which Bessamer steel had furnished a remarkable instance. He also objected to our high duties on wines and silks. I answered that these were regarded as luxuries which should contribute largely to the revenue. I added that the consumption of French wines was not so much affected by the duty as he might believe, inasmuch as they were chiefly drunk by the wealthier people, who would have them equally with or without the duty.

As to silks, there was the additional consideration that there was a large and growing industry (to which he himself alluded) in that fabric in the United States, which it was undoubtedly desired to strengthen by a reasonable present protection. And in that connection I spoke to him of the recent reported American discovery of a machine to replace the costly hand-work in the early stages of the silk spinning, which might change our condition in respect to the French trade.

Toward the close of our conversation he spoke of the possibility of France (he may have included other countries) imposing high duties on our breadstuffs, provisions, &c., in compensation (or retaliation) for the high American duties on French exportations.

To this I answered that if France imposed duties not for the interest of her own people, but against the interest of another people, that would be the initiation of a war of tariff, which might be carried to any extent., That was always possible, and its result was not to be foreseen. Its first manifest effect, however, would be to enhance the cost of the necessaries of life to Frenchmen themselves.

The general tenor of the views I expressed to him, founded upon our tariff history, was that it would too much hamper our freedom of action in respect to both revenue and protection, and too much involve us in difficulties with other friendly nations, should we establish with one of them an exceptional treaty granting exceptional tariff favors.

I beg to add that the present condition of government sentiment in Europe on the subject of tariff, especially in those countries with which we are commercially most connected, gives to American interests occasion for serious care and vigilance. The surprising balance of trade against Europe in favor of the United States, the equally surprising success of Secretary Sherman in advancing the credit of the country, the unexpected development of our financial strength, and the earlier revival of our industries—earlier than in Europe—have attracted the special attention of this continent to the public policy which our country has followed with such beneficial results.

European statesmen appreciate better these visible results of our policy than they appreciate the facts of the interior condition of the United States and the character of their population, with which that policy is in harmony.

The same policy applied to their people and interior condition cannot be trusted to produce similar results. Nevertheless, we must be prepared to witness efforts in some parts of Europe to apply force—retaliatory tariff force—to the United States—with a view to compel us into the system of special commercial treaties. In fact, Canada has already led the way. It is quite possible that enough may yet be accomplished in this direction to embarrass our export trade with Europe, especially in connection with the agricultural interest. It is our good fortune, however, to produce and export leading staples which Europe must have to sustain her own industries; and she cannot carry very far a system of taxing the raw fibers of her own prosperity, or the bread and meat on which her workmen live.

I have, &c.,

JOHN A. KASSON.

No. 37. Mr. Kasson to Mr. Evarts. [Document 48]

No. 37.
Mr. Kasson to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Vienna, May 7, 1879. (Received May 26.) No. 195.]

Sir: In my Nos. 174, 175, written in response to the instructions given me in your No. 87, I referred to certain expected documents from the ministry of commerce, which would enable me to transmit further valuable information touching the railroad system of Austria, and the provisions of law relating thereto. These have since been received at this legation; and I now give an analysis of the principal provisions of the organic regulations.

The executive act of concession referring to the fundamental law of concessions first declares the name of the company which is to undertake the work, and gives the termini and the chief points of the route. It also prescribes the dates within which the enterprise must be begun and terminated, and the amount of caution money to be paid to the government in pledge for the execution of the company’s engagements.

The government reserves its right to approve the modes of raising money to build the road, and the rates at which money is to be obtained on their securities. It reserves the right of free transmission of the public mails, and to use any or all trains for postal carriage, except that the fast trains shall not be used for the package-post.

The company must give free transportation to postal employés, and must provide and keep in order the usual post and ambulance cars according to the requirement of the postal department; and the particulars of such requirements are expressed. Proper postal rooms must also be provided without charge at each station-house on the road.

In the absence of the post-officers, the railroad employés must do certain of the duties for a reasonable compensation from the post direction.

The company undertakes to construct and maintain a telegraph line (or arrange for it with the State, Telegraph Company), to be used by themselves in the conduct of their railroad, the government reserving the right to have this telegraph line employed for public or private business. It also reserves the right to put its own wires on the company’s poles, or erect its own poles and wires along the company’s land; and regulates the terms on which telegraph materials are to be transported and cared for.

In all these affairs the company must come to agreement with the proper organ of the government.

The concession fixes a maximum tariff for passengers and for freight, according to class and train (a, § 7).

It also fixes the rules governing the cost of all military transport for government (a, § 8), with some detailed provisions relating thereto.

On the other hand, the state guarantees annual net earnings (including sinking fund) to the amount of —— per mile for the whole term of the concession, which is. 90 years. Whatever is wanting in the proper earnings of the road to this sum is to be made good by the governments This guarantee begins to have effect from the day of the opening of the whole guaranteed line, (a, § 9.) Its object is to fix a sufficient sum to be annually applied, which shall pay to shareholders 5 per cent. per annum, and shall in 90 years extinguish, by further annual payments, both capital and bonded debt.

Provisions for carrying out this obligation are made, including the refunding to the state of previous disbursements on the guarantee from any subsequent excessive earnings of the road, (a, § 10.)

If necessary, exemption from all taxes is conceded for a limited time. What items shall be counted for necessary expenses are stated. Proper limitations are imposed on the issue of shares and bonds, and the right of the state to anticipate the time of its acquisition of the road on prescribed terms, at any time after thirty years, is reserved.

In brief, the theory of Austrian railroad legislation is this: The need of a railroad being recognized, its general route is established by the government. The concession to build it is given to a company upon maximum conditions of cost, to be repaid, and of time of construction.

A fine for non-execution of contract may be imposed. The government reserves its rights for its free use for postal purposes and certain telegraphic privileges and the right of military use at established rates.

The concession also controls a maximum rate for freight and travel. The road becomes the absolute property of the government in 90 years.

In return the state assures the company against loss, by guaranteeing an amount of annual earnings per mile (or receipts in some form), which shall within the period of 90 years be sufficient to realize beyond current expenses an annual interest of 5 per cent. on share and bonded capital, and shall, upon a prearranged system of annual amortization, extinguish the principal invested in the construction and equipment.

The excess of net earnings beyond the amount necessary to indemnify the government against its guaranty goes to the shareholders.

Thus the interests of the company and of the government are in many respects identical, and where there is a conflict justice is assured to the company by protection against actual loss.

In time all the private interests pass over to the public interest.

I have, &c,

JOHN A. KASSON.

No. 38. Mr. Kasson to Mr. Evarts. [Document 49]

No. 38.
Mr. Kasson to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Vienna, May 14, 1879. (Received May 29.) No. 200.]

Sir: The good order of this city, with its million of inhabitants, its exemption from scandal in its financial and other departments, its remarkably small number of crimes of violence and against property, its comparative freedom from public beggary, the cleanliness of its streets, and its excellent sanitary condition, have induced me to make a study of its organization and administration.

The frequent agitation of questions relating to municipal government in the United States, the constant demand for more effective grants or limitations of municipal jurisdiction, and your own former official interest in these questions, have induced me to forward to you the results of this investigation. It may be that the system, prevailing here, the result of an experience of centuries, will afford useful suggestions to some of the American cities which are seeking improved systems and better securities of good administration in municipal affairs.

The manner in which they have here solved the question of suffrage, so that no one class of the population can secure absolute control of the interests of all others, is especially worthy of consideration. This principle might equally be adopted where the suffrage is universal, and where the distinction of interests may require a different classification.

I.

the municipal theory.

The theory of the municipality appears to be this: It has no sovereign rights. It is merely a local corporation, designed chiefly to protect the property and promote the business interests of the residents within its jurisdiction, under the limitations of general laws imposed from without. Its management is therefore committed to those who have vested interests in it, who contribute to its support, bear its liabilities, suffer from its mismanagement, and who are profited by its honest and successful administration. It recognizes the existence in its midst of conflicting local, class, and personal interests, and the danger of allowing any one interest, whether of wealth, or of labor, or of locality, to obtain a numerical control. To avoid this result, it divides the electoral population into three great classes, each of which chooses its own representation in the governing council.

In this way it becomes difficult to impose burdens upon one interest to the exclusive advantage of another. Those who contribute nothing to defray the expenses, and who bear none of the responsibilities of mismanagement, are not considered as veritable stockholders in the municipality, and are not allowed to elect its managers. It is, in effect, a modification of the principle on which nearly all corporate business enterprises are founded, such as railroads, insurance companies, &c.: that those who furnish the means and bear the losses should Control the administration of the municipality.

I am informed that certain smaller towns of Switzerland have so successfully carried this principle into execution in former years that they have ceased to impose taxes and have become dividend-paying corporations. Wise and interested management has there in the course of time accumulated sufficient public property to provide from its rents for all town expenses, and leave a surplus for distribution to the citizens. In these towns a vote of the corporation was necessary to admit a new citizen, who was also upon his admission required to pay a capital sum representing his interest in the common property.

In Vienna, however, which is very far from such a degree of financial prosperity, there is only required from municipal voters sufficient qualification of some sort to indicate a vested interest in the welfare of the city, and some responsibility for its administration and expenditures. To this end the law arranges the organic control in the following manner:

II.

electors and their classification.

One electoral group is composed of those householders in the city who pay 500 florins or more of land or house tax; and of other persons who contribute upon the industry pursued by them in the city, or upon their income, a tax of not less than 100 florins.

Another electoral group embraces all householders paying taxes on real property in the city to an amount between 10 florins and 500 florins; all employés of the municipality, of the state, and of the court (whether active or pensioned), who pay at least 10 florins of income tax; all officers of the permanent militia, all clergymen of the recognized Christian churches, all Jewish rabbis, “doctors” of all faculties whose degrees were conferred by an Austrian university, all masters and professors of public schools. It is intended to include in this group all the resident active, educated classes, irrespective of their property—such as the medical and legal professions, engineers, architects, &c., all of whom contribute to the revenue in some form.

The remaining electoral group is formed of all other persons who are taxed within the city (upon either industry or income) less than 100 florins. All the smaller industries and occupations of the city are here represented. All “citizens” of Vienna not paying the amount of tax required, nor belonging to one of the liberal professions, vote with this group.

Austrians living in the town, but not “citizens” of Vienna, have also the right to vote with their proper group, if they pay at least 10 florins of direct taxes on houses possessed or trade carried on by them within the city, or if they are rated with at least 20 florins of income tax.

Those who do not exercise the elective function are minors, domestic servants, transient laborers, bankrupts pending proceedings against them by their creditors, paupers, and all persons who have refused or neglected to pay the taxes on which their right to vote is dependent.

Each of the groups above described elects 40 members of the city council.*

All citizens entitled to vote are enrolled in election lists, one for each voting district and for each group to which the voters of that district belong. Six weeks before election these lists are exhibited and published in the official journal.

Reclamations may be made and must be decided (within six days of their presentation) by the district magistrates. The revision must be completed a fortnight before the election. One week before the election the voters are notified of the time and place of holding the election and of the number of seats vacant; and special election commissioners are appointed for each district. They consist of one member of the city council, one magistrate, and four other citizens. The city councilor presides, assisted by a delegate of the governor of this province, whose duty it is to preserve order at the election. The commission receives the votes and supervises and certifies the entire act of the election.

The protocol so certified is laid before the city council, where reclamations may be made within a week. If the election is vitiated upon any such reclamation, a new election takes place. If ratified, the elected member is notified, and in turn notifies his acceptance.

All citizens of Vienna who are qualified voters are eligible to the city council, after attaining the age of thirty years, except soldiers in active service, municipal officers and employés, and dilatory debtors to the community.

III.

organization of the city council and mayoralty.

The members of the city council are elected for a term of three years, one-third being renewed annually, and are re-eligible. The mayor (Burgermeister) is elected by them from their own number, and for a term of three years, and must receive a two-thirds vote of that body. At this election all the members are required to be present on pain of forfeit of their places. The council chooses also two vice-mayors for one year’s term, who may be ready to replace the mayor upon occasion. The bur-germeister is subject to confirmation by the Emperor. He receives no salary, but there is provided for him a spacious official residence and an allowance of 10,000 florins for representation. The members of the common council also serve without salary.

This council of 120 is, for the better consideration of business, divided into eight sections, as follows: 1. On general organization, law, central statistics.

2. On internal department commerce, and trade.

3. On education and public worship.

4. On public safety and board of health.

5. On poor, pauper, and humane institutions.

6. On building and engineering.

7. On financial affairs and control.

8. On provisioning of the city and market police.

The burgermeister (mayor) is charged with the usual supervisory and executive functions of a mayor, and has the right of veto of the municipal resolutions. In case of such veto, the proposed measure can only become valid if it shall subsequently be approved by the provincial Landtag. This legislature corresponds to our State legislatures, and may of its own initiative also impose laws upon the city, as its immediate sovereign in authority.

IV.

limitations of the powers of the city government.

The municipal representatives, in addition to the usual powers in respect to local ordinances and regulations, have the right to adopt a budget of city expenditures for all purposes which may not (without special legislative authority) exceed the fourth part (25 per cent.) of the amount of taxes imposed upon the city for all public and national purposes. If a greater revenue is required, the consent of the provincial legislature must be first obtained. The portion now allotted to the city of the entire taxes is 30 per cent.

In order to the creation of a city, debt, the sanction both of the Landtag and of the Emperor is required. All current liabilities must be met by the taxation, limited as stated above.

The city is not allowed to dispose of any of its real estate exceeding 10,000 florins in value without the like sanction of the Emperor and the Landtag. Its moveable property is within its own control.

The city council does not control the general judiciary of the city nor the general police. These functionaries, being charged with the enforcement of the general state laws, and with the prevention and punishment of crimes, as regulated by the state, are appointed by the state authority exclusively, and are responsible to it. No changes are made in the police force except for cause. Their vigilant attention to duty, and the rare breaches of good order in the city, bear testimony in favor of this system. There are, however, as hereafter described, certain functionaries of the city who combine both administrative and judicial functions in respect to the ordinances of the city. There is also a limited number of municipal police or watchmen, charged with certain municipal duties.

Of the pay of the state police employed in the city, one-third part is borne by the city.

V.

the organization and distribution of executive functions.

The general administration, apart from the mayor, is divided into 24 sections. The officers at the head of these divisions are individually styled Counsellor and collectively are called “The Magistracy.” They are under the general control of the city council, and when assembled, form a sort of executive council, and are the executive organs of the municipality. The mayor is their controlling superior, and presides at their assembled sessions. In his absence, a vice-burgermeister, or some member of the magistracy itself, presides. Should their actions be illegal or prejudicial to the rights of the city, it is to be reported to the Landtag through the governor. When the Landtag is not in session, the government itself may take provisional measures in such cases to prevent injury or wrong to the city.

The magistracy supervises the execution of the city ordinances, and watches over city property, city institutions, and municipal societies. It exercises the functions of a local supervisory board of police. It has the judicial right to punish violations of municipal ordinances, as well as of its own orders and regulations, with fines not exceeding 200 florins ($100), and with imprisonment in the proportion of one day for each 5 florins of fine. Immediately superior to this body is a general director, relieving the mayor of a portion of the labor of supervising the magistracy.

Each of the 24 divisions has at its head a counselor (rath), who is appointed for life and becomes entitled to a pension on cessation of active service. His salary is from 2,500 to 3,500 florins, according to length of service. The general director receives a salary of 6,000 florins.

The director and counselors must, before appointment, have passed their state examination, and must also have taken a regular degree of doctor of laws. They hold their appointment from the city council.

The magistracy, through its proper bureaus, collects all taxes, local and state, and employs in all, under authority of the city council, 36 secretaries and 62 clerks of all grades, who are distributed among the bureaus according to their respective requirements.

The entire business of the city, including the judicial enforcement of its ordinances and orders, is distributed among these 24 bureaus. Each chief of section has the jurisdiction, in respect to violation of city ordinances, of an ordinary justice of the peace or city judge, combining to this limited extent executive and judicial functions. I give only an outline of the distribution of business.

To section I is assigned the charge of important documents of the administration, and of the ordinances of the council; the promulgation of laws when this is not made the duty of another counselor, the editorship of the Official Ordinance Journal; charge of public collections, supervision of the city clerks and servants, &c.

Section II, examination and judgment on all law matters touching the city. Preparation and issue of all documents and memorials, &c.

Section III, accounts and budget of the city of Vienna, administration of loans; also statistics.

Section IV, collection of rates and dues, local police funds, certain special taxes, certain church affairs, charitable institutions, canalization, supervision of the chief city treasury, and other specialties.

Section V, register of landed estates, direction of the district (ward) committees, administration and inspection of real estate, insurance and care of buildings, barracks, and tenements belonging to the city, tire insurance on all city public edifices, bathing establishments, both public and private, lighting of the streets and squares, charge of the city clocks, &c.

Section VI, precautionary and administrative measures against and during inundations, regulation, laying out and good condition of streets, street railways, regulation of the municipal tariffs; guaranties for current work and supplies furnished to the city, &c.

Section VII, the public and private water-works; supervision of wells.

Section VIII, ordinances for the health of the city, especially for that of the working classes, preventive measures against epidemic diseases and the occupation of crowded and unhealthy lodgings; management of the municipal hospitals, the cemeteries, licensed flayers of animals, supervision of apothecaries and surgeons, &c.

Section IX, buildings and deposit of materials, &c.

Section X, all public schools and supervision of all private academies and gymnasia, &c.

Section XI, all matters concerning the poor; alms-houses, workhouses, foundling and orphan asylums, and other humane institutions.

Section XII, expenses of hospitals and interments and collection of the same.

Section XIII, collection of fees and dues demandable from other public authorities; also matters in reference to the stamping of gold and silver plate and stamp duties.

Section XIV, local police, inquests, care of effects of persons suddenly deceased, of suicides, and of insane persons.

Section XV, preventive measures for personal security, and in charge of advertising apparatus, public closets, telegraphs, theaters, cruelty toward animals, insurance against fire or accident, matters relative to firemen, river police, &c.

Section XVI, provisioning and market ordinances; supervision of the guilds of bakers, fishmongers, butchers, poulterers, gardeners, wood-merchants, milk-dealers, &c.

Section XVII, charge of the census, emigration, growth of population, and liability to military service, and all affairs touching the army and militia.

Section XVIII, administration and correspondence in matters of marriages, changes of religion, legitimation of natural children, changing of names, acquirement of citizenship, supervision of the guilds of founders, gold and silversmiths, jewellers, bronze-workers, potters, copper and blacksmiths, platers, and tinmen.

Section XIX, collection of taxes and rates, additional charges of state and city treasury, matters in relation to tax executions, state loans, elections, jury-lists.

Section XX, affairs which concern the guilds and associations in common; also toll matters, exercise of the trade and occupation of peddlers 5 matters affecting fairs, voluntary auctions; also stock companies, insurance companies, exchanges, supervision of printers, booksellers, retail merchants, photographers, and the like.

Section XXI, legalization of documents; supervision of affairs relating to pawnbrokers, builders, slaters, engravers, masons, locksmiths, carpenters, shoemakers, watchmakers, &c.

Section XXII, relating to brewers, innkeepers, confectioners, &c.

Scetion XXIII, relating to house-painters, bookbinders, chemists, bar-biers, glovers, hatters, tailors, dress-makers, perfumers, saddlers, rope-makers, upholsterers, weavers, &c.

Section XXIV, relating to gunsmiths, brush-makers, turners, coachmen, cabmen, piano-forte makers, opticians, musical-instrument makers, joiners and cabinet-makers, &c.

A handbook showing completely and in detail the distribution of business to the different bureaus and counselors is published for the information of all concerned. Any one having reclamations or coin-plaints about taxes, licenses, nuisances, dangers, violations of ordinances, &c., or whatever else, knows his bureau and his judge, and the usual rules of administration, and can seek relief without the intervention of a lawyer or other intermediary. I forward by this mail a copy of this handbook to illustrate the perfection of the system in its details.

I beg to call your special attention to this admirable organization for the transaction of municipal business, its concentration in one building, its distribution in bureaus or sections in such manner that there is the least delay in dispatch of business and its perfect system of responsibility. There is a distinct line drawn between the agents of the state, for the enforcement of general laws and the punishment of crimes on the one hand, and the agents for the enforcement of city ordinances and the application of their limited penalties on the other. The former are appointed by and act under state authority. The latter are appointed by and are responsible to the city authority. In both cases the agents below the chiefs are appointed for life, or during good behavior, and so become perfect masters both of the principles and details of administration, and are in theory and in fact the agents of good order and public security, instead of the will of struggling politicians or parties. Their compensation is not large but increases with length of service, and a pension follows disability. In this manner the total cost of administration is probably less than that which follows our higher paid but more loosely organized city governments. The application of the principles and rules suggested in this paragraph would of itself effect enormous reforms in the administration of our populous American cities.

The burgermeister stated to me that there is no record of any embezzlement or pecuniary fraud as ever having occurred among their life appointees.

VI.

SANITARY ORGANIZATION.

Under the sanitary bureau (one of the 24 sections), the sanitary inspection of the city is entrusted to two physicians, who are subject to the general direction of the mayor and council. They are required to execute also such orders as shall be addressed to them by the provincial governor (Stadthalter), or the police magistrates. They are equal in authority and their appointments are only revoked for cause. Their legal fees are paid into the city treasury to be equally divided between them. Obliged to live in the inner town, having a carriage allowance for official duties in the suburbs and the cemeteries, neither of them may leave the city on private business without the permission of the mayor (Burgermeister).

The city physicians must strictly observe the sanitary regulations and direct their greatest care to the state of the health in all parts of the city; they assist each other and each may perform the duties of the other. Every week they must have a conference. If they hear of unauthorized practice of physicians or surgeons they send notice of it to the town authorities. At the end of each year they must prepare a sanitary report respecting their official activity, and the incidents observed. This report comes before the council.

The work of the city physicians is divided into two main sections, for each of which one of them is primarily responsible.

1st. One has the supervision of the houses, their sink-holes and canals; must enforce the ordinances relative to sanitary interests in all new buildings and rebuildings. He is to be present at the granting of licenses for steam engines, water works and the like, which might interfere with the health and comfort of the neighborhood. He has, moreover, to direct his attention to all trades which are restricted by sanitary ordinances.

All articles of food, all vessels of earthenware and copper used for cooking, etc., must be inspected and examined by him; as also the sale rooms, booths, markets, eating and coffee houses, bars, taps, and the like, and the cook’s galleys of the steamers landing at the city. He must superintend the traffic of all objects which might contain poisonous substances, as stuffs, paper-hangings, toys, cosmetics, etc., and insist on the Strict observance of the ordinances respecting the sale of poisons and drugs. All traffic with nostra, arcana, or prohibited remedies must be reported.

He has the sanitary supervision of all the public and private schools and the gymnasia, as well as of all places of public gathering, which are liable to be crowded, as churches, public walks, theaters, baths, hospitals, prisons, and the like.

He is required to examine carefully the drinking water of the city, and to supervise the cemeteries, upon which he is to make quarterly reports to the city council.

2d. The other city physician, when ordered to do so by the authorities, must pass judgment on the health of municipal officers and servants and on reclamations for discharge from military service. He has the medical superintendence of all work-houses, humane institutions, and the like, belonging to the town, and the chief inspection of all lying-in hospitals, lunatic asylums, and private hospitals in Vienna, as well as of all safety apparatus.

In case of an epidemic lie has to apply all the necessary measures and to superintend their immediate and strict execution.

In order to be well informed of everything concerning the health, diseases, and sanitary police’ of the city, the city physician is required every month to convoke the district surgeons and the municipal medical staff. He has the superintendence of the corpse inspection, keeps evidence of all occurring deaths, and collects the materials necessary for the use of the statistical bureaus of the city, which he utilizes, together with all other incidents of his experience, for the publication of the medical statistics of the city of Vienna.

There is in each, of the ten bezicks (wards) from three to five sanitary watchmen, who frequently visit house drainage and all suspected places of disease, waste deposits, &c., and report to the city physician. The city makes a contract yearly for wagons for each ward, which call twice a week at every house to carry away refuse at fixed charges.

VII.

management of the poor and the sick.

Vienna is richly provided with hospitals for the skillful treatment of diseases and for surgical operations, without cost to the poor. Separate hospitals are provided for contagious diseases. Foundling hospitals diminish the temptation to infanticide. The charitable endowment funds of the city are large. Any deficiency for the poor is made good by the city treasury. The city has six houses for the poor, but this number is insufficient. The oldest, the poorest, and the most infirm are assigned to these poor-houses. A complete system of out-door relief is established under the city government. Each bezick (ward) has its supervisor and his assisting committee (without pay), who care for the humane concerns of the ward and report to the mayor or to the proper bureau. Each case for charitable relief is personally investigated, all the facts noted, and the necessary allowances made. Begging in the streets is prohibited under penalties. But it seems that certain known and deserving cases are excepted from the prohibition (probably on certificate of the armen-vater) (father of the poor) for I see at certain church-doors and at certain points on thoroughfares, the same faces at intervals of some days, appealing, but usually silently, for alms, and always at the same stations. I venture the opinion that such permission accorded to meritorious poverty is not alone beneficial to the pauper. It tends to keep in the memory of the busy and prosperous world the existence of human distress, and the Christian duty imposed on them to extend the hand of relief. A whole community as well as an individual would unconsciously become inhumane after a long suspension of the exercises of acts of humanity.

VIII.

system of cleaning streets.

There is rarely cause for complaint of unclean streets in Vienna. Different systems are applied in the central and exterior districts. The old city with narrow streets, and lying compactly within the Ringstrasse, a boulevard replacing the ancient line of fortifications, constitutes the first district, and its cleanliness is secured by a contract for a fixed price with a transport company for the term of five years. The city authorities have the right to impose on the contractor a fine not exceeding 500 florins ($250) for each day in which this duty is neglected. The inhabitants must keep their sidewalks free, and in time of slippery frost must protect the pedestrians by sanding the walks on their respective fronts. The transport company is entitled to the sweepings, which are constantly made, and for which poor people are usually employed who have no other regular labor. Snow is promptly gathered aside in heaps and carted away, usually by night.

In the other nine bezicks or suburban wards a street supervisor is elected by all voters together for a term of three years. He is allowed 1,000 florins for incidental expenses, but no salary. His ward is divided into 15 to 18 sections, in each of which is a subordinate who watches over the work in his section.

The men are employed as needed under the general control of the ward supervisor, and the expenses are provided for in the city budget. The ultimate control is in the city council and its magistracy. There is an incidental economy in this system, as many people are employed in the work of sweeping, women as well as men, who would otherwise be a charge on the poor funds of the city.

In 1876 the whole area of the streets amounted to 3,993,350 square meters. The cost of cleaning was— Florins.

In 1875 1,112,786

In 1876 996,986

In 1877 1,046,980

In 1878 1,034,800

IX.

system of paving streets.

With few exceptions the streets of Vienna are paved with granite cubic blocks measuring in centimeters 23.7 by 13.2 by 18.4.

The quarries, which belong to the city, are situated a few miles above the town on the Danube, down which the cubes are floated to the city front. The quarries are leased to a contractor on the condition that he furnishes to the city 18,000 per annum at a fixed price. A square meter of this pavement costs 8 florins and 25 kreuzers (about $4), while the endurance of the cubes is found to be 32 years, subject to repairs after 12 years. From the twelfth to the thirty-second year the repairs, cost 2 florins 54 kreuzers, making the cost of pavement for the term of 32 years 10 florins 79 kreuzers per square meter (say $5.25). Its disadvantages are noise and rigidity. Its advantages are its durability, rare need of repair when well laid, secure grasp for horses, cheap maintenance, and facility for cleaning.

The judgment of the city has been against bituminous limestone and asphalt, because of its dangerous smoothness; and against macadam, because of its intolerable dirt and dust; and against wood, because of its rapid decay.

X.

I have given above the more important and distinctive features of the municipal system of Vienna. The late burgermeister, Dr. Felder, was good enough to give me personally much of this information, and to place at my disposal various statistical publications of the city government. I also had the aid in the analysis of their contents of a young American graduate of the University of Vienna (and “doctor of laws”), Mr. Samson, voluntarily attached, to this legation. The report on the municipal affairs of Vienna for the three years of Dr. F elder’s administration (1874–1876), which he presented to me, contains much valuable information which may be of use to statisticians and municipal economists. I therefore forward it, via Hamburg, for the use of the Department.

I have, &c.,

JOHN A. KASSON.

* In this system the charter seems to have followed the principles recommended by Locke and by Montesquieu: “Il y a toujours dans un État des gens distingués par la naissance, les richesses ou les honneurs: mais s’ils etaient confondus parmi le peuple, et s’ils n’y avaient qu’une voix comme les autres, la liberté commune serait leur esclavage, et ils n’auraient aucun interêt à la defendre, parceque la plupart des resolutions seraient contre eux. La part qu’ils ont à la législation doit done être proportionnée aux autres avantages qu’ils ont dans l’État; ce qui arrivera s’ils forment un corps qui ait droit d’arrêter les entreprises du peuple, comme le peuple a droit d’arrêter les leurs.”—Montesquieu.

No. 39. Mr. Delaplaine to Mr. Evarts. [Document 50]

No. 39.
Mr. Delaplaine to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Vienna, July 5, 1879. (Received July 23.) No. 215.]

Sir: Chevalier von Marx, the president of the police in Vienna, has published a statistical statement of various matters which have come under the observation and control of his department, and his report furnishes valuable facts relative to the sphere of operation of the police, as well as interesting items of information in regard to life in Vienna generally.

The efforts of the police and the results toward prevention of crime and in effecting the detection and arrest of offenders are communicated; also facts in regard to its surveillance in matters of the press, of theatrical and other amusements, of unions and political associations; further, the president of the police presents, under an array of figures, a full view of its action with reference to intervention in numberless occurrences of daily life, to its judicial mediation in harmoniously settling differences and disputes which is constantly claimed by the Vienna population in their private affairs.

The figures and items submitted necessarily exhibit representations of much social misery and distress, which are unfortunately peculiar to all large cities. It is to be regretted that figures and items showing comparison with those of other large cities in Europe do not appear, inasmuch as I believe that similar statements are published in London and Paris, but not in other cities of Europe.

The figures will be presented in the order contained in the report.

The police statistical statement declares, with regard to the number of inhabitants in this capital, that the population has increased through births 41,113, by those who have moved into Vienna 167,389 persons, while it has diminished through deaths 31,888 persons, through removals from the city of 162,851 persons, so that an increase of 13,763 persons has ensued, the result being an augmentation of only 1.3 per cent. This is below the average augmentation usually received of 2 per cent.

The changes of residence by tenants and subtenants are exhibited by the official notifications of entry and removal filed in the special bureau for that purpose. There have been filed in the year 1877 notifications of 804,435 persons entering, and of 684,999 persons removing from their residences. In these notifications there were 1,839 persons, whose presence was ascertained by the police by means of a published warrant of seizure, or specially indicated by official communications. The number of transient visitors, being strangers in Vienna, was not larger in the year 1877 than in preceding year, and less than in the year 1875. It amounted in 1877 to 146,748, in the year 1876 to 146,054, in the year 1875 to 155,957 persons.

The highest figure in number of visitors is shown in the month of August, being 16,499. Why Vienna, that offers to strangers so many attractions and so many objects of interest, should receive so few visitors may be discussed another time, it is stated, in a further report.

Coming now to the returns relative to the action of the police in reference to the press, it is shown that there have been submitted to examination of the division of censure and approved 536 theatrical plays, 13 petitions for theatrical licenses, 1,192 texts of songs for public productions, 1,399 texts for amateur performances.

There have taken place 8 confiscations as being criminal, 47 for violation of ordinances, 20 for grossness; further, 3 for piracy of authorship, 4 on account of slander, as alleged in private complaint.

The statement relative to unions shows that there exists in Vienna 1,395 unions or societies of all classes; of these are 382 charitable, 52 religious, 43 political, and 277 unions having only social amusement as their object. The political unions include 14,161 members. If it were known whether these members are also electors, then the fact might be affirmed that half of the electors entertain a vivid interest in union or club life. But there is naturally no proof of electoral qualification being required from a member of the unions; and as the unions develop far too little energy or activity to allow any of them to attain influence or importance, 91 new unions have been formed, 51 have been voluntarily dissolved, 5 have been dissolved compulsorily; 3,386 assemblies of unions and 323 popular assemblies have taken place.

The figures appear uncommonly great, and find explanation only in this, that also the workingmen’s assemblies in reading-rooms are included.

The bureau for unions was obliged to exercise in 52 cases the judicial functions for preserving peace and order. Among so many unions there have been but very few conflicts.

In the passport bureau there were issued 215 passports for the interior; 2,550 passports for abroad; 308 cards of legitimation; 145 pass-books for female servants; and 950 workingmen’s books. The exercise of the system regulating affairs of female servants has given the police much to do. There have been 151,523 notices of entry into service, and 132,581 notices of departure from service; 8,329 issues of books for female servants; 130,000 confirmations of certificates of conduct; further, 6,532 complaints against female servants; 13,085 complaints against employers. The specific returns show that the greater number of complaints have been presented from the second district. Besides these complaints by female servants, the returns of crimes and misdemeanors committed by female servants, as also the applications for premiums of reward, furnish material for judging the qualities of female servants in Vienna. Three hundred and eighty-three female servants have, during their time of service, been guilty of the crime of theft; 147 have committed burglary; 298 have committed other larcenies; 29 embezzlement; 47 fraud. Against 892 female servants complaints were lodged for theft; 5,966 for transgressing the police regulations; 1,173 female servants out of employment were expelled from Vienna, and sent to their places of nativity. For the premiums of award designated for servants, 255 persons have made applications, for whom 207 were found to be qualified, of which number 20 persons have received premiums to the amount of 2,575 florins. Among these applicants one has produced evidence of a term of service of 61 years; 15 of 38 years; 11 of 37 years; 11 of 33 years; 1 applicant served 51 years, without interruption, in the same family; 1, 47 years; 1, 46 years; 3, 42 years; 13, 31 years; 16, 27 years; 20, 24 years, &c.

The, public hackney coaches have likewise engaged the active attention of the police. A matter of general interest is the fact that the number of licenses have decreased. There were for hire 1,008 two-horse hackney carriages; 1,333 one-horse hackney carriages or cabs; 794 omnibuses; 117 livery-stable carriages; 12 country carriages; 6 hotel omnibuses; 182 vehicles from the city limits; 500 tramway carriages; 60 carriages of tramways lying outside the city limits; and 2 sedan carriers. With the tramways were conveyed 18,788,348 persons, being 89,224 more than in the year 1876. With the new tramway were conveyed 1,284,744 persons, being 108,260 less than in the last year.

Not less than 5,910 complaints were reported for misbehavior, of every class, against hackney coachmen and cabmen, and against 2,474 omnibus owners and their drivers. These complaints resulted, that 924 have been punished with warnings, 1,059 with imprisonment, and 1,510 by fines.

The police report further cites specifically what Vienna offers in the way of public amusements.

There have taken place in the theaters 2,269 performances; in the dramatical schools, 241; by amateur performers, 223; by foreign dramatical societies, 45. There have been delivered 28 lectures, 1,097 concert have been given, 417 evening performances by clubs or unions have taken place; further, 4 balloon ascents, 1 exhibition in gymnastics, 1,235 performances in localities for amusement of the class of the Orphenm Hall, 1,834 performances in saloons of vocal music, 11,868 productions of popular singers, 100 performances in the circus Renz, 1,297 performances by gymnasts, 251 performances by necromancers or jugglers; to which still are to be added 39 grand balls, 86 charity balls, 171 masked balls, 37 fancy balls (or costume), 746 ordinary balls, 4 festival entertainments commemorating the foundation of benevolent institutions, 292 smaller dancing assemblies, and 10,561 dancing entertainments. It is hereby to be remarked that the number of masquerade balls, in comparison with the year 1876, has diminished by 76; the ordinary balls by 191; which might be accounted for as an evidence of advanced good taste had there not been at the same time an increase of 1,180 common dancing entertainments.

The police report enumerates yet further in summary manner the horse races, chip races, trotting matches, skating festivals on the ice, also eight pigeon-shooting matches, besides other daily amusements.

From all this it is manifest that there is in Vienna no want of mirthful enjoyments, and that amusements have not decreased.

To the poor fund 20,049 florins were paid over, resulting from the licenses granted for these entertainments, and this is one of the bright sides of these amusements.

In the section relative to railroads the president of the police reports respecting the passenger traffic of strangers to and from Vienna, and we learn from this report that there have arrived at the Southern Railroad station 1,293,926 persons, while 910,788 persons departed, and at Meidling 368,608 persons arrived; at the Northern Railroad station 658,702 persons arrived, while 572,872 departed; at the Western Railroad station 643,851 persons arrived, while 679,780 departed; at the Staatsbahn station 316,445 persons arrived, and 271,476 departed; at the Francis Joseph Railroad station 399,559 persons arrived, while 393,887 departed; at the Northwestern Railroad station 378,736 persons arrived, while 400,841 departed.

The aggregate passenger traffic amounted to 8,165,922 persons, being 249,473 more than in the preceding year.

The total bulk of freight transported amounted at the Northern Railroad station and at Florisdorf to 1,702,201,300 kilogrammes; at the Southern Railroad station and at Matzleinsdorf and Meidling to 625,969,200 kilogrammes; at the Western Railroad station and Penzing, 1,035,046,460 kilogrammes; at the Northwestern Railroad station and at Iedlersee, 262,481,900 kilogrammes; at the Staatsbahn station, 59,465,800 kilogrammes; at the Francis Joseph Railroad station and at Nussdorf, 176,689,390 kilogrammes.

In the local traffic of steamers there were conveyed 117,899 passengers, and 292,115,487 kilogrammes of freight. The bulk of the freight carried was greater by 9,000,000 kilogrammes than in the year 1876.

To the report on the subject of traffic is naturally joined the report of the accidents which occurred by reason of the traffic. The number of disasters by vehicles of all sorts amounted to 1,368, resulting in the death of 12 persons, 73 cases of severe and slight injury.

The number of accidents has increased by more than 200 in comparison with those which occurred in the years 1875 and 1876.

Coming to that part of the report of the police president which has reference to the dark side of life in a great city, in the year 1877 there have been committed 329 suicides and 265 attempts of suicide. The activity of the police on such occasions deserves to be acknowledged, which has in 185 attempted suicides resulted in effecting successfully the restoration of the unfortunates. The manner of death mostly selected by the suicide was by hanging; namely, in 192 instances; then in 146 instances by drowning, in 89 instances by poisoning, and in 85 by shooting. Among the suicides were 5 children, 105 minors under age; 392 were of Catholic, 25 of Israelite, 9 of Protestant, and 1 of Greek confession; of 167 the religious confession was unknown. Extreme poverty was in 148 cases the cause of suicide, in 43 cases family discord and unfortunate love, in 168 cases insanity.

In the most ample manner are reported crimes committed, misdemeanors, and transgressions of law, and hereby is not only the qualification of the violation of law stated, but also the personal record of the culprit and the disposition made of same, the action of the commissariat and police bureau, as also of the official organs, relative to the pursuit and capture of malefactors of every class.

The number of all sorts of crimes amounted in the aggregate to 5,770, in which 4,988 perpetrators who participated were detected by the authorities; 542 perpetrators have remained undiscovered.

The statistics of crimes show that chiefly thefts are committed. The number of the same far exceeds 3,000; then frauds occur more frequently, and, namely, 689 cases of embezzlement, 269 of public outrages, whether by forcible opposition to official organs, dangerous threats, &c.; in 600 cases of other crimes, occur more frequently those against morality, and this in 110 cases. The number of murders, with the intent of robbery, amounted to 8, those of murder to 14, those of robbery to 17. The number of misdemeanors and transgressions of law amounted to 28,217. Of the offenders 27,184 have been discovered, and only 2,237 have remained undiscovered. Not only in proportion to the size of single districts, but also in accordance with their special peculiarities, have the number of violations of law varied. In the inner city, although it in the number of population and in space belongs to the smaller districts, still the greatest number of crimes and offenses were committed, namely, 4,231. Then follows the largest district of the city of Vienna, the Leopoldstadt, with 3,771, and the district outside the suburb, named Ottakriug, with 3,721; Sechshaus, with 2,957, and Währing, with 2,641. Among the districts of Vienna, Neuban, being 911, shows the least number of violations of law. The special returns relative to invasions of private property exhibit the commission of 14,292 punishable acts of this sort.

The damage amounted to 668,147 florins, of which 191,394 florins have been recovered.

Among, the criminals were 3,923 males, 1,065 females, 55 young children: 1,731 minors, 3,202 persons of full age. A higher school education had been received by 114, while 2,146 belonged to the mechanic class; 992 were female servants, 907 day laborers; 14 soldiers. In regard to their place of birth, 1,665 were of Vienna and of the vicinity, 1,036 from Bohemia, 629 from Moravia, 683 from Lower Austria, 417 from Hungary; 199 were aliens.

The number of persons who have been arrested and against whom complaints have been made on account of transgression of police regulations, sanitary and traffic ordinances, amounted to about 80,000. Among these, however, the majority of cases are quite insignificant, and the number is stated only as evidence of the activity and energy of the police in general.

Also mendicity and public begging belongs to the dark side of a great city, and the police has so much to do with the same; and its attention is more claimed, the more pauperism is not regulated. The community in Vienna does very much for the support of the poor; likewise is the population ready to contribute generously towards the alleviation of want; but the work of aid is not systematically conducted, and speculation upon the notorious feelings of benevolence of the Viennese promotes mendicity and begging. The police have arrested 11,801 beggars; and, farther, 6,000 persons who were without residence or home.

The aggregate number of persons arrested amounted to 91,692, of whom 28,908 were Viennese, 60,204 strangers, and 2,538 aliens.

The declarations of objects lost and found also belong to the characteristics of the life at Vienna. In the year 1877 there were declared to the police 4,320 objects lost, 2,171 found. There were deposited at the railroad station 2,490 objects found.

In conclusion may be mentioned the action of the police in the way of mediation and arbitration. It is known that the Viennese always with confidence apply to the police for counsel and advice. The Viennese may deprecate and dislike espionage, a tendency to denunciation, &c.; at the same time he is quite as willing and desirous to support the action of the police authority in maintaining order and security, since he applies in all private affairs to those reliable persons who are intrusted with that responsible and difficult office. This is clearly manifested by the returns relative to the exercise by the police department of its power of mediation and arbitration, since it appears that in 4,345 cases of matrimonial quarrels and in 9,520 extrajudicial cases of compromise the services of the police were claimed. It is scarcely necessary to mention that all the branches of the police agency and direction demand an enormous exertion of the force and ability of that department. The president’s report declares that the number of commissions, inspections, official reports, escorts, communications, &c., reaches far into the thousands, and that it must be especially mentioned that complaints against the action of the police have become so unusual, that even the occurrence of a single one creates surprise.

The police in Vienna has of late, by its skillful and resolute action, earned an excellent reputation; and, although not always successful, it has given frequent evidence of its ability and useful agency.

The compilation of the details of the report is elaborate, and is creditable to the courteous and energetic gentleman now presiding over the police department, in the administration of which, since he has occupied his present position, he has introduced many important improvements and reforms. I beg to submit the foregoing items, under the opinion that a comparison of the various returns enumerated with those of the large cities in the United States may probably be considered worthy of attention.

I have, &c., &c.,

J. F. DELAPLAINE.

No. 40. Mr. Evarts to Mr. Kasson. [Document 51]

No. 40.
Mr. Evarts to Mr. Kasson.

Department of State,
Washington, July 30, 1879. No. 121.]

Sir: The changes wrought in the map of Eastern Europe by the late Russo-Turkish war and the treaty of San Stefano, confirmed and modified as they were by the later treaty of Berlin, could not but prove of interest to those nations which had remained passive spectators of the events which then occurred. The conferring of independent national life upon the northern provinces of Turkey along the Danubian highway, joined to the fuller autonomy gained by their sister provinces to the southward, seems to open an era of political and material development for those States which cannot but react beneficially upon the countries which have now, or may hereafter, have close relations of friendship and commerce with the countries now entering the family of nations.

Your recent dispatches show that you have, from the first, had lively, appreciation of the importance of the Danubian political movement,, and that you have on more than occasion pointed out the advantages to be gained by the entrance upon intimate intercourse with Roumania and Servia—advantages which other powers have not been slow to foresee, to the result of already establishing closer international relations with them. The indirect overtures made to you at various times, and reported in your dispatches, tend to the same conclusion. Your reports, and suggestions on this subject have partly responded to and partly anticipated the expectation of this government that the interests of the production and commerce of the United States and of their citizens would eventually justify entrance upon like relations with the enfranchised commonwealths of the Danube.

In view of your return to your post, and of the circumstance that the political relations of the Roumanian and Servian Governments with that of Austria-Hungary, and the authoritative character of the representatives of those new powers near the imperial-royal court, have made them the media for the communication of the views of their governments through you to that of the United States, I deem it eminently proper that you should be authorized to respond to the tentative overtures which have been made to you looking to the establishment of political relations between the United States and Servia and Roumania.

You are instructed, therefore, as soon as conveniently practicable after you return to your post at Vienna, to proceed to Belgrade and Bucharest, for the purpose of ascertaining what form of diplomatic intercourse is desired by the respective governments of Servia and Roumania, and what grade of diplomatic agents would be acceptable to them on the part of the United States, and how far these governments are prepared to enter upon reciprocal action towards us. After full conference on the subject with the proper representatives of these governments you will report what action by the Government of the United States you deem to be necessary or expedient in the matter.

It is probable, in view of the fact that the overtures heretofore made to you at Vienna contemplated treaty relations as well as merely formal diplomatic intercourse, that the question of the conclusion with those countries of proper treaties, and the nature and scope thereof, will be prominent among the subjects of your conferences with the foreign ministers of Servia and Roumania. With a view to your understanding discussion of this point, and for your appropriate guidance, you are referred to the existing treaties and conventions of the United States with foreign powers, of which the official collection will be found in your legation, and in particular to the treaty of February 26, 1871, between the United States and Italy, concerning commerce and navigation; the convention of May 8, 1878, with Italy concerning the rights, privileges, and immunities of consular officers, and the trade-marks convention with the Austro-Hungarian Empire of November 25, 1871. Copies of these treaties are inclosed for your information and use, not as strictly limiting the phraseology to be employed in the consideration of like treaty arrangements with Servia and Roumania, but as defining their character and scope.

After conference on these points with the Roumanian and Servian Governments, you will fully report to the department what they severally desire and are prepared to agree to. Should the views expressed on these points be in reasonable accord, they may by common consent be reduced to regular form as protocols of conferences, to be duly signed on both sides. These protocols, if approved here on due submission by you to the Department, will be made the basis of formal drafts of treaties which you will then receive full powers to conclude.

It is probable that the instructions now given to you will eventually involve other visits to Belgrade and Bucharest to complete the transaction, unless the formal negotiation and signature of the protocolized conventions be arranged to take place hereafter at Vienna by yourself and the Servian and Roumanian representatives at that capital; but this is not insisted upon, or more than thrown out as a passing suggestion. On the occasion, however, of your present visit to the Servian and Roumanian capitals, it is not unlikely that previous conference with the representatives of those States at Vienna would so prepare the way for your visit that but little time would be occupied in the preliminary details before reaching an understanding.

Certain pending questions which are already known to you render the opening of negotiations with Roumania a matter of some delicacy, requiring tact and discretion on your part. This point is made the subject of another instruction of even date with the present.

* * * * * * *

Reports from time to time of the progress of your negotiations will be awaited with interest.

During your absence from Vienna you will leave Mr. Delaplaine in official charge of the legation.

I am, &c.,

WM. M. EVARTS.

No. 41. Mr. Evarts to Mr. Kasson. [Document 52]

No. 41.
Mr. Evarts to Mr. Kasson.

Department of State,
Washington, July 30, 1879. No. 123.]

Sir: My instruction No. 121 of this date, authorizing and empowering you to proceed to the negotiation of commercial and consular conventions with Servia and Roumania, will have explained to you the motives which have induced such a step, and of the advantages which it is thought and hoped the inauguration of taller political and material relations with those rich countries will bring to the industries and trade of the United States.

I have now to instruct you to avail yourself of the opportunities which are thus afforded to you by your visit to Servia and Roumania to make a careful and, so far as practicable, a detailed examination concerning the commercial facilities of those States and the prospective market therein for the products of the United States, and that you will communicate the result of your observations to this Department as soon as may be conveniently practicable.

I am, &c.,

WM. M. EVARTS.

No. 42. Mr. Kasson to Mr. Evarts. [Document 53]

No. 42.
Mr. Kasson to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Vienna, September 1, 1879. (Received September 17.) No. 229.]

Sir: The following statistics of the production and consumption of beer in this empire of mingled races may be of interest to American statisticians, and perhaps to the Treasury Department.

It appears that in 1878 the number of breweries in operation was 2,332. Their production reached 11,323,414 hectoliters of beer, which was less by 215,000 hectoliters than the production of the previous year. The exportation of beer in 1878 was 214,422 hectoliters, while 11,101,796 hectoliters were consumed.

The revenue which the government derived from this source reached the large sum of 21,041,631 florins (say $10,500,000), or nearly 2 florins (96 cents) per hectoliter.

The population of the empire that year being estimated in round numbers at 36,000,000, this consumption would appear to have been at the average annual rate of nearly 31 liters for each man, woman, and child in the whole empire.

I have, &c.,

JOHN A. KASSON.

No. 43. Mr. Kasson to Mr. Evarts. [Document 54]

No. 43.
Mr. Kasson to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Vienna, October 18, 1879. No. 250.]

Sir: This government has demanded of the legislature a continuance of the military law for an additional term of ten years. As its burdens bear heavily on the people, the ministry seeks to convince the Reichsrath of its necessity by preventing in the motif of the bill a comparison with the military resources commanded by the other great Continental powers. From this exhibit I extract the following statement, which is the latest authentic information that has come under my observation. It presents a remarkable picture of the costly preparation of Europe for the ends of mutual destruction and mutual humiliation.

Permanent army. Landwehr. Reserve. Totals.

Russia, without irregular forces 1,689,000 600,000 2,289,000

Russia, with irregulars 2,446,800

France 1,215,000 300,000 300,000 1,815,000

France may be increased 1,208,000

Germany 1,076,200 307,200 620,900 2,004,300

Italy 698,000 254,200 423,100 1,375,300

Italy may be increased to 310,000 1,016,200

Austria-Hungary 800,000 299,318 95,000 1,194,318

According to this official declaration it appears that the five Continental powers, without reckoning the Landsturm, or remaining population capable of bearing arms, can put in the field under existing provisions of law 8,677,918 men, which number may be increased to 10,992,618 men.

The average of this latter number to each, power would be 2,198,523. Above the average are Russia and France; below it are Germany, Italy, and Austria-Hungary, the latter power making the smallest exhibit.

I have the honor to be, sir, your most obedient servant,

JOHN A. KASSON.

No. 44. Mr. Kasson to Mr. Evarts. [Document 55]

No. 44.
Mr. Kasson to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Vienna, November 19, 1879. (Received December 6.) No. 261.]

Sir: In further obedience to your instructions (No. 123), I now have the honor to submit herewith a condensed report upon the general condition of the Principality of Servia, as gathered from the notes and observations made by me during my recent official visit to that country. This report, together with that made upon the foreign trade of Servia (No. 258), will be as fully responsive to your instructions as it is practicable now to make it. For detailed information for the direct use of American merchants, a consul resident in the country is required.

the organization of the government.

The independence of Servia was recognized by the great powers upon the conditions stated in Art. XXXV of the treaty of Berlin.

The constitution was voted by the National Assembly in 1869, and the prince took an oath to observe it. It guarantees to the citizens equality before the law; personal liberty; liberty of the press; inviolability of property; abolition of confiscation; free public instruction, primary, secondary, and superior; the liberty of religious confessions and their public exercise, and general liberty of opinion.

The executive power is vested in the Prince and in a responsible ministry. The person of the Prince being inviolable, all official acts must be countersigned by a minister, who takes the responsibility. There are seven ministries: Foreign affairs, finance, public works, war, interior, justice, worship and instruction.

The legislative power is vested in the Prince and Skupchtina, or Legislative Assembly. The latter is a single body, composed of 175 members, of whom 45 are appointed by the Prince, and 130 are elected by universal suffrage. The Prince convokes the Skupchtina annually in ordinary session and in extraordinary session as occasion may require. Taxes and appropriations must be voted by this Assembly. The ministerial budget is annually submitted to them. While not many of the members can be counted stupid many are unable to read or write; consequently the delegates appointed by the Prince, seated conveniently among them, exercise great influence over them.

The government also does not hestitate to interfere very positively in the elections. There is a bitter opposition, but it presents a small minority of numbers.

the financial condition of servia.

Aside from the military expenses of the principality, the finances of Servia would be easily managed, and an equilibrium in the budget easily maintained. After 1873, they largely increased their armament, and again still more in the war of 1876. These expenditures involved them seriously in debt. The statement of the public debt of Servia, given to me officially, is as follows: Francs.

Russian loan of 1876, at 6 per cent $6,816,000

Arrears of interest 918,843

Owed to foreigners for supplies 1,617,981

Home debt, national loan, 8 per cent 7,626,742

Interest on same 1,249,288

Requisitions 7,746,591

Deposits under the law 2,916,411

For supplies 1,422,363

Total public debt in 1879 30,314,221

The mode of stating the liabilities is somewhat obscure, and it would not be unwise to add some millions on the 1st of January, 1880, in view of deficits to be annually covered by loans. They are now proposing to again increase their armament, and to purchase a large quantity of the best modern arms for their entire military force. This can only be accomplished by a new emission of obligations, which cannot be placed at par. In the present condition of the country increased taxation cannot well be borne, though they claim that the present debt amounts to only 18 francs per head on the number of inhabitants.

They use no paper money in Servia. The only moneys are gold and silver. For these they have adopted the French system, and have begun a national coinage, of which the one dinar (franc) silver pieces are already in circulation. Pending the introduction of their own gold coins, the Austrian gold ducats (about 12½ francs) continue to be the favorite coin of the country, and circulate largely in Servia, although rarely seen in Austrian circulation.

the industries.

It is a remnant of the Oriental habits, and insecurity of property, that an indisposition exists on the part of the people to engage in any enterprises which require organized capital and attract attention as evidences of wealth. With abundant forests and water-power, they told me there were yet no saw-mills in Servia, and that manufactured timber was imported; cotton-mills and woolen-mills are wholly wanting.

The copper and lead mines are worked by foreigners; the petroleum sources are undeveloped. There are one or two large breweries, also inaugurated by foreign enterprise. The injurious habit prevails among holders of money to invest it solely at usury, where it is not still more profitably employed in trade. There are no manufactories of iron or other metals more extensive than the common blacksmith-shop, or that of the handworkers of copper, of brass, or of steel. In a word, manufacturing industry is totally undeveloped.

All beyond the rudest implements are imported.

agriculture.

Tillage is carried on in the methods and by the means inherited from past generations. The peasant does not like to pay taxes, and is disposed to be content without a surplus, if he has only enough product to provide for the simple wants of his family for the year. He rarely has enough money to buy modern implements for his farm. Improvement in this respect will begin in the suburban districts, and the experience of its advantages here will steadily extend the demand. Special effort will be required for their first introduction.

For their general use improved ways of communication will be required, that the increased production may find a ready and remunerative market.

This improvement of transport ways is now the object of study on the part of the Servian Government, especially in the form of a railroad communication with Mitrovitza, whence a railroad exists to the port of Salonica. To this they look for effectual means of affording to other nations an equal competition with Austria in their market and to themselves a new outlet for their productions.

There are no large proprietors placed in Servia.

The people of the country are generally poor, and cultivate only so much soil as each family can manage with their rude implements, as simple in the workshop as they are on the farm. The rudeness extends to their wagons and to all their draught apparatus.

Notwithstanding this, I saw at Belgrade great activity in the wagon and iron shops, extending late into the night; and I was told that the ironsmiths worked double sets of hands, covering night and day. In agriculture, and all the industries connected with it there is in Servia a new and almost raw but fertile world, which western enterprise must soon enter and develop by persistently urging upon the people the advantages of new methods, of culture.

education and intelligence.

They are making praiseworthy attempts to give better instruction to the present generation of Servian youth.

About 700 teachers in all are employed in the principality. Only 10 receive a salary amounting to $300. The remainder are paid in diminishing sums, till the amount becomes a mere auxiliary to insufficient means of living. They are obliged to accept such teachers as can be had, and these are often shoemakers and tailors, who combine the duties of instruction, such as they can give, with their other laborious employments. Some 80 teachers out of the whole number are represented as qualified. The most competent are of course found in the large towns and villages.

The common clergy of the established church are represented as not sufficiently active in assistance and encouragement to popular education, and as not infrequently presenting bad examples to the youth around them.

The church wields an almost irresistible influence over the public mind, and of course embraces in its ranks many good and exemplary men, as well as the inefficient and the bad referred to above.

The children observed at Belgrade have the appearance of abundant capacity for a high order of instruction. They are quick-witted, animated in speech and manner, and apparently ambitious of scholastic attainments.

There are two or three educational and religious periodicals published in Servia, and two newspapers, one of which is “official” and the other said to be “officious.” Thus the government is not troubled by printed assaults upon its integrity, or criticisms upon its conduct. Besides these means of influencing the public mind, the government has in its pay, as I was assured by an employé of the government, three agents, who send the necessary telegrams and other correspondence touching Servian affairs to the journals of foreign countries. I formed a most favorable opinion of the natural mental vigor of the people.

It is a common remark that “they beat the Jews” at a bargain; that no Jew can grow rich in Servia. Their faults are not those of stupidity, but rather those of “smartness.” The moral elements—veracity, self-respect, love of the right and of justice, a sense of personal responsibility, devotion to the sentiment of honor, both public and private—these need much development.

The school of Turkish supremacy was not one from which these virtues could be expected. Direct contact with western civilization and manners will, it is hoped, lead to amelioration in these respects.

ways of communication.

There are now only two ways of Servian imports and exports, by rail across Hungary from Austria and the German ports, and from the Black Sea by the river Danube. Local distribution is effected by steamers on the Danube and on the Save, and between the river landings and the interior by rude wagons drawn by oxen. This interior transportation must be large, if I may judge by the activity apparent at the landings on the Danube between the Save and Bazias, the lowest landing which I reached.

The Austrian Steam Navigation Company’s line of steamers has almost a monopoly of the transport on both these rivers, and the cost of transportation is complained of as excessive.

For American heavy merchandize the route would be through the Black Sea to Galatz, and thence by steamer to the Servian river ports. After the completion of the Mitrovitza and Belgrade Railroad the communication will be also by way of the Mediterranean and the port of Salonica.

I have, &c.,

JOHN A. KASSON.

Belgium.Belgium.

[56] . Mr. Goodloe to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Brussels, January 2, 1879. (Received January 20.)

[57] . Mr. Goodloe to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Brussels, March 10, 1879. (Received March. 24.)

[58] . Mr. Goodloe to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Brussels, April 9, 1879. (Received April 21.)

[59] . Mr. Goodloe to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Brussels, April 16, 1879. (Received April 28.)

[60] . Mr. Goodloe to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Brussels, May 5, 1879. (Received May 19.)

[61] . Mr. Goodloe to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Brussels, May 7, 1879. (Received May 20.)

[62] . Mr. Goodloe to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Brussels, June 18, 1879. (Received July 7.)

[63] . Mr. Goodloe to Mr. Evarts

Legation of the United States, Brussels, July 17, 1879. (Received: July 30.)

[64] . Mr. Delfosse to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of Belgium in the United States, August 12, 1878. (Received August 13.)

[65] . Mr. Evarts to Mr. Delfosse.

Department of State, Washington, September 19, 1878.

[66] . Mr. Van den Bossche to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of Belgium in the United States, Washington, January 6, 1879.

[67] . Mr. Evarts to Mr. Van den Bossche.

Department of State, Washington, January 31, 1879.

[68] . Mr. Van den Bossche to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of Belgium, Washington, May 7, 1879.

[69] . Mr. Evarts to Mr. Van den Bossche.

Department of State, Washington, June 23, 1879.

[70] . Mr. Van den Bossche to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of Belgium, Washington, June 26, 1879.

[71] . Mr. Seward to Mr. Van den Bossche.

Department of State, Washington, July 3, 1879.

[72] . Mr. Van den Bossche to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of Belgian, Washington, July 7, 1879.

[73] . Mr. Evarts to Mr. Van den Bossche.

Department of State, July 12, 1879.

No. 45. Mr. Goodloe to Mr. Evarts. [Document 56]

No. 45.
Mr. Goodloe to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Brussels, January 2, 1879. (Received January 20.) No. 39.]

Sir: The customary New Year’s receptions were yesterday in this city almost universally observed, the central point of interest being, of course, the one held at the palace. The ladies of the diplomatic corps were received by the Queen on the evening of the 31st. At noon of the 1st the chiefs of missions, with their secretaries and attachés, were received by their majesties the King and Queen. Afterward, in the order named, were received the senators and representatives, the judiciary, the officers of the army, the garde-civique, and citizens for whom permission had previously been obtained.

All countries having ministers at this court were represented save that of England, whose officers remained away on account of the recent death of the Princess Alice. An order temporarily suspending the court mourning for this special occasion was considered sufficient absolution by the rest of us.

As is their majesties’ custom, they talked briefly with each of the ministers, beginning with that one longest accredited to this court and closing with the latest arrival. Fortunately, however, the proper estimate of a country’s worth and greatness neither depends upon the rank nor length of service of its representative.

The King to me was as cordial and gracious in his manner and language as possible, and it gives me great pleasure to make known to you his kindly expressions. He assured me at once of his kindliest sentiments toward our country and people, and said emphatically that he wished “the greatest prosperity and continuous blessings for your truly great country, and every happiness and success for its people.” In this one sentence I have given probably his words, but in subsequent conversation he was neither less cordial nor kind, and I very gratefully expressed to him my thanks. I assured him that I felt I not only reflected the sentiments of those in authority, but that of all thinking Americans, when I said to him his good wishes and friendship were cordially and sincerely reciprocated.

His majesty concluded by saying, “I greatly hope that your Congress will continue the mission at Brussels, and I should be pleased to learn that such was its determination.”

I have, &c.,

WM. CASSIUS GOODLOE.

No. 46. Mr. Goodloe to Mr. Evarts. [Document 57]

No. 46.
Mr. Goodloe to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Brussels, March 10, 1879. (Received March. 24.) No. 50.]

Sir: In the course of a short conversation with the King while in attendance at a ball held at the palace recently, in reply to an incidental remark of mine that the United States seemed now to be entering upon a more prosperous state than it had enjoyed prior to specie resumption, His Majesty said, “I am very glad to hear it; you know well my feelings toward your country; I wish it the greatest prosperity and advancement, and strongly hope that commerce may increase between the two countries.”

It is not uncharitable to conclude that while His Majesty may not be averse to Belgians purchasing goods from the United States, yet his great desire is that the balance of trade should be in favor of his own country, As a similar feeling is doubtless likewise entertained by the United States, it is essential that a healthy impetus should be given to commerce first, and then the country enjoy the greater benefit that may be the better entitled to it. This conversation with the King induces me to transmit to you some general ideas on the subject of enlarging the field of American trade.

Many Americans are apt to suppose that because they have an article of conceded merit, more particularly a patent, that it is the easiest thing in the world to introduce it into Europe, and reap a fortune in a few months. Labor-saving machines, articles of household utility, useful improvements upon articles already in use, they expect to commend themselves at once to foreigners by reason of their superiority over others. They greatly err in comparing the tastes and wants of their own countrymen with that of the average European. An American, as a rule, will promptly and unhesitatingly discard anything he has in use for something he considers better adapted to his requirements; but to argue that a Belgian is equally progressive is a very grave mistake and a pregnant cause of many failures to introduce wares of unquestioned merit.

Americans should study carefully the needs, tastes, habits, customs, and capabilities of those they desire for customers. The differences of climate, prejudices of race, distrustfulness of the ignorant, essentially different forms of government, language, and religion, all combine to add difficulties to the problem “How can American wares be successfully introduced and their sale made permanent and growing?” The port of Antwerp is the radiating point for all Central and Northern Europe, and the suggestion made by the consul here that a sample store of American goods be opened in Brussels is a very good one, but the majority of those who send their wares must not expect an immediate return, but rater look for their remuneration when the permanency of their trade is secured. Americans are not apt to treat with proper patience the slower-going European merchant. A man entering a store here and offering to sell goods by sample would be at once pronounced an escaped lunatic; but when orders are once given to a manufacturer they are continued from year to year and not changed save for very good cause. From a sample store properly conducted and judiciously supplied, would go out those things best suited to the peculiar wants of the people, so that in a short while the nature and requirements of the market would be so well understood that all unsalable articles could in future seek another channel of trade.

To talk of improved agricultural implements in a rural district where the men are so poor—having neither horse, ox, nor cow—that they combine together and themselves pull the plow—a by no means unusual sight in some parts of Belgium, though there are some large and well-cultivated estates—would be wasting breath to a poor purpose indeed. ’Tis equal folly to enlarge upon the immense capabilities of a reaping-machine in a district so subdivided that there is scarcely room enough in one for a team of horses to turn, or of descanting upon the superiority of the American article before a number of Brussels lace merchants. There are, however, many things in America, aside from meats and grain, already getting a firm foothold, that can, and in time will, be introduced here with great profit to our people, but to do so will require tact, patience, and untiring perseverence.

Belgians are averse to innovations, distrustful of changes, and should one be induced to try an experiment, his neighbors would watch him with misgivings and distrust for a long period before venturing to follow the same path. But an article, like a custom, once introduced would be as difficult to supplant as was in the beginning its predecessor.

The chief merits of most of American inventions are their labor-saving qualities—just that improvement which at this time is not wanted in Europe, at least by those who constitute the governing classes. If a machine is offered whereby one man can do the work heretofore done by two, what is to become of the other man, they ask. Is he to be thrown out of employment to be an expense upon the state? Both men were contented before with their small earnings; better that they should remain so, say those in authority; and down to the lowest official such innovations, so styled, meet discouragements and obstructions which, in some instances, amounts to prohibition. To an extent this is even so with food, notwithstanding cheap and wholesome living for the masses solves many a difficult problem of government. Indian corn in any of its varied uses is almost unknown here. American hams were recently denied a sale because the yellow ochre used in coloring the cloth bags in which they were inclosed were erroneously supposed to have affected the meat, a damaged lot of which had been discovered. And all sorts of stories are told about trichina in bacon, rancid lard, diseased cattle, musty wheat, &c. Though such wild statements originate with interested parties, they find willing believers and ready assistants among those whose better interests would be subserved were only the truth known.

How to bring about increased commercial relations with Belgium, whereby the United States may be benefited, is a subject to which I not only give attention and investigation, but assist and encourage our consuls to do the same. I answer promptly and as fully as I am able to do all letters asking for information concerning trade or in any manner pertaining to business, and our consuls will gladly impart any knowledge on such subjects they may possess.

A perfect understanding of the language is an indispensable requisite of an agent. The larger number of the lower classes speak Flemish; all of the upper classes speak French, and great numbers speak also English and German. A knowledge of a foreign language sufficient to travel and carry on an ordinary conversation is not sufficient for the purposes of a traveling agent who expects to meet with much success. His knowledge of the language should be thorough, so that he may have his subject always at his tongue’s end. But, above all, merchants should be cautioned against sending a “smart,” “sharp” fellow on their business. ’Tis well enough for one to have his wits about him, for he will not always have honest men to deal with, but one “sharp trick” practiced on the unsuspecting never fails to utterly destroy the trickster’s business and at the same time to materially injure that of all other Americans.

The limited knowledge of America, her institutions, products, and manufactured articles, is by no means confined to the laboring classes, and it is not very difficult to excite a great prejudice against any article. Among the governing class and landed proprietors there is a perceptible uneasiness in regard to the introduction of American goods, and with a few the panic produced by the increased importation of cattle and grain has been as great as was that among the holders of gas stock in London upon the announcement that Mr. Edison had demonstrated the feasibility of lighting houses and streets with electricity. They reckon no limit to American capabilities when put forth in earnest.

Tenants complain that they cannot pay their rent and compete in the market with American cattle and grain, and in consequence demand a reduction, to which proprietors are greatly indisposed to assent. If land owners concede lower rents to their tenants, they demand in turn lower taxes from the government, and American so-called “innovations” thus become the “bête noir” of more than one class. There are few, if any, freer countries in Europe than Belgium, or in which the people have a more potent voice, but the nobility here, as the world over, with their family influences reaching every class and section, wield the main power, mold the opinions, and shape the direction of affairs. The distress in England, and in a measure throughout Europe, is attributable, in the opinion of many, directly to the introduction of the cheaper American productions.

The consternation produced among landed proprietors in anticipation of future woes, by an occasional article going the rounds of the press concerning a “herd of western cattle fifty thousand strong,” or “twenty thousand acres of wheat” being cut by “fifty improved reapers in a row,” would be amusing did it not have its serious aspect. Nevertheless food and merchandise of any description will force themselves into markets whenever their claim of being “cheaper” or of “better quality” is fully established. With goods in every instance fully up to samples, open and upright dealing, American energy has not only in Belgium a profitable field for development, but one susceptible of expansion far beyond its borders.

I have, &c.,

WM. CASSIUS GOODLOE.

No. 47. Mr. Goodloe to Mr. Evarts. [Document 58]

No. 47.
Mr. Goodloe to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Brussels, April 9, 1879. (Received April 21.) No. 56.]

Sir: The diplomatic relations between Belgium and Mexico which have been interrupted since the death of the Emperor Maximilian (the King’s brother-in-law) are on the point of being resumed. In the budget of the minister for foreign affairs just voted by the chambers was included a salary for an envoy extraordinary and minister plenipotentiary to the Republic of Mexico. A royal decree has just been promulgated, appointing the Baron Greindl as such minister. He has been in the diplomatic service and is considered here as an accomplished and learned gentleman. He is now awaiting orders, but informed me a few evenings since that he expected to start for his post of duty in May or June, and hoped to be able to go through the United States on his way.

At least a hope of reviving Belgian commerce (which has been falling off of late years) was, I think, the chief motive in creating this mission, and the proposed Mexican Exposition in 1880 gave a favorable occasion.

I shall very soon forward you some of the views held by Belgian statesmen in relation to the increase of the consular service, which they hope will be conducive, at no distant day, to an expansion of commerce, by the opening of new channels for Belgian products.

I have, &c.,

WM. CASSIUS GOODLOE.

No. 48. Mr. Goodloe to Mr. Evarts. [Document 59]

No. 48.
Mr. Goodloe to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Brussels, April 16, 1879. (Received April 28.) No. 58.]

Sir: Immediately upon the accession of the liberal party to power, in June of last year, Baron d’Anethan, the minister of Belgium to the Holy See, came home on an indefinite leave of absence. It was stated freely, and by many believed, that diplomatic relations with Rome had been permanently broken off. The long-continued absence of the minister, who has not yet returned to his post, gave strength to the report, but those who knew that a secretary remained in charge of the legation, and the representative of the Pope was still in Brussels, awaited an official announcement before concluding that diplomatic relations between Belgium and Rome had entirely ceased.

There has been the greatest excitement in Belgium concerning this question, and in political and church circles party-spirit has been at its height. The agitation has reached the masses, and this, together with a proposed liberal common-school law, has provoked a discussion which in bitterness and intensity Belgium has been a stranger to for many years.

The people are all Catholics in religion, but the Liberals have proclaimed a total separation of church and state, andon that issue stand before the country.

The Catholic or clerical party, to which the clergy of every degree belong, assail the Liberals as infidels and enemies to the peace and independence of their country; that their course tends toward French Republicanism, and if successful will result in degradation for the church and consequent ungodliness among the people. So intense is the feeling among the clergy that the unbridled utterances of many of the bishops are by some of the more charitable Liberals in all sincerity attributed to mild lunacy.

I do not know that the Liberals are any more choice in their language toward their opponents, and a disinterested party having only the mutual denunciations, charges, and abuse to judge from, might well conclude that the extreme men of both sides had temporarily lost their heads. Newspapers abound in party crimination, and public addresses are more noticeable for force of language than strength of argument. And still it can be truly said that worse is yet to come.

The school bill will call forth the deepest passions of the Catholics in opposition, and an equally determined spirit to pass it upon the part of the Liberals. As the Liberals have a majority in both chambers, and the bill has been favorably reported, it is conceded that it will in course of legislation become a law, I shall, however, reserve for another dispatch the main features of this bill and of the debate thereon when it shall have taken place.

In the recent budget of the minister of foreign affairs was included the salary of the minister to the Vatican, and for your more perfect understanding of the question in all its bearings, I send you herewith almost the entire debate in the chamber of representatives. There are only a very few sentences omitted.

The course of the minister of foreign affairs, in even asking for a temporary retention of the Belgian legation at Rome, caused great surprise and no inconsiderable chagrin to many of his party followers, So well known were his views in opposition to a continuance of the mission that his accession to power was considered as an equivalent to its suppression. It will be observed that Mr. Frére Orban himself, in his remarks before the Chamber, was fully alive to his apparent self-contradiction, and without attempting a full explanation or asking for present justification, requested the votes of his party friends and a suspension of their judgment. I was in the chamber when the vote was taken, and there was a scarcely perceptible “no” in opposition. All the Catholics were for it, of course, and preserved a prudent reserve throughout the debate. However, the total withdrawal of the Belgian legation from Rome has only been postponed for a short while. It will be done a little later, but none the less surely. It is one of the certainties of the future, and has only given place to the more important school bill.

The ministry doubtless had aroused as much opposition by the proposed changes in the school law as they cared at one time to encounter, and the lesser trouble was temporarily smoothed over. For diplomatic relations to cease between Belgium and Rome after the school bill becomes a law will not only be easily brought about, but will scarcely attract public attention. The present Pope was nuncio at this court during the reign of Leopold I, and is said to be anxious that diplomatic relations should be kept up between Belgium and the Vatican, and many say that the King would be greatly gratified could such an arrangement be effected.

The success of the Liberal party in carrying such legislation as is proposed must be regarded as one of the significant signs of the times. The strict lines of party division have been drawn beyond the classes entitled to suffrage, and some of the most intense partisans of either side are to be found among those who as yet supply the want of a ballot with loud noise and coarse abuse of their opponents. The bitterness of the controversy has taken almost an entirely religious turn, and has passed from the political into business and social circles. It is common for men to refuse to purchase articles of a political opponent 5 in many places invitations to a social party are issued only to one side, and lam told that even many of the common people will not “drink” in the saloon of an opponent, albeit neither rum-seller nor rum-drinker has any voice whatever in public affairs. It is common to hear the expression that for thirty-five years never has Belgium experienced such political excitement. And the end is not yet. * * *

I have, &c.,

WM. CASSIUS GOODLOE.

No. 49. Mr. Goodloe to Mr. Evarts. [Document 60]

No. 49.
Mr. Goodloe to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Brussels, May 5, 1879. (Received May 19.) No. 62.]

Sir: The industrial, agricultural, and horticultural exhibition which is to be held in this city next year, as one of the features in the celebration of the 50th anniversary of the existence of Belgium as an independent nation, is to be purely national.

A belief that it will partake of an international character seems to be gaining ground in some quarters of America, and I think it well to correct such an impression. No foreign exhibitors will be invited or allowed to participate, as its object is only to display to foreign nations the resources and capabilities of Belgian industries. Ground has been broken for the construction of the necessary buildings, which, according to contract, are to be ready for occupancy by June 1, 1880. The formal opening will take place June 15, 1880, and the doors are to be closed October 15 of the same year. Competition will be invited in every industry known to the country, and those of our citizens whose interests or pleasure incline them to a critical inspection of Belgian products could have no more favorable opportunity than this will afford. Furthermore, in view of the great numbers of people who are sure to be present, it might not be an inopportune time for Americans to have some of their wares on hand. Of course they would be denied the power of competing for prizes, and no unusual privileges would be conceded for the introduction of goods, nor could they be displayed in the exhibition building, but those whose enterprise should be sufficient to induce them to overlook these obstacles would be rewarded with an audience not only numerous but from every section of Europe.

The object of this dispatch, however, is to make known that the coming exhibition is to be strictly national, and in no sense whatever international.

I have, &c.,

WM. CASSIUS GOODLOE.

No. 50. Mr. Goodloe to Mr. Evarts. [Document 61]

No. 50.
Mr. Goodloe to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Brussels, May 7, 1879. (Received May 20.) No. 63.]

Sir: Referring to your No. 31, asking for particulars of railroad taxation in Belgium, I have the honor to say that immediately upon its reception I addressed a formal communication to the foreign office, setting forth in detail the information desired, and asked that the subject matter be referred to the minister of public works. I then called in person on the minister of public works and explained to him fully the nature and object of the information desired. He kindly promised to furnish me with what I was in quest of at as early a day as possible. In the mean time I pursued an examination myself among the lawyers, and gathered (mainly from Mr. Willemaers, an advocate of great prominence) that in the Kingdom of Belgium the railroads are managed, some directly by the state, and others by private companies constituted under the form of joint stock, and created exclusively for this particular object.

The lines of railroad comprised’ in the first category naturally pay no taxation, inasmuch as the general result is all for the benefit of the state.

It is to be remarked, however, that the management of the state railroads has a distinct organization in the public service, and a separate budget, which enables the yearly public revenue from this source to be ascertained, and consequently tariffs to be made, that the general interests may conform to the necessities of the treasury.

Railroad concessions made to private companies are granted for a period of 90 years.

The construction as well as the management of these lines is regulated by a table of charges imposed by the state.

The land necessary for the making of the roads and their appendages is purchased with the funds of the grantee, but in the name of the state, which becomes the sole proprietor. The state is equally proprietor of all buildings erected for the requirements of the working, and from which the grantee enjoys only a privilege.

The only right, as well as the only benefit, of the holder of the concession consists in the collection of the fares which he is authorized by the prescribed limits of the table of charges to claim as the price for the conveyance of passengers and transportation of merchandise.

The tariffs are nearly always established upon the same basis as those of the state. The state being the proprietor of the road and of the buildings, the result is, in consequence, that the real estate is exempt from taxes and duties imposed on private property.

The grantee, to insure the execution of the obligations imposed by the table of charges, is obliged to deposit a guarantee fund into the hands of an authorized officer of the state.

No concession of railroad to private persons or to companies can be set aside without the positive consent of the state.

In case of a breach of the prohibition, the government can order the line to be managed by the department of public works of the state on account of the corporation.

Generally, the table of charges stipulates the power of the government to make use of the lines granted for the transportation of troops, of military material, and of prison vans, &c., at reduced rates; also mail carriages, telegrams, and the necessary postal agents are conveyed free.

Usually, the deeds constituting the concession reserve to the government the privilege of purchasing the railroad after a working of a certain number of years.

The purchase is uniformly in accordance with the following conditions:

The net revenue of the last seven years of working is calculated; that of the two least favorable years is deducted, and the mean revenue of the five years after this deduction is capitalized at 5 per cent. Then a premium of 10 to 15 per cent is added to the above.

Some railroads possess a concession, granted by the state, for a minimum of the interest upon the capital invested in their construction.

The personal property and the materials for the working of such railroads are exempt from all taxes or duties.

The capital of the companies working lines to which concessions are made is fixed by agreement with the government.

It is not burdened by any particular tax, only its bonds are subject to proportional stamp duty, determined by the laws then existing.

The receipts of the line are not subject to any special previous taxation for the profit of the state, but the companies are obliged to pay more or less to the state, according to profits realized.

At the expiration of the term fixed by the concession, it falls to the state with the material, and the company is paid an amount therefor, after valuation, which may be agreed upon.

I could have forwarded this much some time since, but felt that you would prefer I should await the reply of the minister of public works. This I only received yesterday, and as the railroads of Belgium are directly under his supervision, nothing could be more authoritative than his statements. With his communication came a number of books pertinent to the subject in hand, all of which I have this day forwarded to you through the office of the United States dispatch agent in London.

The package of five, marked with red crayon No. 1 (sent under separate cover), is a work containing the organic arrangements regulating the administration of railroads managed by the government. These regulations apply equally to the postal, telegraphic, and marine service.

A royal decree of the 5th of October, 1876, gave to the marine an independent organization, and created for this service a distinct administration, continuing it, however, as a dependency of the department of public works.

A second royal decree of the 19th of November, 1877, promulgated by ministerial action on the 5th of December following, directed a separation of the administration of state railroads from that of the post and telegraphs, and gave to the first a new organization. The text of this new organization will be found in a document marked No. 2, and inclosed herewith.

Package No. 3 (sent under separate cover) contains two reports, giving for the years 1876 and 1877 the result of the operations of the state.

Railroads worked by companies to which concessions have been made, are subject to certain general conditions, specified in a pamphlet inclosed herewith and marked No. 4, and to special organic regulations, in which the government has no power to interfere.

The minister of public works prefaced his answers to my written questions with the statement that in Belgium the taxation of railways is divided into two classes—railways managed by the State and those managed by companies as grantees.

The first are exempt from all taxation. The second are taxable, according to the limits indicated further on, to the land tax, to the assessed taxes, and to licenses. They are not liable to any other tax.

These three taxes are laid upon the following basis:

1st. land tax. (See code of taxes, pages 27 [Pg. 27 is part of Doc. 25] to 66 [Pg. 66 is part of Doc. 49].)

The basis of this tax is the net revenue of real property (property built or unbuilt) calculated from the mean of a certain number of years, according to the rules laid down by the laws of the 3d day of the 3d month of the 7th year, of the 19th of the 6th month of the 9th year of the first French Republic; of the 15th September, 1807; of the 10th of January, 1824; of the 28th of March, 1828; of the 22d December, 1838; of the 25th March, 1847; of the 3d April, 1851; of the 7th June, 1867; and of the 5th July, 1871. The quota of the tax is at 7 per cent. of the taxable revenue.

The taxable revenue of unbuilt landed property is that which remains to the proprietor after deducting from the gross product the expense of cultivation, of sowing, of harvesting, and of keeping in order. It is calculated from the mean of a determined number of years.

For property built the taxable revenue is all that remains to the proprietor, after deduction from the mean renting value for a certain number of years of the sum necessary to indemnify him against wear and tear and to defray the expenses of repairs.

As will be seen further on, the surface taken up by the railroads, as well as the buildings which form an inherent part of these railroads, are exempt from the land tax.

2d. Assessed taxes.—(See code of taxes, pages 81 [Pg. 81 includes portions of Doc. 52 and Doc. 53] to 129 [Pg. 129 is part of Doc. 80].) These taxes are laid down upon the following basis: 1st. Renting value of the habitations and buildings.

2d. Doors and windows.

3d. Stoves.

4th. Value of furniture.

5th. Male servants.

6th. Horses.

The laws relative to these taxes do not contain anything especially applicable to the companies which manage these railroads. As is stated further on, the buildings used by these companies are liable to the tax when they contain personal property.

3d. Licenses.—(See code of taxes, pages 131 [Pg. 131 is part of Doc. 81] to 242 [Pg. 242 is part of Doc. 139].)

This duty is exacted from persons, societies, companies, &c., who carry on a profession, an industry, or a commerce. It is based upon the amount of profit which the profession, industry, or commerce procures, or is supposed to be able to procure. It is stated further on how the license duties are levied on railroad companies, the only duty in reality which touches them.

The minister now proceeds to answer in detail the questions propounded:

1st and 6th. “On what general recognized principle, if any, is the taxation of the railroads in Belgium based? What taxes are levied upon the receipts of the companies, whether net or gross?”

The first article of the law of the 21st of May, 1819, upon the license duty (code of taxation, page 131 [Pg. 131 is part of Doc. 81]), sanctions the following principle: No one can practice for himself, or any one in another’s name, without having a license; an industry or trade or shop is not exempted by article 3 of this law.

The license is based upon the proportionate amount of profit which each industry may realize, taking into account its usefulness, more or less great. (Law of July 21, 1821, litt. C.)

The workers of railroads are not by name indicated in the law of license duties. However, they are taxed by assimilation with contractors for transports No. 375 of the table No. 14 annexed to the law. (Code of taxes, page 182 [Pg. 182 is part of Doc. 113].)

The minimum duty is 6 francs, the maximum is 425 francs, in principal. The state collects besides 20 additional centimes upon this duty. The provinces and the parishes are authorized to add also some additional centimes, of which the amount varies according to their budget necessities.

Such is the system of imposing the license duty on railroad workers, inasmuch as they are not constituted into joint stock companies or into companies with limited liability by shares. But in Belgium, the grantee railroad companies all having a joint stock form, are taxed exclusively upon the annual profits, in conformity with the hereafter-mentioned legislative provisions.

1st. The table No. 9 annexed to the law of the 21st of May, 1819.

2d. The article 9 of the law of the 6th April, 1823.

3d. The article 3 of the law of the 22d January, 1849. (Code of taxes, pages 169 [Pg. 169 is part of Doc. 104], 196 [Pg. 196 is part of Doc. 117], 220 [Pg. 220 is part of Doc. 131].)

4th. The article 12 of the law of the 5th of July, collection administrative No. 132.

5th. The article 1 of the law of the 12th of March, 1874. (Same collection, No. 1439.)

It is understood by profits the interest of capital employed, the dividends, and generally all amounts divided in any “titres” whatsoever, including those which are affected” by the increase of the social capital and the reserve fund.

The duty is 2 per cent. upon these profits, independently of 20 additional centimes.

No taxation is due when the joint stock company closes its balance with a loss.

2d. Question. In how far are railroad companies taxed as holders of realty?

The land necessary for the construction of conceded railroads for a service of public usefulness being acquired in the name of the state, which is the proprietor, the companies are only usufructuaries until the expirations of their grants of railroads. (Court of appeal at Brussels, decree of March 2, 1850.)

The surface of land occupied by the railroads, being assimilated to the highway, is exempt from land tax. (Article 103 of the law of the 3d day of the 3d month of the 7th year of the first French Republic, code of taxes, page 42 [Pg. 42 includes portions of Doc. 34 and Doc. 35].)

The buildings which are inherent to the works are also exonerated from taxation, to wit: the squares and stations, warehouses, workshops, guard-houses and buildings used for lodgings for station-masters.

In short the only landed property, upon which the land tax is exacted is the surplus land, &c., which remains the property of the grantees outside of the railway.

3d. Question. “In how far as holders of personalty?”

In Belgium there is properly speaking no tax upon personalty.

However, the assessed taxes include a tax upon the furniture of habitations. The law which rules this tax (law of the 28th June, 1822, code of taxes, page 81 [Pg. 81 includes portions of Doc. 52 and Doc. 53]) is applicable to railroad companies, as to all private persons, excepting for the furniture of offices and buildings which serve exclusively for the working.

4th. Question. “In how far are they subject to a franchise tax?”

Such a tax does not exist in Belgium.

5th. Question. “In how far is their stock taxed as personalty to its wner?”

The stock and bonds of railroad companies are not subject to any such special tax, but these “titres” fall under the general application of articles 1 and 2. No. 2 of the stamp law of the 21st March, 1839, is thus worded: The stamp duty upon stocks and bonds and all other deeds at unlimited periods is payable after five years of their issue. It is fixed for those of 500 francs and under at 0.50 franc; for those above 500 francs to 1,000 francs at 1 franc; for those above 1,000 francs to 2,000 francs at 2 francs, and so on at 1 by 1,000 francs without fractions.

Article 10 of the law of the 24th March, 1873, exempts the registering of shares issued by companies “whose business is established in the kingdom.”

Through fear that my translation might be at fault in some particulars I inclose you the original, which possibly may be more satisfactory. I, also inclose a few printed slips marked No. 5, from the office of the minister of finance, upon the taxation of railroads applicable to his department.

If further information is desired, I would recommend the purchase of “Annuaire des chemins de fer Beiges.” It is a work comprising all the legislation, the jurisprudence, and statistics of all the railroads of Belgium since their origin. It comprises eight volumes, embracing the period from 1835, to 1876, and costs 52 francs.

Another useful book would be “Trade des transports par chemin de fer en Belgique,” which costs 10 francs. Either or both of these books I will purchase and forward if desired.

Trusting the above will answer all requirements,

I have, &c.,

WM. CASSIUS GOODLOE.

[Inclosures.]

1. Pamphlet marked No. 2.

2. Original statement from minister of public works.

3. Pamphlet entitled “Concessions de chemins de fer en Belgique,” marked No. 4.

4. Contributions directes, marked No. 5.

No. 51. Mr. Goodloe to Mr. Evarts. [Document 62]

No. 51.
Mr. Goodloe to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Brussels, June 18, 1879. (Received July 7.) No. 70.]

Sir: A bill introduced in the Chamber of Representatives by the minister of public instruction to amend the school law of Belgium, passed in 1842, has, for months past, greatly agitated the people of every class in this little kingdom. Indeed, the excitement among the friends and opponents of the measure has increased with time since the day the King, in his speech from the throne, foreshadowed the contemplated change.

The discussion long since took an almost exclusively religious turn. The Catholics charged, and many of their followers believed, that the proposed law was neither more nor less than an insidious and determined thrust at the religion of the country.

The liberals admitted it was a blow at priestly domination in secular affairs, but only rendered religion itself purer by eliminating from it cares and responsibilities which should be borne exclusively by the laity.

Under the existing law—commonly termed the law of 1842—the priests had the right, in common with the civil authorities, to have committees selected from their order to inspect all the public schools. The civil committees were always from the ranks of the party in power, and when the government was liberal, and there arose a conflict between its committees and those of the church, the suggestions of the one or the other were followed or rejected, according as the majority of the communal happened to be Catholic or liberal in politics. Of course there could be no conflict when the government was Catholic, for the civil appointees owed their places to the representatives of the priesthood. Teachers were completely under the control of the priests, and removal or promotion was at their pleasure. No book could be used in the schools unless previously indorsed by the priests, and bore upon its title page the stamp of the archbishop’s approval. At any hour it was the privilege of the priest to enter the school and give religious instruction. The liberals urge with great vehemence that the priests were not satisfied to give religious instruction, but interfered with everything else pertaining, to the school. With great force they charged that the priests visited the schools in communals that were Catholic, but utterly refused to enter schools established by the liberals; thus proving that it was not religious instruction they were so anxious to impart, unless the entire control of the schools in all other respects could be retained under the priestly robe.

In the normal schools of priests from which the instructors come, it is taught that Leopold and Belgium are but secondary to the Pope and Borne. Under the new law that institution is to be abolished, and all teachers are to come from the state normal school. Neither can priests, under the new law, act any longer as school inspectors, but all such must be taken from the heads of families, and as priests do not marry, they are effectually excluded, no difference which party may be in power.

Under the proposed law the priest will only be permitted to enter the schools one-half hour before the regular time for commencing studies, and immediately after school is dismissed; and these visits will be restricted exclusively to religious instruction. That perfect liberty of conscience may be enforced, no scholar will be required to attend during the priest’s presence unless his or her parents expressly desire it. Now the local authorities can suspend or remove a teacher at the instance of the priests, but it is proposed to allow them only the privilege to suspend for not exceeding fifteen days, and the power of removal is to be vested alone in the government.

The liberals insist that the priests only encourage congregational schools and sow dissension in official schools.

Soon after the now pending bill was proposed the priests ordered an additional prayer in all the churches beseeching the Divine deliverance from “instructors without faith and schools without God.” They officially promulgated the idea that the bill was anti-Catholic, and so necessary was a government contradiction considered that the minister of the interior directed the burgomaster of every communal to post the proposed law conspicuously at the Hotel de Ville. This, several of them, noticeably the one at Bruges, refused to do, and it became a question of parliamentary inquiry eliciting a warm debate as to whether or not the minister of the interior had the right to require such services at their hands.

The bill as proposed by the ministry was, after five weeks continuous discussion, passed on Friday last by the Chamber of Representatives amidst the most intense excitement, by a vote of 67 to 60. The ministry, upon reaching the open air were the recipients of quite an ovation from the people.

The discussion upon the merits of the bill was not at all times confined within strictly parliamentary limits, and the heat and bitterness engendered within the chamber spread like a contagion without, and the respective adherents of either party were not a whit behind their leaders in denunciation and abuse. Language not the choicest was freely indulged in, and anathemas loud and deep were bandied backward and forward with a facility and freedom indicating practice as well as feeling.

I inclose you herewith a synopsis of the leading speeches upon either side, which will serve to give you a clear insight into the merits of the case. It is safe to say that on no question has Belgium been so convulsed in forty years, and to my mind the magnitude of the excitement has been out of all proportion to the subject. But in a country whose population is nine-tenths Catholic this attempt, which certainly promises success, to thrust the priest from the school-room save as a religious teacher at stated hours, can but have an influence probably more extended in its results than is to an American Protestant at once discernible.

The Catholics profess to believe and openly assert that the bill cannot pass the Senate. They urge that while the majority in the Senate belong to the liberal party, yet many of its members are none the less Catholic, and will not give, their assent to a law which they insist is so anti-Catholic in its tendencies. I do not know how this may be, for I scarcely meet two persons in succession who express the same opinion.

It is possible that the liberals may in some measure relax their efforts, claiming to justify themselves before the country as having passed their cherished measure through the most popular branch of the legislature. In a nutshell the new law not only proposes to repeal every clause in the existing law which countenances the interference of the priesthood in any branch of common-school education, and restrict them rigidly to purely religious duties but in unmistakable terms to eject them bodily froth the school-room during the hours allotted to secular instruction.

Since the above was written the bill has passed the Senate by a bare majority of two votes. I have just visited the chambers, and certainly the excitement has in no measure diminished.

The Prince de Ligné, a liberal Senator and president of the Senate, voted against the measure and declared himself strongly opposed to it. I do not think either side was confident of success, and the result was alike a surprise to both.

The news of the passage of the bill spread rapidly through the city, and though an adjournment was, effected very soon thereafter, a large crowd had in the mean time assembled in the square adjoining the chambers and loudly cheered the ministers and liberal members as they passed to their carriages. Had the ministry been defeated in the Senate it was expected they would tender their resignations, but it is now predicted that their hold upon the majority is sufficiently strong to enable them to retain their portfolios indefinitely.

I have, &c.,

WM. CASSIUS GOODLOE.

[Inclosure.]

Synopsis of speeches delivered in the Chamber of Representatives.

[Inclosure in No. 70.]

discussion on the proposed revision of the law, of 1842 upon, primary instruction.

M. Notelteirs said: In discussing the proposed scholastic law, a duty is imposed upon me by my conscience as a Christian, a Catholic, and Belgian citizen. The education of the rising generation depends upon it, and consequently the future of our beautiful country.

This project has caused great emotion in the country this is incontestable. This emotion is sincere; it is profound and lawful.

A great number of electors who were favorable to the left have been gained, and this surprises nobody, for notwithstanding our political dissensions, our populations are Christian and Catholic. Belgium will remain faithful to that faith which civilized her more than twelve centuries ago, and which through all her changes has given her her force, her happiness, and her glory. She wishes to remain Catholic and free.

The great fault of the ministry is in their having made the cause of popular education a political question, and thereby sacrificing this cause, sacred and vital to the country, to the anti-religious passions of some thousands of free-thinkers.

I dare almost say that this fault is a crime to society. The honorable Mr. Frére-Orban once said in this chamber, “Society is unhealthy,” and he deplored the weakening of the religious sentiments in the masses. It was a statesman who spoke thus. To-day Mr. Frére-Orban associates with those who are about to distribute the poison of unbelief into even the smallest villages.

You blame our bishops because they have given a cry of alarm, because they have signalled the danger with which the faith of our children is threatened. For my part, I here publicly present them my respect and gratitude for the fidelity with which in the high position in which God has placed them they have watched over the law of Christ.

Yes, our bishops have had reason to warn you against schools without God and instructions without faith.

Your project has no other object than to bring down upon us this misfortune.

But you will not succeed. I speak to you in the language of the father of a family. Belgian Catholics I we pray and we fight. The project will be voted, but your work will not last. It will perish under the repulse of our Catholic populations, whose faith you will not corrupt.

The project does not date from yesterday. Active efforts have been made since the time that the question arose to lower the electoral suffrage. A deceased member of the left once said to me, “The lodges will at any price establish their dominion over Belgium by unbelief; they will recoil from nothing, not even from the destruction of the essential and sacred basis of society, of religion, and of morality.”

To-day the grand master of the lodges is the minister of public instruction. His project banishes religious instruction from the programme of primary schools. He writes there morality, but a morality without God.

We will remain in the legal path, but we will defend our rights. We will depend upon truth, justice, and good sense, and upon our constitution, which happily for us guarantees us religious liberty, and our liberty of instruction, two liberties indissolubly united as are education and instruction.

We will remain faithful to our institutions and at the same time to the church; we will use our rights and all our faculties in the war which is being declared against us.

You do not admit, constitutionally you ought not to admit, the divinity of the Catholic Church; constitutionally you ought not to admit that its teaching is the truth, and that fidelity to its precepts ought to conduct man to his destined and eternal salvation. But we Catholics, we admit we believe this; we know that we possess the truth. We have the right to profess this faith and to transmit it intact to our children by education. It is our duty. The fulfillment of this duty, and the exercise of this right, cannot be taken from us except by tyranny. And if the Government of Belgium, generally Catholic, give us schools for our children, it ought to give them to us with certain guarantees for our faith, which is dearer to us than life. Let us see now what ought to be the kind of school directed at the expense of the public purse in our parishes where the tree establishments are not sufficient for the inhabitants.

I am going to reply to this question in the words of an eminent Belgian, of a man who consecrated his life to the study of the scholastic science, Mr. De Haerne:

“The scholastic question,” said he, “is now agitated everywhere, and excites general interest. The moral education of children is a duty imposed by nature. The domestic school teaches the first essential to man; the exterior school, common to a certain number of families, depends by its nature upon them and ought to respect their rights. Families have a religion to which they initiate their children, and which forms consequently a part of their education. The instructors ought then to conform themselves to the views of the parent.

“In principle, the school established by the parish, the common school as it is called in America, or communal as it is called elsewhere, always remains a direct and immediate emanation of the families, the reunion of whom constitutes the parish itself. The school of the state finds itself in a similar condition; for the state ought to respect the liberty of the parish, as the parish ought to respect the rights of the family. The state is to the parish what the parish is to the family.

“In England and in the United States the freedom of instruction is not so explicitly stipulated as in Belgium, although it exists in reality. In the first of these countries freedom of instruction is regarded as a consequence or an application of individual freedom; in the second, it is considered as being part of the freedom of speech formally inscribed in the Federal Constitution, and it is this that gives to the different. United States a great latitude.

“Now, this spirit is generally religious in the private institutions. Religion cannot, therefore, be excluded from public schools without acting against the formal intentions of our assembly and against the constitution.”

Here is, gentlemen, an exposé sensible, just and practical, in conformity with our institutions, with our national institution and our constitution.

All superior and practical statesmen were always of this opinion. They desired that the atmosphere of the school should be religious, and proclaimed this quality as a social want. I may mention Portalis, Guizot, Thiers, who all, among others, in their political career thus declared their opinion.

The law of 1842 was voted unanimously in the two Chambers with the exception of three voices. It was wished that the atmosphere of the school should be religious; its programme unites morality and religion; it orders the instruction in the schoo lunder the direction of the clergy; it establishes ecclesiastical inspection.

Where they are in sufficient number the Protestants and the Israelites can enjoy the same satisfaction. Those who do not profess any religion can dispense with the lessons on religion.

The law of 1842, put into vigor thirty years ago, has produced rich fruit, without giving place to serious complaints. Belgium is covered with buildings for superb and spacious schools, and all are crowded with scholars. This is a happy result and is due to public confidence; it has been obtained at the price of our zeal, and with our common gold.

The school without God, the instructor without religious faith; this is the project. The priest is driven from the school by the great door; by tolerance, at the request of parents, he may enter by a concealed door to teach religion after and before the hours of the classes, in a part separated from that of the primary science.

I conclude by affirming that the project is impossible in Belgium; it is an attempt against the liberty of Catholics and against their sacred rights.

Mr. Le Hardy de Beaulieu: Gentlemen, the law which we are commencing to discuss is incontestably one of the most important which could be submitted to our deliberations. It affects not only the present but also the future of the country. According to the solution which you will give to the question, the country will increase in prosperity and in happiness; or it will fall into decline, descending rapidly the hill which for a hundred years we have used all our efforts to mount.

Since the commencement of the session, when the speech from the throne announced the project which is actually submitted to us, a lively opposition was manifested amongst the members of the Catholic clergy. Have we not seen the bishops addressing long letters to the faithful denouncing even its text?

It was not only the chiefs of the clergy who entered into the campaign; they were followed by the whole party, who owe them their blind obedience. The Catholic press commenced a most violent discussion. No means were spared, neither lies nor calumny. Why? Have we not the duty and the right to make the law? Our right appears to me clear, evident, incontestable. Article 17 of the constitution states “the instruction is free.” Now, how does the proposed law touch the liberty of instruction? It contains no preventive measure, and the three orators who have spoken have found none.

The repression of the offenses is regulated only by law; we are then charged to repress the offenses which would be committed in the ordinary exercise of the liberty of instruction. Instruction given at the expense of the state is also regulated by the law. Then our constitution accords us the most explicit, the most formal right to give instruction at the expense of the state, and to regulate this instruction by a law.

Are we thus wrong to be surprised at the attitude of the members of the clergy, bishops at the head, under present circumstances? They ought to have offered to assist us to raise the instruction of the people; they should have co-operated with us; they ought in good faith, in sincerity, have come to us and said, friendly: “Gentlemen, you may deceive yourselves; let us search together the means of doing a useful work.” But instead of this they have employed violent and revolutionary language!

But, gentlemen, this opposition by the clergy proves to us more clearly the necessity there was for reforming the law of 1842.

The state cannot impose any creeds; it must be neutral in matters of faith.

Article 16 shows evidently that the state must preserve its neutrality. It decides that the state has not to interfere in the nomination of the ministers of religion, neither in correspondence nor in any manifestation of activity.

I say then, gentlemen, that we have the power to make the law which the government elected in June last has proposed to us. The clergy in interfering with this right go completely from their attribute. We do not pay the clergy to raise up the country against the laws made by the Chambers. This is not their mission; they have to fulfill the duties of religion, and when they depart from this attribute, they depart from the law.

Never mind putting the state out of the school. The constitution has put it in the school, and it will remain there. The constitution has not put the clergy in the school, and I hope that they will remain outside. I have in vain sought in the constitution the article which gives to the clergy the power to interfere in public instruction, and in vain, also, I should have sought the utility of that intervention.

The clergy is not required either by the Evangelists or by any law to teach grammar and geography. Every where numerous edifices are constructed for religious purposes, and every facility is given to teach religions principles to the populations.

M. Le Hardy de Beaulieu goes on to consider the question as to whether, really the instruction has been confined exclusively to the church, and having proved the contrary, defends the constitutional policy of the state. The morality of the, church, he says, has at all times left much to be desired. Spain and Belgium offer us sufficient examples. In Spain the church has been, since the sixteenth century, absolutely mistress, not only of instruction and of education, but of the politics of the country. She has met with no obstacles; she has all that she desires; she has the inquisition to insure, in a complete and certain, fashion, the execution of her will.

Facts speak more strongly than theories. In Spain, after the conquest of Granada, the church exacted from the Spanish Government the conversion of the Moors to Catholicism. In order to convert them better they suppressed all the institutions, all the colleges, all the schools of that intelligent, civilized, clever nation, as many works which have been preserved prove to us. The university of Cordova, where mathematics and medicine were studied, was suppressed. All the books belonging to the Moorish language and to the Jewish language (for both the religions participated in the university of Cordova) were burned. They were no longer allowed to read their books under pain of death; they could no longer unite together or sing their national songs without being condemned. However, Charles V and Philip II were statesmen; no doubt they were good Catholics.

After the reign of Philip II all lay professors were dismissed and the university of Salamanca, which counted 8,000 scholars, became exclusively. Catholic, and under the domination of the Catholics. Progress was no longer admitted and mathematics even became a thing of the past.

A century later the reports of the ambassadors and travelers, and of learned men, state that there was no longer in Spain either doctor, or engineer, or lawyer, or philosopher; there were only priests and nuns.

The Bourbons, when they succeeded to the reduced Austrian dynasty, were obliged to govern the country by employing strangers. The first ministers of Spain were nearly all foreigners until the end of the eighteenth century. There were no-more Spaniards capable of legislating for a great country. Instruction failed and the desire to instruct was extinguished. Charles III wished to reorganize the fleet, but found not one man capable of steering a vessel, The armies of the Bourbons were commanded successively by Irish, Flemish, Dutch, and French.

Such was the condition of the Spanish monarchy, and if we turn to Belgium we find, the same miserable state of things under the Catholic administration. The universities fell far beneath those of other countries; there were no primary schools, and education was entirely abandoned.

Therefore these examples will clearly prove that the church is not precisely the institution which should preside over the instruction of a people.

He claims for the responsible public men in power the duty of working for the moralization of the people, and adds that he, a Catholic, shall be happy to give his approbation to a project of law, the object of which is to disperse intolerance.

Mr. Mallar, the Liberal member from Verviers, then rose to defend the project of law; the movement organized by the right hp described as a comedy. To believe our friends on the right, he says, the hour of the birth of Christianism has returned; we have martyrs and executioners; blood is shed for the faith; the hour of judgment has sounded.

But why this miserable misrepresentation Because an intelligent and free nation does not let itself be misled by lies; because it knows that we neither wish to destroy rights nor creeds; because it is tired of the pretensions of the clergy to omnipotence in every sphere, and of the humiliation of public men who must obey in public as in private life. Members on the right protest their respect for the constitution; it is the best for the Belgians at the present time; but what of their principle? Rome is their guide and supreme judge; it is for them, only the question of an hour, of an opportunity, and this is the peril of which the country Is conscious. The June elections showed a great effort for the public safety.

Mr. Lippens, the liberal depnty for Ghent spoke very substantially in favor of the project, showing up the work of the clergy in the country districts, how they are become absolute, masters underlie law of, 1842, declaring the necessity of the revision, and contending that the project of the government supplies the requirements of the situation. The clergy, he says practice a thousand annoyances against lay instruction, and the government has done well to furnish the state with a new arm against the clerical invasions. There is no trick that the clergy has not employed to annihilate the authority of the instructor. A vicar in a parish known to me, he continues, prohibited the instructor to read certain journals; he then went on to criticise ecclesiastical inspection, the pressure put upon the instructors to vote anti-liberal, how the new law will put an end to these abuses, and how it will destroy the net spread over our country districts; the clergy, he says, are unwilling that the desire of learning should he inspired into these parts, that women should reason for themselves, or that they should receive instruction.

They would further their object by increasing the number of convents, where nothing is learned; the child there is not required to know anything but the book in which is inclosed all science, “The Catechism.” They must have no other object in view but the salvation of the soul. If the parents desire to send their children to a lay school, they are persecuted by the clergy, who threaten them in their business or private interests.

Superstition reigns, and a morality which cannot continue to be admitted. These are the reasons why the liberal party can no longer suffer such tyranny, such cruel and merciless persecution, renewed day by day, at every instant, under a thousand different devices. It is time that the state takes up anew the position which it never ought to have abandoned, and it is for this act of authority, for this willingness to respect its duties, that he felicitates the government.

Mr. Crombez spoke of the fanaticism of the bishops, and declared that the religious instruction upon the catechism had completely disgusted the members of the left, and concluded by stating, amidst great cheering, that Belgium would never consent to the laws of theocracy.

Mr. Neujean, member for Liege, maintained that the cabinet, by introducing article 4 into the project, had not fulfilled the desire of the nation expressed by the elections of 11th June, 1878. The law of 1842, he said, was made for the profit of the clergy; he is against all-dogmatic instruction, but is in favor of religious, as, indeed, are all the liberals, equally as much so as their adversaries, because the liberals represent incontestably those Catholics not given over to the ultramontane yoke.

A person, he says, must be terribly ignorant, or completely blind, to pretend that the liberal party pursue the ruin of religion, and he adds, amidst cheers, that the priest will fail in his duty if he does not give religious instruction in the school according as the law gives him the right.

The Count Goblet regrets that the project for the revision of the law presented by ‘the government is not a more radical one. He desired that the entry of the schools should be closed to the priests; however, in spite of this, he will vote for the project in discussion. He defies the members of the right, should they ever again return to power, to touch the new law, and to re-establish the law of 1842; Belgium, he says, well remembers what was left to her in the sixteenth century, when the right was in power; if he introduces the sufferings of our forefathers into this debate, it is to encourage this generation to fulfill their work by reducing, to weakness those who caused this suffering.

Mr. Woeste. The country will know, thanks to Mr. Goblet, that we have not erred in accusing the left of desiring to drive out the priest from the school. They respect nothing, neither the law of 1842 nor that of 1850, which acknowledges the necessity of religious instruction. If there has been abuse of the law, is this a reason why the law should be destroyed? Twenty abuses should not suffice to tear in pieces a law which has produced excellent effects in 2,500 parishes of Belgium. He finishes an eloquent speech by declaring that there have been no serious abuses, that religious instruction and ecclesiastical inspection are necessary, and the revision of the law is condemned by the country.

Mr. Thomssen. You are going to upset the creed of all our instructors, and to replace them by men who do not possess our confidence, and as a just consequence we shall have no more Christian children. A school neutral is no more possible than a neutral book or a neutral discourse. For us there is only one moral, that of the Evangelist, that of Christ; it is in this that we instruct our children; any other moral we repudiate in the name of the constitution, of liberty, and of conscience. He concluded by saying: You desire that Belgium should rejoice in 1880 her fiftieth glorious anniversary, therefore do not revive the Dutch despotism which was overthrown in 1830.

Mr. Van Humbeeck, minister of public instruction. Gentlemen, I do not consider it necessary to remind the chamber that this debate is a most important one. It is useless again to repeat the importance of the question concerning the instruction of youth. The destiny of our liberty depends on this instruction. Here is the real truth, and yet this has several times been overlooked in the course of this debate. If this is kept in mind can any one contend that those who are charged with the government of the country can neglect this primary interest, or that the nature of their mission imposes upon them the duty to exercise the right which the constitution gives them? Yesterday again Mr. Thomssen maintained that the state had no other obligation than to supply the insufficiency of the freedom. This situation could be admitted if the government had the right to superintend free instruction; if it was certain that every fatal doctrine would be excluded from private instruction. But it is impossible for the Belgian Government in its present constitutional position to provide proper instruction, having no action on free instruction. I shall notice only the professions of faith plainly ultramontane, which have been heard in this chamber since the commencement of the debate. Has not the right of the Catholic priest to judge all acts of the faithful as electors, as functionaries, as magistrates, as politicians, been proclaimed? This doctrine puts anew into the hands of confessors the result of the polls, the fate of the trial. Under this system the confession realizes the most pitiful of theocracies under the color of the most extended freedom. Forty years ago there was a priest, the Abbey de Foere,” who declared in the place that all threats addressed by the clergy to electors ought to be punished.

In the present day laymen sustain the theory which was disputed by the priest forty years ago. They desire to arrive at the absolute confiscation of the citizen’s freedom, and it is for this object that they would suppress instruction by the state, or condemn the state to be only a person placed under the clergy.

They have not gone so far as this in this chamber, but outside there has not been the same discretion. The bishops in their pastoral letters have plainly declared that they acknowledge the church alone to have right of instruction. It is not to the governments, according to them, that Christ has said, “Go and teach.” But the founder of Christianity did not intend to dismiss all the schoolmasters who lived on the earth, and certainly he did not dream of substituting for them the fishermen of Galilee. It is impossible to admit of such a theory. That which Christ told the apostles to spread was that sublime morality which he did not create, but which he popularized. It is only by the confusion of the political with the religious that the episcopate can produce its actual pretensions. That which is incomprehensible is that the champions of this theocratical theory, which I have brought before you, should call themselves the champions of constitutional liberty. But these defenders of this theory only call for the monopoly of the church. The divine and absolute rights to which they lay claim in matters of instruction, to fulfill their pretended mission, if they were acknowledged by the civil law, would it be anything else than the monopoly of the church, anything in definite form than the suppression of conscientious liberty, and of freedom of instruction? And yet it is these persons who accuse us of attempts against all liberties. To hear them, we violate the freedom of, instruction; the freedom of fathers of families; we sacrifice the faith of children and the independence of parishes; and all this to revise a law, which has not thus far deserved reproach. Such are the criticisms of our adversaries, and I intend to meet them as shortly as possible, and show that each of these reproaches is unjustifiable.

I say first of all that they calumniate the project, when they pretend that it violates freedom of instruction and freedom of fathers of families. Freedom of instruction! But it is a consequence of the general liberty to express and to propagate one’s opinions, it is the liberty to give and to receive an instruction that one believes good and to repel that which one believes to be bad. And in this respect the project incontestably acknowledges the right of the citizen. Let us examine the project in a double point of view, of those who give instruction and of those who receive it.

As to the first point: Does the project suppress freedom of instruction? Does it hinder any one from teaching? Evidently not. Consequently, if every one remains, free to teach, in what is freedom of instruction lessened? As to the second point: Does the project hinder the father of a family from intrusting the education of his children to whomsoever appears right to him? Evidently not.

But they say the state separates religious instruction from profane instruction, Gentlemen, the state is incompetent to give this instruction; but, to satisfy the desire of families, it opens the school-house to the clergy.

We were told yesterday that the clergy could not put this to profit; but, supposing there are difficulties, mutual concessions will make them disappear, and in any case in presence of this facility, it cannot be affirmed that the priest is driven from the school. These things may be said at a meeting, but not before persons to contradict them. It can never be admitted in an assembly that one puts any person outside the door when one keeps a place at his disposal. The truth is this, the state guards its independence, but it respects the liberty of the churches. We believe that profane and religious instruction ought to be completely separate and have nothing in common but the school-house. We believe that by uniting it the school is rendered confessional, and that hate and religious disputes are produced.

There are, in short, but two systems possible, either to establish schools where one religion only, that of the majority, is taught—there is then a real privilege, as is the case with the law of 1842—or to establish confessional schools. These last have received great sympathy from our adversaries, but I will remind them of what a man whom they like to quote, M. Cousin, said of these schools in a discussion which took place in 1844, in the French Chamber, on the occasion of a debate on a project of law upon secondary instruction:

“If there exists an instruction which is built upon the exclusive principle of any particular creed, the college is no longer the image of a common society. Then, Catholic colleges, Protestant colleges, Jewish colleges, shortly, perhaps, Mussulman colleges, are necessary, and from infancy we should learn to avoid one another. What a marvelous apprenticeship of that sublime, virtue which is called patriotism!”

You see here an imposing authority, one which our adversaries often appeal to, demonstrating that in our public schools the young society should be made the image of society of mature men. In our society of mature men we know that there are in Belgium Catholics, Protestants, Jews, free-thinkers. We see in them citizens having the same rights and the same duties one towards the other. For a society so composed a neutral school is necessary. However, there are amongst us those who believe that profane instruction should be united to religious instruction. We do not agree with this opinion, but we respect these scruples. To those who have this conviction the freedom of instruction can give ample satisfaction, and the freedom which we respect completely I have just now demonstrated.

It is, then, impossible for me to find in the project of law the slightest injury to freedom of instruction, or to freedom of study. Is it true after this that religious faith, that the honesty of future generations are placed in danger? Let us speak first of religious faith. I admit that it might be placed in peril if the government had the right to mix itself up in religious matters. But in a state like ours that danger cannot exist. It is pretended that the government could cause creeds to be taught contrary to the religious faith of the child, but then the project must include exactly what it excludes. We were asked yesterday if we would take measures against the instructor who should attack the Catholic dogma. It is evident, gentlemen, that if an instructor tried to ridicule the doctrines of a creed he would be prosecuted. I now ask if the priests of a religion can complain without their assistance, it being understood that all attacks against religion are prohibited. Ought not the priests to be happy to teach children the catechism who have already learned to read in the school? Will not the religious instruction given by the priests be much more easy and fruitful to the child who has received a former education? Why then should the priests complain of an instruction which would not be hostile to their creeds, to an instruction really neutral? It is this that we wish to organize. You have contested this neutrality; you did it without a serious motive, and on this account you suspect our intentions.

Do we pretend that in public instruction religious principles which sympathize with diverse creeds must not be called to mind? Not in the least. There exists a Christian morality superior to all sects, a morality which blends itself with natural morality, the universal morality. This instruction, which may be called religious in a general sense, can be perfectly given in the school; but on their side it is the duty of families to have their children instructed in the things belonging to their respective creeds, and this is why we open the school-houses to ministers of these different creeds. There are, then, in the system of the project the means of satisfying all scruples, at the same time maintaining the indedendence of the civil power. The fears of which we have heard are new. They did not exist at the commencement of this century; two Catholic archbishops acknowledged it in 1806, and twenty years later, in 1827, when a concordat was agreed upon between the Dutch Government and the Holy See, we heard a Belgian prelate pronounce these words:

“The Catholics of the northern provinces, so known for their piety and for their pure morality, have for a long time resented the consequences of an irregular administration.”

So, this Belgian prelate rendered homage to the piety and to the attachment to the Catholic faith of the Dutch, who had been, however, placed for two years in a situation of real inferiority. They had had, in short, neither pastors nor hierarchy, nor freedom of instruction, nor freedom of association in a country where the immense majority were Protestants. And to-day you pretend that in Belgium, where the Catholics, who are in a great majority, have constitutional liberties, a clergy strongly organized, numerous religious orders, you pretend that the faith will disappear; that in ten years it will have vanished, on account of the adoption of our project of law. Is this a serious argument?

You are alarmed at the changes which the project of law introduces into the actual management; but the proposed changes are only the realization of what ought to happen, according to Mr. Nothomb, in case of a conflict with the clergy. Ecclesiastic cal authority formerly pretended not to admit of instructors being appointed by itself. Mr. Nothomb refuses to submit to this exigency. Lay authority cannot any more submit to the pretension of the clergy to give confessional instruction in the school where even one dissenting voice is to be found.

Either the law of 1842 admits of a neutral instruction, and acknowledges it possible, or it has given the Catholic priest the right to violate the consciences of dissenters by the organization of a Catholic instruction. I defy you to get clean out of this dilemma.

In some of our large towns are there not dissenters? Is there not therefore an instruction forcibly neutral? Has this instruction produced these revolutionists and insurrectionists of whom you were so disturbed at the commencement of this discussion?

There is, then, no danger for the faith of families. There is no deception for the ambition of the clergy; faith is not threatened. Further, this is not the first time that the Catholics have attempted to suppress the neutral school. They tried it in Holland, hut without success. We are willing to forget that you have driven us from the school; we ask you loyally to co-operate with us in the work of the education of youth. But this distinction between morality and religion was formally acknowledged by the men whose opinion you are accustomed to quote. Mr. Guizot said to his pupils: “It is evident that morality exists outside of that which is religious.”

What Mr. Guizot said is indisputable. The morality comprises the duty of man towards his neighbor, towards his country, towards humanity. It comprises; even if you will, his duty towards God, without; be it well understood, any spirit of sect. But the moment that you understand it in the sense which the different creeds attach to it, the duty towards God is a question of religion and not a question of morality. Therefore, it is the priests who should teach it. We leave them on this account full liberty, but we ask in return that the right be left to our instructors to teach in the school what constitutes truly the morality.

Saint Jean Chrysostom shows plainly the existence of a universal morality. He proves it by the aid of two precepts: the first, what you will that one should do unto you, do it; the second, what you would be angry that one does to you, do not do it.

Peoples which date from the Christian era practice a morality in which they agree.

Protestants, Catholics, Jews, are they not all agreed upon the manner of understanding their duties to wards their neighbors and towards their country? How, then, can any one say that there is not a universal morality?

Let us leave philosophy and go to politics. Will any one deny that to be a good citizen it matters not to what religion one belongs; even if one does not practice any religion whatever? The contrary theory would be the negation of the principle of our institutions, which proclaims the absolute liberty of opinion. Our institutions suppose that every citizen has the notion of right and wrong, of justice and injustice. If not, it must be admitted that certain men would make laws prohibiting what morality permits and permitting what morality prohibits. Our society then intrusts itself to a morality placed out of all religion. If not, you must admit that a day will arrive when the guarantee will be exacted for the belief which the majority will believe the true one. The theory of the right is in consequence to revive a state religion by the side of tolerated religions.

The government only occupies itself in forming citizens; families and the clergy must occupy themselves with creeds, and the project of law gives them every facility in this respect. The clergy on the contrary wish to create a Catholic theocracy, which would scorn all creeds which were not its own, and which it would include under one denomination with atheism.

I had intended to show that you are wrong in pretending that the project would prepare irreligious masters, and that the reform which we propose is useless. But I think that I can dispense with the latter and go on to prove that it is untrue that the new schools will be a nursery of irreligious masters. The project of law enables all alike to enjoy complete freedom for the exercise of their religious duties. From this article you make a pretext that, in point of fact, religious instruction will not exist. I do not hesitate to say that, if we do not consider it our mission to train up believers, still we should fail in our duty if we sought to encourage unbelieving masters. In these schools there will be indoor and outdoor children. With regard to the former all difficulty disappears. It is for their families to watch over their religious duties. With regard to the latter the rules guarantee the freedom to fulfill their religious duties. Would any one wish to force a child, who is not a Catholic, to fulfill religious duties which would make him a hypocrite? Do you go so far as to say that the Catholics alone can be instructed? If so, it is not the maintenance of the law of 1842 which you demand; it is a real revolt. I pass on now to say that it is equally possible to teach a neutral history as a neutral morality in the primary school.

The teaching of neutral history is that in which one makes it his duty to teach only true, undeniable facts in which one will avoid controversies. Evidently one will not make an historical philosophy for children. We have heard that our history must be either catholic or liberal, but if it is so, historical instruction would be variable, which it is not; and if it were, could any one ask us to teach our adversaries’ history in our schools—why we should be obliged to teach what we condemn?

Gentlemen, I do not think that I want to dwell any longer on this point. I pass on to say that the revision of the law of 1842 was indispensable, because never since it has existed have the clergy loyally executed it. They have always sought to favor congregational schools to the detriment of official schools by tearing to pieces the contract signed in 1842. You know, gentlemen, that I undertook to show that the project of law did not injure the liberty of fathers of families, nor the freedom of instruction, nor of faith, nor of morality, nor of communal independence. I think I have fulfilled my task, and have convinced you that we make this reform to fortify the attachment of our population to constitutional liberties. Those who dispute this confound the ambition of the clergy with the interests of religion. I do not suspect the sincerity of their alarms, but experience will shortly disperse them. We believe sufficiently in their patriotism to he convinced that they will thank us then for having accomplished this reform without them.

Mr. Devigne considered the constitutionality of the project of law perfect and invited the members of the right to insure liberty of conscience, and warmly spoke up for the rights of citizens who do not belong to the Catholic faith.

Mr. Jacobs thought that there was no ground for complaint against the law of 1842. When a person wishes to kill his dog he says that he is mad. There is no better reason for abolishing the law of 1842. He will not hear of morality as opposed to the Catholic religion, because respecting morality the liberals have nothing determined and do not agree among themselves. He does not know what the clergy will do if they will enter into a neutral school to give religious instruction, or if they will refuse to do so. They will not decide hastily, but will give the free school time to organize itself.

Mr. Pumez (member of the majority) considers the project perfectly constitutional, but is not favorable to the revision, at the sametime he does not think that the new law will cause any serious consequences, and he thinks that the clergy cannot refuse to enter the new school. They risk all kinds of danger to go out to teach the African negroes; surely, then, they can put up with a little inconvenience for their fellow-citizens.

Mr. Bergé: The project does not satisfy him because it leaves the door of the school open to the priest. He foresees that the clerical party will endeavor to regain the influence of which one wishes precisely to deprive it. He does not understand, either, why religious emblems should be maintained in the schools. The clergy, he says, are incompetent in respect to a moral education, and that it is the state which is charged with this all-important mission.

Mr. Janson warmly defended the project, at the same time stating that the government solution was not exactly the one he would have preferred. He contended that it was the duty of the state to give an historical, literary, and scientific instruction in public schools. There, is a morality, he said, independent of dogma and of the divinely revealed morality of the Roman Catholic and Apostolic Church. He accepts the great, beautiful, sublime morality of Christ, but, turning toward the right, he said, The church, what has it done with this sublime morality? You have organized celibacy, a revolting immorality, which will finish by making the country revolt when it sees our poor little children exposed to the crimes of “petits frères.” Take care of vengeance. Is this the morality which you defend? Ours is worth more than this, I hope. You organize begging orders, and we, we ask for the organization of labor.

If religious morality can do anything, it is by acknowledging the liberty of conscience. What do the church commandments say? The Sunday ought to be a day of rest; the constitution acknowledges the rest optional. The church commands that marriages be consecrated by herself; that unless they are so, there is only concubinage. The constitution says the contrary. Our universal morality is far superior to the Catholic morality.

What created Christianism? The revolt against immorality. What created reform? The revolt against the clergy. What brought about the French revolution? Was it not the disorder caused by the intolerance of the clergy of the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries? The country will acknowledge the superiority of our schools over those of the clergy who have given us so many examples of frightful immorality.

Liberty of conscience, he said, is not in peril; equality of citizenship is not in peril; but do you know what is in peril? It is the religious intolerance which wishes to separate children in this life as in death. It is the religious intolerance which would silence science under its dogmas. It is this that is in peril; it is your revolting against the immortal principles of 1789. Peril, necessary, for upon its intensity depends the maintenance of our public liberties, of progress, and of our institutions.

Mr. Bernaert, member of the late Catholic cabinet, considered the project of law in discussion as a really public misfortune.

Mr. Frère Orban, minister of foreign affairs: I should not have dreamt of speaking to-day had I not been strongly requested to do so by my friends. If, as I had intended, I had spoken after the chief of the opposition, I should have prolonged the debate, for the said honorable member has conducted the battle outside, but has been silent here up to this moment. I am, therefore, playing to-day into the hands of my political adversaries.

The return of the Liberals to power has brought consternation to the country, and yet the country has never been so calm as under the Liberal administration. Our first error was the creation of a minister of public instruction. Therefore, no more instructors to pay, no more public instruction. Then appears the actual project. The bishops preach a crusade, and invent a new prayer to curse the instructors without faith and the schools without God. And there are the women and children falling down on their knees. The crusaders enter the battle-field. A catastrophe is predicted if the project of law is voted. The anathemas of the crusade are pronounced. A sympathetic movement is expected, but no noise whatever is heard. Some speakers speak loud, however, to rouse up those outside, but the crowd passes and remains indifferent. What is the reason for all this? It is always the same manner of ill-treating projects of law proposed by the Liberals. The right has cried out persecution at every project of law. Nowhere is the church so independent as in Belgium, or so respected.

During the twenty years that we have been in power, tell us what are the deeds which we have committed against the liberty of the Catholic creed? Answer me. This is not the first time that war has been declared against us. I was here twenty years ago when you lighted up insurrection against us respecting the most simple projects of law. This is not the first time that we are attacked on the question of instruction. Twenty years ago how did you attack the law on middle-class instruction? You said that it was unconstitutional, that it produced burdens for the citizens, that it was anti-religious and anti-social. There were the same words as are repeated today. Is it necessary to complete the picture? We were not turned out of office then by you, but by divisions of our own, thanks to the traitors who went over to your ranks, and who are still there. We had in 1850 the interference of the Pope against the law of instruction; however, the law was voted by the most moderate men, the Prince of Ligne at the head. Five years afterwards the Catholics came into power. I asked the minister if he would maintain the law. The Catholics maintained and observed it. In 1870 they still continued to apply this law, which they had called odious. I have, consequently, to-day the right to tell you that your conduct is only a political maneuver, yes, a political maneuver, since you will not amend the project of law, and because you provoke us to appeal to the country.

We do not fear that appeal. We will do it, but you will permit us to choose our time in order that we may have the time to unveil your faults by the electoral law, because this will serve to unveil your intrigues and electoral corruptions. If you doubt the calmness of the country, I wish for no other proof than the last provincial elections, when the Liberals were returned by a great majority. In 1850 we invited the clergy to come into the school; to-day only one word is changed, a place is set apart at the disposal of the clergy. The project of law with which we are occupied is the expression of the new opinion which desires the secularization of instruction. We are far from that orthodoxy which puts heterodoxy out of the civil state.

The Jewish people suffered eighteen centuries of pressure and violence before arriving at liberty. The Protestants the same for several centuries. We must finish with these struggles. We wish to see the principle of modern society predominate by suppressing the confessional school and the sectarian. The actual law develops the principles of the law of 1842, and article 4, which is an act of loyalty, gives every satisfaction to religious interests. In the middle class, as in the primary school, religious wants of pupils will be satisfied. The instructions given by fathers of families will be respected. I am confident that the country will acknowledge that we have done a salutary work. We have heard angry words from the clerical party. They have threatened. Do you remember that their threats have always been the same? They cry out that a funeral monument must be erected upon the ruins of the constitution. Always the same violence under like circumstances. We are on the eve of 1880, and they threaten us with a secession. But this will pass, and we shall find you better citizens and better patriots than you wish to appear. You will remember that we are the children of the same mother to celebrate the glory of the country and the defense of our liberal institutions.

Mr. Malon: I will make use of no repetition, but will at once approach the two principal questions which concern the chamber (article 4 and article 7). It is traditional to develop religious instruction in schools. The neutral school is but the work of troubled times. It is a poisonous toadstool, nearly rotten, and coming in this calm and quiet time we cannot understand this modification. What do we undertake here? That to which man attaches the greatest price; it is the faith which you would modify.

The legislative game which you are playing under guise of instruction, is to create schools for yourselves with our money. If we only studied party feeling, we would not oppose your law, which is the contrary to malice. We have opposed it to enlighten the country, and we have succeeded. When you shall have carried your law, the combat will commence, not in words but in actions. That which gives power to free nations, is the development of individual power. There are only declining nations which return to monopoly. I will not seek the origin of the law: Is it a modification of the law of 1842? No; it ought to be called the project of law organizing lay instruction. But is it the national sentence which is being executed? Some newspapers spoke, in 1878, of revision, but I affirm that the country has never suspected the solution which you propose. I repeat, if the country had known your project it would not have nominated you. Since you are sure of the contrary, dissolve the chamber. But you would be great babies to expose yourselves to be checkmated.

I state that, notwithstanding the declaration of the government, the law excludes the priest from the school, and that many of my adversaries, whose convictions I respect, would not vote for the law if the exclusion of the priest was not logically decided. Since the project of law has been known to us, we have considered it our duty to consult the country. The country is not agitated because it is conscious of its force. We are Invited to make amendments to the law. It is not for us to do it, for we denounce your project in an absolute, radical manner, wishing to put all the responsibility upon you. The only amendment which we can present, is to maintain the law of 1842, with a few modifications. In England, true liberalism condemns your law. There is not one foreign legislation which I do not prefer to your system. For us the English system would be a welcome one.

It is said that the clergy have always conspired against the law of 1842. This is an error. The schools placed under their direction have always prospered. What will be the effect of the law? Firstly, religious associations, which direct the communal schools, will desert the schools because they will not submit to neutral instruction.

Do you wish that religious associations should accept the situation which will be made for them? I do not know, but I believe that I may say that they will not accept that mission. It is an error to belive that fathers will send their children to the school when they shall have seen the application of the law. Your law is a retrograde movement. I pronounce myself against it, and I hope that it will not last long.

In the double light of faith and reason, as Catholics and as citizens, we desire the confessional schools.

The revision of the law of 1842 is a question of confidence. Let us examine what will be the result if the project is voted. At the present time the books harmonize with confessional instruction. I have asked what books will be used, but have received no answer. Let us consider how great is the anxiety of the father when he chooses the instructor of his children. The higher classes choose for themselves; but the poor and ignorant, it is the state which ought to choose for them such an instructor, such a school. We are assured that the instruction will be neutral. You will hot teach Christian virtues, you dare not, for you are perfectly aware that if you put Christian virtues into the law it would be rejected by many of your friends.

Neutrality, liberty of conscience, what will be their effect? You take young people in the moment of passion, you preach to them the God of Deists, and you pretend to believe that bad passions will not corrupt these young persons. We ask you to make a reasonable law, but these conditions are dangerous. You are about to destroy primary instruction; it will not revive. But I will say no more on this subject, as I hear that the project of law will be sent back from the Senate. Your object is to create rival schools and to make the populations pay twice over. The Catholic opinion will do every possible thing to make the faith of the country respected. Your schools will be deserted.

We foresee that you yourselves will regret this law. When you will have applied it, when you shall have caused disunion in the country, classed the poor children of five years of age into Catholics and liberals, do you think that you will have sown peace? Then we shall be avenged. You date only from the liberal congress of 1846; we date from the national congress of 1830, to which we will always appeal.

Mr. Delhougne, member for Ghent, energetically maintained that the country had perfectly foreseen the consequences of the elections of the 11th of June, and these elections were a vigorous protestation against the practices of the clergy, who falsified our institutions by intimidation, fraud, and all sorts of evil. The country wished the clergy to recede, and the mission of the liberal party is to render to the country its independence by voting the law on primary instruction, and by suppressing the electoral frauds, by means of which the opposition has attempted to obtain a new majority. We have heard several times “The state out of the school,” but the honorable member replies, “The clergy out of business affairs.” He desires that religion be respected and liberty of conscience maintained, but on political ground the state ought to be master. In concluding he hopes the country will be thankful to the liberal party for voting a wise and tolerant law, which respects all liberties.

No. 52. Mr. Goodloe to Mr. Evarts [Document 63]

No. 52.
Mr. Goodloe to Mr. Evarts

Legation of the United States,
Brussels, July 17, 1879. (Received: July 30.) No. 76.]

Sir: I have received from the minister of foreign affairs the following information in answer to questions previously propounded concerning gold and silver coin and bullion in Belgium.

The information desired by the honorable Secretary of the Treasury was set forth in six questions:

“1st. What is the amount of gold coin and bullion in the treasury, in the banks, and in circulation in Belgium?

“2d. What is the amount of silver coin and bullion in the treasury, in the banks, and in circulation?”

The National Bank in Belgium is what might be termed the State Cashier. And it is only from this source that definite information can be obtained.

The bank vaults on June 12, 1879, contained in gold (pieces of the Latin Union and others) 74,630,000 francs. In silver (5-franc pieces) 13,650,000 francs. In silver (divisionary coins at 835/1000) 12,350,000.

There are no means of determining with certainty the amount of gold or silver coin in the vaults of private banks or in general circulation. The Belgian Government and the National Bank have, following the example of the French Government during the sitting of the International Monetary Conference of 1878, caused an inquiry to be made as to the quantity of gold and silver coins of different dates in circulation. The result of this inquiry was given as a “rider” to the reports of the conference in a publication made by the French Government, and has of course been for some time in the possession of the Department. These inquiries have also been the subject of a special report, which I inclose herewith marked with red crayon A.

As to the divisional silver coins (pieces of 2 francs, 1 franc, and 50 centimes, at 835/1000) the quantity is limited to 6 francs for each inhabitant, which gives to Belgium 32,000,000 francs.

“3d. What is the amount of outstanding paper currency?”

The circulation of bank-notes has for some time past closely approximated 300,000,000 francs the amount outstanding June 12, 1879, being 302,690,000 francs.

“4th. What is the amount of gold produced annually from the mines?

“5th, What is the amount of silver produced annually?”

Belgium does not possess either gold or silver mines. A few metallurgic works in the Bleyberg and at Sclaiguaux smelt the argentiferous lead, but the quantity of silver thus collected is not considered of sufficient importance to note.

“6th. What is the amount of gold annually coined, imported, exported, and consumed in the arts and manufactures?”

I inclose a table of statistics (marked in red crayon B) which gives in full the minting of national specie from 1832 to 1878, inclusive.

In addition to the sums mentioned in this table the mint has turned out on account of foreign governments 31,500 kilograms of fine silver, amounting to 7,000,000 francs, in crowns of five francs or pieces of 25 grams, at 900/1000, and 5 k. 971,896 fine gold, amounting in value to 20,580 francs in pieces of 20 francs.

The Belgian laws do not even approximately estimate the consumption of gold and silver in the industrial arts, but I give you, however, a statement of the weights of the objects submitted to be marked since the year 1870, under the regulation of the law declaring free the manufacture of ail objects of gold and silver (see inclosure marked C) and abolishing the obligatory mark of the state.

Year. Gold. Silver. Year. Gold. Silver.

Kilograms. Kilograms. Kilograms. Kilograms.

1870 233.065755 2,898.6208 1876 92.563575 2,899.6064

1871 225.964950 3,051.7904 1877 60.207900 2,824.8192

1872 182.838600 3,456.7904 1878 50.154900 2,477.6064

1873 165.879675 3,485.6544

1874 133.295625 3,398.4448 Total 1,263.657405 27,684.6144

1875 119.686425 3,192.0728

The following table, marked D, presents the movement of gold and silver for the past ten years:

D.—Statement of the quantities of gold and silver imported and exported from the year 1868 to 1878.

[Special commerce.]

SILVER IMPORTATION.

Year. Unwrought. Wrought. Minted. Year. Unwrought. Wrought. Minted.

Kilograms. Francs. Kilograms. Kilograms. Francs. Kilograms.

1868 32,773 742,744 91,743 1874 445,775 1,294,715 24,263

1869 133,328 798,181 78,353 1875 1,173,934 1,208,843 11,568

1870 177,327 627,005 264,428 1876 30,972 1,207,589 20,116

1871 106,288 961,017 94,749 1877 3,076 1,069,522 3,221

1872 131,992 986,922 189,896 1878 7,291 1,023,986 43,773

1873 311,651 1,142,984 50,313

GOLD IMPORTATION.

Year. Unwrought. Wrought. Minted. Year. Unwrought. Wrought. Minted.

Kilograms. Francs. Kilograms. Kilograms. Francs. Kilograms.

1868 273 850,247 399 1874 2,588 526,108 1,150

1869 5,336 844,650 2,282 1875 1,316 459,634 4,131

1870 15,138 463,332 5,045 1876 572 694,429 561

1871 29,844 532,844 23,219 1877 1,657 608,504 3,651

1872 53,230 490,584 14,199 1878 1,008 432,569 3,367

1873 3,060 591,894 1,110

SILVER EXPORTATION.

Year. Unwrought. Wrought. Minted. Year. Unwrought. Wrought. Minted.

Kilograms. Francs. Kilograms. Kilograms. Francs. Kilograms.

1868 6,344 35,778 22,922 1874 201,194 33,767 2,885

1869 259 51,704 72,210 1875 3,950 57,681 443

1870 37,377 25,843 6,207 1876 840 16,006

1871 194,344 67,480 11,247 1877 1,166 11,221 13,233

1872 96,033 38,640 10,355 1878 1,179 32,395 96

1873 12,800 75,728 2,753

GOLD EXPORTATION.

Year. Unwrought. Wrought. Minted. Year. Unwrought. Wrought. Minted.

Kilograms. Francs. Kilograms. Kilograms. Francs. Kilograms.

1868 316 67,537 172 1874 3 20,562 7

1869 292 55,823 13 1875 4 23,415 82

1870 12,303 275,754 13 1876 3 16,264

1871 4,341 107,855 1877 172 30,244 10

1872 455 66,653 1878 711 4,660

1873 27 67,809

I applied to some of my personal acquaintances here among the leading bankers for the benefit of their knowledge on the above subject, but, after receiving their replies and comparing them with the above, I found they were so incomplete and inadequate that I have thought it best not to transmit them at all. I think it is safe to conclude that the information I now send you is as full and reliable as it is possible to obtain.

Trusting that it will prove satisfactory to you and entirely meet the requirements of the honorable Secretary of the Treasury,

I have the honor to be, &c.,

WM. CASSIUS GOODLOE.

No. 53. Mr. Delfosse to Mr. Evarts. [Document 64]

No. 53.
Mr. Delfosse to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of Belgium in the United States,
August 12, 1878. (Received August 13.)

Sir: I am instructed by the Government of the King to transmit to you the inclosed circular, whereby it invites the’ Government of the United States to a conversion of the local dues now collected in the port of Antwerp in accordance with the stipulations of the treaty for the redemption of the Scheldt dues.

The new regulation, which is projected in consequence of the revision of the system of admeasuring Belgian vessels, is but a simple conversion, without any augmentation, of existing dues, and in no wise impairs the engagement entered into with the powers that signed the treaty not to permit the re-establishment of the local dues at Antwerp.

The Government of the King would be very glad to be made acquainted as speedily as possible with the views of the Government of the United States as regards the subject of this circular, to which are annexed— 1st. A copy of the proposed regulations for the admeasurement of seagoing vessels.

2d. The text of the revised articles of the regulations of June 22, 1861.

I should therefore be very grateful to you, Mr. Secretary of State, if you would cause these papers to receive as prompt attention as the convenience of the Department will permit.

Accept, Mr. Secretary of State, the assurance of my very high consideration.

MAURICE DELFOSSE.

circular.

The governments represented at the International Conference, held at Constantinople in 1873, recognized, in principle, the utility of the adoption, by all maritime powers, of a uniform system of admeasurement of sea-going vessels, and they came to an agreement, practically, on two essential points, namely: the capacity of the standard ton (110 English cubic feet) and the method of measuring the gross ton.

The Belgian Government, having decided to revise its own system of admeasurement, has adopted, on these points, the unanimous views of the members of the conference. It has also accepted the method recommended by them for the measurement of the net tonnage of sail-vessels. As regards the computation of the net tonnage of steam vessels, on which subject differences of opinion prevailed among the members of the international assembly, it has thought proper to pronounce in favor of the special deductions allowed by the system of the sontes fixes.*

The Government of the United States of America will become familiar with the nature of the new Belgian system by perusing the accompanying proposed regulations.

The change made in the capacity of the official ton in Belgium, as well as in the method of admeasurement, rendered it necessary to remodel the local dues at Antwerp, which are collected according to the tonnage of the vessels. This revision was made by the government, with the assistance of the communal administration of Antwerp.

Although the point in question is a simple conversion of dues, involving no increase of those now collected, the Government of the King has decided not to enforce the new regulations and the tariff arising therefrom until after it shall have invited the States which signed the treaty of July, 1863, for the redemption of the Scheldt dues, to examine the perfect legality of the projected measure; its design has been thereby to prevent any ulterior objection to the character of the revision, and to give evidence of the strict good faith with which it proposes to respect the engagement contracted by it towards the powers in question, not to permit the re-establishment of the local dues at Antwerp.

The Government of the United States of America will therefore be pleased to compare with the former text the new wording (inclosed) of articles 1, 4, and 10 of the regulations of June 22, 1861, relative to the collection of navigation dues, and to notify, as speedily as possible, the Government of the King of its adhesion to the proposed revision.

A communication identical with the present one is addressed to each one of the States that have contributed to the redemption of the Scheldt dues.

Those of them which have adopted or which propose to adopt the Moorsom system of admeasurement will be pleased to observe that the enforcement of the new regulations will enable the Belgian Government to dispense with the remeasurement of such vessels as have been measured according to this system in the country to which they belong.

revised articles of the regulations of june 22, 1861, relative to the collection of navigation-dues at antwerp.

Article 1. Sea-going sail-vessels and steamers entering the basins or the canals shall pay a single duty to the city, according to the following tariff: Tonnage of the vessels (tons of 2 m. cubic, 83-100). Duty per ton (not including the additional ones).

Francs.

85 tons and under 0.47

86 to 128 tons 0.53

129 to 171 tons 0.58

172 to 214 tons 0.64

215 to 257 tons 0.76

258 tons and upwards 0.82

Article 4. Sea-going steamers loading or unloading in the harbor, at the docks or at a wharf in the river, shall pay per ton— Francs.

For each of the first ten voyages 0.26

For each of the ten following 0.18

For each subsequent voyage 0.12

To secure a diminution of dues, the voyages must take place within the course of the year after the date of the first arrival.

Article 10. On payment of the dues required for stay in the basins, vessels may remain there three months. After that time they will pay six centimes per ton for each month. A month begun shall be paid for in full.

Note.—The regulations for the admeasurement of vessels are not printed, because they do not differ essentially from the Moorsom system, which is found in the Revised Statutes of the United States, and also in the customs regulations of the Treasury Department for 1874.

* Sonte, a magazine or store-room. Sonte a Carbon, coal-hole or coal-bunker.

No. 54. Mr. Evarts to Mr. Delfosse. [Document 65]

No. 54.
Mr. Evarts to Mr. Delfosse.

Department of State,
Washington, September 19, 1878.

Sir: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your note of the 19th ultimo, together with a circular relating to a project for the “conversion” of the local dues now collected in the port of Antwerp, under treaty stipulations, and, having procured the views of the Secretary of Treasury thereupon, I hasten to communicate the same, inclosing herewith a copy of that officer’s letter in reply to the inquiry of this Department on the subject.

I beg to renew to you the assurance of my distinguished consideration.

WM. M. EVARTS.

[Inclosure.]

Mr. Sherman to Mr. Evarts.

Treasury Department,
September 13, 1878. (Received September 14.)

Sir: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your letter of the 19th ultimo, inclosing a copy of a note from the minister of Belgium in this country with regard to a project for the “conversion” of the local dues now collected in the port of Antwerp, under treaty stipulations, together with a translation of a circular on the subject; and you solicit from this department an expression of its views in connection with the project in question.

The papers submitted by the Belgian minister relate to the admeasurement of vessels in that kingdom, and to the proposed conversion of local dues collected from shipping in the port of Antwerp, which the minister says “is but a simple conversion, without any augmentation of existing dues.”

As regards the first subject, it would appear that the Belgian Government has adopted the Moorsom system of admeasuring vessels.

The department observes from a note by the translator of the papers received from the Belgian minister, that he has omitted from them the text of the Belgian law or regulations, “because,” he says, the regulations “do not differ essentially from the Moorsom system, which is found in the Revised Statutes of the United States” (section 4153). But it would seem that the British admeasurement law has been adopted, which, however, was not precisely followed in our own legislation.

Hitherto the registers of Belgian vessels have not been accepted at American ports, for the reason that the system of admeasurement has not conformed to that of the United States. It is understood that the Belgian old rule is not materially different from the rule of the United States which prevailed under the act of 1799, and which was superseded by the new method in 1865; and it depends upon the build of each vessel whether the change of the method of admeasurement increases or diminishes the tonnage thereof.

The registers of Belgian vessels not being as yet accepted at American ports, such vessels are admeasured for tonnage in the manner provided by law for vessels of the United States; and this practice must continue until the Belgian Government shall apply to this government to accept the registers of Belgian vessels in our ports without admeasurement on the ground of having adopted the Moorsom system, and that Belgian vessels are admeasured in conformity therewith, and on condition that a similar courtesy will be extended to American vessels in Belgian ports, when the proper instructions will be given to our collectors of customs.

As regards the second subject, the change proposed by the Belgian Government in the conversion of the dues collected of shipping at Antwerp, it appears to the department that inasmuch as the minister gives an assurance that the present dues shall in no wise be increased by the mode of “conversion” if it be adopted, there would be no cause of complaint by American shipmasters, provided the regulations to carry the change into effect shall throw no obstacles in the way of a speedy liquidation of the customs claims, and do not impose burdens upon them from which they are now free.

Very respectfully,

JOHN SHERMAN,
Secretary.

No. 55. Mr. Van den Bossche to Mr. Evarts. [Document 66]

No. 55.
Mr. Van den Bossche to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of Belgium in the United States,
Washington, January 6, 1879.

Mr. Secretary of State: The Government of the King, my august sovereign, has taken cognizance of your excellency’s note of the 19th of September last, and has given special attention to the considerations which appear to have inspired the reply of the Washington cabinet to its propositions for the conversion of the local dues collected at Antwerp.

The Treasury Department seems to think that the Moorsom system for the admeasurement of vessels has already been adopted by the Government of the King. The latter has, it is true, adopted a plan of revision according to that system; but that plan has not yet received the legislative sanction. The question is therefore still open, and the cabinet will propose no solution to the chambers until all the foreign governments have expressed their views in relation to the plan of conversion which is the subject of the present negotiation.

The Government of the King, moreover, has no intention to adopt the English method pure and simple; the plan of the new regulations is based upon the Moorsom system, as in use in England, only so far as regards the gross tonnage of vessels, and as to the determination of the net tonnage it drops certain provisions of the English system, particularly those which fix the deductions to be granted for the machinery of steam-vessels, following in this respect the method in use in Germany, France, &c.

I will add, Mr. Secretary of State, that the Belgian authorities, while still regarding the old certificate as possessing an official and obligatory character, have for a few months past, when requested to do so, granted a supplementary certificate of admeasurement, drawn up in conformity with the prescriptions of the Constantinople Conference, to vessels passing through the Suez Canal.

The Government of the King has been pleased to observe the favorable disposition manifested by the Washington cabinet as regards the reciprocal acceptance without admeasurement of the registers of Belgian vessels in the United States and of American vessels in Belgium.

Nevertheless, it will be unable to make any proposition in this respect before having definitely modified its system of admeasurement.

The Secretary of the Treasury, in concluding the note which your excellency was pleased to communicate to the legation of the King, seems also to desire a declaration on the part of the Belgian Government to the effect that not only will the conversion of the local dues at Antwerp cause no increase of these dues, but that it will give rise to no obstacles to the speedy dispatch of vessels, and that it will impose no new burdens upon American ship-owners. The Government of the King would be willing to furnish such a guarantee to the Interests of navigation, especially as the adoption of the new system of admeasurement will probably enable it to exempt American vessels from the special admeasurement to which they are now subjected.

I flatter myself, Mr. Secretary of State, that these explanations will induce the Government of the President to fully approve the propositions which Mr. Delfosse had the honor to submit to your excellency by his note of August 12, 1878. I hope, at all events, that you will be pleased to submit them to a thorough examination.

I avail myself of this occasion, Mr. Secretary of State, to renew to your excellency the assurance of my highest consideration.

LEON VAN DEN BOSSCHE.

No. 56. Mr. Evarts to Mr. Van den Bossche. [Document 67]

No. 56.
Mr. Evarts to Mr. Van den Bossche.

Department of State,
Washington, January 31, 1879.

Sir: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your note of the 6th instant relating to the system of admeasurement of vessels under Belgian laws, and in reply to transmit herewith a copy of a communication from the Secretary of the Treasury presenting certain considerations on the subject.

Accept, sir, a renewed assurance of my high consideration.

WM. M. EVARTS.

[Inclosure.]

Mr. Sherman to Mr. Evarts.

Treasury Department,
January 27, 1879. (Received January 28.)

Sir: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your letter of the 10th instant, referring to my communication of the 13th of September last, giving the views of the department on the project submitted, in a note of the minister of Belgium in this country, respecting the “conversion” of the local dues now collected in the port of Antwerp, under treaty stipulations; and you transmit for my consideration a translation of another note on the same subject, received recently, from the chargé d’affaires of Belgium, with a request for the further views of the department on the matter as now presented, in order that you may communicate them to the Belgian legation.

The note of the chargé d’affaires, as appears by the translation, relates to the admeasurement of vessels, and to the conversion of the local dues collected at the present time at the port of Antwerp.

I would observe that my letter of the 13th of September last related to both those subjects, but chiefly to the proposed revision by the Belgian Government of its system of admeasurement of vessels; and I stated there that that government appeared to have adopted the Moorsom system, but until such adoption was officially communicated to this government, that the proper instructions might be issued to collectors of customs, the admeasurement of Belgian vessels arriving at ports of the United States would continue according to the laws and regulations of this country.

It seems, however, from the note, that while the adoption in Belgium of the Moorsom system is contemplated, it will not be made “until all foreign governments have expressed their views in relation to the plan of conversion which is the subject of the present negotiation.”

In reference to this subject, the Belgian minister states in his note of August 12, 18781, that “the new regulation, which is projected in consequence of the revision of the system of admeasuring Belgian vessels, is but a simple conversion, without any augmentation of existing dues.”

The department understands that the Belgian “regulations of June 21, 1861, relative to the collection of navigation dues at Antwerp,” provide that certain duties shall be collected from all foreign vessels entering at the port of Antwerp, upon their tonnage as ascertained by measurement according to the existing Belgian rule or method.

Those duties or navigation dues are as follows, viz: Centimes. Centimes.

Under 100 tons 40, and 15 per cent. = 46

Above 100 to 150 tons 45, and 15 per cent. = 51.75

Above 150 to 200 tons 50, and 15 per cent. = 57.50

Above 200 to 250 tons 55, and 15 per cent. = 63.25

Above 250 to 300 tons 65, and 15 per cent. = 74.75

Above 300 tons 70, and 15 per cent. = 80.50

By the proposed revised regulations, these dues are made specific, as follows, viz: Centimes per ton.

Under 85 tons 47

From 86 to 128 tons 53

From 129 to 171 tons 58

From 172 to 214 tons 64

From 215 to 257 tons 76

From 258 and upwards 82

A comparison of the two schedules, given above, shows that the dues per ton are slightly increased; the large vessels (above 258 tons) from 80.50 centimes to 82 centimes; or say 15/100 centimes per ton on a vessel of 1,000 tons, the increase would be 15 francs = $2.89½.

It is presumed that the object of the Belgian Government in making the new regulations (conversion so called) is to provide against a loss to the revenue of that government which, it is apprehended, will result from the adoption of the Moorsom system, for ascertaining tonnage.

If the conversion is acceded to, the Belgian Government proposes to discontinue measuring vessels entering at the port of Antwerp, and to collect the navigation dues upon the tonnage expressed in the vessel’s register.

The department understands that the Moorsom system is simply a method of ascertaining cubic capacities, and that maritime nations which have adopted it have a different rule of applying the system to tonnage.

The United States rules include in the tonnage not only the capacity of the hold and between decks, but the capacity of all permanent closed-in spaces on the upper decks, or on the spar deck, available for cargo or stores, or for the berthing or accommodation of passengers or crew, and no deductions are allowed from the (gross) aggregate tonnage. In other words, there is no recognized net tonnage.

The rules of other nations, however, provide for certain deductions from the gross tonnage, and the remainder is the net tonnage, and is usually what is stated in the register. These deductions may be said, generally, to amount, in steam-vessels, to from 25 to 45 per cent., averaging 35 per cent. of the gross tonnage. In sailing vessels such deductions are about 5 per cent. of the gross tonnage. These deductions were considered unequal and unjust, and the Constantinople Conference, which the chargé d’affaires refers to, was held for the purpose of establishing a uniform rule of deductions and allowances. Whether the Belgian Government shall adopt the English method “pure and simple,” or the Moorsom system modified in its application according to the Danube rule adopted at Constantinople, is not material in the opinion of this department. American vessels entering at the port of Antwerp will, no doubt, be required to pay navigation dues on their gross or register tonnage; Belgian vessels entering American ports will pay tonnage duties on their register tonnage “with the addition of the deductions made under Belgian law hot authorized by the admeasurement law of the United States.”

As regards the proposed “conversion,” it will not, in my opinion, materially or unfavorably affect American vessels.

Very respectfully,

JOHN SHERMAN,
Secretary.

No. 57. Mr. Van den Bossche to Mr. Evarts. [Document 68]

No. 57.
Mr. Van den Bossche to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of Belgium,
Washington, May 7, 1879.

Mr. Secretary of State: I duly communicated to the Government of the King, my august sovereign, the contents of the last note of the honorable Secretary of the Treasury, relative to the proposed conversion of the local taxes levied at Antwerp, which your excellency was pleased to transmit to me under date of the 31st of January last, and I have now been instructed to submit to your kind consideration the observations suggested by the communication of the Hon. Mr. Sherman, to which I have just referred.

According to that communication, the Treasury Department seems to think that in preparing the new tariff of local taxes at Antwerp, the Government of the King has proposed to add to the principal of the dues, as it appears in the resolution of the Communal Council of Antwerp of June 22, 1861, the additional centimes levied on those dues in virtue of the same resolution. It was doubtless from taking this idea as his point of departure that the Hon. Mr. Sherman thought that the tariff had been slightly increased. Now, it is not proposed by the plan for the conversion of the taxes to unite the principal and the additional centimes. These additional centimes, which are now levied, will continue to be levied like the present tariff 5 the projected tariff calls for the principal duties only. But the reform proposed by the government has a wider scope; it consists not only in a change in the process of admeasurement, but it has for its basis a more important and more radical modification—that of the legal value of the sea ton; that is to say, of the unity of measure which serves to express the tonnage. It thus became necessary to bring the local taxes of Antwerp into harmony with the new tonnage which will result from this change, and this has been the basis of the conversion that has been prepared; the manner in which this work has been performed offers, moreover, every possible guarantee of accuracy and impartiality.

On considering these facts and these explanations, the Government of the United States will doubtless be convinced that the proposed conversion involves no increase of the tariff.

The Secretary of the Treasury inquired, moreover, in his note of January 27, what kind of tonnage was to serve as the basis for the collection of navigation dues in Belgium as regards American vessels registered simply according to their gross tonnage, the rules in force in the United States making no deduction on this tonnage, and consequently recognizing no net tonnage. I will take the liberty to remark that according to the plan communicated to the Government of the President, it is net tonnage, as it will be defined by the Belgian rules that will serve as the basis for the collection, whatever be the nationality of the vessel, and I will add that the spaces to be deducted are therein expressly indicated.

Moreover, if the registers of American vessels state the gross tonnage only measured by Moorsom’s rules, the Belgian authorities will accept such gross tonnage as correct (according to article 24, § 4, of the proposed regulations), and they will deduct therefrom the capacity of the spaces for whose deduction said regulations provide for the purpose of finding the Belgian net tonnage; they will make this deduction not according to a fixed and invariable proportion, but by measuring the spaces to be exempted.

In a word, it is on net tonnage as defined in the proposed regulations that duties will be required as well for American vessels as for vessels carrying the Belgian flag. This method of procedure is, morever, entirely in accordance with article 3 of the treaty of commerce and navigation of March 8, 1875, which guarantees to vessels of the United States entering the ports of Belgium the same usage as is accorded to Belgian vessels.

Article 2 of that treaty contains a stipulation which is in all respects similar as to the usage to be accorded to Belgian vessels in the ports of the United States. Thus, when American vessels pay navigation dues in these latter ports, according to their gross tonnage, the Government of the King can have no objection to Belgian vessels being compelled to pay the same dues according to their gross tonnage, unless more favorable usage should be accorded to a third power, in which case Belgium would be entitled to the usage of the most favored nation. The tonnage certificate of Belgian vessels will, moreover, state both their net and gross tonnage; no difficulty can therefore arise in determining the latter in American ports.

I need not add, Mr. Secretary of State, as I have already had occasion to remark, that the Government of the King will not introduce its new system of admeasurement until all the foreign governments shall have expressed their views in relation to the proposed conversion of the tariff of the local taxes at Antwerp, and that when the proper time shall have arrived it will inform the said governments by a special communication of the day on which the new system shall have been introduced.

I shall be glad, Mr. Secretary of the State, if foregoing observations are sufficient fully to enlighten the Washington Cabinet as to the scope of the measure proposed by the Government of the King, my august sovereign, and I hope that they will enable your excellency soon to notify me of the adhesion of the Government of the President to the propositions that are now submitted to it.

I avail myself of this occasion, Mr. Secretary of State, to offer your excellency a renewed assurance of my highest consideration.

LEON VAN DEN BOSSCHE.

No. 58. Mr. Evarts to Mr. Van den Bossche. [Document 69]

No. 58.
Mr. Evarts to Mr. Van den Bossche.

Department of State,
Washington, June 23, 1879.

Sir: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your note of the 7th ultimo, in further relation to the conversion of the local taxes levied at Antwerp, and to say in reply that I have communicated the substance thereof to the Secretary of the Treasury, who observes in his responsive ‘letter on the subject, as follows: * * * * * * *

The questions for consideration raised in the note of the chargé d’affaires are chiefly two: first, as to the effect of the proposed conversion.

In the letter of this department, which you acknowledge and to which the Belgian note is a reply, a schedule was given of the present tariff of dues and a schedule of the proposed tariff; and a comparison of the two would indicate that a slight hut unimportant increase is contemplated. The note, however, states that the proposed conversion involves no increase of the tariff; and it is probably the fact that the duties, while apparently slightly increased per ton, are to be levied on a decreased tonnage, which wall be the result of the admeasurements under the Moorsom system.

The second question relates to the kind of tonnage which is to serve as a basis for the collection of the local taxes at Antwerp.

The Belgian Government proposes that these taxes shall be collected upon net tonnage; and as to American vessels, whose registers state only gross tonnage, the necessary deductions will be made to bring them within the Belgian rule, provided the same usage is accorded to Belgian vessels entering ports of the United States. If this is not agreed to, and American vessels pay navigation dues in Belgian ports upon their gross register tonnage, the Belgian Government will not object to Belgian vessels being compelled to pay in the ports of the United States the same duties according to their gross tonnage, unless a more favorable usage should be accorded to a third power, in which case Belgium would be entitled to the usage of the most favored nation.

It appears, therefore, to me, that so long as this government continues the present practice of collecting navigation dues upon the gross tonnage of American and foreign vessels, no complication can arise by reason of the different methods adopted by foreign nations, either separately or in concert, of stating taxable tonnage. Each must first ascertain the gross tonnage, for with that only has the United States to do; and so long as the present practice is continued the present regulations need not be altered.

As regards the “conversion” of the local dues on shipping at Antwert, the department has already expressed its views thereon, in its letters to the Department of State of the 13th of September, 1878, and the 27th of January last.

Observing that copies of the above-named letters were sent to your legation with the notes of this Department of September 19, 1878, and January 31 last, I avail myself of this occasion to renew to you the assurances of my high consideration.

WM. M. EVARTS.

No. 59. Mr. Van den Bossche to Mr. Evarts. [Document 70]

No. 59.
Mr. Van den Bossche to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of Belgium,
Washington, June 26, 1879.

Mr. Secretary of State: The Royal Government at present is directing its attention to the conditions upon which marriage in foreign parts between Belgian citizens and those of other countries depends.

It has instructed to this end its diplomatic representatives to collect and transmit detailed information regarding the legislation in force in the matter of marriage in the countries of their temporary residence, and concerning the regulations followed, in order to insure the correct formulation, authenticity, and preservation of the records of the civil state.

Before proceeding with this work, which, in so far as His Majesty’s legation at Washington is concerned, ought to comprehend the special legislation of each of the States of the Union, and to the end of my procuring the documents which would afford the accuracy desirable, I have the honor to have recourse to the kind intervention of your excellency to ask of the proper executive department whether there does not exist some work or official collection containing the legal and other rules in force upon this subject in the various States and Territories.

I shall be greatly indebted to your excellency for all the information I can obtain in this regard, and I embrace this opportunity, Mr. Secretary, to renew to you the assurances of my very highest esteem.

LEON VAN DEN BOSSCHE.

No. 60. Mr. Seward to Mr. Van den Bossche. [Document 71]

No. 60.
Mr. Seward to Mr. Van den Bossche.

Department of State,
Washington, July 3, 1879.

Sir: I have the honor to acknowledge reception of your note of the 26th ultimo, in which you state that the Government of His Majesty is giving its attention to the conditions which, in foreign countries, may govern marriages between Belgians and persons of other nationalities; and that to this end it has charged its diplomatic agents-abroad to collect and transmit information and detailed reports upon the existing legislation with respect to marriage in the countries where they reside, and the rules followed, to assure the correct wording, the authenticity, and the safe-keeping of the records of the civil state. And in order to accomplish the task thus assigned to you, you ask this Department to inquire of the competent executive department whether there is any work or official compilation containing the rules and laws in force in this respect in the different States and Territories.

With a view to aiding you in the investigation wherewith you are charged, I have to observe that the marriage laws of the several States and Territories were made the basis of an exhaustive examination by the law officer of the Department in 1874, but that now, on looking over that report, prepared with great labor, he finds that the State and Territorial legislation has in many instances been since modified and that a new and revised examination would be necessary should you require the aid of the Department in your work. As there are thirty-eight States and eight Territories, each with their own laws on marriage, divorce, and the rights of married women, it will readily be seen that such an examination requires time and care; but should it be desired by your legation, the law officer would be requested to give the matter his personal attention during the summer months.

The custody or supervision of the State and Territorial laws affecting the marriage relation is not within the federal province of the Department of Justice; neither is there any official collection of such laws. The standard text-book on the subject in use by the legal profession in the United States is published by private enterprise, under the title of “Bishop on Marriage and Divorce,” which, it is thought, may contain all the information desired by His Majesty’s Government.

Accept, sir, the renewed assurance of my distinguished consideration.

F. W. SEWARD,
Acting Secretary.

No. 61. Mr. Van den Bossche to Mr. Evarts. [Document 72]

No. 61.
Mr. Van den Bossche to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of Belgian,
Washington, July 7, 1879.

Mr. Secretary of State: In acknowledging to your excellency the receipt of your note of the 3d instant, I have the honor to express to you my very especial thanks for the information which you have been kind enough to convey to me upon the subject of the laws in force in the various States and Territories of the Union in relation to marriage.

The work with which my government has charged His Majesty’s legation having for its special object to present, in general terms and without going into details, the regulations observed and the authorities competent for the celebration of marriages, it is not necessary for me to pay attention to the successive modifications which legislative activity may from time to time add to existing laws.

I should consider myself extremely fortunate if I could merely obtain knowledge, in a purely informal way, of the important researches made by the law officer of the Department of State in 1874 (1872?), and of whose existence your excellency has been good enough to inform me, The legation of the King would consider this a special favor.

I embrace this opportunity, Mr. Secretary, to offer to your excellency renewed assurances of my highest consideration.

LEON VAN DEN BOSSCHE.

No. 62. Mr. Evarts to Mr. Van den Bossche. [Document 73]

No. 62.
Mr. Evarts to Mr. Van den Bossche.

Department of State, July 12, 1879.

Sir: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your note of the 7th instant, and in reply to inclose herein copies of two circulars of the Department based on the report of the law officer of the Department regarding marriage laws in this country, referred to in the note of the Department of 3d instant. That report appears, however, to have been made in 1872, rather than in 1874, the date assigned in the above-mentioned note.

Accept, sir, a renewed assurance of my high consideration.

WM. M. EVARTS.

[Inclosures.]

Circular No. 18.

Department of State,
Washington, February 16, 1872.

To the Diplomatic and Consular Officers of the United States:

Gentlemen: Occasions having arisen in which it was found desirable for the diplomatic and consular officers of the United States to possess authentic information concerning the laws in force in the several States and Territories of the United States as to the age at which males and females, whether unmarried or married, attain their majority, the Department, some time since, addressed a circular letter to the executives of the several States and Territories, from which the following information has been extracted:

states.

Alabama.—Males under 17 years, and females under the age of 14, cannot contract marriage. Both males and females attain their majority at 21 years of age.

Arkansas.—Males at the age of 21 years, and females at 18, attain their majority.

California.—Males attain their majority at the age of 21 years and females at 18.

Connecticut.—Males and females, unmarried or married, attain their majority at 21 years of age.

Delaware.—Males attain their majority at 21 years of age, females at 21 or marriage.

Florida.—Males and females, married or unmarried, attain their majority at 21 years of age.

Georgia.—Males and females, married or unmarried, attain their majority at 21 years of age.

Illinois.—Males attain their majority at 21 years of age and females at 18.

Indiana.—Males and females, married or unmarried, attain their majority at 21 years of age.

Iowa.—The period of minority extends in males to the age of 21 years and in females to 18, but all minors attain their majority by marriage.

Kansas.—Males attain their majority at 21 years of age and females at 18, whether married or unmarried.

Maine.—Males attain their majority at 21 years of age, and females, for the purposes of marriage, at 18, and for all other purposes at 21.

Maryland.—Males attain their majority at 21 years of age and females at 18.

Massachusetts.—Males and females attain their majority, whether married or unmarried, at 21 years of age.

Michigan.—Males and females attain their majority at 21 years of age. (The age, however, so far as relates to females, is established rather by implication than direct averment of statute.)

Minnesota.—Males attain their majority at 21 years of age and females at 18. (Males, however, are qualified under the law to contract marriage at 18 and females at 15.)

Missouri.—Males attain their majority at 21 years of age and females at 18.

Mississippi.—Males and females attain their majority, whether married or unmarried, at 21 years of age. (Females are allowed to marry without consent of parents or guardian at 18.)

Kentucky.—Males attain their majority at 21 years of age, females 18. (Males can marry at 18 and females at 14.)

Louisiana.—Males attain their majority at 21 years of age and females at 18. (Males can marry at 14 and females at 12.)

New Hampshire.—Males attain their majority at 21 years of age and females at 18.

New Jersey.—Males and females attain their majority at 21 years of age. (Females can marry without consent of parents or guardian at 18.)

New York.—Males and females attain their majority, whether married or unmarried, at 21 years of age. (Males may dispose of personal estate, by will, at 18 and upward, and females at 16. Marriage of females under 14, without consent of parents or guardian, may be declared void by the courts.)

North Carolina.—Males or females attain their majority, whether married or unmarried, at 21 years of age.

Nebraska.—Males attain their majority at 21 years of age; females, married, at 16; unmarried, at 18.

Nevada.—Males attain their majority at 21 years of age and females at 18.

Ohio.—Males attain their majority, whether married or unmarried, at 21 years, and females at 18.

Oregon.—Males attain their majority at 21 years of age and females at 18, or on their marriage.

Pennsylvania.—Males and females attain their majority at 21 years of age. (In cases of apprenticeship, the male, under the law, is released at 21 and the female at 18.)

Rhode Island.—Males and females, married or unmarried, attain their majority at 21 years of age. (But both male and female may make a will of their personal property at 18.)

South Carolina.—Males and females, married or unmarried, attain their majority at 21 years of age.

Tennessee.—Males and females, married or unmarried, attain their majority at 21 years of age.

Texas.—Males or females attain their majority at 21 years of age. (Minor female upon marriage becomes of full age.)

Vermont.—Males attain their majority at 21 years of age and females at 18.

Virginia.—Males and females attain their majority, married or unmarried, at 21 years of age.

West Virginia.—Males and females attain their majority at 21 years of age. (Minors, 18 years of age and upward, may dispose of personal property by will. No marriage can be solemnized between parties either of whom is under 21 years of age, unless with the consent of father, guardian, or mother.)

Wisconsin.—Males attain their majority at 21 years of age and females at 18. (Marriage of a minor does not affect the state of majority.)

territories.

Colorado.—Males attain their majority at 21 years of age and females at 18. (Males can marry at 16 and females at 14.)

Dakota.—Males attain their majority at 21 years of age and females at 18. (Males can marry at 16 and females at 14.)

Idaho.—Males attain their majority at 21 years of age and females at 18. (Males can marry at 16 and females at 14.)

Montana.—Males attain their majority at 21 year’s of age and females at 18. (Males can marry at 18; no age fixed for females.)

New Mexico.—Males attain their majority at 21 years of age and females at 18. (Males must be 21 years of age to marry without consent of parents, but no age fixed for females.)

Utah.—Males attain their majority at 21 years of age and females at 18. (A minor may make contract for personal services.)

Washington.—Males attain their majority at 21 years of age and females at 18. (All females married to a person of full age shall be deemed and taken to be of full age. Males and females under age must have consent of parents or guardian to marry.)

I am, gentlemen, your obedient servant,

HAMILTON FISH.

Circular No. 39.

Department of State,
Washington, February 16, 1872.

To the Diplomatic and Consular Officers of the United States:

Gentlemen: Occasions having arisen in which it was found desirable for the diplomatic and consular officers of the United States to possess authentic information concerning the laws in force in the several States and Territories of the United States in relation to births and marriages, the department has collected from the laws of the several States and Territories the following information on the subject:

states.

Alabama.—There must be a license to marry from the judge of probate; certificate of the marriage returned to him and recorded in his office. No registry of births.

Arkansas.—No license; but the person solemnizing must return a certificate to the clerk of the court for the county, who shall record it. No registry of births.

California.—No license required; but persons solemnizing must keep a record and transmit it to the county recorder, who shall record it. No registry of births.

Connecticut.—License must be had from town clerk; certificate returned to town registrar, and by him recorded. No registry of births.

Delaware.—A marriage license must be had or bans published in church. Persons solemnizing must keep a record, and once a year transmit copy to recorder of county, who records it. No registry of births.

Florida.—License for marriage to be issued by clerk of county; certificate of; returned to him, and he records it. No registry of births.

Georgia.—License for marriage issued by ordinary of the county; certificate returned to him, and he records it. No registry of births.

Illinois.—Bans must be published two weeks in church or license obtained from county clerk; in either case certificate to be returned to him by party solemnizing, and by the clerk recorded. No registry of births.

Indiana.—No license required; but certificate of, must be returned to county clerk, and by him recorded. No registry of births.

Iowa.—License must be had from the county clerk, and party solemnizing must return certificate to clerk, who records it. No registry of births.

Kansas.—No license is required; but certificate to be returned to the county clerk by the person solemnizing, and to be recorded by the clerk. No registry of births.

Kentucky.—There must be a license, or publication notice, filed in clerk’s office; certificate to be returned to the registrar of births, deaths, and marriages, who is to record it. While there is provided in this State a mode of registering births, as there is no provision requiring parents to report birth, the law is to a great extent a dead letter.

Louisiana.—The parish judge issues a license, and the certificate is returned to that officer, and he records it. No registry of births.

Maine.—The town clerk issues license, or publication of bans in church; the party solemnizing the marriage keeps record, and makes return to the town clerk within a year; clerk records it. No registry of births.

Maryland.—The clerk of orphans’ court issues license; the certificate is returned to him, and he records. No registry of births.

Massachusetts.—Parties intending to marry must file notice with the clerk, after which he issues licenses; and certificate is returned to-the-town registrar, who records it. Inhabitants of this State going out of the State to marry, in order to evade law, marriage declared void. No registry of births.

Michigan.—License issued by county clerk, and certificate returned to him; clerk records it. No registry of births.

Minnesota.—No license; but the minister or magistrate who performs ceremony must examine one of the parties, on oath, as to whether the proposed marriage is such as the law allows; certificate of oath and marriage returned to the county clerk for record. No registry of births.

Missouri.—License by clerk, and certificate returned to him for record. No registry of births.

Mississippi.—License issued by registrar of orphans’ court, and certificate returned to him for record. No registry of births.

New Hampshire.—The intention to marry must be published at three meetings, either religious or town meetings; certificate of town clerk of such publication is the license; it is returned to him and recorded. No registry of births.

New Jersey.—No license is required; but certificate of marriage to be returned to town clerk, and by him recorded. No registry of births.

New York.—No license is required; but certificate of marriage must be returned to the registrar of births, marriages, and deaths; provision is also made for the return of all births, but not generally enforced.

North Carolina.—License to be issued by county judge or clerk, and certificate returned to clerk, who records it. No registry of births.

Nebraska.—Judge of probate issues license, and certificate is returned to that officer, and he records it. No registry of births.

Nevada.—No license required; certificate returned to county clerk, who records it. No registry of births.

Ohio.—Bans may be published in church or a license from clerk of county court, to whom, in either case, certificate is returned for record. No registry of births.

Oregon.—No license is required; but certificate returned for record to recorder of the county court. No registry of births.

Pennsylvania.—No license required; but the person solemnizing the marriage must keep record. No registry of births.

Rhode Island.—No license required; but return must be made by person solemnizing marriage to town clerk for record. No registry of births.

South Carolina.—Licence from the clerk of the county court, and return made to him for record. No registry of births.

Tennessee.—License from clerk of county court, and return of certificate to him for record. No registry of births.

Texas.—License from clerk of probate court, and return of certificate to him for record. No registry of births.

Vermont.—Publication in either church or town meeting; certificate returned to town clerk for record. No birth registry.

Virginia.—License from county court, and return of certificate to court for record. No registry of births.

West Virginia.—License from clerk of county court; certificate returned to that officer for record. No registry of births.

Wisconsin.—Person solemnizing to examine one of the parties on oath, to make certificate, and return the same to the county clerk for record.

territories.

Colorado.—No marriage license required, but certificate to be returned by the party solemnizing to the clerk of county for record. No registry of births. In this Territory, if a married man dies without a will or issue, all his property, real and personal, goes to his widow.

Dakota.—No marriage license required, and no record kept. Judges, justices of the peace, and ministers of the gospel may solemnize. No registry of births.

Idaho.—No license required; but party solemnizing must, within three months, return certificate of, to county recorder for record. No registry of births.

Utah.—No license required, and no registry of either marriages or births.

Washington.—No license required; but certificate to be returned by the party solemnizing to the county recorder for record. No birth registry.

New Mexico.—No license required, and no registry of marriages or births.

I am, gentlemen, your obedient servant,

HAMILTON FISH.

Note.—In the several States and Territories penalties are imposed by the statutes for a failure to comply with the requirements as to license or return of the certificate—in some cases against the parties to the contract, in other cases against the party solemnizing the marriage, and in some instances against all parties; but in none of the States or Territories is the marriage null and void because of a non-compliance with the requirements of the statute.

Bolivia.Bolivia.

[74] . Mr. Evarts to Mr. Pettis.

Department of State, Washington, June 23, 1879.

[75] . Mr. Evarts to Mr. Pettis.

Department of State, Washington, June 25, 1879.

[76] Mr. Evarts to Mr. Sherman.

Department of State, Washington, June 18, 1879.

[77] Mr. Sherman to Mr. Evarts.

Treasury Department, June 24, 1879.

[78] . Mr. Pettis to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, La Paz, Bolivia, August 25, 1879. (Received October 16.)

[79] . Mr. Pettis to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, La Paz, Bolivia, August 25, 1879. (Received October 16.)

No. 63. Mr. Evarts to Mr. Pettis. [Document 74]

No. 63.
Mr. Evarts to Mr. Pettis.

Department of State,
Washington, June 23, 1879. No. 12.]

Sir: The British Government has lately received information that the Government of Bolivia has decreed the issue of letters of marque, with authority to privateers to seize Chilian property in neutral vessels, and that agents have departed for the United States.

You are directed to call the attention of the Bolivian Government to the treaty of 1858, and more especially to the XVIth article thereof, which stipulates for the freedom from capture or confiscation of effects or goods belonging to subjects or citizens of a power or State at war when found on board of neutral, vessels, with the exception of articles contraband of war.

The neutrality act of 1818 (section 5281 et seq. of the Revised Statutes) specially prohibits the fitting out, arming, or equipping in this country of any vessel for the purpose of committing hostilities against the people of a country with whom the United States are at peace. Should it prove true that the Bolivian Government has dispatched agents to this country for the purpose, as is understood, of engaging in this enterprise, you will remind them of the existence of this act and of the necessity which will compel this government to adopt measures for preventing a violation of it.

I am, &c.,

WM. M. EVARTS.

No. 64. Mr. Evarts to Mr. Pettis. [Document 75]

No. 64.
Mr. Evarts to Mr. Pettis.

Department of State,
Washington, June 25, 1879. No. 13.]

Sir: Referring to my instruction No. 12, of the 23d instant, in regard to the intimation received that the Government of Bolivia has decreed the issue of letters of marque, with authority to privateers to seize Chilian property in neutral vessels, and that Bolivian agents are understood to have already departed for the United States, I now transmit for your information two copies of a circular issued by the Secretary of the Treasury under date of the 21st instant, instructing collectors of customs and others whom it may concern with respect to the observance of the neutrality laws of the United States in case of any possible attempt being made to infringe the same in behalf of either of the belligerentst

I am, &c.,

WM. M. EVARTS.

[Inclosure.]
[June 21, 1879]

Copy of letter from the Secretary of State to the Secretary of the Treasury.

Copy of letter from the Secretary of the Treasury, and circular No. 101, June 21, 1879.

Mr. Evarts to Mr. Sherman. [Document 76]

Mr. Evarts to Mr. Sherman.

Department of State,
Washington, June 18, 1879.

Sir: I have the honor to inform you that the British Government has received information that the Government of Bolivia has decreed the issue of letters of marque, with authority to privateers to seize Chilian property in neutral vessels, and that agents of Bolivia have departed for the United States.

With a view to causing due observance of the neutrality laws of this country, I will thank you to direct the attention of such of the collectors of customs of the United States to the matter as you in your judgment shall deem proper.

I have the honor to be, sir, your obedient servant,

WM. M. EVARTS.

Mr. Sherman to Mr. Evarts. [Document 77]

Mr. Sherman to Mr. Evarts.

Treasury Department, June 24, 1879.

Sir: Referring to your letter of the 18th instant relative to the proposed issue of letters of marque by the Government of Bolivia, with authority to privateers to seize Chilian property in neutral vessels, I have the honor to inclose herewith six copies of the circular on the subject issued by this department on the 21st instant and sent to the collectors of customs at ports from which illegal expeditions might be arranged, warning them to be vigilant to guard against any breach of the neutrality laws of the United States.

Very respectfully,

JOHN SHERMAN,
Secretary.

Observance of the neutrality laws.

Treasury Department, Office of the Secretary,
Washington, D. C., June 21, 1879.

[1879. Department No. 101. Secretary’s office.]

To collectors of customs and whom it may concern:

This department has received information that the Government of Bolivia has decreed the issue of letters of marque, with authority to privateers to seize Chilian property in neutral vessels, and that agents of Bolivia have departed for the United States.

Collectors of customs, in whose ports attempts may be made to fit out warlike expeditions in aid of either of the belligerent powers, will take care to see that section 5290 of the Revised Satutes be vigilantly enforced against all vessels that appear to be destined to violate the neutrality laws of the United States. The section is here reproduced:

“Sec. 5290. The several collectors of the customs shall detain any vessel manifestly built for warlike purposes, and about to depart the United States, the cargo of which principally consists of arms and munitions of war, when the number of men shipped on board, or other circumstances, render it probable that such vessel is intended to be employed by the owners to cruise or commit hostilities upon the subjects, citizens, or property of any foreign prince or state, or of any colony, district, or people with whom the United States are at peace, until the decision of the President is had thereon, or until the owner gives such bond and security as is required of the owners of armed vessels by the preceding section.”

JOHN SHERMAN,
Secretary.

No. 65. Mr. Pettis to Mr. Evarts. [Document 78]

No. 65.
Mr. Pettis to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
La Paz, Bolivia, August 25, 1879. (Received October 16.) No. 23]

Sir: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your dispatch of the 23d June last (No. 12), and have, in compliance with directions therein contained, called the attention of the minister for foreign relations of Bolivia to the subject of your dispatch, as will appear from a copy of my said letter herewith forwarded, marked inclosure 1.

I am, &c.,

S. NEWTON PETTIS.

[Inclosure in Mr. Pettis’s No. 23.]

Legation of the United States,
La Paz, August 25, 1879.

Sir: I am informed by an official dispatch from Washington that the United States Government has received information that the British Government has lately been informed that the Government of Bolivia has decreed the issue of letters of marque, with authority to privateers to seize Chilian property in neutral vessels, and that agents have departed for the United States, and assuming that my government has been correctly informed, I am directed by it to call the attention of the Bolivian Government to the treaty of 1858, and especially to the sixteenth article thereof, which stipulates for the freedom from capture or confiscation of effects or goods belonging to subjects or citizens of a power or state at war when found on board of neutral vessels, with the exception of articles contraband of war.

May I ask your excellency to be kind enough to advise me whether the information received by my government touching the decree of the Bolivian Government, hereinbefore referred to, is correct or not?

Allow me to renew to your excellency the assurances of the high consideration with which I have the honor to remain, &c.,

S. NEWTON PETTIS.

No. 66. Mr. Pettis to Mr. Evarts. [Document 79]

No. 66.
Mr. Pettis to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
La Paz, Bolivia, August 25, 1879. (Received October 16.) No. 24.]

Sir: I am in receipt of your dispatch of June 25 (No. 13), and inclosures, and in answer thereto I have the honor to inform you that I have transmitted one copy of the Treasury circular to the minister of foreign relations of Bolivia, as will be seen by my letter addressed to him upon the subject, a copy of which is herewith inclosed and marked inclosure 1.

I am, &c.,

S. NEWTON PETTIS.

[Inclosure in Mr. Pettis’s No. 4.]

Legation of the United States,
La Paz, Bolivia, August 25, 1879.

Sir: In connection with my note this day addressed to your excellency upon the subject of information received by the British Government and communicated to the Government of the United States touching upon the supposed action of the Bolivian Government with reference to the issuing of letters of marque, I inclose herewith a copy of a circular issued by the Secretary of the Treasury of the United States of America under date of the 21st June last, bearing upon the subject of the observance of the neutrality laws of the United States, all of which is most respectfully submitted to your excellency’s considerations.

With distinguished consideration, I have the honor to be, sir, &c.

S. NEWTON PETTIS.

Brazil.Brazil.

[80] . Mr. Hilliard to Mr. Evarts.

United States Legation, Rio de Janeiro, October 1, 1878. (Received October 29.)

[81] . Mr. Hilliard to Mr. Evarts.

United States Legation, Rio de Janeiro, November 4, 1878. (Received November 29.)

[82] . Mr. White to Mr. Evarts.

United States Legation, Rio de Janeiro, January 16, 1879. (Received February 17.)

[83] . Mr. White to Mr. Evarts.

United States Legation, Rio de Janeiro, February 26, 1879. (Received April 7.)

[84] . Mr. White to Mr. Evarts.

United States Legation, Rio de Janeiro, February 27, 1879. (Received April 7.)

[85] . Mr. White to Mr. Evarts.

United States Legation, Rio de Janeiro, March 25, 1879. (Received April 28.)

[86] . Mr. Hiliard to Mr. Evarts.

United States Legation, Rio de Janeiro, May 3, 1879. (Received June 9.)

[87] . Mr. Hilliard to Mr. Evarts.

United States Legation, Rio de Janeiro, June 4, 1879. (Received June 27.)

[88] . Mr. Borges to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of Brazil in the United States, Washington, February 23, 1878. (Received February 25.)

[89] . Mr. Borges to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of Brazil in the United States, New York, September 24, 1878. (Received September 26.)

[90] . Mr. Borges to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of Brazil in the United States, Washington, November 8, 1878.

[91] . Mr. Evarts to Mr. Borges.

Department of State, Washington, March 3, 1879.

[92] . Mr. Evarts to Mr. Barros.

Department of State, Washington, June 20, 1879.

No. 67. Mr. Hilliard to Mr. Evarts. [Document 80]

No. 67.
Mr. Hilliard to Mr. Evarts.

United States Legation,
Rio de Janeiro, October 1, 1878. (Received October 29.) No. 32.]

Sir: Having received a full power authorizing me to conclude a convention between the United States and Brazil for the protection of trademarks for articles of American manufacture and commerce, I brought the subject to the attention of his excellency, Baron de Villa Bella, minister and secretary of state for foreign affairs, and expressed a wish that we might proceed without delay to accomplish that object.

He replied promptly, inviting me to submit a project for such a convention. I proceeded to do so, and after an exchange of views in regard to the subject we reached a satisfactory conclusion.

I have the honor now to forward the convention agreed upon, and I hope that it will meet your approval.

You will observe that it provides that the citizens and subjects of the United States and Brazil shall enjoy in the dominions and possessions of the other the same rights as belong to native citizens or subjects in everything relating to property in marks of manufacture and trade. Nothing can be more satisfactory than this.

I have examined the laws of Brazil on this subject and I find that they are thorough, comprehensive, and stringent. A citizen of the United States will, under this convention, enjoy all the rights of a native subject of Brazil.

Such a convention is imperatively demanded for the advancement of the interests of our people engaged in manufacture and commerce, and they will find, under its provisions, ample protection.

It affords me great pleasure to be able to forward a convention so important to the interests of our people doing business in this country. I do not doubt that it will meet your approval and that of the President, and that it will be duly ratified after having been submitted to the Senate.

It will ever be a source of great satisfaction to you, and to myself, to feel that we have been able to accomplish a convention that must exert the most beneficent influence upon the manufacturing and commercial interests of our country.

There is in Brazil a wide undeveloped field for the employment of the energy, the enterprise, and the capital of our countrymen.

I know how earnestly you desire to conduct the great Department over which you preside so as to promote, in the highest degree, the interests of our country, and to give to the United States the most commanding advantages in our foreign relations.

I shall be at all times ready to co-operate with you in the accomplishment of that object so long as I have the honor to represent our country at this important post.

I believe that the policy of the administration, both at home and abroad, will contribute largely to the prosperity and glory of the country, and that it will be sustained by our people.

The administration will achieve a complete triumph, and while it secures domestic tranquillity, it will give to our foreign relations a higher prosperity than they have heretofore enjoyed.

Never was the country more respected abroad and never were its commercial advantages greater than they are to-day. So far as our intercourse with Brazil is concerned there is the greatest encouragement for the enterprise of our people.

I shall hereafter make some suggestions as to measures for the advancement of our commercial interests.

I inclose the original of the convention agreed on in regard to trademarks of manufacture and commerce, in the tin case which is forwarded with this dispatch.

I have, &c.,

HENRY W. HILLIARD.

No. 68. Mr. Hilliard to Mr. Evarts. [Document 81]

No. 68.
Mr. Hilliard to Mr. Evarts.

United States Legation,
Rio de Janeiro, November 4, 1878. (Received November 29.) No. 36.]

Sir: I inclose a translation of a leader which appeared recently in the columns of O Cruzeiro, a paper published in this city, and understood to express the sentiments of the Liberal ministry now in power.

I have found, in my intercourse with the leading statesmen of the Liberal party, a strong desire to cultivate intimate relations with our country. They wish to deliver Brazil from the influence of European ideas, and to encourage in the people the growth of a vigorous sense of independence. Some of these leaders are extreme in their opinions) others are more moderate. But they all desire progress.

* * * * * * *

They regard the institutions of the United States as a splendid illustration of the principles of free government. They express their admiration of a people who not only asserted their independence and threw off their colonial bondage, but who at the same time constructed a great free government in defiance of the traditions of the monarchies of Europe. You will observe this tone in the article which I inclose to you. The wisest men of the Liberal party do not desire at this time to effect any change in the form of their government, but they do earnestly desire to free themselves from the dominion of European ideas. They wish to direct the attention of the men now growing up to the civilization of the United States, as far more vigorous and wholesome than that which prevails in Europe. They favor what I name an American policy.

From the day of my arrival here I have endeavored to stimulate the sentiment. In my address to the Emperor I expressed my sentiments in strong language, and I have steadily pressed these views upon the public men of the empire from time to time.

* * * * * * *

Without entering into the conflict of parties, I have at all times encouraged the growth of American sentiments.

The present minister of finance some time since, in a great speech in the Brazilian Parliament, eulogized the institutions of the United States in such strong terms that a Conservative member replied to him and said, “that one who entertained such sentiments ought to make his home in the United States.”

The gentleman made a grand reply, and said that it was perfectly consistent with loyalty to the Imperial Government of Brazil to direct the aspirations of his countrymen to the institutions of the greatest free government on the globe. He now has charge of one of the most important departments of the government.

In my judgment the progress of free principles in Brazil is quite as rapid as the best friends of the country could desire.

The imperial government is thoroughly constituted. The Emperor is an enlightened ruler; his personal qualities are of the first order; he fully comprehends the civilization of the present period; and he appreciates in the highest degree the institutions of the United States.

I am intimately acquainted with the leading statesmen of the empire, and I do not desire a more rapid advancement than I observe at this time.

In the article from O Cruzeiro, which I forward, you will observe that reference is made to the convention recently concluded with Brazil for the protection of trade-marks of commerce and manufacture.

* * * * * * *

I have, &c.,

HENRY W. HILLIARD.

[Inclosure in No. 36.—Translation.]

[O Cruzeiro, Rio, October 22.]

The establishment of a regular line of packets between Brazil and the United States raised our hopes. We received that improvement with enthusiasm. We welcomed from our hearts that new epoch which we judged to be opened to us; in which frequent and periodical intercourse with a people inspired by the good sense of Franklin should introduce to this country a, current of ideas which should quicken a new social life.

Little time has elapsed since the new enterprise has commenced to operate, and it could not reasonably be expected that within so short a space the relations between the two countries should be profoundly modified. But nothing can hinder us from desiring that the two peoples shall approach each other as rapidly as possible, and from pointing out the propriety of studying institutions and customs, such as that great nation in a period relatively short in the life of nations has developed with such useful results.

Unfortunately the English language is even to-day little known among us, and it is not to be wondered at that a people among whom their own journalism finds a comparatively small number of readers should make a most limited use of journals published in a foreign language. This is one obstacle that we encounter to the interchange of ideas between the two peoples; but it is exactly because such an obstacle exists that it behooves us to combat it in the most energetic way possible.

If the population of Brazil had an intimate knowledge, such as only the journals can give, of the daily public life of the United States; if they knew how public affairs are there administered, how critical conjunctures are solved, we are sure that from that comparison a great advantage would result to our political ideas, exhibiting frequently an easy solution for questions that present themselves to us as very intricate.

We do not present that nation as an absolute type which others must copy servilely; far from it. In the United States abuses have occurred which perchance sometimes reveal an imperfection in their institutions. Not because of that, however, does that country cease to be one of the most enviable for the dignity of its citizens, for the full liberty with which they exercise their rights, and above all for the absence of preconceptions of the old society—preconceptions that yet oppress us, and that we sometimes resist with a kind of insolence, when we ought rather to resist them with that calmness and serenity of mind born of a profound conviction of an incontestable right.

The difference between the republican form of the United States and the monarchical that actually exists in Brazil cannot oppose the least objection to the introduction into this country of many modifications of administration already tried with advantage in a kindred country. The chief difference between the two countries is that of races.

The Teutonic peoples really have aptitudes and habits sufficiently diverse from the Latin peoples, but their aspirations are the same. To-day all detest privilege; all long for fraternity; and the position that the United States occupy in North America is so analogous to that which Brazil occupies’ in South America that an intimate binding together of the two nations appears a fact as useful as inevitable.

Already has there been effected between the two countries a treaty in regard to commercial trade-marks; and we understand that an extradition treaty is under negotiation.

These are two works of morality, since the public international right does not suffice to guarantee the punishment of crimes and abuses.

A nation can never worthily give an asylum to those who have committed the gravest offenses in a foreign country; as little can it permit that in the one, the industrial products of the other be falsified with impunity.

The lack of protection for literary, scientific, and artistic property is an omission lamentable in the legislation of Brazil, which we hope to see remedied shortly.

At all events, the treaties which we are about to effect with the United States prove that attention is already turned to these subjects.

Let us pursue this course with ardor worthy of the objects.

No. 69. Mr. White to Mr. Evarts. [Document 82]

No. 69.
Mr. White to Mr. Evarts.

United States Legation,
Rio de Janeiro, January 16, 1879. (Received February 17.) No. 55.]

Sir: I believe it to be my duty to call attention to the fact that a young man desiring employment as clerk, and who is not a linguist, should not come to Brazil. Unless he has a written contract, he had better remain at home. I have frequently of late had my attention called to this subject through cases of distress. Several young men who came out here expecting to find employment suffered disappointment, and their funds having become exhausted, they were forced to accept pecuniary aid to defray the expense of the return voyage home.

Wages are low, living is expensive, and the climate of Rio is trying to Americans.

A knowledge of the Portuguese language is as indispensable to a clerk as the knowledge of English is to a clerk in New York.

I have, &c.,

JOHN C. WHITE.

No. 70. Mr. White to Mr. Evarts. [Document 83]

No. 70.
Mr. White to Mr. Evarts.

United States Legation,
Rio de Janeiro, February 26, 1879. (Received April 7.) No. 64.]

Sir: A crisis in the cabinet has occurred and the respective ministers of foreign affairs and of finance, Baron de Villa Bella and Mr. Gaspar Silvaria Martins, have resigned.

The Emperor has appointed Mr. Alphonsus Celso as minister of finance, and Mr. Sinimbu, president of the council of state, as minister of foreign affairs ad interim.

It appears that there was a disagreement in the cabinet over the proposed change in the electoral system from indirect to direct elections, the two ex-ministers insisting that the change should include the political emancipation of non-Catholics, giving to them the same political rights enjoyed by Catholics; to this the Emperor and majority of the cabinet refused to assent, and the two resignations were promptly tendered to, and as promptly accepted by, the Emperor.

The question of giving political rights independent of religious belief or faith has caused a division in the Liberal party through which the Conservative party fancy they see the road to power. Equal political rights will be enjoyed ere many years, and in my judgment the time is not far distant. When the new law is proposed in the Chambers (the two houses) I shall forward a copy of it to you.

Mr. Alphonsus Celso, the new minister of finance, had the twofold honor of being made senator and minister of state on the same day. He was minister of marine during the war with Paraguay, and displayed great ability and energy in the conduct of the affairs of the department of marine during that trying period. He is considered one of the ablest financiers in the empire, and his appointment gives universal satisfaction.

I find that Mr. Celso is a warm friend of our country, and during the debate in the assembly on the reply, to the speech from the throne, he, in the course of his speech, alluded to the recent extradition, approving of it, and adding that the United States were sure to become, sooner or later, the Mend and ally of Brazil on whom Brazil must rely in time of danger.

The references to his approval of the extradition and to our country were cheered by members.

Mr. Sinimbu, president of the council, and minister of agriculture, commerce, and public works, who takes charge of foreign affairs until a minister is decided upon, you are already acquainted with through the dispatches from this legation. He is a wise, practical statesman, possessing extraordinary abilities and energy, and he has accomplished many reforms of vital importance in the interest of economy and good government.

It is to be hoped that Mr. Sinimbu will decide to retain the portfolio of foreign affairs, for he is eminently qualified for the position, and the diplomatic corps have unbounded confidence in his judgment and his talents.

Brazil is fortunate in having as director-general of foreign affairs a ripe scholar, an experienced diplomatist, a careful, conscientious, and indefatigable official, Baron de Cabo Frio. Since I became chargé d’affaires ad interim I have had occasion to visit the foreign office very frequently, and I have always been received by the Baron de Cabo Frio, who has invariably shown me the greatest attention, and has also aided me in obtaining information desired by persons who have written to the legation. The baron has been in diplomatic life forty years.

The foreign office is a model department.

I have, &c.,

JOHN C. WHITE.

No. 77. Mr. White to Mr. Evarts. [Document 84]

No. 77.
Mr. White to Mr. Evarts.

United States Legation,
Rio de Janeiro, February 27, 1879. (Received April 7.) No. 65.]

Sir: When Mr. Gaspar Silvaria Martins became minister of finance a mil-reis was worth 26 pence; when he retired from the office it was worth but 21, and to-day it is worth but 20½ pence.

Customs duties are payable in national currency, and consequently government suffers from the depreciation of its currency.

Last year the national deficit was $10,000,000, and unless a remarkable change takes place this year will furnish higher figures.

Business is bad, and the prospects are not encouraging. I could not conscientiously advise my countrymen to invest their capital here at this time.

Foreigners and foreign capital control the trade of this country.

English banks regulate exchange; the great bulk of the debt of Brazil, principal and interest, is payable in gold; emigration gravitates towards the cities, and the great farming regions are almost wholly uninhabited, and coffee and tobacco are depended upon to keep the machinery of government in motion, and to pay for imports.

With the exception of the blacks, Brazilians do not perform manual labor, and very few of them are engaged in trade.

A professional existence or a political office is the wish and work of the Brazilian.

The wealthy Brazilian keeps his money in England or France, receiving from 3 to 4 per cent. interest, and he pays taxes on improvements, for which the government or province pays from 7 to 10 per cent. to foreign contractors.

Brazilians, as a rule, do not invest in home bonds or securities or improvements.

Monopolies and corporations having government guarantees of from 7 to 10 per cent. have been a great curse to this country.

In many instances a company has received a government guarantee of 7 per cent. on “estimated cost,” when the actual cost would not be more than one-half the estimate; but the assumed cost has almost invariably been the statement furnished the government.

* * * * * * *

The series of causes are sufficient to clearly demonstrate the effect which is now felt by the business interests of Brazil.

The soil of this country is rich and fertile, and if the colonization of skilled farm labor can be accomplished, this country will become one of the great; nations of the earth.

* * * * * * *

I know it is popular to say that this country is an Eldorado for Americans with energy and money, and many American newspapers have pictured Brazil as the land of plenty, but it is my duty to give you the facts, and to describe affairs as they exist.

Unless a man has ample capital to carry on a business in which he has had experience, or is under contract, or has a specialty which he has good reason to believe will pay here, he is much better off in his own country.

There is room here for our merchants and manufacturers who have goods and wares adapted to this market, provided they can compete with the home prices of foreign dealers.

Eventually the trade of this country will be controlled by our country, but it will take time and honest goods, and persistent effort, to bring it about.

English capital, English goods, English subsidized steamship lines, and English influence, must be met, checked, and overcome.

It is necessary to have established here branches of solid American business houses, and to have the quality of goods kept up.

I think it is wrong in Brazil to tax our flour and many other of the necessaries of life, but in the present distressed condition of affairs the time is inopportune to suggest a change.

* * * * * * *

In giving you this extended and frank explanation I believe I but perform my duty.

I have, &c.,

JOHN C. WHITE.

No. 72. Mr. White to Mr. Evarts. [Document 85]

No. 72.
Mr. White to Mr. Evarts.

United States Legation,
Rio de Janeiro, March 25, 1879. (Received April 28.) No. 81.]

Sir: In my No. 65 I referred to the importance of having solid American business houses established here.

* * * * * * *

The great bulk of our goods are handled by foreign dealers who take them because they are forced to. A new element is needed here, a stronger national prestige must be impressed upon the markets. It is necessary that the merchants and manufacturers doing business with Brazil should be represented here. Selling by sample and consigning to commission houses of very limited capital will not bring about the equality of the exports and imports. We need here the real American reliability coupled with energy and sustained by financial strength. If some distinguished merchant (Hon. Elliot C. Cowdin, for instance) could be induced to visit Brazil he would impart more information and give better advice than could be crowded into one hundred dispatches.

I have, &c.,

JOHN C. WHITE.

No. 73. Mr. Hiliard to Mr. Evarts. [Document 86]

No. 73.
Mr. Hiliard to Mr. Evarts.

United States Legation,
Rio de Janeiro, May 3, 1879. (Received June 9.) No. 92.]

Sir: An important change in the electoral law of Brazil has been proposed by the ministry with the sanction of the Emperor.

The system as it now stands is indirect, and the privilege of suffrage is but little restricted. The new system submitted by the Liberal ministry proposes to confer on the people the right to vote directly for those who are to represent them. Hitherto the people have been allowed to vote, not directly for the candidates who are proposed for the several places to be filled, but for a certain number of electors, who subsequently choose the persons to be elevated to office. This system interposes a body of men supposed to be better qualified between the people and their representatives.

It would seem at the first view that the proposition to confer on the people the privilege of choosing their representatives without the intervention of another body who control the final selection, was a concession to the popular will. But the new system proposes a much higher qualification for the right of suffrage than that which exists to-day. It requires that the right of suffrage shall be limited to those who can read and write, and who enjoy a “renda,” a certain income amounting to about $200.

It is undersood that this would exclude nineteen-twentieths of those who now enjoy the right of suffrage.

So, while the proposed change in the electoral system seems to be a concession to the popular will, it is really a conservative measure, and restricts the influence of the people upon the power and the action of the government. The measure has been submitted to the Chamber of Deputies, and it is under discussion at this time. It has given rise to a debate of great interest and power.

Some of the leading Liberal statesmen oppose the measure earnestly and vigorously. Among these the most conspicuous, as he is, too, the ablest and the most eloquent, is José Bonifacio, member from San Paulo, the finest province in the empire.

In a recent dispatch I spoke of this remarkable man and described the part which he took on the occasion of the” interpellation” of Mr. de Sinimbu, president of the council of state, by M. de Martins, the late minister of finance. He took the floor a few days since, when the proposed change in the electoral laws of the empire came up for discussion in the Chamber of Deputies, and delivered a speech in opposition to the measure, which is pronounced to be the greatest parliamentary effort made during the present reign. I was in the diplomatic tribune observing the progress of the debate when José Bonifacio rose to address the Chamber, and the spectacle was most impressive.

* * * * * * *

The fate of the proposed measure is uncertain.

The conflict between the Liberal and Conservative parties is fierce, but I do not see that there is any probability that the latter will return to power for some time to come.

The state of political parties here affords a subject for study of deep interest; their action is controlling the course of the government, and guiding its fortunes in a way that must essentially affect its powers and perhaps modify its form.

I have, &c.,

HENRY W. HILLIARD.

No. 74. Mr. Hilliard to Mr. Evarts. [Document 87]

No. 74.
Mr. Hilliard to Mr. Evarts.

United States Legation,
Rio de Janeiro, June 4, 1879. (Received June 27.) No. 103.]

Sir: In my dispatch No. 92, under date of May 3, I stated that an important change in the electoral system of Brazil had been proposed by the ministry to the Chambers, with the sanction of His Imperial Majesty.

The measure was submitted to the chamber of deputies, and it has been much discussed there.

Some of the ablest Liberal leaders oppose the proposed change vehemently, and the bill has not yet passed the chamber. It has, however, been ordered to a second reading. It may be styled the electoral reform bill of Brazil. It abolishes the electoral colleges, and makes the system of one degree instead of two.

On the 31st of May the bill was pressed to a second reading. Before the vote was taken on the bill, the various amendments that had been brought forward, in the course of an interesting and at times very exciting debate, were voted upon. One of these amendments declared among its other provisions that non-Catholics and naturalized Brazilians should be eligible to seats in the chamber of deputies. It was defeated, however, by a vote of 27 to 55; and this in a chamber unanimously Liberal. This amendment was offered by Mr. Saldanha Marinho, member from Amazon, one of the ablest and most distinguished men in the empire.

Councillor Saldanho Marinho is an eminent Liberal statesman of advanced views, who, some five or six years since, took such a prominent part in the war against the Ultramontane bishops of Pernambuco and Para, when a conflict arose in the empire between the authority of the late Pope Pius IX and the authority of the Emperor.

The bishops insisted that their allegiance was primarily due to the Pope, whose supremacy was indisputable in spiritual affairs.

A great conflict ensued. The bishops were firm, obstinate, uncompromising; and the excitement ran high.

As the bishops refused to yield, they were brought before courts, tried, condemned, and imprisoned.

In this onslaught on the bishops, Councillor Saldanha Marinho was so active and conspicuous that he brought down upon his head the thunders of the Vatican. He was excommunicated by Pope Pius IX, and his work entitled “Igregia e Estado” was placed in the Index librorum prohibitorum.

The electoral reform bill will, in all probability, pass both the chamber of deputies and the senate. The senate’ is largely conservative; and it is thought that the measure, brought forward as it is, by a Liberal ministry, will pass that body without serious opposition.

The Emperor is understood to be earnestly in favor of the measure, and it seems to me that he treats the question in a way eminently statesmanlike; for while the reform in the electoral system will bring the-people nearer to the throne, it at the same time narrows the basis of the privilege of suffrage so much that popular influence will scarcely be felt under the new restrictions.

The right of suffrage will be confined to men of education and property, who will naturally feel an interest in maintaining the imperial authority, and who will oppose any material change in the structure of the government. There is in the empire a powerful party properly named Liberal. There are in its ranks men who decidedly approve a republican form of government.

* * * * * * *

The Emperor is not merely a wise ruler, he is a great statesman; and he looks far beyond the present in shaping the measures of the government. The best interests of this vast country are associated with the reign of the Emperor. So long as he lives, the empire is stable. This is a free government, essentially so, with an imperial form, but still the Emperor might say, in a high sense, “I am the State.”

When you observe his course; the crown placed upon his head while yet a youth 5 great political changes going on, not only in Europe, but revolutionary convulsions shaking the states of South America so frequently that the friends of liberal institutions began to despair of any stable free government, the young ruler of Brazil steadily grew in strength, and exhibited such fine sense and such admirable temper in the administration of his power, that the empire became consolidated, and, while its supremacy was maintained, it not only tolerated, but it encouraged the growth of liberal principles.

A profound student of history, he has enjoyed, too, the advantages of extended travel, and he has brought the civilized world under his observation. The teachings of history are not lost upon him, and he has observed the world not as a tourist lingering in gay capitals, but as a philosophical student of human affairs.

* * * * * * *

M. de Siminbu, the great leader of the Liberal party to-day, advocates the new measure with his accustomed ability. He insists that when the existing electoral system, the indirect, was adopted, the actual condition of the country demanded it; the population was widely scattered, and the facilities for intercommunication imperfect 5 so that it was obviously proper the people should vote for a body of men constituting an electoral college, a body of higher intelligence than the masses, and who would upon consultation select suitable persons for seats in the chamber of deputies. But, that now, with the improved condition of the country, it is proper to confer upon the people the privilege of voting directly for their representatives, with such restrictions as will secure a proper choice of men.

But some of the eminent leaders of the party dissent broadly from the Premier’s views. Such men as José Bonifacio, the great, pure tribune; Martinho Campos, the ablest parliamentarian in the chamber; Baron de Villa Bella, late minister of foreign affairs; Silveira Martius, late minister of finance; Baron de Macedo; Andrade Pinto; and Joaquin Nabueo, a young brilliant member, lately attached to the Brazilian embassy at Washington; these and others voted against the proposed measure.

Some of the Leaders of the Liberal party, who really favor the idea of conferring on non-Catholics and naturalized Brazilians the full rights demanded in the proposed amendment of Saldanha Marinho, voted against it because they believe the senate would not concur, and that the country is not prepared for such an advanced measure. But a statesman should not vote against his convictions upon a question of such momentous interest.

The proposition that in a country so advanced as Brazil a religious test should be applied to men in every respect qualified for office, so as to exclude them, is not only wrong in principle, but it is a stupendous blunder in policy. The underlying force of a great principle, especially a principle which involves the rights of conscience, is simply indestructible. It will yet upheave all that oppresses it, and drive from power the men that would bind it.

The electoral reform bill will probably pass in the course of a few days. But you, as a statesman, will at once comprehend the effect of it. The people will clamor against the restrictions placed upon the privilege of suffrage until they sweep them away, and break down all the barriers that exclude them from the polls. Then comes the test of the strength of imperial government.

I have, &c.,

HENRY W. HILLARD.

No. 75. Mr. Borges to Mr. Evarts. [Document 88]

No. 75.
Mr. Borges to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of Brazil in the United States,
Washington, February 23, 1878. (Received February 25.)

Mr. Secretary of State: I had the honor to communicate to the Imperial Government the notes which your excellency addressed me, under date of the 14th and the 29th of July last, in reply to mine of the 9th of the same month, relative to a plan for counterfeiting the notes of the Brazilian treasury which was entertained by a person residing in New York.

The documents, of which copies accompanied-the second of the aforesaid notes of your excellency, show that the counterfeiting of notes issued by foreign governments is not provided for by the laws in force in the United States, which only refer to notes’ issued by banks authorized by foreign governments.

The Imperial” Government having been informed of this circumstance has instructed me to ask your excellency’s attention, as I now have the honor to do, to the lack of provision in this country for the repression of a crime which, beside being so subversive of public morals and of legitimate interests in general, may so seriously affect the interests of Brazil, where paper money issued by the treasury is used, a part of which has been printed in New York by the American Bank Note Company in pursuance of a contract with the Imperial Government.

Hoping that the subject of this note will receive the attention of the United States Government, I avail myself of this occasion to renew to your excellency the assurances of my highest consideration.

A. P. DE CARVALHO BORGES.

No. 76. Mr. Borges to Mr. Evarts. [Document 89]

No. 76.
Mr. Borges to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of Brazil in the United States,
New York, September 24, 1878. (Received September 26.)

Sir: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of the note which was addressed to me by Mr. Seward on the 17th of July last, and which did not reach me until the 21st instant, as your excellency has already been informed.

The subject of that note is a difference between the vice-consul of Brazil, at Richmond, and the collector of customs of that port, in reference to the manifest of the cargo which had been received by the bark “Annie’ Mark,” at New York for a Brazilian port, which appears from the correspondence of which a copy is inclosed with said note.

After having carefully persued that correspondence, and having made inquiry of the consul-general of the empire in the United States, I think that the regulations which govern the consulates of Brazil in similar cases can be easily harmonized with those of the custom-houses of the United States, and Mr. Hawley’s letter to your excellency points out means to avoid difficulties.

According to the regulations of the empire, all vessels that have received cargo in more than one port are to be provided with a number of manifests equal to that of the ports, and they may be cleared in each port, or only in the last; when in the last, the custom-house furnishes to the consular agent of Brazil the separate manifests of the cargo shipped in each port.

In the case of the “Annie Mark,” as in other similar ones, the consular agent of Brazil has no doubt that the manifest of the previous port is in the possession of the custom-house, because when a vessel is dispatched at a Brazilian consulate, that consulate requires a copy of the document, which is sent, duly authenticated and sworn to, to the proper Brazilian custom-house. If the Richmond custom-house would not detach the manifest of the “Annie Mark” from the other documents to which it was sealed, this is due to the fact that, it being the duty of the consul-general at New York to attach his certificate to the custom-house clearance, and that clearance being already attached to the manifests, the three documents were fastened together. That clearance is the document which it is indispensable should be in the hands of the captain. If, therefore, the manifest was not attached at the custom-house to the clearance, and was sent so that it could be detached at the next custom-house, or if there is a duplicate of it, the doubt will be settled, as Mr. Hawley remarks in his aforesaid communication to your excellency.

The communication of Mr. Charles S. Mills to the Secretary of the Treasury, which accompanied your excellency’s note, states that it is only since the appointment of the present vice-consul at Richmond that differences of this kind have occurred. I am informed, however, that there was previously some irregularity in the clearances of vessels from more than one port, the result of which was that several Brazilian captains were fined, and it was to prevent the occurrence of such cases that the consul-general of the Empire recently caused to be published in the newspapers a circular urging vice-consuls to comply exactly with the requirements of the imperial regulations, public notice being thus given to all the parties interested.

The papery of the bark “Annie Mark” are herewith returned.

I reiterate to your excellency the assurances of my highest esteem and consideration.

A. P. DE CARVALHO BORGES.

No. 77. Mr. Borges to Mr. Evarts. [Document 90]

No. 77.
Mr. Borges to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of Brazil in the United States,
Washington, November 8, 1878.

Mr. Secretary of State: Your excellency’s note of the 3d of July last, in reference to legislation concerning the crime of counterfeiting the paper money of foreign governments in the United States, contains a passage in which your excellency expressed a desire to be informed whether there is a law in Brazil providing for the punishment of this crime.

In reply I have the honor to state that provision is made in the criminal code of the empire for the punishment of the crime in question. The Imperial Government, to whose consideration I submitted the matter, is therefore able to guarantee the observance of the laws of the empire on this subject by way of reciprocity for any similar legislation that may be adopted in the United States.

Hoping that the present statement will be instrumental in bringing about the desired result in this important matter, I reiterate to your excellency the assurances of my highest consideration.

A. P. DE CARYALHO BORGES.

No. 78. Mr. Evarts to Mr. Borges. [Document 91]

No. 78.
Mr. Evarts to Mr. Borges.

Department of State,
Washington, March 3, 1879.

Sir: Referring to your note of the 23d of February, 1878, on the subject of making provision by law for the punishment of counterfeiting paper money of foreign governments, and to your notes of June 25 and November 8 last, relating to the same subject, I have the honor to inclose herewith a copy of a letter in regard to the matter from the chairman of the Senate Committee on the Judiciary.

Accept, sir, &c.,

WM. M. EVARTS.

[Inclosure in Mr. Evarts’ note.]

Mr. George F. Edmunds to Mr. Evarts.

United States Senate Chamber,
Washington, February 26, 1879. (Received February 27.)

Sir: Referring to your letters of 22d March and 16th December, 1878, on the subject of making provision by law for the punishment of counterfeiting, &c., of the notes and securities issued by foreign governments, which matter arose upon the suggestion of the Brazilian minister of certain attempts in the State of New York at counterfeiting the securities of his government, I have the honor to say that the Committee on the Judiciary of the Senate have had the matter from time to time under consideration. I regret to inform you that, owing to differences of opinion among the gentlemen of the committee in relation to the constitutional power of the United States to reach such cases by national laws, we have so far been unable to report to the Senate any provision upon the subject. The committe fully share in the friendly disposition manifested by your department, and by the authorities of the State of New York, towards the Government of Brazil, and in the desire to prevent and punish the wrongs referred to, and I hope that at the next session of Congress, if the matter should be again called to its attention, some adequate means may be found to reach the end in view.

Very respectfully, &c.,

GEORGE F. EDMUNDS,
Chairman of Committee.

No. 79. Mr. Evarts to Mr. Barros. [Document 92]

No. 79.
Mr. Evarts to Mr. Barros.

Department of State,
Washington, June 20, 1879.

Sir: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of Mr. Borges’ note of the 12th instant, expressing the hope that the subject of the provision by United States law for punishing the crime of counterfeiting the paper currency of foreign governments may be brought to the attention of Congress at its next session, and to say in reply that I shall have the honor to again address the chairman of the Committee on the Judiciary with reference to the matter.

Accept, sir, &c.,

WM. M. EVARTS.

Central America.Central America.

[93] . Mr. Williamson to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States in Central America, Guatemala, January 14, 1879. (Received February 6.)

[94] . Mr. Logan to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States in Central America, Guatemala City, June 14, 1879. (Received July 16.)

[95] . Mr. Logan to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, in Central America, Guatemala City, August 20, 1879. (Received September 17.)

No. 80. Mr. Williamson to Mr. Evarts. [Document 93]

No. 80.
Mr. Williamson to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States in Central America,
Guatemala, January 14, 1879. (Received February 6.) No. 818.]

Sir: I have the honor to report that President Barrios has ordered the election of deputies to a constitutional convention, which is to meet in this city in February or March next, nominally for the purpose, of adopting a constitution, and taking other measures for the election of a President and other officials. President Barrios has resigned the dictatorship, to take effect when the new government is organized. He publicly declares that he will not accept the presidency if a constitution is adopted which “ties his hands”; and it is generally believed that the results of the meeting of the constitutional convention will be according to his wishes. In that case he will probably be declared President for life and invested with what we would call dictatorial powers.

I have, &c.,

GEO. WILLIAMSON.

No. 81. Mr. Logan to Mr. Evarts. [Document 94]

No. 81.
Mr. Logan to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States in Central America,
Guatemala City, June 14, 1879. (Received July 16.) No. 6.]

Sir: Upon the 10th instant the President of Guatemala returned from his visit to the provinces, and I was at once informed by note from Mr. Montúfar, the minister of foreign relations, that the President would be pleased to receive me in public audience on the following day, the 11th instant, at two o’clock in the afternoon, at which hour he would send a committee to my hotel, with carriages, for the purpose of conducting me to the government palace.

At the appointed time the committee arrived, and your representative was driven to the palace, where a large detail of national troops, with cadets from the military academy and bands of music, were drawn up in line and received him with military honors. Upon entering the audience hall, all of the principal functionaries of the republic, in Ml dress, were found ranged in line upon both sides of the room.

He was then formally received by the President.

The reception ceremonies were altogether unusual to this government, and were evidently intended as an offering of particular distinction to our own.

Upon the day following the reception I called, with my wife, upon the President and lady, at the official residence, and received a most cordial welcome from both. During the interview I took occasion to express the feeling of good-will and friendship which would always characterize my course while I remained in my present position, to which sentiment the President responded with much warmth. He assured me of his desire to cultivate the closest relations with the United States, and invited me to lay before my government the expediency of a treaty of reciprocity. I have reason to believe that the subject will be brought to my notice in an official form, when I shall present the matter in greater detail.

The visit was terminated by the expression of the most kindly sentiments upon both sides.

I also inclose, under cover of this dispatch, a sealed letter, received since the foregoing was written, from President Barrios to President Hayes, which I have been requested to transmit to the latter, by the minister of foreign relations.

I have, &c.

C. A. LOGAN.

No. 82. Mr. Logan to Mr. Evarts. [Document 95]

No. 82.
Mr. Logan to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, in Central America,
Guatemala City, August 20, 1879. (Received September 17.) No. 22.]

Sir: In a former dispatch I have incidentally remarked upon the fact of a large number of people floating through the Spanish-American Republics, claiming the protection of the American flag, a majority of whom, perhaps, are not entitled to the protection they demand. Some experience has prompted me to classify these people as follows:

1st. Bona fide native American citizens, who have left their country at an early period in life, who have engaged in permanent business in their adopted country, who may have married in the latter, who may have acquired property, and who by the circumstance of long residence in a foreign country, a participation in its internal affairs, social and political, and a non-expectation of ever returning to their native country, should fairly be considered, as I believe, to have expatriated themselves.

The English rule, of course, claims the allegiance of native subjects to be unchangeable and perpetual, and that the subject has no power to expatriate himself. But why should a person who practically has renounced all duty and allegiance to his country, who contributes nothing to its support in peace or war, and who escapes the obligations of all nationalities, become a charge upon his country, often involving it in expense, and sometimes in international difficulties?

The United States has strongly announced the right of voluntary expatriation upon the part of the subject or citizen. Why should it not go further, and declare the conditions under which involuntary or enforced expatriation shall occur.

2d. Naturalized citizens. These may be subdivided into several classes, according as their citizenship is bona fide or not, and legitimately or illegitimately obtained, &c.

3d. Downright impostors, whose native tongue is probably English, though they may never have put foot in the United States.

* * * * * * *

Of those, however, most frequently claiming the aid of our ministers, the class claiming citizenship by naturalization stands foremost. Large numbers of English-speaking people are found in the countries referred to, asserting themselves to be citizens by naturalization. Some of these have papers, but whether legitimately or illegitimately obtained, it is often impossible to determine; while those having none present the most varied stories of having lost them by fire, theft, shipwreck, &c. Many if not all these people, after having tried their fortunes in the United States, have left that country forever, but still retain their American citizenship for reasons of personal expediency. They escape all national obligations, and in cases of difficulty receive the protection of a powerful government. Often they shift their nationality to meet the most favoring circumstances.

In this particular connection, I desire to draw your attention to the case of one Anton Joseph Maassen, which may be briefly related as follows:

Maassen came to Guatemala about two years since, representing himself as a German subject, and mixing in the German society of the country. On the 30th of October, 1877, he went before the German consul in Guatemala with certificates of service in the German army, and other documents going to prove his nationality; and convincing the consul of his right to be registered on the books of the consulate as a German subject, he was so registered, as will appear from the certificate of Mr. E. Lehnhoff, consul of the German Empire, inclosed under cover of this dispatch and marked No. 1.

Maassen finally settled near Izabal, and reports soon came to his German friends of his ill-treatment of his family. The “Jefe Politico” of his district at length wrote a private letter to Baron von Bergen, the German minister in Guatemala, telling him that unless Maassen’s children were cared for by a proper person they would go to ruin.

Upon Maassen’s own assurance that he was a German subject, the minister at once took measures to provide the children with suitable homes, the wife having previously left the husband by reason of ill-treatment. Maassen resisted the well-meant acts of his minister and declared himself an American citizen, adducing as evidence of the fact the document also inclosed herewith, marked No. 2. The German minister immediately ceased all interest in the matter of Maassen’s family affairs, when the latter made a charge against the minister for damages caused by his interference. This charge was presented to Mr. T. J. Potts, United States consular agent at Isabal, who forwarded it to Mr. Medina, the consul at this place, and by whom it was referred to me for action.

The case of this man justly represents that of many others in these countries. He went to the United States from his native land to better his fortunes; staid there long enough to be naturalized; left the country with no intention of ever returning to it, and is now here, claiming the intervention of a government which receives no benefit from his citizenship, and which can have no earthly interest in him. The naturalization certificate which he presents may be entirely fraudulent for aught an official in this country can know to the contrary. It purports to be a copy of the original record of his naturalization act; but you will observe that the whole blank has been filled by the same hand, including the signature of Maassen. Now, what evidence does this paper furnish an official at this distance, where Maassen’s signature upon the court records cannot be compared with his proper signature, as attached to the accompanying document, No. 3, for instance, so that a judgment may be formed as to whether he is or is not the veritable person naturalized by the court of Fresno County? Manifestly, it furnishes no evidence of a fact most important to be known.

Assuming him to be the person naturalized by the act referred to, the point I desire to illustrate is presented in its strongest light. In about three and a half years from the time of naturalization we find the man in another country, declaring his allegiance to the German Empire, which he had previously sworn to renounce; and in two years from the latter act, again claiming his United States citizenship as a protection against the representative of his native land. I shall be glad to receive any instructions you may have to give as to this particular case.

I have long been impressed with the idea of a necessity for action by our government in two directions relating to our foreign affairs: 1st. A declaration of the conditions under which citizens of the United States, native and naturalized, shall be deemed to have expatriated themselves; and,

2d. More substantial evidences, in foreign lands, of the possession of American citizenship.

While there may be serious inconveniences and objections to a passport system, it seems to me, that until something better could be devised every citizen of the United States, before leaving the country, should be compelled by law to obtain a passport, to be given with or without fee, and failing to obtain one, to forfeit his unquestionable right of recognition by the foreign representatives of his country. The facts of his possession and presentation of a genuine passport should be registered in the various consulates of the United States located in the countries he may visit, with the purpose of furnishing proof of his citizenship in case of loss of the document and until such time as it could be duplicated. This passport should be renewable at prescribed periods while the bona fide character of the person’s citizenship continued.

Frauds might be expected, but not more, if so many, as are now practiced in connection with naturalization papers. Other objections could be urged against such a system, many of which time and experience would doubtless remove; but, as the result of some observation in the matter, I would present to our government the expediency of adopting such a measure, among the advantages of which may be enumerated the following: 1st. The bona fide citizen would possess a document clearly defining his nationality, and one which would go far towards protecting him in foreign lands, even in the absence of his country’s representatives.

2d. The questionable and disreputable people residing abroad claiming privileges and exemptions which the natives do not enjoy, and who are continually rushing to the minister for intervention in their private business affairs, sometimes embroiling the government in difficulty, and perhaps, through misrepresentation and falsehood, placing it in a wrong position, would receive a wholesome check.

3d. Some degree of restraint upon fugitives from justice might be expected through a well-devised passport system.

4th. The government would have a supervision over a class of native citizens not now possessed, who by long continued residence abroad, and by becoming identified with the countries in which they live, should by every consideration relating to the mutual obligations between state and citizen, be deemed to have expatriated themselves.

5th. This supervision would reach to the very large class of naturalized citizens, who, residing but a few years in the United States, have left that country, making no concealment of a purpose never to return for residence; thereby constituting a class of persons who have never become identified in spirit and feeling with the ideas our government represents, who have contributed little or nothing to its welfare, who lend nothing to its support, and who, beyond all reach of its influence and authority, use it in a foreign land as a personal protection to themselves and their interests.

In the countries to which I am now accredited, there is an unusual number of persons of questionable nationality; and while I shall endeavor to afford every protection within my power to genuine citizens of the United States, native or naturalized, I shall, unless otherwise instructed, draw the lines as sharply as possible, requiring in every case of doubt, conclusive evidence of a person’s right to receive protection from our government, before extending it to him.

I have, &c.,

C. A. LOGAN.

[Inclosure 1 in No. 22.]

Kaiserlich Deutches Consulat,
Guatemala, July 31, 1879.

I hereby certify that Anton Joseph Maassen voluntarily appeared at this Imperial German Consulate with the necessary proofs on the thirtieth day of October, eighteen hundred and seventy-seven and registered himself as a German subject.

[seal of consulate.] Ed. LEHNHOFF,
Consul of the German Empire.

Journal, No. 541.

[Inclosure 2 in No. 22.]

[Expositor Print, Fresno.

certificate of citizenship.

No.—.

In the county court of Fresno County, of the State of California.

Present, Hon. Gillum Baley, judge.

In the matter of the application of Anton Joseph Maassen, an alien, to become a citizen of the United States of America.

In open court, March term, A. D. 1874, this 2d day of March, A. D. 1874, as yet of said term.

It appearing to the satisfaction of this court, by the oaths of Charley Blackburn and J. S. French, citizens of the United States of America, witnesses for that purpose, first duly sworn and examined, that Anton Joseph Maassen, a native of the Kingdom of Prussia, has resided within the limits and under the jurisdiction of the United State five years at least last past, and within the State of California for one year at least last past; and that, during all of said time, he has behaved as a man of good moral character, attached to the principles of the Constitution of the United States, and well disposed to the good order and happiness of the same; and it also appearing to the court by competent evidence that the said applicant has heretofore, and more than two years since, and in due form of law, declared his intention to become a citizen of the United States; and having now here, before this court, taken an oath that he will support the Constitution of the United States of America; and that he doth absolutely and entirely renounce and abjure all allegiance and fidelity to every foreign prince, potentate, state, or sovereignty whatever, and particularly to the King of Prussia.

It is therefore ordered, adjudged, and decreed that the said Anton Joseph Maassen be, and he is hereby, admitted and declared to be a citizen of the United States of America.

GILLUM BALEY, Judge.
(Signature) ANTON JOSEPH MAASSEN.

Office of the clerk of the county court, county of Fresno, State of California, ss:

I, A. M. Clark, clerk of the county court, Fresno County, State of California, said court being a court of record, having common-law jurisdiction and a clerk and seal, do certify that the above is a true copy of the act of naturalization of Anton Joseph Maassen, as the same appears upon the records of said court now in my office in Fresno, in said county.

In testimony whereof I have hereunto set my hand and affixed the seal of said court this 31st day of May, in the year of our Lord one thousand eight hundred and seventy-nine, and in the year of our Independence the 102d.
[county seal of fresno.] A. M. CLARK, Clerk.

By C. L. WAINWEIGHT,
Deputy Clerk.

Chili.Chili.

[96] . Mr. Osborn to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Santiago, Chili, November 15, 1878. (Received December 26.)

[97] . Mr. Evarts to Mr. Osborn.

Department of State, Washington, January 29, 1879.

[98] . Mr. Osborn to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Santiago, Chili, February 20, 1879. (Received March 26.)

[99] . Mr. Osborn to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Santiago, Chili, March 31, 1879. (Received May 8.)

[100] A. Mr. Clayton to Mr. Lautrup.

United States Consulate, Callao, Peru, March 14, 1879.

[101] B. protest.

Callao, March fifteenth, one thousand eight hundred and seventy-nine,

[102] . Mr. Osborn to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Santiago, Chili, April 3, 1879. (Received May 8.)

[103] . Mr. Osborn to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Santiago, Chili, April 10, 1879. (Received May 18.)

[104] . Mr. Osborn to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Santiago, Chili, April 19, 1879. (Received May 27.)

[105] . Mr. Osborn to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States. Santiago, Chili, April 26, 1879. (Received June 3.)

[106] Mr. Osborn to Mr. Christiancy.

Legation of the United States, Santiago, Chili, April 26, 1879.

[107] . Mr. Seward to Mr. Osborn.

Department of State, Washington, May 29, 1879.

[108] . Mr. Osborn to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Santiago, Chili, June 5, 1879. (Received July 8.)

[109] . Mr. Evarts to Mr. Osborn.

Department of State, Washington, June 9, 1879.

[110] . Mr. Osborn to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Santiago, Chili, July 24, 1879. (Received September 4.)

[111] . Mr. Hunter to Mr. Kellar.

Department of State, Washington, June 2, 1879.

[112] . Mr. Hunter to Mr. Foote.

Department of State, Washington, October 23, 1879.

No. 83. Mr. Osborn to Mr. Evarts. [Document 96]

No. 83.
Mr. Osborn to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Santiago, Chili, November 15, 1878. (Received December 26.) No. 71.]

Sir: The mail which leaves Valparaiso to-morrow will be closed here in about an hour, and I must therefore make my dispatch exceedingly brief. It refers to the ship Devonshire, and the boundary dispute with the Argentine Government.

I neglected to say in my former dispatches that when I was informed by the minister of foreign relations that an American vessel was loading with guano at Monte Leon, I addressed a note to the captain in which I informed him of the claim made by Chili to that territory, and suggested that it would be well for him to avoid a conflict with the authorities of either the Chilian or Argentine Governments. This note was left with the minister of foreign relations for delivery, but from some cause it failed to reach its destination.

In a conference which I had with the minister a few days since, I called his attention to this fact and suggested that, inasmuch as the legation had taken such steps as prudence seemed to dictate to prevent the vessel from coming in conflict with the authorities of Chili, and that inasmuch as the letter to that end failed to reach its destination through no fault of the legation, it seemed to me that, in view of the friendly relations existing between our respective countries, Chili could well afford to release the ship unconditionally.

The suggestion was well received, and the minister yesterday informed me that the government had determined, if I would embody in a note the ideas which I had suggested to him verbally, to place the vessel at liberty. This I did yesterday, and the orders were, the minister has just informed me, soon after issued directing the governor of Magallanes to permit the Devonshire to go to sea. The formal answer to my note has not yet been received, but there is no doubt of the facts stated. A government vessel leaves Valparaiso to-day for Punta Arenas, conveying necessary orders. The release is made unconditionally.

The Chili Navy is moving in the direction of the Straits of Magellan, and it is understood here that the Argentine Government is sending its war vessels in the same direction. Negotiations are, however, being carried on here looking to a peaceful settlement of the dispute, and I have reason for believing that actual hostilities will be avoided.

I have, &c.,

THOMAS A. OSBORN.

No. 84. Mr. Evarts to Mr. Osborn. [Document 97]

No. 84.
Mr. Evarts to Mr. Osborn.

Department of State,
Washington, January 29, 1879. No 55.]

Sir: I have to acknowledge the receipt of your No. 76, of the 11th ultimo, in which you state that a treaty has finally been signed for the submission to arbitration of the boundary dispute between Chili and the Argentine Republic, the tribunal to be composed of two citizens of each country; and a fifth person as umpire, to decide upon points not otherwise settled.

You will express to the Chilian Government the extreme gratification which the Government of the United States derives from this intelligence, which sets at rest any present apprehensions of a rupture between the two governments, a result which, as regards the damage it might inflict on the commerce of the world, would be highly deplorable, and, as concerns the perhaps irremediable injuries it might entail on the prosperity of both republics, would be a subject of great regret to the United States.

It is hoped that in the arbitration which now seems about to take place the representatives of both parties will be so strongly actuated by a desire to conclude a lasting settlement of the boundary question, that no motive less broad will be permitted to interfere with that most important object. It is conceived that either country could much better afford to sacrifice many square miles of territory, or a large extent of coastline hitherto claimed, than to hazard in their defense, not only their commercial success and general credit, but the favorable estimation of other nations. The Government of Chili has evinced, by her participation in this great but peaceful triumph of negotiation, that she entertains views of policy which must ultimately result in establishing the highest prosperity of the country.

I am, &c.,

WILLIAM M. EVARTS.

No. 85. Mr. Osborn to Mr. Evarts. [Document 98]

No. 85.
Mr. Osborn to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Santiago, Chili, February 20, 1879. (Received March 26.) No. 83.]

Sir: Chili is involved in another dispute concerning her boundaries. It is with Bolivia now, and concerns the territory on the Pacific coast lying between the 23d and 25th degrees of latitude. Prior to 1866, jurisdiction over this territory was claimed by both of these governments, but on December 9 of that year they promulgated a treaty which had for its purpose a settlement of the dispute. In substance, the treaty provided that the 24th degree should constitute the line of division, but that all guano deposits within the territory prior thereto in dispute, as also all duties which might be derived from the exportation of minerals therefrom, should be equally divided between the two countries. It soon became evident, however, that the treaty had failed to accomplish the purpose for which it was intended, and on the 6th of August, 1874, they celebrated another.

In this the 24th degree was reasserted as the line of division, and each government relinquished its right, within the jurisdiction of the other, to duties arising from exportation of minerals. They agreed, also, that within the hitherto disputed territory neither government should, for the term of twenty-five years, impose upon the exportation of minerals a higher duty than was then provided for, and that neither government should, within said territory tax the citizens, industries, or capital of the other, of whatever character, in excess of that then fixed by law.

The country referred to as the disputed territory is in the heart of what is known as the desert of Atacama, and was regarded, until about the time of the execution of the first treaty, except for the deposit of guano at Majillones, its northern boundary, as of little or no value. The discovery of vast nitrate deposits about that time, however, in that part of the territory, set apart to Bolivia by the treaty, soon brought it into prominent notice, and companies were organized for the purpose of developing that industry. The business seems to have been monopolized by a corporation known as “Elcompañia de Salitres y Ferrocanil de Antofagasta,” a company composed mainly of gentlemen of means, citizens of Chili. It is claimed in behalf of the company that it had full authority from the Bolivian Government for the prosecution of its business, and that it relied upon the good faith of Bolivia in making its investments. It is claimed that its investments now exceed $4,000,000. It has constructed a railroad 40 miles into the interior, running through the nitrate deposits, and Antofagasta, the shipping-point for the nitrate, and the location of the principal works, has developed into a city of nearly 10,000 people.

In February of last year the Bolivian congress enacted a law exacting a tax of ten cents a quintal on all exportations of nitrate, and from this has arisen the present difficulty with Chili. The Chili Government promptly protested against the execution of this law, claiming that it was in direct conflict with the guaranties of the treaty of 1874. The law was allowed to remain dormant for several months, but no action was taken looking to its revocation.

A short time since, however, the Bolivian authorities notified the company at Antofagasta that the law was to be executed, and that the amount which was due from it on account of shipments made since the passage of the law was something in excess of $90,000. The Chili Government protested anew, and caused Bolivia to be informed that if she insisted upon executing the law Chili would regard the treaty as abrogated, and would proceed to assert her right of dominion to the territory claimed by her prior to 1866. Notwithstanding this threat the works at Antofagasta were levied upon and notice was given that they would be sold; whereupon, on the 12th instant the Chilian minister at La Paz was instructed by telegraph to demand his passport, and forces were immediately forwarded by water with instructions to take possession of the territory on the coast as far north as the 23d degree of latitude. On the 14th the Chilian forces occupied Antofagasta without firing a gun, and the disputed territory is now held by Chilian troops.

The course of the government here meets with a hearty approval from all classes. The movement was an exceedingly popular one. It is doubtful, indeed, if the administration could have taken another course and sustained itself. There is much anxiety concerning the course which Peru is likely to take. That her people strongly sympathize with Bolivia in this affair is undoubtedly true, and it is feared by some that the government may be driven into an alliance with Bolivia. I think the fear is well grounded.

The Chili Government is endeavoring to prepare itself for any emergency. The naval force has all been sent to the north and troops are being forwarded as rapidly as possible.

It is understood that congress will be convened in extraordinary session about the 10th of March.

I forward you by this mail a copy of a pamphlet entitled “The new question of Chili with Bolivia,” which was sent to me from the foreign office. Also, a copy of the “Diario Official,” which contains a sort of manifesto from the government under the head of “El conflicto con Bolivia.”

I have, &c.,

THOMAS A. OSBORN.

No. 86. Mr. Osborn to Mr. Evarts. [Document 99]

No. 86.
Mr. Osborn to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Santiago, Chili, March 31, 1879. (Received May 8.) No. 85.]

Sir: The correspondence which I inclose refers to three English-built steamships, recently purchased at Valparaiso by Henry L. Stevens, an American citizen domiciled in Chili, and treats of three questions, to wit: 1st. The good faith of such purchase.

2d. The character of the protection to which such ships are entitled from the American Government.

3d. The right of such vessels to carry the American nag, and to be clewed by American consuls.

It appears that these ships were purchased by Mr. Stevens, on the 27th of February last, from the South American Steamship Company, a Chili corporation. The bill of sale was recorded in the consulate at Valparaiso and a certificate to that effect made on the original, pursuant to, sections 220 and 221 of consular regulations.

Rear-Admiral C. R. P. Rodgers, from on board the flag-ship Pensacola in tie harbor of Valparaiso, under date of March 13, addressed me a note in which he expressed a doubt concerning the legitimacy of these transfers, and requested that I should inform him, in view of the probability of a war between Chili and Peru, if said ships were entitled to his protection. I immediately inclosed a copy of the admiral’s note to the consul at Valparaiso, and directed him to enter upon a thorough investigation concerning the legitimacy of said transfers, and to revoke the action therein taken by him, if it should be developed that they were not made in perfect good faith.

It will be seen from, the consul’s report that he concludes that the sale was made in good faith, and that the action of the consulate was in every respect proper. The report is quite lengthy, but inasmuch as it treats of the matter of this class of transfers in general, and refers to numerous precedents which tend to sustain that officer in his view of his duties I trust you will give it a careful consideration.

To the latter clause of my reply to Rear-Admiral Rodgers, I wish to call your especial attention. It will be observed that in responding to the admiral’s request, I therein gave him my views of the status of foreign-built vessels owned by American citizens, and of the character of the protection to which they are entitled. If I have erred it might, perhaps, be well that I should be informed.

Can vessels so purchased carry the American flag, and should they be cleared by our consular officers? The action of the United States authorities in Peru concerning one of said ships, the “Itata,” would seem to render it important that the views of the government in this regard should be more clearly defined. I request that the letter of Consul McKellar on this subject, which is inclosed, shall receive that consideration which the importance of the subject of which it treats would seem to demand.

It appears that the Itata was cleared from the American consulate at Valparaiso for Callao, and that soon after her arrival at that port her captain was directed by the United States consul, who was acting under instructions from Minister Gibbs, to haul down the American flag under which she had sailed from Valparaiso. I have a note from Minister Gibbs wherein he inform sme of his action in this matter, and explains that his course was based upon the theory that registered vessels only have the right to use the American flag. Section 226 of the consular regulations will, I admit, bear an interpretation consistent with this view, yet I can hardly believe that the State Department intended that this section should be so construed. Sections 220, 221, and 225 clearly recognize the right of American citizens to purchase foreign-built ships, and acknowledge the obligation of the government to afford them, at least, a qualified protection. I am not prepared to believe that the department desired to be understood as saying that our citizens might purchase these ships, but that they should not sail them. And yet I submit that Mr. Gibbs’s interpretation leads to this. In this connection I beg to call your attention to an opinion of Mr. Gushing, to which reference is made on page 6 of the “Digest of Opinions and Leading Cases on International taw” recently forwarded by the State Department to this legation.

That there may be no conflict with our authorities in Peru I have directed the acting consul at Valparaiso to clear only registered vessels for Peruvian ports until he shall be further instructed.

I have, &c.,

THOMAS A. OSBORN.

[Inclosure 1 in No. 86.]

Rear-Admiral Rodgers to Mr. Osborn.

United States Flag-Ship Pensacola,
Valparaiso, Chili, March 13, 1879.

Sir: Since my arrival in this neighborhood I have learnt with much concern that three steamers” hitherto sailing under the Chilian flag have raised the flag of the United States, and have been furnished with prima facie evidence that the transfer of ownership to an American citizen has been made in good faith.

These vessels, it is believed, are owned in this country, and the American citizen who is their alleged purchaser has domicil in Chili. I am told that he is not a man of fortune, nor has he hitherto been thought able to buy a costly line of steamships. If such transfers may be made, the whole mercantile marine of Chili may thus find immunity from capture in evident violation of the belligerent rights of Peru, should the war now imminent break forth between the two great South American republics.

Our consular regulations declare that “the privilege of carrying the American flag is under the regulation of Congress, and the statutes have not made that privilege practicably available to any ships except those duly enrolled at some custom-house.” I am aware that our attorney-generals have affirmed the right of a citizen of the United States to purchase a merchant ship of a belligerent anywhere, at home or abroad, and that the ship so purchased becomes entitled to bear the American flag and to American protection, but it was equally insisted that the purchase should be bona fide and property passed absolutely and without reserve.

The English admiralty courts in making similar decisions have also insisted that no interest should remain with the seller.

In our civil war, Southern vessels sold to English subjects, and furnished with provisional registers by British consuls, found little favor in our prize-courts, and it is probable that the courts of Peru would give little heed to the flag of the United states hoisted on board Chilian ships merely to save them from capture, or to the certificate of their being owned by one of our citizens domiciled in Chili.

I may at any moment be called upon to protect by force of arms ships carrying the flag of our country in these seas, and I therefore respectfully beg your permission to call your excellency’s attention to the facts I have recited, and to ask whether the steamers in question are entitled to the protection of the squadron under my command.

The consuls of the United States in Chili are subject to your supervision, and I know that you as well as Mr. McKellar will share my desire that our flag shall not be used by those not entitled to its protection.

I have, &c.,

C. R. P. RODGERS,
Rear Admiral Commanding United States Naval Force in the Pacific.

[Enclosure 2 in No. 86.]

Mr. Osborn to Admiral Rodgers.

Legation of the United States,
Santiago, Chili, March 15, 1879.

Sir: Your favor of the 13th instant, making certain inquiries concerning the alleged transfer to an American citizen domiciled in Chili of three steamers heretofore carrying the Chilian flag, was received to-day by the hands of Mr. McKellar.

I have caused Consul McKellar to be furnished with a copy of your letter, and have directed him to make prompt and careful inquiry as to the legitimacy of such pretended transfers, and to forthwith revoke all documents by him executed under which said vessels assume to be American vessels, if upon due investigation he shall become satisfied that your suspicions concerning such transfers are well founded. From a brief conversation with the consul on this subject, I am led to conclude that his action was based upon sections 220 and 221 of the Consular Regulations, and that he did no more than is therein required of an American consul Upon the sale in good faith, within his consulate, of ships to American citizens. Good faith in the transaction, however, is absolutely essential to entitle it to respect from the American authorities, and if it shall appear that the consul has been deceived by the owners in this regard, I apprehend that he will not be slow in canceling the papers by him executed.

However, assuming that the sales were made in good faith, the property interest thereby acquired must be regarded as other property belonging to citizens similarly situated is regarded, and is entitled to protection in the same degree and no other. If war should unfortunately occur between Chili and Peru, and the purchaser of these ships should continue his domicile in Chili, his property, like that of others so situated, would become a legitimate subject of seizure by Peru; and while the United States Government would, probably, in case of such seizure interfere to the extent of insisting that its foreign domiciled citizen should be fairly and legally dealt with, it would, I apprehend, with the accomplishment of this, regard its duty “to him as fully discharged. The government does not, in my judgment, expect its naval force to be used in protecting from legitimate seizure by belligerents, property so owned by its foreign-domiciled citizens.

I will cause you to be fully informed of the result of the consul’s inquiry.

I have, &c.,

THOMAS A. OSBORN.

[Inclosure 3 in No. 86.]

Mr. McKellar to Mr. Clayton.

United States Consulate at Valparaiso,
March 15, 1879.

Dear Sir: I have had my attention called to a telegram from Lima, which states as follows: “American minister raises difficulties to accept the documents of steamer Itata, and says that the consul had no authority to issue them.”

I think this must be a mistake, as the facts of the case are as follows:

Mr. Henry L. Stevens, an American citizen residing in this city, has purchased this steamer and others last month. The respective bills of sale of these vessels were executed before me and duly recorded at the consulate, in conformity with Article XVII of Consular Regulations, 1874, a copy of which article I have attached to each bill of sale, as well as a certificate that the purchaser is a citizen of the United States. I may also state that, besides the referred regulations, I have for my guidance a book furnished this consulate by the Department of State, viz, “Digest of the Opinions of the Attorneys-General and Leading Decisions of the Federal Courts with reference to International Law,” &c. On page 6 will be found the opinion of Mr. Cushing in reference to the purchase of foreign-built vessels by citizens of the United States; on page 142, Article XXVI, is another opinion of the same eminent jurist on the same subject. I annex herewith a copy of the articles referred to.

I may furthermore state that my action with reference to the above transfers has been precisely as that observed on former occasions at this consulate by my predecessors.

I had written the government upon the subject, and our minister at Santiago is cognizant of the matter.

I am, &c.

P. A. McKELLAR,
United States Vice-Consul.

[Inclosure 4 in No. 86.]

Mr. McKellar to Mr. Osborn.

Consulate of the United States of America at Valparaiso,
March 22, 1879.

Sir: I have the honor to acknowledge receipt of the communication of your excellency dated 15th instant, which reached me on 18th, inclosing copy of letter of Rear Admiral C. R. P. Rodgers, Commanding United States Squadron on Pacific station, to which letter my special attention is directed, referring to the transfer of three steamers hitherto sailing under the Chilian flag, and which have raised the flag of the United States, and have been furnished with prima facie evidence that the transfer of ownership to an American citizen has been made in good faith.

Your excellency furthermore states that if the surmises of Admiral Rodgers concerning the legitimacy of the transfer of these ships are correct, the action of the consulate, concerning their sale cannot be too soon revoked, but if on the contrary the sales were made in perfect good faith, as is contemplated in the consular regulations, that fact cannot be too soon fully developed.

Your excellency furthermore requests me to enter upon a thorough investigation concerning the legitimacy of such transfers at the earliest possible moment, and if it shall be developed to my satisfaction that such transfers were not made in good faith, I shall cause the authority by me executed, under which such vessels assume the character of American vessels, to be annulled, and finally that I will report to your excellency fully my action in the matter.

I take for granted that the three steamers referred to are the Itata, the Loa, and the Rimac, sold recently by Horatio Lyon, esq., Agent of the South American Steamship Company, to Henry L. Stevens, esq., of this city. Your excellency’s understanding that the action of this consulate in this matter was had under authority of sections 220 and 221, of the Consular Regulations of 1874, and that the steps required by those regulations were duly taken by this consulate in strict accordance with the letter as well as the spirit of Article XVII, is most correct.

The sale and transfer of the said steamers was made on or about the 27th February last past by Mr. Lyon, the company’s agent, in its name and by its authority, and his acts therein were approved by the board of directors of that corporation, who further authorized said agent to cause to be extended and to sign the corresponding instrument, which he accordingly did on March 11 last past, before Julius Cæsar Escala, esq., one of the notaries public of this city, in strict accordance with the laws of Chili in such case made and provided.

In the conscientious conviction of persons who, like myself, have been personally acquainted for years with all the gentlemen concerned in and parties to the transaction, their high personal and commercial character and standing would emphatically and totally preclude even the shadow of a shade of doubt, far less incite suspicion, as to the bona fides of any arrangement made by and between them. But when such arrangement, in addition to such a guaranty, is stamped with the sanction of a notarial instrument executed before and duly authorized or certified by a gentleman of such high standing in his profession as Mr. Escala, who is par excellence the notary always employed by the mercantile community of Valparaiso, no higher proof can be adduced.

In no part of the United States certainly, and, to my knowledge, probably in no other part of the world save France and Italy, is the maxim, “a cilibet in arte suâ credendum est,” so apposite as when speaking of notaries public in Spanish and Hispano-American countries (Chili, for instance) when acting within the scope of their legal attributes. His certificate,, authenticated by his signature and notarial “sign” or seal, is the strongest possible voucher and proof of the exactitude and authenticity of the assertions or statement of facts therein by him asserted. He is by law “un ministro de fé i. e., a minister of faith, and his signature and notarial sign or seal to all Ms acts are “confirmation strong as proofs from Holy Writ,” and as such are received both in judicature and without in the above-mentioned countries.

I have been thus extensive, even, I fear, to prolixity, in this exposition to demonstrate to your excellency that so far from having contented myself with a perfunctory discharge of my duties in this respect, I exacted and obtained the most convincing and irrefragable proofs of the good faith observed in the sale now animadverted upon.

Admiral Rodgers does not state the name of his informant who told him that the American citizen “who is the alleged purchaser” of the steamers in question “is not a man of fortune, nor has he hitherto been thought able to buy a costly line of steamships;” but if Mr. Stevens, the actual purchaser of those vessels, be the person alluded to by this innuendo, I can assure you that from my long residence in Valparaiso, and my experience among its capitalists, I am far from being of the same opinion as his informant. Mr. Stevens is a young, enterprising American, well and creditably known in commercial circles here, and could readily find “backers” of the strongest kind to enable him to effect the purchase. And he could the more readily do this as the objects of such purchase were three fine and popular steamers, and he had determined to place them under the aegis of the ensign of his native country, as he was entitled to do.

As it was, he proposed to pay the consideration money in my presence, and so it would instantly have been done had I seen any reason for executing the performance of what I considered an idle ceremony, as I, neither then nor at present, had the slightest doubt, certainly no suspicion, of the good faith of the parties, and especially as I was aware that the notary authorizing the transfer would take care to be satisfied a$ to the pecuniary part of the transaction.

I trust I have demonstrated to your excellency’s satisfaction that the proof of the bona fide nature of the purchase was satisfactory to myself, and so would have been to the most hypereritically captious of United States consular officers. I deemed the purchase to have been fair, and as the regulations specify no character of proof and define no method of its rendition, I felt not merely satisfied but authorized in relying upon the employment of a sound discretion and judgment in the matter.

I note that Admiral Rodgers cites and founds upon a clause in section 226 of Consular Regulations (ed. 1874), which declares that “the privilege of carrying the American flag is under the regulatio’h of Congress, and the statutes have not made that privilege practicably available to any ships except those duly enrolled at some customhouse “; but admits at the same time that he is “aware that our Attorneys-General have affirmed the right of a citizen of the United States to purchase a merchant ship of a helligerent anywhere, at home or abroad, and that the ship so purchased becomes so entitled to bear the American flag and to American protection; but that it was equally insisted upon that the purchase should be made bona fide, and the property passed absolutely and without reserve.”

It is evident from the tenor of the regulations, that the consul is the officer to be satisfied with the proof of the bona fide character of the purchase and of its fairness. I have already manifested to your excellency, to your satisfaction I trust, that I had the most conclusive and irrefutable proofs possible of these facts before becoming satis-lied, and I have had, as yet, no motive for changing myopinion.

Respecting the clause quoted by the admiral, as above set forth, I submit it to your excellency’s superior judgment, as to whether such a clause, which is seemingly rather a dictum of the compiler than any statutory enactment, can override or invalidate the previous declarations. In my opinion, certainly not. Paragraph 225 of same article even declares that “the right of American citizens to acquire property in foreign ships has been held to be a natural right, independent of statutory law, and is declaratory of such right therein, and of their right to protection in the enjoyment of the same.”

The acquirement by an American citizen to an undivided share in a foreign vessel certainly does not entitle him to display the American flag by virtue of such ownership, but his interest in such vessel, to use the cautious and rather vague language of the paragraph, “is no more and no less” entitled to recognition than the property of an American citizen.

The intent and meaning of the regulation is plainly shown by the first paragraph (section 634) of chapter XXXIII of the Consular Regulations of 1856, from which the regulation of 1874 is copied in ipsissima verba:

Sec. 634. Inquiry is frequently made of the Department of State and of the Treasury as to what documents can be issued under the laws of the United States to foreign?-built vessels, purchased and wholly owned by citizens of the United States, whether purchased of belligerents or neutrals during a war, to which the United States are not a party; or in peace, of foreign owners, the purchase in either case being in entire good faith.

Sec. 635. Vessels so purchased and owned are entitled to the protection of the authorities and flag of the United States, as the property of American citizens, although no register, enrollment, license, or other marine documents prescribed by the laws of the United States can be lawfully issued to such vessels.”

This is also affirmed by Attorney-General dishing, whose opinion will be found in page 6 of “Digest of Opinions and Leading Cases on International Law,” in the following words:

“A citizen of the United States may lawfully purchase a merchant ship of either of the belligerents, Turkey, Russia, Great Britain, France, or Sardinia, and if purchased bona fide, such ship becomes an American vessel in the sense of American property, although she is not an American vessel in the sense of the registry or enrollment acts; and she is entitled to protection and to the flag of the United States although she cannot take out a register. That is because she is foreign-built, not because she is belligerent built. The question as to what documents such a ship is entitled to, referred to, but not decided.”

The correctness of these views was entertained by the Hon. Thomas H. Nelson and General Judson Kilpatrick, United States ministers to Chili, and by Commodore John Rogers, commanding the United States squadron, then in the bay of Valparaiso, during the year 1866, at which time war existed between Spain and the Republic of Chili, and the ports of the latter were blockaded by a powerful and numerous Spanish squadron, was admitted and cordially acquiesced in by the Spanish Admiral, Don José Manuel Pareja, and his successor Don Castro Mendez Nunez, and their subordinates. In fact, no doubt existed, and no question was raised as to the fact, in the minds of any of these gentlemen, as to the legality of the acts of Mr. Silvey, then United States consul at this port, and his successor in office, Hon. A. W. Clark.

Commodore Rodgers did not content himself with a mere verbal approval, but on several occasions rendered prompt and efficient aid in similar cases. In the case of the Gravina, he intimated to Consul Clark his intention to have interfered, had the Spanish admiral refused to deliver her up.

This vessel then wearing Chilian colors had been sold in transitu to an American purchaser. Upon her approach to Valparaiso, displaying the Chilian flag, she was seized by the Spaniards, and condemned as a lawful prize by the prize court constituted and held on board the flag-ship of the capturing squadron. So soon as this came to the knowledge of Consul Clark, he proceeded on board the Spanish flag-ship, and exhibiting the documentary evidence of her new American nationality, demanded her release as the property a citizen of the United States. The Spanish admiral having examined the documents, admitted the justice of the demand, and ordered her release, courteously excusing himself, for evident reasons, from towing her into the anchorage by his own men. This was done by Commodore Rodgers.

Upon the evening previous to the bombardment, Commodore Rodgers put a crew of his own men on board, who took her out and anchored her close to the Spanish squadron. She was boarded by an officer from the flag-ship, who examined and indorsed her papers and retired. After the bombardment next day, the commodore, having ascertained that it would not be renewed, again sent a crew on board and brought her back to her anchorage in the port.

An instance occurs to my recollection of three Chilian vessels, whose names have at present escaped my memory, which were sold while at anchor in one of the southern ports, Talcahuano, if I mistake not, to an American purchaser. The evidence of purchase of these vessels was duly recorded in this consulate, and delivered to the purchaser, together with the proper certificates. He, taking them and three United States flags which he had caused to be made here for the purpose, started off for Talcahuano, where he arrived about noon of the day after the arrival there of the Vencedora, one of the Spanish squadron. Immediately upon reaching Talcahuano he repaired on board his vessels, furnished each with its corresponding documents, and ordered the American colors to be hoisted. This at once brought a boat off from the Vencedora, the officer in command of which examined the papers, indorsed them and took his leave, laughingly expressing his regret that he had not effected their capture previously.

Upon many occasions valuable assistance was rendered by the Spaniards to vessels recently flying the Chilian colors but which had been purchased by American citizens Nor was this a mere act of courtesy on their part. It arose out of their knowledge of the rights of the American owners, which they considered as properly authenticated by this class of documents. For they burned remorselessly every vessel they could lay hold of carrying Chilian colors; although wholly owned by Spanish subjects lately resident in Valparaiso, and who had taken refuge on the Spanish squadron.

Further proof as to the course of this consulate being considered legitimate, may be adduced from the fact of the United States consuls in Callao, and other ports of Peru, following the example of this consulate, and copying the formula used by it, with the approval of the then American minister to Peru.

I may likewise mention the significant fact that accounts of the receipts for the fees charged and received by this consulate for services in this behalf, and for the subsequent arrivals and deposit of papers, &c., of such vessels were approved by the Department of State without objection.

That the items and facts originating these fees were not unobserved by the Department is evident from the fact that this consulate was informed by it of the non-observance of the regulations exempting those who regularly traded between Port Constitution and Valparaiso from the payment of consular fees more than once in each and every three months.

I have thus endeavored to show your excellency that my course in relation to the three steamers above mentioned was not an adoption of the ancient rule of sic volo, sic jubeo, stat pro ratione voluntas, but was based upon reasons gathered from the practice long since adopted by my predecessors in the consular office, sanctioned by the approval of the gentlemen whom I have above mentioned, and admitted by the officers of the hostile squadron under the circumstance of a state of actual war, which admission on their part caused them heavy pecuniary losses in prize-money which they could have realized had they doubted of the legality of the consular proceedings.

Hoping the foregoing statements may meet your excellency’s approval,

I have the honor to be, sir, your obedient servant,

P. A. McEELLAR,
United States Vice-Consul.

[Inclosure 5, in No. 86.]

Mr. McKellar to Mr. Osborn.

Consulate of the United States of America at Valparaiso,
March 27, 1879.

Sir: I have the honor of laying before your excellency the following statement of facts which have recently taken place relative to certain acts on the part of the United States consul at Callao, Peru, to which I desire to direct your most serious attention in view of the delicate and unpleasant position in which the difference of opinion between that functionary and myself, and his acts consequent thereupon, have placed this consulate.

Not alone has it originated a grave public scandal, but, as I shall have the honor of manifesting to your excellency, has caused considerable pecuniary damage to an American citizen resident here.

The steamer Itata, formerly belonging to the South American Steamship Company, was sold on the 27th day of February last past to Henry L. Stevens, esq., a citizen of the United States resident in this port. Mr. Stevens furnished this consulate with proof of his purchase, of the bona fide nature of the transaction, and that the property had passed to him absolutely and without reserve. Being desirous of placing his lawful property under the protection of the authority and nag of the United States, he desired that the bill of sale might be recorded in this office, and the original delivered to him with the usual certificate indorsed thereon.

The proof being in the highest degree satisfactory, and I, deeming the purchase fair, acceded to his request and recorded the bill of sale, and indorsed the desired certificate.

Upon the departure of the Itata, she was duly cleared by this consulate and the port authorities, and sailed on her voyage north, stopping at Coquimbo, Caldera, and Iquique, where her documents were received, and the vessel duly cleared by the United States consul and port authorities of those ports. Arriving at Callao, her captain deposited his papers with the United States consul there, who received them without remark. His subsequent acts will be best told by his own communication to the captain, dated 14th instant, a copy of which, marked A, I herewith inclose. Captain Lautrup obeyed the order therein contained to haul down the American flag, and took back his papers. As the consul had informed him that he did not “officially recognize her as an American vessel,” and he “must decline to clear her, or to issue any papers to her whatsoever,” Captain Lautrup had no other resource than to obtain a sea-letter or “passavante” from the Chilian consul-general there, protest in due form against the minister and consul of the United States at Callao, and leave thence under the flag; of Chili.

I have the honor to inclose herewith a translation of the protest, which is dated 15th instant, and duly certified by the Chilian consul-general at that port, which translation is marked B.

I have already in my communication to your excellency of the 22d instant, stated fully my opinion of the action had in this matter by this consulate, and some of the reasons which induced me to form that opinion. I take this opportunity of adding some recent examples, which, I respectfully suggest, will corroborate and strengthen the views I therein expressed.

The former Peruvian steamer Sofia, which, sold and transferred to an American citizen, has been sailing in and out of Callao and other ports along the coast for more than a year past, wearing the American flag, without any objection on the part of the United States consul, minister, or admiral, or the various port authorities.

The steamer Honduras, built in Liverpool, England, in 1871, arrived in Valparaiso in August of that year, went hence to Panama, where she took the American flag—being owned by the Panama Railroad Company—and has ever since been actively engaged in traffic between the ports of the Pacific coast of Central America and Panama. And, moreover, she is marked on the record of American and foreign shipping as an American vessel under the number 875. The steamer Independence was purchased at Valparaiso by an American citizen, and took the American flag February 7, 1877, and the steamer Cargador, purchased by an American citizen, took the American flag April 24, 1877. This was during the consulate of D. J. Williamson, esq., who also was chargé d’ affaires during the absence of the Hon. C. A. Logan, your excellency’s predecessor.

Both the last named vessels, furnished with the documents usual in purchases by this consulate, left Valparaiso, displaying the American flag, for Panama, calling at Callao, while either the present incumbent, or his late father, the Hon. Philip S. Clayton, was consul there. They passed the consulate, were regularly entered in and cleared thence without objection on the part of that office or of the port authorities, and proceeded thence to Panama, where they are at present still under the American flag.

My opinion of the duties of an American consular-office in similar cases, having been formed upon the reasons heretofore detailed to your excellency in my above recited communication, and not having been whimsically or inconsiderately adopted, is still unchanged. Should a vessel in the position of the Itata arrive at this port, such is my conscientious conviction of those duties that I should not hesitate to dispatch her.

Furthermore, there are one or two vessels similarly circumstanced, i. e., owned by American citizens and wearing American colors for the last thirteen or fourteen years on this coast, which have been regularly entered and cleared at this consulate both by my predecessors and myself.

Having been favored by Mr. Stevens with the telegrams sent here by Captain Lautrup from Callao, informing him of the action of the consul in the matter, I at once addressed a letter to that officer, dated 15th instant, the object of which will fully appear by reference to the copy thereof herein inclosed and marked C, to which I have yet to await an answer.

But, sir, the mail of the 25th instant brings me copies of the South Pacific Times (Vol. VII, Nos. 134 and 135), a paper published at Callao in the English language, containing a communication from a certain Henry S. Wetmore, of that place, relative to the steamer Itata, apparently in answer to an editorial interrogatory put in consequence of the insertion of a communication signed “A disenchanted Yankee,” in No. 134 of March 13, 1879. I send herewith the two newspapers to which I refer.

It will, I imagine, require but little critical sagacity to enable any one to preceive that the letter, the answer, and the editorial comments therein contained in both papers are ail inspired by the identical Henry S. Wetmore, who takes it upon himself to ‘ pronounce his opinion ex cathedra upon this point. Be this as it may, the letter of this Wetmore has been translated and so published in the Callao public newspapers, and repeated yesterday by the Mercurio, the paper having the largest and most influential circulation in Chili.

It appears that this letter is published in the Callao newspapers as emanating from the United States consul, and as such misstatement has not been contradicted by him, so far as I know, I may be excused if I accept it as containing an exposition of that gentleman’s opinion upon the matters therein definitely pronounced upon.

The tenor of the remarks and of the letters above referred to have given me serious apprehensions that the American consul in Callao has unwittingly been made an instrument, in an attempt to carry out a deep laid conspiracy for depriving an American citizen of his lawfully acquired ownership of the Itata, and probably that of the other steamers which were about to follow her to Callao; for I am far from being at all inclined to consider him as being instigated by any other motive than his sincere desire to fulfill his views of public duty in the premises.

But in this direct opposition of our conflicting opinions as to our duty as United States consuls in such cases, and in view of the serious consequences which will unquestionably arise therefrom unless the question be promptly settled by the proper department at Washington, I have the honor to lay the entire subject before your excellency, that you may be pleased to transmit the same to the government for instructions in that behalf.

The only feeling which actuates me at present is a deep regret that Mr. Stevens should have been subjected to considerable pecuniary loss, as finding that in the opinion of the consul and minister of the United States his vessels are, in Callao at least, not permitted to be recognized as American ships, has disposed of them to a British subject, who has placed them under the protection of the flag of that nation. So that the present difficulty is at an end, for the present, at least, and nothing remains to avoid such for the future, save a declaration of the Department of State as to the means by which an American citizen, being solely and wholly owner of a foreign-built vessel by bona fide purchase can publicly claim the protection of his government and flag, if it is forbidden him to display that flag upon the vessel.

While upon this subject, I may as well state to your excellency that Captain Lautrup himself has just made declaration that during the years 1866 and 1867 he was in command of a vessel called the Adelida, purchased by an American citizen in Sydney, New South Wales, who placed her under the American flag. Furnished with the bill of sale and other usual consular papers, he sailed with her under that flag to Batavia. Singapore, Calcutta, and thence back to Sydney, where the vessel was sold.

He has also exhibited to me the certificates of the deposit and delivery of the bill of sale and papers of the said vessel by the various consuls-generals, consuls, and vice-consuls of the United States at those ports. And all this without let, hmderaiice, or even question therein arising on the part of any consular or port authority whatever.

Referring to that portion of the dispatch wherein I allude to Henry S. Wetmore, who, as I hate every reason to believe, is the instigator, if not the originator, of the conspiracy to which I have heretofore made reference, I have just discovered that my predecessor, D. J. Williamson, esq., who knew him well, both while here and in Peru, expressed his opinion of him in no flattering terms in his dispatch to Hon. Wm. Hunter, Second Assistant Secretary of State, dated Valparaiso, October 14, 1875, No. 49, when he closed a long explanation with reference to the rent of the consulate in Callao with the following strong but just language, referring to the same individual:

“I regret that Mr. Thomas has so lowered himself to eulogize this man Wetmore, who states that he is the owner of property in five of the States of the Union. He may be the owner of property as he states; I think that his property, if known, would consist of a dice-box and a pack of cards. Gambling has been his principal business in Callao, as it was in Savannah, Ga., and other southern cities before he came to South America.”

I have, &c.

P. A. McKELLAR,
United States Vice-Consul.

A. Mr. Clayton to Mr. Lautrup. [Document 100]

A.
Mr. Clayton to Mr. Lautrup.

United States Consulate,
Callao, Peru, March 14, 1879.

In compliance with instructions this day received from the Hon. Richard Gibbs, United States minister to Peru, I have the honor to inform you that in accordance with the laws of the United States the vessel under your command, viz, the steamship Itata, though by paragraph 220 of the Consular Regulations is entitled to the protection of the authorities of the United States, she being the property of a citizen thereof, is not entitled to fly the flag of the United States.

I therefore officially request that the flag be hauled down, and not again hoisted in this port, or within this consular jurisdiction.

You are furthermore requested to send an authorized person to receive the papers now in my possession pertaining to said ship, with power to receipt for the same.

As I do not officially recognize her as an American ship, I must decline to clear her or to issue any papers to her whatsoever.

If you decline to comply with the provisions of this letter you must yourself be responsible for any complications which may arise.

Very respectfully, yours, &c.

[seal.] ROBERT L. CLAYTON,
United States Consul.

B. protest. [Translation.]

[Document 101]

B.
protest.

The Captain of the Steamer Itata, against the Consul of the United States of America at this port, and against the Minister of the same nation, resident at Lima.

In the city of Callao, on the fifteenth day of the month of March, one thousand eight hundred and seventy-nine, before me,, the notary public, and witnesses who subscribe, personally appeared Mr. Peter Lautrup, of full age, temporarily sojourning in this city, captain of the American steamer Itata, whom I certify that I personally know to be such, and declared that he protested against the proceedings of the Consul of the United States of America at this port, and against the Minister of the same-nation, resident at Lima, in the terms of the memorandum following:

Mr. Notary for Maritime Affairs: Be pleased to extend a protest in due form, which I, Peter Lautrup, captain: of the American steamer Itata, belonging to Henry L. Stevens, esq., and chartered by the South American Steamship Company, do make against the proceedings of Robert L. Clayton, esq., consul of the United States of America at this port, and of the honorable Richard Gibbs, minister of the same nation, resident at Lima, in the dispatch of the vessel under my command, and for their refusal to acknowledge the legality of the ship’s papers, which accredit the perfect right with which the steamer Itata flies the American flag.

The facts which occurred, to the truth and exactness of which I depose upon oath, are as follows:

On the seventeenth of February last past the steamer Itata was sold to Henry L. Stevens, esq., her actual proprietor, who, having previously complied with all the formalities prescribed by the laws of the United States of America, obtained from the vice-consulate of America at Valparaiso the corresponding bill of sale and certificate, and the authorization in form to bear the flag of the United States of America, and ask the protection of the authorities of that nation.

Provided with the certificate aforesaid and other sea-papers, which accredited the ownership which Mr. Henry L. Stevens has in the steamship Itata, under my command, and which justify and legitimate the use of the flag of the United States of America, which she flies, I sailed from Valparaiso and anchored in this bay of Callao on the twelfth of this present month, on which day I also delivered to Robert L. Clayton, esq., American consul at this port, the above-mentioned papers, which the said functionary did not object to on receiving them. Being, therefore, confident in the legality of these documents, which had not been challenged by the consular authority, I got the vessel under my command ready for her return voyage to Valparaiso, with the intention of making use of the same papers and of flying the same flag. But, to my surprise, I was notified yesterday, by an official letter of same date from the consul, R. L. Clayton, esq., not to make use of the flag of the United States of America.

In this official letter the consul sets forth to me, in compliance with instructions received from the honorable Richard Gibbs, the minister, that although the steamer Itata is under the protection of the authorities of the United States of America, as belonging to a citizen of that nation, she cannot fly or make use of the flag of that country. In view of this notification, which involves an illegal mandate, I, Peter Lautrup, captain of the steamer Itata, in protection of the rights of Mr. Stevens, the owner, and of those interested in the cargo, have applied to the legation of the Republic of Chili, asking for the necessary sea-letter and authorization to fly the Chilian flag during the voyage from this port to Valparaiso, which sea-letter and authorization I have received.

But as the proceedings of messieurs the said minister and consul of the United States of America, which I deem contrary to the laws of the nation they represent, occasions to the steamer Itata, to her owner, and to those interested in the cargo the damages they may estimate; as these proceedings have determined me in the resolution to change the American flag for the Chilian; and, finally, as it is necessary that these facts should appear by making the necessary protest in due form, in order that at the proper time, the convenient claims may be made, I, Peter Lautrup, captain of the steamer Itata, in the name and legal representation of Henry L. Stevens, esq,, the owner, do protest once and as often as it may be necessary against the aforementioned minister and consul of the United States of America, declaring that whatever claims for damages that may arise by reason of the above-recited facts are at the exclusive responsibility of those functionaries.

You, Mr. Notary, will cause it to so appear in safeguard of my own responsibility.

Callao, March fifteenth, one thousand eight hundred and seventy-nine, PETER LAUTRUP.

In testimony of all which, thus he said, did, and signed, the witnesses being Mr. Justice P. Flores, Mr. Michael Diaz, and Mr. Francis Soria, all of full age, and residents of this city, this instrument having previously been read to him, the formalties required by articles from seven hundred and thirty-five to seven hundred and thirty-eight of the code of legal procedure in civil matters having before been complied with, to all which I certify.

(Signed)

PETER LAUTRUP.

Witnesses:

Justice P. Flores.

Michael Diaz.

Francis Soria.

ALEXANDER O. DEUSTUA.
Notary Public and for Hypothecations.

The emendations “ton,” “sa,” “sa” having been made before signing.

His first copy agrees with the original, which appears on folio seven hundred and thirty-nine and over leaf of the protocol for the present biennial term, with which it has been collated and found to be true and correct; and in faith thereof I subscribe and make my notarial sign hereto the date of its execution.

[l. s.] (Signed)

ALEXANDER O. DEUSTUA,
Notary Public and of Maritime Hypothecations.

I, Raymon Rivera Jofié, consul-general of Chili in Peru, certify the authenticity of the preceding signature of Alexander O. Deustua, esq., notary public, of this city.

Callao, March 15th, 1879.
[l. s.] (Signed) R. RIVERA JOFIÉ.

[Inclosure 6 in No. 85.]

Mr. McKellar to Mr. Osborn.

United States Consulate at Valparaiso,
April 2, 1879.

Sir: Since my communication of the 27th ultimo, I have been informed by the house of J. T. Ramos, esq., at this port, that the barks Mathilde and Monroe, barkentine Franklin, and schooner Cobija, which during the year 1866 had been sold to an American citizen resident in this port, and flew the American flag until December 5, 1876, made voyages during that period to Eten and Cobija, always stopping at Callao, Iquique, and Arica on an average of three times a year at least, without their right to that flag being disputed by any of the United States consular officers at any of those ports or by the United States minister to Peru.

The bark Monroe sailed with that flag to Bordeaux and returned with a valuable cargo of sugar, and neither the consular, ministerial, nor naval authorities of the United States, nor the authorities of France, interposed a doubt as to her right to wear the flag of the United States.

Since the difficulty made by the United States minister to Peru, and the United States consul at Callao, instances are daily furnished to this consulate which show that those gentlemen are alone in the views they have, at last, suddenly taken as to the right of vessels wholly owned by United States citizens to bear the American flag to any part of the world, save those of the United States, according to the exceptions made by the consular regulations and acts of Congress. I refrain from mentioning them, however, as I should needlessly prolong my already lengthy argument.

I have, &c.,

P. A. McKELLAR,
United States Vice-Consul.

No. 87. Mr. Osborn to Mr. Evarts. [Document 102]

No. 87.
Mr. Osborn to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Santiago, Chili, April 3, 1879. (Received May 8.) No. 86.]

Sir: Following the events related in my dispatch No. 83 came the proclamation of the President of Bolivia, on the 1st of March, declaring war against Chili, and providing for the confiscation of the property of Chilians. Upon the receipt of this proclamation here, the Chilian land forces were ordered to advance upon Calama, and the naval force was directed to occupy Cobija and Tocopilla. The two latter places are the only Bolivian ports north of the 23d degree, and the former is a town of about five hundred people, in the valley of the Loa, some hundred miles from Antofagasta, and is supposed to have some strategic importance.

The two ports were taken possession of without trouble, but the secretary of war, who was in the vicinity, reports that at Calama the Ghili troops were seriously resisted.

A number were killed on both sides, but the Chilians triumphed, and the Bolivians who were not killed were taken prisoners. I judge, however, that there were not more than five hundred men engaged, all told. This is the only engagement of which advices have been received here.

Peru is giving the government and people here much more concern just now than is Bolivia.

Soon after the taking of Antofagasta the Government of Peru sent here an ambassador extraordinary, Señor Lavalle, with instructions to tender the good offices of his government in the settlement of the dispute with Bolivia, and to urge, earnestly, an amicable arrangement. Señor Lavalle was kindly received by the government, but among the people there has been an almost universal expression of displeasure at his coming. From day to day the newspapers have been filled with reports from the north tending to show that Peru is preparing herself for a struggle with her rival.

I was invited to an interview with the minister of foreign relations, and attended for that purpose at his official quarters, on the 29th ultimo.. Among other things he informed me that Chili was not satisfied with the attitude of Peru, and that Mr. Godoy, their minister at Lima, under instructions from his government, had demanded an answer from the Peruvian Government as to its purpose in the dispute between Chili and Bolivia. The answer was not, he said, satisfactory. In it was embodied an acknowledgment that there had existed for several years a secret alliance between Peru and Bolivia, the effect of which would be to force Peru into the conflict against Chili.

I told Mr. Fierro, the foreign minister, that I was sure that my government would be exceedingly sorry to hear of a war between these countries, and I urged him to neglect no opportunity to settle the dispute amicably. In response to a suggestion from him, I remarked that I did not doubt that the United States Government would cheerfully lend its efforts to an amicable arrangement of the difficulties if the governments engaged in the controversy should request it to do so, but that I trusted that they would be able to arrange it among themselves.

His language concerning the reply of Peru to Mr. Godoy led me to believe that war was almost certain to follow.

I had informed the minister some time previous of my intention to avail myself at a convenient time of the privilege granted me by my government to visit the United States, and he now expressed a very earnest wish, in behalf his government, that pending these difficulties I should remain in Chili. He seemed satisfied with my answer.

Minister Levalle is still in Santiago, and it is barely possible that Peru may yet remain out of the conflict. I don’t regard it as probable, however.

The minister informed me that the Chilian legation in Washington was about to be supplied with a minister, and that post would be filled by Don F. L. Asta-Buruaga. Mr. Asta-Buruaga formerly represented Chili at Washington in the same capacity. He has a high regard for our country, and I look upon his selection as a fit one. He will probably leave for the United States next week.

I inclose some slips cut from an English paper containing an article translated from the Diario Official of Santiago, upon the “Desert of Atacama and its resources.” The article will well repay a perusal.

I have, &c.

THOMAS A. OSBORN.

the desert of atacama and its resources.

[Translated from the “Diario Official.”]

1. Antofagasta.—This is the worst port in the Pacific; the only excuse for locating there the flourishing town which Chilian enterprise and industry has built, is the rudiamentary state of civilization prevailing in Bolivia. When the mining fever was at its height, the population amounted to upwards of 10,000. This was afterwards reduced to one-half by the decadence of Caracoles and the reaction naturally following on the first excitement; but latterly, confidence having been restored by the Chilian occupation, the population has doubled, counting the troops that have been sent there; so that it may be truly said, from Coquimbo northwards, it is the most populated port in Chili. It possesses several good hotels, a church, doctors, drug-stores, a cemetery, a well-supplied market, a theater, and several water-condensing machines, which provide a plentiful supply of the needed element at a relatively moderate price. The climate is healthy, and the temperature moderate and agreeable.

2. The roads leaving Antofagasta for the interior are three in number. The first starts in a southeasterly direction, and after touching at various nitrate deposits, terminates in the range called Cordon de Varas. The second makes a bend to the north-east, and then follows the same direction as the former: it also calls at various nitrate beds and ends at the same range. The third is the railway constructed by the Nitrate Company, the object of Bolivian avarice.

Let us take a seat in a car and pursue our way into the interior. At first the engine takes us in a southeast direction, then changes to east, and afterwards to the northeast. The first point we stop at is Salar del Carmen, headquarters of the great Nitrate Company—a magnificent establishment, where the traveler meets with every kind of resources, especially water in abundance, condensed by the company’s machines. The large number of workmen here, all Chilians, have laid the foundation of a town that time and labor will cause to progress with the rapidity of other places that were yesterday arid desert, and which the hand of man has converted into flourishing colonies.

3. From this place to Mantos Blancos the traveler sees only an extensive desert, where nature appears to sleep the sleep of ages. In the latter place there are several houses, the first being built by the Chilian don Zacarias Echiburú, where a tired traveler meets with good accommodation for himself and beast.

4. We continue on the same route till we arrive at Cuevitas, where there are a few houses. Provisions are scarce, and the only water is that brought by the trains.

5. Rising the same plateau we reach Salinitas, where abundance of everything is found. Here the Nitrate Company possesses an establishment, which, although on a smaller scale than the first, consists of several houses and a large number of workmen. The railway ends here, but it will doubtless soon be continued to Caracoles. In Salinitas the traveler finds good hotels, goats, fowls, &c.; and numerous carriages, carts, mules, &c., to convey him to Caracoles, Sierra Gorda, Rebosadero de Cobre, &c.

6. Leaving Salinitas, we arrive at Punta Negra after a journey of twelve leagues. Here is only an ordinary inn and a few houses. The water used is brought from Salinitas.

7. After a journey of eight or nine leagues from Punta Negra, we find ourselves in the famous mineral region of Caracoles. Before 1870, that which has been the object of so many golden dreams and febrile aspirations, only offered to the eye of the traveler yawning ravines and inhospitable desert, till the hand of man awoke nature from the lethargy in which she was bound. Then, the Chilian miners, “shedding in streams those tears of the body called the sweat of labor, snatched from the rocks the riches buried within them, and converted this solitary region into the busy scene now called Caracoles. Early in May, 1868, the first expedition left Valparaiso bound for the Bolivian desert, consisting of only two daring explorers—Don Emilio E. Garin and Don Maximiano Agurto. Arrived at Cobija, they were under the necessity of disguising the real object of their voyage, in order to avoid the ridicule of little minds, who considered it quite absurd enough to think of such a daring enterprise. Provided with the necessaries for the journey, the two first Chilian explorers penetrated into the dessert—the vanguard of the army of civilization which subsequently subdued these bar-fen regions to the hand of man. After exploring for many months in every direction the mountains and ravines of that territory from the Pacific to the Argentine frontier, they returned to Chili, out of supplies and overcome with privations, relating as they went the news of the great wealth concealed in that ocean of sand and rock called the desert of Atacama. This stimulated and encouraged other explorers and resulted in the discovery of the wealthy district, without—mystery of destiny!—profiting in any way its original initiators. Vicissitudes peculiar to such expeditions and such places prevented them reaching the cerros fajados (now Caracoles), notwithstanding they were in sight after a long journey in their direction, so difficult that the explorers were obliged to return owing to some unforseen accident.”

8. Within a short time after the discovery of Caracoles, more than 5,000 applications for mining claims were sent in, and the population exceeded 10,000. The absence of all the necessaries of life did not appall our enterprising fellow-countrymen. Water was at first brought from Limon Verde, nine leagues to the northwest; although of good quality it was not very abundant, so that it was found necessary to bring more from Calama, until the springs called Diaz Gana were discovered; this water, though bad and stinted at first, has been improved both in quantity and quality by proper means. From these springs, situated six leagues to the northeast of the mineral, from those of Sierra Alto, at ten leagues to the east, and from various others recently found, sufficient water is obtained for a numerous population. There are machines for distilling it, so that at present it is obtained in a perfectly potable condition. Caracoles possesses a church, cemetery, several hotels, market, cuartel, jail, and a school; its population now exceeds 5,000 souls. There are several amalgamating works of great importance, and the edifices of the mining companies as well as many commercial establishments are of the first order. Besides the private drug stores belonging to the mining companies, there are others in the town, and some doctors.

9. There are several roads leading from the coast to Caracoles, and thence to other points. That of Mejillones, which is the shortest, starts from that port in a southeast direction, then turns to the north, passing by Naguayan, where are mines of silver and copper, and afterwards goes east, passing by Sierra Gorda the spring called el pozo de la Victoria, and ends at Caracoles. That of Tames, which starts from Cobija, follows a southerly direction for about seven leagues, then turns east, joining the Mejillones road at various points in the desert, and follows the same route. At twelve leagues from Punta Tames it divides in two, one leading off to Miscanti. Another road leaves Cobija towards the north, to the Gatico cove, follows the same direction with an easterly inclination till arriving at the Cuesta de la Paciencia; on the summit of this, after a distance of five leagues, it turns east, passes by Culupo, a post supplied with water from the Loa, and touches at Chacance and Miscanti. Here it separates into two, one of which goes east to Calama, and the other southeast to Caracoles.

10. From Tocopilla starts the best road of all; it leads to Culupito and Chacance, and thence to Caracoles. We should observe that all these, except that of Tames, are cart-roads, the last named and that of Antofagasta being preferable, as well on account of the water as the topography of the country.

11. On leaving the coast for Caracoles we have touched at Chacance and Miscanti. The first of these is situated at an equal distance from Tocopilla and Caracoles, twenty-five leagues more or less from each. It lies in the bed of the Loa, and there is a smelting works and a few private houses there. Around the township there are a few (twenty or twenty-five) cuadras of pasture; the inhabitants number about one hundred. The second is a post maintained by the Bolivian Government, and is also situated in the bed of the Loa; and though the traveler finds there some resources, its soil is not cultivated like that of Chacance, for which reason it looks arid and gloomy. The number of inhabitants is small.

12. At three leagues from Miscanti is met a kind of village, called Huacate, situated on the Loa, and comprising a smelting establishment and some six houses. As in Chacance, there are twenty-five cuadras of pasture, and no lack of provisions. Its population does not exceed twenty. From here there is another road leading to Caracoles, passing by the springs already named as the pozo de la Victoria.

13. We will now occupy ourselves with the roads leaving Caracoles for the interior. These are four in number. The first goes by the west side of the Limon Verde hills, passing by the springs of the same name, sufficient for about sixty persons with their horses, and ends at Calama. The second crosses the same range and also ends at Calama, but without meeting with any water for the whole distance. The third, passing by the east side of the Limon Verde hills, forms an imperfect ellipse with the first named, and terminates at Calama like the others, but without meeting water; in the middle of the road another branches off which leads to Chiuchiu, where abundance of necessaries are met with. The fourth, the Atacama road, leaves Caracoles in a northeast direction till reaching the place called Los Cerrillos; here it turns to the east as far as Tambores, where a few stone-sheds are found which serve for shelter. Two leagues before reaching this spot exist the walls of an old post, which may be of some service to the traveler. Three leagues to the northwest the springs called La Teca are found, sufficient for about sixty horsemen. From Tambores the road continues to the east, with a slight southerly inclination (east one-quarter south) till arriving at Atacama, previously passing by the broad glen called Paciencia, and the incline going down to the river of Atacama, two leagues before arriving at the city of this name, the road here lying along the river bed.

14. Calama is situated about a league to the north of the Loa, on a plain formed by the river and the deposits from the hills to the north, and comprising a space of some eight square leagues. The town is composed of some sixty houses, and the inhabitants number 500. The houses are badly constructed, and the remains of many are found that have been destroyed by the frequent earthquakes, which easily occurs in consequence of the material used—pieces of caliche cut in the form of adobes—and the shifting nature of the soil where they are situated.

It possesses a Catholic church in very bad condition, a cemetery completely open, and an edifice which serves as a cuartel, a jail, and the habitation of the authorities. The best buildings are the houses of Dorado and Artola. The inhabitants most well to do are four, the richest not being worth over $50,000. The soil is only fit for pasture, which is very poor, and for the chircas, which grow spontaneously and are used for fencing. Calama is not so abundant in resources as Caracoles, but fresh beef and mutton and some fowls are met with. The waters of the Loa, which supply the town, from two leagues west of Chiuchiu are distasteful and unhealthy, affecting the respiratory organs, and creating corns or warts on the hands, for which reason they should be used with caution. They serve to wash clothes, however, equal to soap, but they destroy them. The temperature is dry, and fatal for those who use alcoholic liquors or keep late hours. The prevailing sickness is the puntada or costado, which only arises from a disordered mode of living. Although a disease so fatal that in three days it kills a patient, it maybe easily cured, by mixing a yolk of egg with eight grams of powdered incense, taken every morning, fasting, for three consecutive days This is the only remedy used for this disease in all the interior of Bolivia. Calama being the point of union of all the roads leading from the interior and exterior, its strategical position is of the greatest importance. It is twenty leagues distant from Caracoles.

15. From Calama starts the main cart-road leading to the interior, passing through Chiuchiu, Santa Barbara, and other places. Chiuchiu is situated on the southern bank of the Loa, distant 9 leagues to the east of Calama, and about 25 to the N. ¼ E. of Caracoles. Its population amounts to 300 inhabitants, between Bolivians and Chilians; the town consists of about 40 houses, counting the church and the “town hall,” which serves as cuartel, jail, and quarters of the local authority, who is a correjidor, as in Calama. This town is an ancient post, sustained by the Bolivian Government. It is well off for fresh provisions, and has some pasture of as bad quality as that of Calama, and which extends over some 100 cuadras. Here the waters of the Loa are not injurious, as at Calama, but they are useless for irrigation, only a few algarrobos and chañares being raised. Here is situated the smelting works of Don Francisco Rivas, whose value amounts to $100,000. The temp erature is milder than that of Calama, and the climate is healthier, though the same diseases prevail here whose treatment Ave have before detailed. Four or five leagues to the east, upon the same river, there is more pasture, as also maize, barley, and potatoes, of excellent quality but limited quantity.

16. Seven leagues further on, and to the east of Chiuchiu, are situated the hills called Care anal, a most dangerous place for an army. From these hills start upwards of 70 ravines, very near to each other (from one cuadra to two or three) and running east and west. Their average depth is thirty meters, many reaching to seventy. At the head of three or four of these ravines are springs of potable water, near which a few families of Indians dwell with their flocks, whose number never exceeds 150 head.

This region, viewed from the north, west, and south, represents a plain, inclined towards the west, the precipices it contains not being observable, from which reason a number of explorers have perished there.

Four or five leagues to the north of Care anal, traversing the great ravine through which passes the road to La Paz, on an elevated hill is found the dwelling of an Indian on the edge of a scanty spring, overlooking the roads leading to the interior, the course of the Loa, about a mile distant, and the circumjacent valleys. It is one of the best points for a fortress.

17. About nine leagues from Chiuchiu is the gold-mining district called Conchi, where now only vestiges of some old and rich mines are found; but there exist abundant springs of good water. To the east of these hills, and at their termination, about two leagues before arriving at Santa Barbara, are some elevations suitable for the erection of forts, they also commanding all the roads leading to the interior.

18. The principal roads leaving Chiuchiu are three in number, and all lead to Atacama by different routes. The first takes a southeast direction, touches at the watering place called Teca, Tambores, Paciencia Valley, and rising the cuesta, descends to the Atacama River, and thence to the town of the same name. The second takes almost the same direction, but separates from the former between three and five leagues out, and touches at the Posta del Inca (where there is water for about 100 horsemen), at Alto de la Cruz, and on arriving at Paciencia Valley, again joins the first. The third starts in an east and south direction, passing by the river Salado, which is about midway between Chiuchiu and Aiquina, touches at the latter place, and thence leads to some Indian dwellings at the base (west side) of the hill Inacaliri; it goes on to Caspana, to San Bartolo (a copper mine of Artola), and descends by the ravine of the Atacama River till reaching the town of the same name.

None of these roads are fit for carts, except for a short distance; the best is the first named, although the third is better, topographically speaking. We should add that all these roads except that of Aiquina, cross at the hills of Teca and Alto de la Cruz.

19. Let us enumerate the points touched at by the last of these roads, which we have not yet described.

Rio Salado is formed by the waters of the Cordilleras near Aiquina, and those of Caspana and Tatio, and runs north and south as far as Aiquina; it turns then to the northeast, and joins the Loa two leagues west of Chiuchiu. Its waters are disagreeable and unhealthy, and it is for this reason that those of the Loa are spoiled from their confluence with them.

20. Aiquina is a township nine leagues to the E. ¼ S. of Chiuchiu, situated in the ravine of the Salado, and possesses some 12 to 16 houses. It is supplied with tolerably good water from some springs of the same river. Meat is found here, potatoes brought from Caspana, and a few fowls. The inhabitants do not exceed 30. There is a church also, which is the best of these regions after that of Atacama.

Crossing the hills of Inacaliri and Bupo, about a league and a half to the east of Aiquina, a place is found called Inacaliri, the dwelling of some 12 Indians, who possess some flocks scattered about the valley, amounting altogether to 400 to 500 head; about an equal quantity exist at Aiquina and its neighborhood. A little further to the south of the residence of these Indians, three leagues more or less, rises the Loa; still more south, after a journey of five or six leagues, and crossing the hills where the Loa springs, is found the excellent and abundant watering place called El Cajon.

To the southwest of Aiquina are found some hills running north and south; at the latter of the extremities lie the ruins of an ancient Indian town, about five leagues from Aiquina.

Two roads leave Aiquina to the small valley of Inacaliri; one passes at the foot and north side of Cerro Bupo, and the other at the south side of Cerro Inacaliri, distant one from the other about three leagues. Both are so rugged that a very small force could defend the passage into the interior.

We should observe that these roads are provided with water, firewood, and even with flocks, belonging to the Indians dwelling here. Leaving Aiquina for the south by the road previously mentioned, at six leagues distant Caspana is reached, the residence of a few Indians. Here is the best water of this district, a few pasture fields, and a small plantation of potatoes. Maize and barley are also raised on the same limited scale as in Chiuchiu and Calama. Firewood is not scarce in proportion to the number of the inhabitants, who do not exceed 40.

Following in the same direction (S. ¼ E.), after a journey of 12 leagues we arrive at San Bartolo, where Artola’s copper-mining works are situated, whose cost is estimated at $400,000. To reach the establishment we have to descend a very rugged ravine, about 60 meters in depth vertically, which seems placed there purposely to try the patience of the traveler, after having traversed twelve leagues of the worst road imaginable. The works possess all kinds of resources.

About 200 peones are employed, mostly Chilians. In the quebrada there are pieces of ground sown with alfalfa of very good quality, and which together would amount to 40 or 50 square cuadras in extent, belonging to Artola. The road continues through the quebrada to Atacama, where we arrive after passing the river 72 times. This part of the road is the pleasantest and most picturesque. Here we meet with bits of green and beautiful pasture; there with capricious and brilliantly white figures in salt, formed on the shores by the waters of the Atacama, with which, though brackish, the fatigued traveler joyfully refreshes his parched throat. If the roads previously passed have been full of difficulty, the pleasanter becomes this stretch of nine leagues, which recall at every step the valleys of the cordilleras of the center of Chili. All the road from San Bartolo to Atacama offers no difficulty to the traveler, even at the river fords; and although it is not fit for vehicles, it could easily be made so. The various pieces of pasture met with here and there would amount together to about 60 square cuadras. Neither are wanting some handsome algarrobos and chañares between San Bartolo and Atacama.

21. At ten leagues from the Andes, and between the rivers Bilama and Atacama, is situated the town bearing the name of the last of these rivers. Both rise in the cordillera of the Andes, and pass, the one to the south of the town, and the second to the north. Their course runs from east to west, inclining to the south, and at Atacama take the latter direction, losing themselves at three leagues from the town, forming the vegas called Salinas de Atacama, which are increased by other rills flowing from the same range. The town of Atacama is the largest in the desert, and contains more than 200 houses. In the plaza, which is small, are found the “town hall,” the residence of the sub-prefect, the school and church, cuartel, jail, and courthouse. Its streets are narrow and badly laid out. From leaving Calama this is the only place where a regular hotel is found, provided even with a billiard-table. Although there are neither druggists nor markets, their places are supplied by various houses of commerce.

The town possesses abundant resources, especially in animals, and in merchandise imported from the Argentine Republic and the coast. Everything here is relatively cheap. The population, including the suburbs, is about 1,500, mostly Indians; the rest are Bolivians, Argentines, and a few Chilians. The pasture lands adjoining the town are of excellent quality, and occupy an extent of 1,300 square cuadras. All classes of vegetables and fruit trees are cultivated, the waters of the Atacama being used for irrigation, those of the Bilama being prejudicial to all plants except alfalfa chañares, and algarrobos. On each of these rivers there is a mill, where the wheat and maize raised are ground.

The town of Atacama is a “dry port” (puerto seco), where all the roads join leading from the Argentine Republic, by which great herds of animals are brought for Peru, Bolivia, and the coast, this being the only place where they can be conveniently rested and refreshed. For this reason Atacama is a place of the greatest importance it is the key of the desert, and with a little trouble, by establishing forts on the cuesta where the roads descend from Caracoles, Calama, and Chiuchiu, on the banks of the Bilama, and at the grotto of San Pedro, it would become an impregnable place, and might deprive the towns of the coast and a large part of the interior of Bolivia of provisions.

Its climate and temperature are the best of all the coast, but the puntada or custado prevails, whose treatment we have already mentioned at § 14.

22. A league and a half to the west of Atacama is the beautiful grotto of San Pedro. It is about two cuadras in length, and on entering one is surprised with the singular beauty of the stalactites and stalagmites of the whitest salt, which in capricious forms decorate the interior of a handsome Gothic temple. The walls of the grotto are covered throughout their extent with this crystallized salt, and it has a beautiful effect with the lights that one uses in visiting the grotto. This salt is used for all domestic purposes in its natural state, without any preparation.

By the west side of the grotto and by the Paciencia Valley a cart-road can be easily made, communicating with Caracoles, Calama, and Chiuchiu.

23. Two roads lead from Atacama to the Argentine Republic. By the first, after a journey of five leagues, we arrive at Tambillo, where are the borax works of SS. Dorado, and where we find potable water for some hundred riders. Salt-water is very abundant, and it would not cost much to purify it. Two leagues from Tambillo, and a mile and a half from the road towards the east, is the quebrada of Zapar, where there are about 120 cuadras of alfalfa, a few algarrobos and flocks belonging to Indians, and abundant and excellent water. In the same quebrada are thermal springs bearing a high reputation in Atacama.

Journeying toward the south, we come to Toconao, the most beautiful oasis of the desert, in the depths of a quebrada, with good and abundant water and a plantation of 16 square cuadras, where grow in full vigor all kinds of fruit-trees, especially figs. There is a chapel and a few houses, some belonging to residents and others to well-to-do persons in Atacama, who, come to spend the summer in this beautiful spot. The flocks number about 300, besides asses and mules. To the east, and about two leagues distant in the same quebrada, lies the oasis called Queri, with plantations, pasture, and flocks similar to Toconao, but with fewer houses. Following the same road, and in the same southerly direction, we find in the quebradas of the Cordillera the places called Záncon, Camas, Socaire, and Peine, distant one from another from five to seven leagues; they mostly contain small pieces of pasture, good water, and a few flocks of sheep.

Leaving Peine, which with Camas is the most important of the four last named places, after a journey of five leagues, we come to Tilomonte, where the natural grass only is found, water, a dwelling of Indians, and a few head of sheep. Following the road in the same direction, by the center of the first cordillera, at 15 leagues distance are Pajonal and Pular, small places of no more importance than Tilomonte. Eight leagues from Pajonal is situated Socompa, of the same category; here the road turns to the east, and at 12 leagues touches at Antofaya, Antoiayita, and Antofagasta, lying 18 leagues distant from one another. All are situated in the center of the cordilleras, the most important being Antofaya, for its abundant natural grasses and flocks. Here are found a few Indian dwellings, and it is the meeting point of the Argentine herdsmen, where they refresh their animals. All these lands were purchased by General Melgarejo, but the Bolivian Government confiscated them. In Antofagasta concludes the road, which passes to the Argentine Republic as far as Salta and San Juan. If we pursue the second road, which leads from west to east, ten leagues from Atacama, we shall pass by the foot of the cerro Licancaur, which lies to-the north of the road, and where rich silver deposits are said to exist. It is the highest hill of these ranges, and shows like a sugar-loaf viewed from the west. Three leagues from ticancaur the road divides in three; one enters the cordillera and leads to Jujui, in a southeasterly direction; another leads to the east to Incahuasi, an important place, where dwell the Indians called Esquiveles, who possess a large number of alpacas (1,000), llamas (700), and sheep (600). This point is distant 60 leagues from Atacama; and hence, seven leagues to the east is the small silver-mining township of Lipez, where Señores Aramayo possess an establishment costing upward of $300,000. It has a chapel, many houses, and 500 inhabitants, and was formerly much more peopled. The necessaries of life are not scarce. Here the road takes a north one-quarter east direction, and leads to La Paz. The other road enters the Cordilleras, touches at Canchas Blancas, and other points, and arrives at Potosí. All these roads which pass by the upper plateaus of the cordillera abound in many places in natural grasses, though also possessing large tracts exceedingly arid.

Besides the roads enumerated, starting from Atacama, there is another, which, leading in a southerly direction by the edge of the salinas, touches at Tambillo, Carvajal,, Quelama, Ciñnaga Redonda, and Tiloposo; then bending to the S. ¼ E. and passing through the range in the middle of the desert, calls at Puquios, Punta Negra, el Profeta, Sandon, Juncal, and ends at Chañaral. From Tiloposo leads another road, which takes a southwest direction and passes through Imilar, Aguas Blacas, and ends at Botija. At all these places water of bad quality is found.

24. Twenty leagues northeast of Atacama are the hills called Machucas, from a tribe of Indians of that name, who live there, and possess about 300 llamas and as many sheep. There is also house accommodation for about 200 persons, plenty of good water, forming the chief affluent of the Atacama, some pieces of natural pasture, and firewood.

25. To the north of Machuca, and 25 leagues from Atacama, is situated the active volcano Tatio. At the foot of this in a northeast direction are numerous beautiful fountains, which, as they are injurious, we will describe in detail. Those most to the north, on the edge of the hill, and about in the middle of the quebrada, contain a green-colored water charged with sulphate of copper, and is consequently poisonous. Those following towards the south have their waters white as milk, and contain carbonate of magnesia, potash, sulphur, and other substances. In those most to the south, the water runs over a bed of carbonate of iron for a distance of six quadras; these are crystalline and excellent for drinking. Not many years ago an arriero let his mules drink at a place where some of these streams mix with that of the green-colored water; all died. The traveler can never find a more surprising and marvelous spectacle than that offered to his view in the valley situated at the foot and to the east of Mount Tatio. A sheet of mineral substances white as snow covers all the valley, with beautiful fountains here and there, like those in our public promenades, throwing continuous streams to the height of even five meters, being highest early in the morning. In the midst of these innumerable fountains is found a block of stone, a yard high, in whose center the sediment of the volcanic waters has formed a globe of veined stone of various colors, through the midst of which several springs of water spout forth with great force.

We close our description of the desert here, with the remark that if we have not been more minute in our details, it has been because we consider them unnecessary under the present circumstances, and reserve them for a future opportunity, when the pacific possession of the territory shall have encouraged our citizens and led them to explorations as daring as those realized up to the present time.

No. 88. Mr. Osborn to Mr. Evarts. [Document 103]

No. 88.
Mr. Osborn to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Santiago, Chili, April 10, 1879. (Received May 18.) No. 89.]

Sir: As will be seen from, the inclosed translation of a note received by me from the minister of foreign relations, war was formally declared against Peru on the 5th instant, and on the same day the port of Iquique was placed in blockade by the Chilian squadron.

The government promises a statement of the reasons for its action, for the information of friendly governments, in a few days. Awaiting it, I inclose a slip from a newspaper containing the “memorandum,” published in the Official Gazette simultaneously with the declaration of war.

The army is being rapidly increased, and there is apparently no abatement in the enthusiasm.

Iquique is the great niter depot of Peru, and is situated about midway in the province of Tarapaca, from north to south. This province extends to the Bolivian frontier on the north, and is supposed to contain almost inexhaustible wealth in its niter and guano deposits. If Chili succeeds in getting possession of Tarapaca she will, I judge, insist upon holding it. An intelligent gentleman with whom I have conversed upon the subject, and who formerly lived in Tarapaca, estimates the value of its niter deposits alone at tour hundred millions of dollars.

I have, &c.,

THOMAS A. OSBORN.

[Inclosure in No. 89.]

Republic of Chili, Ministry of Foreign Relations,
Santiago, April 9, 1879.

Señor: I have the honor to inform you, pursuant to special orders received from his excellency the President of the republic, that on the 5th instant war was declared against the Government of Peru.

The reasons which obliged my government to take that hard but necessary resolution will be in a short time communicated to you.

At the same time it becomes my duty to announce to you that on the date above indicated the maritime forces of Chili placed in blockade the port of Iquique.

In requesting that you will please place these facts within the knowledge of your government, it affords me pleasure to offer to you the assurances of high consideration with which,

I am, &c.,

ALEJANDRO FIERRO.

No. 89. Mr. Osborn to Mr. Evarts. [Document 104]

No. 89.
Mr. Osborn to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Santiago, Chili, April 19, 1879. (Received May 27.) No. 92.]

Sir: By this mail I have the honor to forward a copy of the manifesto of the Chilian Government, addressed to friendly nations, in justification of the declaration of war against Peru, in Spanish, as also a copy of the Chilian Times, containing a translation of the same in English.

I have, &c.,

THOMAS A. OSBORN.

[Inclosure in dispatch No. 92.]

manifesto of the chilian government to the representatives of friendly powers, with reference to the declaration of war against peru.

[Translated from the Diario Oficial.]

Ministry of Foreign Affairs,
Santiago, April 12, 1879.

Mr. Minister: Annexed to the present note you will find a copy of the official gazette of Chili, from which you will learn the authority conferred on my government by the high authorities of the state to declare war against Peru, and conduct it to an end by all the means recognized by the rights of nations, and with all the resources at the disposal of the country.

By order of his excellency the President of the republic, I fulfill the duty of informing you of the grave causes that have led to the formation of this unavoidable though lamentable resolution, which breaks old ties that Chili has always endeavored to strengthen.

The government, in whose name I have the honor of speaking, flatters itself with the hope that the calm judgment of that represented by your excellency will duly appreciate the conduct that Chili has observed, in this emergency—as foreign to her character and tradition as contrary to her dearest interests.

The especial characteristic of this country, the constant tendency of its foreign policy, and even its social and economic necessities, have withdrawn it from all spirit of adventure, and have stimulated it to maintain the most friendly relations with all nations. Chili lives by peace and industry; requires as a prime element of its prosperity, foreign immigration; and possessing a vast territory only partially fertilized by the rude labor of its sons, requires more than any people foreign and internal tranquillity.

The latter has been obtained, thanks to the frank adoption of a system by which all the public powers emanate from the national vote; and clearly is it proved, by the history of many years, that it has always endeavored to avoid conflict with foreign nations. The republic can show with legitimate pride that it has never been sparing of its blood or resources whenever it has been embarked in a noble cause, and much less when to it have been united the interests of this continent; but it can also declare with no less satisfaction that, though always ready to defend outraged rights, it has syteniatically avoided all provocation, even under circumstances that would have authorized it. Only a few months-ago it has given a new proof of the traditional character of its policy, by submitting to the honorable solution of arbitration an old and vexed question it sustained against a neighboring power, although it had to yield to the uncertainty of a sentence, rights to which the national sentiment attached great importance. From this it will be easy for your excellency to deduce that Chili, in forgetting its historic conduct and the necessities of its situation, has done so only by the irresistible force of evident justice and in obedience to the clearest demands on its dignity.

My government very recently complied with its duty in manifesting to those with whom it has the pleasure to maintain cordial relations, the circumstances which obliged it to declare at an end the treaty existing with Bolivia, and to occupy the territory lying between parallels 23 and 24 S. lat.

Subsequently, and without previous declaration of war, the President of Bolivia issued a decree emanating from his single will, by which he expelled Chilian citizens from that state, confiscated their property, and sequestrated the products of the industry and capital of this country.

It is unnecessary to recapitulate the bonds uniting the two nations, confirmed by solemn treaties, never respected by our neighbors; unnecessary to repeat that since 1866 till the occupation of Antofagasta on February 14 of this year, my government, by a series of concessions more or less valuable, had arrived at the last sacrifice in order to maintain peace.

If Chili has been forced into war, it is not through its own act, but is the unavoidable consequence of the extraordinary conduct observed by the government of La Paz. This, on one hand, declined to fulfill the treaty of 1874, in virtue of which, and by whose sole title, it occupied conditionally the territory whose possession was transferred by the treaty mentioned. On the other it refused the honorable resource of arbitration, pretending to constitute itself absolute judge of the interpretation and practical application of the rights and duties established by the mutual sanction of both nations.

From whatever point of view the severest impartiality may consider the irregular proceedings of the Bolivian authorities, we feel convinced that the friendly powers whose opinion we so much esteem will recognize, in homage to the strictest justice, that the situation imposed on Chili by a will not its own, indicated one sole course as possible in protection of its decorum.

My government nevertheless, in spite of antecedents that perhaps should have indicated a different course, wished to limit itself to pointing out the natural consequences of the rupture of the treaty of 1874. If it be undeniable that before the treaty of 1866 the territory comprised between parallels 23 and 24 belonged to Chili by right and by the constant exercise of veritable possession; if it be true that it was ceded to Bolivia by the treaty of 1874 on the emphatic condition that no new taxes should be levied on Chilian industry and capital; and if, in fine, it is the melancholy truth, proved by public documents of the Bolivian Government, that it, turning a deaf ear to all remonstrance, ceased in truth to impose taxation, but rendered illusory the right of property recognized by its own laws—it was necessary on the part of Chili to replace things in the state in which they stood before the extraordinary violation of the treaty mentioned.

This violent act of Bolivia was necessarily followed by the occupation of the consideration ceded, on the ground of nonfulfillment of the conditions. This sufficiently explains the landing of our troops at Antofagasta, so that in attributing to this the character of a belligerent act, the antecedents of the conflict are deliberately disregarded. In order to avoid the occupation, Bolivia possessed the means open to the commonest honesty—viz, promising to respect the treaty of 1874. This would have been the course of a civilized nation, for no reasoning, no protest, can defend the unjust sentence Bolivia claimed to give in the question: to retain the territory it owed to the liberality of Chili, and at the same time to break the fundamental condition of the concession.

It is painful, but at the same time indispensable, to bring to the memory of friendly powers another evident reason that my government could have wished not to reveal, out of respect to a State of the same origin. Official documents, and still more, the private history of Chilian industry on the coast between 23° and 24° S. lat., are witnesses that cannot be refuted to the fact that since 1866 to the date of the occupation of Antofagasta, the Bolivian Government appears to have conceived, organized, and put in practice an inflexible system of persecution against the development of Chilian enterprises which have been the only origin and the principal element of the wealth of that locality, never suspected and never stimulated by the private industry or national protection of Bolivia.

The capital of this republic, and that developed under the protection of our laws without distinction of nationality, being embarked in costly speculations, my government could not view with indifference the adoption by Bolivia of special measures tending to place Chilians in an exceptional situation. Soon after the treaty of 1866, and then after that of 1874, the painful certainty was realized that in Bolivia no idea existed of individual guarantees. Taxes were imposed under the pretext of municipal rates; disgraceful punishments were inflicted by the authorities on citizens of this republic; and finally, a Chilian enterprise for the working of nitrate beds, authorized by the Bolivian Government, afforded a pretext for a law irreconcilable with the most essential stipulation of the treaty of 1874.

My government could not and ought not abandon its citizens to the caprice of that of Bolivia, and less to the discretion of its subalterns; and the official documents inserted in the reports of the ministry of foreign affairs since 1866 render unnecessary any additional proof that since then till now it has been impossible to restrain the action of the Bolivian authorities.

These precedents showed sufficiently that the occupation of Antofagasta was urgently required, through the violation of the treaty; and my government found itself under the necessity of ordering it, for the protection of interests and persons threatened by measures which respected no rights whatever.

The occupation effected on February 14 could not be considered as a declaration of war, and still less as a threat on the part of my government against the sovereignty of Bolivia. Nor was it reasonable to suppose that the cabinet of Santiago intended to modify the geographical limits of the neighboring nations. In this conflict, which never would have arisen if even a show of respect had been evinced for the spirit and letter of treaties, what this republic has aimed at from the beginning, with the greatest frankness, was to defend its national rights and protect private property. Before 1866 we possessed effectively up to the parallel 23. By the treaty of that year we accepted the exploitation in common up to parallel 25; and subsequently we fixed the limits of Chili at 24°, on condition of the neighboring republic leaving our industry free from any new exaction.

The situation of the two republics seemed to be clear enough. Chili renounced its effective possession up to lat. 23° S.; Bolivia ceded its fantastic pretensions up to lat. 24°; and both countries, respecting the fact that Antofagasta, Mejillones, Caracoles, and Salinas were of Chilian creation, agreed to guarantee the freedom of the industries established in those regions. This undoubtedly imported an immense sacrifice to Chili, considering that she not only ceded to Bolivia a territory in dispute, but also a large area over which her title could not have been questioned for a moment.

The antecedents of the treaty of 1866 and the negotiations which resulted in that of 1874 are the most evident proofs that Chili, far from desiring the extension of its limits recognized under the colonial regimé, only sought an arrangement that permitted the untrammeled exercise of Chiliau industry, not withstanding the appropriation by Bolivia of the territory that we possessed.

It is unnecessary to dwell upon the right of a sovereign state to claim from another with which it contracted the fulfillment of its stipulations, and the no less indisputable faculty to employ the means of enforcement which the law of nations has placed in use. Although the proceeding of my government was open to no objection, considering that the conflict with Bolivia in no way affected Peru, we wished to give the latter a proof of our friendship by informing it fully of whatever transpired, calling previously its attention to the necessary results of a groundless complication.

The Lima cabinet knew, therefore, everything concerning the negotiations at La Paz; it could appreciate the tenacious resistance opposed to the conciliatory proposals of our chancellery; and it also knew that such proposals were replied to by unheard of acts of violent spoliation. In spite of this, that cabinet, so zealous for the peace of America, which has assumed at the eleventh hour the charge of Bolivia, could find then—when an opportunity offered for it to fulfill its duty—not a single word nor course whatever to avert a conflict in which it may now he said Peru represented a secret rôle by no means in conformity with its much-talked-of highhandedness.

It was our duty then to confide in the loyalty of Peru; still more, we had the right to demand it, either on the ground of a sincere friendship, or as a slight return for the blood of our citizens and our treasure spent in giving that country a nationality, and defending it at the price of our own ruin.

It was natural for us to give faith to the professions of neutrality which the Peruvian Government transmitted to us through our plenipotentiary; and to consider as friendly the intimation given us by that cabinet, that until war was declared it must permit the passage of Bolivian troops through its territory, in virtue of a previous treaty.

There were, however, various antecedents which contradicted in a great measure the declarations that now we may stigmatize as insidious, with full knowledge of the circumstances. The President of Peru did not hesitate to express his fears for the pressure that might be brought to bear in an opposite sense by a reckless popular opinion. He hinted at the not improbable event of the action of the authorities^ being interfered with, and recognized the influence of certain circles whose disaffection to Chili is only founded on the childish jealousy with which our prosperity is regarded.

This caused my government to observe an attitude of vigilant expectation. According to the rules regulating the relations of friendly powers, it would have been rash to provoke a definitive situation; but according to the claims of our own responsibility and dignity, we were bound to prepare for any emergency.

This explains the reception accorded to the extraordinary legation from Peru which arrived at Santiago at the beginning of March, with words of peace and conciliation.

The nature of the complication with Bolivia did not exclude the possibility of some arrangement, as it was not our desire to make war unnecessarily. My government, however, believed that all mediation under the then circumstances was inopportune; that it had even been so when on a previous occasion it had been offered by the chargé d’affaires of Peru; and that the cabinet of Lima had lost the occasion of interposing its friendly offices, even if it had at any time professed them.

When the government of La Paz showed itself deaf to all remonstrance; when its only argument was decrees violatory of the treaty of 1874; when it replied to pacific indications by the enforcement of the law of 1878 which implicitly abrogated its recent pledges to Chili; then indeed mediation would have been practicable, supposing that Peru had possessed the real character of an honorable mutual friend.

Believing firmly that mediation for the moment was groundless, my government yet considered that such belief was not incompatible with hearing the ideas of the Peruvian Government, transmitted by its representative, Don José Antonio de Lavalle. At the preliminary conference held by the undersigned with Señor Lavalle, it appeared that the object of the mission was to exchange ideas and make general observations on the Chilino-Bolivian question. As then the belief became more pronounced in the existence of a secret treaty of alliance, concluded in the year 1873 between Peru and Bolivia, it seemed advisable to interrogate Señor Lavalle concerning an event of such importance; and as at the same time an unusual activity was observable in the army and navy of Peru, explanations were demanded as to the signification and object of such preparations.

Señor Lavalle gave the following reply:

“That he had no knowledge of the treaty alluded to; that he believed it had no “existence; that it could not have been approved by the Congress of 1873, because the “legislature being biennial till the constitutional reform of 1878, that assembly did not “meet in that year; and that he was sure it was not approved on the following years, “during which he had the honor of presiding over the diplomatic committee of Congress, at which such negotiation would necessarily have had to be discussed. But “nevertheless, as since his arrival in Chili he had heard the existence of this treaty “spoken of, he had asked instructions from his government, which he would communicate “immediately they were received.”

Respecting the belligerent attitude which Peru commenced to assume, its representative attributed it to the special condition of its territory, and to the necessity of preventing its violation by the operations of the belligerents, which it was reasonable to anticipate, as the Bolivians had invaded it even in cases of internal commotion.

These explanations were not tranquillizing, because they were not conclusive, and confirmed my government in the conviction that it would be necessary to resolve so equivocal a situation before the cabinet of Lima itself; and even without knowing its antecedents, instructions were sent at the first moment to our minister at that capital, to ask for a prompt declaration of neutrality.

The cabinet of Lima, as I have already had the honor of stating to your excellency, declared to our representative in verbal conference that it would be neutral in the-conflict with Bolivia, and that such resolution would remain in suspense until the declaration of war were notified to it.

On March 14 our minister in Lima announced to my government that the chargé d’affaires of Bolivia had made known to the diplomatic corps there resident that his country was at war with Chili, and on the same day orders were sent Señor Godoy to demand the declaration of neutrality. It was asked for, in moderate terms, on the 17th of the same month, and the Peruvian chancellery, replying on the 21st, referred to instructions that would be transmitted to its envoy extraordinary in Chili, without explaining the reasons which induced it to delay the solution of a legitimate right which gave no margin for further explanations. The disloyal evasion of Peru was unacceptable even to the least suspicious judgment, and for this reason my government informed Señor Godoy on the same day that it did not admit of such a tardy course being adopted; that it insisted on claiming its right in Lima itself; and that it now not only asked Peru to define its attitude, but demanded a frank explanation as to the object of its armament, and substantial guarantees for the future, in the event of any probable contingency.

Such a demand was fully justified. The extraordinary mission of Señor Lavalle, at such a critical moment, only served to satisfy us as to his ignorance of subjects of immense importance; and at the same time the Government of Lima had to be reminded that it had confessed itself impotent to fulfill its duty, and that an explosion of hate as profound as unreasonable against this republic, had burst forth among the people of the pretended mediator.

The moment had therefore arrived to dissipate all doubt. My government, sensible of the responsibility weighing upon it, and being aware of the extent of the right of self-defense before an ill-defined neutrality that was arming in every haste, did not hesitate to give its demands the pressing nature that the gravity of the situation demanded.

On the said 21st of March, Señor Godoy communicated to my government the result of that step, but the defective telegraphic transmission necessitated the rectification of the dispatch, which from various causes could not be effected before the night of the 24th. His note had not been replied to in writing, but in verbal conference he was given clearly to understand by the Government of Peru that it was impossible for it to assume a neutral attitude, owing to the existence of a treaty of alliance with Bolivia. In spite of the importance of this declaration, that government insisted on Chili abiding by the explanations of the Peruvian envoy; and exhibited, with an impassiveness at variance with the simplest demands of honor, the desire of postponing the solution of the problem.

Notwithstanding, my government, obedient to the respect which it has always professed toward the opinions of other nations, and desirous of avoiding the reproach of hastiness, by the omission of any essential requisite to establish clearly the situation of Peru, endeavored to obtain, explicit and exact explanations.

On the said 24th of March, peremptory instructions were sent to our minister at Lima. According to them he was to insist that the question of neutrality should not be discussed in Chili; that we demanded the immediate and guaranteed suspension of the armament, and the production of the secret treaty, inquiring if it was approved in due form, and if Peru was disposed to abrogate it immediately and give us the requisite explanations for having negotiated in secret, while on terms of friendship with us, a treaty showing want of confidence in and even of hostility toward Chili.

Such were our last demands and their just foundations. Our representative in Lima, putting them into prompt execution, conferred verbally with the head of the Peruvian Government and the members of his cabinet.

The result of those conferences was the following declarations, which suffice without any comment to show the international policy of a government allied till then with us by a treaty of friendship offered by Chili when the ancient masters of Peru imposed oh it an humiliating vassalage.

The cabinet of Lima, without a tinge of shame, undeterred by recent events, without even the frankness which occasionally excuses great faults, tranquilly answered our minister: 1. That it would not declare nor assume an attitude of neutrality, though with an incomprehensible logic it offered, nevertheless, on its already violated word, to suspend its warlike preparations.

2. That the secret treaty with Bolivia—a shameful net spread for our friendship— was duly completed for a long time past.

3. That that treaty, whose hidden existence was the best proof of its bastard nature, had to be kept secret in accordance with one of its articles, calculated cunningly against the friend of many years, the ally in trouble, the savior in the two great crises of the nation that with such a monument testified its gratitude; and

4. That a copy of this singular treaty had been remitted to Señor Lavalle; but on the understanding that it should only be read to us, doubtless to satisfy our curiosity to know a negotiation whose like can scarcely be found in the darkest records of diplomacy.

It is not surprising that the cabinet of Lima had the assurance to insist, with all the appearance of seriousness, on the possibility of the continuance of the pending negotiations.

If all this was not war, such as it is understood by civilized nations, it signified the same thing, under the transparent disguise of a mediator who assumed the double part of a friend when he was an interested belligerent.

The secret treaty of February 6, 1873, needs no lengthy examination to ascertain its object: and the reserve in which it has been maintained confirms in the least suspicious mind the conviction that it was entered into solely as a means of security for the fiscal egotism of Peru in its pecuniary troubles, and to aid the schemes of the Government of Bolivia, a perpetual conspirator against the treaty of 1868. In 1873, neither Peru nor Bolivia was threatened by the remotest danger of territorial dismemberment; and much less could it be foreseen that Chili cherished such idea, seeing that it had granted to Bolivia whatever that republic demanded in the convention of 1866—applauded by the Bolivian people as a splendid manifestation of Chilian generosity.

The treaty of 1873 owed its origin—hidden as a shameful act—to the measures adopted by Peru at that epoch, to justify one of the most audacious and cruel spoliations witnessed by countries submitted to a régime of common respect toward the industry of all nations.

Peru desired to monopolize and appropriate the nitrate works; and in order to sustain its daily diminishing credit, adopted the supreme measure of ruining an industry to satisfy a fiscal voracity that could not satisfy itself with the ordinary resources of a country that has lived, thanks to its territorial wealth, in complete obliviousness of economy and labor.

Your excellency cannot be ignorant of the situation of these three republics in February,1873; and in fact, only by the cause I have just indicated can be explained the existence of the treaty of that year, entered into in prevision of acts that nobody threatened to realize; that could not be realized while the treaty of 1866 existed; and when in no case was it possible to anticipate that Chili or any other nation would threaten the integrity of Bolivian territory, or the never-disputed sovereignty of Peru within its recognized limits.

It is evident that Peru sought in the treaty of 1873 to protect the financial measures it meditated against an industry that in any commonly scrupulous country would have had the right to develop itself freely. What it desired was to strengthen the nitrate monopoly without considering the sums invested in that industry; for in vain are antecedents of any kind scraped up to justify the belief, not probable, but even possible, of any aggression against the independence or dominion of the contracting powers.

Knowing the respective situation of these countries, the secret treaty of which I have spoken was either wholly useless, or it possessed an ulterior design that events have shown to be the real one. Neither Bolivia or Peru could fear the perturbation of their sovereignty by any of the surrounding nations; so that the alliance is explainable by much less elevated motives, and which decidedly were intended to embarrass the action of my government in exacting the due fulfillment of the treaty we had celebrated with Bolivia, and provide against the consequences of the indignant clamor of Chilian citizens, despoiled by the despotic hand of the monopoly established in Tarapacá.

As a last analysis, the Peru-Bolivian convention was for Peru the cold calculation of a trader; and for Bolivia a vote of indemnity which covered the previous violations and future infractions of the agreement of 1866. The monopolizing interest of the former republic and the international ill faith of the second, found their faithful expression in that document, whose celebrity will be as lasting as the condemnation which the honest conscience of every civilized people will attach to it.

And this, your excellency will observe as an original lesson of diplomatic loyalty, was on the eve of adjusting the treaty of 1874, when Chili, without necessity, and only in homage to peace, being able to exact the fulfillment of the treaty of 1866, agreed to renounce its recognized right to the territory between 24° and 23°.

There is even yet something more worthy of observation. Article 3 of the secret convention reserves to each party the qualification of the casus fœderis. The 8th establishes as a solemn pledge, to avert war as far as possible, employing conciliatory means to avoid a rupture, and among them arbitration.

Peru therefore possessed the fullest liberty of action for deciding if the time for an alliance had arrived. It could and ought to have considered the object and character of the operations undertaken by my government; and more than one opportunity presented itself for offering its mediation, when it assisted asa mute witness to the negotiations whose logical results it could not otherwise than foresee It is not therefore unwarranted to impute to the cabinet of Lima the deliberate intention, formed long before, of assuming the character of a belligerent. For this reason it manifested a decided inclination for neutrality even whilst it armed with unusual rapidity; for this it sent us a legation which claimed to be without instructions on the cardinal points of its mission; for this, whilst it delayed the replies asked by our representative, it sent urgent orders to Europe for new war material.

All this would merit, on the part of any power disinterested in the conflict, qualifications too severe for my government to repeat here out of respect for that of your excellency. The nations whose worthy representatives I have the honor to address will observe by the accompanying documents, that even accepting as obligatory the secret treaty of 1873, the Peruvian Government was free from any pledge. That of Bolivia refused the arbitration referred to in article 8 of the secret treaty, as it did in the treaties celebrated with Chili; and the casus fœderis had not occurred, inasmuch as Chili stated, and repeated frequently, that it did not intend to conquer a hand’s breadth of Bolivian territory. Peru not only could but should observe the strictest neutrality, even observing the secret stipulations binding it with Bolivia; because these are founded on the existence of a threat against territorial integrity, which was never thought of on our part; and because they also fix as an indispensable precedent to the casus fœderis the previous recourse to arbitration.

The explanations given by Señor Lavalle, far from attenuating, strengthened more clearly, if that be possible, the terminant spirit of the treaty of 1873. How accept the trifling excuse that it contained a generic stipulation, not directed at Chili, whilst it is carefully hidden from her knowledge? If the treaty meant a general guarantee against any advance of a foreign power, why was the co-operation of Chili not sought, which has given more than one example of being the first to contribute, with its men and its wealth, toward the maintenance of the sovereignty of nations of a common origin?

It was still more inconceivable that Peru should inform us by its envoy that the reserve of the treaty arose from one of its conditions, fearing our susceptibilities might be wounded if it proceeded to act as mediator while informing us of its relations with one of the belligerents.

To discuss such allegations would be merely to tire your patience, and is doubly unnecessary, inasmuch as Peru from the beginning of the conflict has done everything in its power to elude any explanation relating to the secret treaty.

My government needed no extraordinary effort to ascertain, from the acts and declarations related, what was the position that Peru preferred to assume, what were the rights, and, more than all, what were the duties that were consequently imposed.

The mediator offered himself, backed by an army, whose rapid reunion testified to the prevision of proximate conflicts, manned his navy, and, whilst uncertainly stammering words of impartiality, allowed to transpire the engagement of a belligerent duly sealed.

It was Peru which, if it did not declare war first, with the frankness of a noble resolution, commenced it first; and, what is worse, a war hidden and sheltered under false protestations of friendship.

Chili has never forgotten the course marked out by the patriotism of its sons, the energy strengthened by the conviction of violated justice, and its historic name among civilized nations. It is Peru that has plotted and desired war; let Peru, therefore, be charged with the responsibility, whilst Chili delivers its future to the protection of God, to the stout hearts of its citizens, and to the just opinion of enlightened nations.

I have, &c.,

ALEJANDRO FIERRO.

No. 90. Mr. Osborn to Mr. Evarts. [Document 105]

No. 90.
Mr. Osborn to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States.
Santiago, Chili, April 26, 1879. (Received June 3.) No. 96.]

Sir: For your information I have the honor to inclose a copy of a note which I have this day written to Mr. Christiancy, at Lima, concerning the status of foreign-built vessels owned by American citizens.

I am, &c.,

THOMAS A. OSBORN.

Mr. Osborn to Mr. Christiancy. [Document 106]

Mr. Osborn to Mr. Christiancy.

Legation of the United States,
Santiago, Chili, April 26, 1879.

Sir: I see published in the Lima papers what purports to be a note addressed by Mr. Gibbs to the foreign minister in Lima, under date of the 7th instant, which, I fear, may result in seriously imperiling the property interests of American citizens in foreign-built ships on the coast.

It is unquestionably true that no law of the United States directly authorizes this class of vessels to carry the American flag. Nor is there any statute, so far as I have observed, directly conferring this privilege upon any class of vessels whatever. But that the government recognizes the right of American citizens to purchase foreign-built ships, and acknowledges its obligation to protect them in their property thus acquired, is an undoubted fact.

I am credibly informed that there are many vessels of this character, owned by American citizens, now doing business on this coast; some of them have been so engaged many years, and have been recognized by our consular officers as American vessels. The consul at Valparaiso informs me that only yesterday a vessel so owned came into port flying the American flag, having been dispatched in due form by our consul at Lambayeque, Peru. Her papers show that she was purchased by an American citizen, and the bill of sale recorded in the consulate at Lambayeque, as is provided in sections 220 and 221 of Consular Regulations.

I am not prepared to believe that the State Department intended to be understood as saying that our citizens might purchase foreign-built ships but that they should not sail them; hence I cannot agree with Mr. Gibbs in his understanding of section 226 of Consular Regulations. A vessel without a country, to me seems an anomaly. It would be in quite as pitiable a condition as was the “man without a country,” of whom we have read.

To fully guard against fraud in these transfers, however, it seems to me that some more stringent rules concerning them should be adopted. I should be pleased to exchange views with you on the subject.

Permit me to call your attention to the opinion of Mr. Cushing, referred to on page 6 of the “Digest of Opinions and Leading Cases on International Law.”

I am, &c.,

THOMAS A. OSBORN.

No. 91. Mr. Seward to Mr. Osborn. [Document 107]

No. 91.
Mr. Seward to Mr. Osborn.

Department of State,
Washington, May 29, 1879. No. 63.]

Sir: I have to acknowledge the receipt of your dispatch of the 19th ultimo (92), in which you send me a copy and a translation of the manifests of the Government of Chili, in justification of its war with Peru.

Whatever may have been the causes leading to this war, its commencement and continuance cannot but be regretted by the United States; and it is hardly necessary to add that the announcement of an early peace between the two governments, as also with Bolivia, would be news most welcome to the Government of the United States.

* * * * * * *

I am, &c.,

F. W. SEWARD,
Acting Secretary.

No. 92. Mr. Osborn to Mr. Evarts. [Document 108]

No. 92.
Mr. Osborn to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Santiago, Chili, June 5, 1879. (Received July 8.) No. 100.]

Sir: I have the honor to inclose a copy of the President’s message, delivered to Congress at its opening on the 1st instant.

The message treats almost exclusively of the international difficulties in which the country is involved, but I discover little in it worthy of note which has not been already adverted to in my dispatches. Its review of the origin of the war with Bolivia and with Peru, is but a repetition of the arguments presented by the foreign office in documents with which you have been furnished.

The President speaks with a pardonable pride of the valor displayed by the Chilians in the combat of the 21st ultimo at Iquique between the Chilian wooden ships Esmeralda and Covodonga and the powerful Peruvian ironclads Huascar and Independencia. In this battle the Esmeralda, with no possible hope of escape from destruction except through a surrender, continued for four long hours the desperate encounter, and then went down with her colors still at the mast. The Covodonga, more fortunate than her companion, managed to get out of the bay closely pursued by the Independencia, and being a ship of light draught, by running close to the shore she led the large iron-clad upon the rocks and witnessed its total destruction.

The enthusiasm of the people in consequence of this battle is beyond my power of description. Chili has had other heroes, but I doubt if any were ever so honored as is now the memory of Arturo Prat, the late commander of the Esmeralda.

At the time of this battle the Chilian fleet, except the two ships mentioned, was in the neighborhood of Callao, where it still remained at last advices received here. The Huascar in the mean time has continued in the vicinity of Iquique. The loss of the Independencia must prove to be a severe blow to the Peruvian cause, and I doubt if it can be repaired in the present condition of the Peruvian credit.

The two Chilian iron clads are powerful vessels, and ought to be able to destroy the Huascar if they can succeed in bringing her under their guns.

The government is exceedingly reticent as to the future movements of the fleet, but I infer that the blockade of Iquique will be soon re-established, if it has not already been done.

I see by the newspapers that the Queen’s ministers have assured the British Parliament in response to questions propounded to them, that their government would take the proper steps to protect the interests of British citizens on this coast pending the war. This declaration caused’ considerable uneasiness here.

The large Peruvian debt is principally held in England, and it was feared by the friends of Chili that the contemplated action meant an interference in behalf of the holders to the extent of insisting that the niter and guano in the Tarapaca district should be applied to the liquidation of this debt regardless of the result of the war in that section.

I have, &c.,

THOMAS A. OSBORN.

P. S., June 6.—A dispatch received this morning announces that the Chilian fleet had returned to Iquique. On the 31st ultimo the Huascar was at anchor in a small inlet a short distance this side of Antofagasta.

OSBORN.

No. 93. Mr. Evarts to Mr. Osborn. [Document 109]

No. 93.
Mr. Evarts to Mr. Osborn.

Department of State,
Washington, June 9, 1879. No. 65.]

Sir: I have to acknowledge the reception of your dispatch of the 31st of March last, with the inclosed correspondence in reference to the purchase of three English-built ships, by H. L. Stevens, an American citizen domiciled in Chili.

You say that it appears that the ships in question were purchased by Mr. Stevens on the 27th of February last from the South American Steamship Company; that the bill of sale was recorded in the American consulate at Valparaiso, and a certificate to that effect made on the original, pursuant to sections 220 and 221 of the Consular Regulations.

You state, furthermore, that you requested the consul at Valparaiso to investigate the good faith of the sale, and that that officer, in response, submitted a favorable report. It appears, moreover, that the Itata, one of the vessels in question, was cleared from the American consulate at Valparaiso for Callao, and that soon after her arrival at that port she was required by the American consul, acting under instructions from Minister Gibbs, to haul down the American flag, under which she had sailed from Valparaiso, and that, in order to avoid any conflict with the authorities of our own country in Peru, you had directed the acting consul at Valparaiso to clear only registered vessels at Peruvian ports uhtilhe shall be further instructed.

The chief question raised by your dispatch, with its inclosures, is as to the character of tire protection to which foreign-built vessels, purchased abroad in good faith by American citizens, are entitled from the American Government, and the right of such vessels to carry the American flag and to be cleared by American consuls.

It is proper to observe, first, that, in the case under consideration, grave doubts are entertained by this Department as to the bona fides of the purchase of the vessels in question by Mr. Stevens, under the circumstances as disclosed in your dispatch. Inasmuch, however, as these doubts could only be solved properly by a judicial investigation, the Department can do no more than lay down the general principles which would be deemed applicable to this case, provided the good faith of the transaction should be established.

The statutes of the United States, sections 4131 to 4134, inclusive, very clearly point out what vessels are entitled to be considered vessels of the United States. A mere reference to provisions of the sections just named is sufficient to show that the vessels which it is alleged Mr. Stevens purchased were not entitled to the benefit of the registry laws of the United States.

The Consular Regulations provide for the purchase of foreign vessels abroad by citizens, and (section 220) that, if such purchase is made in good faith, it entitles the vessel to protection as the lawful property of a citizen of the United States. Section 4196 of the Revised States provides that— No sea-letter or other document certifying or proving any vessel to be the property of a citizen of the United States shall he issued, except to vessels duly registered or enrolled and licensed as vessels of the United States, or to vessels which shall be wholly owned by citizens of the United States, and furnished with or entitled to sea-letters or other custom-house documents.

This section clearly recognizes the right of American citizens to become the owners of foreign-built vessels.

There is, however, no law which in express terms permits a foreign vessel, so owned by an American citizen, to use the flag of the United States, nor, on the other hand, is there any prohibition of such use by a foreign vessel beyond the jurisdiction of the United States, or any penalty provided therefor.

The practice of making purchases of foreign-built vessels has been advantageously pursued by American citizens from the origin of this government. There may have been instances in which the privilege has been abused by collusion between a consul and the parties to a sale, and it is known, as you state in your note to Mr. Christiancy of the 26th of April last, a copy of which you inclose in your No. 96 of that date, that there are many vessels thus purchased and owned by citizens of the United States now doing business on the coasts of Chili and Peru and other South American countries, and that while there is no specific provision of law, either permissive or prohibitory, on the subject of such vessels carrying the flag of the United States, it has been the long-established practice of these vessels to sail under that flag.

Under these circumstances the Department does not feel disposed, at the present moment, to issue any more or specific instructions on the subject, and especially any that might in anyway tend to jeopardize the interests of American citizens owning such property.

The matter will receive the attention of the President at an early day, with a view to such general instructions to the diplomatic and consular officers of the United States as may tend to secure uniformity of action, and at the same time promote, as far as may be in accordance with existing law, the interests of American citizens involved in this somewhat delicate question.

In the case under consideration, the vessels having been sold to a British subject since the action of the consul at Callao, to which you refer, it is not probable that any further action will be called for upon your part in regard to the vessels in question. You are instructed, however, to apply the principles herein laid down to any cases of a similar character which may hereafter arise having first thoroughly investigated the good faith of such transactions.

I am, &c.,

WM. M. EVARTS.

No. 94. Mr. Osborn to Mr. Evarts. [Document 110]

No. 94.
Mr. Osborn to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Santiago, Chili, July 24, 1879. (Received September 4.) No. 107.]

Sir: General Urbina, an Ex-President of Ecuador, has been here a few weeks on a special mission from his government in the interest of peace, and left this morning for Lima. On his way down the coast General Urbina had an interview with Presidents Prado of Peru, and Daza of Bolivia, at Airca, which resulted in his being informed that Peru and Bolivia would consent to a cessation of hostilities and an arbitration of the matters in dispute upon the condition that the status quo ante bellum should be restored, and should continue pending the arbitration. In an informal interview which I had with the minister of foreign relations yesterday, he informed me that this condition would not be agreed to by this government. Said he, and truly, I believe, “a ministry which would consent to this now could not stand a day.”

He added, however, that Chili would consent to arbitrate, leaving the status quo as at present, and with an understanding that if the dominion of the country in dispute should be determined to belong rightfully to Bolivia, Chili would pay therefor the price which the arbitrator might fix. I judge that this is the proposition with which General Urbina goes to Lima to-day.

What the other governments will say to it now is more than I dare to venture an opinion upon.

Since the first interview of General Urbina with Presidents Prado and Daza the allies have met with quite a severe loss in the destruction of the Independencia, one of the Peruvian iron-clads, and it is possible that their demands touching the status quo may be somewhat modified.

From the beginning I have believed that, if the Chili troops should succeed in capturing Iquique before an arrangement could be reached, it would be difficult to induce Chili to consent to withdraw therefrom until she should be indemnified for expenses in the war $ and this opinion I still entertain. The proposition which I assume General Urbina carries, is, I doubt not, made in good faith, but it is made with the surroundings of to-day. There is here a strong party urging upon the government greater energy in the prosecution of the war, and one of the movements demanded is the capture of Iquique. President Pinto is exceedingly conservative and disposed to “make haste slowly,” but public sentiment is pressing him forward, and has just made it necessary for him to change the commander-in-chief of the army. There is a very general demand for an aggressive campaign, and I think I venture little in predicting that, before the receipt of this dispatch, a part of the army now at Antofagasta will have effected a landing north of Iquique. I know that a forward movement has been determined upon, and the government anticipates a severe and bloody battle.

In the conversation referred to the foreign minister volunteered some expressions touching the choice of an arbitrator, if that point shall be reached. While the Emperor of Brazil would be satisfactory to Chili, the government expects, I am led to believe, that the President of the United States will be requested to assist the belligerents in the arrangement of their difficulties.

Business in all its branches is at a standstill, and I can see nothing but universal bankruptcy in a long continuance of the war.

Some few months since the government, after failing in all efforts to secure a loan, issued six millions of paper notes. This is about exhausted, and I apprehend that ere long a new issue will be made.

The extraordinary expenses growing out of the war are not much short of two millions a month.

To provide the necessary funds for expenditures abroad, a decree has just been issued by the Executive requiring that all import duties shall be paid in silver or its equivalent in bills on Europe. This was made necessary by the great decline in the value of paper money exchange on London, which, rated at about 40d. for the dollar at the commencement of the war, has advanced to 28d.; or, putting it in another way, the American gold dollar, which was worth a few months since a dollar and a quarter in this money, now commands a dollar and three-quarters.

By the New York papers which came to hand by the last mail, I see that there has been some newspaper discussion growing out of a telegraphic dispatch from Berlin indicating an intention on the part of the German Government to interfere in this controversy.

These articles have been generally copied and commented upon by the Chili press, and I have yet to see an expression of dissent from the views entertained by our leading journals regarding the ability of America to arrange her difficulties without assistance from the other side of the Atlantic. The Ferro-canil, the leading newspaper of the country, has quite an able editorial on the subject this morning, in which it rejoices that the opportunity occurred for an expression of opinion upon the part of the American press regarding the “Monroe doctrine.”

Public sentiment here now seems to be decidedly averse to European interference in any contingency.

I have, &c.,

THOMAS A. OSBORN.

No. 95. Mr. Hunter to Mr. Kellar. [Document 111]

No. 95.
Mr. Hunter to Mr. Kellar.

Department of State,
Washington, June 2, 1879. No. 69.]

Sir: Your dispatches numbered 161, 162, and 163, with their respective inclosures, have been received.

Your action with reference to the vessels recently sold and transferred to citizens of the United States, which were formerly engaged in trade under the Chilian flag, as set forth in your No. 161, of the 8th March, last, will have consideration.

An essential element of the validity of the sale of a foreign vessel to an American citizen, is the bona fide character of the sale. If circumstances should admit of any reasonable doubt as to the right of the transaction to that character, the consul is expected to do no act which will sanction or tend to sanction it, whereby the master in charge of the vessel sold would suppose that the sale entitled him to fly the flag of the United States.

I am, &c.,

W. HUNTER,
Second Assistant Secretary.

No. 96. Mr. Hunter to Mr. Foote. [Document 112]

No. 96.
Mr. Hunter to Mr. Foote.

Department of State,
Washington, October 23, 1879. No. 9.]

Sir: With reference to your dispatch No. 3, of the 26th June last, which nominates Mr. Peter A. McKellar for appointment as vice-consul of the United States at Valparaiso, I have to inform you that the Department deems it advisable that another nomination should be made for that office. It is preferred that an American citizen be named if practicable.

Your dispatch No. 8, of August 22 last, has been received.

I am, &c.,

W. HUNTER,
Second Assistant Secretary.

China.China.

[113] . Mr. Holcombe to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Peking, July 6, 1878. (Received September 2.)

[114] . Mr. Holcombe to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Peking, October 28, 1878. (Received December 19.)

[115] . Mr. Holcombe to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Peking, November 4, 1878.

[116] Messrs. Butterfield & Swire to Mr. Forbes.

Shanghai, August 1, 1878.

[117] . Mr. Holcombe to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Peking, November 12, 1878. (Received January 11.)

[118] . Mr. Holcombe to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Peking, November 23, 1878. (Received February 6.)

[119] A. Mr. Jenkins to Mr. Shepard.

Hankow, November 1, 1878.

[120] B.

Chung Ching, October 4, 1878.

[121] . Mr. Holcombe to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Peking, December 3, 1878. (Received February 24.)

[122] . Mr. Holcombe to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Peking, December 5, 1878. (Received February 24.)

[123] . Mr. Holcombe to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Peking, December 5, 1878. (Received February 24.)

[124] . Mr. Holcombe to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Peking, December 12, 1878. (Received February 6.)

[125] . Mr. Holcombe to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States. Peking, January 18, 1879. (Received March 29.)

[126] . Mr. Holcombe to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Peking, February 20, 1879. (Received April 19.)

[127] . Mr. Holcombe to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Peking, March 12, 1879. (Received May 5.)

[128] Mr. Jenkins to Consul Shepard.

February 6, 1879.

[129] . Mr. Evarts to Mr. Holcombe.

Department of State, Washington, March 3, 1879.

[130] . Mr. Seward to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Peking, June 26, 1879. (Received September 1.)

[131] . Mr. Seward to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Peking, July 29, 1879. (Received September 29.)

[132] . Mr. Seward to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Peking, September 18, 1879. (Received November 4.)

[133] . Mr. Seward to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Peking, October 7, 1879. (Received November 28.)

[134] . Mr. Seward to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Peking, October 11, 1879. (Received November 28.)

[135] . Mr. Knight to Mr. Evarts.

Shanghai, July 14, 1879. (Received September 1.)

[136] Mr. Eliot to Mr. Knight.

Harvard University, March 10, 1877.

[137] . Mr. Wing to Mr. Evarts.

Chinese Legation, Washington, October 10, 1879.

[138] . Mr. Evarts to Mr. Wing.

Department of State, Washington, October 13, 1879.

[139] . Mr. Evarts to Mr. Wing.

Department of State, Washington, October 24, 1879.

(Inclosure 1 in Mr. Evarts’ note.)

No. 97. Mr. Holcombe to Mr. Evarts. [Document 113]

No. 97.
Mr. Holcombe to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Peking, July 6, 1878. (Received September 2.) No. 25.]

Sir: I have the honor to inclose herewith, for your information, a copy of a dispatch addressed to Prince Kung by Mr. Seward, in October last, and the response of the prince, received some few weeks ago.

The subject of this correspondence was the issue of transit passes for native produce to be exported from the province of Szchuen, and it was caused by the refusal of the customs intendant at Hankow to continue the issue of such papers, since Ichang, which is an open port, is nearer to the province named. Mr. Seward requested that the former custom be adhered to, and the prince yielded a modified assent.

Mr. Seward, as you will see from his letters to Prince Kung and Mr. Consul Shepard, considered the proposed temporary arrangement to be satisfactory.

I have, &c.,

CHESTER HOLCOMBE.

[Inclosure 1 in No. 25.]

Mr. Seward to Prince Kung.

Peking, October 26, 1877.

Sir: In the month of April last, the consul of the United States at Hankow applied to the intendant on behalf of Mr. M. A. Jenkins, an American citizen, for the usual transit certificate under which to bring from Chung King, in Szchuen, certain white wax, raw silk, saffron, and rhubarb. The intendant responded that the application must be made at. Ichang, that port being open to trade and on the route between Chung King and Hankow. The consul then applied to the intendant at Ichang, and the latter after some time agreed to issue the required paper, the transit dues to be paid at Ichang, and the produce shipped under bond for Hankow. As there are no American merchants at Ichang, and until the present time no foreign vessels running between that port and Hankow, the plan proposed did not appear practicable, and the consul has asked my intercession to secure a continuance of the old system, under which passes were applied for at Hankow, and the transit dues paid there.

It would seem that there should be no difficulty in arranging a matter which is so simple in its character.

Whether transit dues are paid at Ichang or at Hankow is the same thing for the revenue, but for the merchant resident at Hankow the requirement to pay them at Ichang, and to give a bond under which the produce may be taken forward to Hankow is very oppressive, especially at the present moment when there is no consular official at Ichang, no foreign firms, and no regular communication with Hankow. Moreover, there is no requirement of the treaties that produce brought out under transit certificates shall be taken account of, or the dues paid at the port nearest to the place of production or purchase. It would seem optional, under the 7th rule of the supplementary treaty, for the merchant to elect the port of shipment, and this privilege has been freely conceded heretofore. Produce has been taken from near Chefoo and Tientsin to Chinkiang, and from ports north of Chinkiang, by that port to Shanghai. Doubtless, inquiry would show that a similar procedure has prevailed at other points.

I beg leave, therefore, to ask your imperial highness to give the subject careful attention. I feel sure that the interests of trade will be best consulted by an adherence to the system heretofore observed, and that no departure from it should be allowed without a thorough examination into all considerations involved.

I have, &c.,,

GEORGE F. SEWARD.

[Inclosure 2 in No. 25.]

Prince Kung, chief secretary of state for foreign affairs, herewith makes a communication in reply:

I have had the honor to receive your excellency’s dispatch, of October 26 last, stating that an American merchant at Hankow desired to export from Chung King, in Szchuen, certain white wax, raw silk, and other articles; that the intendant at Hankow informed the consul that, as Ichang was an open port, the transit certificate must be issued by the Ichang intendant, and that that officer agreed to issue the certificate, but required that the transit dues be paid at Ichang. Upon this, your excellency observes that at the present time, there being no United States consul nor American merchants at Ichang, and no foreign vessels running between that port and Hankow, you feel bound to call my attention to the matter, &c.

This office forwarded a copy of your excellency’s letter to the northern and southern superintendents of foreign trade, and to the viceroy of Hupeh and Hunan, with instructions for a report upon the subject. I am now” in receipt of the earlier and later responses of these officers.

From the statements of the Ichang intendant and others, it appears that an English firm at Hankow has exported Szchuen produce from Ichang, paying the transit dues at Ichang, and, in the absence of steamers at that port, has sent the merchandise to Hankow for shipment. The exportation of local produce from Szchuen by the American firm of M A. Jenkins & Co., is, in its conditions, similar to the transactions of the English firm, and should be guided by the same rule.

If it be said that there is no United States consul at Ichang, Mr. Consul Shepard, of Hankow, has also jurisdiction at Ichang. If it be said that there are no American merchants at Ichang, and no steamers regularly running thither, British mercantile houses will be established at an early moment, steamers will be put upon the route, and American merchants will closely follow. Besides, in advance of the establishment of steamship lines, native boats may be hired to carry produce to Hankow for transshipment to steamers, all of which considerations have in view mercantile interests.

As it is held that in the absence of steamers and American merchants the payment of transit dues at Ichang is not convenient, a procedure may be allowed similar to the rules under which customs at Chin-Kiang collects duties on tea, for the Hankow customs Blank transit forms may be prepared by the Ichang intendant, and deposited with the customs at Hankow. Whenever a merchant provided with this form arrives at Ichang with native produce the Ichang customs will examine the goods as to quality, weight, &c., and affix upon the packages the stamp of the Ichang customs. The amount of regular and transit duties will also be determined, and a transit certificate given permitting the exporter to take his merchandise to Hankow, at which place the customs will collect the dues. For the time being, because there are no American merchants and no steamers at Ichang, this procedure will be quite satisfactory, but will be terminated when merchants establish themselves and steamers appear at Ichang.

Upon this report I beg leave to remark that the plan proposed by which the Ichang customs will issue transit passes in blank for merchants living at Hankow, and by which these merchants can pay the transit duties to the customs at Hankow for the Ichang customs, appears to meet entirely the convenience of the merchants concerned. I ought, therefore, to approve the temporary procedure proposed. I have accordingly addressed the northern and southern superintendents, of foreign trade and the viceroy of Hupeh and Hunan, instructing them in this sense, and beg leave thus to inform your excellency.

His Excellency George F. Seward, &c., &c., &c.,

Peking, April 15, 1878.

[Inclosure 3 in No. 25.]

Mr. Seward to Prince Kung.

May 16, 1878.

Sir: I have had the honor to receive your imperial highness’s dispatch of the 15th ultimo, in response to my communication, ‘having regard to the issue of transit passes to an American merchant at Hankow to enable him to export native produce from Szchuen.

Your imperial highness states that you learn from the northern and southern superintendents of foreign trade that it is proposed by the intendants at Ichang and Hankow that the first-named intendant shall issue transit forms in blank and deposit them at Hankow. Whenever a merchant provided with one of these forms arrives at Ichang with native produce, the Ichang customs will examine the goods as to quality, weight, &c., and affix upon the packages the stamps of the Ichang customs. The amount of regular and transit duties will also be determined, and a transit certificate given, permitting the exporter to take his merchandise to Hankow, at which place the customs will collect the dues. For the time being, because there are no American merchants, and no steamers at Ichang, this procedure will be satisfactory, but will be terminated when merchants establish themselves and steamers appear at Ichang. Your imperial highness states your approval of this proposal, &c.

I beg leave to say in response that the procedure suggested appears to be satisfactory, and I have instructed the consul at Hankow to inform the merchants at that port.

I have, &c.,

GEORGE F. SEWARD.

[Inclosure 4 in No. 25.]

Mr. Seward to Mr. Shepard.

Peking, May 17, 1878. No. 49.]

Sir: Recurring to your dispatch No. 10 of September 25, 1877, covering a correspondence had by you with the intendants at Hankow and Ichang upon an application of Mr. M. A. Jenkins for the issue of transit passes to enable him to export certain native produce from Szchuen, I have the honor to hand to you herewith a reply only recently received from the foreign office, to a note which I addressed them upon the subject last October.

You will see from the response of the prince that, as a temporary measure, transit passes may be taken out and transit dues paid at your port, on goods brought from the interior of Szchuen. I shall be glad to be informed whether, in your opinion, the arrangement proposed meets the requirements of the trade affected by it.

I am, &c.,

GEORGE F. SEWARD.

No. 98. Mr. Holcombe to Mr. Evarts. [Document 114]

No. 98.
Mr. Holcombe to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Peking, October 28, 1878. (Received December 19.) No. 61.]

Sir: I have the honor to hand to you herewith, copies of four dispatches which I have received from our consul at Foochow, narrating the destruction by a Chinese mob, of certain premises owned and occupied by the English Church Missionary Society at his port, and subsequent events in connection with the riot.

The property in question was located upon a hill within the walls of the city of Foochow, and has been in the quiet possession of the missionaries of the society named, for more than twenty years. Quite near to it are buildings and grounds held by the British Government for consular purposes, but which have not been occupied for some considerable time, as the consul of Her Majesty prefers to reside in the foreign settlement which lies across the river. And in the immediate vicinity of the scene of the riot is an establishment of the missionaries of the “American Board.”

So far as 1 can learn no question as to the residence of the foreigners, upon the premises which have been destroyed, had ever been raised until about eighteen months ago, when the populace began to make complaints that foreign buildings, placed upon this elevation and overlooking the native residences, interfered with the “feng shui,” and brought ill fortune upon the lives and the business of the Chinese.

These complaints increased until in the summer of 1877, when the local authorities, through the British consul, proposed to the missionaries to remove from the premises in question, offering to give them in exchange a more valuable property situated in the foreign settlement across the river, and owned by the Chinese Government. Mr. Wolfe, the head of the mission, did not look with favor upon the proposition, objecting that it would remove him to a distance of nearly six miles from the scene of his daily labor, and interfere seriously with the success of his efforts among the Chinese.

Upon being urged he consented, however, to refer the question to his superiors in London.

It was at about this juncture that my visit to Foochow, which you will doubtless remember, took place. During my interviews with the viceroy and governor, they on several occasions adverted to the effort being made to secure the removal of the English, missionaries from the city, and said frankly that they feared disturbances among the people if the point were not granted.

From these remarks I gathered that the object ultimately in view was the removal of not only the English, but of all missionaries from the city to the foreign settlement, and that they “moved upon the position” of the English first, simply because their location offered readier excuses for the effort. It should be remarked that there are no foreigners excepting those of this class, resident within the city of Foochow.

The reply received from London was unfavorable to the views of the Chinese. Thereupon statements began to be made that the title of the foreigners to a part, at least, of the premises in question was invalid. These assertions gained currency to such an extent that they were brought officially to the notice of the British consul by the local authorities, and at length a day was fixed when the officers of the two governments, accompanied by Mr. Wolfe, should visit the property and there examine into their truth. And it was upon this day, August 30, and in the very presence of the officials named that a mob gathered and the destruction of the buildings was accomplished.

This conjunction of events was, to say the least, peculiar, and it is somewhat remarkable that no effort seems to have been made by the Chinese authorities to restrain their people.

Mr. De Lano lost no time in informing me of the occurrences, and as I considered the interests of our people to be threatened to some extent, I at once addressed Rear-Admiral Patterson, requesting him to dispatch a vessel of war to Foochow. I inclose copies of my letters to him and to Mr. De Lano.

I also inclose a copy of the admiral’s answer from which you will see that prior to the receipt of my request he had ordered the United States steamer Alert to proceed to the scene of the disturbance.

I have not time at the moment to comment further upon this affair, but shall have occasion to revert to it at an early day.

I have, &c.,

CHESTER HOLCOMBE.

[Inclosure 1 in No. 61.]

Mr. DeLano to Mr. Holcombe.

Foochow, August 31, 1878. No. 109.]

Sir: On yesterday afternoon an immense mob of Chinese, led by the literati, assembled upon the premises of the English Church mission at Wu Shih Shan, within the vcity walls of Foochow, to give expression to their indignation on account of the erecition by the mission of a fine school building, then in course of construction and nearly completed.

At present I am, only so far advised about the matter as to be able to say that, for a long time past the literati and gentry have sought to effect the ejection of the mission from the city, and have stubbornly resisted the erection of this school building from the first, and the officials have so far yielded to their demands as to have, some time since, entered upon negotiations with the mission’s agent, the Rev. Mr. Wolfe, looking toward an exchange of their property for other property outside the city. Mr. Wolfe, under instructions from the society, declined to make the exchange, and persisted in going on with the construction of the building (which was being erected within the compound where other mission buildings have been standing for some years).

A meeting of the Chinese officials, Her Majesty’s consul, and Mr. Wolfe, upon the premises was arranged for yesterday, upon which occasion a mob of some thousands of people assembled, and by them the objectionable building was fired and destroyed; the officials, I hear, making but a very feeble attempt to prevent it.

It is currently rumored that the consul, Mr. Wolfe, and other members of the mission, were assaulted, but I cannot undertake to state this as a fact.

“The American Board of Missions” owns property only a short distance from “Wu Shih Shan,” and it is likely that if the Chinese succeed in ejecting the English church mission they will not be content till they have also ejected the Americans. I shall keep you advised of any further developments in the case.

I have, &c.,

M. M. De LANO,
United States Consul.

[Inclosure 2 in No. 61.]

Mr. De Lano to Mr. Holcombe.

Foochow, September 5, 1878. No. 110.]

Sir: Recurring to my dispatch No. 109, on the subject of the riot in the city on the 30th ultimo, I have to report that much excitement prevails still, and there is reason to fear that, on account of the complete immunity of the rioters from punishment, more serious trouble may yet follow. The ringleaders have been pointed out to the high officials, and, as I understand, their arrest and punishment has been urged, but to no purpose. The rioters were allowed to assemble on the premises of the mission on Saturday and Sunday after the burning of the school building, and no effort was made by the officials to disperse them. On Sunday they commenced to tear down the walls of the building which were left standing, when Her Britannic Majesty’s consul, accompanied by the commander of an English man-of-war, appeared on the scene, and they were checked in a marked degree by the unsupported efforts of the commander.

This I mention as proof of the ease with which the outrage might have been prevented had the Chinese officials made an effort in that direction. In point of fact, it is positively asserted that the new Futai, Wu, has sanctioned and encouraged this demonstration, which has been openly planned by the literati and gentry, and executed by the rabble, egged on by many of the first named, who were on the scene with the officials when the building was destroyed.

On Sunday the commander (Napier) accompanied Mr. Sinclair to the government general and asked to have an armed guard of native soldiers sent to the scene to protect the property from further destruction, and the missionaries from further insult and assault, but his excellency first protested against it, saying that if armed men were sent there it would encourage the populace and more serious complications would arise. The request was then repeated in the form of a demand, and after a good deal of parleying his excellency promised to send the guard. They informed his excellency that they would return to the scene and await the guards’ arrival, which they did, and after a good deal of delay the men appeared, but without arms. They were sent back for arms and again came with arms, but without ammunition.

They at last returned with arms and ammunition, and were disposed upon the premises by order of Captain Napier, since when the rioters have been restrained from further acts of violence; but they openly declare that the balance of the property shall be destroyed, and avow their purpose to drive all missionaries from the city. Anonymous placards have also been posted about the city, calling upon the people to rise and complete the destruction of the Wu Shih Shan property.

A good deal of uneasiness prevails among the foreign residents, and it is not easy to predict how the matter may end. If there should not be some positive and decisive action on the part of the British Government, there is sure to be, to say the least, a protracted controversy over the subject of the restoration of the school building, and it is doubtful if the Chinese allow it to be rebuilt, though it stood upon ground which was acquired twenty or more years ago.

I have, &c.,

M. M. DE LANO,
United States Consul.

[Inclosure 3 in No. 61.]

Mr. De Lano to Mr. Holcombe.

Foochow, September 15, 1878. No. 111.]

Sir: Since my last to you on the subject of the Wu Shih Shan riot there has been no further hostile demonstrations beyond the posting of threatening and incendiary placards.

A second English gunboat arrived here last week, a day or two before the threatened attack on the 14th of the moon, and came up to the settlement. This, coupled with the rumor that others were coming, it is believed, restrained the gentry and allayed the excitement of the populace, as well as to lead the officials to take some decisive steps to prevent further outrages.

I inclose herewith a copy of the memorial which is to be sent to the foreign office, and a copy (printed) of two of the inflammatory placards alluded to.

I have, &c.,

M. M. DE LANO,
United States Consul.

To the Right Honorable and Most Noble the Marquis of Salisbury, K. G., &c.,
Her Majesty’s Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs.

The humble memorial of the undersigned British subjects residing at the port of Foochow, in the Empire of China, showeth: 1. That your memorialists view, not only with indignation, but with much apprehension, the incidents of an outrage by a Chinese mob on the evening of the 30th ultimo, when property belonging to the Church Missionary Society at Wu Shih Shan, within the walls of the city of Foochow, was wantonly and premeditatedly destroyed.

2. That being interested in the rights of property, provided by Article XI and XII of the Tientsin treaty, your memorialsts naturally feel concerned in drawing your lordship’s attention to this riot, more especially as the circumstances under which it originated and was accomplished, seem calculated to weaken the position of foreign residents, both present and future.

3. That while aware that the facts of this case have been already communicated to your lordship by Her Majesty’s consul at this port, your memorialists, without being in any way desirous of interfering with the functions or authority of Her Majesty’s consul, wish to add their independent testimony to the gravity of the event.

4. That your memorialists have no doubt as to the validity of the deeds under which the Church Missionary Society held the property in question.

5. That facts, which have since come to the knowledge of your memorialists, tend to prove that the outrage was an organized affair, connived at by the Chinese authorities.

6. That your memorialists are in possession of positive information, charging a certain man, known by the name of Sin Ying Lin, with having taken a principal part in organizing this attack on the mission premises.

7. That the said Sin Ying Lin is a member of the native gentry class, and a person enjoying considerable local influence, which he unlawfully used to excite the ordinarily peaceful inhabitants against the missionaries; and that he is charged with having hired a mob by whom the outrage under notice was perpetrated.

8. That the Chinese officials whose obvious duty it was, under Article XVIII of the Tientsin treaty, to have exerted themselves in preventing this riot by adopting rigorous precautionary measures, abstained from interfering with Sin Ying Lin and his associates; and that the latter were permitted to openly threaten the missionaries with expulsion, and finally to carry out their settled purpose of destroying the building in question.

9. That while the riot was in progress the Chinese officials who were on the spot absolutely declined to interfere with the lawless proceedings, and this, notwithstanding the proximity of a military force which was, there is good reason to believe, quite competent to deal with the rioters.

10. That your memorialists can bear personal testimony to the uniform good conduct and friendly disposition of the lower orders of the native population towards the foreign residents of the port; but as regards the local gentry and literati generally, it is only right to state that many members of this class make no concealment of their objection to the presence of foreigners.

11. That under these circumstances there can be no reasonable justification of the action, or rather inaction, of the Chinese authorities; nor, in the opinion of your memorialists, can it be fairly urged that the native officials were not in a position to have prevented the late outrage had they desired to do so.

12. Finally, your memorialists would respectfully urge the necessity of taking such prompt measures as may seem to your lordship adequate to the case, and they trust that, in obtaining ample redress for the injury inflicted on, and losses sustained by, the Church Missionary Society, your lordship will see fit to convince the Chinese authorities of this port that the treaty rights of Her Majesty’s subjects cannot be violated with impunity.

the wu shih shan riot.

Native placards.

The following are translated copies of placards which have been extensively posted in the city and suburbs during the past week:

1. “The heroic and good men of the empire (Teen heir) are to assemble at the grand meeting to be held at Wu Shih Shan on the evening of the 14th of the 8th moon, for the purpose of exterminating all the foreign thieves residing in the province (Fohkien). They cannot be permitted to live (among our people) and (we must) recover our Feng Shui land, which they have encroached upon.

“If the mandarins interfere, they will be murdered—the official dogs! On recovering our Feng Shui land, then the state will be prosperous, the people peaceable, the winds moderate, and the rains favorable. Let all the people exert themselves.”

“You official dogs! you official dogs!! Remember that the Viceroy of the two Kwang—Yang Wei Chen (? Yeh ming chen) fell into the clutches of the foreign thieves. It was in this way: He was invited by the foreign thieves to an entertainment (led to drink wine) on board of one of their vessels, and as soon as he got on board, they sailed to the foreigners’ country, where they disemboweled him, and exhibited his entrails at the seven gates of their city. They are not brave! They are not brave!!—These barbarian thieves! These barbarian thieves!!

“Issued by the people of the two Kwang (i. e., Kuangtung and Kwanghsi).”

2. “The foreigners are decidedly wrong in encroaching by force upon our Feng Shui land. They insult the ignorant people of our country, and regard them with contempt and aversion. They look upon all our officials, both civil and military, with scorn (for they see) that in the discharge of their official duties there is no one to lead or direct them. They make no distinction between the good and the bad; they wildly brandish (their sticks) like an acrobat. This is very vulgar. They deceive the people, and get them to embrace their religion and join their churches. The vices prevailing among them are well known. Their churches are a banditti hold; they are known to be guilty of uncleanly acts; the more they increase in number the worse they act. They are dangerous! If these terrible men are not exterminated, then we (the people), are not equal to the birds of the air and the beasts of the field. We must not try to imitate the officials—they are stupid. These stupid officials are afraid to take action; not like the people, who love to give vent to their feelings, and who fired the foreign house, which the officials could not prevent, for, when they tried to do so the other day, the youngsters exerted themselves with a will, and in a short time the building was destroyed.

“We are still unsatisfied with the work accomplished, and what is the use of deputing soldiers when the will of the people is to destroy (the remaining buildings). Do not blame us! Do not say that we were wrong—for the land is public property, and if there had been (a single person) unwilling to assist in the destruction of the building he would have offended the people. Not one of us could bear being charged with having carried dissatisfaction among the people.

“We therefore explain to you in a straightforward manner (and request you to) carefully view the condition of affairs (?) Bear in mind that ten of the literati petitioned the officials about the land in question; and if they are involved in trouble, we (the people) are to come forward in a body and assist them, and see what action the officials will take. If they are to be punished, then we are to exert ourselves to the utmost, and see who will gain the day! This matter concerns the entire populace of the city; every man has an interest at stake, and succeed (we must), if we break out in open rebellion. Let there be no encroachment on our Feng Shui land; if there is, we will then declare war (lit: invite you to fight us).

“Issued by the people of the entire city (Foochow) for the information of the foreigner Hu.”

[Inclosure 4 in No. 61.]

Mr. De Lano to Mr. Holcombe.

Foochow, October 5, 1878. No. 113.]

Sir: Recurring to the Wu Shih Shan riot, I have to inform you that since the date of my last to you on the subject there have been no further acts of violence committed by the Chinese, though they have been prolific in threats against foreigners, and foreign property in the city. From the 30th of August to September 19, five men-of-war arrived here (four English and one American) and this evidently had the effect to move the authorities to the exercise of special energy and efforts to prevent further outrage or destruction of property.

About the date of the arrival of the United States ship Alert in port, to wit, the 18th September, placards were posted threatening the destruction of the remainder of the English Church Mission property on Wu Shih Shan, and the expulsion of all foreigners from the city. There was every reason to believe that these incendiary placards emanated from the literati, Hing, who led the incendiary mob on the 30th August and who has been repeatedly pointed out to the authorities; and it has been well known that this man has all along been with his ruffian followers quartered in a temple adjoining the mission premises, yet no move has been made toward his arrest.

Yesterday, the 4th, being the Chun Yang festival, was fixed upon for another demonstration against foreigners. Many thousands of people repaired to the hill to fly kites and to worship, and it was feared that trouble would arise, but many officials were on the spot or stationed near the mission premises with a large body of soldiers, and the day passed without any hostile demonstration being made. I have every reason to believe that the riotous propensities of Hing and his followers will now be held in check until a settlement of the burning of the college building has been effected.

The United States ship Alert will likely leave here in the course of a week.

I have, &c.,

M. M. DE LANO,
United States Consul.

[Inclosure 5 in No. 61.]

Mr. Holcombe to Rear-Admiral Patterson.

Peking, September 10, 1878.

Sir: I am informed by M. M. De Lano, esq., United States consul at Foochow, that a somewhat serious disturbance has occurred at his port, which has resulted in the destruction of a considerable amount of property owned by English missionaries, and that American-owned property lying in the same neighborhood is more or less in jeopardy.

Under these circumstances, it appears to me that the presence of one of our vessels of war at that port for a short period may be desirable.

While I am aware that ships cannot ascend the Min River to the city of Foochow, and hence cannot command the threatened neighborhood, yet the moral effect of the presence of a vessel may be of service in causing Chinese officials to put forth the necessary effort to restrain their people.

I have, therefore, the honor to request that, if it is consistent with your views and arrangements, you will dispatch a vessel to that port at your earliest convenience.

I shall send this dispatch under flying seal to our vice consul-general, requesting him to communicate with the senior naval officer at Shanghai or with you by telegram direct.

I have, &c.,

CHESTER HOLCOMBE,
Chargé d’Affaires.

[Inclosure 6 in No. 61.]

Mr. Holcombe to Mr. De Lano.

Peking, September 10, 1878. No. 63.]

Sir: I have the honor to receive your dispatch No. 109 of the 31st ultimo, reporting a disturbance at your port, and thank you for the promptness with which you communicated the fact to me.

I have furnished my colleague, Her Britannic Majesty’s chargé d’affaires, with the substance of your dispatch, to whom it was the first intimation that trouble had occurred.

In view of the present situation, I have requested Rear-Admiral Patterson to send a vessel of war to your port for a short time.

I am, &c.,

CHESTER HOLCOMBE.

[Inclosure 7 in No. 61.]

Rear-Admiral Patterson to Mr. Holcombe.

United States Flag-ship Monocacy (3d rate),
Yokohama, Japan, October 2, 1878.

Sir: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your communication of September 10, in relation to the recent disturbance at Foochow. Previous to its reception I had ordered the United States steamer Alert, Commander R. Boyd, U. S. N., commanding, from Amoy to that place.

I shall be glad at all times to hear from you in relation to American interests in China, and to co-operate with you in their promotion and protection.

Very respectfully, &c.,

F. H. PATTERSON,
Rear-Admiral.

No. 99. Mr. Holcombe to Mr. Evarts. [Document 115]

No. 99.
Mr. Holcombe to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Peking, November 4, 1878. No. 66.]

Sir: In his dispatch No. 379, of January 5 last, Mr. Seward brought to your notice a discussion which had arisen between the Chinese and British authorities with regard to the right of the former to insist upon the removal of a certain hulk at Chinkiang from its moorings to another locality, upon the ground that, as placed, it so deflected the current as to endanger the bank of the river. He informed you that the Chinese Government had taken legal advice in England as to their rights in the premises, which advice, also summarized by Mr. Seward, was entirely in their favor.

In July of the present year, the local authorities at Chinkiang again took steps to secure the removal of the hulk, whereupon its owners, Messrs. Butterfield & Swire, sought, through the Shanghai general chamber of commerce, the intervention of the diplomatic corps in their behalf.

I have the honor to place before you the correspondence which took place, from which you will see that we declined to interfere in the business. We reached this conclusion in view of the following reasons: 1st. The case being purely between the Chinese and British authorities, no action could be taken by us without the request of Mr. Eraser, Her Britannic Majesty’s representative.

2d. Mr. Fraser frankly informed us that his government entirely conceded the right claimed by the Chinese, and had definitely instructed him to take no steps to prevent the removal of the hulk.

3d. It was shown to us that the intendant at Chinkiang had requested the consent of the British consul to the removal of the hulk temporarily, which consent had been granted.

It was also the opinion of the majority of the representatives present that, with or without the consent of the British Government, China had the right to take such steps as she deemed necessary to the preservation of her rivers and harbors.

I have, &c.,

CHESTER HOLCOMBE.

[Inclosure 1 in No. 66.]

Mr. Luder to Mr. De Espana.

German Consulate General of Shanghai,
Shanghai, August 8, 1878.

Mr. Minister and Doyen: The Shanghai Chamber of Commerce has requested, under date of 3d instant, the consular body to forward to your excellency the subjoined request, relative to the measures taken by the Chinese authorities with respect to the hulk of the British firm of Messrs. Butterfield & Swire at Chinkiang. This the consular body is unable to refuse.

Receive, Mr. minister and Doyen, the assurances of our distinguished consideration.

C. LUDER,
Consul-General for Germany, Doyen of the Consular Corps.

[Inclosure 2 in No. 66.]

Mr. Forbes to Mr. De Espana, Doyen.

Shanghai, General Chamber of Commerce,
August 3, 1878. No. 516.]

Sir: I have the honor to hand you herewith a copy of a communication from Messrs. Butterfield and Swire, dated the 1st instant, respecting an order which they have received to remove their Chinkiang hulk from the position which it has occupied since 1874.

The chamber is hot in possession of the facts further than they are given in this communication, but the case seems to be in brief as follows: 1st. That Messrs. Butterfield & Swire are now ordered in an arbitrary way by the Chinkiang harbor-master to remove their hulk from the position where some years ago they were compelled to place it by direction of the commissioner of customs, and where, according to good English professional opinions, it can do no harm to the river bank or otherwise.

2d. That the order is now given by the customs officials without cause assigned, and, as Messrs. Butterfield & Swire believe, in opposition to the wishes of the Chinese authorities.

Without expressing any opinion on the merits of this peculiar case, the chamber is impressed with the importance of the principle involved to the general interests of foreign trade in China. While it is not only right but necessary that the Chinese government should take active measures for the conservation or improvement of their waterways and harbors, it is manifestly expedient that the foreign authorities should be allowed some voice, where the acquired rights or privileges of their nationals are in question.

Such concurrent action of the foreign officials has been provided in the new rules for the conservation of the Shanghai harbor, and it seems strange that the same principle should apparently have been lost sight of at Chinkiang.

The chamber would be wanting in its duty if it failed to bring to the notice of the proper authorities this introduction of a dangerous precedent, which if now allowed to pass unchallenged, might be hereafter employed to the grave detriment of shipping interests at this port.

I have therefore to ask the favor of your excellency’s consideration for the subject, and to express the hope that you and your colleagues may see fit to make some representations to the high Chinese authorities.

I have, &c.,

F. B. FORBES,
Vice-Chairman.

Messrs. Butterfield & Swire to Mr. Forbes. [Document 116]

Messrs. Butterfield & Swire to Mr. Forbes.

Shanghai, August 1, 1878.

Sir: We have the honor to request the attention of the chamber to the following facts as evincing a danger to the foreign shipping trade in China, which, in our opinion, it is the duty of the chamber to use its influence to avert:

In April, 1873, as agents of the China Navigation Company, limited, we took over at Chinkiang the hulk belonging to the Union Steam Navigation Company. The hulk was then moored near the north hank of the river. She had been there, in common with all the other hulks, for some years, not because it was a convenient place, but because it was well known that there was a current against the south bank and a strong scour caused by the current. To the repeated invitations of the customs and the public to moor her on the south bank, the previous owners had for years been unwilling to comply, owing to the existence of this current, and we ourselves when first applied to to take a more convenient berth on the south bank were afraid to do so, as we were advised that the scour along that bank would render the access of steamers and cargo-boats to the hulk difficult. However, ultimately we had to move by order of Mr. Huber, then commissioner of customs, and, under threat of the withdrawal of facilities for the shipment and landing of cargo, we shifted the hulk to the south bank in 1874, and moored her in a berth indicated to us by Mr. Goldspink, the tide-surveyor of the port. Connections were made between the hulk and the shore by us at considerable expense, and we regarded her as moored there permanently.

In the course of 1875 considerable damage was done to the Chinkiang concession bund from the scour alluded to as caused by the river current, and the customs tide-surveyor, Mr. Goldspink, expressed an opinion, in which he was supported by several more professional people, viz, that our hulk had “more or less” to do with the scour, and advised the removal of the hulk, “as an experiment, to see whether it was so.”

He, early in 1876, ordered her out of the berth to which, in 1874, he had ordered her in. His letter was accompanied by a very guarded opinion from the customs engineers that the hulk might have something to do with the scour, and that at any rate her removal would show whether she had or not.

Being naturally unwilling to have experiments tried at our expense by the imperial customs, we tried to induce them to desist, by obtaining the opinion of a professional engineer, Mr. Kingsmill, which showed conclusively that the scour was the result of a current from the opposite shore, and not of a hulk floating in ten fathoms of water. A further survey by Captain Pitman corroborated Mr. Kingsmill’s report, and though the evidence adduced by these gentlemen was allowed by the tide-surveyor and the engineers-in-chief to be correct, the customs still persisted in their orders to move the hulk to see whether she caused any “eddies” or not.

Further surveys were made by Captain Colomb, of the Audacious, and Captain Bridgford, R. M. A., all of which went to prove that the theory of the customs engineer and tide-surveyor was wrong, but they could not be induced to abandon their experiments.

The same threats of withdrawal of facilities, by which in 1874 we were made to move from the north to the south bank, were in 1876 put in force to make us move from the south bank, and, naturally thinking that there must be some limit to the powers of subordinate officers of the customs, or at least to their wanton exercise at the expense of foreign merchants, and to the detriment of foreign trade, we declined to move. Their threats of refusing to allow steamers to anchor alongside were carried out on the 22d June, and for several months our steamers had to give up the Chinkiang trade, and we had to submit to a loss of upwards of 40,000 pounds.

Subsequently the permit to land and ship cargo was restored to the hulk, but we regret to say that recently a further desire to make experiments of the effect of a small floating body on the mighty current of the Yangtsze has seized the Chinkiang customs, and we have once more been requested to move the hulk. This time the order is given without a cause being assigned, and we have good reason to believe in opposition to the wishes of the Chinese authorities.

We would point out to the chamber that this is a matter which concerns the whole foreign carrying trade. Without disputing the right which China, in common with other sovereign States, has of domain over her rivers, a right which she recognizes the possession of by systematically neglecting those navigated by foreign vessels, we would point out that the vesting of the exercise of it in inexperienced customs officials is a most dangerous step.

The foreign customs was constituted by the treaty powers solely as a collectorate of maritime revenue, and as such they have hitherto done their duty with fidelity; but for that body to assume, as it has done in the present case, the powers and functions of hydraulic engineers and international judges, is to go so far beyond the special province for which they were created as to call for, in our opinion, a vigorous protest from the chamber of commerce.

When the imperial customs has in its ranks as its advisers a competent staff of hydraulic engineers skilled in fluviatile formations, and when their powers as a service have been extended by the express command of the Chinese Government, with the express sanction of the ministers, it will be for us, as foreign merchants, to accept their dicta in such cases as the present; but until that time we should be doing less than our duty if we did not bring to the notice of the chamber any unwarrantable and untimely assertion of power by the customs, calculated to injure foreign trade.

The action of the customs at Chinkiang prejudices, it is true, a British firm only; hut, the power once asserted, to-morrow it may be an American or a German one. We remember with pleasure that the chamber has ever been alive to the solidarity of the rights of merchants of all the treaty powers, and we would beg the chamber to make a representation on this subject to the consular body here, or the corps diplomatique at Peking.

Without presuming to dictate the language of such a representation, we would beg to suggest that it should, in the interests of all, protest against the assumption of powers of such magnitude by the foreign maritime customs to drive our hulk from one berth to another, for reasons which the best professional advice obtainable states have no existence, should be discontinued, and to ask our representatives that if they contemplate sanctioning the extension of the sphere of the maritime customs, so as to include the preservation of the sovereign rights of China over her navigable rivers, they take steps at the same time, in the interests of foreign trade, and of their nationals, to prevent the arbitrary and wanton exercise of these novel powers by inexperienced and irresponsible officials.

We have the honor, &c.,

BUTTERFIELD & SWIRE.

[Inclosure No. 3 in No. 66.]

Mr. de España to Mr. Luedor.

Peking, August 22, 1878. No. 297.]

C. Luedor, Esq.,
Consul-General for Germany, and Doyen of the Consular Corps, Shanghai:

Sir: I have the honor to forward you a note to the chamber of commerce at Shanghai, in response to the statement of Messrs. Butterfield & Swire, relative to the measures taken by the Chinese authorities with respect to their hulk at the port of Chinkiang, which, at the request of the consular corps, you did me the favor of transmitting with your letter of 8th of this month.

Receive, Mr. Consul-General and Doyen, the assurances of my distinguished consideration.

de ESPAÑA.

[Inclosure No. 4 in No. 66.]

Mr. de España to Mr. Forbes.

Peking, August 23, 1878.

F. B. Forbes, Esq.,
Vice-President of the Chamber of Commerce, Shanghai:

Mr. Vice-President: In reply to the letter which you did me the honor of addressing to me, under date of 3d of this month, on the subject of a communication presented to the chamber of commerce, Shanghai, by Messrs. Butterfield & Swire, bearing on an order to remove a hulk at the port of Chinkiang, moored since 1874, I hasten to inform you that this case has been definitely decided by Her Britannic Majesty’s Government; therefore it is impossible for either myself or colleagues to take it into consideration.

Her Britannic Majesty’s chargé d’affaires explained to me that the request to remove the ponton was addressed by the local Taoutai to the English consul of that port, and consequently the action taken by the Chinese authorities in this case has the required legal basis.

Receive, &c.

de ESPAÑA.

No. 100. Mr. Holcombe to Mr. Evarts. [Document 117]

No. 100.
Mr. Holcombe to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Peking, November 12, 1878. (Received January 11.) No. 69.]

Sir: Recurring to Mr. Seward’s several dispatches concerning the conservation of the river and harbor at Shanghai, and more especially to his No. 371, bearing date December 29, 1877, which covered a set of rules agreed upon between the Chinese foreign office and the several legations here, and having for their object the protection of the harbor named, I now have the honor to submit for your consideration copies, in French and English, of a correspondence which has taken place concerning these rules between the consular body and the Chinese authorities at Shanghai, between the consular body and the diplomatic corps here, and between the last named and the foreign office.

From this correspondence it appears that, as provided for in the third article of the regulations in question, the consular body delegated certain of their number to co-operate with the harbor-master and the Chinese authorities in carrying the rules into effect. This delegation consisted of the consuls for Austria, France, and Great Britain. At their first meeting, held June 19 last, it was agreed to propose that the harbor-master’s jurisdiction be extended beyond the limits fixed in rule 2, and be enforced from Woosung to the Lunghwa Pagoda.

This proposition was in due course laid before the intendant of customs for his indorsement. While agreeing to the proposed extension of the limits down the river to Woosung, he objected to their extension up the stream to the Lunghwa Pagoda, and also to the application of the rules to what is known as the “Pootung side” of the river, opposite to the Chinese city and suburbs. It should be said that the objections of the Taotai cover those portions of the harbor which are given up mainly or exclusively to the anchorage of Chinese junks, and his intention would seem to be to prevent the application of the rules to native shipping. After some discussion, the intendant referred the matter at issue to the southern superintendent of foreign trade—the viceroy at Nanking—who sustained him in his objection to the extension of the harbor-master’s jurisdiction up the river, and its application to the shore opposite the Chinese city and suburbs, and directed him also to withdraw his consent to its extension down to Woosung. Thereupon the consular body referred the matter to the foreign representatives here.

After consideration of the subject, we requested the French minister, as doyen of the diplomatic corps, to inform the senior consul at Shanghai that, although the proposed extension is eminently desirable, yet the moment did not seem opportune, and it would have been better to have avoided all pretexts for opposition upon the part of the Chinese authorities, and to recommend them to confine their action strictly within the terms of the provisional rules in question.

Mr. Brenier was also requested to address Prince Kung, in the name of himself and his colleagues, in order to secure the issue of instructions to the viceroy at Nanking, to carry into operation the rules as originally agreed to.

The answer of the foreign office is decidedly non-committal, and it is by no means certain that the local authorities at Shanghai will consent to the enforcement of these rules upon all persons and all craft within the area originally defined.

As native shipping is responsible for a full share of the abuses which have led to the deterioration of the harbor at Shanghai, it maybe a question whether anything practical will be gained by the application of the rules to foreign vessels and over a portion of the specified area, unless they can be enforced upon both classes alike, and without modification or exception.

Asking your approval of my action in this business, I have, &c.,

CHESTER HOLCOMBE.

[Inclosure 1 in No. 69.]

German Consulate-General,
Shanghai, August 10, 1878.

Mr. Minister and Doyen: The third article of the provisional regulations, relating to the port of Shanghai, sent from Peking in 1878, charged the consular body to name a committee to co-operate with the harbor-master and native officials, in order to fix the limits mentioned in the regulations. This committee was formed, and consisted of the representatives of Austro-Hungary, France, and Great Britain.

The action taken by the committee and Taotai is reported by them in a letter, which, at the request of the consular body, the chairman of the committee has addressed to me, under date of 10th instant.

In obedience to the request of the consular corps, I forwarded to your excellency the subjoined letter as well as a translation of the correspondence had with the Taotai.

Receive, Mr. Minister and Doyen, the assurances of my high consideration.

C. LUDER,
Consul-General for Germany, Doyen of the Consular Body.

[Inclosure 2 in No. 69.]

Imperial and Royal Austro-Hungarian Consulate-General,
Shanghai, August 10, 1878.

Dear Sir and Colleague: In accordance with the resolution taken at the meeting of the consular body on the 2d day of August, 1878, to give a summary of the proceedings of the committee appointed to deliberate with the local authorities the execution of the Tsungli Yamên’s Regulations regarding the preservation of the Shanghai Harbor, I have the honor to report as follows:

The first meeting of the committee was held on the 19th of June, 1878, where all the members present unanimously agreed to propose that the present limits of the harbormaster’s jurisdiction should be extended beyond the localities specified in the second article of the Tsungli Yam en’s Regulations, in order to secure for them the greatest possible efficiency, and for that purpose it was proposed that the control and authority of the harbor-master should be enforced in future time all over the river from Woosung up to the Lunghwa Pagoda.

The undersigned was directed to communicate this proposition to the acting Taotai, with the request to procure for the same the approval of the Chinese Government.

It was further decided that in the mean time the harbor-master should survey the river and prepare the plans in reference to the line for the wharves and jetties, &c., which are to be taken into deliberation as soon as the question of the future limits of the harbor-master’s jurisdiction shall be decided.

On the 20th June, 1878, I communicated to the acting Taotai the minutes of the meeting, requesting him to indorse the resolution of the committee in regard to the proposed extension of the harbor-master’s jurisdiction, and secure for the same the approval of the Chinese Government. I also had some personal interviews with the acting Taotai, discussing and demonstrating the necessity and expediency of the proposed measure.

At these occasions, as well as by the acting Taotai’s note, dated June 29, 1878, which I received in reply to the one addressed to him on June 19, 1878, it would be seen that the acting Taotai, although willing to adopt the committee’s opinion in regard to an extension of the harbor-master’s jurisdiction all over the river as far down as Woosung, is not only utterly averse to any extension of the same on the upper part of the river, but is going even so far, notwithstanding the respective decision of the Tsungli Yamên, as to object to have the harbor-master’s jurisdiction established over that part of the river opposite the Chinese city and suburbs, where the junks and other Chinese craft are usually anchored, pleading that any interference with them by the harbor-master might give rise to many difficulties.

At a subsequent interview, I distinctly made the Taotai understand that this objection could never be admitted by the consular body as according to the second paragraph of the Tsungli Yamên’s Regulations, where the present limits of the harbormaster’s jurisdiction are clearly defined, that part of the river opposite the Chinese city and suburbs is already placed under the control and authority of the harbor, master, and I also pointed out to this functionary the incompatibility of his altering a decision of the highest authority in such an arbitrary way.

In the same sense I addressed the acting Taotai in writing, on the 13th of July, 1878, but much to my regret without having been able to change his opinion in regard to this point.

The acting Taotai replied to my last note the 18th day of July, 1878, admitting as before the extension of the harbor-master’s jurisdiction over the whole part of the river north of the bridge of the 16th tithing, at the boundaries of the French concession, down to Woosung, declining, however, not only any extension of the same on the upper part of the river, but even objecting to have the river opposite the Chinese city and suburbs, south of the bridge of the 16th tithing, placed under the control of the harbor-master; and therefore remains still at variance with the above quoted decision of the Tsungli-Yamen.

The acting Taotai intends to lay the question before the superintendent of the southern ports, who, according to his opinion, is competent to decide the same.

I may be permitted finally to say that the correspondence which took place between myself and the Taotai in regard to the extension of the harbor-master’s jurisdiction, viz, the notes I addressed to this functionary on the 20th June and 13th of July, and the replies I received on June the 29th and July 18, 1878, I had already the honor to transmit to you in due time.

I have, &c.,

CHARLES DE BOLESLAWSKI.

I.

[Translation.]

Imperial Royal Austro-Hungarian Consulate-General,
Shanghai, June 20, 1878.

Your Excellency: Referring to your note of May 29, 1878, I beg to inform you that a meeting of the committee to deliberate the execution of the regulations drawn up by the Tsungli-Yamtai regarding the conservation of the Shanghai Harbor was held on the 19th day of June, 1878.

It was unanimously agreed that the local authorities, after the survey of the river, shall make a proposition in regard to the limits of the jurisdiction to be exercised by the harbor-master in accordance with the rules of the Tsungli-Yamen for the consecration of the Shanghai Harbor.

After the determination of the limits of the jurisdiction of the harbor-master the lines as mentioned in Article III of the aforesaid rules will be proposed.

It was also unanimously considered to be the most urgent necessity that at the occasion of defining the future limits of the jurisdiction of the harbor-master, the same ought to be extended far beyond the existing points as well up as down the river, in order to prevent obstructions, although put up in a certain distance to endanger or deteriorate in time the fairway of the river.

For this reason, it seems to be very desirable that in the future the jurisdiction of the harbor-master should be in force from Woosung up to Lunghwa Pagoda.

Directed by the committee to inform your excellency of these resolutions, the committee trust that your excellency will indorse their opinion, and procure from the Chinese Government the approbation of the same.

I have, &c.,

CHARLES DE BOLESLAWSKI.

II.

[Translation.]

By a communication of the Acting Taotai to Chevalier Boleslawski, Imperial Royal Austro-Hungarian consul.

Cha-lan-Shêng communicates the following:

I had the honor to receive your communication of the 20th of June regarding the meeting for deliberating the regulations of the Tsungli-Yamen concerning the preservation of the harbor of Shanghai. In the same is stated that there is the most urgent necessity to define the future limits of the jurisdiction of the harbor-master, and that the same shall be extended from Woosung up to the Lunghwa Pagoda.

On the 28th instant I had the honor to receive your call, when we again spoke of the former business.

I find that the tract of the Huang-pu River, beginning from the little east gate, north of the bridge of the sixteenth tithing, at the boundaries of the French settlement, down to the mouth of Woosung, is constantly occupied by foreign ships coming and going, and it is therefore a natural consequence that the tract in question should he under the jurisdiction of the harbor-master.

Concerning, however, the tract of the Huang-pu River, beginning south of the bridge of the sixteenth tithing up to the Lunghwa Pagoda, there were hitherto no foreign ships anchored, and the same is full of little boats from various places of the interior going and coming; there are, moreover, numerous junks; it is, therefore, very difficult to place this tract under the jurisdiction of the harbor-master; it ought to be left to the district magistrate of Shanghai to fix regulations, and to issue thereupon notices, in order that the junks and the people living on the shores of the Huang-pu may unanimously obey (such regulations), and a distinct line in the respective boundaries will be thus re-established.

Should the tract of the river south of the bridge of the sixteenth tithing up to the Lunghwa Pagoda, also be under the rule of the harbor-master, it is to be apprehended, as the junks arriving from the various places are unaware of such regulations being fixed, that great difficulties would arise therefrom.

This tract ought to remain still under the jurisdiction of the district magistrate, who again will depute an officer who will assist (the magistrate) in exercising the jurisdiction; thus every difficulty will be avoided, and the affair carried on in safety.

In matters regarding the construction of wharves, &c., that deputy can, not being an expert in such matters, consult the harbor-master.

Concerning the regulations to be drawn up for the preservation of the tract of the Huang-pu River north of the bridge of the sixteenth tithing down to the mouth of the Woosung, I beg that your honor, together with your colleagues, and the district magistrate of Shanghai, and the officers delegated, Chang and Tung, besides the harbor-master, will take a survey, draw thereupon a plan, and make the necessary remarks thereon, and accordingly to draw up regulations and to send all to the Taotai, that he may deliberate and take a decision thereon, and he may hereafter transmit the same in a report to his excellency, the superintendent of trade of the southern ports, and to the governor of Foochov, and the Taotai will then act accordingly to the reply thereon.

In this sense I wrote also to the commissioner of customs, to the district magistrate, and to the respective delegates.

This is a special reply.

5th moon, 29th day (29th June, 1878).
True translation.
JOSEPH HAAS.

III.

Imperial Royal Austro-Hungarian Consulate-General,
Shanghai, July 13, 1878.

I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your note of June the 29th, and in reply to your observations to the proposed extension of the harbor-master’s jurisdiction, I beg to carry your attention to the second paragraph of the regulations regarding the conservation of the Shanghai Harbor, drawn up by the Tsungli Yamên in concert with the representatives of the treaty powers.

According to the tenor of this paragraph the authority and control of the very same, tract of the river—south of the bridge of the 16th tithing—which you desire to remain as heretofore, under the jurisdiction of the district magistrate, is already by the Tsungli Yamên for the future accorded to the harbor-master, and therefore an alteration of this decision would not be appropriate.

The committee, with the intention to secure the greatest efficiency of the regulations now under deliberation, considered it an urgent necessity to have the harbor-master’s jurisdiction extended beyond the point enumerated in the second paragraph of the Tsungli Yamên regulations, and proposed for that purpose that the river from Woosung up to the Lunghwa Pagoda should be placed in the future under the control of the harbor-master.

I can only repeat my request that your excellency may be pleased to procure for this proposition the approval of the Chinese Government; and I beg further to say that in the mean time the harbor-master will prepare the plans in reference to the line to be fixed for the wharves, jetties, &c.; which, after due deliberation, will be submitted by the committee to the consular body for further action.

I have, &c.,

CHARLES DE BOLESLAWSKI.

Communication of the acting Taoutai, Cha-lan-Sheng, to the Aus Chevalier de Boleslawski.

[Translation.]

On the 15th instant, I had the honor to receive your communication in regard to the proposed regulations for the preservation of the harbor of Shanghai, and that the jurisdiction of the harbor-master shall extend from Woosung up to the Lunghwa Pagoda. You further request me to procure the approval of the high authorities to this proposition. Concerning this point I find that (the tract of the river) north of the bridge of the 16th tithing down to Yang Shoo-poo (boundary of the American settlement), and the water-read down to the mouth of the Woosung, was, according to the rule hitherto existing, under the control of the harbor-master.

When I had the pleasure of seeing you on the 12th instant I called your attention to this point.

Your letter of the 15th instant speaks still of the boundaries from Woosung up to Lunghwa Pagoda.

The limits of every harbor of the southern treaty ports were hitherto always fixed, according to the real state of circumstances, by the superintendent of trade for the southern ports.

As your honor’s suggestion is not in accord with mine, I petitioned thereupon to the superintendent of trade for the southern ports—Shen and I shall act according to his decision.

As soon as I have his decision thereupon I shall communicate the same to you.

6th moon, 19th day (July 18, 1878).
True translation.
JOSEPH HAAS.

Shanghai, August 26, 1878.

Mr. Minister and Doyen: The consular corps of Shanghai has the honor to forward to the diplomatic corps, at Peking, the subjoined copy and translation of a third dispatch, which the Taotai of Shanghai has addressed Mr. de Boleslawski, on the subject of the provisional rules relating to the port of Shanghai.

The two parts of the river placed at present under the orders of the harbor-master are indicated on the plan subjoined, near to Shanghai by II, and near Woosung by two red lines.

The region under control of the harbor-master has been extended by Article 2 of the Provisional Rules over that part of the river which is marked on the plan with III, along the Chinese city and it suburbs.

The committee of the consular corps, the harbor-master and the two Chinese deputed by the Taotai have moreover recommended the extension of the provisional rules over those portions of the river marked on the plan by I and IV.

The governor-general at Nanking is opposed to any extension of the present radius, and answers me that the second article of the provisional rules has not placed part III under the orders of harbor-master.

The consular corps cannot help but indicate to the diplomatic corps that it would be an essential advantage if the second article, which places part III under control of the harbor-master, could be put into execution.

To do this, it is indespensable that the Tsungli-Yamên should renew their instructions to the governor-general at Nanking.

As to the extension of this provisional rule over the parts I and IV of the river, the consular corps well know its desirability, and has the honor to commend this question to the kind consideration of the diplomatic corps at Peking.

Receive, Mr. Minister and Doyen, the assurances of my high consideration,

C. LUDER,
Consul-General for Germany and Doyen of the Consular Corps.

Dispatch from the acting Taotai, Cha, to the Austro-Hungarian consul, Chevalier de Boleslawski.

[Translation.]

Cha, &c., makes the following communication:

On the 13th day of the 7th moon, the 4th year of Kuang hsii (August 11, 1878), I had the honor to receive from the superintendent of trade for the southern ports, His Excellency Sheu, the decision upon my report, which I made according to orders received with regard to the regulations for the conversation of the harbor of Shanghai, and to the deliberations which took place concerning the limits of the Huang-pu for the jurisdiction of the harbor-master.

According to this decision received, the very first important matter is the firm maintainance of the old limits.

In the careful translation of the definement of the foreign settlements of Shanghai the southern limit goes just to the end of the French, and the northern limit just to the end of the American settlement, a fact known to both Chinese and foreigners.

The meaning of the second paragraph of the inspector-general, Mr. Hart’s, proposed regulations is, that the harbor-master’s jurisdiction goes over that part of the river which is within the settlements, and nothing is contained therein of the part south of the bridge of the 16th tithing; also nothing of Woosung; this is quite clear.

What is moreover therein contained about the part of the river opposite of the city wall, of the Chinese custom-house, of the suburbs, and the foreign settlement, as well the part of the Hongkew Creek between the settlements, point specially out the limits of the eastern and western shores of the Huang-pu. The Huang-pu River, within the settlements, has on its western shore the district city, the foreign customhouse, and the Hongkew Creek; on its eastern shore, only open country and villages.

To the south and north the limits are clearly defined by those of the foreign settlements, and it is unnecessary to lose more words about it.

Moreover, in the same paragraph the foreign settlements are twice mentioned, and their meaning is very clear. The passage, “to that part of the Hongkew Creek,” denotes also, clearly, that thereby the part of the river between the settlements is meant, therefore the jurisdiction cannot go beyond the settlements.

Generally speaking, the western boundary of the settlements ends at the bridge of the Hongkew Village, which for this reason is also generally comprised among the limits of the harbor.

Now the consular body desire to have extended the limits towards the south and north for together several tens of li, which, however, does really not agree with the regulations of the foreign settlements.

Moreover, in the first paragraph of the regulations for anchorage of the second year of Tung Chih there is contained, “that the places for anchorage have been fixed within the settlements,” and this refers to the old regulations of the settlements; it is therefore evident that beyond the settlements no foreign ships can anchor, load or discharge cargo; such places could not have been assigned to this purpose by the harbor-master.

The Taotai by not assigning the south of the settlements to the jurisdiction of the harbor-master did very properly. He agreed, however, on the other side, that the north of the settlements should be extended over 20 li, and this was not correct; he ought to have ascertained the old limits of the settlements in the south and north, and thereupon deliberate the question, and act with correctness.

As soon as the matter is deliberated and fixed, the harbor-master has to draw up an accurate plan of the limits of the river under his jurisdiction, that it may be placed in record for further references.

According to these instructions it has to be acted properly and further reports to be made.

These the contents of the dispatch received from the superintendent of trade which the Taotai already communicated to the commissioner of customs, that he may thereupon order the harbor-master to act accordingly.

I feel myself in duty bound to communicate the same to your honor, and beg of you to further communicate it to the whole consular body, that they may act accordingly.

Kuang Hsii, 4th year, 7 moon, 17th day (August 15, 1878).
Translated by–
JOSEPH HAAS.

Peking, October 12, 1878.

Mr. Luder,
Consul-General for Germany and Chief of the Consular Body, Shanghai:

Previous to his departure for Shanghai Mr. de España handed me your letter of 26th August, ultimo, with various documents relating to an arrangement concluded in Pekin between the diplomatic corps and the Tsung li Yamên relative to the port of Shanghai.

At the time all my colleagues were absent staying at their temples, and his excellency the Peruvian minister knew nothing of the matter at issue, so it was impossible to ascertain the views of any of my colleagues on the subject. It is these untoward circumstances that have caused the delay in making the answer which, as temporary chief of the diplomatic body in Pekin, I am charged to make.

If we have well understood your letter of the 20th August to his excellency Mr. de España, and to which was annexed a translation of a third copy of despatch, which the Shanghai Taotai had addressed to Mr. Boleslawski concerning provisional rules relating to the port of Shanghai, the governor-general at Nanking is opposed not only to the execution of article 2 of the provisional rule, above that part of the river opposite the Chinese city and suburbs, and which is marked on the plan which you addressed the chief of the diplomatic body as No. III, but he also objects entirely to article 2 of provisional rules which place this portion III under the orders of the harbor-master.

This article 2 being perfectly clear and precise, the diplomatic corps have unanimously addressed a verbal note to the Tsung li Yamên with the request that the yamên insist that the viceroy at Nanking should respect and execute this rule, which His Imperiei Highness Prince Kung, by his letter of 31st January, 1878, proposed to ratify if we approved.

In regard to the extension of the provision of rules over the parts I to IV, the diplomatic corps is of the opinion that the consular body at Shanghai would have done better and avoided all pretext for opposition on the part of the Chinese authorities, if they had not sought to accomplish what the diplomatic corps itself recognizes as eminently desirable— i. e., the extension of the rules in question over the parts I to IV.

It seems desirable, therefore, to recommend that the consular body at Shanghai should, for the moment, confine their action strictly within the terms of the provisional rules in question.

Please accept, sir, the assurance of my most distinguished consideration.

Peking, October 16, 1878.

His Imperial Highness Prince Kung and their excellencies the members of the Tsung-li Yamên:

On the 31st January, 1878, Your Imperial Highness Prince Kung honored each member of the diplomatic body with a letter containing certain provisional rules, proposed by Mr. Hart, inspector-general of imperial maratime customs, relating to the port of Shanghai.

The letter of Your Imperial Highness ended thus:

“This is the communication which we have received from Mr. Hart; all of which has for its object the conversation of the river and the port of Shanghai, is for general interest of commerce and merchants.”

I inclose a copy of the rules mentioned, and pray your excellency to communicate them, if it be approved by you, to the consuls of your nation to the end that they may be obeyed. I wait a telegram from your excellency.

We severally addressed replies to His Imperial Highness approving the provisional rules in question, and we inform Your Imperial Highness that we had communicated these rules to our consuls and instructed them to conform themselves to them.

The diplomatic corps deeply regret to inform Your Imperial Highness and your excellencies that, according to the reports we have received from our consuls at Shanghai, who have addressed us after some months, it results that his excellency the Viceroy of Nanking objects, as required by article 2 of the provisional rule, to placing the part of the river situated in face of the Chinese city and its suburbs under the authority and control of the harbor-master.

The terms of article 2 bear but one interpretation, and we request from Your Imperial Highness and your excellencies permission to reproduce it.

“Article 2. The authority and control that the harbor-master can exercise can be extended, and it is defined by the present rule to extend over that part of the river that faces the Chinese city, its suburbs, the foreign concession, and the Souchow Creek embraced in these concessions.”

The diplomatic corps, therefore, beg that Your Imperial Highness and your excellencies will instruct the viceroy at Nanking to respect this provisional rule, as proposed to the diplomatic corps at Pekin by Your Imperial Highness.

Memorandum from the Tsung-li Yamên in response to a communication received October 19, 1878.

[Translation of memorandum.]

Peking, October 22, 1878.

It is evident that in all the stipulations of these rules the interests of the port and approaches of Shanghai are kept in view, but that they are no doubt susceptible of some modification, if on rigorus application any local obstacles are met with.

We have received from the northern and southern superintendents of trade a rêsume of the discussion which the intendent of customs and the several consuls have had on the subject. They are not at all of the same opinion.

We have written to the inspector-general of customs, in order that he might make his comments upon the proposed modifications to the rules.

The inspector-general advises us to reply negatively to the interpretation given by the consuls to article II, as overstepping the limits fixed by the regulations.

We have instructed the two superintendents to reach some definite arrangement, whereby the rule may become susceptible of perpetual application.

True translation.

A. DÉVÉRIA.

Peking, October 23, 1878.

To L. L. E. E., the Members of the Foreign Board:

The Doyen of the diplomatic body has the honor to acknowledge receipt of the Yamên’s memorandum sent him yesterday, in response to one forwarded on the 19th of this month by Mr. Dévéria, and he is requested by the several members of the diplomatic body to address the following remarks to the foreign board.

The diplomatic body has not requested the extension of article 2 of the provisional regulation proposed to be adopted by His Imperial Highness Prince Kung, but simply claim the execution of the second article of this regulation, which was produced in its entirety, in order to avoid all misconception.

Regarding the opinion of the acting inspector-general of customs, transmitted to us by the foreign board, there remains but to inform the Yamên, that had this agent of the Chinese Government been better informed he would have known that the Doyen of the diplomatic body in the name of his colleagues had, in the early part of the month, addressed the consul-general for Germany, Doyen of the consular body at Shanghai, requesting him to conform strictly to the terms and limits fixed by the second article of the provisional rules in question.

The Doyen of the diplomatic body has therefore again the honor to pray in his own name, as well as in those of his colleagues of the diplomatic corps in Pekin, that the Tsung-li Yamên will instruct the viceroy at Nanking to execute the provisional rules as proposed to the diplomatic corps at Pekin by His Imperial Highness, Prince Kung.

The Tsung-li Yamên to the French Minister.

Peking, October 29, 1878.

On the 24th of October we received your letter, to which was annexed a memorandum signed by the various foreign representatives resident at Pekin.

We have immediately taken note of it.

As regards the request therein made to us again to instruct the viceroy of the two Kiang to conform to the regulations, &c., we had already replied to it in our memorandum, so that it is superfluous to refer to it again here.

We are forwarding to the viceroy your two collective memoranda, telling him to lend his attention to them.

On the other hand, we beg your excellency to please communicate the present note to the diplomatic body.

We have, &c.,

A true translation.

DÉVÉRIA.

No. 101. Mr. Holcombe to Mr. Evarts. [Document 118]

No. 101.
Mr. Holcombe to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Peking, November 23, 1878. (Received February 6.) No. 76.]

Sir: I have the honor to submit to you herewith a copy of a dispatch which I have received from the consul at Hankow, complaining of the action of certain Chinese officials in the interior of the province of Szchuen in refusing to acknowledge the validity of ten transit passes issued to Mr. M. A. Jenkins, an American merchant at Hankow, and under which he was bringing native produce to that port.

A reference to my dispatch No. 25 will remind you that Mr. Seward had some correspondence with the foreign office, shortly prior to his departure for the United States in regard to the issue to American merchants at Hankow of transit passes for the export of native produce from Szchuen. This correspondence resulted in an arrangement, proposed by the Chinese and agreed to by this legation, under which such passes could be issued, and the transit dues on goods covered by them paid at Hankow.

It appears that, in accordance with this procedure, Mr. Jenkins, of Hankow, applied for and received ten passes from the customs at his port and transmitted them to his agent in Szchuen, who in turn purchased the merchandise for shipment. He was thereupon warned by the Chinese authorities at Chung-King not to attempt to use the transit passes named, and told that if, in disobedience to the warning, he sent forward his purchase, the goods upon arrival at the tax station at Kwei Chow would be held for payment of dues the same as though they were not covered by transit passes. A copy of the order issued by the Chung-King magistrate forms the inclosure to Mr. Shepard’s dispatch.

I inclose a copy of a letter which I have addressed to Prince Kung in this business, asking him to issue such orders to the authorities concerned as will cause them to respect treaty stipulations and the rights of such citizens of the United States as may be within the limits of their jurisdiction.

It is proper, however, for me to add that I am far from sanguine that my request will secure such prompt and unmistakable action on the part of the authorities here as will prevent a recurrence of the abuses complained of, or even, in the present instance, enable Mr. Jenkins to take his goods to Hankow without the payment of unjust and illegal taxes.

It is hard to conceive a more flagrant violation of treaty obligations than that narrated above, nor a better illustration of the readiness and freedom with which local authorities in China ignore the agreements and instructions of the central government. The officials in charge of the tax station at Kwei Chow have long been notorious for their conduct in this direction, as the correspondence between this legation and the department abundantly proves.

It is not likely that a change for the better will occur until the government at Peking is driven by the decided language of foreign powers to assert and exercise its legitimate authority.

I have, &c.,

CHESTER HOLCOMBE.

[Inclosure 1 in No. 76.]

Mr. Shepard to Mr. Holcombe.

Hankow, November 2, 1878.

Sir: I had the honor to receive, on the 30th of May, your No. 47, covering an inclosure of a reply from the foreign office touching transit passes for the export of native produce from the interior, and especially from the province of Szchuen. Your dispatch also suggested an expression of my opinion as to whether the arrangement proposed would meet the requirements of the trade to be affected by it.

I delayed to offer such opinion until the facts of operation should give me some grounds upon which to base it with some show of reason, although the plan decided upon by the board appeared on paper to give, in a degree, the facilities we had a right to ask. Such facts have now transpired, and I regret to say certain officials have shown no disposition to carry out the provisions agreed to, but have, on the contrary, not merely made them a dead letter, but by refusal to respect them, have been the willing and direct cause of pecuniary loss and trouble to an American merchant acting in good faith under them. The details I give for your full information, and also copies of a correspondence to substantiate them.

On reception of your dispatch above referred to, I at once communicated the basis of it to the two American houses then engaged here in the inland transit business. The same information was promulgated by the native authorities about the same date and notice given that the requisite blanks were in readiness at the Hankow customs. One of the merchants, Mr. M. Andrew Jenkins, on whose occasion my original correspondence arose, on the 13th of July applied to me to procure for his use ten transit passes to bring goods out from Szchuen. These are the passes described in the Chinese dispatch inclosed, On the 27th of the same month he applied for ten more.

In both cases I at once communicated with his excellency the Taotai, asking for the passes, and he promptly forwarded them to me. They were promptly delivered to Mr. J., who paid the established fee of $2 on each—$40 in all. He sent the documents forward to his agent at Chung Ching, directing the purchase and forwarding of the merchandise. The result is, the goods are stopped, as stated in the official communication, and they arbitrarily refuse to forward under the provision of the passes.

In fact they are repudiated, and the merchandise detained from market, and left to lose from deterioration. The authority of the foreign office at Peking is set at defiance by subordinate officials, and I am decidedly of opinion that Mr. Jenkins has undoubted claims for remunerative damages.

I am sorry that the plighted faith of officials is not more readily observed, and doubt not you will do all that is possible to secure our treaty rights, absolutely indispensable for the transaction of business.

I am, &c.,

ISAAC F. SHEPARD.

A. Mr. Jenkins to Mr. Shepard. [Document 119]

A.
Mr. Jenkins to Mr. Shepard.

Hankow, November 1, 1878.

Sir: I beg to hand you the original order which was sent to my agent at Chung Ching, in Chinese, with a copy of it in English. It is from Lee, the magistrate of Chung Ching. It explains itself. I have to request that you will forward a copy of it to his excellency the minister at Peking, and have most respectfully to ask that steps be taken as early as possible to prevent further heavy loss. I shall forward, as soon as received, particulars of a claim for loss of market, interest, &c.

I am, &c.,

M. ANDREW JENKINS.

B. [Document 120]

B.

[Translation.]

Chung Ching, October 4, 1878.

I have to inform you that on the 19th of September, 1878,1 received from his excellency the Chung Ching Taotai “Youn,” who on the 15th of September, 1878, received from the officer in charge of the tax-station at Kwei-Chow the following dispatch, in which he states:

“I am in receipt of a dispatch from his excellency, Sung, Taotai of Ichang, who has received from his excellency Ho, the Hankow Taotai, stating that Consul Shepard has addressed him a dispatch, requesting that I will forward to his office the following transit passes to carry goods from Chung Ching to Hankow, which has been applied for by Mr. M. A. Jenkins. Passes as follows: five for musk, two for gallnuts, one for silk, one for white wax, and one for safflower; in all ten passes, and that Chung Ching is considered the first tax-station en route, and all of the rest of the way stations are to examine and pass without delay, all duties for the said goods to be collected at Ichang. I, the tax officer, in reference to the above, would observe that since imported goods have been taken into Szchuen, under transit passes, the customs and internal tax offices at Kwei Chow have suffered a loss of over 200,000 taels. Now, if native produce is to be brought out from Szchuen, on which my office can collect nothing, the treasury will be empty, and where is the money to come from which the province will be called on to forward for public services? Strict orders from high authority have been issued to my office to make strict investigation that the large packages of foreign goods which pass here under transit passes, to see that they do not cover native goods; and should any native produce be found concealed, it is to pay the duties as per regulations.

“This order plainly shows that all produce coming out from Szchuen is to pay the regular charges. I have written to his excellency the viceroy, and have asked that he will bring this to the notice of the foreign board at Peking, and I have also written to the prefect at Ichang to ask that instructions be sent to Mr. M. A. Jenkins not to use the passes he has in his hands at present.

“It is now for this purpose that I address your excellency and ask that you will instruct Mr. M. A. Jenkins that the passes which he has at Chung Ching be not used for the present. Should Mr. M. A. Jenkins not obey your instructions, please inform him that on the arrival of the goods at Kwei Chow tax-barriers, that I shall not recognize the passes, but shall demand the regular dues payable at my office. As soon as I have received instructions from his excellency the viceroy, I will write you again. Thus I will be acting in accordance with the strict orders referred to.

“I, the Chung Ching Taotai, having received the above dispatch, have to instruct you, the magistrate of Chung Ching, to issue orders for the carrying out of the tax-officer’s views, and you are instructed to order Mr. M. A. Jenkins not to disobey.”

Now, I, the magistrate, having received the above instructions, address you this, and have to instruct that you will not disobey the orders above given.

From Lee, the magistrate of Chung Ching, to the American merchant, Kung-Tai.

M. A. JENKIN’S Agent.

[Inclosure 2 in No. 76.]

Mr. Holcombe to Prince Kung.

November 21, 1878.

I have the honor to inform your Imperial Highness that I am in receipt of a communication from the United States consul at Hankow, in which it is stated that Mr. M. A. Jenkins, an American merchant at Hankow, having applied for and received ten transit passes for the purpose of bringing to that port certain native produce purchased by him in Szchuen, has been warned by the local authorities at Chung Ching that the passes would not be respected, and informed that upon the arrival of his goods at Kwei Chow he would be required to pay the usual barrier charges, the same as for goods unprotected by transit passes. As a result of this procedure the produce purchased by Mr. Jenkins is stopped in the interior, and he is subjected to serious loss from deterioration of the produce and changes in the market. The consul requests me to bring this business to the notice of your Imperial Highness, and to seek from you such remedy as the circumstances demand.

Your Imperial Highness will, doubtless, remember a correspondence had with Minister Seward upon the subject of the issue of transit passes to American citizens who may desire to bring native produce from the interior of Szchuen to Hankow, and which resulted in a scheme proposed by yourself and accepted by this legation last spring, by which such passes could be secured, and the transit dues upon the produce covered by them could be paid at Hankow.

The consul at Hankow was in due course informed of this arrangement, and the ten transit passes in question were issued under it. It appears that the tax authorities in the district named refuse to acknowledge the validity of these documents, although issued by virtue of a distinct understanding arrived at between your Imperial Highness and this legation, and venture to take a course which is in manifest violation of treaty, and calculated to work grave injury to the interests of my countrymen.

Under these circumstances I have the honor to request that your Imperial Highness will issue such orders to the local authorities concerned as will cause them to respect treaty obligations, adhere to the arrangement made between your Imperial Highness and Mr. Seward, and regard the rights of such Americans as may be within the limits of their jurisdiction.

I inclose a copy of the notice served upon Mr. Jenkins.

I have, &c.

CHESTER HOLCOMBE.

No. 102. Mr. Holcombe to Mr. Evarts. [Document 121]

No. 102.
Mr. Holcombe to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Peking, December 3, 1878. (Received February 24.) No. 82.]

Sir: In reference to the provisions of “An act [Public No. 72] making appropriations for the consular and diplomatic service of the government for the year ending June thirtieth, eighteen hundred and seventy-nine,” &c., by which the salaries of the interpreters to our consulates at Tientsin and Foochow are reduced from $2,000 to $1,500 per annum, I have the honor to inform you that the gentlemen now holding these positions have unofficially indicated to me their intention to resign them at an early day.

While it would ill become me to raise any question or make comment upon the wisdom of the action of the legislative branch of the government, as referred to above, I cannot refrain from the expression of my regret that it should have appeared necessary to reduce still further the exceedingly meager allowances to the consular service in China, and especially to apply such reduction to the salaries of the interpreters at Tientsin and Foochow.

The files of correspondence between this legation and the Department will show, extending back to the first establishment of commercial relations between the United States and China, frequently repeated statements upon the part of our representatives, here, as to the paramount importance of having a competent staff of interpreters at the various consulates.

As there has not been in the past, and is not likely to be in the near future, a single Chinese-speaking United States consul in this empire, it follows that the interpreter must form the sole medium of communication between each consul and this government, and that upon his tact, discretion, honesty, and knowledge of the ways of the Chinese must depend, in a very large measure, the maintenance of good relations and the protection of our interests here. Though occupying less prominent positions than their chiefs, it is, perhaps, not an exaggeration to say, that in the faithful and efficient performance of their duties interpreters render a service to the United States not second in value or importance to that of any consular officer in China.

With them must rest, to a large extent, the recuperation and increased development of our languishing trade. For, by their ability to come into immediate contact with the merchants and trading classes among this people, they can readily disseminate in each country knowledge of the peculiar productions and requirements of the other, and so open up hitherto unsuspected avenues of commercial enterprise to our people. In my opinion, one of the most important preliminary conditions to the development, to any considerable degree, of the trade between the United States and China, is the equipment of each consulate with a well-educated, competent Chinese interpreter, who should be a citizen of the United States, and who should be instructed, under the supervision of his consul, to give special attention and study to both the foreign and native trade at his port, with a view to furnishing information upon it to the Department and to our people.

Such of the other treaty powers as are permanently represented in China have long since come to an appreciation of the importance of having competent interpreters in their consular establishments, and without an exception send young men to this city to be educated in Chinese preparatory to doing interpretative duty at the ports. Our government has not elected to follow this system, whether wisely or unwisely I do not, at the moment, venture to say.

But if we choose to hire interpreters in the markets of China, as we do practically, we must, of course, be prepared to pay the market price for their services. Such a knowledge of Chinese as would fit a person to interpret at any of our consulates, superadded to a common-school English education, is worth here, as a mere business investment to any able-bodied, American, at least $3,000 per annum. If this is a fair statement of fact, and I believe it to be considerably within the limit, it is idle for us to attempt to secure proper, interpreters at salaries varying from $500 to $1,500; for our young men do not come to China from patriotic motives, and, having come here and invested years of time and labor in the study of this most difficult language, they cannot be expected to serve our government at a compensation less than half that which their abilities would readily secure them in trade or business, especially when called upon to serve the government in this capacity with no reasonable prospect of promotion.

I am not ignoring the fact that at the ports where the smaller amount mentioned is allowed, the government has acted upon the supposition that the entire time of an interpreter was not needed, and has expected that the persons so employed would also be engaged in other business. But the difficulty of securing suitable interpreters to act under these conditions is so great as to amount to a practical impossibility. If they are engaged in trade it demands all their time, and they are naturally unwilling to place themselves in a position where they are liable to be called upon to lay aside their business engagements, at perhaps a most critical juncture, to serve the government for a merely nominal compensation. Missionaries are, with all their loyalty, equally unwilling to enter into engagements which render them liable to be interrupted in their most important and valuable labors at frequent and uncertain intervals.

As a matter of fact, it has been found necessary, at nearly all the ports having only the smaller allowance named, to employ English-speaking Chinese as interpreters, and the evils which result from their employment in this capacity can hardly be depicted in too strong language. I need only refer you, by way of illustration, to the facts developed in my report upon charges made against Mr. De Lano by the Chinese authorities at Foo Chow, and forwarded to you with Mr. Seward’s dispatch No. 345, of October 20, 1877.

Complaints of a grave character against the interpreter at Canton have been repeatedly made within the last three years, and it is safe to say that at nearly every port where persons of this class have been employed serious abuses have in consequence sprung up.

At every port in China there are numbers of natives who, being either engaged in litigation with their countrymen, accused of crime, or from various other motives, are anxious to secure by bribery the illegal exercise of consular authority and prestige in their behalf; and the report above mentioned shows that an unscrupulous interpreter can do what might almost be termed a wholesale business of this sort, and continue for years, without the knowledge of his immediate superior.

In my opinion, the wiser course, at ports of the class now under discussion, would be to appoint an American citizen, having a good knowledge of Chinese, as consul, and require him to do his own interpreting. This would, it is true, tend to make his office a permanency, which, perhaps, might also be a change for the better.

The present staff of interpreters at our several consulates in China is made up as follows: At New Chwang, Chin-Kiang; Ningpo, Amoy, and Canton, of English-speaking Chinese; at Hankow, the work is done by an American merchanti; at Shanghai, by an American physician; and at Tientsin and Foo Chow by Messrs. Pethick and Cheshire, who give their entire time to the service. I am not able to speak exactly with reference to the persons employed at the various consular agencies, but believe it safe to assume that they are all Chinese.

For reasons already intimated, it seems of the utmost importance to the protection of our good name in China, and the preservation of our interests here, that the several interpreters who are of Chinese birth be, without exception, dismissed from the service, and the employment of’ such persons be discontinued. In my experience of ten years of intercourse and intimacy with all classes of Chinese, I have hardly met one who was competent to act as interpreter, and who, in my opinion, could be trusted to withstand the temptations and opportunities for ill doing which, of necessity, constantly present themselves to a person in such a position.

It is likewise desirable that the post at Hankow should not be tilled by a person who is engaged in trade. The name of the present incumbent, Mr. A. Jenkins, is familiar to the Department and to this legation, by reason of the frequently recurring questions laid before us, in connection with his business, and it surely is not consistent with the dignity of our government that its consul at Hankow, in the discussion of questions with the Chinese authorities, should be obliged to employ at the same moment, and as his mouth-piece, one of the parties to the business at issue. In saying this, I disclaim all intention to reflect in any way upon the personal character of Mr. Jenkins or the nature of his business. They are both, so far as my information goes, above reproach.

And again, whatever may be the other qualifications of the present interpreter at Shanghai, I believe it to be entirely just to him to say that in knowledge of the Chinese language he is not qualified for his very responsible duties, and that some other person should be appointed to his present post at an early moment.

From what has immediately preceded, you will correctly gather my opinion that at present our only consulates in China which are properly furnished with interpreters are those at Tien-Tsin and Foo-Chow, and that if, in consequence of the reduction of their salaries, we lose the services of the persons now employed at those ports, we shall be, at all our consulates, in a most undesirable situation.

To sum up my views upon this subject, the consular establishments at Shanghai, Tientsin, Hankow, Foo Chow, Amoy and Canton should each be provided with an interpreter who is a citizen of the United States, thoroughly acquainted with the Chinese language, and who should be required to devote himself exclusively to the duties of his position. These officers might also be made vice-consuls at their several ports. To accomplish this an appropriation of not less than $2,000 and not more than $3,000, at each of the ports named, would be necessary.

The proper persons for these positions can be found with but little delay, if the government is able and willing to pay a reasonable compensation for their services.

Consuls should be appointed to Chinkiang, Ningpo, and New Chwang in such persons as have a knowledge of Chinese, and no allowance made to them for interpreting.

In case no change can be effected, which requires enlarged expenditures of money, I respectfully submit for your consideration whether it would not be better for our consuls to arrange, if possible, to employ the interpreters attached to the consulates of other powers at their respective posts, rather than, as at present, to employ merchants, or, worst of all, English-speaking Chinese.

In concluding this somewhat lengthy despatch, I venture to express the hope that in writing it I shall neither be accused of presumption nor of disregarding the necessity of an economical administration of all the branches of our government. As to the latter, I thoroughly realize the duty and necessity of exercising the most exact care and scrutiny in the expenditures of public funds. But, in my opinion, in the interests under discussion, there is no safe middle ground to be taken, and our consular establishments should be maintained in a dignified way or not at all. It would be far better to discontinue some of them, or indeed all, than to sustain them upon a basis so inadequate as to subject us to constant embarrassment and ridicule. As to the former, I fully and cheerfully recognize the better knowledge of the Department as to the course which may be advisable and necessary to be taken in the management of our interests in China and elsewhere. I have been led to place before you the views given herein, particularly by the fear that the action taken by Congress, and referred to above, would deprive us of the services of our two best interpreters, and generally by an anxiety that the consular establishments of the United States in China should be sustained in an efficient, dignified, and economical manner.

And I have hoped that my utterances might recall to your mind, and possibly emphasize, the opinions of my predecessors upon the same subject.

I have, &c.,

CHESTER HOLCOMBE.

No. 103. Mr. Holcombe to Mr. Evarts. [Document 122]

No. 103.
Mr. Holcombe to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Peking, December 5, 1878. (Received February 24.) No. 83.]

Sir: I have the honor to inform you that several changes in the personnel of the foreign office have taken place during the past autumn.

Mao Changhsi and Li Hungtsao have both retired from it, and from all public life, in order to observe the three years’ mourning which is required by Chinese law on the death of their parents. The first named of these gentlemen has been in the foreign board for many years; the last named only about eighteen months. As neither of them took an active part in the business of the board, their retirement is not particularly noticeable.

Their places have been filled by the appointment of Wang Wen Chao and Chow Chia Mei. Of these, the former has been governor of Hunan, and is now senior vice-president of the board of rites. The latter has been, for years, the senior secretary of the foreign office. They are both intelligent gentlemen, and seem disposed to participate actively in the business of the office.

Chung How, recently appointed Chinese minister to Russia, and Kuo Sungtao, now on his return from the Chinese mission to Great Britian, still remain in nominal connection with the Yamen, which now numbers eleven members, and contains all the privy council of state.

I have, &c.,

CHESTER HOLCOMBE.

No. 104. Mr. Holcombe to Mr. Evarts. [Document 123]

No. 104.
Mr. Holcombe to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Peking, December 5, 1878. (Received February 24.) No. 84.]

Sir: In the autumn of 1875, the Department was informed of the appointment, by the Chinese Government, of Kuo Sungtao as minister to the Court of Saint James.

I have now the honor to inform you that, in accordance with the rules of the Chinese diplomatic service, His Excellency Kuo has been granted permission to return to his native land, and the Marquis Tseng has been appointed as his successor.

This appointment deserves something more than a passing notice. The marquis is the son of the celebrated Tseng Kuo-fan, who was one of the ablest statesmen of this country in modern times. He possesses at least a portion of his father’s unusual ability, is about forty years of age, an elegant Chinese scholar, and as avowedly progressive in his ideas as his father was conservative.

Upon emerging from the retirement made necessary by the death of his parents, he came to this capital, where he has resided for the past year, awaiting his appointment to office. During this period he has openly cultivated the acquaintance of foreigners in both the diplomatic and missionary circles, making almost daily visits upon some of them, and inviting them freely to his house.

So far as my knowledge goes, he is the only Chinese of high rank who has ever sought to learn a foreign language. While in mourning he applied himself to the study of English, and, although without an instructor, he made very fair progress, and is now able to make himself understood in it.

You will be amused to know that his only text-books in this study were Webster’s Unabridged Dictionary, the Bible, and a copy of “Watts’ Select Hymns,” a book used fifty years ago in some of the churches in our country. As a consequence his idiom is somewhat peculiar.

In my opinion his appointment is highly to be commended as one eminently fit to be made and promising the best results.

The marquis, accompanied by his family and a numerous suite, has already sailed for Europe.

I have, &c.,

CHESTER HOLCOMBE.

No. 105. Mr. Holcombe to Mr. Evarts. [Document 124]

No. 105.
Mr. Holcombe to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Peking, December 12, 1878. (Received February 6.) No. 91.]

Sir: In my dispatch No. 76, of the 23d ultimo, I reported to you the details of a complaint made to me by our consul at Hankow, that the local authorities in Szchuen had refused to recognize certain transit-passes taken out by Mr. M. A. Jenkins, whose goods were, in consequence, detained in the interior of that province, I also forwarded a a copy of a dispatch in the business which I had addressed to Prince Kung.

Upon the 28th ultimo a response was received from the prince, a translation of which I now have the honor to inclose. As indicated only the usual routine reference of the subject to the provincial authorities of Szchuen, which would involve further and indefinite delay, I addressed the foreign office again, upon the 6th instant, objecting to this procedure as unnecessary, inasmuch as the language used by the Chung King magistrate, in his order warning Mr. Jenkins not to make use of the passes, not only failed to indicate any irregularity in the action of the merchant, but, in itself, condemned the course of the official as a manifest violation of treaty. I objected to the farther delay made necessary by this reference as involving my countryman in additional hardship and loss, and urged Prince Kung to issue peremptory orders that the transit passes should be respected and the produce passed to Hankow. I inclose a copy of this dispatch.

In order to leave no effort untried by which relief for Mr. Jenkins might be obtained, I visited the foreign office upon the 10th instant and spoke personally with the ministers in the case, reiterating the arguments and renewing the request contained in my dispatch. The ministers promised to instruct the magistrate peremptorily that, in case the transit passes, and the produce covered by them were in order,, he should allow Mr. Jenkins to take his goods to Hankow at once. And I am now in receipt of the inclosed dispatch from Prince Kung, informing me that orders have been issued as promised. I have thanked him for his prompt and satisfactory action.

Awaiting your approval of my course in this business,

I have &c.,

CHESTER HOLCOMBE.

[Inclosure 1 in No. 91.]

Prince Kung, chief secretary of state for foreign affairs, herewith makes a communication in reply.

I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your dispatch of the 21st instant, stating that you had received a communication from the United States consul at Hankow, informing you that Mr. M. A. Jenkins, an American merchant of that port, had taken out ten transit passes for the purpose of bringing out native produce from the interior of Szchuen. The Chung King magistrate refused to recognize these passes and warned Mr. Jenkins that if he brought his goods to the tax station at Kweichow dues would be levied upon them the same as though unprotected by transit passes, &c.

You refer to an arrangement made in the early part of this year by which transit passes for Szchuen produce may be taken out at Hankow, and the dues paid there. You inclose a copy of the order issued by the magistrate named and request me to issue such instructions as will secure compliance with the arrangement mentioned above, &c.

I have requested the southern superintendent of trade, and the viceroys of Szchuen and Hukwang to instruct the intendants concerned to examine into and report upon, this business at once. Upon receipt of their replies I shall again address you.

Chester Holcombe, Esq., &c., &c., &c.,

[Inclosure 2 in No. 91.]

Mr. Holcombe to Prince Kung.

December 6, 1878.

Sir: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your Imperial Highness’s dispatch of the 28th ultimo in response to mine of 21st, which requested your attention to the refusal of the Chinese authorities at Chung King, in Szcnuen, to recognize certain transit passes taken out by M. A. Jenkins, an American merchant, and beg leave to express my thanks for the promptness with which your Imperial Highness ordered an inquiry into the business.

I address you again upon it from no lack of appreciation of your desire to protect the interests of my countrymen, and to secure obedience on the part of your officials to the provisions of the treaties. This case, however, is one of peculiar hardship and injustice, and I cannot refrain from requesting your Imperial Highness’s attention again to certain features of it, with the hope that you will be able to afford Mr. Jenkins some more speedy relief than seems likely to come in the ordinary course.

The transit passes in question were taken out by Mr. Jenkins upon the 27th of last July, and were sent at once to Szchuen, where the produce covered by them was shortly afterward purchased and prepared for shipment to Hankow. Upon the 4th of October Mr. Jenkins was warned not to use the passes held by him, as they would not be recognized by the tax officers at Kwei-Chow.

It thus appears that the merchandise covered by these passes has already been detained in the interior of Szchuen some three or four months, to the serious inconvenience and loss of its owner. If, now, it must further be detained until the instruction recently issued by your Imperial Highness can reach the capital of Szchuen, the viceroy can issue his orders to the delinquent local authorities for a report; until they see lit to make the report, and until these replies can reach your Imperial Highness, receive consideration by you, and fresh instructions go hence to Szchuen—if this delay must arise, then it is evident that some six or Seven months more must elapse before the merchandise can be released from detention, and further serious loss to the owner must arise, if indeed, the produce is not entirely ruined.

I freely admit that this argument on behalf of the merchant would not hold good were there reason to accuse him of any violation of the treaties or trade regulations in connection with the export of his merchandise; but the transit passes were taken out regularly, and conformed in every respect to the requirements of treaty, and no charge is made of any conduct on the part of the merchaut which would justify the detention or seizure of the goods. This detention is based on the simple assertion that because of the use of transit passes in Szchuen, the local tax office at Kwei-Chow has suffered a loss of more than two hundred thousand taels, and that if these passes are respected the officials at Kwei-Chow can collect nothing from the owner of the produce covered by them. The detention of Mr. Jenkins’s property by the official named was therefore, by his own showing, an offensive violation of a solemn treaty engagement, and of that good faith between our governments which I am sure your Imperial Highness desires zealously to maintain, and which should be faithfully respected by all classes of officials in both countries.

As there appears, therefore, from the showing of the Chung King magistrate himself, to have been absolutely no reason whatever for the detention of Mr. Jenkins’s property, I venture to place this business before your Imperial Highness again, and most earnestly to request, in the interest of good feeling between the two governments, that you will not subject my country man to further delay and loss, but will at once instruct the local authorities concerned to respect the transit passes held by him, and to allow the merchandise which they cover to be taken to its destination.

I have, &c.,

CHESTER HOLCOMBE.

[Inclosure No. 3 in No. 91.]

Prince Kung, chief secretary of state for foreign affairs, herewith makes a communication in reply.

Upon the 6th instant I had the honor to receive a dispatch from you in the matter of the transit passes taken out by Mr. M. A. Jenkins, to cover native produce brought from the interior of Szchuen, in which you remarked that if the export of the produce must further be delayed until the receipt by me of reports from the several parties to whom I had sent instructions, a farther detention of six or seven months must arise before the merchandise could be moved, and you requested me to issue imperative orders to the local authorities concerned to respect the transit passes, and to allow Mr. Jenkins to transport his merchandise to Hankow at once, &c.

Upon the 10th instant you called at the foreign office and again requested that orders be sent to the viceroy of Szchuen to give this case immediate attention, &c.

Upon receipt of your earlier dispatch in this business, I instructed the viceroy of Szchuen without delay to direct his subordinates to examine into and effect a satisfactory disposition in the premises at once.

Being now in receipt of your later favor, as above recited, he viceroy of Szchuen has bet again instructed by this office to see to it that the local officers concerned make at once the usual examination of the merchandise referred to, and if no irregularities are discovered to allow it to proceed, and to report the fact to me directly, in order 1 hat I may inform you, and so the case be speedily disposed of.

Chkster Holcombe, Esq.,
&c., &c., &c.

Peking, December 12, 1878.

[Inclosure 4, in No. 91.]

Mr. Holcombe to Prince Kung.

December 12, 1878.

I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt this moment of your Imperial Highness’s dispatch of this date in matter of the transit passes for Szchuen produce taken out by Mr. M. A. Jenkins, in which your Imperial Highness informs me that you have instructed the viceroy of Szchuen to see to it that the local officers concerned make at once the usual examination of the merchandise, and if no irregularities are discovered, to allow it to proceed, &c., &c.

I beg to present my most sincere thanks to your Imperial Highness for this very prompt and satisfactory action.

I have, &c.,

CHESTER HOLCOMBE.

No. 106. Mr. Holcombe to Mr. Evarts. [Document 125]

No. 106.
Mr. Holcombe to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States.
Peking, January 18, 1879. (Received March 29.) No. 104.]

Sir: In further reference to the refusal of the local officials at Chung King, in the province of Szchuen, to recognize certain transit passes for the export of native produce, issued at Hankow to Mr. M. A. Jenkins, and to my action in the premises, as narrated in my dispatches numbered 76 and 91, I now have the honor to hand to you a translation of a later dispatch, which has been received from his Imperial Highness, Prince Kung.

You will be pleased to see that the viceroy of Szchuen has promptly disapproved the action of his subordinates, and instructed them to allow Mr. Jenkins’s produce to proceed to its destination without further delay or interference.

I have requested Prince Kung to communicate the thanks of this legation to the viceroy, and have given the necessary information to our consul at Hankow.

I have, &c.,

CHESTER HOLCOMBE.

[Inclosure 1 in No. 104.]

Prince Kung, chief secretary of state for foreign affairs, herewith makes a communication.

In the matter of the transit passes taken out by Mr. M. A. Jenkins, of Hankow, for the exportation of native produce from Szohuen, upon the 6th Deee nber last, I had the honor to receive a communication from you saying that in case action was deferred upon my part until my ins ructions had reached the several local authorities concerned, and their reports could be received by me, a further delay of six or seven mouths must ensue before the merchandise in question could be forwarded to its destination; and shortly after the receipt of that dispatch you called in person at the foreign office and urged that the viceroy of Szchuen be pressed to give the business immediate attention.

This office, upon your request, instructed the viceroy named above to give the necessary orders at once to the local authorities to straighten out this business without delay, and so informed you.

I am now in receipt of the Szchuen viceroy’s response, in which he informs me that he has received a report from Chin Kwei, the superintendent of the Lekin tax station at Kwei Chow, and his associate officers, stating that, in the past few years the Lekin tax station at Kwei Chow has suffered a loss of over 200,000 taels in each year from the exemption from tax given to foreign goo Is passing into the interior under transit certificates. Native produce passing out of the province is also covered by the certificates, and consequently the most valuable commodities of Szchuen pay dues at Ichang. The Kwei Chow office is not allowed to levy upon them, and the office seems to have been established for no purpose, &c.

The viceroy indorsed this statement, to the effect that goods both for import and export were protected with transit certificates, and in consequence the revenues of the Kwei Chow Lekin station were diminishing; there could be no doubt of this. But article 7 of the trade regulations attached to the treaty with the United States declares that “Produce purchased by a citizen of the United States in the interior will be inspected and taken account of at the first barrier it passes on its way to the port of shipment. A memorandum showing the amount of the produce and the port at which it is to be shipped will be deposited there by the person in charge of the produce; he will then receive a certificate, which must be exhibited and viséd at every barrier on his way to the port of shipment., On the arrival of the produce at the barrier nearest the port, notice must be given to the customs at the port, and the transit dues thereon being paid, it will be passed. On exportation, the produce will pay the tariff duty.”

The American merchant, M. A. Jenkins, having received from the customs at Hankow certain transit passes for the export of Szchuen produce, and the customs at Ichang having informed the Lekin officials at Kwei Chow, all the steps thus taken were in accordance with the requirements of the treaty. But the course taken by the superintendent of the station at. Kwei Chow to prevent the export of the produce in question was in violation of the stipulations of the treaty. He is directed to inspect the produce purchased by the American merchant at once, and to issue his certificate and to pass it for export without further delay. If goods unenumerated in the transit certificates are presented for export, they must, of course, pay the various taxes and dues at each of the stations and barriers passed, according to regulations, &c. Thus the viceroy of Szchuen.

It becomes my duty to communicate the foregoing substance of his reply for your information.

Chester Holcombe, Esq.,
&c., &c., &c.

Peking, January 17, 1879.

[Inclosure 2 in No. 104.]

Mr. Holcombe to Prince Kung, January 17, 1879.

I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your Imperial Highness’s dispatch communicating the substance of the report of the viceroy of Szchuen as to the action taken by him in the matter of the native produce, covered by transit certificates taken Out by Mr. M. A. Jenkins, and which the Lekin officers at Kwei Chow had refused to recognize.

My government will be much pleased to hear of the prompt and just action of his excellency the viceroy, and I beg of your Imperial Highness to communicate to him my most sincere thanks.

I have, &c.,

CHESTER HOLCOMBE.

[Inclosure 3 in No. 104.]

Mr. Holcombe to Mr. Shepard, January 18, 1879.

Sir: Recurring ‘to my dispatch No. 57, in the matter of the refusal of the local authorities at Chung King, in Szchuen, to recognize certain transit passes taken out by Mr. M. A. Jenkins for the export of native produce from Szchuen, I have the honor to inclose for your information a translation of a dispatch from the foreign office in the promises.

You will see that the viceroy of the province named has promptly disapproved the action of his subordinates, and has instructed the officials at the Lekin station at Kwei Chow to issue the customary certificate for Mr. Jenkins’s produce, and to allow it to pass without further delay.

I am, &c.,

CHESTER HOLCOMBE.

No. 107. Mr. Holcombe to Mr. Evarts. [Document 126]

No. 107.
Mr. Holcombe to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Peking, February 20, 1879. (Received April 19.) No. 123.]

Sir: In my dispatch, No. 69, of November 12 last, I had the honor to lay before you certain correspondence which had passed between the consular body at Shanghai and the diplomatic corps here, and between the latter and the Chinese foreign office, in regard to the rules agreed to early in 1878, for the conservation of the harbor at Shanghai.

That correspondence was closed by a note from Prince Kung, in which he stated that he had referred the several questions raised to the northern and southern superintendents of foreign trade for their consideration.

I have now the honor to hand to you herewith a translation of a further note from the Prince, in which he communicates the opinion of the two high officials mentioned above, that the authority and jurisdiction of the harbor-master should be restricted to the limits of the foreign concessions $ assumes that the Chinese Government has the power to modify the rules without the consent of the foreign representatives; and asks us to instruct our consuls at Shanghai in accordance with the terms of his note. * * *

Some time having elapsed after the receipt of this latter note from the Prince, and the senior minister, Mr. Brenier de Montmorand, having evinced no disposition to take further action in the premises, I brought the subject to his notice and expressed the opinion that a joint answer should be prepared. He informed me that he had not thought of doing anything further; that, in point of fact, he had been opposed to the rules from the beginning, and had only agreed to them out of deference to the wishes of his colleagues. He, however, added that he would submit a draft of a response for our approval. Two days later he submitted the form of an answer, of which I inclose a copy in French and English.

As none of his colleagues agreed with Mr. Brenier that the draft suggested by him was in the most desirable shape for presentation to the Chinese, although approving its general sense, he at once sent his answer to the foreign office and left his associates to make such reply as should seem best to each. After consultation with my colleagues, the chargé d’affaires of Russia and Germany, we sent an answer substantially identical. A copy is inclosed of the note sent by me.

Having taken this action, I went, with the advice and consent of the representatives mentioned above, to the foreign office and discussed the subject with the ministers, all of whom were present. They did not seem to be thoroughly informed as to the nature and operation of the rules in question, and hence exaggerated some of the difficulties in the way of their enforcement. My explanations seemed to give them much satisfaction, and the interview was, I think, productive of good. They promised to refer the subject again to the northern and southern superintendents of foreign trade, and to urge the enforcement of the rules as originally agreed to. They stated, however, that a little delay would be necessary, as the British Government is, at the moment, unrepresented in Peking, and it would be advisable to await the arrival of Sir Thomas Wade, who is expected here in March. To this, of course, no objection could be raised.

I beg, respectfully, for your approval of my action as narrated herein.

I have, &c.,

CHESTER HOLCOMBE.

[Inclosure 1 in No. 123.]

The Foreign Office to the French Minister.

January 11, 1879. Unofficial.]

Sir: In the matter of the rules for the conservation of the harbor at Shanghai, and referring to your excellency’s two notes to us, and to our reply to the effect that we had requested the northern and southern superintendents of foreign trade to cause the subject to be taken into consideration, and that we would address you again when their reports should have been received, we have now the honor to inform your excellency that those reports are before us.

According to the statements of the intendant at Shanghai, the area defined within yellow lines upon a chart sent by the acting inspector-general of customs, and extending from the Little East Gate of the Chinese city of Shanghai, in a southerly direction, to the south tea and silk customs barrier, is called the suburbs of the city, which it is proposed to put within the jurisdiction of the harbor-master.

This area is to the south of the French concession, and the land along the river here is all owned by Chinese. The number of shops is immense, and the wharves and jetties are as thick as a forest. In the river, Chinese vessels from Ningpo, Tientsin, Foochow, and Canton, to the number of many thousands, are accustomed to lie at anchor. An immense number of small craft from the interior are also constantly coming and going. For hundreds of years jurisdiction over this area has been exercised by the magistrate of Shanghai, and no obstruction to the course of the river has resulted.

The masters of Chinese craft and other persons, having heard that it was proposed to put the area in question under the control of the harbor-master, have petitioned the magistrate in great numbers to prevent this action. It is to be feared that if their wish is disregarded they will rise en masse and cause serious disturbances.

The area to be hereafter under the jurisdiction of the harbor-master should be that embraced within the foreign concessions. There is no necessity for placing him also in control of parts outside of those limits. In regard to the river at Weisung, the signal master has hitherto had control for a distance of three miles, and this area might be put under the general supervision of the harbor-master. Modification of the rules in the sense indicated above is requested.

In regard to this subject we have the honor to observe that the rules in question were enacted by China herself, with a view to the protection of the harbor of Shanghai. If there are local obstacles to their exact application, then they ought certainly to be modified so as to be satisfactory. Having received the reports of the northern and southern superintendents of trade, we have the honor to communicate their substance to your excellency for your consideration, and to request that you will transmit it to the several foreign representatives in this city and instruct your consul in the premises.

Cards and compliments.

[Inclosure 2 in No. 123.—Translation.]

Peking, February 3, 1879.

To their Excellencies the Ministers, Members of the Tsung-li Yamen:

Gentlemen: I have communicated to my colleagues the letter your excellencies did me the honor to address to me on the 11th January last, and beg to say we are unanimously of opinion that the regulations relating to the harbor of Shanghai having then consented to between your excellencies and the members of the diplomatic body at Peking, no alterations can be made by the Chinese Government in these regulations without the assent of the parties thereto.

Please accept, &c.

The Minister for France in China,
Doyen of the Diplomatic Body.

The Minester for Peru.

The Chargé d’affaires for Russia.

The Chargé d’affaires for Germany.

The Chargé d’affaires for the United States.

The Chargé d’affaires for England.

[Inclosure 3 with dispatch No. 123.]

Mr. Holcombe to Prince Kung.

February 11, 1879.

(Red note.)

Sir: His excellency the minister for France has furnished me with a copy of your Imperial Highness’s note of the 11th ultimo, to him, in the matter of the rules for the conservation of the harbor at Shanghai. In this note Your Imperial Highness states that these rules were enacted by China herself, with a view to the protection of the harbor at Shanghai, and that if there are local obstacles to their exact application, they ought to be modified so as to be satisfactory, &c.

I notice with regret and surprise that Your Imperial Highness is of opinion that the rules in question should be modified, and that such modification is possible without the consent of the various diplomatic representatives in this capital.

These rules as proposed by Your Imperial Highness, and agreed to by the several foreign representatives in January, 1878, gave certain powers and authority to the harbor-master at Shanghai, over a class of Chinese and foreigners, and put a portion of the river under his immediate jurisdiction. Your Imperial Highness was well aware; that in order to make the rules in question operative within the foreign concessions and generally in their application to foreigners, the consent and co-operation of the foreign representatives was necessary. That consent was asked, and without exception the ministers resident at Peking, believing the rules to be formed with a view to the conservation of the harbor at Shanghai, and in the interests of foreigners and natives alike, cordially granted the concessions, and gave the necessary instructions to their respective consuls. And further, they reported their action to their several governments and received their approval. Hence the rules stand in the light of a convention agreed to between China and the several powers represented at Peking, and, this being the case, it is self-evident that no modification is possible without the previous consent of both parties to the original agreement.

As representing one of the parties to the convention, I am unable to give my consent to the modification of the rules in question.

By reducing the area of the application of the rules we not only lessen their practical utility, but it even becomes doubtful whether their enforcement in the remaining district will serve any useful purpose.

The intendant at Shanghai, in his note as quoted by Your Imperial Highness, fails utterly to give any valid reason for the modification which he proposes. The harbormaster, to whom the rules give a certain limited jurisdiction over the area in question, is not a foreign official, but a Chinese employé and directly under the control and direction of the Government of China. The area mentioned and the shipping and other interests within it would therefore come in no sense under foreign control. The Taotai manifestly mistakes the situation and exaggerates the opposition of the people when; he represents that disturbances are likely to result from an attempt to apply the rules to the area mentioned. There are perhaps foreign ship-owners and masters who object to the enforcement of the rules against them, but this of itself would hardly cause any foreign representative to withdraw from the convention, so long as he believed that; the rules were well calculated to preserve and protect the general interests of the port, and of the large amount of shipping which frequents it.

Confident that the rules in question, if faithfully enforced, will be of great benefit to the harbor of Shanghai and to natives and foreigners alike, and, resolved on my part to conform strictly to the terms of these rules as originally agreed to, I beg leave to request Your Imperial Highness to instruct the intendant at Shanghai to conform on his part, as the local representative of Your Imperial Highness’s government, to their stipulations, and thus to end the discussion of the subject.

I have, &c.,

CHESTER HOLCOMBE.

No. 108. Mr. Holcombe to Mr. Evarts. [Document 127]

No. 108.
Mr. Holcombe to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Peking, March 12, 1879. (Received May 5.) No. 133.]

Sir: I regret to be obliged to report the opening of a fresh chapter in the history of the transit passes—ten in number—taken out at Hankow by Mr. M. A. Jenkins or the export of native produce from Szchuen.

In my dispatch, No. 104, of January 18, I had the honor to inform you that the Szchuen viceroy had promptly disapproved the action the Lekin tax-officer at Kwei Chow, and ordered him to respect th transmit certificates, and to pass the merchandise covered by them.

Upon the 23d of February I received a further dispatch in the premises from Prince Kung, a translation of which is inclosed. It merely covered a report from the Lekin officer, sent through the viceroy, that, upon the 28th of December, Mr. Jenkins had presented two of the passes at the tax station and that the goods covered by them had been passed the same day. It further declared that no obstacles had been put in Mr. Jenkins’s way by the officials at Kwei Chow.

This appeared to be very satisfactory. But, upon the 6th instant, I received a dispatch in the same matter from Mr. Shepard, in which a state of the case strangely at variance with the report of the Lekin official was developed. According to the consul’s letter, the merchandise represented by two passes was entered at the Kwei Chow tax-station, not, indeed, upon December 28, but January 2. So far, however, from having been passed the same day, permission to pass it without the payment of the usual taxes was refused, and, upon the 16th January, the merchandise was still detained at Kwei Chow, with no prospect of release.

Immediately upon receipt of this information, I addressed a dispatch to Prince Kung, a copy of which is inclosed. In it, as you will see, I called his attention to the sharp contrast between the facts of the situa-atiou, as reported by our consul, and the statements of the Lekin deputy. I also spoke somewhat plainly in regard to the conduct of the local officer, and requested the Prince to send stringent orders to him to release the merchandise at once.

I inclose a translation of the reply of His Imperial Highness. It is merely routine in its nature; yet it may be that the instructions sent are more stringent than the Prince cares to indicate.

I wish I could add that circumstances such as are set forth in these inclosures are of rare occurrence in China. But the reverse is the fact. It is difficult to induce the foreign office to issue the necessary orders for a faithful performance of the promises contained in the treaties, and by no means certain that such orders, when issued, will be obeyed.

I shall press this business as vigorously as seems proper.

Asking your approval of my action, I have, &c.,

CHESTER HOLCOMBE.

[Inclosure 1 in dispatch No. 133.]

Prince Kung, chief secretary of state for foreign affairs, herewith makes a communication in reply:

In the matter of the ten transit passes taken out by Mr. M. A. Jenkins at Hankow, to cover the export of native produce from Szchuen, some time since, I received a dispatch from you requesting me to intruct the local authorities to give heed to the transit rules and release the goods at once. Thereupon, I addressed the viceroy of Szchuen directing him to cause the local officials to make the customary examination and to pass the merchandise as required by treaty, and I informed you of my action. In January last, I received a response from the viceroy of Szchuen stating that he had directed the deputies in charge of the Lekin station at Kwei-Chow to obey the provisions of the treaties in the case, and I also informed you of this.

Upon the 12th instant I received a further dispatch in the premises from the governor-general of Szchuen informing me that the intendant of the eastern circuit of that province had reported the recelpt of a communication from the Ichang intendant stating that he was in receipt of a dispatch from the superintendent of customs at Hankow informing him that Mr. Shepard, United States consul at Hankow, had applied for the following transit passes on behalf of Mr. M. A. Jenkins, for the export of Szchuen produce, i. e., for musk, five passes; for gall-nuts, two passes; raw silk, one pass; white wax, one pass; saffron, one pass; and that the passes had been made out and delivered.

Orders were at once issued to the Lekin station to make the usual examination, and in case the goods corresponded with the passes, to allow them to proceed at once.

The viceroy is now in receipt of a report from the deputy in charge of the Lekin station, informing him that upon the 28th December Tsusi-chi-shan, the agent of M. A. Jenkins, entered at the Lekin station seven boxes of gall-nuts covered by one transit certificate, No. 31, of 1878, issued by the Hankow customs, and 8 boxes of gall-nuts covered by the transit certificate No. 32, of 1878, also, issued by the Hankow customs. Upon the same day the examination was made, the passes countersealed and returned to the agent, and the merchandise passed. From the 3d day of August, at which time the ten passes were issued from the Hankow customs, up to the 28th December Mr. Jenkins has only entered the two passes for gall-nuts at the Lekin station, and for these the inspections have been promptly made and the merchandise passed at once. No other passes have been presented by him. Mr. Jenkins is himself very dilatory in transacting his business, and no obstacles have been put in his way. The Lekin station will be instructed upon the entry of the passes for musk and other merchandise to make examination and to pass the goods at once, &c.

It becomes my duty to convey to you this report from the viceroy for your information. “

Chester Holcombe, Esq., &c., &c., &c.

Peking, February 23, 1879.

[Inclosure 2 in dispatch No. 133.]

Mr. Shepard to Mr. Holcombe.

February 8, 1879.

Sir: Referring to my No. 24, of November 2, 1878, to which you responded in your Nos. 54 and 57, I have the honor to forward herewith a copy of a letter just received from Mr. Jenkins, to which I need add no remarks. As requested in your No. 57, I also inclose the original of the paper designated.

In the case of Messrs. Russell & Co. versus certain Chinese, I have the pleasure to report that his excellency the taotai has at length notified me of his assent to the investigation in my presence, which I have so long contended for, at a day to be mutually agreed upon. When it has been held, I will at once advise you of its course and its results.

I am, &c.,

ISAAC F. SHEPARD.

Mr. Jenkins to Consul Shepard. [Document 128]

Mr. Jenkins to Consul Shepard.

February 6, 1879.

Sir: Referring you to my letter of the 1st of November, 1878, I have to give you the following facts:

On the 29th of December, 1878, a boat left Chung Ching (Chinese characters) with 15 packages gull-nuts, weighing 28 peculs. This boat arrived at Kwei Chow (Chinese characters) on the 2d January of this year. On the arrival of the boat at the tax station the transit pass, covering the 15 packages gall-nuts, was presented to the official in charge, but the boatman was informed that the goods could not pass the station until the regular native charges were paid. According to the latest dates which I have from Kwei Chow, January 16, of this year, the goods were not released So you will notice the officer at Kwei Chow has been as good as his word.

I am very sure that the officer in charge at Kwei Chow has received, the letter from the board at Peking to grant protection to the transit passes which have been granted to me to bring produce from Chun Ching, but he has determined to carry out his own idea as stated in my letter of the 1st of November, 1878.

I have to ask your kind assistance, and would recommend as a measure to save time that you will ask his excellency the minister to request the foreign board to send an order for the release of the goods direct to the officer in charge at Kwei Chow, through the Tartar general at Kin Chow (Chinese characters), with orders that he will hand it to the Ichang taotai, who resides at Kin Chow (Chinese characters), for his excellency the taotai to forward to Kwei Chow, as well as the hoard’s usual order to the Szchuen viceroy. A letter sent to the Kwei Chow officials as suggested will reach Kwei Chow in about thirty days (a month), which is a saving of fifty days. I must ask that you will give this case your earliest convenient attention, for besides the loss sustained by the detention of the 15 packages gull-nuts, there are goods waiting to be shipped under the other transit passes granted me in July last, 20 in number.

I am, sir,

M. A. JENKINS.

[Inclosure 3 in dispatch No. 133.]

Mr. Holcombe to Prince Kung.

March 7, 1879.

I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your imperial highness’s dispatch of the 23d ultimo, in the matter of the ten transit passes taken out by Mr. M. A. Jenkins at Hankow, to cover the export of certain native produce from Szchuen. In it your imperial highness informs me that you are in receipt of a report though the Szchuen viceroy, from the deputy in charge of the Lekin station at Kwei-Chow, to the effect that upon the 23th of December last, Tsusi-Chishan, the agent of Mr. M. A. Jenkins, entered 15 boxes of gall-nuts, covered by transit passes Nos. 31 and 32 of 1878, and that the merchandise was examined and passed the same day; that Mr. Jenkins has presented only these two passes at the barrier; that he is very dilatory in transacting his business, and that no obstacles have been put in his way, &c.

I regret very much the necessity which I am under of troubling your imperial highness further in this business, but I yesterday received information from the United States consul at Hankow, of a nature diametrically opposed to the statements of the Lekiu tax deputy as quoted above. Mr. Shepard writes me that upon the 29th December, 1878, Mr. Jenkins’s agent shipped from Chun-Ching 15 boxes of gall-nuts weighing 28 peculs. They arrived at Kewei-Chow upon the 2d of January. The transit passes covering the produce were presented to the deputy who refused to allow the goods to proceed until the Lekin tax had been paid. Upon the 16th January the goods were still detained at Kwei-Chow with no prospect of being released. The other transit passes have not been presented because the Lekin deputy still refuses to recognize those already in his hands, &c.

Your imperial highness will see at a glance the wide discrepancy between these two reports. I beg leave to ask that stringent orders be sent with all possible speed direct to the Lekin deputy concerned to release the goods in question at once.

Mr. Jenkins has already been a heavy sufferer by the wrongdoing of this officer, and I doubt not your imperial highness will take proper measurers to put an end to this illegal and unfriendly conduct. It will be for your imperial highness to decide what steps should be taken towards an official who, if my information be correct, refuses obedience to the orders of his superiors, and then seeks to cover up his presumption with falsehood.

I have, &c.,

CHESTER HOLCOMBE.

[Inclosure 4 in dispatch No. 133.]

Prince Kung, chief secretary of state for foreign affairs, herewith makes a communication in reply:

I have had the honor to receive your dispatch of the 7th instant, in the matter of the transit passes for Szchuen produce taken out by Mr. M. A. Jenkins, at Hankow, stating that you had received my dispatch of the 23d ultimo, stating that upon the 28th December last, Tsusi Chishan, the agent of Mr. Jenkins, entered 15 boxes of gall nuts at the Kwei-Chow Lekin station, which, according to the report of the deputy in charge, were examined and passed the same day; that from the 3d day of August last, when the ten passes were issued at Hankow, down to the 28th December, Mr. Jenkins had presented only these two passes; that he is dilatory in transmitting his business; and that no obstacles have been put in his way, &c. And you add that you are in receipt of information from Mr. Consul Shepard, of Hankow, to the effect that upon the 29th December, 1878, Mr. Jenkins’s agent shipped from Chung-King 15 boxes of gall-nuts; that they reached Kwei-Chow upon the 2d January, 1879; that the transit passes were presented to the deputy for the usual examination and he refused to allow the goods to proceed until the Lekin tax had been paid; that upon the 16th January the goods were still detained at Kwei-Chow with up prospect of being released. You state that the report of Mr. Consul Shepard is diametrically opposed to the statement of the Lekin deputy, and you request me to send stringent orders with all passible speed direct to the Lekin deputy concerned, to release the goods in question at once, &c.

I have the honor to state that upon the receipt of your dispatch, now under reply, I instructed the viceroy of Szchuen to order the Lekin officer at Kwei-Chow to release the goods mentioned at once, and to report his action to the viceroy.

Upon receipt of the last-named officer’s response I will inform you of its nature.

Chester Holcombe,
&c., &c., &c.

Peking, March 12, 1879.

No. 109. Mr. Evarts to Mr. Holcombe. [Document 129]

No. 109.
Mr. Evarts to Mr. Holcombe.

Department of State,
Washington, March 3, 1879. No. 285.]

Sir: Your dispatch No. 94, in relation to the recently-exchanged convention between China and Spain, has been received. Due attention has been given to the request of Prince Kung, contained in his communication to you of December 14 last, that instructions be given to the consuls of the United States, resident in the island of Cuba, that in matters relating to Chinese laborers those consuls should extend their good offices, as occasion may arise, to secure the faithful observance of the stipulations of that convention.

In view of the circumstance that, as is understood, the Imperial Government is about to establish consular representation in Cuba as a consequence of the diplomatic relations to be established with Spain by the Chinese mission now in the United States, it is deemed unnecessary to instruct the consular representatives of the United States to use their good offices in such manner as might imply the officious assumption of representation of Chinese consular interests in the island of Cuba; but this government will have pleasure in so far acceding to the wish of that of His Majesty, the Emperor, as to direct the consuls of the United States in that island that they may use their good offices, unofficially, for the protection of Chinese laborers under the treaty, if appealed to by the latter, and with the consent of the authorities of Cuba, until such time as the Chinese Government shall establish consular representation there.

I am, &c.,

WM. M. EVARTS.

No. 110. Mr. Seward to Mr. Evarts. [Document 130]

No. 110.
Mr. Seward to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Peking, June 26, 1879. (Received September 1.) No. 443.]

Sir: In reference to Mr. Holcombe’s several dispatches reporting the refusal of the tax officers at Kwei Chow to respect certain transit passes for Szchuen produce taken out by Mr. M. A. Jenkins, and stating the line of action taken by him in the premises, I have the honor to inform you that Mr. Holcombe’s proceeding as reported to you in his dispatch No. 133, of March 12 last, resulted in the release of the merchandise in question without further objection on the part of the local authorities.

I have, &c..

GEORGE F. SEWARD.

No. 111. Mr. Seward to Mr. Evarts. [Document 131]

No. 111.
Mr. Seward to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Peking, July 29, 1879. (Received September 29.) No. 464.]

Sir: In my dispatch No. 451 I informed you that the diplomatic body here had decided to take up certain general questions of great public interest for discussion in September next.

As a preparatory step, I have thought best to request our consuls in China to furnish me full information regarding the course heretofore followed by them in civil cases arising between the Chinese and our people. I have also asked them for their opinions as to whether the system of trial of such cases in mixed courts, or in the court of the defendant, is preferable.

I have the honor to band to you, herewith, a copy of my circular requesting the information indicated above.

I have, &c.,

GEORGE F. SEWARD.

[Inclosure 1 in No. 464.]

circular to the consuls of the united states in china.

July 26, 1879.

Will you be so good as to prepare careful answers to the following questions, and to transmit them to me at your earliest convenience?

A. —What is the practice at your consulate in civil cases arising between Chinese and our people? Are such cases tried by the officer of the defendant, or by the consul and a native officer sitting as a mixed court?

B. —If by the officer of the defendant, what native official sits for the trial, in cases where a Chinese is the defendant?

C. —Are the courts so held open for the personal appearance of the plaintiff and of his witnesses?

D. —Does the consul attend; and, if so, what position is given him as to seat, &c., and what part does he take in the proceedings?

E. —If the consul attends, does he take an interpreter? If so, what position is given to the interpreter?

F. —Is a full and accurate record made of the pleadings, and of the proceedings of the court?

G. —If so, by whom is the record made; and if by the native assistant of the foreign interpreter, what position is assigned to him?

H. —Is the record made in English and Chinese? If so, how are such records, or any which are made, certified to?

I. —To what court do appeals from the decision of the native officer lie?

J. —If trials are in mixed courts, what native officer acts?

K. —What positions are assigned to the consul and those with him?

L. —What records are made, and how are they made?

M. —What law is taken as binding upon the court?

N. —How are judgments enforced?

O. —To what court do appeals lie?

P. —Generally is it the practice of other consuls at your port to sit in mixed courts, or is the system of trial in the court of the defendant preferred?

Q. Have you any opinion as to which is the preferable procedure? If so, will you be so good as to state it as fully as possible?

Will you please add, also, any remarks on the general subject which may appear appropriate to you?

It is particularly desired that your answers may be here by the middle of September.

I am, &c.,

GEORGE F. SEWARD.

No. 112. Mr. Seward to Mr. Evarts. [Document 132]

No. 112.
Mr. Seward to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Peking, September 18, 1879. (Received November 4.) No. 480.]

Sir: I bad the honor to transmit to you on the 29th of July a copy of a circular which I had addressed to the consuls in regard to procedure upon the trial of mixed cases occurring between our own people and the subjects of China, and I beg leave to hand to you now copies of the responses which I have received.

You will observe that there is a divergence of opinion between the consuls, but that the tendency is to favor the rule to which I adhere, that all such cases are to be tried in the court of the defendant.

My views on this subject are set forth with exactness in the protocol of November 25, 1876, and the dispatch with which I transmitted that paper to the Department, No. 177, of the 5th December following.

I am in hopes that these views will be fully indorsed at the approaching conference of the ministers at this court, and steps taken to gain the formal assent of the Chinese to it, and to the adoption of a few simple rules of procedure intended to aid our people in their efforts to secure the right hearing of their matters in the Chinese courts. This, of course, would be a modest beginning for judicial reform in mixed cases, but it may prepare the way for something still better.

I have, &c.,

GEORGE F. SEWARD.

[Inclosure 1 in No. 480.]

Mr. Lincoln to Mr. Seward.

Canton, August 18, 1879. No. 27.]

Sir: I have had the honor to receive your dispatch No. 58, of 26th ultimo, relative to the practice at this consulate in civil cases arising between Chinamen and Americans.

In reply to your interrogatories I have to say: 1st. Since Mr. Jewell’s administration of this office no such cases as you mention have arisen and been brought to trial.

2d. We have no mixed court here as at Shanghai.

3d. It has been and is the custom where claims are presented against natives for the consul to inform defendant of complaint and arrange, if possible, an amicable settlement; if not successful, then to present the case by dispatch to his excellency the viceroy, who, according to its importance, instructs either the prefect or one of the magistrates to take cognizance of the case. At this investigation the consul, with interpreter, plain tiff, and witnesses can be present if they so desire; this is seldom done however. In nearly every instance the case is conducted through correspondence.

4th. If not satisfactorily adjusted by the prefect or magistrate, complaint would be made to his excellency the viceroy. In case he should concur in the decision rendered, copies of correspondence, &c., would be referred Peking.

5th. Were a consul present at such trial it would only be to watch the proceedings, and in case of any injustice being done to enter protest. He would be received and treated on such occasions as he would be in making an official call. Seats would be so arranged that neither officer would occupy the seat of honor, though the native official should and would conduct the proceedings.

6th. In cases where foreigners are defendants and natives plaintiffs, suit would be brought before the consul either direct or through the native authorities at his request. If by the authorities, it would be carried on by correspondence; if by the plaintiff, notice would be issued for parties to appear, witnesses be summoned, &c. If the plaintiff desired a native official to be present, the consul would notify the viceroy of the pending suit, and request him to direct an officer to be present. The prefect would probably be sent, who would occupy a similar position to that of a consul at a trial before a Chinese official. In case of dissatisfaction with the decision, the case would be erred to Peking.

7th. Judgments against native defendants are enforced by seizure and sale of property and imprisonment of party until liquidation of claim.

8th. The practice as above stated is preferred by the consuls at this port.

9th. Taking in view the limited number of foreigners at this port and the infrequency of litigation arising, I think the practice followed here is preferable to the more complicated and formal practice of mixed courts.

Only one case of importance has been brought to suit here within several years. This was a claim for damage, or to enforce specific “performance of contract.” Suit was brought by a French firm against a native silk merchant. The loss sustained by nonperformance of contract was estimated at $80,000. It was tried before the prefect, the French consul, plaintiff, and witnesses being present. The consul claimed the right to and did conduct the proceedings, notwithstanding the prefect’s protest. He gave judgment for plaintiff, the prefect dissenting. Not having authority to enforce his judgment, the case was referred to Peking. I am told that the French minister declined to interfere in the matter, on the ground that the course pursued by the consul had been so erroneous—in fact, ridiculous—that the plaintiff had no other recourse but to submit, and so it ended.

Trusting the foregoing will prove satisfactory as a reply to your No. 58,

I have, &c.,

C. P. LINCOLN.

[Inclosure 2 in No. 480.]

Mr. Scruggs to Mr. Seward.

Chinkiang, August 11, 1879. No. 3.]

Sir: I have had the honor to receive your dispatch No. 141, of the 28th ultimo. It relates to civil cases arising between citizens of the United States and Chinese subjects, and contains some eighteen interrogatories touching the practice in such cases at this port.

The very short time elapsed since I assumed the duties of this office will, I fear, render it impossible to make my responses as full and satisfactory as you desire; but I most cheerfully comply with your request as far as I am able.

And, first, as to your inquiry marked A. The practice at this port, when a Chinese subject is a party to the action, is to notify him of his right to have a native official sit in conjunction with the consul, a right, however, which all Chinamen seem anxious to waive, and which has heretofore been waived in every instance. But, B, should no waiver be made, the consul would insist that the official so sitting be of a rank corresponding to his own; and, C. —Whether mixed or single, consular courts could scarcely be said to subserve the ends of justice unless “open for the personal appearance of the plaintiff and his witnesses,” or, indeed, to both litigants, for that matter; and, so far as I know, no other rule has obtained here.

D. —In case of mixed courts, it would be but ordinary politeness to tender the seat of honor to the official who should attend at the office or yamên of the other; and when a different place of meeting is designated, relative positions as to precedence would have to be arranged according to those principles of comity recognized among intelligent men. The consul being present as an ex officio magistrate would be there in discharge of judicial functions of course.

E. —In all such courts an interpreter would be necessary, and his position would, ex necessitate rei, be that of a member of the court, possibly with rank similar to that of clerk.

F. —A full and accurate record, and in proper legal form, should be made of all the proceedings; and, so far as I know, this has always been done here. Furthermore,

G. —This record would have to be made by some one duly authorized by the court; most likely the interpreter and his assistants, his position being that already indicated in E; moreover,

H. —It should be in both languages, verified by the judges and signed by them in the alternat.

I. —Appeals from the decisions (or rulings) of the Chinese official, sitting as one of the magistrates, would naturally be to the third magistrate (previously agreed upon), and in default of this precaution to the legation and the Tsung li Yamên.

J. —The taotai, being of equal rank, would probably sit with the consul; the prefect, or inferior magistrate, with the vice or deputy consul.

Your inquiries marked K and L are believed to be answered in D, E, F, G, and H, as above.

M. —Presumably, the statutes of the United States, construed under liberal interpretation of existing treaties, in so far as applicable; the common law, the law of admiralty, the principles of equity, and of international law applicable to each particular case. And,

N. —Judgments would be enforced by the judges, one or the other, according as the decision be for or against their respective countrymen.

Your inquiries marked O and P are believed to be answered above in J and A.

Q. —In cases of much magnitude, or where nice questions were involved, or the sum in litigation large, a mixed court would doubtless be preferable, so organized as to give the consul the casting vote, in case of disagreement. Section 4098 of the Revised Statutes seems to be mandatory as well as advisory. Consuls are to encourage settlements (especially of the class of cases indicated) by arbitration; and my observation in this and experience in other countries has been that this method of settlement seldom fails to put a satisfactory end to such controversies.

I am, &c.,

WM. L. SCRUGGS.

[Inclosure 3 in No. 480]

Mr. De Lano to Mr. Seward.

Foochow, August 9, 1879.

Sir: I have had the honor to receive your dispatch No. 80, of date July 26, making inquiry in regard to the practice at this consulate in civil cases arising between the Chinese and our people, and I proceed to answer your questions in order as they appear in your dispatch.

A. —They are tried by the officer of the defendant.

B. —Usually the district magistrate.

C. —They are not.

D. —He does not, but usually makes up a brief of the case for plaintiff and states what testimony can be produced in support of it. In point of fact the proceedings are irregular and partake very little of the nature of judicial proceedings.

E. —The interpreter is sometimes sent to watch proceedings, and is given a seat next the magistrate’s.

F. —The only record kept on the side of the plaintiff appears in the Record of Official Correspondence. A record of the proceedings of the court is made by the Chinese Hsii pans.

G. —Have never yet had a case of sufficient importance to require the presence of the native assistant of the interpreter.

H. —It is made in Chinese, and a copy of it is given to the consul, if he requires it. The only certification is the seal of the magistrate.

I. —Usually to the prefects, but the consul may, if he chooses, take the case to a higher court; the intendants or the neatais, but if to the latter, application would be made to the governor or governor-general to have such officer deputed to try the case on appeal.

J. —There is no mixed court at this port.

K. —Answered. See J.

L. —Answered. See J.

M. —Answered. See J.

N. —Judgments are enforced by imprisonments or other punishments, such as flogging or torture, but if payments are actually enforced it is usually absorbed wholly or in part by the mandarins and their underlings. I have never yet known of a judgment being paid in full to a foreign plaintiff.

O. —Answered. See J.

P. —Practice is the same in all the consulates, as far as I know. Trials in the consular courts are preferred by foreign defendants, and would be also by most native defendants if it were practicable. Foreign plaintiffs would greatly prefer to have their cases tried in a mixed court if one existed here.

Q. —I have been an advocate of mixed courts, and have often suggested the organization of one here. The proposition has been favorably met by the more enlightened officials, and others have strongly opposed it. I am not advised as to the views of other consuls on the subject. The great distance of the foreign settlement from the city might be urged as an objection to the establishment of such a court.

At the trial of important cases in the court of this consulate, the presence of some intelligent native official is often solicited, but the Chinese officers are very averse to the presence of foreigners in their courts. In fact, I have been obliged to make emphatic demands, based upon treaty stipulations, on occasions, before gaining their assent to the presence of the interpreter in their courts.

If a mixed court could be established here for the trial of causes in which natives are defendants, leaving it optional with native plaintiffs to avail of such court, or bring their suits in the consular courts, as they might elect, the ends of justice might be more easily attained, but it is not likely that such an arrangement would be acceptable to the Chinese authorities.

I have, &c.

M. M. De LANO.

[Inclosure 4 in No. 480.]

Mr. Shepard to Mr. Seward.

Hankow, August 26, 1879. No. 33.]

Sir: I have the honor to acknowledge receipt of your dispatch No. 68, of July 26, and of No. 69, of July 30. I have not as yet heard from the intendant on the subject of the latter. To the several inquiries of the former I herein respond as fully as in my power.

A. —To your query A, my answer is that at this consulate all civil cases arising between the Chinese and our people have been examined and decided by the officer of the defendant during my term of office; nor do I find any record that the United States consul and any native official have ever sat together as a mixed court.

B to O. —The answers to the series of questions from B to O inclusive are involved in the foregoing, with the explanations to be made in my remarks on the general topic. It is to be remarked, however, that in correspondence with the present Taotai he has claimed that any deputy he might indicate would be competent to act with the consul on equal terms in any investigation arising, but I have dissented from this claim.

P. —I think that no other consular officer here, except Her Britannic Majesty’s consul, has desired any formal trial with a native official. Mr. Consul Hughes, in a conference sought by myself, was understood to say he had on some occasion demanded a joint investigation, but so much hostility to it had arisen and so many obstacles had been interjected that he gave it up in disgust. I think in that case the matter was arranged between deputies of both nationalities. I speak not with absolute certainty, however, for Mr. Hughes has left China, and I cannot verify my recollections of his statement. I can say, nevertheless, that Mr. Hughes fully indorsed my own rights to a full and unconditioned joint examination in a case hereinafter to be referred to (that of Russell & Co.), and in my demand that the Taotai must sit with me in person and upon equal terms, expressing great interest to see my intents fully carried out.

Having thus disposed of the specific questions, I avail myself of your invitation to more fully discuss the several topics of the general subject.

Several cases have been brought to me by Chinamen for breach of civil contract by Americans—for non-payment of wages claimed and for moneys due in various ways. As the official of the defendant, I have in every separate ease been enabled to bring matters to a satisfactory settlement by conference and advice without the necessity of any formal trial. Thus no occasion has arisen for either party to demand an appeal nor for me to call for a formal judicial sitting with a native official, either as a court of the defendant with a Chinese magistrate advising, or as a mixed court. In case such joint action were demanded, I should insist upon an official coadjutor of equal rank with myself, and give him equally honorable position. I should have each witness’s testimony recorded as given by the clerk of the court if in English, and by the Chinese scribe of the court if in Chinese, and each one’s testimony read over to him and by him subscribed, as in courts-martial. I should allow plaintiff’s presence and the introduction of any witness pertinent, to be examined and cross-examined by my native associate at his pleasure. I should be guided in the conduct of the case according to customs of common pleas courts in the United States as far as circumstances were analogous, without a jury. The provisions as to appeals I should apply as they exist in the consular court regulations. Thus much where our people are defendants.

This course of procedure and its results are, I think, in exact conformity with the of ink given by Attorney-General Cushing, September 19, 1855, that “subjects of China and of any government who, by voluntarily making themselves parties complaint ant or demandant before the consular court, appeal pro tanto, to the laws of the United States.”

But there is another class of cases, some of them of considerable magnitude, wherein Americans are the complainants or demandants, and a Chinese the defendant. In Mr. Cushing’s language in the opinion above quoted, “the former must of necessity be content with such judicial or executive action of the Chinese Government in the premises as appertains to their institutions, or * * * as may be required on the part of the public officers of the United States.”

Several such cases have been brought before me, being for violations of contract, for balance of moneys due, and for claims on broken native banks. In the spirit of the language quoted I have uniformly brought these claims before the intendant and sought his intervention in their settlement. With a single exception, the case of Messrs, Russell & Co. versus Shin-Ton-Shan, heretofore reported in full to the legation, the intendant has procured acceptable settlement without formal trials, or at least without any joint action with the consul being demanded. In some instances much correspondence has been required which might largely have been avoided by a joint’ investigation promptly given. But the end has finally been a concession of all the consul demanded for his clients, including money collections, or such arrangements as were satisfactory to the parties complainant. Thus I have had no experience in this class of cases on which to formulate answers to your questions beyond the general replies already recorded.

The suggestions involved in the inquiries marked M, N, and O have often been considered, and my conclusions have not been entirely satisfactory to myself. Of course a consular court in China under United States law is exterritorial, and has no jurisdiction over any persons excepting citizens of our own government. It can take no compulsory course toward any but its own citizens, and can therefore enforce no judgments against the Chinese. The native authorities alone are competent to do this, as Chinese law must prevail over their own subjects, just as we apply United States laws to our people resident in China, the conditions being reversed, i. e., a Chinaman being the complainant against an American. I see no appeal possible, therefore, in the strict legal application of the term.

When a case is wrongfully decided, and when investigation and justice is refused by a native official, the only remedy I have been able to discover is the privilege of reporting the whole matter to the legation, who may present the facts to the foreign board, or other proper authorities. Doubtless here would be the power to see that wrongs were righted, judgments reversed, and exactions made. But it is not to be lost sight of that even the legation, and its nationality itself, must in the ultimate “be content with such judicial or executive action in the premises as appertains to Chinese institutions.” If justice is decreed and enforced it is matter of congratulation; if the contrary, I can only hope for future remedy by wise and successful diplomacy.

Your final query, Q, remains to be noted. For myself, I answer clearly I am in favor of a mixed or joint court, in which the nationalities shall be equally represented, with equal privileges, rights, and authority. Such I deem to have been the intent of Article XXXIII of the treaty of 1858, and it commends itself to my judgment as the reasonable method of reaching a correct result. The facts in any given case may thus be brought to light through the vigilance and in the presence of the two officials, so there can be no mutual doubts, and the standpoints for opinions will be equally grounded. The law governing proceedings must in any event be that of the defendant, since his representative official alone has jurisdiction over his person and property. The prime idea of a trial is, or ought to be, to discover facts. Applications and rulings of law, and administration of judgments are consequents. In civilized courts the presumption is that the law and judgments will correspond to the burden of the facts. In the application of Chinese law and judgments we are at the best at their mercy, and decisions, whether consistent or not, must be accepted finally, so long as there is between them and us no community of ideas, no common law of nations.” I trust it is not an impossible matter for the legations of Christendom to lead the Chinese Government to some proper and authoritative regulations for such a mixed court, wherein due regard may be had to the proprieties of rank and etiquette, as well as to the more vital purpose of securing mutual justice.

From my present light, I can see no such practical good as the certain outcome from a court where an official of one nationality sits as judge and jury, and the other merely attempts to watch proceedings. The authority of the latter is nothing; his influence is nullified, his judgment is silenced, his protests inadmissible. He is in a humiliating position, without even a right to certify proceedings.

In a case now before you, already referred to, where the intendant of this circuit is defendant official, he consents only to a degraded seat for the consul; his interpreter and native scribe are required to be out of sight of the court; examination of witnesses is forbidden except by himself; cross-examination, and even any question to to witnesses, forbidden, and no provision is intended for an official record. I am not sure, however, that in all this he exceeds his rights in such a trial, as seems intended by the provision in the Chefoo convention, from which he models his intended court. If it be his court solely, and no authority is given to plaintiffs official in it, it seems to be quite the correct thing for him to dictate all the minutiae. While protesting against it all, I have recently felt that he was right on the basis of such a court. But, most certainly such a state of facts could never have been contemplated by our treaty as referred to, and is not legitimate from it. The provisions of that treaty are to my mind wise and practicable, and, in my judgment, should be firmly adhered to until the progress of civilization induces China to a greater comity among the family of nations.

I have thus endeavored to meet your request considerately, and with my best judgment, without prolixity.

I am extremely glad you are engaged in the investigation of the subject, for you are aware it has given me much trouble in the defense of the interests of our citizens, and I know of no one point in our relations with China more important. I trust you may succeed in a fortunate solution, and if in any wise I can furnish you other aids or fuller answers, I shall most gladly serve you.

I have, &c.,

ISAAC F. SHEPARD.

[Inclosure 5 in No. 480.]

Mr. Lord to Mr. Seward.

Ningpo, August 20, 1879. No. 101.]

Sir: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your dispatch No. 42, dated the 26th ultimo, desiring answers to a series of questions relating to the course of procedure at this consulate in civil cases arising betwixt our people and the Chinese. In reply, I beg to submit the following as my answers:

A.—What is the practice at your consulate in civil cases arising between Chinese and our people? Are such cases tried by the officer of the defendant or by the consul and a native officer sitting as a mixed court?”

When cases are brought by the Chinese against our people I hear them, if lean-not persuade a private settlement, which, in all cases, I endeavor 1o do. When eases are brought by our people against the Chinese, my plan has been, first, to inquire carefully into their merits. If satisfied that they are more or less reasonable, I then usually address a private message to the party complained of, if in the neighborhood, requesting him, or them, to call and see me. If they do so, I explain to them the complaint, and advise a private settlement. In the majority of cases my advice is folio wed. In case the party is at a distance, or in case he is near and does not call, or in case he calls and does not heed my advice, then the case is sent either to the taotai, or to the prefect, or to the magistrate of the district in which the party resides, with the request that said officer will enforce settlement. And in nearly all of such cases settlement has been enforced.

There is no mixed court at this place. In one or two instances Chinese officers have attended cases brought against our people; and in one instance I was present at an examination, or hearing, had before the taotai, when Chinese were defendants. These cases were peculiar, and arose from some hoped-for advantage contemplated in that clause of the treaty pointing out this course of procedure.

“B.—If by the officer of the defendant, what native official sits for the trial in cases where a Chinese is the defendant?”

As I have remarked above, as a general thing, there are no mixed hearing of cases. The consul hears the cases when his people are the defendants, and the Chinese magistrate hears the cases when his people are the defendants. This is the common practice. Exceptions have arisen, and they might again arise. As to the officer that would sit in a mixed hearing when Chinese are defendants, supposing such a case to arise, something, I think, would depend on the nature of the case. It might be the taotai, or it might be the, district magistrate, according to its difficulty or importance.

“C.—Are the courts so held open for the personal appearance of the plaintiff and of his witnesses?”

Chinese courts are hardly courts in our sense of the word. The officer in charge of them is very arbitrary and very summary in his proceedings; and the common opinion is that very little care is taken to secure justice. It is a place where Chinese dread to go, either as complainants or defendants, and they often suffer many wrongs in order to avoid it. No case has occurred where an American has attended such court with witnesses. He might possibly do so by previous arrangement of his consul with the officer, but I think it would seldom happen when a consul acquainted with Chinese matters, as they are understood and transacted here, would request such a course of procedure. It would result in no satisfaction, unless the magistrate were favorably disposed. And if he were favorably disposed, it would rarely happen when such attendance would be needed. The consul, in presenting the claims of his people, would be expected to present with them reasonable evidence of their validity. Unless this evidence could be clearly set aside, the case would be summarily decided. And if it were set aside, the case would be referred back to the consul for revision or withdrawal. In short, such matters are usually settled here, if settled at all, by correspondence rather than by judicial processes.

“D.—Does the consul attend; and, if so, what position is given him as to seat, etc., and what part does he take in the proceedings?”

If a case should occur where the consul should ask for a joint hearing, it would no doubt be arranged where the hearing should be. If at the yamên of the Chinese officer the consul would no doubt be requested to take she seat of honor, and all needed respect would be shown him. If he felt competent to question or cross-question or discuss any point of law or fact, he would no doubt be permitted to do so. The influence he would have would of course depend very much upon himself and upon the disposition of the magistrate towards him.

“E.—If the consul attends, does he take an interpreter; if so, what position is given to the interpreter?”

If the consul were to attend a hearing as supposed above, at the office of the Chinese magistrate, he would be likely to take with him an interpreter. If the interpreter were a foreigner he would certainly be treated with respect if his own conduct were respectful. If the interpreter were a native, judging from my own experience (I use only a native interpreter), I think he would be treated with entire respect. He would sit near his consul and act as the consul’s mouthpiece.

“F.—Is a full and accurate record made of the pleadings aud of the proceedings of the court?”

There may be some record kept of the cases brought before Chinese magistrates, but nothing’, I fancy, that could be called an “accurate record”; and pleadings in their courts are probably unknown, but in case a mixed or joint hearing were agreed upon, arrangements, I presume, could be made to secure such record.

“G.—If so, by whom is the record made; and if by the native assistant of the foreign interpreter, what position is assigned to him?”

Of course nothing has been arranged here for such proceedings; but speaking still of a supposed case, so far as I know, the record could be made by the interpreter’s clerk or assistant; and any officer or assistant attached to the consul would no doubt be treated with all needed respect. His position as to seat would naturally be at the side of the interpreter.

“H.—Is the record made in English and Chinese? If so, how are such records, or any which are made, certified to?”

Still speaking of what might be, records made where a Chinese officer is judge would naturally be in Chinese. They could, of course, be made in English also, were the consul provided with a clerk for the purpose; and either or both records, when made, could be read and interpreted in court; and when so read and interpreted, if assented to by magistrate and consul, they should be held to be full and accurate. Copies, or the originals, could be attested by both judge and assessor.

“I.—To what court do appeals from the decision of the native officer lie?”

The rule here is that all matters of debt, crime, or controversy are prosecuted before the district magistrate. There are no rules, as with us, of carrying cases to higher courts; yet it sometimes happens that appeals are made to the prefect, to the taotai, to the viceroy, and even to Peking. The cases presented to the native authorities by myself in behalf of our people are sometimes sent to one officer and sometimes to another. I am governed in this partly by the nature of the case and partly by the place where the party complained of resides.

“J.—If trials are in mixed courts, what native officer acts?

“K.—What positions are assigned to the consul and those with him?

“L.—What records are made and how are they made?

“M.—What law it taken as binding upon the court?

“N.—How are judgments enforced?

“O.—To what court do appeals lie?

“P.—Generally, is it the practice of other consuls at your port to sit in mixed courts, or is the system of trial in the court of the defendant preferred?”

The above seven questions are all answered in saying that there are no mixed courts here. It may have happened with other consuls, as it has once or twice with me, that there has now and then been a case of joint hearing; but, I think, nothing more.

“Q.—Have you any opinion as to which is the preferable procedure? If so, will you be so good as to state it as fully as possible? Will you please add also any remarks on the general subject which may appear appropriate to you?”

My opinion in regard to mixed courts must be mainly theoretical, as I have had no actual experience in them. But from what I think they are, or at least might be, and from what I know of others, my opinion is in favor of them.

In the first place, they seem to me needed in the interest of justice. Justice is the equal right of plaintiff and defendant; and this right relates not only to the matter in dispute, but to the proceedings of the court to which appeal is made. In other words, the parties should have their case decided according to its merits; and in obtaining such decision they should be exempted from all needless inconvenience, and from all needless expense. Now such justice, I suppose, is seldom had, and seldom expected in Chinese courts; for everybody says, and what everybody says is commonly true, that bribery, corruption, and extortion reign in them and rule over them. Chinese courts have no juries, nor have they any adequate system of pleading or of evidence; and their judges are often ignorant, often unprincipled, and always arbitral Then, too, these tribunals, bad as they are, are surrounded by troops of hungry menials, who suffer no one to pass, either in or out, without exactions. I say “no one,” I mean, of course, no native; for over us they have yet no power. In applying to these courts, we ourselves may have little to fear. But this is not enough. It is an inconvenience and an evil to appeal to courts at all, but it is sometimes necessary; and when it is, we not only want justice for ourselves, but we want no injustice for others, however free we may be from its responsibility.

But in prosecuting the Chinese in their courts, as they now exist, we are not only sure to occasion them this wrong, for which we are not responsible, but we are liable to occasion them another for which we are responsible. In other courts there are heavy penalties, such as exposures, costs, fines, and counter-actions to restrain the prosecution of unjust claims; but defendants in Chinese courts have, with regard to us, very little, if any of this protection. Our prosecutions have too much facility, and when our claims are wanting in justice, as may sometimes happen, great and irreparable wrong is committed.

Then, too, we should not overlook the fact that while we can bring our cases into Chinese courts without the restraints above referred to, the Chinese cannot bring their cases into our courts on the same condition. Our courts are open, they can bring their cases into them if they like, but they must do it with the understanding that, if they fail to make them good, they are liable for costs. This, I think, is entirely right and as it should be. The wrong is on the other side, in the constitution and character of Chinese courts; and for this wrong I see no present remedy but the substitution of mixed courts. And if these courts were substituted, and properly organized. I think we should then have the means of securing substantial justice to all parties.

Justice, of course, is the first and great object to be aimed at in this matter, but it is not the only one. These courts would become institutions of great convenience in matters of record, reference, &c. They would also become institutions of great moral influence—training-schools, so to speak, where this people would gradually learn to understand their rights, and acquire power to assert them.

But these, courts, in order to meet the wants to which I have referred, would need great care in their organization, and great care in the selection of officers to preside over them. In theory all this might be easy, but in-practice it would no doubt meet with many obstacles. There would be the native jealousy, and the native incompetency; and for the present, and I know not for how long a time, there would be this difficulty, that our consulates would find it hard, if not impossible, to furnish officers competent to assist, and have the needed influence in these courts. But with all its difficulties the measure may be practicable, and, if so, I should be glad to see it undertaken.

I have, &c.,

EDWARD C. LORD.

[Inclosure 6 in No. 480.]

Mr. Seward to Mr. Shepard.

September 18, 1879. No. 71.]

Sir: Recurring to your dispatch No, 33, I beg leave to say that I have read your remarks upon the subject with much interest, and that they will be of much value to me in the further consideration of the subject. I entirely agree with you that, looking to the character of native courts and the interests involved, it is indispensable that the foreign officer present in the native court must be admitted to assist his national and the court, by intervention, intended to place the court in full possession of all the facts, and to see that their bearing is understood and appreciated. While in Shanghai I never found difficulty in accomplishing such intervention as fully as could be expected with reason. I accorded like privileges to the native officers who were present upon the trial of cases in which their people were complainants and ours the defendants, and it was a matter of satisfaction to me then, as it is of encouragement to me now, that I never failed to secure the approval of such officers to my judgments.

The views entertained by many that we should establish the principle of mixed courts, and make it effectual by securing the adoption of a code applicable to natives and foreigners alike, to be enforced in such courts, is an attractive one, but I fear that the prospects of success which could be entertained would not be great, and, moreover, as it seems to me, it is not desirable to fix upon the Chinese a system which, in the end, would still be irregular and abnormal. We may enlist Chinese pride in the demonstration of the merits of their courts, and in the introduction of ameliorations of their own system, but we could at best expect only a halting support to an institution of an exotic sort.

I am, &c.,

GEORGE F. SEWARD.

No. 113. Mr. Seward to Mr. Evarts. [Document 133]

No. 113.
Mr. Seward to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Peking, October 7, 1879. (Received November 28.) No. 487.]

Sir: In further reference to the questions involved in the trial of mixed cases, civil and criminal, between our people and subjects of China, I have now the honor to hand to you copies of responses to my circular letter of July 26 from the consul-general, Mr. Bailey, and the vice-consul at Newchwang, Mr. Bandinel. I have prepared a memorandum on this very interesting subject to be submitted to my colleagues in conference here upon this and other matters, which I am having printed. I shall transmit you a number of copies as soon as they are completed.

I have, &c.,

GEORGE F. SEWARD.

[Inclosure 1 in No. 487.]

Mr. Bailey to Mr. Seward.

United States Consulate-General,
Shanghai, September 15, 1879. No. 4.]

Sir: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your dispatch No. 174, hearing date July 26, propounding certain questions to be answered at my very earliest convenience.

In compliance with your request I remark, first, that the entire staff of this consulate having been changed since I assumed charge, I am not at present fully advised as to the former practice under query A.

Since my incumbency civil cases by the Chinese against our people have been tried in the court for this consular district, the consul-general sitting alone as judge. Similar cases by our people against Chinese subjects have been tried in the mixed court of the foreign settlements, presided over by the Chinese magistrate, Cheu-Fu-shün, and the United States interpreter acting as American assessor.

No cases involving exceptional difficulties have occurred in either court, except that of Loo-Fung-Kwan, a Chinese subject, against the estate of the late Edwin Maurice Smith, a citizen of the United States. This was an action brought for a considreable sum of money, and was decided purely upon a question of law. The cases thus far disposed of in the mixed court of Shanghai by the magistrate Chen and the United States assessor have been reasonably satisfactory to all parties concerned. Should cases arise involving important questions or considerable interests which could not be amicably settled between our people and the Chinese, upon a demand made by the proper officer of either nationality, I apprehend that a joint court would be organized in accordance with the treaty, and presided over by the consul and the intendant of circuit, sitting with equal powers to decide “conformably to justice and equity.” That a decision in such a case by the public officers of the two nations acting in conjunction is to be the decision of a joint court appears to be made clear by Article XXVIII of the treaty of 1858. Article XXIV of the same treaty provides that Chinese subjects having claims against citizens of the United States may seek redress by representation through the consul or by suit in the consular courts. The plaintiff may elect which remedy he will pursue. Should he elect to proceed by suit in the consular court, in my opinion he is bound to accept that forum as to its organization, its law, and its decrees, subject only to appeal to the United States appellate courts at Peking or California, in accordance with the jurisdiction provided for by statute.

Subject to these remarks, it may be said that in Shanghai there are two mixed courts, the higher and the lower. The latter is held by a Chinese magistrate and the United States assessor appointed by the consul-general to act for him. The former is held by the consul-general and the intendant of circuit for the Soo, Sung, and Tai jurisdiction, and is either a court of appeal from the lower court, or for the hearing of cases that have never passed through the lower court.

I now proceed to answer the remaining interrogatories in the order in which they are named.

Interrogatory B.—Answer. A subprefect in the lower court, and the intendant of circuit for the Soo, Sung, and Tai jurisdiction in the higher court.

Interrogatory C.—Answer. Yes.

Interrogatory D.—Answer. The consul-general attends in the higher court only, he appointing the consular interpreter to act for him in the lower court. The consul-general sits on the right of the intendant of circuit and acts as one of the judges.

Interrogatory E.—Answer. The consul-general attends in the higher court only, the position of the consular interpreter being to his right.

Interrogatory F.—Answer. In the lower court the magistrate’s clerk of the court keeps a record of the pleadings and proceedings; the assessor also keeping a record in the English language of the proceedings. In the higher court the clerk of the consular court keeps a record of the pleadings and proceedings, the secretary of the intendant of circuit also keeping a record in the Chinese language.

Interrogatory G.—Answer. Records are kept, as shown under F. The position of the native writer of the consular interpreter is to the right of the interpreter.

Interrogatory H.—Answer. The records are kept both in English and Chinese. They are certified to in neither language, so far as I know.

Interrogatory I.—Answer. Appeals from the decision of the native magistrate in the lower court go to the higher court, and appeals thence to the United States minister and the Tsung-li-Yamên.

Interrogatory J.—Answer. In the lower court a “Tung chih” or subprefect acts, and in the higher court the intendant of circuit for the Soo, Sung, and Tai jurisdiction.

Interrogatory K.—Answer. The position assigned to the consul-general is to the right of the intendant of circuit, the consular interpreter sitting to the right of the consul-general, the native writer to the right of the consular interpreter, and the clerk of the consular court would be the subject of arrangement.

Interrogatory L.—Answer. The records of the proceedings are kept as shown under F.

Interrogatory M.—Answer. The only law prescribed by the treaty in such courts is that cases shall be “examined and decided conformably to justice and equity.”

I understand these words as applied to a joint court to be used in the treaty in their generic sense and not in their technical sense, as a legal distinction descriptive of our common law and equity courts and their refinements of rules and principles.

It was intended by the framers of the treaty, I apprehend, that the judges of this joint court should travel on the broad palpable highway of justice and equity in that large view which finds and administers the right.

To prescribe the absolute law of either country in such a court would almost surely lead to a disagreement of the judges in every case and make the court simply a nullity. There are certain fundamental principles in our system which we could never yield, and perhaps the same may be said of the Chinese system, and where the decision of a case depended upon giving away such a principle on either side, diplomacy must endeavor to adjust what the judges cannot reconcile. But it is reasonable to suppose that if the judges of this joint court are actuated by liberal and enlarged views of justice and equity, not simply as abstract principles, but essential agencies in adjusting the affairs of men and nations, the rule provided for by the treaty is not only to be observed as the law binding upon the court, but it is safe and ample for the administration of the usual course of justice.

But this presupposes a habit of thought of that high order which is rarely found in Chinese judges. Nevertheless, if justice and equity within the meaning of the treaty be approximately observed, there is a prescribed rule, which may by said to be a law recognized and binding upon the court.

Interrogatory N.—Answer. The mode of enforcing a judgment against a citizen of the United States would be the same as in the court for this consulate, but as against a Chinese subject it is difficult, if not impracticable, to define a rule.

The enforcement of such a judgment would depend more upon the good faith of the Chinese co-judge and his subordinate officers and underlings than upon regular, defined, and exact proceedings whereby judgments of courts are satisfied. Supposing a judgment agreed upon between the two officers constituting the court, it might not un-frequently happen that the foreign plaintiff would be as far from having his claim satisfied as before he began his proceedings, although it should be clear that the defendant had the means to satisfy it. The situation would then be so anomalous as that one of the judges of the court would feel compelled to bring no inconsiderable pressure to bear on his brother judge to secure the enforcement of their joint judgment.

Interrogatory O.—Answer. The mode of appeals is-shown under I.

Interrogatory P.—Answer. With the other consulates at Shanghai the practice is in general understood to be the same as in ours, at least so far as any practice has arisen. It is to be observed, however, that only three foreign assessors sit in the lower mixed court, viz, the British, American,, and Austrian; the British assessor sitting three days in each week, the American two days, and the Austrian one. The interpreter of the German consulate-general sits sometimes in the absence of either of the assessors named.

There seems to be an exception, however, in the practice of the British consulate so far as the higher court is concerned. By the thirty-fifth section of Her Britannic Majesty’s order in council for the government of Her Majesty’s subjects in China, all jurisdiction, civil and criminal, for and within the district of the consulate of Shanghai, is vested in Her Britannic Majesty’s supreme court for China and Japan.

The British consul, it appears, therefore, does not assume or exercise judicial authority in conjunction with the intendant of circuit. How such functions are exercised by the British vice-consul as assessor in the lower mixed court I am not advised.

In a recent case, reported in the Shanghai newspapers September 3, wherein T. W. Duff and D. M. Davids, British subjects, were plaintiffs and the committee of the Swatow Opium Guild, Chinese subjects, were defendants, the intendant of circuit sat as judge in the court-room of the lower mixed court, the British consul being present on the bench, but declared in open court that he appeared only as consul to watch British interests, and that the British vice-consul, who sat on the right of the taotai, was there in his ordinary capacity as assessor; that Chen, the subprefect, practically was also sitting in his ordinary capacity as magistrate of the court, but that “the chief officer was his excellency the Taotai,” who was sitting to decide the case. The proceedings had been pending for quite a while, and it is to be presumed that the organization of the court was well considered before it convened.

Pertinent to these questions concerning mixed courts, and indeed the whole system of jurisprudence for the settlements of Shanghai, is the subject of an international court, to which I beg casually to draw your attention.

The multiplicity of courts established in Shanghai may be fairly said to constitute the most cumbersome system of judicature known to exist in any considerable commercial center in the world.

The importance of Shanghai in its tradal relations, the extent of its commerce, the various-conflicting interests, the enormous foreign capital centered here, the large foreign population, the fact that the settlements are introducing western civilization into China, and therefore the education which China is to receive through Shanghai, all make it exceedingly desirable that there should be a court with full powers, having original and exclusive jurisdiction, civil and criminal, over all persons and property within the limits of the several foreign settlements of Shanghai. This should be an international court similar, perhaps, to the one organized in Egypt, January 1, 1875, in pursuance of a special convention entered into between the seven great powers. Such a judiciary must be instituted by the joint action of all the powers, for a tribunal established by any one nation cannot answer the requirements of all.

The effect of such a court upon the Chinese system would, no doubt, in time be vast and beneficial in the highest degree, for through Chinese judges who would constitute a part of the judicial organization, the educational process would be going on. This judicial system to be effective must necessarily be based upon a code, assimilating to the “Code Egyptian,” the code Napoleon, or perhaps the Indian code would be more suitable, but these are subsidiary questions which would grow naturally out of the major proposition, viz: that there shall be an international court. The tribunal once fairly established, the friction which now exists between the disjointed courts of Shanghai, often resulting in the defeat of justice, would disappear, and instead there would be a harmonious system with ample powers to adjudicate and enforce by the fixed and enlightened rules of a modern code, all questions of life, liberty, property, and demands arising between citizens and subjects of the different nationalities within the territorial limits of the settlements. Such a court must come sooner or lately and, in my opinion, they who identify themselves with its creation will confer a benefit on this people which shall not fail to endure; for, may we not reasonably anticipate that that system, that benefit, would widen and widen until it embraces the empire? I append a synopsis of some of the salient features of the international court of Egypt, extracted from a memorandum prepared and sent to Judge Folger by Judge George S. Batchelder, late of Saratoga Springs, one of the judges of the international court.

I have, &c.,

DAVID H. BAILEY,
Consul-General.

A.
The international court of Egypt.

[undated].

There were established three chambers of mixed jurisdiction, styled tribunals of first instance, one at Cairo, the capital, one at Alexandria, the chief commercial city, and a third at Ismailia, on the Suez Canal, but since transferred to Mansourah, the chief agricultural city and center of the cotton trade of the Delta, also a court of appeals at Alexandria.

Each of the great powers, viz, United States, England, France, Germany, Austria, Italy, and Russia, were entitled to designate two members of the first instance (supreme court), and one member of the court of appeals. Should additional foreign judges be required by the necessities of service, they were to be selected from the minor powers. This necessity has already required magistrates from Holland, Belgium, Denmark, Sweden, Norway, and Greece, so that all the civilized governments are represented in the tribunals, except Spain and Portugal. There was also instituted a “parquet,” at the head of which is a “procureur général,” assisted by a suitable number of substitutes or deputies. He has the right in person or by deputy, to a seat in each tribunal, and is required by the code to deliver his opinion or “conclusions,” in a certain class of civil and commercial cases, which is done by an oral address to the court after the argument of counsel is closed.

The function of a procureur général, while resembling in some respects that of attorney-general in the United States, especially in criminal proceedings, is peculiar to the courts of continental Europe, and its characteristics and workings in connection with the tribunal are a subject of considerable interest, which may be hereafter described.

Each tribunal is composed of seven judges, four foreign and three natives.

Five judges constitute the quorum of a chamber, maintaining always the same proportion between natives and foreigners. The presiding judge or president, as he is designated, is by right accorded to the foreigners, and he is elected annually by a majority vote of his colleagues, and, aside from his duties as president of the public audiences, he is charged with the general discipline of the clerks, sheriffs, and other employés of the tribunal.

The judges are immovable, either by the power appointing them or by the Egyptian Government, during the five years for which they were designated, but may be impeached for causes compromising their honor or integrity, the court of appeals, or a composition of the different tribunals, forming the court for the trial of impeachment. It is stipulated that these tribunals shall be considered as an experiment for the first five years, after which the powers shall determine whether to continue, modify, or abandon the system.

The tribunals are essentially international mixed courts, and are the first regular establishment of the kind ever introduced into any country. The experiment has been watched with great interest throughout Europe, and their workings have already formed the subject of discussion in-numerous international gatherings, besides various European periodicals and journals.

The competence of the tribunals is defined by the treaty as follows: 1. All contestations in civil and commercial transactions between foreigners and natives, and between foreigners of different nationalities.

2. All contestations arising out of title or interest in real estate between all persons, even of the same nationality.

3. The Egyptian Government, the administration of the Daira (the various private estates of the Khedive and his family) in all “processes” with foreigners.

4. The tribunals, without power to adjudicate upon the public domain, or prevent the execution of an administrative measure of the government, may adjudge, under the civil code, all prejudices, wrongs, or injuries against an acquired or established right of a foreigner caused by or arising out of any administrative act.

5. The tribunals, subject to the usual restrictions of nationality, have general maritime and bankruptcy jurisdiction. The “statut personelle,” or laws of succession, marriage, divorce, religious privileges, guardianships of persons and of property, &c., are excepted from the competency of the tribunals: this administration remaining in case of foreigners with their consuls, and in case of natives with their local code.

The penal competence is limited to offenses against the administration of justice, offenses against the judges, functionaries, and employés, opposition to process or any interference with the operations of the courts, in which instances the provisions of the penal code, transcribed almost literally from the French code, are applicable. It has been found necessary to apply this penal quality frequently.

The composition of the criminal code is novel and worthy of consideration elsewhere. It combines the jury and magistrate into a tribunal in which both elements are merged, at the same time maintaining the best qualities of each. Three judges and four “assessors” or jurors (selected from the resident notables) constitute the court. They hear the evidence and arguments, deliberate together, and fix the sentence, which is determined by a majority, and pronounced at once by the presiding judge.

It will be observed that the accused has the benefit of a “trial by his peers,” the four assessors constituting a majority of the court; and at the same lime the deliberations of the jury-room under the guidance of disciplined and experienced judges, are relieved from many of the anomalies and perversions which sometimes characterize the present jury system of the United States and England. The laws in use are styled the “Code Egyptien,” and are founded upon the “Code Napoleon “modified in many respects to adapt them to the local laws and customs.

These codes were submitted to and approved by the different powers, before being promulgated in this country.

The law is subdivided as foilows:

Code civil. Code of commerce. Code of commerce, maritime. Code of procedure, civil and commercial. Code penal. Code of criminal instruction (for the preliminary examination of criminals and the investigation of crimes).

The codes comprehend every department of affairs, defining clearly each profession or occupation and prescribing rules for their government.

The “statut personnelle,” which is excluded from the competence of the mixed courts, will be interesting to examine hereafter.

The code of procedure is very simple, and is followed in practice in the most literal manner; the interpretations of French jurisprudence which are adopted are all in favor of a strict construction which has the merit of rendering its meaning certain, but is, according to the light of the American system, narrow and illiberal, and often works serious hardships, and a denial rather than a giving of justice, especially in its restrictions in the department of parol evidence.

It would seem that the system of evidence prevalent in Europe, and followed here was founded upon the theory that all business transactions should be in writing; and that if parol proof be allowed it must come from other sources than those most likely to be cognizant of the facts.

[Inclosure 2 in No. 487.]

Mr. Bandinel to Mr. Seward.

New Chwang, September 12, 1879. No. 29.]

Sir: I have had the honor to receive your excellency’s dispatch, No, 49, containing a series of questions with regard to the practice at this and other consulates at this port in civil cases arising between Chinese and foreigners, and now beg leave to transmit my replies to the same as follows:

In reply to question A, I have to state: The only civil case in my time between Chinese and our people, was a claim for damages arising out of a collision, brought against the master of the “William Phillips.” This was tried by the vice-consul (defendant’s officer) only, to whose court the taotai had directed the plaintiff to apply. The taotai also furnished the vice-consul with some information requested by the latter; but, after judgment had been given in defendant’s favor, denied the validity of the proceedings, which, he maintained, ought to have been in the nature of a mixed court.

In reply to questions B to I, I have to state: No case in which a Chinese was defendant has been brought to an issue in my time.

In reply to questions J to O, I have to state: No trials in mixed courts have taken place in my time, nor, as I believe, previously.

In reply to question P, I have to state: It is not the practice of other consuls at this port to sit in mixed courts; the foreign defendant is tried by his consul; the foreign plaintiff applies to his consul, who generally investigates the facts and endeavors to arrange matters amicably, failing in which he reports to the taotai. The latter usually takes the consul’s dispatch as a statement of the plaintiff’s case, examines the defendant, and, generally speaking, grants the claim in a modified form; if there is anything in the case which he does not understand, or any suggestion for a compromise which he does not care to put on record until he knows that it will be agreed to, he calls, or more generally sends a deputy to call, on the consul and discuss the matter.

The Chinese defendant frequently puts in an appearance in the first place before the consul, with the hope of arranging matters amicably; and thus a sort of preliminary investigation is held, which results in the facts of the case being pretty thoroughly sifted before any representation is made to the taotai.

In reply to question Q, I have to state: I consider that the present mode of action, as stated under my reply to question P, has worked so very well that it is not desirable to disturb it, in the present condition of this port; but that some modification in the direction of a mixed court might be necessary in the events a large increase in the number of foreign residents, or the general adoption here of the transit-pass system, or the concession to foreigners of the right of inland navigation, or of residence in the interior.

I would recommend that in small ports like this the consul should be at liberty to take as associates, in cases of collision between Chinese and American vessels, captains of American vessels, or American captains of other vessels, who may happen to be in port at the time.

I have, &c.,

F. H. BANDINEL.

No. 114. Mr. Seward to Mr. Evarts. [Document 134]

No. 114.
Mr. Seward to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Peking, October 11, 1879. (Received November 28.) No. 490.]

Sir: I have the honor to inclose to you ‘herewith an extract from a dispatch recently received by me from Mr. De Lano, reporting the fact that the local officials at his post have of late dealt with missionary cases occurring in the interior promptly and satisfactorily, and, in some cases, without intervention on his part. Such cases have been frequent at his post in the past, and settlement of them has been obtained only with great difficulty.

I attribute the improved condition of things to a better feeling on the part of the Chinese generally, and to greater caution on the part of the missionaries, resulting in a measure, as I believe, from the circular letter which I addressed to them in March, 1876 (vide Diplomatic Correspondence 1876, p. 77).

I am especially pleased to find that appeals made by the missionaries directly to the local officials have resulted well at Foochow and elsewhere. I have been and am very desirous that the missionaries shall be encouraged to go to the local officials for the redress of their grievances, and in this way to avoid the appearance that our official establishments in China exist largely to sustain efforts for the propagation of religion.

I have, &c.,

GEORGE F. SEWARD.

[Inclosure 1 in No. 490.]

No. 130.
Mr. De Lano to Mr. Seward.

August 8, 1879.

Sir: * * * * * * *

Consular cases growing out of missionary work, such as have hitherto claimed much of my attention, have become rare, and I am glad to say that when such cases do arise, of late, in which American missionaries are concerned, the Chinese officials take them up without solicitation from the consulate and settle them with promptness and fairness, either procuring recompense for native converts who have been maltreated or despoiled of their property by mobs, or causing chapels to be rebuilt or repaired when torn down or damaged.

At Yeuping-foo the American Methodist mission had occasion to make some alterations and repairs upon their chapel during the last winter, when the obstructive society known as the “Lien-chiah” interfered and stopped the work. This was reported through the consulate to the provincial officers, who at once caused the “Lien-chiah” to retire, and the work was completed without further opposition.

* * * * * * *

I have, &c.,

M. M. De LANO.

No. 115. Mr. Knight to Mr. Evarts. [Document 135]

No. 115.
Mr. Knight to Mr. Evarts.

Shanghai, July 14, 1879. (Received September 1.)

Sir: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your dispatch No. 20 of the 20th of April last.

* * * * * * *

During my term of office I have given much consideration to, and have frequently addressed the Department upon the subject of the urgent need of providing regular interpreters to our consulates in this country—a need which no one I dare say will deny—must soon be supplied if the work of the offices is to be carried on with intelligence and dignity as the Empire advances, and the increasing commercial interests of our country in this direction be properly watched over and guarded.

In this connection, and on the occasion of my taking leave of the consular service, I would beg, sir, to recall to your recollection the Chinese educational scheme I had the honor, when at home in 1877, to propose for Harvard University, a scheme which now promises to be successful, and one which, I feel assured, will provide our consulates in two years with the interpreters so much demanded.

In order to remind you thoroughly of my scheme, I take the liberty of inclosing printed copies of my correspondence with President Eliot, of Harvard, on the subject.

I have now the gratification to add that a Chinese gentleman, who is fully competent for the teachership, will arrive at Cambridge in time for the next October course of instruction; and I boldly, though most respectfully, would ask the government to consider the propriety of signifying to President Eliot, without great delay, its willingness to appoint from the class a certain number of scholars to permanent and promising positions in our legation and consulates in China; and now that the Chinese have established a legation in Washington, the government may think well of appointing regular Chinese interpreters therefrom to the State Department.

I have, &c.,

FRANCIS P. KNIGHT, Consul

[Inclosure 1 in Mr. Knight’s letter.]

Mr. Knight to Mr. Eliot.

Boston, February 22, 1877.

proposal for teaching chinese at harvard university.

Dear Sir: A commercial and official experience in China for the past fifteen years has convinced me that a great mistake has been made by residents in not acquiring a knowledge of the language of the Country on their arrival, rather than depend thereafter on the so-called “Pigeon English” for communication with the people of that great Empire. The changes which have taken place the last few years in China, where our commercial and diplomatic interests are increasing, and where I am confident they will continue to increase until they exceed in importance those of other occidental nations, have made this error most painfully evident.

Since my return to this country the knowledge that many European universities, and that of Oxford as well, had established professorships of Chinese, and that Yale College contemplated doing so with the view of appointing Dr. S. Wells Williams,, L. L. D., to the chair, has drawn my attention, as you are aware, sir, to the desirability of some provision being made for introducing instruction in the Chinese language into Harvard University.

Few, if any, who have had experience in China during the last ten years, will dispute my assertion that for young men who will study with the view of pursuing a certain career away from their native land, China offers an exceptionally rare field for success and honor. To be practical, I may say that our legation at Peking will offer two permanent positions, that of secretary of legation and Chinese interpreter, and that I am assured that our consulates will hereafter be given to capable men who have made the language of the country their study.

To those who prefer a commercial life, there will be a number of opportunities open, as both merchants and bankers there recognize daily the necessity of independence from the Chinese shroff or treasurer, on whom now they must chiefly depend.

The foreign Chinese customs service (in which already Harvard has four graduates, one, who after about twelve years’ service, is now a commissioner, in the enjoyment of a salary of nearly £2,000 per annum, and three others, who have made such excellent progress in two years in the language and in gaining a knowledge of their duties as to receive $150 per month) will have, I am sure, a number of excellent positions for those who have the forethought to study for them. But for those whose aim will be for a distinguished career in some profession, China, it is my belief, will prove the most satisfactory country for eminent success and honor.

The one small railroad, of but eleven miles, now running from Shanghai to Woosung, in China, is but the opening wedge, it is commonly believed, to vast lines across the Empire, equalled only at present in our own country, and this fact should stimulate students who will follow the profession of civil engineering to study for fame in that direction, and to assist in opening up, by the aid of surveys, telegraphs, and railroads, that vast empire to civilization.

It is well known that China is as rich in minerals as is our own favored country, and the employment of an English expert in the coal fields of Formosa and the constant assertion by all who best are qualified to express an opinion that the Chinese must and will employ foreign mining engineers should be sufficient to induce some to learn the language with the determination of pushing their fortunes there. To those who will enter the law school of Harvard, China presents a field for a most lucrative practice. Already do the lawyers at Hong-Kong and the treaty ports in China, now mostly London barristers and solicitors, realize the value of their Chinese business, and feel greatly the want of the Chinese language, in the person of an intelligent and honorable foreigner in their offices. And as more ports are opened and mixed courts established for the adjudication of cases between foreigners and Chinese, it may well be expected that those who become lawyers may advantageously go out from this country, where the profession is so crowded, to one where its honors are as yet so lightly competed for.

Having pointed out that, in visiting China, young men may find many opportunities for furthering their interests in a pecuniary point of view, it is not to be forgotten that in doing so they will extend the means of communication between the Western world and a large portion of the human race, which is now practically excluded from the family of nations—an honorable office. Moreover, there is in China an almost untouched field for the traveler, the scientific man, and for many others, which might well attract many minds, apart from the consideration of emolument, for they would find an unexplored country and an unexplored literature, both of vast extent, and although in science we should teach, it is far from improbable that we may in the arts be able ourselves to acquire some valuable empirical knowledge which has come down from a remote antiquity.

I do not propose to you at present the establishment of a Chinese chair, as I am not aware how far an appeal to the public would be responded to; but I think the main object in view may be reached by bringing from China one or two native teachers, by the aid of whom, with the excellent books now attainable, any resolute scholar may acquire a knowledge of the language by a system generally pursued by students at Peking. This would involve but a very moderate annual expense, and if it meets your approbation, I shall be happy to see what can be done in the community with regard to funds.

I am, &c.,

FRANCIS P. KNIGHT.

Mr. Eliot to Mr. Knight. [Document 136]

Mr. Eliot to Mr. Knight.

Harvard University, March 10, 1877.

Dear Sir: I have read with great interest the letter you addressed to me touching the opportunities which China would offer to educated young Americans who had acquired a knowledge of Chinese. Your plan of raising money to maintain a native teacher of Chinese at the university for a period of years, commends itself very much to my judgment, and your efforts to this end will have my most cordial support.

In the public service of China, in our consular service, and in the practice of law and engineering there, I see profitable and honorable opportunities for ambitious and capable young men who will prepare themselves for success by acquiring some familiarity with the spoken and written language of China.

At the last meeting of our corporation I laid the matter before the board, and they will be happy to do anything in their power to promote your undertaking.

The president and fellows will feel the need of help and guidance in so novel an educational enterprise, but they do not doubt that your zeal in directing and furthering the undertaking will be equal to your discernment and energy in starting it.

Believe me, &c.

CHARLES W. ELIOT.

No. 116. Mr. Wing to Mr. Evarts. [Document 137]

No. 116.
Mr. Wing to Mr. Evarts.

Chinese Legation,
Washington, October 10, 1879.

Sir: Numerous complaints having reached me during the past summer from San Francisco in regard to a decision of the collector of internal revenue there affecting the interests of Chinese residents, I venture to call your attention to the facts, and I inclose documents which fully explain the subject.

It is alleged that for the first time in twenty years the collector refuses to accept as bondsmen for tobacco manufacturers wealthy Chinese merchants, but insists that the sureties shall possess real estate. As the Chinese rarely own houses and lands, the new regulation operates harshly against them. In many cases they are driven into the hands of professional “bond-signers,” who exact exorbitant fees for signatures. Under the former regulation the government never suffered loss from the Chinese, but under the new its receipts are diminishing.

The collector was not compelled by law to establish the new rule, and there are many things connected with it which look like a design to drive the Chinese residents from trade in San Francisco. If this be true, it is a violation in spirit, if not in letter, of treaty stipulations, and by an officer of the United States Government.

As the regulation referred to is within the discretion of the Executive, I have no hesitation in presenting the subject for your consideration.

I have, &c.,

YUNG WING.

[Inclosure 1 in Mr. Wing’s letter.]

Mr. Bee to Mr. Wing.

San Francisco, June 19, 1879.

Dear Sir: I regret exceedingly the necessity of calling your attention to a matter which I am compelled to say, after a thorough inquiry, partakes of persecution towards a large number of Chinese engaged in the manufacture of cigars and tobacco in this city. I am compelled to say that, for the first time, this persecution comes from the United States officials, through the internal-revenue office of this district. I need not call your attention to the many annoyances the Chinese have been compelled to submit to by statutory enactments of the State and local authorities. But I must say I never anticipated the United States Government would, in any of its departments, without good and sufficient reasons, be influenced by the clamor of a foreign mob and lend its aid in striking down any class of residents, and I don’t believe it will tolerate such an act when inquiry is made. Hence I place the facts before you that you may judge if my language is too strong. As a preface to the great wrong, I call your attention to what I call petty persecution. A few months since a new special agent made his appearance here, representing the Internal-Revenue Department. As to his acts in connection with “the citizens” the proof has fully ventilated; his acts towards the Chinese have never been made public.

This man learned that the Chinese vegetable peddler, in self-defense, had to take with him in his rounds each morning a pocket full of cigars to appease the hoodlum who met him regularly and demanded his supply of cigars, which the poor fellow at once complied with to save his wares. Scores were arrested and imprisoned for having unstamped cigars in their possession to the ruin of their calling, and loss of a city license of $10 per quarter paid in advance.

The hoodlum and ex-convicts were pressed into service to convict old established factories of illicit acts. The collector ordered the investigation of one of the oldest factories here upon the affidavit of a young thief who, five days after, was sent to the industrial school for ninety days for petty larceny, and a most estimable gentleman, Mr. Cooper, removed for refusing to be a party to such a transaction. So much for petty acts.

Please turn to Revised Statutes of United States, second edition, p. 664, sec. 3387, which requires all cigar manufacturers to give a bond, &c.

In this connection it is well known to every resident of California that the Chinese own hut little real estate. In executing bonds it has been the custom for fifteen years in the internal-revenue office to take a “Chinese merchant’s bond,” or personal property security; how this class of security is looked upon by our leading business men, I refer you to 200 pages of printed testimony taken before the Morton committee; and, further, I challenge the internal-revenue office to show the loss of one dollar from this class of bonds for ten years past; in fact I cannot learn of any loss since the inception of the cigar interest, and I get my information from officials who for several administrations have been in the office. For ten years past, up to three months since, every “anti-coolie club” and “white man’s cigar union” have petitioned, resolved, and urged, threatened vengence unless this practice was changed requiring Chinese to give real-estate bonds, openly said in their meeting, and re-echoed daily on the “sand lot” that that only would destroy the Chinese cigar business, but representations have been urged in time and out of time to aid in this nefarious business, but have refused to help in so contemptible a transaction. It was left for the present agent, Mr. William Higby, to comply with this demand, who issued an order about three months ago calling in the old bonds and demanding new ones in real-estate security from all cigar manufactories. As there are but few white men in comparison with the Chinese it was an easy matter for them; in fact quite all were already doing business under real-estate security.

The result of this action of Mr. Higby has been to put the Chinese manufacturers in the power of a class of men who make a living by an occupation known as professional bondsmen, otherwise straw-bail men. I know of firms who paid these cormorants from $50 up to 250 as a bonus to get them to go security; many are paying one per cent. per month interest on the full face of the bond; upwards of twenty factories have had to close up business. The books of the internal-revenue office here will show that these factories have paid over $500,000 yearly for stamps and licenses in this business alone.

Two weeks since, at the urgent request of these persecuted people, I called upon the new special agent, Mr. Grimson, and laid this whole matter before him. He pledged his word that he would at once investigate, and, if he found that the government had not lost by the old system of merchants’ security, he would at once so report to Washington. I have not heard from him since I inclosed copies of my correspondence with Mr. Higby on this subject. Please note that he places his action upon orders from the commissioner at Washington, under dates of February 6; that of June 12 he says, I had to do it to protect the interest of the government,” which is the most astounding assertion, in view of the real facts, yet made. I herewith inclose letters received bearing upon this matter. You quite naturally ask why this change from the old and tried system, wherein the government was fully secured to this irresponsible straw-bond security?

Representing in part the interests of the Chinese here resident, I deem it my duty to place this matter before you, that you may take such action as the necessities of the case may dictate.

With high regard, I am, &c.,

F. A. BEE.

[Inclosure A in Mr. Bee’s letter.]

Mr. Bee to Mr. Higby.

San Francisco, June 11, 1879.

Sir: I am requested by the proprietors of the Roscoe cigar factory to present the following two Chinese mercantile firms—Kim, Lung & Co., 728 Dupont street, corner of Clay, and Quang Man, Long & Co., 620 Dupont street—both old firms in good standing financially, for your acceptance of them for bondsmen in the sum of 5,000, either of which firms can justify before you in the sum required on personal property security. Will you oblige me by an early answer?

Your obedient servant,

F. A. BEE,
His Imperial Chinese Majesty’s Consul.

[Inclosure B in Mr. Bee’s letter.]

Mr. Higby to Mr. Bee.

Sir: Your note of yesterday receved, referring to the Roscoe cigar manufactory, &c., I regret I cannot comply with your request. By doing so I would violate a rule I had to establish to protect the interest of the government.

Very respectfully,

WILLIAM HIGBY, Collector.

[Inclosure C in Mr. Bee’s letter.]

Mr. Bee to Mr. Higby.

San Francisco, February 4, 1879.

Sir: In reference to the notification to the Chinese cigar-manufacturers, issued by you, requiring hereafter that the manufacturers of cigars, &c., must give bonds in real estate in accordance with section 3387 of Revised Statutes of the United States, on examination of the law, I believe it is left to your option to determine what is a bond, or as to the security being good and sufficient for the purposes of the law.

Have you made this new departure under instructions from the Commissioner of Internal Revenue? I am satisfied that to insist upon bonds secured by real estate will destroy two-thirds of the Chinese cigar manufactories now in operation, and reduce the revenue of the government proportionally, as but few will be able to execute the bond required.

I have, &c:,

F. A. BEE,
His Imperial Chinese Majesty’s Consul.

[Inclosure D in Mr. Bee’s letter.]

Mr. Higby to Mr. Bee.

Sir: Your letter of date February 4 is received. A great crowd of business has delayed me in my answer.

In regard to the class of bonds of which you inquire, the Commissioner has ordered a thorough examination, and in calling for new bonds, I am exacting such security as I think the law requires to prevent frauds, and no more.

Very respectfully,

WILLIAM HIGBY.

[Inclosure E in Mr. Bee’s letter.]

Mr. Adams to Mr. Bee.

San Francisco, June 12, 1879.

Sir: In reply to your letter of the 10th instant, in regard to the nature of bonds taken from cigar and tobacco manufacturers by the collectors of internal revenue of this district, in answering, I have to say— 1st. I have been in the internal-revenue service since June, 1869, until March, 1879, and during nearly all that time I had the supervision of all the cigar and tobacco manufacturers in the city of San Francisco.

2d. The nature of security of the bonds has been more of a commercial nature than otherwise, such as stock in trade and personal property.

3d. I am unable to say what amount has been paid by the Chinese manufacturers annually for stamps, but would estimate that they have paid for one-third of the stamps that have been sold by collectors.

4th. The number of Chinese manufacturers has averaged for the past five or six years about from 60 to 70, employing, I should judge, from 900 to 1,100 persons.

5th. The government, as far as I know, has never, during the time I have been in the service, lost anything by reason of such bonds.

6th. Business men considered an established Chinese merchant as good a surety on a bond as an American, whether he has realty or not.

For the past six years it has been my duty to make all bonds for cigar manufacturers in this city. Whenever they offered Chinamen or Chinese firms as sureties, I have invariably (if not known by me) examined personally the property or goods and insurance policies of the firms offered, and if, in my judgment, the property was not sufficient for the amount named in the bond I rejected them, and required them to furnish other sureties before I would pass the bond to the collector for his approval. And I believe those bonds were better than those the collector is approving now (and has been for the past two months) from these “professional bondsmen.”

Having answered your inquiries as near as I am able to do,

I remain, &c.,

A. F. ADAMS.

[Inclosure F in Mr. Bee’s letter.]

Mr. Cooper to Mr. Bee.

San Francisco, June 11, 1879.

Sir: In reply to your inquiries under date of the 10th instant, in regard to the nature of the bonds taken from manufacturers of cigars and tobacco by officers of internal revenue in this the San Francisco district, answering your inquiries in the order made, I have to say: 1st. I have been in the internal-revenue service in San Francisco some seven years and for six years and up to the 20th of last March I held the position of principal deputy in the collector’s office;

2d. The nature of security on what is generally known as cigar and tobacco bonds has been, up to within a very recent date, of a commercial nature, such as bonds, stock in trade, personal effects, &c.

3d. This system has prevailed under the administration of the late collectors L. H. Gary, John Sedgwick, and under Mr. Higby until within a few months past, and the government has met with, no loss from this class of bonds.

4th. When the Chinese manufacturers of cigars were required to furnish bonds with sureties having and owning realty, they found it difficult to comply, and were obliged to pay a bonus for parties to act as their bondsmen. I cannot say that I personally know any “professional bondsmen,” but a bondsman on one of these bonds told me that he received $100 for so doing, and that the Chinaman transferred to him his bankbook, worth $1,000, as security.

5th. Business men regard the commercial security given by established Chinese merchants as better than a security purchased from professional bondsmen.

6th. I know of no loss to the government under the old system and nature of security. Since my connection with the revenue service here there has been no occasion to bring suit on a cigar manufacturer’s bond. Since the requirement of realty on the bond I learn that 15 or 20 factories have discontinued business.

7th. I regard the surety of an old established Chinese merchant based on stocks and personality as ample and good, though not better than that of realty.

Very respectfully,

HULSEY F. COOPER.

[Inclosure G in Mr. Bee’s letter.]

Mr. Van Shaiek to Mr. Bee.

San Francisco, June 18, 1879.

Sir: You are aware that I have a large number of clients among the Chinese population of this city and, as their attorney, many facts come to my knowledge as to the manner in which these people are oppressed and plundered by outrageous and unnecessary rules and regulations of public officers and more particularly the internal-revenue office in this city.

I now desire to call your attention to the present management and conduct of William Higby, collector of internal revenue of this district. It seems to be his object and aim to drive the Chinese cigar manufacturers out of the business by persecution and oppressive rules and regulations discriminating against them alone in the matter of giving bonds, and compelling a renewal of good and sufficient bonds.

Mr. Higby is enforcing rules entirely outside of internal-revenue law relative to the sufficiency of bonds for the manufacture of cigars. His uncalled-for and arbitrary course has closed up many Chinese cigar factories, besides incurring great loss to these people, depriving many of employment, besides lessening the revenue of the government, from this source alone, at least from severity-five to one hundred thousand dollars per year.

This collector refuses to approve a bond signed and properly qualified to by a Chinaman as one of the sureties, no matter what amount of property the surety is worth. He also requires at least one white man on the bond, and refuses to accept a bond of two good and sufficient Chinamen even if they are worth ten times the amount of the penalty mentioned in the bond.

It has come to my knowledge that there are respectable Chinese cigar manufacturers in this city, who have been engaged in the business for years, who have paid the government thousands of dollar’s for stamps, under the uncalled-for regulations of Mr. Higby, were called upon to file new bonds in accordance with the above-mentioned rules of his office or close up business. These men have been obliged to seek out and employ “professional bond-signers”—white men—and pay them each as much as $250 to sign a cigar manufacturer’s bond in order to comply with Mr. Higby’s requirements and to coutinue in business, and that Mr. Higby has refused to sell them cigar-stamps until such new bonds were filed and while the old bonds were still in force and effect.

These bonds have been approved by Mr. Higby after his attention had been called to instances of a similar nature to the above.

There are other instances where Chinese cigar manufacturers are now paying white “professional bond-signers” interest at the rate of one per cent. per month as the amount of the penal sum mentioned in the bond signed by them, besides a bonus at the time of signing the bond. These bonds have also been approved and accepted by Mr. Higby in preference to receiving good and sufficient bonds signed by Chinese sureties or permitting the old bonds to remain intact and allow the manufacturers to proceed under them as he had been doing previous thereto.

I know of one instance where a respectable Chinese cigar manufacturer, who has been in the business for years, and who has now on hand 440,000 cigars ready to be boxed, stamped, and put on the market. This man was recently notified by Mr. Higby to fill a new bond in the sum of $4,000, and the collector’s office refused to sell him stamps until he did so. He procured one white man and one Chinaman to sign the bond, each of whom justified in more than double that amount, the Chinese surety being a merchant in this city owning two stores and worth at least $15,000 in personal property; still Mr. Higby refused to receive this bond or to sell the manufacturer stamps, so that he is deprived of selling his cigars and subjected to great loss.

I might mention other instances where great injustice has been practiced upon the Chinese cigar manufacturers by this collector’s office under the sanction of Mr. Higby.

I remain, &c.,

L. H. VAN SHAICK.

No. 117. Mr. Evarts to Mr. Wing. [Document 138]

No. 117.
Mr. Evarts to Mr. Wing.

Department of State,
Washington, October 13, 1879.

Sir: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your note of the 10th instant and its accompaniments in regard to the refusal of the collector of internal revenue at San Francisco to accept as bondsmen for tobacco manufacturers wealthy Chinese merchants. In reply, I beg leave to inform you that the subject has been submitted to the Secretary of the Treasury, who has competent jurisdiction over, affairs of that character.

Accept, sir, renewed assurance of my very high consideration.

WM. M. EVARTS.

No. 118. Mr. Evarts to Mr. Wing. [Document 139]

No. 118.
Mr. Evarts to Mr. Wing.

Department of State,
Washington, October 24, 1879.

Sir: Referring to your note of the 10th instant, I have the honor to acquaint you of the reply of the Secretary of the Treasury, to whom the subject was referred, to the effect that the collector of internal revenue at San Francisco had been instructed on the 15th September, ultimo, to accept as surety on a tobacco manufacturer’s bond any good and solvent person, whether the owner of real estate or not.

Accept, sir, renewed assurances of my very high consideration,

WM. M. EVARTS.

(Inclosure 1 in Mr. Evarts’ note.)

Mr. Sherman to Mr. Evarts.

Treasury Department, October 22, 1879.

Sir: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your letter of the 17th instant, transmitting a copy of a note from the Chinese legation, in which it is alleged that the collector of internal revenue at San Francisco refuses to accept as sureties on the bonds of tobacco manufacturers wealthy Chinese merchants, unless they are owners of real estate, which few possess, thus compelling the cigar manufacturers to pay a bonus to owners of real estate to become their sureties.

With reference to the practice complained of in said note permit me to call your attention to a copy of a communication upon the subject, under date of the 20th instant, from the Commissioner of Internal Revenue, from which it appears that the collector at San Francisco, on the 15th of September last, was instructed to accept as surety on a tobacco manufacturer’s bond any good and solvent person whether the owner of real estate or not.

Very respectfully,

JOHN SHERMAN, Secretary.

[Inclosure 1 in Mr. Sherman’s No 5771.]

Mr. Raum to Mr. Sherman.

Treasury Department,
Washington, October 20, 1879.

Sir: I have received and duly considered a letter of Hon. Wm. M. Evarts, Secretary of State, of the 17th instant, inclosing a communication from his excellency Yung Wing, of the 10th instant, with inclosures from L. H. Van Shaick, dated San Francisco, June 19, 1879, complaining that William Higby, collector of internal revenue, declined to accept as sureties on the bonds of cigar manufacturers, persons who could not qualify to the ownership of unencumbered real estate, thereby forcing the Chinese cigar manufacturers to pay a bonus to owners of real estate to sign as their sureties.

In reply, I have to state that an examination of the collector’s office at San Francisco, instituted several months ago, disclosed the fact of the irregularity and insufficiency of a number of manufacturer’s bonds of various character, whereupon the collector was directed by this office to carefully examine all the bonds in his office, and to require good and sufficient security to such as were insufficient.

Acting upon these instructions, the collector adopted the rule which, however, is not required by law, that the sureties must show themselves to be the owners of real estate. I am satisfied that Collector Higby acted in entire good faith in this matter, but, believing that the rule was harsh, and would lead to oppression, I addressed him a letter on the 15th September upon this subject, a copy of which is herewith inclosed, under the instructions of which letter he is now accepting as surety any good and solvent person whether he is the owner of real or personal property.

It is proper for me to say I am satisfied that the hardships growing out of Collector Higby’s order have been greatly exaggerated. I observe, in the inclosures of Mr. Van Schaik, strong letters from two ex-deputy collectors, recently removed by Collector Higby, whose statements are, no doubt, biased by that fact.

Assurances can be given to his excellency Yung Wing that the internal-revenue service in California will be so administered as to give Chinese residents the equal protection of the laws.

Very respectfully, your obedient servant,

GREEN B. RAUM,
Commissioner.

[Inclosure 2 in Mr. Sherman’s No. 5771.]

Mr. Raum to Mr. Higby.

Treasury Department, Office of Internal Revenue,
Washington, September 16, 1879.

Sir: The attention of this office has been called to the subject of the execution of bonds by tobacco and cigar manufacturers of your district who are Chinamen. It is alleged that they have been required to furnish sureties who are the owners of real estate, and that competent bondsmen, possessed of personal property, are rejected^ and that thereby the manufacturers have been compelled to pay a large bonus to real-estate owners in consideration for their becoming sureties.

Neither the law nor the regulations limit the qualification of bondsmen to real-estate security, and where a collector finds that requiring such security works a hardship upon the manufacturer, it is improper to exact it where the manufacturer is able to give good security with persons possessing personal property only.

I desire that you shall investigate this subject, and take such action as will prevent any undue hardship upon this class of manufacturers.

Very respectfully,

GREEN B. RAUM,
Commissioner.

Colombia.Colombia.

[140] . Mr. Dichman to Mr. Evarts.

Colon, Aspinwall, United States of Colombia, August 14, 1878. (Received August 23.)

[141] . Law 28th of 1878 (18th of May) “approving the contract for the construction of an interoceanic canal across Colombian territory.”

In witness whereof they sign the present in Bogota, on the 20th March, 1878.

[142] . Mr. Dichman to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States. Bogota, October 30, 1878. (Received December 10.)

[143] . Mr. Dichman to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Bogota, November 7, 1878. (Received December 10.)

[144] . Mr. Dichman to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Bogota, November 16, 1878. (Received December 31.)

[145] . Mr. Dichman to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Bogota, November 29, 1878. (Received January 27.)

[146] . Mr. Dichman to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Bogota, December 14, 1878. (Received January 30.)

[147] . Mr. Dichman to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Bogota, January 15, 1879. (Received January 25.)

[148] . Mr. Evarts to Mr. Dichman.

Department of State, Washington, February 4, 1879.

[149] . Mr. Dichman to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Bogota, February 15, 1879. (Received March 28.)

[150] . Mr. Evarts to Mr. Dichman.

Department of State, Washington, February 20, 1879.

[151] . Mr. Dichman to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Bogota, March 17, 1879. (Received April 14.)

[152] . Mr. Dichman to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Bogota, March 24, 1879. (Received April 18.)

[153] . Mr. Dichman to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Bogota, March 31, 1879. (Received June 2.)

[154] . Mr. Dichman to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Bogota, April 14, 1879. (Received May 20.)

[155] . Mr. Evarts to Mr. Dichman.

Department of State, Washington, May 12, 1879.

[156] . Mr. Dichman to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Bogota, June 1, 1879. (Received July 8, 1879.)

[157] . Mr. Dichman to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Bogota, June 14, 1879.

[158] . Mr. Dichman to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Bogota, June 28, 1879. (Received August 7.)

[159] . Mr. Dichman to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Bogota, July 2, 1879. (Received August 7, 1879.)

[160] . Mr. Dichman to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Bogotá, July 19, 1879. (Received August 23.)

[161] . Mr. Dicliman to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Bogota, August 1, 1879.

[162] . Mr. Dichman to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Bogota, October 17, 1879.

No. 119. Mr. Dichman to Mr. Evarts. [Document 140]

No. 119.
Mr. Dichman to Mr. Evarts.

Colon, Aspinwall, United States of Colombia,
August 14, 1878. (Received August 23.)

Sir: In order to furnish the Department as speedily as possible with the information requested in the Department’s dispatch No. 4 of the 26th ultimo, which I received before leaving the United States, I herewith forward a copy of the Official Gazette (Diario Oficial), containing the law of the Colombian Congress approving of the convention concluded between the United States of Colombia and the International Interoceanic Canal Company, and the decrees issued in accordance therewith. The paper and translation have been kindly furnished to me by Mr. B. Mozley, the general superintendent of the Panama Railroad Company, and the Pacific Mail Steamship Company.

* * * * * * *

Very, &c.,

ERNEST DICHMAN.

No. 4187. Law 28th of 1878 (18th of May) “approving the contract for the construction of an interoceanic canal across Colombian territory.” [Translation from the Diario Oficial of Bogota, Wednesday, May 22, 1878.]

[Document 141]

No. 4187.
Law 28th of 1878 (18th of May) “approving the contract for the construction of an interoceanic canal across Colombian territory.”

The Congress of the United States of Colombia, after an examination of the contract, which is verbatim as follows:

contract for the construction of an interoceanic canal across Colombian territory.

Eustorgio Salgar, secretary of the interior and of foreign relations of the United States of Colombia, duly authorized, of the one part, and of the other part Lucien N. B. Wyse, chief of the Isthmus Scientific Surveying Expedition in 1876, 1877, and 1878, member and delegate of the board of directors of the International Interoceanic Canal Association, presided by General Etienne Türr, in conformity with powers bestowed at Paris, from the 27th to the 29th of October, 1877, have celebrated the following contract:

Article 1. The Government of the United States of Colombia grants to Mr. Lucien N. B. Wyse, who accepts it in the name of the civil International Interoceanic Canal Association, represented by their board of directors, the exclusive privilege for the construction across its territory, and for the operating of a canal between the Atlantic and Pacific Oceans. Said canal may be constructed without restrictive stipulations of any kind.

This concession is made under the following conditions: 1st. The duration of the privilege shall be for ninety-nine years from the day on which the canal shall be wholly or partially opened to public service, or when the grantees or their representatives commence to collect the dues on transit and navigation.

2d. From the date of approbation by the Colombia Congress for the opening of the interoceanic canal, the government of the republic cannot construct, nor concede to any company or individual, under any consideration whatever, the right to construct another canal across Colombian territory which shall communicate the two oceans. Should the grantees wish to construct a railroad as an auxiliary to the canal, the government (with the exception of existing rights) cannot grant to any other company or individual, the right to build another interoceanic railroad, nor do so, itself, during the time allowed for the construction and use of the canal.

3d. The necessary studies of the ground, and the route for the line of the canal, shall be made, at the expense of the grantees, by an international commission of individuals and competent engineers, in which two Colombian engineers shall take part. The commission shall determine the general route of the canal and report to the Colombian Government directly, or to its diplomatic agents in the United States or Europe, upon the results obtained, at the latest in 1881, unless unavoidable circumstances clearly preven, should prevent their so doing. The report shall comprise in duplicate the scientific labors performed, and an estimate of the projected work.

4th. The grantees shall then have a period of two years to organize a universal joint stock company, which shall take charge of the enterprise, and of the construction of the canal. This term shall commence from the date mentioned in the preceding paragraph.

5th. The canal shall be finished and placed at the public service within the subsequent twelve years after the formation of the company which will undertake its construction, but the executive power is authorized to grant a further maximum term of six years in the ease of encountering superhuman obstacles beyond the power of the company, and if after one-third of the canal is built, the company should acknowledge the impossibility of concluding the work in the said twelve years.

6th. The canal shall have the length, depth, and all other conditions requisite in order that sailing vessels and steamships measuring lip to 140 meters long, 16 meters in width, and 8 meters in draught shall, with lowered topmasts, be able to pass the canal.

7th. All public lands which may be required for the route of the canal, the ports, stations, wharves, moorings, warehouses, and in general for the construction and service of the canal as well as for the railway, should it be convenient to build it, shall be ceded gratis to the grantees.

8th. These unoccupied public lands shall revert to the government of the republic with the railroad and canal at the termination of this privilege; there is also granted for the use of the canal a belt of land two hundred meters wide on each side of its banks throughout all the distance which it may run, but the owners of lands on its banks shall have free access to the canal and its ports as well as to the right of use of any roads which the grantees may open there; and this without paying any dues to the company.

9th. If the lands through which the canal shall pass, or upon which the railroad may be built, should, in whole or in part, be private property, the grantees shall have the right to demand their expropriation by the government according to all the legal formalities in such cases. The indemnity which shall be made to the land-owners, and which shall be based on their actual value, shall be at the expense of the company. The grantees shall enjoy in this case, and in those of temporary occupation of private property, all the rights and privileges which the existing legislation confers.

10th. The grantees may establish and operate at their cost the telegraph lines which they may consider useful as auxiliaries in the building and management of the canal.

Art. 2. Within the term of twelve months after the international commission shall have presented the result of their definitive surveys, the grantees will deposit in the bank or banks of London, which the national executive power may designate, the sum of seven hundred and fifty thousand francs as security for the accomplishment of the work. The receipt of said bank or banks shall be a voucher of the fulfillment of said engagement. The deposit shall be made in certificates of the foreign debt of Colombia, at the current market price on the day of delivery. It is understood that should the grantees forfeit this deposit by virtue of the provisions of clause 2, Article 22, of this contract, the said sum with its interest shall become the sole property of the Colombian Government. On the conclusion of the canal the amount deposited as security shall remain to the credit of the treasury, as indemnity to the national government for the expenses incurred in the erection of buildings for the use of public offices.

Art. 3. Should the route of the canal from one ocean to the other pass to the west and to the north of the imaginary straight line which connects Cape Tiburon with Garachine Point, the grantees must make a friendly arrangement with the Panama Railroad Company, or pay an indemnity which shall be determined in accordance with the provisions of law 46, of August 16, 1867, “which approves the contract celebrated July 5, 1867, reformatory of that of April 15, 1850, for the construction of a railroad from ocean to ocean, across the Isthmus of Panama.”

In case the international commission selects the Atrato, or some other stream now navigable, as one of the entrances of the canal, the canalized mouth shall be considered as one of the parts of the principal work, and maintained in equally good condition. River navigation in the upper part of the stream, so far as it has not for its object the use of the canal, shall be open to commerce, and free from all dues.

Art. 4. In addition to the lands granted by paragraphs 7 and 8 of Article 1, these are gratuitously given to the grantees, and at their choice five hundred thousand hectares of the unoccupied public lands, with the mines which they may contain. This allotment shall be made directly by the national executive power. The public lands situated on the sea-coast, or on the border of the canal, or at the rivers, shall be, divided as closely as possible in alternate lots between the government and the company, forming, if the ground will permit, areas of one and two thousand hectares. The measurement for the allotment or location shall be made at the cost of the guarantees) and with the intervention of commissioners of the government.

Unoccupied lands so granted, with the mines which they may hold, shall be awarded to the grantees as soon as they request them after the deposit of the security. In a belt of two myriameters on each side of the canal, and during five years after the conclusion of the work, the government cannot transfer other lands beyond the said lots until the company shall have obtained the whole of the lands which are granted to it gratuitously.

Art. 5. The government of the republic declares neutral, for all time, the ports of each terminus of the canal and the waters of the latter from one sea to the other, and consequently, in case of war between other nations or between one or more of these and Colombia, the transit of the canal shall not be interrupted on that account, and the merchant vessels and individuals of all nations of the world may enter said ports, and navigate the canal without let or hinderance. In general any ship whatever may navigate the canal freely without discrimination, exclusion, or preference of persons or nationalities, by paying the dues and abiding by the regulations laid down by the company for the use of said canal and its dependencies. Exception is made of foreign troops, which cannot pass without permission from Congress.

Art. 6. The entrance to the canal shall be rigorously prohibited to the war vessels of those nations which are at war, and to those whose destination manifests their intention to take part in hostilities.

Art. 7. The grantees will enjoy the right during the whole time of the privilege to use the ports at the termini of the canal, as well as intermediate points, for the anchorage and repair of ships, and the loading, depositing, transshipping, or landing of merchandise. The ports of the canal shall be open and free to the commerce of all nations, and no import duties shall be exacted, except on merchandise destined to be introduced for the consumption of the rest of the republic. Tire said ports shall, therefore, be open to importations from the commencement of the work, and the custom-houses, and the revenue service which the government may deem convenient for the collection of duties on merchandise destined for other portions of the republic, shall be established, in order to prevent introduction of smuggled goods.

Art. 8. The executive power shall issue the necessary regulations for the protection of its revenue by preventing smuggling, and shall appoint the number of men necessary for this service at its own expense. Of the employés indispensable for this, ten shall be paid by the company, and their salaries shall not exceed those paid to officials of the same grade in the custom-house at Barranquilla. When necessary, the company shall transport, free of charge by the banal or by the auxiliary railroad, the men at the service of the union or destined for police duty, with the object of guarding public service without, or preserving public order within. If the company should not own ships or tugs, they shall pay the passage of these men across the isthmus. The sustenance of the public force necessary for the security of the interoceanic transit shall also be at the expense of the company.

Art. 9. The grantees shall have the right to introduce, free of import or other duties of whatever class, all the instruments, machinery, tools, fixtures, provisions, clothing for laborers which they may need during all the time allowed to them for the construction and use of the canal. The ships carrying cargoes for the use of the enterprise shall enjoy free entry into whatever point shall afford them easy access to the line of the canal.

Art. 10. No taxes, either national, municipal, of the State, or of any other class, shall be levied upon the canal, the ships that navigate it, the tugs and vessels at the service of the grantees, their warehouses, work-shops, and offices, factories of whatever class, storehouses, wharves, machinery, or other works or property of whatever character belonging to them, and which they may need for the service of the canal and its dependences, during the time conceded for its construction and operation. The grantees shall also have the right to take from unoccupied lands the materials of any kind which they may require without paying any compensation for the same.

Art. 11. The passengers, money, precious metals, merchandise, and articles and effects of all kinds which may be transported over the canal, shall also be exempt from all duties, national, municipal, transit, and others. The same exemption is extended to all articles and merchandise for interior or exterior commerce which may remain in deposit, according to the conditions which may be stipulated, with the company in the storehouses and stations belonging to them.

Art. 12. Ships desiring to cross the canal shall present at the port of the terminus of the canal at which they may arrive, their respective registers and other sailing papers, prescribed by the laws and public treaties, so that the vessels may navigate without interruption. Vessels not having said papers, or which should refuse to present them, may be detained and proceeded against according to law.

Art. 13. The government allows the immigration and free access to the lands and work-shops of the grantees of all employés and laborers, of whatever nationality, contracted for the enterprise, or who may come to engage themselves in the service of the canal, on condition that such employés or laborers submit to existing laws, and to the regulations established by the company. The government assures them aid and protection and the enjoyment of their rights and privileges, according to the constitution and laws of the nation, during the time they live in Colombian territory.

Art. 14. As a compensation to the grantees for the expenses of the building, preservation, and operation of the canal, which are for their account, they shall have the right during all the period of this privilege to charge and collect for passage over the canal, and the ports dependent upon it, dues for light-house, anchorage, transit, navigation, repairs, pilotage, towing, hauling, storage, and station, as per the tariffs they may establish, and which may be modified at any time under the following express conditions: 1st. These dues shall be imposed without exception or favor upon all ships in identical conditions.

2d. The tariff shall be published four months before going into operation in the Diario Oficial of the government, as well as in the capitals and principal commercial ports of the countries affected thereby.

3d. The principal dues to be collected on vessels shall not exceed the rate of ten francs for each cubic meter, resulting from the multiplication of the principal dimensions of the submerged portion of the ship in transit (length, breadth, and draught).

4th. The principal dimensions of the ship in transit, that is to say, the greatest exterior length and beam of vessel, as well as the greatest draught of water, shall be nautical dimensions, inserted in the official clearance papers, with the exception of such modifications as may result in the course of the voyage. The captains of ships and agents of the company may require a new measurement to be taken, which operation shall be effected at the expense of the solicitor.

5th. The same measurement, that is to say, the parallelopiped described by the submerged part of the ship, shall serve as the basis for the determination of the other accessory charges.

6th. Special dues for navigation shall be reduced in proportion to the excess when the net profits derived therefrom shall exceed 12 per cent. of the capital employed in the enterprise.

Art. 15. By way of compensation for the right and exemptions which are conferred upon the grantees by this contract, the government of the republic shall enjoy a participation equal to 5 per cent. of the gross earning which shall accrue to the enterprise, as per the tariff to be fixed by the company.

Art. 16. The grantees are authorized to require payment in advance of any charges which they may establish; nine-tenths of these charges shall be made payable in gold, and only the remaining one-tenth part shall be payable in silver of twenty-five grammes, of a fineness of 900.

Art. 17. The ships which shall infringe upon the rules established by the company shall be subject to the payment of a fine which said company shall fix in its regulations, of which due notice shall be given to the public at the time of the issue of the tariff. Should they refuse to pay said fine, nor furnish sufficient security, they may he detained and prosecuted according to the laws. The same proceedings may he observed for the damages they may have caused.

Art. 18. If the opening of the canal shall be deemed financially possible, the grantees are authorized to form, under the immediate protection of the. Colombian Government, a universal joint-stock company, which shall undertake the execution of the work, taking charge of all financial transactions which may be needed. As this enterprise is essentially international and for public utility, it is understood that it shall always be kept tree from political influences.

The company shall take the name of “The Universal Interoceanic Canal Association;” its residence shall be fixed in Bogota, New York, London, or Paris as the grantees may choose; branch offices may be established wherever necessary. Its contract, shares, bonds, and titles of its property shall never be subjected by the Government of Colombia to any charges for registry, emission, stamps, or any similar imposts upon the sale or transfer of these shares or bonds, as well as on the profits produced by these values.

Art. 19. The company is authorized to reserve as much as 10 per cent. of the shares emitted, to form a fund of shares, to the benefit of the founders and promoters of the enterprise. Of the products of the concern, the company take, in the first place, what is necessary to cover all expenses of repairs, operations, and administration, and the share which belongs to the government, as well as the sums necessary for the payment of the interest and the amortization of the bonds, and, if possible, the fixed interest or dividend of the shares; that which remains will be considered as net profit, out of which 80 per cent. at least shall be divided among the shareholders.

Art. 20. The Colombian Government, should it consider it important, may name a special commissioner in the board of directors of the company. This delegate shall enjoy all the advantages conceded to the other directors by the statutes of the company. The grantees are obliged to appoint in Bogota, near the national government, an agent duly authorized to resolve all doubts and to present all demands to which this contract may give rise. Reciprocally, and with the same intention, the government shall name a resident agent in the principal establishment of the company on the canal. In every case the difficulties which may arise between the contracting parties shall be submitted to a committee of arbitrators, composed of four individuals, two of whom shall be selected by the executive power from among the members of the federal supreme court, and the other two named by the company. In case of a tie in the votes of this committee, the said arbitrators shall name a fifth party. The decision pronounced by this tribunal shall be final.

Art. 21. The grantees, or those who in the future may succeed them in their rights, may transfer those rights to other capitalists or financial companies, but it is absolutely prohibited to cede or mortgage them under any considerations whatever to any nation or foreign government.

Art. 22. The grantees or their representatives shall forfeit their acquired rights in the following cases: 1st. If they do not deposit within the term stipulated the amount reguired as security, for the execution of the work.

2d. If in the first of the twelve years allowed for the construction of the canal the work is not already begun. In this case the company shall forfeit the sum deposited as a guarantee, and which shall go to the benefit of the republic.

3d. If at the termination of the period fixed by paragraph fifth of Article 1 the canal is not navagable.

4th. If they do not comply with the provisions of Article 21.

5th. If the service of the canal should be interrupted without some superhuman obstacle.

In cases 2, 3, 4, and 5, the federal supreme court shall decide whether the privilege has become null or not.

Art. 23. In all cases of declaration of nullity, the public lands mentioned in paragraphs 7 and 8 of Article 1, and those not alienated among those conceded in Article 4, will return to the possession of the republic in the state in which they are found, and without any indemnity whatever, and also the buildings, materials, works, and improvements of which the grantees hold possession in the canal. These shall reserve only their capital, vessels, provisions, and in general their movable property.

Art. 24. Five years previous to the expiration of the ninety-nine years of the privilege, the executive power shall appoint a commissioner to examine the condition of the canal and annexes, and, with the knowledge of the company or its agents on the isthmus, to make an official report, describing in every detail the condition of the same and pointing out what repairs may be necessary. This report will serve to establish in what condition the canal and its dependencies shall be delivered to the national government on the day of expiration of the privilege now granted.

Art. 25. The enterprise of the canal is reputed to be of public utility.

Art. 26. This contract, which will serve as a substitute for the provisions of law 33, of May 26, 1876, and the clauses of the contract celebrated on the 28th of May of the same year, shall be submitted for the approval of the president of the union and the definite acceptance by the Congress of the nation.

In witness whereof they sign the present in Bogota, on the 20th March, 1878.
EUSTORGIO SALGAR.

LUCIEN N. B. WYSE.

Bogota, March 23, 1878.

Approved.

The president of the union:

AQUILEO PARRO.

The secretary of the interior and of foreign relations:

EUSTORGIO SALGAR.

decrees.

The foregoing contract is hereby approved, with the following modifications:

Article 1, with the addition of the following paragraph:

§—“It is, however, stipulated and agreed that if, before the payment of the security determined upon in Article 2, the Colombian Government should receive any formal proposal; sufficiently guaranteed, in the opinion of the said government, to construct the canal in less time and under more advantageous conditions for the United States of Colombia, said proposal shall be communicated to the grantees or their representatives, that they may be substituted therein, in which case they shall be preferred; but if they do not accept said substitution, the Colombian Government, in the new contract which they may celebrate, shall exact, besides the guarantee mentioned in Article 2, the sum of three hundred thousand dollars in coin, which shall be given as indemnity to the grantees.

Article 2, thus:

“Art. 2. Within the term of twelve months from the date at which the international commission shall have presented the definite results of their studies, the grantees shall deposit in the bank or banks of London, to be designated by the national executive power, the sum of seven hundred and fifty thousand francs, to the exclusion of all paper money, as security for the execution of the work. The receipt of said banks shall be a voucher for the fulfillment of said deposit. It is understood that if the grantees should lose that deposit by virtue of the stipulations contained in clauses 2 and 3 of Article 22 of the present contract^ the sum referred to, with interest accrued, shall become in toto the property of the Colombian Government. After the conclusion of the canal, said sum, without interest, which latter will in this case belong to grantees, shall remain for benefit of the treasury, for the outlays which it may have incurred or may incurr in the construction of buildings for the service of the public officers.”

Article 3, thus:

“Art. 3. If the line of the canal to be constructed from sea to sea should pass to the west and to the north of the imaginary straight line which joins Cape Tiburon with Garachiné Point, the grantees must enter into some amicable arrangement with the Panama Railroad Company, or pay an indemnity, which shall be established in accordance with the provisions of law 46, of August 16, 1867, ‘approving the contract celebrated on July 5, 1867, reformatory of the contract of April 15, 1850, for the construction of an iron railroad from one ocean to the other through the Isthmus of Panama.’

“In case the international commission should choose the Atrato or some other stream already navigable as one of the entrances to the canal, the ingress and egress by such stream, and the navigation of its waters, so long as it is not intended to cross the canal, shall be open to commerce and free from all imposts.”

Article 4, thus:

Art. 4. Besides the lands granted in paragraphs 7 and 8 of Article 1, there shall be awarded to the grantees, as an aid for the accomplishment of the work, and not otherwise, five hundred thousand hectares of public lands, with the mines they may comprise, in the localities which the company may select. This award shall be made directly by the national executive power. The public lands situated on the sea-coast, on the borders of the canal or of the rivers, shall be divided in alternate lots between the government and the company, forming areas of from one to two thousand hectares. The measurements for the allotment or locating shall be made at the expense of the grantees and with the intervention of government commissioners. The public lands thus granted, with the mines they may hold, shall be awarded to the grantees as fast as the work of construction of the canal progresses, and in accordance with rules to be laid down by the executive power.

“Within a belt of two myriameters on each side of the canal, and during five years, after the termination of the work, the government shall not have the right to grant other lands beyond the said lots until ^the company shall have called for the whole number of lots granted by this article.”

Article 5, thus:

“Art. 5. The government of the republic hereby declares the ports at each end of the canal, and the waters of the latter from sea to sea, to be neutral for all time; and consequently in case of war among other nations, the transit through the canal shall not be interrupted by such event, and the merchant vessels and individuals of all nations, of the world may enter into said ports and travel on the canal without being molested or detained. In general, any vessel may pass freely without any discrimination, exclusion, or preference of nationalities or persons, on payment of the dues and the observance of the rules established by the company for the use of the canal and its dependencies. Exception is to be made of foreign troops, which shall not have the right to pass without permission from Congress, and of the vessels of nations which, being at war with the United States of Colombia, may not have obtained the right to pass through the canal at all times, by public treaties wherein is guaranteed the sovereignty of Colombia over the Isthmus of Panama and over the territory whereon the canal is to be cut, besides the immunity and neutrality of the said canal, its ports, bays, and dependencies and the adjacent seas.”

Article 6, thus:

“Art. 6. The United States of Colombia reserves to themselves the right to pass their vessels, troops, ammunitions of war at all times and without paying any dues whatever. The passage of the canal is strictly closed to war vessels of nations at war, and which may not have acquired, by public treaty with the Colombian Government, the right to pass by the canal at all times.”

Article 8, thus:

“Art. 8. The executive power shall dictate, for the protection of the financial interests of the republic, the regulations conducive to the prevention of smuggling, and shall have the power to station, at the cost of the nation, the number of men which they may deem necessary for that service.

“Out of the indispensable officials for that service, ten shall be paid by the company, and their salaries shall not exceed those enjoyed by employés of the same rank in the Barranquilla custom-house.

“The company shall carry gratis through the canal, or on the auxiliary railway, the men destined for the service of the nation, for the service of the state through whose territory the canal may pass, or for the service of the police, with the object of guarding against foreign enemies, or for the preservation of public order, and shall also transport gratis the baggage of such men, their war materials, armament, and clothing which they may need for the service assigned to them.

“The subsistence of the public force which may be deemed necessary for the safety of the interoceanic transit shall likewise be at the expense of the company.”

Article 13, thus;

“Art. 13. The government allows the immigration and free access to the lands and shops of the grantees of all the employés and workingmen of whatever nationality, who may be contracted for the work, or who may come to engage themselves to work on the canal, on condition that such employés or laborers shall submit to the existing laws, and to the regulations established by the company. The government promises, them support and protection, and the enjoyment of their rights and guarantees, in conformity with the national constitution and laws, during the time they may sojourn on Colombian territory.

“The national peons and laborers employed on the work of the canal, shall be exempt from all requisition of military service, national as well as of the state.”

Article 14, thus:

“Art. 14, In order to indemnify the grantees of the construction, maintenance, and working expenses incurred by them, they shall have, during the whole period of the privilege, the exclusive right to establish and collect for the passage of the canal and its ports, the dues for light-houses, anchorage, transit, navigation, repairs, pilotage, towage, hauling, storage, and of station according to the tariff which they may issue, and which they may modify at any time, under the following express conditions; “1st. They shall collect these dues, without any exceptional favor, from all vessels in like circumstances.

“2d. The tariffs shall be published four months before their enforcement in the Diario Oficial of the government, as well as in the capitals and the principal commercial ports of the countries interested.

“3d. The principal navigation dues to be collected shall not exceed the sum of ten francs for each cubic meter resulting from the multiplication of the principal dimensions of the submerged part of the ship in transit (length, breadth, and draught).

“4th. The principal dimensions of the ship in transit, that is to say, the maximum exterior length and breadth at the water-line, as well as the greatest draught, shall be the metrical dimensions inserted in the official clearance papers, excepting any modifications supervening during the voyage. The ships’ captains and the company’s agents may demand a new measurement, which operation shall be carried out at the expense of the petitioner, and,

“5th. The same measurement, that is to say, the number of cubic meters contained in the parallelopipedon circumscribing the submerged part of the ship, shall serve as a basis for the determination of the other accessory dues.”

Article 15, thus:

“Art. 15. By way of compensation for the rights and exemptions which are allowed to the grantees in this contract, the government of the republic shall be entitled to a share amounting to five per cent. oh all collections made by the company, by virtue of the dues which may be imposed in conformity with Article 14, during the first twenty-five years after the opening of the canal to the public Service. From the twenty-sixth up to the fiftieth year, inclusive, it shall be entitled to a share of six per cent.,; from the fifty-first to the seventy-fifth to seven per cent.; and from the seventy-sixth to the termination of the privilege to eight per cent. It is understood that these shares shall be reckoned, as has been said, on the gross income from all sources, without any deductions whatever for expenses, interest on shares, or on loans or, debts against the company. The government of the republic shall have the fight to appoint a commissioner or agent, who shall intervene in the collections, and examine the accounts, and the distribution or payment of the shares coming to the government shall be made in due half-yearly installments. The product of the five, six, seven and eight per cent. shall be distributed as follows:

“Four-fifths of it shall go to the government of the republic, and the remaining one-fifth to the government of the state through whose territory the canal may pass.”

“The company guarantees to the Government of Colombia that the share of the latter shall in no case be less than the sum of two hundred and fifty thousand dollars a year, which is the same as that received as its share in the earnings of the Panama Railroad, so that if in any year the five per cent. share should not reach said sum, it shall be completed out of the common funds of the company.”

Article 20, thus:

“Art. 20. The Colombia Government may appoint a special delegate in the board of directors of the company whenever it may consider it useful to do so. This delegate shall enjoy the same advantages as are granted to the other directors by the bylaws of the company.

“The grantees pledge themselves to appoint in the capital of the union, near the national government, a duly authorized agent for the purpose of clearing up all doubts and presenting any claims to which this contract may give rise. Reciprocally and in the same sense, the government shall appoint an agent, who shall reside in the principal establishment of the company situated on the line of the canal; and, according to the national constitution, the difficulties which may arise between the contracting parties shall be submitted to the decision of the federal supreme court.”

Article 22, thus:

“Art. 22. The grantees, or their representatives, shall lose the right hereby acquired in the following cases: “1st. If they do not deposit, on the terms agreed upon, the sum which by way of security must insure the execution of the work.

“2d. If, in the first year of the twelve that are allowed for the construction of the canal, the works are not already commenced, in this case the company shall lose the sum deposited by way of security, together with the interest that may have accrued; all of which will remain for the benefit of the republic.

“3d. If, at the end of the second period fixed in paragraph 5 of Article 1, the canal is not transitable, in this case also the company shall lose the sum deposited as security; which, with the interests accrued, shall remain for the benefit of the republic.

“4th. If they violate the prescriptions of Article 21; and,

“5th. If the service of the canal should be interrupted for a longer period than six months without its being occasioned by the acts of God, &c.

“In cases 2, 3, 4, and 5, the federal supreme court shall have the right to decide whether the privilege has become annulled or not.”

Article 23, thus:

“Art. 23. In all cases of decisions of nullity, the public lands mentioned in clauses 7 and 8 of Article 1, and such lands as are not settled or inhabited from among those granted by Article 4, shall revert to the possession of the republic in the condition they may be found in, and without any indemnity whatever, as well as the buildings, materials, works, and improvements which the grantees may possess along the canal and its accessories. The grantees shall only retain their capital, vessels, provisions, and in general all movable property.”

Given at Bogota on the seventeenth day of May, eighteen hundred and seventy-eight.
The president of the senate of plenipotentiaries:
RAMON GOMEZ.
The president of the chamber of representatives:
BELISARIO ESPONDA.
The secretary of the senate of plenipotentiaries:
JULIO E. PEREZ.
The secretary of the chamber of representatives:
ENRIQUE GAOUA.

Bogota, May 18, 1878.

Let it be published and enforced.

The president of the union:
[seal.]
JULIAN TRUJILLO.
The secretary of the interior and foreign relations:
FRANCISCO J. ZALDUA.

Note from Mr. Lucien N. B. Wyse, wherein he declares he accepts all the modifications made by law 28 to the contract for the construction of the interoceanic canal.

To the honorable Secretary of the Interior and Foreign Relations:

I have the honor to inform you that I accept each and all of the modifications introduced by Congress to the contract which I celebrated with Señor Eustorgio Salgar, your worthy predecessor in the department of the interior and foreign relations, for the construction of the interoceanic canal, which contract was approved by the executive power under date of March 23 last.

The modifications to which I have alluded are those recorded in law No. 28 of the 18th instant.

I hasten to lay this declaration before the Government of Colombia, so that it may be taken in consideration, in order that said law may be effective in all its parts.

Bogota, May 18, 1878.
LUCIEN N. B. WYSE,
Chief of the International Scientific Commission for the Survey of the Isthmus, Member and Delegate from the Board of Directors of the Interoceanic Canal Association.

No. 120. Mr. Dichman to Mr. Evarts. [Document 142]

No. 120.
Mr. Dichman to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States.
Bogota, October 30, 1878. (Received December 10.) No. 17.]

Sir: Before leaving the United States my attention was called, at the Department, to the subject of an extradition treaty with this country. The inclosed copies of correspondence will show to the Department what I have done in this matter, upon which I desire to make the following observations:

The Department will learn from the inclosed papers, that in my intercourse with the Colombian Government I have treated the general subject of extradition as entirely separate from the right to bring criminals across the Isthmus of Panama. The latter is a matter of importance to the Government of the United States, and, I think, ought to be settled in the direction indicated in my letter to the secretary of foreign relations of Colombia. In my conversations with him on this subject, I have endeavored to impress him fully with the following points, viz: 1. That extradition of criminals is no longer a measure of exceptional gravity, but that as nations have extended and multiplied their relations they have realized the necessity of mutually aiding each other in the repression of offenses against the laws of universal morality and justice.

2. That the transit across a nation’s territory cannot be considered in the light of extradition, on the ground that a criminal brought to the borders of a State under compulsion, for the purpose of transit, cannot be compared to one who voluntarily seeks an asylum there under the protection of its laws, and for the surrender of whom the power of the State has to be invoked.

3. That aside from the general principle stated in the aforesaid No. 2 (and to avoid difficulties arising under the constitution of Colombia), the right of transit guaranteed to the Government of the United States by the treaty of 1846, clearly embraces the transfer or transit of criminals by the Government of the United States.

4. That the right of transit being guaranteed to the Government of the United States by treaty prior to the adoption of the constitution of the United States of Colombia, no possible benefit of its “bill of rights” can inure to a criminal to be taken across the Isthmus of Panama by the Government of the United States.

The main issue between the secretary of foreign relations and myself is as to what papers or proofs, in the case of a criminal brought by the Government of the United States to the Isthmus of Panama, for transit, are to be exhibted to the Government of Panama as the constitutional agent of the Government of the United States of Colombia, it being inadmissable, in my opinion, for the United States to consent to the exercise of any discretion whatever on the part of the Government of Panama, while the secretary of foreign relations contends, as shown in his conditions 2 and 3, for a discretion to refuse the transit.

As to the general subject of an extradition treaty with this country, I do not deem it advisable to negotiate one at present, but will keep the question before the Colombian Government, and continue to discuss the same informally, in order that a treaty may be negotiated at any time the Department may deem advisable. I do not believe that the Colombian Government, if an extradition treaty were negotiated and ratified, would be able to carry it out at all times. The want of a federal judiciary and federal officers in the different States, and the necessity of relying upon the State governments to execute an international agreement, produces complications wherever the State and federal governments are in the hands of parties opposed to each other. A demand might be made upon the Colombian Government, under the terms of a treaty, for the surrender of a criminal, with which it could not comply even with the greatest disposition on the part of the government to fulfil its agreement, thus giving rise to misunderstandings between the two governments, which had best be avoided.

* * * * * * *

I am, &c.,

ERNEST DICHMAN.

[Inclosure 1 in No. 17.—Translation.]

Bogota, October 24, 1878.

Sir: In conformity with the understanding in our interview of to-day, I have the honor to address you, with the object of informing you that the Colombian Government does not deem it inconvenient to execute with that of the United States of America an extradition treaty, which will be in conformity with the principles generally admitted by the waiters (publicists) upon this matter, and adopted usually in conventions of this nature.

Respecting the transport across the Isthmus of Panama of individuals, the extradition of which has been obtained by the United States, from other countries, in accordance with the respective treaties, the Colombian Government will consent thereto under the following conditions: 1. That the crime shall be among those mentioned in the extradition treaty to be executed between the United States of America and Colombia.

2. That there be presented to the government of the State of Panama the documents on which the extradition is based.

3. That said government may refuse the transit when in its opinion the extradition is not justified by the documents which have been presented.

4. That the custody of the criminals will be by the armed forces of the nation or of the State of Panama.

I am the honorable minister’s, with all consideration, very attentive and obedient servant,

PABLO AROSEMENA.

Hon. Ernest Dichman,
Minister Resident of the United States of America.

[Inclosure 2 in No. 17.]

Legation of the United States,
Bogota, October 25, 1878.

Sir: It affords me pleasure to acknowledge the receipt of the Hon. Pablo Arosemena’s note of yesterday, on the subject of the extradition of criminals from the United States of Colombia, and the conditions under which the Colombian Government will permit the transit of criminals across the Isthmus of Panama.

The Government of the United States of America will undoubtedly be gratified to learn of the readiness with which the Government of the United States of Colombia is willing to enter upon this negotiation, and I shall ask for instructions concerning the same.

Before, however, submitting to the government at Washington the conditions under which the Colombian Government is willing to permit the transit of criminals extradited by the United States across the Isthmus of Panama; I would respectfully invite the attention of the honorable secretary in charge of the foreign relations, to the following propositions, which are made informally, in order that in the discussion thereof the principles underlying this question maybe fully developed, and a result reached which, while acknowledging and keeping within the rights of sovereignty of the United States of Colombia, will give to my government a safe and practical method of accomplishing the object in question.

1st. The question of transporting across the Isthmus of Panama criminals of the United States of America extradited from foreign countries, or taken from one port of the United States to another, is simply a question of the regulation of the right of transit provided by article 35 of the treaty of 1846, and in the discussion of this question the general principles applicable to extradition treaties do not enter.

2d. The transit of such criminals from countries other than the United States of America, shall be permitted upon the exhibition to the government of the State of Panama, as the agent of the Government of the United States of Colombia, of the warrant of extradition or other document on which such criminals have been surrendered.

3d. The transit of such criminals from one part of the United States to another shall be permitted upon the exhibition of the warrant of arrest, or a certified copy of the indictment under which such criminals are held, to the government of the State of Panama, as the agent of the government of the United States of Colombia.

4th. Upon the application of the consul of the United States of America to the government of the State of Panama, as the agent of the Government of the United States of Colombia, the officers in charge of such criminals may be appointed officers of the United States of Colombia for the purpose of conducting such criminals across the Isthmus of Panama; otherwise the custody of such criminals will be by the officers of the United States of Colombia, who will then be responsible for their safekeeping.

A careful reading of paragraph 1 of article 35 of the treaty of 1846 leads me to the conclusion expressed in the first of the above propositions. The right of transit is not only guaranteed to the citizens of the United States and their merchandise, but also to the government, and the government cannot enjoy the right of way or transit across the Isthmus of Panama, except in the exercise of one of its functions, and the function with which we are now concerned, is the one of bringing back criminals to the plaee where the crime was committed in order that they shall be tried and, if found guilty, punished. This is a duty for the protection of society, in the prompt discharge of which the United States of Colombia, in fact the whole world, are equally interested with the Government of the United States of America, and for the better performance of which it might some time be desirable for the Government of the United States of America to make use of the right of transit guaranteed to it by article 35 of the treaty of 1846.

If the honorable secretary should arrive at the same conclusions with myself, then the only remaining question would be as to how this right of transit is to be exercised. For my views on this branch of the question, I beg leave to call the honorable secretary’s attention to my propositions 2, 3, and 4. By the acceptance of 2 and 3 the rights of persons would be sufficiently protected, and No. 4 would guard against any infringement of the sovereignty of the United States of Colombia. On this point I am satisfied that the honorable secretary agrees with me, that it is not to be supposed that there should be any desire on the part of the Government of the United States of America, even for the purpose of exercising a function of government by which the good order of society is maintained, to infringe in the slightest degree upon the rights of sovereignty which the United States guarantees in the same article of the treaty of 1846, which secures and guarantees to the United States and the Government thereof the right to transit.

In the interviews which I have had with the honorable secretary on this subject, I have become convinced that he takes a statesmanlike view of the question, endeavoring to reconcile his ideas of duty to constitutional law with the equally high duty to humanity and social order.

It is with this spirit that the above propositions are submitted for his consideration, and I feel satisfied that in further personal conferences on this subject, an understanding will be arrived at which I can recommend to my government as the basis for a treaty, and which will show to the world that the United States of Colombia is always ready to contribute its share in the family of nations towards the good order and regulation of society.

I avail myself of this occasion to renew to the honorable secretary the assurances of my high consideration.

ERNEST DICHMAN.

No. 121. Mr. Dichman to Mr. Evarts. [Document 143]

No. 121.
Mr. Dichman to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Bogota, November 7, 1878. (Received December 10.) No. 18.]

Sir: Inclosed is a letter addressed to me by the Hon. Salvador Camacho Roldan, secretary of foreign relations, on the subject of a reduction of the duty on Colombian tobacco in the United States in exchange for the free admission of American beer, and a reduction of 25 per cent. of the duty on American dry goods imported into this country.

As far as the trade with this country is concerned, the importance of the proposition cannot be overestimated. As Dr. Camacho points out, dry goods form the bulk of the importations into this country, and I am satisfied that, as they would all have to be bought in the United States, under a reduction of 25 per cent. in duty, all the other trade would follow. Nor would the free admission of American beer form an inconsiderable item, for beer of all kinds is kept out now by the prohibitive duty, and the free admission of American beer would cause a large trade in that article. Of course, I am not in a position to state how much the duty on Colombian tobacco can be reduced, but I am satisfied that the amount of tobacco which would be imported into the United States would be inconsiderable. But if we can have American dry goods admitted with a reduction of duty of 25 per cent., everything which this country will buy will have to come from the United States.

* * * * * * *

Situated as I am here, I can clearly see the time coming when everything worthy of the name of commerce will be transacted with or through the United States 5 when the railroads, bridges, and other public improvements in this country will be made by our people, and when not only all the advantages resulting from an exchange of commodities will accrue to our people, but when, owing to the increased stability of the Colombian institutions arising from a closer intercourse with the United States, and the influence which our government and people will then be able to exercise upon the affairs of Colombia, the export and import trade of this country will rise to proportions which will dwarf the present amount.

There is not an article produced in this country but what is needed in ours, and to secure the commercial advantages thus hastily outlined, the proposition which I inclose to-day is the first step in a commercial policy with this country, which I hope to be able to submit in person to the consideration of the Department.

* * * * * * *

I have, &c.,

ERNEST DICHMAN.

[Inclosure 1 in No. 18.—Translation.]

Mr. Camacho to Mr Dichman.

Bogota, November 6, 1878.

My Esteemed Mr. Minister: In a private conversation with you in days past, it was manifested to me that it might just be possible to open to Colombian tobacco the great market of the United States by means of a special reduction in its favor of the high duties which are now contained in the American tariff, provided always that these be considered in the tariff of this country in reciprocity, a total remission of the duties on American beer, and a prudent reduction in the duties on cotton goods of the same origin (American).

If you should not find it inconvenient to proceed in this matter, I should like to know what special reduction on the duties of importation of our tobacco the United States could make on the raw material, as well as on tobacco manufactured into cigars, always provided that we will give free entry to American beer, and consent to a discount of 25 per cent. of the duties on the cotton goods manufactured in the United States.

The consumption of beer among our coast population above all would not be inconsiderable, for among those people, over 600,000 in number, there is to-day no popular beverage except liquors, and even in the states of the interior the use of it (beer) is already popular. In these last states of the interior there are small breweries, but the quality of the beer leaves much to be wished for and the foreign beer is consumed in small quantities, of course weighed down by the high duties which it pays now.

The consumption of cotton goods is perhaps 5,000,000 kilograms, the value of which may be estimated on an average in a lump at not less than $1 per kilogram.

The production of our tobacco is limited. It requires fertile and rich soil; is subjected to plagues and diseases, which destroy it frequently, and which in reality have reduced the cultivation of it about one-third part of what it was fifteen years ago; it needs much labor to cultivate it in the hot climate on the bottom lands of the large rivers, ordinarily unhealthy, and for that reason thinly inhabited. The total exportation of this article into the Hanseatic cities, where it is imported free of duty, and from where it penetrates into the markets of Germany, has never exceeded 125,000 cwt., according to the official statistics, which, in reference to tobacco, are the most complete which we possess. In reality it does not exceed, if it does reach, 50,000 cwt., on account of a disease which has attacked the plantations for several years. The quantity of tobacco which we can export cannot be considerable, nothing to a country which produces on its part 3,000,000 or 4,000,000 cwt. of the same article, and exports it in enormous quantities to the markets of Europe.

In return for our tobacco, the United States could not only sell us cotton goods, but also furniture, hardware, and iron and steel, boots and shoes, and many other articles which we do not buy now on account of the want of well-established commercial relations. Our gold might as well go to that market (United States), partly to pay for merchandise, partly to buy exchange on Europe. And the commerce of Colombia, situated on a point open by water between the two Americas and the two oceans, would be the best basis which the United States could desire to control the commerce with the republics of South America.

With distinguished consideration, your obedient servant,

SALVADOR CAMACHO ROLDAN.

No. 122. Mr. Dichman to Mr. Evarts. [Document 144]

No. 122.
Mr. Dichman to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Bogota, November 16, 1878. (Received December 31.) No. 19.]

Sir: In connection with my No. 18 I beg to submit to the Department the inclosed copy of a letter (and translation) from the Hon. Salvador Camacho Roldan, in answer to certain inquiries made by me on the subject of the revenue of Colombia, and the amount of export and import trade. From the figures therein presented the Department will be able to obtain a general view of the movements of trade in this country. In connection therewith I would respectfully call attention to the following.

The population of Colombia is estimated at about 3,500,000, (as soon as I shall be able to obtain the exact figures upon this subject I shall communicate them). Assuming this as a basis, it is seen that the amount of taxation, or revenue per capita for national purposes, is only about $1.20 per annum. The taxation for state purposes varies, but 1 am informed is equally light.

The amount of produce exported annually is only about $3.44 per capita, and the amount of imports per capita is only about $2.86 per annum.

It will also be seen that cotton goods form the leading article, if not the bulk, of the importations, and that any steps which will give to the American manufacturer the exclusive control of this market for cotton goods, will as a necessary consequence, bring to the United States the purchase of all other articles imported into this country.

In the items of revenue, if it is necessary to explain, that the income from the post-office and telegraph is the gross income, and that the expenses of conducting both these branches of the public service exceed the amount of the revenues derived from them.

From the rent or subsidy paid by the Panama Railroad Company the sum of $25,000 is paid annually to the state of Panama.

The inquiry upon the subject of the quantity of tobacco exported to the United States prior to 1860, was for the purpose of being able to lay before the Department the information as to the largest amount which had ever been exported to the United States under a low rate of duty, and otherwise the most favorable circumstances.

While the figures herein submitted are official, I would respectfully suggest that they be examined in connection with the reports of Mr. E. P. Pellet, our consul in Barranquilla, who is very exact in his information, and who, from his position at the principal seaport of this republic, will be able to give correct accounts of at least eight-tenths of the foreign trade of this country. It will readily be seen by the Department, from the figures herein submitted, that considering the area and situation of this republic, its great extent of sea coast, the fertility of its soil, and the wealth of its mineral resources, the amount of its revenue and foreign commerce is very small.

While in some respects the reasons for this are found in the influences of a tropical climate, yet the chief cause of this lack of material development is without doubt the insecurity which attaches to property on account of the instability of the government.

I am, &c.,

ERNEST DICHMAN.

[Inclosure 1 in No. 19.—Translation.]

Mr. Roldan to Mr. Dichman.

Bogota, November 4, 1878.

My Dear Sir: I have the pleasure to answer your inquiries contained in your note of the 15th ultimo.

1st. Revenues of the United States of Colombia.

Those of the national government are estimated for the present fiscal year (September 1, 1878, to August 31, 1879) at ‘$4,200,000. Those of the year which ended with August 31, 1878, will amount to very nearly $6,000,000, but this figure is supposed to be occasioned by the extraordinary increase of importations of one year of peace after another year of war, in which latter the importation of merchandise from abroad was not sufficient for the necessities of commerce.

2d. From what sources they proceed.

The revenues of this country are derived— 1st. From the duties on importations.

2d. From the sale of salt derived from the salt-works belonging to the government.

3d. From the subsidy paid by the Panama Railroad Company.

4th. From the income of the post-office.

5th. From the income of the telegraphs.

6th. From miscellaneous receipts of little importance.

The customs tariff is actually high, and weighs upon the value of foreign merchandise a little more than 36 per cent. ad valorem, and yields, one year with another, $2,500,000.

The income from the salt-works consists in the difference between the cost of production of salt and the price at which it is sold at the national salt-works. The cost of production of salt (of the rock salt from the mines, and of the salt from salt springs, the former costing about 20 cents per cwt., and the latter about $1, more or less, on an average) is about $240,000 annually, and yields more than $1,250,000. There are about 350,000 cwt. of salt sold per year, at a mean price of $3.20 per cwt.

The Panama Railroad Company pays annually a rent of $250,000.

The post-office yields about $50,000 annually.

The postage is 5 cents for a letter weighing 10 grains, within the limits of any State, and 10 cents for letters which are carried through more than one State. The land routes for the mails are, more or less, about 1,800 leagues per week.

The telegraph yields about $40,000. The number of leagues of wire reach about 600.

The miscellaneous receipts consist in the yield from national property, fines, the Bolivar Railroad, &c.

The Bolivar Railroad, recently bought by the nation, is five leagues long, cost $600,000, yields from $90,000 to $100,000 annually, and requires from $70,000 to $80,000 annually for repairs and operating expenses.

3d. Exportations of Colombia in one year.

More or less, $12,000,000, distributed thus: Gold and silver in bars and coined $3,500,000

Quinia 80,000 cwt 2,500,000

Coffee, 20,000 cwt 3,200,000

Tobacco, 50,000 cwt 1,250,000

Hides, 180,000 500,000

Divi-divi and dye-woods, 8,000 tons 300,000

India-rubber, balsam of tolu, cattle on foot, corn, raw sugar, &c 450,000

Straw hats 350,000

12,050,000

In this amount are not comprised the exportations from the Isthmus of Panama, nor those from the eastern territories, there being no custom-houses nor means to obtain statistics in either.

4th. Importations of Colombia in one year.

Approximately, $10,000,000. The difference between exportation and importation covers the cost of transportation, duties, &c. Two-thirds of the importation in value consist in cotton, wool, hemp, linen and silk goods, which pay three-fourths or more of the duties on importations. Cotton goods represent themselves alone more than half of all the importations, and pay in reality more than 50 per cent. ad valorem in custom duties.

5th. Quantity of tobacco exported, to the United States before 1860.

There are no statistical data on this point, but I have private information that there was an important commerce in cigars between 1851 and 1858. A Mr. Moore, an American, had contracts to manufacture cigars for the United States, representing three or four millions of cigars annually. And from Cartagena and Santa Marta, considerable quantities were carried to the United States. According to my recollection, the value of these exportations was not below $300,000 annually. The cigars were cheap which, after paying duty, could be sold at from $2.50 to $3 a hundred. It seems to me that this commerce disappeared with the changes which were made in the tariff iii the United States in 1857 and 1863.

Accompanying, you will please find a pamphlet which I had published in 1874, in which you will find some data upon the subject of your inquiries.

In the reports of the Hacienda (revenue and finance) which I have the pleasure also to send you, you will also find some information more detailed.

I am having prepared several statistical tables upon the fluctuations of the revenues, the importations and exportations of this country in the last six years, which I will send later to you.

With, &c.,

SALVADOR CAMACHO ROLDAN.

No. 123. Mr. Dichman to Mr. Evarts. [Document 145]

No. 123.
Mr. Dichman to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Bogota, November 29, 1878. (Received January 27.) No. 23.]

Sir: Before leaving Washington you were pleased to communicate to me your views on the subject of establishing regular and frequent communication by steamers between New Orleans and the ports of this country. I now take pleasure in submitting for your consideration the accompanying copies of correspondence, a synopsis of which is briefly as follows:

Inclosure No. 1 is a copy of a letter addressed to me by the president of the Illinois Central Railroad Company (asking for information), which explains itself, and which I made the occasion of my letter to the Hon. Salvador Camacho Roldan. This letter was written after several conversations on the subject, and the answer of the Hon. Salvador Camacho Roldan contains not only a great deal of valuable information on the commerce of this country, but also a statement as to the probability of the Colombian Government contributing to the enterprise, thereby showing a most gratifying desire to assist in cultivating closer commercial relations with our country.

To the views advanced by the Hon. Salvador Camacho Roldan, I desire to add, that to both the United States and this country it is of the greatest importance that the line of travel to Europe from Colombia should be by the way of the United States, in order to enable the people of both countries to become better acquainted with each other.

It is also deserving of attention in this connection, that the more regular and frequent exchange of mails would not only produce more intimate commercial relations, but I am also of the opinion that a reciprocal arrangement could be effected with this government whereby letters from the United States would be distributed free of postage here in exchange for a similar free distribution of Colombian letters in the United States, and that in this way the postage between the two countries could be reduced to five cents for letters of half an ounce.

* * * * * * *

I am, &c.,

ERNEST DICHMAN.

[Inclosure 1 in No. 23.]

Mr. Akerman to Mr. Dichman.

Illinois Central Railroad Company, President’s Office,
Chicago, Ill., July 25, 1878.

Sir: I am very anxious before the next session of Congress, to be able to satisfy some of our Western Congressmen and Senators of the great importance to the West of establishing a line of steamers between New Orleans and South American ports.

To assist in doing this, I would be obliged to you if you would send me any statistics in your power relative to the trade between the United States of Colombia and this country, and any other information which you may think useful to the end I have in view.

I am, &c.,

W. R. AKERMAN.

[Inclosure 2 in No. 23.]

Mr. Dichman to Mr. Roldan.

Legation of the United States,
Bogota, November 22, 1878.

Sir: A request having been made of me by the president of the Illinois Central Railroad Company to obtain for him certain information bearing on the possibility of establishing and maintaining successfully a line of steamers between the ports of the United States of Colombia and the port of New Orleans, in the United States of America, I beg that you will permit me to ask you for an expression of opinion on this subject.

It is my intention to answer the inquiry made of me, through the State Department at Washington, in order that the correspondence may remain on file there, and that, if not now, perhaps at some future time, the expression of your views may serve as a basis of calculation for a similar enterprise.

The advantages resulting to both the United States of Colombia and the United States of America, if a regular line of mail steamers should be established between the nearest ports of both nations, are self evident.

As you have for many years given to the subject of the increased means of intercourse between the two countries much thought and study, I trust that this inquiry will not cause you too much inconvenience.

With sentiments of the highest consideration,

I have, &c.,

ERNEST DICHMAN.

[Inclosure 3 in No. 23.—Translation.]

Mr. Roldan to Mr. Dichman.

Bogota, November 26, 1878.

My Esteemed Mr. Minister: It is with much pleasure that I give an answer to your semi-official note of the 22d instant, in which you solicit an opinion from the department of foreign relations upon the advisability of establishing a line of steamers between New Orleans and the ports of our country.

For some years I have had the conviction that the commercial relations between the United States of America and Colombia had not all the importance at which they might arrive, solely for the want of lines of transportation, since Colombia produces many articles which are consumed extensively in the United States, and consumes many articles of European production which might be received, perhaps, with advantage from your country.

Colombia exports principally tobacco, quinia, coffee, gold, hides, straw-hats, caoutchouc, balsam, cotton, hard wood for railroad-ties, dye-woods and other coloring materials, tortoise-shell, preserves, cattle on the hoof, ivory-nuts, and mother-of-pearl.

I judge that of these articles, you receive only one-half or three-fifths of our exportations of coffee, half of the quinia, four-fifths of the hides, and insignificant quantities of all the rest.

The exportations of quinia and coffee have increased considerably in two years, perhaps doubled for your country, solely upon the introduction of the line of steamers (Atlas) recently to the ports of Sabanilla and Barranquilla.

The abolition of duties upon these articles, which took place in 1870, has, of course, contributed to this result in a considerable degree.

It must be borne in mind that by the way of Maracaibo (Republic of Venezuela), more than two-thirds at least of the exportation of coffee from our country takes place, which appear probably in the United States as importations from Venezuela.

I estimate that only to the amount of 25 per cent. to 30 per cent. of our exportations (which amount from $12,000,000 to $14,000,000) seek a market in the United States.

The importation of American articles in Colombia does not exceed, perhaps, 15 per cent. of our total importation, which vibrates between $9,000,000 and $10,000,000, and which must have been more than $12,000,000 in 1877–’78.

The articles which are at present imported are flour and crackers; lard, butter, cheese, beef, and pork; furniture, to a small amount, for the coast States; soap, Florida water, and perfumery, drugs; printing materials; steamers for the Magdalena River, and articles for repairing the same; fire-arms; materials for dentists; agricultural implements (principally Collins).

We might import on a large scale, cotton and woolen goods, boots and shoes, felt and cloth hats, school furniture, printing and wall paper, printed books, blooded live stock, beer, fish, ice, watches and clocks, petroleum and lamps, gas-pipes, fixtures, &c., ready-made wooden houses in pieces, and many articles of glass and crockery and glassware from Cincinnati and Pittsburgh, which enjoy a very good reputation.

Regular lines of steamers between New York and New Orleans on the one hand, and Colon, Carthagena, Barranquiila or Sabanilla, and Rio Hacha on the other, touching, perhaps, as well at Maracaibo, Puerto Cabello, and La Guayra, will surely give, in my opinion, good results.

For passengers alone, more than $50,000 annually might be counted upon, and more than 50,000 tons of freight, belonging to the commerce of this country; not, of course, in the first two or three years.

I believe that in time it will be much more advantageous for our exporters of gold to send it to the United States instead of to Europe; for, with the same amount of gold, from two to five per cent. more sterling exchange can be bought in New Orleans and in New York than in London.

England sustains three semi-monthly lines of steamers with our coast; France, one, and Germany, one, aside from lines of sailing vessels. The establishment of a line of Spanish steamers is spoken of, and another line of French steamers proceeding from Bordeaux. Why should not the United States sustain one, situated as they are nearest to our coast? The establishment of a line of steamers between New Orleans and the Colombian ports, will require, in order to give the desired results, the establishment of commission houses, known to our merchants, and provided with funds to accept drafts against consignments, or to draw upon Europe for account of our exporters. It would require as well to initiate relations between this city, Baranquilla, Medellin, Cucuta, and Cali, with the merchants of Chicago, Saint Louis, Pittsburg, Cincinnati, Louisville, and San Francisco.

Such a line would not only be able to count upon the freights and passengers to and from the United States of Colombia, but also upon those of the West Indies, which already, are not to be depreciated, as well as the commerce of Venezuela, which, would not be inferior to that of our country.

In former years, we were disposed to grant a subsidy, of $30,000 annually to an American line of steamers, which, however, was not established. In our present condition, I judge that Congress will, perhaps, be willing to vote $10,000 annually, for two years, and somewhat more for the following years, if the rates of freight and passage would give real advantages to our commerce.

I suppose that you have the very interesting tables of exportations from Sabanilla to the United States for the one part, and Europe and the West Indies for the other, in the past year, published by Mr. Pellet, the consul of the United States, to which (tables) I refer more or less.

With sentiments of the highest consideration,

I am, &c.,

SALVADOR CAMACHO ROLDAN.

No. 124. Mr. Dichman to Mr. Evarts. [Document 146]

No. 124.
Mr. Dichman to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Bogota, December 14, 1878. (Received January 30.) No. 26.]

Sir: I inclose copies of two communications addressed to the secretary of foreign relations, dated November 5 and December 13, respectively, on the subject of the custody of the registers of vessels of the United States by their consuls.

The Department will perceive from these inclosures that the difficulty is one of long standing, dating almost from the very origin of this government, and that in any treatment of the question my object is to arrive at a final settlement which will preclude the possibility of a similar difficulty in future. With this view, a mere understanding with the department of foreign relations as to how the objectionable law in question can be avoided, or even a promise to ask the Congress of Colombia to repeal the same, will not answer my purpose, for either mode of settlement might be only temporary.

The position of the Colombian Government can be stated briefly as follows, that it cannot neglect the execution of a plain act of Congress; that Congress at its last session passed a resolution directing the law to be enforced, and that the reason for such action arose from the fact that several vessels had left the ports of Colombia without a clearance.

My answer to the last was, that unless the Colombian Government could point out to me a case where a consul of the United States had been reported to his government for having delivered the papers of an American vessel, the captain of which had not produced to him a clearance, and no action having been taken on such report by his government, the reason advanced by the Colombian Government could not constitute an explanation for its action.

As to the law itself, I have endeavored to point out to the secretary of foreign relations that the matter was one of international obligation, and as such it was superior to any local law, and that article 91 of the constitution of the United States of Colombia expressly recognized the law of nations as the law of the land.

I also illustrated the position of the Government of the United States from the standpoint of public convenience, its necessity for the protection of destitute seamen who would otherwise become a charge upon the authorities at the Colombian ports, and the disadvantages arising to Colombia by trying to adopt a policy different from that of other maritime nations.

The attention of the department is respectfully called to the citation of the law of Colombia on the duty of Colombian consuls in foreign ports, quoted in page 20 of inclosure No. 1.

I am, &c.,

ERNEST DICHMAN.

[Inclosure No. 1 in No. 26.]

Mr. Dichman to Mr. Roldan.

Legation of the United States,
Bogota, November 5, 1878.

Sir: Under instructions from my government, and in accordance with the method pointed out by the provision of the 5th paragraph of article 35 of the treaty of 1846, between the United States and New Granada, I beg leave to call the earnest attention of the Government of the United States of Colombia to what appears to be a violation or infringment of said treaty, caused by an officer of the United States of Colombia, claiming to act under instructions from the government at Bogota, which violation or infringement of said treaty took place in the port of Colon. A spin wall, in the month of April, 1878, the facts of which, and proofs thereof, will hereinafter appear; and for said infringment of said treaty I am instructed to demand justice and satisfaction, and to request, respectfully, the taking of such measures on the part of the Government of the United States of Colombia, as will prevent a like violation of said treaty in future.

The facts constituting the cause of complaint, fully set forth, are in the accompanying copies of the official statement of the consul of the United States, and the statements of other persons at Colon-Aspinwall (which copies are respectfully submitted for the inspection of the honorable secretary of foreign relations), and are briefly as follows:

The schooner “Lorine,” being a merchantman of the United States of America, and duly registered as such, arrived on the 15th day of April, 1878, in the port of Colon-Aspinwall, and in accordance with the law of the, United States of America, and in the manner recognized and established, as will be shown hereafter, both by the said treaty of 1846 and the law of the United States of Colombia for merchant vessels of Colombia in the ports of the United States of America, the captain of said schooner deposited the register and other official papers of his vessel with the consul of the United States of America at Colon-Aspinwall.

On the morning of April 16, 1878, the inspector of the port and chief of customs, claiming to act under special instructions from the government at Bogota, did come on board of said vessel “Lorine,” accompanied by armed forces, and then and there, by force of arms, did take possession of said schooner, dispossessing the captain of his command, and did keep possession of said schooner Lorine by means of the armed forces of the United States of Colombia, for four days without paying any heed or attention to the official protests of the United States consul, who set forth clearly what were his rights and duties, and the rights of the vessels of the United States under said treaty of 1846; and by his action, the inspector of the port of Colon-Aspinwall, interfered to their great damage with the business of citizens, and of a corporation of the United States, which business they had a right to carry on, excited local prejudices and hostilities, to the danger of the lives and property of citizen of the United States, and endangered in a reckless manner the good relations which have existed for so long a time between the two sister republics of the United States of Colombia and the United States of America.

It is alleged that the ostensible cause for such action on the part of the inspector of the port was the fact of the non-delivery to him of the register and other official documents of the schooner Lorine.”

As this question of the rights of the consuls of the United States of America to execute the duties of their office by receiving the registers, and their official documents of the vessels of their nation in the ports of the United States of Colombia, has been recognized and affirmed by the Colombian Government in several instances, a being in accordance not only with the usage of maritime nations, but, also, clearly falling within the meaning of the “reciprocity in commerce and navigation,” provided for and protected by the treaty of 1846, and as the law of the United States of Colombia on the duties of Colombian consuls in connection with the vessels of their nation when in foreign ports, and the custody of the documents of such vessels, is identical in spirit with the law of the United States of America on this subject, thus clearly recognizing the reciprocity existing between the two nations, with all of which facts the inspector of the port was made acquainted by the consul of the United States of America, it does not seem probable that his inconsiderate action against an officer and a vessel of a friendly nation, could have arisen from a sense of duty. An over-zealous officer, from a sense of duty, might have raised the question to be decided anew by his superiors at Bogota, but the motives are unknown which could have induced actions whereby, carelessly, interests of such great importance were jeopardized.

As this question of the custody of the official documents of United States vessels by the consuls of the nation has been at different times a subject of discussion between the Colombian and United States Governments, I beg leave to submit the following statement to the consideration of the honorable secretary of foreign relations:

As the honorable secretary knows, and as is so well expressed in the laws of the United States of Colombia, the register of a ship is the evidence of its nationality, issued by the authority of the law of the nation to which such ship belongs, which law is generally enacted in conformity with the well-established international and maritime usage. It is a public document, and so recognized even in the treaty of 1846, where, in article 33, occur the words, “The registers of vessels, or ship’s roll and other public documents.” As the register of a vessel is one of the means by which the Government of the United States exercises its police and revenue power over its commercial marine, and as by means of it the national character of vessels of the United States is established, the Government of the United States cannot consent that the register of any vessel of the United States be surrendered into the keeping of any person other than one of its officers, which is also the principle which controls the legislation of Colombia concerning the documents of Colombian ships in foreign ports.

As early as the 27th of May, 1823, the Hon. John Quincy Adams, then Secretary of State of the United States, in his instructions to Mr. Anderson, then minister of the United States to the former Republic of Colombia, on the subject of a treaty of commerce and navigation between the two countries, in speaking of the rights which the consuls have in the ports of both nations, says:

“There is one right which may be claimed for them (the consuls) with much earnestness on the principle of reciprocity, and even in the fullness of their consular commission. That the registers of vessels of the United States frequenting the ports of Colombia should be delivered to them (the consuls) while they remain there may be reasonably required, because it is prescribed by our laws, and because also, by our laws, the consuls of Colombia would be entitled to the same privilege in relation to the vessels of their nation in our ports.”

In order to illustrate fully the above remark of the Hon. John Quincy Adams, viz, “and even in the fullness of their consular commission,” I beg leave to present a consular commission of the United States to the honorable secretary for his inspection, and respectfully call his attention to Article 4 of law 3 of 1847, which provides that, in the granting of exequatur to consuls of foreign nations, they are to be permitted to exercise the functions prescribed by the treaties with such nations duly ratified and exchanged.

The law of the United States on the subject of the papers of vessels of foreign nations in the ports of the United States, requires that they be delivered to the consuls of their respective nations, under a heavy fine or penalty for a failure to comply with its provisions.

On the subject of the papers of vessels of the United States in foreign ports, the law requires that they be delivered to the consul of the United States, who shall keep them until the master or commander of such vessel shall produce to him (the consul) a clearance from the proper officer of its port, where his ship or vessel may be. Under this provision of the law no consul of the United States could deliver to the commander of a vessel its papers, until the authorities of the port had certified that all the laws of the country had been complied with by giving him a clearance.

As the treaty of 1846 is identical in language in Articles 30, 31, 32, and 33 with the language contained in Articles 26, 27, 28, and 29 of the treaty of 1824, which articles relate to the appointment of consuls and the consular power, the construction put on any part of the treaty of 1824 by the Colombian negotiator thereof, the Hon. Pedro Gual, then secretary of state of the Republic of Colombia, maybe looked upon as authoritative for the Government of the United States of Colombia.

In this communication it affords me pleasure to bring to the notice of the honorable secretary a letter of the Hon. Pedro Gual to Mr. Anderson, under date of August 3, 1824, in which, in answer to a complaint made by Mr. Anderson, he is informed that upon the principle of reciprocity for the consuls of both countries, and according to the position of the United States, a decree had been issued on the 28th of the preceding month, satisfying the observation and wishes of Mr. Anderson, that the consuls of the United States should be permitted to have the registers and other papers of the vessels of their nation.

As this decision was made about the time when the various articles of the treaty of 1824 were being discussed by Mr. Gual and Mr. Anderson, it would be reasonable to presume that no further evidence of the construction of the consular power under the treaty would be necessary; but as the same question has arisen several times from a want of knowledge of the officers of the ports since the decision rendered by the Hon. Pedro Gual, and as the decision of the Government of New Granada and Colombia sustained the rights of the consuls of the United States to have the registers of the vessels of their nation while in the ports of New Granada or Colombia, I beg the indulgence of the honorable secretary in stating to him that under date of March 18, 1835, the Hon. Lino de Pombo, then secretary of foreign relations, informed the minister of the United States at Bogota that a decree would be issued in accordance with the wishes of the minister of the United States, he having brought to the notice of the Government of New Granada that the rights of the consuls of the United States in regard to the registers of United States vessels were being interfered with.

The archives of this legation show further that under date of March 15, 1854, a complaint on this subject was made by the minister of the United Stages and promptly redressed by the Government of New Granada.

The correspondence which took place in 1876 in relation to this matter, by the honorable Mr. Aneizar, then secretary of foreign relations of the United States of Colombia, and the minister of the United States, is undoubtedly familiar to the honorable secretary.

In order to point out to the honorable secretary that the non-delivery of the registers of vessels of the United States to the consuls of the nation may lead to frauds upon the revenue of the United States, and upon seamen shipped in United States ports, and that the laws of Colombia might be made a cloak for dishonest and illegal actions, I beg leave to call the honorable secretary’s attention to the correspondence between the minister of the United States in London and Lord Derby (p. 606, et seq. part 1, of the published reports of Foreign Relations of the United States for 1875). The honorable secretary will learn from the perusal of this correspondence that the right of the consul of the United States at Liverpool to the papers of the ship under discussion was not even questioned, and that the main issue of the controversy was whether the laws of Great Britain afforded any protection against frauds upon the revenue of the United States and the rights of the United States consuls.

I trust that I have shown to the satisfaction of the honorable secretary that both international usage, and the action of his own government, sustain the position of the Government of the United States on this question; but in order to have it settled for all time, as coming clearly within the treaty of 1846, and also the terms of the consular convention, I beg to call his attention to Article 3 of said treaty, which states, as the purpose and object of said treaty, the “placing of the commerce and navigation of their respective countries on the liberal basis of perfect equality and reciprocity.”

To show how the Government of the United States has acted up to this principle, I beg leave to refer to section 4209 of the Revised Statutes of the United States, which, as stated above, not only requires the delivery of the register of a foreign vessel in the ports of the United States to the consuls of its nation, but also attaches a penalty to the non-compliance with that law. Having enjoyed the benefits of this law ever since the Republic of Colombia became a member of the family of nations, I respectfully submit to the honorable secretary if the United States of Colombia can adopt a different policy towards the United States of America without violating the spirit and terms of the treaty existing between the two countries. In this connection, the honorable secretary will, I hope, not deem it out of place if I call his attention to the fact that the rights of the United States, under the treaty of 1846, are not only based upon the mutual advantages of reciprocity of commerce and navigation, but are also required by the consideration set forth specifically in the first paragraph of Article 35.

An examination of Article 33 of the treaty of 1846, and of Article 11 of the consular convention, clearly shows that the rights of the consuls of the United States to the custody of the registers, muster-rolls, and other official documents belonging to the vessels of their nations, is recognized in stipulating in both articles that consuls may demand the arrest of deserters by exhibiting, if necessary, “the registers of the vessels, their muster-rolls, and any other official document in support of the demand.”

I respectfully submit to the honorable secretary that by the very terms of these two articles, not only are the registers and muster-rolls recognized as official documents, but the inference to be drawn from their language is very clear that the fact that the registers, muster-rolls and other official documents belonging to the vessels of either nation must be in the possession of the consuls, otherwise it would be an impossibility for the consuls to exhibit them.

It is very gratifying to find that on the question of consular authority over the vessels of the United States of Colombia, when in foreign ports, the laws of the United States of Colombia require the same duties of, and grant the same rights to, the Colombian consuls which the laws of the United States prescribe for their consuls.

If the honorable secretary will examine article 62, chapter 2, of the law 23 of the 1st of May, 1866, of the laws of the United States of Colombia, he will find it to read as follows:

“Upon the arrival of a national (Colombian) merchant vessel in a foreign port in which resides a consul or vice-consul of the republic, he will visit it in person. In this visit he will cause to be delivered to himself by the captain, and under receipt, the register and other papers of navigation of the vessel under penalty of a fine of $50 to $200, to return the same to him (the captain) without delay when he executes the permission to leave the port (clearance),” &c.

The language of this law is so plain as to leave no doubt whatever on the duty of Colombian consuls in ports of the United States, and that under the principal of reciprocity the consuls of the United States have the right to discharge the same duties in the ports of Colombia.

I hope that by the foregoing statement I have shown to the satisfaction of the honorable secretary that, aside from international usage, the consuls of the United States have a clear and undoubted right to the custody of the registers and other official documents of the vessels of their nation while in the ports of the United States of Colombia, under the treaty of 1846, and the subsequent consular convention, any law of the United States of Colombia to the contrary notwithstanding. For that in a conflict between the provisions of a treaty and a statute law interfering with the execution of the former, the treaty must control is a well-established principle.

Before concluding my remarks on this subject, I beg to remind the honorable secretary that it has always been the policy of the United States to free commerce and navigation from all needless restraints and exactions, and that in this policy the United States have been seconded by the statesmen of Colombia and New Granada who negotiated the treaties of 1824 and 1846.

The reasons which have given rise to an international usage on the subject of the papers or documents of ships, apply with the same force to the United States of Colombia, as they do to other maritime nations, and any deviation from the reciprocity provided by treaty and maritime usage, while the commercial marine of Colombia may be small, might give rise to a similar policy on the part of other nations, proving an inconvenience and a burden to Colombian commerce when it shall reach, as it undoubtedly will, much larger proportions.

I am also instructed by my government to present claims for damages to citizens, and to a corporation of the United States arising out of this violation and infringement of the reciprocity in commerce and navigation guarantied by the treaty of 1846, by an officer of the United States of Colombia. I shall have the honor to bring these claims to the notice of the honorable secretary at the earliest convenience.

Before the receipt of the instructions from my government, on the subject of this communication, I had several conversations with the predecessor of the honorable secretary, by whom I was assured that no disposition existed on the part of the government to deviate from the previous understanding on this question. In order to remove any impression which might have been made upon my government, based upon the aggravated circumstances of this case, that the action of the inspector of the port of Colon-Aspinwall was in any manner due to a sense of unfriendliness on the part of the Colombian Government towards the Government of the United States, I took occasion to avail myself of the last mail to send a dispatch to my government, giving the substance of my conversation on this subject with the predecessor of the honorable secretary.

In view of the importance attached to this question by my government, I should feel obliged to the honorable secretary if he would indicate a time when it would suit his convenience to have a personal conference, with a view to coming at an understanding thereon, and that this ground of complaint, between the two countries be removed.

I avail myself of this opportunity to assure the honorable secretary of my high consideration, and to subscribe myself,

His, &c.,

ERNEST DICHMAN.

[Inclosure 2 in No. 26.]

Mr. Dichman to Mr. Arosemena.

Legation of the United States,
Bogota, December 13, 1878.

Sir: Under instructions from my government, I beg to call the attention of the honorable secretary to the following cases of the violation of treaty stipulations on the part of officials of the Colombian Government, relating to the question of registers and other official papers of vessels of the United States of America, which have been brought to the notice of the State Department by the consul of the United States at Barranquilla, and transmitted to me since my communication to your department of November 5, 1878:

First. The schooner “Thomas W. Holder,” lying in the Magdalena River in front of Barranquilla, was ready to go to sea, and her captain went to the office of the collector of customs for his register. Search was made for it, but it could not be found, and it was not until a day or two after the vessel was ready to sail that the register was discovered and placed in the hands of the captain.

I shall have the honor to present a claim for damages for the needless detention of this vessel, in connection with the claim to which reference is made in my communication of November 8, 1878.

Secondly. The brig J. Howland arrived in Sabanilla, when the custom-house officer took her register, and when the brig was about to sail for the mouth of the Magdalena River, the register of the vessel could not be found, and the brig was obliged to sail without it. Fortunately the brig entered the river without encountering bad weather, but had she been blown to sea the question would have been serious.

Thirdly. On the morning of September 19, 1878, the consul of the United States of America at Barranquilla, in pursuance with the authority and right stipulated for in article 33 of the treaty of 1846, and article 11 of the consular convention, made an application to the governor of the province of Barranquilla, demanding the arrest of a deserter from an American vessel. Compliance with the demand of the consul was refused by the governor, unless the consul should produce the register and muster-roll, as provided by the treaty. This the consul was unable to do, as the papers were in the custody of the Colombian authorities, and thereby a plain treaty stipulation was violated.

In my communication of November 5, 1878, I endeavored to present to the honorable secretary a view of the principles upon which rests the question of the custody of the registers of the vessels of the United States by the consuls of the nation in the ports of Colombia.

To this I beg leave to add that the granting of a right to the consuls of both nations, as the one of article 11 of the consular convention, necessarily carries with it the means for its enforcement, and that from this article, as well as from article 38 of the treaty of 1846, it would be difficult to draw any other inference than that the register, muster-rolls, and other official papers of vessels of both nations must be in the possession of their respective consuls.

As this is also in conformity with the practice of all the commercial nations of the world, the reason for such a maritime usage must arise from the practical advantages which it confers, and the spirit of reciprocity among nations, which is one of the most distinguishing features of the civilization of the nineteenth century.

This is also recognized by Colombia, as I had the honor of pointing out in my communication of November 5, 1878, in which I cited the law of Colombia (article 62, chapter 2, law 23, May 1, 1866) on the subject of the duties of Colombian consuls in foreign ports.

Any departure from a practice so well established by the common consent of all commercial nations is apt to lead to complications such as I have been instructed to bring to the notice of the honorable secretary.

I would also beg leave to suggest as a grave objection to the present regulation of the Colombian Government on this subject, that inasmuch as the execution of the same is confided to officers at a great distance from the seat of government, with slow and difficult means of communication, the hasty, careless, or inconsiderate action of such officers may endanger the good relations between the United States of Colombia and other governments, a danger which must far outweigh in importance the advantages which an adherence to the present system can possibly confer.

I trust that the honorable secretary will appreciate the importance of this cause of complaint between this government and that which I have the honor to represent, and that he will accord me the honor of an interview at as early a moment as may be convenient to him, in order that in a conversation, a protocol of which I would respectfully suggest to be kept for transmission to my government, the honorable secretary and I may arrive at a satisfactory settlement of the difficulty in question.

With sentiments of the highest consideration,

I am, &c.,

ERNEST DICHMAN.

No. 125. Mr. Dichman to Mr. Evarts. [Document 147]

No. 125.
Mr. Dichman to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Bogota, January 15, 1879. (Received January 25.) No. 34.]

Sir: As stated in my No. 33, I beg to inclose a duplicate and translation of an agreement in the “register question,” entered into between the honorable secretary of the interior and foreign relations of Colombia and myself. For the files of this legation I have obtained a certified copy from the department of the interior and foreign relations.

The Department will perceive that in the conference preliminary to the agreement, the Colombian Government admits that the question is governed by the spirit of the treaty of 1846, and subsequent consular convention.

On the subject of the claims the Colombian Government enters a demurrer, which was perhaps to be expected, but regret is expressed for the occurrences at Colon-Aspinwall.

As to the agreement itself, it was the object of both the honorable secretary of foreign relations and myself to adopt as a basis for the same, sections 4209, 4210, 4211 and 4309 of the Revised Statutes of the United States, and sections 118 to 124 of Article XII, and forms 13 and 14 Appendix V, United States Consular Regulations, as nearly as it could be done consistent with the revenue and police laws of this country and the difference in language.

Articles 1 and 2 of the agreement are as near as could be a reproduction of section 4209 Revised Statutes of the United States.

In regard to section 4211 Revised Statutes of the United States, which the honorable secretary of foreign relations desired to incorporate also, and to embody the same into the legislation of Colombia hereafter, there was some difficulty. For I did not deem it advisable or prudent to agree to the exercise of any power to inflict a fine on consuls of the United States by this government, if for no other reason than that on account of the want of federal judicial officers in this country, such power might be exercised arbitrarily and lead to difficulties and complications. Instead of this I suggested the provisions of article 3, to which I did not see any objections, as it is a right possessed by either government on general principles, and in this particular instance the provisions of article 3 of the agreement only define one of the causes referred to in article 2 of the consular convention. By referring to a dispatch, No. 15, dated August 20, 1824, from Mr. R. C. Anderson to the Hon. John Quincy Adams, the Department will find in one of the accompanying copies of letters addressed to the then Colombian secretary of foreign relations, under date of July 20, 1824, by Mr. Anderson, then the minister plenipotentiary to the Republic of Colombia, the following language: The law of the United States requires that the consul who has received the papers of the vessel shall, &c. Any consul who should violate the plain language of the law would immediately incur punishment from his own government, and justly incur the revocation of his exequatur from this.

As this action of Mr. Anderson appears to have been approved or acquiesced in by the Department, I considered myself justified in looking upon it as a precedent for my action in addition to the reasons given above. The Department will notice in this connection that by the language of article 3 of this agreement the permission to weigh anchor (clearance) is to be issued by a federal officer.

This phraseology was adopted to avoid possible misunderstandings on the subject of State laws and State officers.

Article 4 explains itself.

On the subject of the claims for damages, which are provided for in article 5, there was some difficulty in coming to an agreement. It was but natural that the Colombian Government should decline any liability for any claims, even if this denial were only a matter of form; besides, there was the difficulty in fixing upon an amount, and an excusable sensitiveness as to the views of the opposition party in congress, which meets on the first day of next month. The Colombian Government offered to have the cases mentioned investigated, and come to an agreement thereon later, but as such a proceeding would not have led to any definite result, I concluded that it would be a better position for both governments to occupy, and move in accordance with a spirit of fairness to have the whole question submitted to arbitration. As soon as the Colombian Government obtains the necessary legislation from congress I shall report further on this point.

I trust that the above statement and accompanying protocol, will be found by the Department a compliance with the instructions contained in Department’s dispatches Nos. 6 and 10.

The diplomatic agreement of 1876, to which reference is made in the Department’s dispatch No. 6, only applied to the free ports of Colon (Aspinwall) and Panama, and the preliminary correspondence on the part of the foreign representatives was based principally on public convenience.

At that time the Colombian Government was engaged in a civil war of great magnitude, and it is understood that Dr. Ancizar, the then secretary of the interior and foreign relations, yielded to the pressure, rather than have any foreign complications to deal with. Subsequently the Colombian congress passed a resolution of inquiry, why the law had not been complied with in the two ports above mentioned, and directed its enforcement. This placed the administration of this country in an embarrassing position, and out of this grew the transactions complained of at Colon (Aspinwall); with a full knowledge of these facts, and after a careful examination of the legal questions involved, I came to the conclusion that they were covered by the treaty of 1846 and subsequent consular convention, and that an agreement under the provisions of these treaties would be more binding and permanent than the mere repeal of the law in question could be. Besides, in asking a compliance with treaty stipulations, no national jealousies could be awakened; the delicate question as to how far a nation ought to yield to a spirit of international comity in modifying its revenue and police laws was entirely avoided, and the decision arrived at in the accompanying agreement will stand during the existence of the treaties, and will be of general application in all the ports of this country instead of only at the free ports of Panama and Colon (Aspinwall).

Referring to the letters of Mr. E. P. Pellet, the consul of the United States at Barranquilla, inclosed in the Department’s dispatch No. 10, in which he states that upon his arrival at Barranquilla, over twelve years ago, he found the custom established of delivering the registers of American vessels to the Colombian authorities, and in which he makes certain just complaints of the authorities in failing to render him assistance to arrest a deserter of an American vessel, I take pleasure in stating that as soon as the vessel can reach the coast orders will be sent there in accordance with the accompanying agreement, the Colombian federal and State officers will be directed to a strict compliance with international obligations hereafter, and all cause of complaint in the future will be removed.

The honorable secretary of the interior and foreign relations has also informed me that in his next report to congress, he will recommend to that body the adoption of section 4209 Revised Statutes of the United States, under the condition of reciprocity contained in section 4210, as the law of Colombia on this subject. This would put it into the power of the consuls of the United States to compel a compliance with section 4309, Revised Statutes of the United States, which is a matter of some importance, as may be seen by reference to pages 606, &c., part 1, Foreign Relations of the United States for 1875.

As incidentally connected with the subject of this dispatch, I desire to call the attention of the Department to No. 675, page 1365, Foreign Relations of the United States for 1875, part 2. It was thought by the secretary of foreign relations that he might use the same as an authority; but he admitted that after all it was only a dispatch asking instructions, and that the individual views of the author could not in any way be considered as the views of his government; further, that the publication of the same did not invest it with any authority, as the publication was only for the Congress of the United States, and was sent to other governments merely as an act of courtesy.

My object in calling attention to this dispatch is to show that the same sentiment or idea must have been the cause of similar legislation in both countries, and that it may be well to bear in mind, if any difficulties should arise similar to those spoken of in the No. 675 above quoted, that the treaty of 1824 was applicable to both the country where No. 675 was dated and this, and that therefore the correspondence of the Hon. John Quincy Adams, Mr. R. C. Anderson, and the Hon. Pedro Graul had, perhaps, best be transmitted for the files of that legation from the Department.

The correspondence to which reference is made would be an extract from Mr. Anderson’s instructions on the subject of the consular power, and suitable extracts from Mr. Anderson’s dispatch No. 15, and inclosure of July 20, 1824, and the answer of the Hon. Pedro Gaul, which was also transmitted in Mr. Anderson’s dispatch No. 15.

With an anxious wish that the Department may find in the result of my exertions something to promote the interest of our country,

I am, &c.,

ERNEST DICHMAN.

Protocol of a conference held at the office of the secretary of the interior and foreign relations, in the city of Bogota, at three o’clock in the afternoon of the 7th day of January, 1879, between the secretary of the interior and foreign relations of the United States of Colombia and the Hon. Ernest Dichman, minister-resident of the United States of America, for the purpose of terminating in a friendly and mutually satisfactory manner the differences which unfortunately have arisen between the two countries on account of the late legislation of Colombia on the subject of the registers of foreign merchant vessels which arrive in the ports of this country engaged in lawful commerce.

The Hon. Ernest Dichman expressed the views of the Government of the United States of America upon the matter, in the manner in which they were presented in the notes directed by him to the Colombian Government, dated November 5 and December 13 of last year, namely: 1. That in accordance with the treaty of 1846, and the subsequent consular convention, the registers and other official papers of the vessels of the United States of America should be in the custody of the consuls of the nation during their stay in Colombian ports.

2. That the Government of Colombia ought to pay the damages caused by the detention in its ports of the vessels of the United States of America, on account of a compliance with the laws of Colombia upon the matter, for not having rendered assistance to the consuls of the United States of America in the apprehension of deserters of the vessels of said country according to the stipulations of the treaties in force between the two nations, and for the violent and unwarranted conduct of an officer of the United States of Colombia in Colon, reference to which is made in the note of the Hon. Mr. Dichman, dated November 5, 1878.

The secretary of the interior and foreign relations replied that after a lengthy examination of the matter he had arrived at the conclusion that, if not the letter, the spirit of the treaties in force between the two countries requires that the registers and other documents belonging to the vessels of the United States of America should be, during the stay of said vessels in Colombian ports, kept in the custody of the respective consul, and that, proceeding in conformity with this judgment, the necessary instructions would be communicated to the collectors of customs and inspectors of ports.

The secretary of the interior and foreign relations expressed himself further that, in his opinion, the republic was not responsible for the damages which might have been caused to citizens of the United States of America, from the compliance with her laws upon customs and the police of the ports, for the conflict which, in the judgment of the Hon. Mr. Dichman, existed between those laws and the treaties in force between the two countries, was not evident; that he deplored profoundly any illegal proceedings, the object of which might have been the vessels and mariners of the United States of America in the ports of Colombia, and that it was his wish, without doubt in accordance with that of all his fellow-citizens, to see extinguished every cause of difference between the two nations, which are called upon, for many reasons, to strengthen and draw closer each day the ties of sincere friendship which happily unites them.

The Hon. Mr. Dichman stated, in the name of the government and the people of the United States of America, that he concurred in these sentiments, and, in view of the opinions of the secretary of the interior and foreign relations, arrived with him at the following agreement: 1st. That the register and other documents belonging to the vessels of the United States of America, and the clearance from the ports of departure, executed by the proper officer, shall be produced to the collector of customs or the inspector of the port, respectively. Forty-eight hours after having entered the port, the captain shall deposit the register and other documents of the vessel with the consul of the United States of America, and deliver to the collector of customs or the inspector of the port, respectively, the certificate of the delivery of such documents which said consul shall execute.

2d. That the consul of the United States of America, upon the receipt of the register, muster-roll, and other documents belonging to a vessel of his nation, which may have entered the port, shall execute a certificate setting forth the fact, which (certificate) shall be delivered to the collector of customs or the inspector of the port.

The consul shall not return the register and other documents to the captain who may have deposited them in his hands, only when he (the captain) produces to him the permission to weigh anchor (clearance) executed by the proper authority.

3d. It shall be a cause for canceling the exequatur executed to a consul of the United States of America, who shall return the register and other documents which may have been deposited with him, before there shall have been presented to him the necessary permission to weigh anchor (clearance) executed by the proper federal officer.

4th. The word consul used in the aforegoing articles comprises all classes of officers in that service.

5th. The question as to the responsibility of the United States of Colombia for the claims above mentioned, made by the Government of the United States of America, and the amount of the same, shall be submitted for a decision to an authority duly constituted by both governments.

In faith whereof we have signed and sealed this present instrument in duplicate, at Bogota, the seventh day of January, eighteen hundred and seventy-nine.
The secretary of the interior and foreign relations:
[seal.] PABLO AROSEMENA.
The minister resident of the United States of America:
[seal.] ERNEST DICHMAN.

No. 126. Mr. Evarts to Mr. Dichman. [Document 148]

No. 126.
Mr. Evarts to Mr. Dichman.

Department of State,
Washington, February 4, 1879. No. 26.]

Sir: I transmit herewith for your information copy of correspondence recently had with Her Britannic Majesty’s representative at this capital in relation to the Colombian law requiring the deposit of the registers of foreign vessels with the customs officers of the port entered.

This correspondence took place before your No. 26, of the 14th of December last, was received and examined. Although not taken into consideration, the circumstance now known from your later dispatch, that the Colombian Congress has recently legislated in favor of the enforcement of the law, the main object of that correspondence, remains unchanged. You are accordingly authorized to consult with those of your colleagues representing the maritime powers whose interests are touched by this exceptional legislation, with a view to making the concurrent action looking to its modification as harmonious and efficacious as may be possible.

While the representations made may be coincident, it is not expected that you will necessarily join in any identic or joint remonstrance, but will present the case in favor of this country, fortified by all pertinent arguments.

Your No. 26 has been separately answered in an instruction of this date.

I am, &c.,

WM. M. EVARTS.

No. 127. Mr. Dichman to Mr. Evarts. [Document 149]

No. 127.
Mr. Dichman to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Bogota, February 15, 1879. (Received March 28.) No. 48.]

Sir: Since the date of my No. 35 I have had repeated conferences with the secretary of foreign relations on the subject of the right of transit guaranteed to the Government of the United States by the thirty-fifth article of the treaty of 1846. In these conferences, I have discussed with him the origin of, and reason for, the thirty-fifth article, and have applied to the words, “The Government of New Granada guarantees to the Government of the United States that the right of way or transit across the Isthmus of Panama shall be open and free to the Government of the United States,” every possible rule of construction. The more I study the question in all its details, the more I become confirmed in the views which I have expressed in my No, 17.

The difficulty in the way of the Colombian secretary of foreign relations may be stated as follows:

The erroneous view taken by his predecessor, as stated in his communication addressed to the department under date of July 1, 1878. To this view, and all its mistaken inferences regarding the Colombian constitution, the present secretary of foreign relations appears to attach perhaps undue importance, either as a matter of consistency in the administration of his department, or from too great a deference to the opinions of a gentleman who for many years occupied a position of prominence in the politics of this republic.

* * * * * * *

I am, &c.,

ERNEST DICHMAN.

[Inclosure 1 in No. 48.]

Mr. Dichman to Mr. Arosemena.

Legation of the United States,
Bogota, January 21, 1879.

Sir: Under instructions from my government I beg leave to call the attention of the honorable secretary of foreign relations to the action of the government of the State of Panama in refusing the right of transit across the Isthmus of Panama to a duly commissioned officer of the United States in charge of au extradited criminal from the republic of Peru, and to the further action of said government of the State of Panama in releasing such prisoner and placing him at liberty.

As previous to the receipt of instructions on this matter, the same has been discussed informally by the honorable secretary and myself, I do not deem it necessary to dwell upon the same at length in this note, but only beg leave to add that I am directed to invite his earnest attention to this cause of difference between the two governments, for in the action of the Colombian Government by its agent the government of the State of Panama on the occasion above stated, my government does not find either an exhibition of that spirit of friendship which has always animated the relations between the two nations, or a compliance with the guaranty to the Government of the United States contained in the thirty-fifth article of the treaty of 1846, by which the right of way or transit across the Isthmus of Panama shall be open and free, not only to the citizens, but also to the Government of the United States.

With the history of that article of the treaty, the obligation assumed by the United States, and the manner in which the same has been discharged, the honorable secretary is quite familiar, therefore I shall not trouble him with a statement thereof on this occasion.

As the honorable secretary has expressed to me his anxiety that this cause of difference between the two countries should be removed, I would request the honor of a personal conference with him at as early a day as may suit his convenience for the purpose of reaching a common accord on this question.

With the assurance of the highest consideration,

I have, &c.,

ERNEST DICHMAN.

[Inclosure 2 in No. 48.—Translation.]

Mr. Arosemena to Mr. Dichman.

United States of Colombia, Department of the Interior and Foreign Relations,
Bogota, January 24, 1879.

I have had the honor to receive the note which your honor has addressed me under date of the 21st instant for the purpose of calling the attention of the Colombian Government toward the fact that there had been placed in liberty by order of the president of the State of Panama, C. G. Scrafford, accused of forgery, who was being taken to the United States of America by way of the Isthmus, by Señor W. F. Clayton, vice-consul of the United States at Callao.

Your honor manifests in the same note that the Government of the United States of America has not found in the conduct of that of the Colombian Union the same spirit of loyal friendship which has always prevailed in the relations which the two nations cultivate, and that this conduct impairs the rights which the American Union acquired by the 35th article of the treaty which it executed with the republic in 1846. Your honor concludes with soliciting a conference with the undersigned in order to consider the question and terminate it in a mutual satisfactory manner.

I see myself obliged here to repeat, that which was said from this office under date of the 1st of July last upon the same subject, to the honorable secretary of foreign relations of the United States of America.

The compliance with the constitution of the republic is the first of the duties of the Government of the Union and of its agents in the States. Among other rights, not less precise, the fundamental code of this country recognizes and guarantees to the persons which cross its territory personal security in such a manner that they may not be confined without being heard and convicted in court in accordance with pre-existing law. To keep Scrafford a prisoner, who had committed no crime in Colombian territory, nor had been heard or convicted in court according to law, would be to violate in him the personal security and for the same the constitution which recognizes and guarantees this right. In decreeing his liberty, the president of the State of Panama barely complied with his written duties, and bowed before definite precepts of our constitutional law.

The fact of placing Scrafford in liberty, which, as has been seen, was necessary in view of the constitution of the republic, is no violation of the thirty-fifth article of the treaty of 1846, executed between New Granada and the United States of America, yet in force. The article refers only to the franchises, privileges, and immunities of a mercantile nation, and the right of transit, which-is then conceded across the Isthmus of Panama to the citizens and to the Government of the United States, does not comprise the transportation of criminals through our territories with an evident violation of our political institutions.

The Government of the American Union ought not therefore to see in the proceeding of that of Colombia (which had caused this correspondence) a relaxation of the ties of frendship which happily exist between the two countries. These ties have been created by the similarity of institutions and the well-understood interests of the two people, and far from weakening them, they will, without doubt, grow stronger with the march of time.

As I have had the honor to say to your honor on several occasions, the Colombian Government finds itself disposed to execute, with that of the American Union, a convention which fixes and regulates the right of transit across the Isthmus of Panama, conceded to said country by the thirty-fifth article of the treaty of 1846, in a way which takes into consideration the sovereignty of Colombia in that territory and the just aspirations of the cabinet of Washington.

In order to consider this matter, I will hold in the shortest time possible the conference which your honor proposes, the result of which will not be less than mutually satisfactory.

With sentiments of distinguished consideration, &c.,

PABLO AROSEMENA.

No. 128. Mr. Evarts to Mr. Dichman. [Document 150]

No. 128.
Mr. Evarts to Mr. Dichman.

Department of State,
Washington, February 20, 1879. No. 31.]

Sir: Your dispatches, No. 28, of December 24, 1878, and No. 33, of the 8th ultimo, have been received. They both relate to the question as to the proper custody of the registers of American vessels in the free or customs ports of Colombia. The note received from Señor Arosemena, in reply to yours of December 13, is extremely satisfactory as evincing a spirit of justice and conciliation in the discussion of the issue involved, and the nearness of a settlement of the question would have been inferred from it, even in the absence of your latter dispatch reporting the signing of an agreement in adjustment of the question. My recent instruction to you relative to the coincident action of the various foreign representatives at Bogota, whose countries are alike interested with our own in obtaining a satisfactory settlement of the matter, will have shown you the importance attached to it, and it is trusted that the arrangement you announce will facilitate, if indeed it be not a part of, a general disposition of this long-pending question.

I am, &c.,

WM. M. EVARTS.

No. 129. Mr. Dichman to Mr. Evarts. [Document 151]

No. 129.
Mr. Dichman to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Bogota, March 17, 1879. (Received April 14.) No. 58.]

Sir: The inclosed copy of a protocol, and translation of the same, on the subject of the right of transit across the Isthmus of Panama, guaranteed to the government of the United States by the 35th article of the treaty of 1846, concludes, I trust, the negotiations which I have carried on with this government in obedience to your instructions contained in your Nos. 12 and 23.

The original will be forwarded by the first safe opportunity. For the files of the legation I have obtained a certified copy.

In the course of the negotiation various expedients were proposed by the Colombian secretary of foreign relations for the purpose of avoiding the direct issue in question, and in pursuance of the views indicated by his predecessor in his letter to the Department of State dated July 1, 1878. Among others, he submitted to me the draft for a new convention, explanatory of the existing treaty in reference to the subject in question, but as this draft contained the objectionable feature of allowing the exercise of a discretion to the State government of Panama, in refusing the right of transit to prisoners in the custody of the government of the United States under certain circumstances, and as also, in my opinion, the multiplying of conventions on a subject clearly within the provision of an existing treaty, is a matter of doubtful policy or propriety. I was obliged to decline the proposals made by the Colombian secretary, and instead thereof urged upon him the desirability of arriving at a common accord on the question at issue, by giving a satisfactory construction to article 35 of the treaty of 1846. At the same time I was free to admit that while I considered the right of the government of the United States to the “innocent use” of the right of way or transit as a “perfect right” under the treaty, I was ready to acknowledge the propriety of adopting such reasonable regulations for the exercise of the same as would assure to the government of the United States a practical enjoyment thereof.

The objections raised on account of the Colombian constitution were met by the arguments set forth in my previous communication to the Colombian Government, a copy of which was inclosed in my No. 17 to the Department, supported by citations from Calvo, Bello, and other Spanish writers on international law, to whose works I also referred for authorities in the construction of the language used in article 35 of the treaty. I also took occasion to suggest that the doctrines maintained by the government of Colombia in regard to the sheltering and protecting power of articles 10 and 15 of the Colombian constitution might, at some future time, prove highly inconvenient to the government of this Republic in making it an impossibility to repel an undesirable emigration of criminals who would wish to avail themselves of this country as a place of refuge.

The ever-present danger to the sovereignty of his country, which, to the Colombian statesman, is something to be apprehended in his intercourse with other nations, and which was brought forward on this occasion as a standing objection, was disposed of in the manner indicated in the communication to which reference was made above, in which I set forth clearly that inasmuch as the government of the United States had guarantied the sovereignty and property of the Isthmus of Panama to the United States of Colombia by the solemn obligation of a treaty, it was, to say the least, an inconsistent view that any apprehensions should be entertained of, or any precautions need be taken against, the guaranteeing power.

The subject was discussed several times by the President and cabinet, and when finally the secretary of foreign relations informed me that his government acknowledged the justice of the position of the Government of the United States, the question arose as to the manner in which this acknowledgment of the Colombian Government should be expressed and how the exercise of the right of transit thus conceded to pertain to the Government of the United States should be regulated.

Instead of a note which the secretary of foreign relations offered to write, I suggested a protocol of a conference embodying an agreement. I beg to refer here to my No. 35 in which I informed the Department of certain researches which I was making, and having made, for the purpose of finding a precedent if possible.

Among the unpublished executive communications of the Colombian Government a letter was discovered, a copy and translation of which I inclose, in answer to an inquiry made by the Government of the State of Panama, which by the use of the words “and prisoners under the Federal jurisdiction” in the second article of the letter was perfectly applicable to the settlement of the subject under consideration. As the language of the second article of this letter is so clear in setting forth the rights of the Government of the United States, and in order to make use of it as a link in the chain of precedents, I suggested that in the protocol to be drawn up and signed, the pertinent parts of this letter be inserted. You will perceive that article 1 of the protocol expresses the rights of the Government of the United States in the premises clearly and distinctly, and is a clear statement of the rights and obligations of both governments.

Article 2 of the protocol relates to the manner in which the right of transit is to be exercised by the Government of the United States in the case of prisoners. A distinction is made between prisoners extradited from other countries and those taken from one part of the United States to another. In the former case the documents upon which the extradition has taken place are to be shown to the agents of the Colombian Government at Panama, merely as an act of notification$ in the latter case no such formality is necessary.

Concerning article 3 of the protocol, I beg to refer to the correspondence in inclosures Nos. 3 and 4. In addition to the views therein expressed, I am of the opinion that the custody of any prisoner of the United States during the time of transit and embarkation by the Colombian authorities, will save a great deal of trouble and annoyance to any officer in charge of such prisoner.

The accompanying correspondence, contained in inclosures No. 3 and 4, also expresses my views in regard to article 4. As the Colombian secretary requested that the same should be inserted, I expressed a willingness to sign the protocol with the distinct understanding expressed in my letter of February 22, contained in inclosure No. 3.

After the signing of the protocol and the delivery of my note of February 22, 1879 (inclosure No. 3), and before Dr. Arosemena could answer the same as agreed upon, the Colombian Senate deprived him of the power of so doing by refusing to confirm his nomination.

In order that this matter should be closed up by an answer to the note of February 22, I have delayed this dispatch until this answer could be obtained from the successor of Dr. Arosemena. I beg to refer to it as inclosure No. 4.

As soon as the protocol is published in the official newspaper (Diario Oficial), I shall send copies of the same to the consuls of the United States at Aspinwall and Panama.

I trust that the result of my actions will meet with your approval.

I am, &c.,

ERNEST DICHMAN.

protocol.

[Inclosure No. 1 in No. 58.—Translation.]

At a conference which took place in the department of the interior and foreign relations at Bogota to-day, the 22d of February, 1879, between the secretary thereof, Pablo Arosemena, and the Hon. Ernest Dichman, minister resident of the United States of America at Bogota, being both duly empowered by their respective governments, with a view of examining the differences which have arisen between them relating to the right of transit which the Government of the United States of America has across the Isthmus of Panama, and for the purpose of arriving at a common ac cord which will remove said differences definitively, agree upon the following: 1st. As was recognized explicitly by the Government of the United States of Colombia in a note directed by the secretary of the interior and foreign relations to the Government of the State of Panama, on May 15, 1885, under No. 77. According to article 35 of the treaty with the United States of America of the 12th of December, 1846, the Government of Colombia guarantees the right of way or transit across the Isthmus, not only to the citizens of the United States, but also to their government, and consequently, the troops of the American Union, as well as the prisoners under the Federal jurisdiction, can pass as the usual service of its administration, a right which is established in compensation for the guarantee of the sovereignty and property of the isthmus, to which the same government is bound.

2d. In the ease of transportation across the Isthmus of Panama of criminals, the extradition of which may have been obtained by the United States of America from other governments, there will be presented by the, consular agent of that country to those (the agents) of the Government of the Union in the State of Panama, the documents which may have served as a basis for the extradition. In the case of the transportation of criminals, proceeding from the territory of the United States, this formality will not be necessary.

3d. The armed forces of the nation or of the State (troops) will take charge gratuitously of the custody of the criminals, the transportation of which is requested by the Government of the United States of America, from that of the United States of Colombia (across the Isthmus of Panama).

4th. The honorable senate of plenipotentiaries will be notified of this settlement.

In faith of which, we sign and seal two copies of this protocol at Bogota, the twenty-second of February, one thousand eight hundred and seventy-nine.
[seal.] PABLO AROSEMENA.
The minister resident of the United States of America:
[seal.] ERNEST DICHMAN.

[Inclosure 2 in No. 58.—Translation.]

United States of Colombia, National Executive Power.

department of the interior and foreign relations.—bureau of foreign affairs.

Section 1, No 77.

To the Secretary of the Government of the Sovereign State of Panama:

The citizen President of the Union, to whom was referred your note of the 13th of January last, No. 43, has ordered me to transmit to you the following instructions, according to which the government will regulate its conduct concerning the transit of foreign troops across the isthmus, leaving inoperative those which may have been given formerly upon the same matter: 1. The transit across the isthmus, as a general rule, is prohibited to all nations, unless permission be obtained previously from Congress, in view of section 4 of article 49 of the constitution.

2. According to article 35 of the treaty with the United States of America of the 12th of December, 1846, the Government of Colombia guarantees the right of way or transit across the isthmus not only to the citizens of the United States, but also to their government, and consequently the North American troops, as well the prisoners under the Federal jurisdiction, can pass as the usual service of its administration, a right which is established in compensation for the guarantee of the sovereignty and property of the isthmus, to which that same government is bound towards ours.

3. When there may be a necessity of changing the crews of foreign men of war, the executive power of the State shall warn them not to commit any hostile act, and to require an account of the sailors who are being exchanged or replaced, who will not be permitted to take the train of the railroad, except as ordinary passengers, and free from any foreign military authority; that is to say, they must not be in military order.

4. The same will be observed when soldiers or sailors, being sick and coming from foreign men of war, wish to cross the isthmus for the purpose of going to other places to be cured.

I say this to you in answer to your note herein referred to, and in order that you may be pleased to communicate the same to the citizen-president of the state with a view of securing the due compliance therewith.

ANTONIO DEL REAL.
Bogota, May 15, 1865.

[Inclosure 3 in No. 58.]

Mr. Dichman to Mr. Arosemena.

Legation of the United States,
Bogota, February 22, 1879.

Sir: Referring to the protocol of a conference embodying an understanding on the subject of the right of transit across the Isthmus of Panama, guaranteed to the Government of the United States by the thirty-fifth article of the treaty of 1846, which I had the honor to execute with you to-day, I deem it right to observe, for a fuller and better understanding of the same, that I offered in behalf or the Government of the United States to provide for a reimbursement of any expenses to which the Government of the United States of Colombia might be subjected in executing article 3 of the protocol.

To which you replied as follows:

“Speaking for the Government of Colombia, and also for the Colombian people, as an evidence of our traditional friendship for the United States of America, to show a liberal spirit in complying with treaty stipulations and to promote the ends of justice and morality, the Colombian Government reaffirms not only the right of way or transit guaranteed by treaty to the Government of the United States, but also offers the services of its national and the State forces at Panama, in order to enable the Government of the United States to make an efficacious use of this right of way or transit in the exercise of one of its administrative functions, concerning in this particular instance the transit of prisoners under its jurisdiction, and I deem it improbable that in the services to be rendered under article 3 of the protocol, any expenses will be incurred by the Colombian Government.

“The maintenance of any prisoners who may be unavoidably detained on the Isthmus of Panama may be provided for by the Government of the United States of America.”

With this understanding the word “gratuitously” was inserted in article 3 of the protocol. I also took occasion to state, before signing the protocol, that the notification, or account to be given to the Colombian Senate by article 4, which was added at your instance, was not to be construed as an admission on the part of the Government of the United States that the exercise of the rights guaranteed by the treaty of 1846, and the execution of the understanding embodied in the protocol, should depend upon the action of the Senate of Colombia, to which you replied that the purposes of article 4 of the protocol were only to be considered as pertaining to the relations between the executive power of the United States of Colombia and the Colombian Senate, and, being thus purely internal, article 4 was not to be construed as imposing any limitation or restriction upon the rights acquired by the United States by the treaty of 1846, or upon the execution of the understanding embodied in the protocol which was executed for the purpose of defining and regulating the manner in which one of these rights may be exercised.

I will thank you to notify me of the correctness of these statements, in order that a duplicate of this note may accompany the protocol herein referred to. I have addressed this note to you in duplicate in order that you may be able to return one copy with your remarks thereon.

In bringing the correspondence on this subject to a close, permit me to express my appreciation of the courtesy and patience which you have always manifested during the entire course of what has at times been a difficult and delicate negotiation, and to subscribe myself, with sentiments of the highest consideration,

Yours, &c.,

ERNEST DICHMAN.

[Inclosure 4 in No. 58.]

Mr. Ancizar to Mr. Dichman.

United States of Colombia, Department of the Interior and Foreign Relations,
Bogota, March 15, 1879.

Upon studying the note of your honor dated February 22 last, and the protocol to which it (the note) refers, I was obliged to consult with my distinguished predecessor, the Señor Dr. Pablo Arosemena, upon the points of which that note treats, and he has informed me that they are correct in every part.

I have the honor thus to manifest the same in answer to the honorable minister resident of the United States of America, and to subscribe myself his honor’s most obedient servant,

M. ANCIZAR.

No. 130. Mr. Dichman to Mr. Evarts. [Document 152]

No. 130.
Mr. Dichman to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Bogota, March 24, 1879. (Received April 18.) No. 60.]

Sir: The attention of the administration has undoubtedly been bestowed before this upon the balance of trade against the United States which exists in the commerce with South and Spanish American countries. With a view of being able to make recommendations to the Department on this subject, I have given much time and attention to the commercial movements of this republic, and my investigations lead me to the following conclusions:

In a commercial point of view, ever since the political independence of this country, it has been practically a dependency, almost a colony, of Great Britain. An examination of the file of the dispatches from this legation at the Department will show that ever since 1824 (referring to Mr. Anderson’s No. 9 of March 18, 1824, in which he states that even the recognition of the independence of this country by Great Britain was made a matter of barter for a commercial treaty, giving to that nation a preference in the trade of Colombia) the commerce of the United States with this republic has labored under the disadvantage of a differential duty of five per cent., which all the efforts of the representatives of the United States could not remove until 1846, when, in the negotiation of the present treaty of commerce, the differential duties were surrendered in exchange for the guarantee by the United States of the sovereignty and property of the Isthmus of Panama. (See proctocol of Mr. Bidlack.)

Possessing thus almost a virtual monopoly of the commerce of this country for many years, it has practically continued in British hands until a few years ago. This connection was strengthened by the feeling of suspicion entertained of the United States on account of the several adjustments of the boundary with Mexico and other causes, the reason of all of which has disappeared at present, and in connection herewith the usual hostile influence against the United States on the part of the diplomatic and consular officers of Great Britain, is a factor to be taken into consideration, which, however, at present is a matter of no importance, and may be viewed with indifference. (See No. 269, September 9, 1866, last sentence, and many similar dispatches from this legation.)

To overcome the habits of trading with a certain country which have been formed by business associations of long standing, advantages of some kind must be held out to turn the channel of trade toward the United States.

To a certain extent this is already being done by a superiority of goods, which is slowly but surely making itself felt in favor of the exporters of the United States. But while the merchants of a country engaged in a foreign trade may not inaptly be looked upon as an army which battles for commercial supremacy, the government of a country may, in a certain sense, be considered as the engineers of that army, making roads and removing obstacles to facilitate its progress. This is the object of commercial treaties, and in this the British Government has generally been successful by advancing the interests of its commercial and manufacturing classes. Leaving other nations out of the question, the struggle for commercial supremacy in these countries may be said to be with Great Britain. In this struggle Great Britain has the advantage of an immense capital employed in its foreign trade and the many lines of communication. Undoubtedly the greater activity of our people, and the greater resources of our country, may be a partial set-off, and it is unquestionable that, with the establishment of lines of communication with the United States, the advantages now possessed by Great Britain will be overcome, and, in the course of time, the United States will obtain the control of the commerce of this country, to which, from their proximity of position, diversity of productions, and similarity of institutions, they are naturally entitled. But as a measure which, in my opinion, would yield immediate results, in the way of increasing the commerce of the United States with South and Spanish America, I would earnestly recommend our government to change its policy of a general tariff to the policy of a conventional or a treaty tariff, adapted to the different commercial wants and interests arising out of the commercial relations of the United States with the natives on this continent.

An examination of the balance of trade against the United States shows that it arises principally from purchases of coffee and sugar, while the coffee and sugar producing countries purchase their dry-goods and other articles from Great Britain.

I would recommend the restoration of the duty on coffee, but leaving its collection or remission discretionary with the President upon the negotiation of a satisfactory treaty or convention, assuring to some articles of American manufacture an equivalent remission of duty. The planting of coffee-trees in coffee-producing countries is increasing at an immense ratio, and the time is not far distant when the world will have a surplus of coffee.

It is difficult for me to understand why the Government of the United States will deliberately throw away the advantages which our markets, as being large purchasers of coffee, afford, to compel a more liberal treatment for our exports on the part of countries having coffee to sell.

The question of sugar is, perhaps, more complicated on account of its home production, and the different political-economical position which it occupies. But even then it is a matter of serious consideration whether the duty which is now collected, partly as a revenue measure and partly to make up for the deficiency of the heat of the sun in the United States, compared with other countries better suited for the growth of the cane, could not be used as a means of bringing about a greater exchange of equivalents of labor or value with sugar-producing countries. In this country sugar-cane has been known to last, without replanting, over eighty years.

Sugar can be produced at a cost of less than two cents a pound, and if a market could be found in the United States, not only would every dollar paid for sugar be used to purchase American dry goods, boots and shoes, and other manufactured articles, but this country would necessarily become the debtor of the United States to a large amount, yielding a high rate of interest for the railroads and other improvements which would have to be constructed to carry the products of this country to the markets of the United States.

These ideas have been suggested already in my previous dispatches, particularly my No. 18, on the subject of tobacco. My object in, or reason for selecting tobacco on that occasion was to follow or keep within the precedent which the Congress established by the “joint resolution in relation to the tobacco trade of the United States with foreign nations,” approved February 14, 1859.

Nor ought the fact to be lost sight of, that, in entering upon any measure of reciprocity with this country, the United States will be the source from which to supply a population of over three millions of people instead of the forty or fifty thousand who make up the population which comes under the provisions of the treaty with the Hawaiian Islands. Like all the people living in the tropics, the inhabitants of this country are improvident and wasteful. They possess no accumulated stores of any kind, and having but little, if any, idea of economy, the products of their labors would lead to an instant and constantly increasing exchange of commodities.

Bearing on the same subject, I also beg to call attention to an extract from the last message of the President of the United States of Colombia, which will be found on pages 4 and 5 of my No. 43.

The readjustment of the commercial treaties with these countries in the manner herein indicated would also be productive in securing to them stability of government, and that advance in their material prosperity and development to which their abundant natural wealth would lead, but which they have failed to realize on account of political struggles. Closer commercial relations with the United States would naturally bring about an assimilation of political ideas and the moral influence of our country would enable them to break through the vicious circle of politics, which knows of no appeal from a grievance, fancied or real, except the appeal to the sword. Aside from the question of pecuniary interest, this subject ought also to be considered from its political aspect, and the standpoint of responsibility and duty. The government of this country is modeled after that of the United States, and it is to the United States that they must look for sympathy and good-will in their efforts to break from the traditions and practices of the past.

* * * * * * *

The progress of education is teaching the masses of this people that there are two great nations speaking the English language, and the political men of the country are realizing the fact “that the time has come for laying the foundation of an American policy which shall bind in closer union the American republics.” (Secretary of State to Senate of the United States, July 14, 1870.)

Being fully aware of the difficulty of giving instructions on a subject of such a general and comprehensive nature as the one treated of in this despatch, I shall coniine my efforts to the obtaining of such tangible and practical propositions for the Colombian Government as will enable the Department to submit the same, with its judgment or recommendation thereon, to the consideration of Congress.

Actuated as I am by the great desire to bring about a closer commercial intercourse between the two countries, I trust that in forming a judgment in the opinions herein expressed the Department will take these motives into consideration.

I am, &c.

ERNEST DICHMAN.

No. 131. Mr. Dichman to Mr. Evarts. [Document 153]

No. 131.
Mr. Dichman to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Bogota, March 31, 1879. (Received June 2.) No. 62.]

Sir: In answer to your No. 26, of the 4th of February, 1879, I have to inclose copies of notes exchanged between the minister resident of Her Britannic Majesty at this capital and myself, and also a copy and translation of that part of the report of the Colombian secretary of foreign relations which treats of the question of the custody of the registers “of foreign vessels in the ports of Colombia.” The honorable secretary * * * fully justifies his action in concluding the convention, a duplicate of which was forwarded in my No. 34, but he omitted to introduce a view of the subject which was distinctly presented to him for his consideration, and which, in my opinion, is a matter of importance.

The particular point to which I have reference may be stated as follows:

The exercise of the powers of consuls of the United States concerning the custody of the registers of United States vessels should not only be permissive, but the legislation of Colombia should also be modified in such a way as would enable consuls to avail themselves of the same or similar compulsory process to enforce the delivery to them of the registers and other official papers of vessels of the United States as is provided by section 4209, Revised Statutes of the United States, in the case of foreign vessels entering their ports.

In order to enable you to judge of the arguments in support of this position, which I presented to the honorable secretary on different occasions, I beg to submit a brief statement thereof.

The enrollment or registration of ships, in evidence of which a “register” is issued, appears to have originated in the navigation act of Charles II of England, and the great and perhaps the only object thereof was to facilitate the exclusion of foreign ships from those departments of trade in which they were prohibited from engaging by the navigation laws of Great Britain. As is the case with many other legal practices and instruments, the convenience afforded by the registration laws, and the “register,” made them applicable to other purposes when the original object no longer existed, and these present purposes constitute now the reason for such laws.

Aside from determining the national character of the vessel, the register is an instrument by means of which the Government of the United States is enabled to enforce its police and revenue laws over the vessels of the nation in foreign ports, and whereby frauds against the revenue of the United States or against individuals are prevented.

As to how frauds against the revenue of the United States may happen for the want of compulsory legislation such as in force in the United States, a very clear case is presented on pages 606, &c., Part I, Foreign Relations of the United States for 1875.

The object of this correspondence was fully explained to the Colombian secretary, and he agreed that, upon principles of comity and national self-interest, the Colombian executive should urge the passage of such laws upon Congress, under the conditions of reciprocity set forth in section 4210, Revised Statutes of the United States, as would enable his government to act in accordance with the same liberal spirit on this subject as has been the practice in the United States for nearly a century.

In further illustration of the necessity of making the delivery of the “registers” of the vessels of the United States to their consuls obligatory, in order to prevent frauds against individuals, the different subjects of marine survey, repairs, protest, bottomry bond, and others relating to the rights of absent owners of vessels, and the care with which such rights are protected by the laws of the United States, and the minute and careful provisions of the United States Consular Regulations, were presented to the Colombian secretary, with suitable illustrations concerning the provisions made for American seamen. The laws and consular regulations on this subject were also brought to the notice of the honorable secretary, the wisdom and beneficent effect of which laws he readily admitted, as well as the advantages which accrue to the seaports of his country if the consuls of the United States should be placed in such a legal position that, by compelling a delivery of the “register,” they could, by withholding the same, enforce a compliance with the laws of the United States on this subject.

In the course of my conferences with the honorable secretary, the views, of which the aforegoing is a brief outline, were fully brought to his notice, and several private memorandums embracing the same were left with him at his request, in order that he might embody them in his report. The reason for the omission thereof may be accounted for by the political excitement in which he was involved, and which had the result of suddenly terminating his official position, as reported in my No. 54.

My investigations on the subject of the consular power being entitled to the custody of the registers of vessels of the United States in foreign ports, have led me to the conclusion that its exercise is necessary for the purpose of promoting justice, enforcing a compliance with law, and preventing the possibility of frauds as herein indicated, and I am of the opinion that the efficacy of any measure for the exercise of this power is not complete without such legislation as will provide also for compulsory powers by which the demands of the consuls for the official papers of the vessels of their nation may be enforced.

Both the nation to which a vessel may belong and the one in the port of which such vessel may be, have a common interest in the maintenance of order and in providing for a compliance with the laws. An American vessel in the ports of this republic is subject to the municipal laws of Colombia, not in conflict with the treaties, while at the same time there is a concurrent obligation to the laws of the United States. In no way can these obligations be enforced better than by lodging the register with the consul of the United States; for the clearance issued by the Colombian authorities, which enables the consul to return the register, shows that the Colombian laws have been complied with, and by withholding the same the consul has it in his power to enforce a compliance with the laws of the United States.

In view of the correspondence had with Her Britannic Majesty’s representative at Washington, inclosed in your No. 26, and the correspondence between this and the British legation at this capital, I would respectfully suggest, if in your opinion a fitting opportunity has not arrived, for the maritime powers to establish, by treaties or otherwise, the following or similar provisions of international law, to which the consent of this government can be obtained, and which would make the principles of the legislation of the United States of general application:

1st. Every merchant-vessel shall be provided with a register or other document, issued according to the laws of the nation to which such vessel belongs.

The additional article to the treaty of 1846 appears to embody this principle, as applied to United States and New Granadian (Colombian) vessels, while nearly all the other treaties of the United States referring to registers of vessels make provision only for a time of war, and regulate the exercise of the right of search in this connection; the statements on page 279 of the case of Great Britain, Volume I, Geneva Arbitration, are not without interest.

2d. Upon the arrival of a foreign merchant-vessel, the register and other official documents of the same shall be produced to the local authorities, and shall be delivered within——hours after the arrival in port to the consul of the nation to which such vessel belongs.

3d. Penalties for enforcing the above.

* * * * * * * *

ERNEST DICHMAN.

[Inclosure 1 in No. 62.]

Mr. Mansfield to Mr. Dichman.

Her Britannic Majesty’s Legation,
United States of Colombia,
Bogota, March 20, 1879.

Sir and Dear Colleague: I have the honor to inform you that I have been instructed by Her Majesty’s Government to obtain, if possible, the co-operation of my United States, French, and German colleagues in pressing upon the Colombian Government the revision of the law of 1875 respecting the depositing of ships’ registers with the local authorities instead of in the hands of the consular agents in Colombian ports. I have perused with much interest the convention signed between yourself and M. Arosemena upon this subject, which indeed takes about the same ground as a somewhat similar arrangement entered into with the Colombian Government in 1876, when Mr. Ancizar was secretary of foreign affairs.

The arrangement of 1876, as indeed your recent convention with Mr. Arosemena, does not entirely meet the case. As long as the Jaw of 1875 remains upon the Colombian statute-book, grave inconvenience might arise at any moment, as a law ratified by Congress might be assumed and with justice to override any arrangement or convention entered into between the secretary of state and foreign diplomatic agents. I should therefore feel extremely obliged if you would inform me whether Mr. Arosemena has, in addition, given you any definite promise that the government will promote legislation in Congress with a view to the abrogation of the obnoxious law.

I beg to inclose a copy of a dispatch from Sir Edward Thornton, containing the views of the Cabinet of Washington upon this subject.

I have the honor to be, sir and dear colleague, your most obedient servant,

C. E. MANSFIELD.

The Hon. E. Dichman, United States Minister.

[Inclosure 2 in No. 62.]

Mr. Dichman to Mr. Mansfield.

Legation of the United States,
Bogota, March 21, 1879.

Sir and Dear Colleague: I hasten to inform you of the receipt of your note of yesterday, and to state in reply that under date of February 4, 1879, the Government of the United States forwarded the correspondence which took place between it and the minister of Her Britannic Majesty at Washington on the subject mentioned in your note.

According to instructions, I shall take pleasure in co-operating with you in effecting an adjustment of the question relating to the custody of registers of foreign vessels in the ports of Colombia which will be satisfactory to the maritime powers.

Referring to the convention executed by Mr. Arosemena and myself, I desire to state that it differs from the arrangement of 1876, in so far that while the latter was merely a diplomatic understanding, to the validity of which your observation is quite relevant (a position which I was anxious to avoid), the former is a plain recognition of the rights of the United States and their consuls under the provision of the 33d article of the treaty of 1846, and section 11 of article 3 of the consular convention between the United States and New Granada.

This makes the convention a recognition and explanation by the political power of the United States of Colombia of rights acquired by the United States of America under the treaties in force between the two countries, which makes the convention, in my opinion, paramount as a national obligation to any local law in conflict with the same.

I fully agree with you that the Colombian law of 1875 ought to be repealed, and, in answer to your inquiry on this point, I desire to state that there was a distinct understanding between Mr. Arosemena and myself to the effect that the Colombian executive should urge the repeal of the law upon Congress.

With this understanding Mr. Arosemena has fully complied, as you will see on pages 72–79 of his report, which has only just now been published in book form.

Reference was also had to the repeal of the law in executing the convention, the first four articles of which are substantially a translation, with a few modifications, of the law of the United States on the same subject. The object of this was that the first four articles might be used as a basis or draft for a law to be enacted by the Colombian Congress. I am also informed that the present secretary of foreign relations is preparing a note on this subject to be transmitted to Congress next week.

There is quite an extensive correspondence on file at this legation which has taken place on this subject, which I shall take pleasure in submitting for your perusal at any time you may be pleased to indicate.

It is, perhaps, needless for me to remark that any suggestion in relation to this matter which you may be pleased to make shall receive my immediate and careful consideration.

I have the honor to be, sir and dear colleague, your most obedient servant,

ERNEST DICHMAN.

The Hon. C. E. Mansfield,
Her Britannic Majesty’sMinister Resident,

No. 132. Mr. Dichman to Mr. Evarts. [Document 154]

No. 132.
Mr. Dichman to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Bogota, April 14, 1879. (Received May 20.) No. 68.]

Sir: The Colombian Senate having been notified by the executive of the agreement entered into between the honorable secretary of foreign relations and myself, relating to the understanding of so much of the 35th article of the treaty of 1846 as concerns the right of transit guaranteed to the Government of the United States (reference is respectfully made to article 4 of the copy of the protocol forwarded with my No. 58), the agreement was returned to the executive by the Senate without any objection, which settles the matter definitely. The debate in the Senate on the subject was quite animated, the bill of rights of the Colombian constitution, and the protection due to life and liberty being brought into the focus of the discussion; but as the whole matter had been previously explained to the majority of the senators it was found when the vote had been taken, the motion being to postpone, that while the orators of the senate enjoyed the applause of the galleries, their motion had been defeated by the silent majority. The opposition to the agreement was not a factious one, nor was it an indication of an unfriendly feeling towards the United States.

* * * * * * *

The instructions to the Government of the State of Panama leave nothing to be wished for. They are written in the most liberal spirit towards the Government of the United States, and in my acknowledgment of the honorable secretary’s note, I have taken occasion to express my high appreciation of the same.

I trust this determines finally and conclusively the question of the right of the Government of the United States to bring prisoners across the Isthmus of Panama.

I am, &c.,

ERNEST DICHMAN.

No. 133. Mr. Evarts to Mr. Dichman. [Document 155]

No. 133.
Mr. Evarts to Mr. Dichman.

Department of State,
Washington, May 12, 1879. No. 41.]

Sir: Your dispatch No. 58, of the 17th of March last, has been received. It relates to the right of transport claimed by this government across the Isthmus of Panama, pursuant to the thirty-fifth article of the treaty between the United States and New Grenada of the 12th of December, 1846. The protocol which accompanies the dispatch, and which embodies the results of your conferences with the minister for foreign affairs upon the subject is approved. It is regarded as creditable to your prudence and skill and a proof of a liberal view on the part of that government of its obligations under the treaty, and of the heavy contingent liability which those obligations impose upon the United States. Perhaps, however, the third article of the protocol may have scarcely been necessary.

It is well known that almost always a civil officer is sent abroad to receive a prisoner whose extradition may be demanded. Usually he adopts sufficient precautions to prevent the escape of the prisoner after he shall have received him into custody. The same course would probably be sufficient for carrying prisoners across the Isthmus of Panama. It might, therefore, have been preferable if the third article had at least left it optional to require national or State troops as a guard. Such a requisition might seldom be made except there should be cause to fear a rescue.

I am, &c.,

WM. M. EVARTS.

No. 134. Mr. Dichman to Mr. Evarts. [Document 156]

No. 134.
Mr. Dichman to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Bogota, June 1, 1879. (Received July 8, 1879.) No. 93.]

Sir: The cessation of the political troubles in this republic (accounts of which have been given in my dispatches) seemed to indicate to me a fitting opportunity for manifesting to this government the interest and feeling of friendship entertained by the Government of the United States toward the sister republic of Colombia.

Accordingly I directed a note, a copy of which is inclosed, to the honorable secretary of the interior and foreign relations.

Upon the opportune receipt of your dispatch No. 34, of March 21, 1879, I brought the concluding part thereof to the notice of the President, and I take pleasure in stating that the sentiments of interest and sympathy to which it gives expression were not only highly appreciated, but also exercised a most beneficial influence, conducive to a pacific settlement of questions which at one time threatened to precipitate this country into civil war, by awakening a sense of moral responsibility to the opinions of a friendly government.

This is an influence which, if it will continue to make itself felt, will do much towards assimilating the settlement of political questions to the actions of other countries.

I have, therefore, deemed it advisable to incorporate the concluding part of your No. 34 in my note to the honorable secretary of the interior and foreign relations.

I would respectfully call your attention to the accompanying answer from the Colombian Government.

I have, &c.,

ERNEST DICHMAN.

[Inclosure 1 in No. 93.]

Mr. Dichman to Mr. Rico.

Legation of the United States,
Bogota, May 20, 1879.

Sir: The impending danger of civil war, which at one time threatened to disturb the peace of the republic of the United States of Colombia, having subsided, I take this occasion as the representative of a friendly republican and American Government, to offer you my congratulations upon this happy change in the course of events. It would have been a sad calamity if the people of Colombia, who have made so many sacrifices for the establishment of free institutions in the spirit of an advanced civilization, should have been forced by unforeseen circumstances to endure the miseries and distress arising from a civil conflict, which was averted by the energetic measures of the administration, the wisdom of Congress, the loyal spirit of the government of the State of Cundinamarca, the efforts of the citizens of Bogota, and the patriotism of the people.

It is sincerely to be hoped that the patriotic spirit of conciliation and of regard for the institutions and welfare of the country which manifested itself on this occasion, will make itself felt in all parts of the republic, and will be adopted as a precedent for the settlement of any difference which may arise in the future.

Identified as are the Governments of the United States of America and the United States of Colombia in institutions and political principles, I am sure that the peaceful solution of questions which at one time threatened to engulf this country in civil war will be hailed with joy in the United States, both from a feeling of friendship and sympathy existing between the two countries, and, also, as giving an additional proof of the fact that republican institutions educate and develop a regard for law, and a spirit of restraint and self-government in the people.

As expressive of the views of the Government of the United States, I beg to add an extract from a dispatch just received from the Secretary of State of the United States, in which the Hon. Wm. M. Evarts, Secretary of State, expresses himself as follows:

“The Government of the United States could not but feel the keenest sorrow, should the territory of a sister republic be ravaged by civil strife, and it hopes, that a pacific and equitable solution maybe found whereby to avert so great a disaster.”

With the assurance of the highest consideration, I have, &c.,

ERNEST DICHMAN.

[Inclosure 2 in dispatch No. 93—Translation.]

Mr. Rico to Mr. Dichman.

United States of Colombia, Department of the Interior and Foreign Relations.
Bogota, May 27, 1879.

It has afforded me particular gratification to acquaint the President of the Union with the dispatch of your honor of the 20th instant, in which you were pleased to congratulate the Government of Colombia upon the happy change in the political situation of the republic in the direction of peace, after the recent agitation which threatened to disturb it.

As the faithful interpreter of the sentiments of loyal American feeling of the friendly and republican people which your honor so worthily represents in our country, your honor has known to appreciate the gravity of the situation in which we found ourselves but a few days ago, and the flattering aspect which is presented to-day; considering this as an augury of tranquility and of order and stability for the future.

The president thanks you, in the name of the Colombian people, for the spontaneous friendship with which your honor interested yourself for the tranquility and progress of Colombia, and the manifestations which in that sense your honor has been pleased to make, as well as for the kind wishes of the American Government, which your honor communicated from it, and which that magistrate (the President) esteems as a proof of elevated views and of the most cordial sympathy.

I will thank your honor to be pleased to communicate this testimonial of gratitude at large to your government, aud to accept the assurance of the most distinguished consideration with which I have, &c.,

LUIS CARLOS RICO.

No. 135. Mr. Dichman to Mr. Evarts. [Document 157]

No. 135.
Mr. Dichman to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Bogota, June 14, 1879. No. 96.]

Sir: The United States consular agent at Honda, in the State of Tolima, one of the constituent States of the United States of Colombia, reports that a decree has been issued by the government of that State declaring public order in danger of being disturbed, and that in view of this fact a special and extraordinary tax for war purposes has been decreed, and that the State government of Tolima was about to enforce the collection of said tax.

Citizens of the United States domiciled in that State, and who are menaced with this extraordinary tax, have applied to this legation for protection against the same.

This subject of extraordinary taxation for war purposes by the different States of the Colombian Union, has been a prolific source of correspondence between the Department and this legation, and the general principles governing such cases have been set forth on different occasions by the Department, the clearest exposition of the subject being perhaps the one contained in the circular dispatch of the Hon. William H. Seward, No. 4, of June 13, 1867.

But aside from the general principles involved, there exists in this country a special provision governing such cases, which I cannot find has ever been brought to the notice of the Department, and the existence of which special provision ever since 1857, makes the consideration of general principles perhaps unnecessary.

I beg to refer to the fifth article of the treaty of 1857, between France and New Grenada (now the United States of Colombia), to the benefits of which citizens of the United States are entitled under the most favored-nation clauses contained in the treaty of 1846 between the United States and New Grenada.

For the sake of easy reference, I shall insert a copy of the relevant part of Article 5 of the French treaty, which in the French language reads as follows: Art. 5. Les francais dans la Nouvelle Grenade et les Grenadins en France seront exempts detoute service personnel, soit dans les armées de terre on de mer soit dans les gardes on milices nationales ainsi que de toute contribution de guerre, emprunts forcés, réquisitions on services militaires quels qu’ils soient, &c.

Which may be translated as follows: Art. 5. The French in New Grenada and the Grenadians in France shall be free from all personal service either in the army or navy, in the national guards or militia, as well as from all war taxes (contributions), forced loans, military requisitions or services of whatever nature; &c.

As this treaty with France will be in force until 1882 (the Colombian government having given the requisite notice of a wish to reform the same), until that time citizens of the United States will be entitled to the benefits of the article just quoted.

But in addition to the consideration stated above, as there is no war in the State of Tolima, and as far as may be judged no likelihood of any taking place, the constitutional power of the State government to collect money by means of an extraordinary tax, in apprehension of danger or possibility of war, is very doubtful.

Upon the receipt of the information relating to the action of the State government of Tolima, above mentioned, I called on the honorable secretary of the interior and foreign relations, to whom I communicated the same.

He agreed with me as to the legal aspect of the case, and telegraphed the views of the general government, coupled with a request for the suspension of the collection of the tax to the government of the State of Tolima. He also informed me that in his opinion the government of Tolima had no power under the constitution to levy and collect such a tax, and that the attorney-general would be requested td bring the action of the Tolima government before the supreme court, in order to obtain a decision as to its constitutionality.

On the occasion of my interview with the honorable secretary, I left a note with him, a copy of which is inclosed, drawn up in general terms, and merely calling his attention to the facts brought to my notice.

It will be seen from the inclosed copy of the honorable secretary’s answer to which the attention of the Department is respectfully invited, that the prompt intervention of the general government was efficacious, and that the matter may be considered as settled.

The extended reference herein made to the French treaty is respectfully submitted to the Department as a matter of information which may, perhaps, be of use in the discussion of similar questions in the future.

I am, &c.,

ERNEST DIGHMAN.

[Inclosure 1 in No. 96.]

Mr. Dichman to Mr. Rico.

Legation of the United States,
Bogota, June 3, 1879.

Sir: Information has reached this legation that the government of the State of Tolima has issued a decree declaring public order in danger of being disturbed, and under this novel expedient it is proposed to levy and collect a tax for war purposes, among others, from citizens of the United States.

Without endeavoring to discuss the merits of this question, I beg to bring these facts to your notice in order that you may be pleased to take such steps in relation thereto as may be in conformity with the laws and treaties on this subject.

I am, &c.,

ERNEST DICHMAN.

[Inlosure 2 in No. 96.—Translation.]

Mr. Rico to Mr. Dichman.

United States of Colombia, Department of the Interior and Foreign Relations,
Bogota, June 10, 1879.

Referring to the communication of your honor of the 3d instant, I have the honor to bring to your knowledge that the government of the State of Tolima, which was called upon by the executive power in order that the collection of the so-called war-tax should be suspended, in so far as it affected citizens or subjects of other nations, has communicated by telegraph that the decree concerning the assessment of said tax levied upon the foreign houses at Ambalema had been reconsidered, and that it had been resolved to suspend the same and to lay the matter before the next legislative assembly at its next meeting for a suitable determination thereof.

I avail myself, &c

LUIS CARLOS RICO.

No. 136. Mr. Dichman to Mr. Evarts. [Document 158]

No. 136.
Mr. Dichman to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Bogota, June 28, 1879. (Received August 7.) No. 103.]

Sir: In continuation of the concluding part of my dispatch No. 99, of June 19, 1879, I beg to add the following:

An examination of the contract made in 1874 between the Colombian Government and the holders of the foreign debt, discloses the provision, that if Colombia should fail to-make four quarterly payments of the interest as agreed upon in said contract, then by the fact of the failure of such payments the contract of 1861, concerning the foreign debt, is revived, and this last contract contains an express pledge of all the gains or profits which Colombia may derive from the Panama Railroad. In my judgment, therefore, the Colombian Government can only pledge its interest in the Panama Eailroad, rent or subsidy, in the negotiation of a new loan, contingent upon a fulfillment of the obligations towards the holders of the foreign debt.

The interest on this debt at 4¾ per cent. per annum (the principal of the debt is between $9,000,000 and $10,000,000) is now three months in arrears, and the contingency of its not being paid is not an impossibility.

Injustice to the Colombian Government, however, I deem it right to state that it has always made great efforts to comply with its obligations under the contract of 1874, and that I cannot learn of any party in this country which is in favor of taking any steps looking toward repudiation.

It may be that neither the contents of this dispatch, nor those of my No. 99 are of a nature to invite the attention of the Department. In that case I beg that the two dispatches may be looked upon merely as an evidence of my desire to keep the Department fully informed of everything that takes place with this government, and to place the Department in a position to answer any inquiries which might possibly be made by parties interested.

I am, &c.,

ERNEST DICHMAN.

No. 137. Mr. Dichman to Mr. Evarts. [Document 159]

No. 137.
Mr. Dichman to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Bogota, July 2, 1879. (Received August 7, 1879.) No. 104.]

Sir: During the last two weeks of the extra session of Congress, which body adjourned sine die on last Monday, the 30th of June, a law was enacted on the subject of the custody of the registers of foreign vessels in the ports of Colombia, a copy and translation of which are inclosed, and which I trust will be found a satisfactory general disposition of this long pending question.

In the examination of this, law, which is known as the law 40, of 1879, reforming the law 60, of 1875, I beg to invite reference to my dispatches No. 34, of January 15, 1879, and No. 62, of March 31, 1879, with incisures, as well as sections 4209, 4210, 4211, and 4309 Revised Statutes of the United States, and paragraphs 118 to 124, and forms 13 and 14 United States Consular Regulations.

It will be seen that the new Colombian law is substantially a translation of the law of the United States on the same subject.

The first article provides that the captain of a foreign merchant-vessel shall exhibit the papers of his ship to the collector of customs or inspector of the port, and deposit them immediately with the consul of his nation.

A question having been raised as to the meaning of the word “present,” used in the first article of the protocol, forwarded with my No. 34, it was determined to remove all doubt by using the word “exhibit” in the draft of the law.

I deem it but just to state in this connection that the president and the secretary of foreign relations lost no opportunity in prevailing on Congress to take the proper steps in this matter.

I am, &c.,

ERNEST DICHMAN.

[Inclosure 1 in No. 104.—Translation.]

Law 40 of 1879 (June 24), which reforms the law 60 of 1875.

The Congress of the United States of Colombia, decrees: Article 1. The merchant vessels which may enter the ports of the republic shall exhibit to the “administrador” or inspector of the port, the register and other sea documents. Said documents shall be deposited immediately with the consular officer of the nation to which such vessel belongs, who shall be obliged to deliver to the “administrador” or inspector a certificate of the deposit of said documents.

The captain of a vessel who shall not comply with this provision shall be subject to a fine of from $500 to $1,000, within the judgment of the collector of customs or the inspector of the port respectively.

Art. 2. Upon receiving the register and other sea documents belonging to a vessel of their nation which may have entered the port, the foreign consular officers in the ports of the republic shall execute a certificate setting forth the fact, which shall be delivered to the collector of customs or the inspector of the port.

Art. 3. Said consular officers shall not return the register and other documents to the captain who may have deposited them in their hands until the clearance be presented to them executed by the proper authority.

Paragraph. It shall be a cause for cancelling the exequatur, or for the withdrawal of the permission executed to the consuls, vice-consuls, or consular agents respectively, the fact of their returning the register and other documents which may have been deposited with them, before there may have been presented to them the necessary clearance executed by the proper federal officer.

Art. 4. The fines and penalties referred to in this law maybe lowered, and even remitted by the executive power, when, in his judgment, there be presented satisfactory proof to relieve the persons upon whom they may have been imposed of all responsibility.

Given in Bogota the twenty-third of June, 1879.
Signed by the president and secretaries of the two houses of Congress.

Bogota, June 24, 1879.

Let it be published and executed.

The President of the Union: JULIAN TRUJILLO.
The secretary of the interior and foreign relations: Luis Carlos Rico.

No. 138. Mr. Dichman to Mr. Evarts. [Document 160]

No. 138.
Mr. Dichman to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Bogotá, July 19, 1879. (Received August 23.) No. 112.]

Sir: The information received from Paris relating to the so-called International Scientific Congress which has been in session in that city, discussing the merits of the different routes for an inter-oceanic canal, and which appears to have decided in favor of the Panama-Limon route, has been the cause of much self-congratulation at this capital, and the words of Mr. De Lesseps which may, perhaps, have been incorrectly reported, or only due to momentary enthusiasm, to the effect that he was assured of capital to the extent of one hundred millions of dollars to secure the execution of the great undertaking, have in the opinion of the Colombian statesmen, brought the great expectations which they have cherished so long and so ardently, almost to a point of fruition.

It has been my intention for some time to submit my views on the subject of an inter-oceanic canal for your consideration as soon as a fitting opportunity should present itself, this being one of the subjects to which I have reference in my No. 90, of May 19, 1879.

The present occasion makes it opportune to do so, confining myself to the political and economical aspect of the subject as far as this country is concerned the technical and scientific questions connected therewith must of course be left to the opinion of those gentlemen who have made a special study thereof.

It would also be a work of supererogation on my part and foreign to my purpose, as well as an undue demand upon your attention, if I should enter upon any statements which have reference to the importance of this great enterprise; for the project of uniting the Atlantic and Pacific Oceans by means of a canal has enlisted the attention and support of the most eminent men of the world from a period but little subsequent to the discovery of this continent, and it would therefore be impossible to express any opinion which has not, at some time or other, been made public.

The Republic of the United States of Colombia, having within her territory the choice of several routes for an inter-oceanic canal, many treaties and contracts have been made with this government for the purpose of undertaking this vast enterprise. An examination thereof seems to show they have been enacted by the Colombian Government in rather a narrow and selfish spirit, containing stipulations which would prevent a canal from attaining that degree of usefulness which the world would naturally expect from a work fraught with such vast consequences to the well being of mankind. The action of the Colombian Government in this matter shows a marked deviation from the liberal spirit displayed by the founders of this republic, as evidenced by the correspondence of Bolivar.

The Wyse contract (a copy and translation of which I forwarded from Aspinwall under date of August 14, 1878), being the last of these engagements with the Colombian Government for the construction pf an inter-oceanic canal, is well deserving the careful examination of the Department, for if it affords an assurance that under its provisions satisfactory results can be obtained, it would merit the support of the United States, but if upon examination the contract should not prove to be of such a nature as to assure to a canal the highest degree of usefulness, then it ought not to be permitted to be an impediment to a negotiation of a more satisfactory character.

It will readily be conceded that the nearer an inter-oceanic canal approaches to the character of a strait in freedom from obstructions of all kinds, both natural and artificial, the more’ it will be suited to the wants of commerce and be useful for all time.

As far as the natural obstructions are concerned, that is a question for engineering skill and scientific knowledge.

The artificial obstructions are created by the conditions of the contract under which, the canal is to be constructed. They are principally questions of a political and economic character, relating to the security of the enterprise and the amount of participation in its revenue required by the government in compensation for the privilege which has been granted. The consideration of these questions would naturally be of great influence in determining the conditions under which the necessary amount of capital for the execution of the enterprise can be obtained, and as a corollary the charges for the use of the canal would be low or high, or the usefulness of the canal would be greater or less according to the more or less favorable conditions of the contract under which it may be constructed, judged by any of these considerations. I am of the decided opinion that the Wyse contract is defective, and is not deserving of any encouragement; and while it would be difficult to indi+ cate any step which might or ought to be taken to prevent any individual or society from risking his or their money in its execution, I am sure that eventually its provisions will be found inadequate to allow a completion of so noble an enterprise.

Without going into an examination of all the details of the contract, sxich as the limit in time for the construction of the work, its political and neutrality articles, the rights reserved to the Colombian Government of the inspection of the accounts, the free passage of Colombian troops and ships, the participation in the gross income of the canal, the burden of having to maintain such troops, without limit as to number, which the government may deem necessary to insure its security, the absolute ownership of the entire property by Colombia in ninety-nine years, the various reasons for which a forfeiture of the entire property may be decreed by the supreme court of Colombia; it is a sufficient and insuperable objection to the contract as a whole that it is a mere undertaking between a private company and a government, which, whatever our wishes and hopes in that regard might be, does not possess that degree of stability and power to make its guarantees effective, and the history of which is not calculated to inspire confidence as far as the investment of large amounts of capital under its protection is concerned.

The question of the security of this enterprise has to be considered from the internal or domestic, and from the external or foreign standpoint. The conditions of peace and war, not only with and in Colombia, but throughout the world, enter into its consideration.

Without attaching an undue importance to the ever present danger from local, State, and national revolutions, they are a fact, the danger from which cannot be overlooked and must be taken into consideration. The history of the diplomatic relations between the United States and Colombia (New Grenada) relating to the present inter-oceanic route by means of the Panama Railroad, shows a series of difficulties which have taken place from time to time, such as the Panama riots, questions as to mail transportation, attempted exaction of tonnage dues, and attempts at exorbitant and war taxation, all of which constitute elements of insecurity, and which should be provided against in a careful manner and by means of a treaty with a powerful American government.

In making these statements I do not wish to be understood as assuming or even intimating intentional bad faith on the part of the government of this republic, for quite the contrary is true. But circumstances are stronger than the government; the vicious habit of resorting to arms for the settlement of political differences has become chronic if not constitutional, and in determining the basis upon which a work is to be inaugurated in which the whole world has a deep interest, care should be taken to remove it from the sphere of local polities, or from the influence of popular commotion.

In the consideration of the question of security from the foreign standpoint and the conditions of peace and war, it does not require any argument to show that a mere contract between Colombia and a private company does not afford that assurance of undisturbed use and enjoyment of the canal, which the commerce of the world has a right to expect. It is attempted to establish certain principles in article 6 of the contract, a translation of which article reads as follows: Art. 6. The United States of Colombia reserve to themselves the right of passage through the canal for their vessels, troops, and munitions of war at all times without paying any tolls whatever. The passage through the canal remains rigorously closed to the vessels of war of the nations which may be at war with each other, and which by public treaties negotiated with the Colombian Government may not have acquired the right of transit through the canal at all times.

It is merely necessary to read the aforegoing article once, in order to notice its objectionable and impracticable features. Will a powerful belligerent nation allow the canal to be closed against its ships when it is open to the ships of the enemy? What nation will make the special treaty required?

As yet but one nation, the United States, has guaranteed to Colombia the sovereignty and neutrality as well as right of property in the isthmus, nor is it likely that any other of the great maritime powers will do so.

Is the isthmus canal, pre-eminently a work of peace, to be made the theater of war? How will Colombia cause her will and sovereignty to be respected in time of war?

It would be an easy matter to continue these reflections, any one of which shows the objectionable character of the article of the contract above quoted. The Government of the United States cannot view with indifference the effort made therein to establish a principle of distinction in, or exclusion from, the use of the canal.

It may also be argued, and with much propriety, that a work of such magnitude and involving consequences of such importance should not be made a matter of speculation, but should possess such government guarantees as will insure its security at all times, define its use clearly, whether in peace or in war, and which would enable the capital necessary for its construction to be obtained at the lowest possible rate of interest. In the various documents which have come under my notice having relation to the present scheme for a canal, the disinterestedness and enthusiasm of its authors or promoters are given great prominence. A reference to article 20 of the contract will show that there is much method in that enthusiasm. “The company remains authorized to reserve ten per cent. of the stock which it may issue to credit a beneficiary stock fund in favor of the founders and promoters of the enterprise,” &c. If in a paper of this nature the reference were admissible, I might say that in reading this part of article 20 just quoted, the language of Colonel Sellers would not be inapplicable: “Hurrah for the old flag and a little appropriation.” Who are the founders of the enterprise? In the explorations for an inter-oceanic canal route, the greatest talents and the ablest skill have been engaged for over half a century. Governments and individuals have vied with each other in furnishing the means to make these explorations, and able men have sacrificed their health and even their lives in the enthusiastic pursuit of trying to find a solution to this problem of nature. The literature which has been written on this subject alone would make a fair sized library. By what title do the promoters of the present scheme claim to be the heirs to all of these efforts? It does not seem to be in accordance with a sense of right, that all the sacrifices which have been made, all the hardships which have been endured, should only redound to the profit of the founders and promoters of the enterprise. No, it was founded when Columbus set sail from Palos, and has been promoted by a long list of names, including that of Strain and his ill-fated companions.

The world will have to pay for its construction by means of tolls on its commerce. Why then allow these tolls to be increased by paying again for that in which the world already has a vested interest? The proposition does not require any demonstration that the cheaper the canal can be constructed, the lower will be the tolls and the greater its usefulness.

In the light of the aforegoing statements, a gratuity or beneficial stock fund of its entire capital to the founders and promoters of the present scheme would certainly be a heavy tax on the commerce which is to make use of the canal. It would certainly be surprising if, upon a careful study of this contract, a sufficient amount of capital could be secured to carry this great work on successfully. A company may be organized, and subscriptions made to its stock, but it is very much to be apprehended that its existence will only prove an obstacle to the Ultimate realization of this great enterprise upon a sounder and more judicious basis.

In the case of an undertaking of such magnitude as the construction of an inter-oceanic canal in which the whole world is interested, and in which the interest of the government of the territory through which such canal may be located is a mere matter of deriving pecuniary advantages from, or compensation for the right of way, it is a part of wise statesmenship to weigh not only the probable, but also the possible effects of any steps which are to lead to its realization, and which may not only be for a temporary purpose, but which may affect important interests for all time.

In my opinion, considerations of reason and expediency concur in indicating the policy that any arrangement between the Colombian Government and a private company should be discouraged.

In speaking of expediency, I do not desire the word to be understood in a narrow or unworthy sense, but as relating to the practical effects of any policy prescribing the political and economic conditions under which this great work should be undertaken in order to make it productive of the greatest possible benefit to humanity and civilization.

Nor is the policy of indifference or non-intervention on the part of the Government of the United States to be recommended in any proceedings which have for their object the regulation of the conditions under which an inter-oceanic canal is to be constructed, for such a policy of inaction might be construed into a tacit consent to the inception of abuses, which, however slight at first, would grow with time and become burdensome in proportion. The history of the “Sound dues,” their origin, continuation for centuries and the efforts and capital necessary for their abolition, may be studied with advantage in this connection.

It appears that considerations of national and individual jealousy have been important factors in some of the previous negotiations of treaties and contracts with the Colombian Government for the right to construct an inter-oceanic canal. (See legation Nos. 115, February 22, 1869; 116, March 1, 1869; 12, March 16, 1870: 19, April 17, 1870, &c.)

In the treatment of the subject of this dispatch, which I fear has assumed an undue length, I have been influenced by the consideration that among the nations interested in the construction of an inter-oceanic canal the United States occupy the first rank. With a territory washed by both oceans, a water-way by means of such a canal between the Atlantic and Pacific States is pre-eminently to be desired, both on account of commerical as well as political reasons. It is therefore proper that the United States should not only be called upon to contribute materially to the successful execution of the enterprise, but also that the voice of their government should be potent in defining the conditions under which the same shall be undertaken and used.

I am &c.,

ERNEST DICHMAN.

No. 139. Mr. Dicliman to Mr. Evarts. [Document 161]

No. 139.
Mr. Dicliman to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Bogota, August 1, 1879. No. 118.]

Sir: In my No. 112 of July 19, 1879, I took occasion to bring to your notice my views on the subject of an inter-oceanic canal across the terri tory of this republic, releating particularly to the Wyse contract and the defective nature of that instrument.

* * * * * * *

I now beg to reiterate and respectfully submit to your judgment, that not only ought this mode of undertaking the construction of an inter-oceanic canal be not encouraged, but it ought to be discouraged by all proper means. The unsatisfactory character of the conditions contained in that instrument for attaining the objects for which it was executed, and its speculative features, as well as my reasons for arriving at the unfavorable opinion formed in regard to the same, are fully set forth in the dispatch to which reference is made above. Nor would the instrument be made acceptable by any amendments or modifications which could be introduced. The insuperable objection mentioned in my No. 112, that it was a mere contract or understanding between the Colombian Government and a private company, would always remain.

In addition to the reasons set forth in my No. 112 to sustain this opinion, it is only necessary to refer to chapter 2, section 2, article 5, of the constitution of the United States of Colombia, which article treats of the guarantees of the rights of property, and provides that private property shall not be taken for public use without judicial condemnation and previous indemnification. A copy and translation of the constitution of Colombia were forwarded to the Department with my No. 70, of April 17, 1879.

The language of the first part of article 5 might be well enough if it were not for the second part of the same article, which provides that in time of war the indemnification need not be previous, and that the necessity for the expropriation may be declared by other than judicial authorities (which means any military officer, from a general down to the commander of a squad), and thereby involves the tenure of properly in an uncertainty of doubts rendered all the more aggravating by the fact that by article 91 of the same constitution civil war is recognized as one of the institutions of the country, and that unfortunately the normal state of this republic is one of civil war, or, in its absence, one of-arined peace.

* * * * * * *

Of course It does not need any argument to demonstrate that any contract entered into between the Colombian Government and a private company, is subject to all the limitations and provisions of the Colombian constitution; and while the same may also be said to be true in the case of a treaty, there is this great difference, that in the case of a treaty, and particularly one with a government which has the power to make itself respected, no difficulties as to rights of property guaranteed by the treaty nead be apprehended.

In treating of this subject, I have so far confined myself, both in this dispatch as well as in my No. 112, in setting forth the reasons which in my opinion make the present contract for the construction of a canal unacceptable to the United States, and to the commerce of the world. I shall now make a further demand upon your attention, in presenting some views as to the policy which, in my judgment, would be productive of the most satisfactory results in determining upon the legal and political conditions under which this great enterprise is to be executed and used.

I beg to premise in this connection, that perhaps the time has come when this dream of generations, the construction of a water-way between the Atlantic and Pacific Oceans, is to be realized, and that it may possibly, if not probably, be constructed within the territory of this republic, for the sentiment of the world appears to be in favor of a tide-level canal, without locks, even at an increased original cost for construction.

* * * * * * *

As I have already exjjlained, the political condition of this republic is not of such a nature as to attract the investment of many millions of dollars in such an enterprise.* * * Even the existence of the government, and the union of these States, is anything but assured; and the ever-present danger of the secession of the State of Panama makes it exceedingly improbable that anybody can be found to invest his money in an undertaking which, without the support and guarantee of the United States, might probably be made a bone of contention between the different political factions of this country. Nor is it to be supposed that any European government would give its moral or material support to an enterprise of such magnitude on this continent without first coming to an understanding with the Government of the United States.

* * * * * * *

I would also respectfully suggest that the question of the neutrality of the canal, and a zone covering its approaches, might probably be made the subject of an understanding between the great maritime powers.

While it is with great hesitancy and diffidence that, on the point of the neutrality of the canal, I would submit a modification of the views entertained by so eminent a statesman as the late Hon. William H. Seward, as expressed in his No. 58, of September 27, 1868 (explanation of Article IX), I should not deem it consistent with propriety to advance my views unless requested to do so by the Department.

The question of the neutrality of the canal is the only one about which a possible difference might exist between the United States and the other great maritime powers. After this shall have been satisfactorily adjusted, it would be easy to come to an understanding on the subject of additional surveys for a route for a canal, the manner in which a route is to be finally determined upon, and the support and guarantees which the different governments would be willing to give to the enterprise.

If an understanding between the great maritime powers can be arrived at on this subject, it would also have the effect of eliminating from any future negotiations with Colombia in regard to the right of way, the jealousies which have marred previous efforts in that direction. (See No. 115, of February 22, 1879; 116, of March 1, 1869; 12, of March 16, 1870; and 19, of April 17, 1870, &c., from this legation.)

All the previous negotiations with the Colombian Government for the privilege to construct a canal have turned principally upon the amount of equivalent required for the right of way. Tile extravagant views entertained here of the value thereof, the idea of a participation in the income and management of the canal, and the absolute ownership of the entire work by Colombia in ninety-nine years after its completion are features which appear in all treaties and contracts which have been made so far, and which ought not to be entertained in any new negotiations. The rights of Colombia should be paid for by a fixed sum of money, excluding the idea of any future or contingent interest and if the amount of this sum of money cannot be determined by means of a direct agreement, it will, no doubt, be possible to devise some way whereby the same may be established by means of arbitration. In this connection it is well to bear in mind that on some of the proposed canal routes within Colombian territory the Indian title to the land has not yet been extinguished, and that the exercise of the sovereignty of the government of this republic is perhaps more nominal than real.

Precedents for an international understanding concerning improvements of channels of commerce or communication in which more than one nation is interested are not wanting. I beg to mention only the abolition of the Sound and the Scheldt dues, the Mont Cenis and St. Gothard tunnels, the improvement of the navigation of the Lower Danube, and the erection and management of the light-house at Cape Spartel.

It is more than probable that, after the construction of an interoceanic canal, the commerce from which the tolls will have to be collected will belong principally to the United States and Great Britain. Therefore the questions as to the cost and management of this enterprise are of great importance to the United States. The guarantee for its security against domestic and foreign dangers will ultimately have to be assumed as a heavy responsibility by the United States Government, and it is only right that, in determining the conditions under which this work is to be undertaken, the Government of the United States should be consulted,, and should have that control over its management and use which is demanded by the commercial and political interests of our country, the proximity of the canal to our ports, and its position on the American continent.

I am, &c.,

ERNEST DICHMAN.

No. 140. Mr. Dichman to Mr. Evarts. [Document 162]

No. 140.
Mr. Dichman to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Bogota, October 17, 1879. No. 151.]

Sir: In continuation of my previous dispatches on the subject of an interoceanic canal, and in compliance with the instructions contained in your No. 57, of July 9, 1879, I beg to inclose a copy and translation of the grant for the construction of such a canal from the Colombian Government to a French company. The grant or contract is known here as the “Wyse contract,” and I shall refer to it by that name in this dispatch. The translation thereof which accompanies this dispatch having been made with great care, I would respectfully request that it be substituted for the translation which was forwarded with my unnumbered dispatch from Aspinwall under date of August 14, 1878, and reported in my No. 4, of October 8, 1878, from this legation. I also beg to state that there exists no treaty or convention between the Government of the United States of Colombia and any other government relating to the subject of an interoceanic canal.

Before proceeding to give an account of the history of the Wyse contract it may not be uninteresting to note as briefly as possible, the successive steps taken by the different governments of this country with a view of inducing foreign capital, skill, and labor to open a communication between the Atlantic and Pacific Oceans. The following statement is taken from the archives and records of the Colombian Government, which I have searched from the independence of the country down to the present time, and embraces, I believe, an enumeration of all the grants, contracts, and treaties relating to the opening of interoceanic communication across Colombian territory which have been executed. A few general observations are applicable to all these legislative contributions of Colombia toward the realization of a canal between the Atlantic and Pacific Oceans. Exceedingly great care appears to have been taken in the execution of all of these instruments to secure as large a share as possible of the gross income of any road or canal which might possibly be constructed; and notwithstanding the many noble sentiments with which they abound, testifying to the readiness of this country to contribute its share towards advancing such a work, fraught with incalculable advantages to the commerce and civilization of the world, they all seem to have been based upon the principle of benefiting the national treasury by exacting as large an equivalent as could be obtained for the concession of the right of way.

The first mention of anything relating to the construction of an interoceanic canal across the Isthmus of Panama which I can find in an official document of this government, occurs in a letter from Mr. F. A. Zea, under date of September 6, 1820. At that time Mr. Zea was the minister of Colombia at London, seeking the recognition of the independence of his country from the British Government. In the letter just mentioned he informs the President—Bolivar—that he has subscriptions from many of the first commercial houses of Europe for a loan of $80,000,000 for the purpose of constructing a canal between the two oceans. But as no canal was constructed, it is reasonable to suppose that the subscriptions to the loan were reconsidered.

The independence of the former Republic of Colombia had hardly been established before President Bolivar addressed a message to the Colombian Congress, in 1823, recommending that steps be taken to provide for the construction of a canal or road across the fothmus of Darien or Panama. The next mc occurs in connection with the Panama congress (see instructions of the Hon. Henry Clay to Mr. Anderson and Mr. Sergeant, the representatives of the United States to that body. The instructions are not on file at this legation).

In 1828 and 1829, President Boliver directed that explorations of the isthmus should be made; but the political troubles of the country and its subsequent division in 1831 into the three republics of New Granada, Ecuador, and Venezuela frustrated his intentions in that direction.

Upon the dissolution of the former Republic of Colombia, the sovereignty of the territory in which a canal could be constructed remained with New Granada, the government of which made a contract in 1831 with the French Baron Charles de Thierry for the opening of a canal on the line of the Rio Grande, Chagres, and Bay Limon. Nothing was done under this contract; and on the 22d of June, 1836, a new concession was made to Mr. Charles Biddle and associates. Pursuant to a resolution of the United States Senate, in 1835, offered by the Hon. Henry Clay, Mr. Biddie had been appointed by President Andrew Jackson a commissioner of the United States to examine the different routes best adapted to interoceanic communication. Mr. Biddle was also instructed to obtain information at Bogota concerning the Thierry contract of May 22, 1834. His visit to Bogota resulted in the contract made in 1836 above mentioned, which shared the fate of its predecessor and remained without tangible results of any kind. (See Department’s dispatches No. 24, of May 1, 1835; No. 33, of September 23, 1836, and No. 35, of February 18,1837.)

On the 1st of June, 1842, the Congress of New Granada passed a law, offering the concession for the construction of a canal or railroad, and inviting proposals for the same. This led in 1847 to a contract made with a French company, comprising among others, prominent officials of the French Government, and tipon their failure to carry out the concession to the contract made with Mr. John Lloyd Stephens, in 1850, under which the Panama Railroad has been constructed. This was the first of the many grants or contracts which was faithfully executed, and from which New Granada and the United States of Colombia have derived, and are deriving large revenues.

On the 7th of June, 1850, three days after the signing of the Panama Railroad contract, a law was passed authorizing the Executive of New Granada to permit the transit of closed mails of friendly governments over that road, instructing the Executive by the same law to prescribe rules under which the transit of such mails is to be permitted and to “exact the greatest possible advantages in favor of the republic.” * * *

In 1851 two concessions for canals were granted, one on the Atrato-Napipi route, and the other on the line of the Atrato and San Juan. And, lest two canals might not suffice, a third grant was executed in the following year (1852) for a canal to be located between the Gulf of San Miguel and Caledonia Bay.

In 1854, the Government of New Granada, stimulated into activity by the explorations made by the lamented Strain and others, decided to make explorations on its own account; but no work was ever done under this laudable resolution beyond the printing of the law authorizing and directing that such explorations should be undertaken.

It was perhaps feared here in 1855 that some possible canal route had been overlooked in the three grants made in 1851 and 1852: and, in order to supply such a defect, a contract for a fourth canal was executed in 1855, to be located anywhere between the 4th and 8th degrees of latitude.

* * * * * * *

With peace in the republic came a new canal project in January, 1866, but not appearing to meet the views of the Colombian Congress, it failed to meet with the approval of that body.

On the 27th of June of the same year (1866) Congress enacted a law laying down certain bases for the construction of a canal, and prescribing conditions upon which a concession would be granted. By the same law the Executive was requested to make all due exertions with a view of promoting the execution of another canal contract either within the country or abroad. The desire of the Colombian Government to enter into a new contract for the construction of a canal was advertised in Europe; and in 1867 a French company offered to construct a canal with only two locks, but the proposal not being in conformity with the law of 1866, referred to above, it could not be accepted. Proposals were also made about the same time by several associations formed in England. One of the associations counted among others the name of Count Gleichen, which appears to have attracted considerable attention on account of the support given to him Lord Clarendon. But their proposals, also, did not reach any satisfactory result. So far no government had made any proposals; but in the spring of 1869 the Peruvian minister at this capital offered, in the name of and under instructions from his government, to contribute a large sum of money towards the construction of an interoceanic canal, on the ground that the governments of the American continent should be directly and largely interested in such an undertaking.

The treaties negotiated in 1869 and 1870 between the plenipotentiaries of the United States and of Colombia, and the objectionable changes in them proposed by the Colombian Congress, are too well known at the Department to need any further explanation.

No contracts were executed between the years 1870 and 1876, owing probably to the absence of contractors; for the records of the Colombia Congress show that the matter received a due share of attention in the discussions of that body. (See also No. 74, of November, 1874, from this legation, and Department’s No. 60, of December 15, 1874.)

The aforegoing brings the history of the efforts made by the successive governments of this country to enlist foreign enterprise in the construction of an interoceanic canal across Colombian territory down to the inception of the Wyse contract.

It might have been supposed that this record of a series of failures to accomplish the desired object would have taught the public men of this country that a work of such magnitude, and involving considerations of a political and commercial nature of the greatest importance, could not be realized by the mere granting of a concession or the execution of a contract, and that the indiscriminate manner in which such concessions had been sought and granted could only prejudice, if not the ultimate construction of the canal, at least any efforts which might be made in good faith with this government to negotiate in relation to the matter upon such a basis as would inspire confidence and assure the support of the large amount of capital required.

But such was not the view of the subject which was entertained here; and when, in the spring of 1876, a Mr. A. de Gorgoza arrived at Bogota for the purpose of obtaining a new canal contract, he readily procured the passage of a law, known as law 33 of 1876, authorizing the Executive to negotiate for the opening of a canal between the Atlantic and Pacific Oceans.

On the 28th day of May of the same year (1876), being two days after the passage of this la law contract for the opening of a canal was executed between the Colombian Government and A. de Gorgoza, the latter signing the contract for himself and for General Stephen Türr, of France. For a copy of this law and contract, I beg to refer you to the inclosures, with the contemporaneous dispatches Nos. 163, of May 7, 1876, and 170, of June 5, 1876, from this legation.

It appears that this contract was transferred to a French company, known as the “Civil International Society of the Interoceanic Canal.” For the sake of brevity this society will be mentioned hereafter as the “Türr Society.” It is reasonable to suppose that A. de Gorgoza was sent here as its agent in the procuring of the canal contract, and that his signature to the contract in his individual name, and that of General Türr, was undoubtedly made in that manner for the purpose of avoiding much prominence being attracted to the scheme in which he was engaged. For it does not seem from all that I can learn that in the passage of the law of 1876, and the subsequent execution of the contract with A. de Gorgoza, any expectation was entertained here at the time that the contract would ever amount to anything serious. The statesmen of Colombia were otherwise occupied then, in making provisions for the conduct of a war which surpassed in magnitude any of the previous civil wars of this republic, and which taxed its resources to the utmost. The law was passed, and the contract made after the usual stereotyped formula, with the expectation that in a few years at the most they would both drop out of sight, as had done their many predecessors.

Under the auspices of the “Türr Society,” Lieut. K. B. Wyse, of the French Navy, one of its members, spent about five months, from December, 1876, to April, 1877, on the Isthmus of Panama in the examination of various canal routes. In February, 1878, he presented himself at Bogota for the purpose of obtaining some modifications of the canal contract then held by the “Türr Society.” The result of his efforts was a new contract, in the name of the “Türr Society,” a copy of which, with translation, are inclosed.

The next step in the programme was the convocation of the so-called “International Scientific Congress,” in May, 1879, with the result of which you are familiar. As belonging to the history of this congress, the proceedings of the so-called “Geographical Congresses,” which met at Paris in 1875 and 1878, perhaps merit a passing remark. In view of the especial importance given at these reunions to the project of an inter-ocean canal, and the prominent part taken in the discussion of this subject by the promoters of the present scheme, the suspicion is perhaps not wanting in reason that the meetings of the geographical congresses were only the preliminary machinery placed in operation for the purpose of attracting greater public attention to the “International Scientific Congress,” and to give an air of impartiality and scientific merit to its decision, which might otherwise appear to have been the result of a previous arrangement.

After the dissolution of the “Scientific Congress,” the promoter of the present scheme lost comparatively little time before attempting to to convert the indorsement given to it by their congress into a tangible pecuniary result. Accordingly, in pursuance of this object, the “Türr Society” transferred, by an instrument dated July 11, 1879, all the rights which it had acquired under the contract with the Colombian Government to Mr. de Lesseps, to be transferred by him to a canal company to be organized in such manner as he should see fit. The considerations for the transfer to Mr. de Lesseps were to be 1,000,000 francs to be paid fifteen days after the organization of the canal company, 4,000,000 francs to be paid one month after one-half of the stock subscriptions shall have been paid, and 5,000,000 francs in the fully paid-up stock of the company, in all amounting to the sum of 10,000,000 francs.

The disappointment experienced by some of the Colombian statesmen, when the news of this transfer reached Bogotá, at not having made a provision in the Wyse contract that at least one-half of the consideration to be paid upon the transfer of the contract to another company, should belong to the Colombian government, may be readily imagined. But these gentlemen evidently overlooked the important fact that the payment of the 10,000,000 francs as well as the construction of the canal itself would depend entirely upon the very improbable contingency that a considerable amount of the subscriptions for the stock of the canal company would be received by Mr. de Lesseps in answer to his invitation.

In a previous dispatch on this subject, No. 112, I have already made mention of the state of feeling in this country on account of the nattering prospect of the construction of the canal through the territory of Colombia. Mail after mail brought the most glowing account from Europe of the assured success of Mr. de Lesseps, extracts from his speeches were published, and when it was officially announced by the Colombian minister at London that the caution money of seven hundred and fifty thousand francs had been deposited, and that on the first of next January Mr. de Lesseps would visit the Isthmus of Panama for the purpose of inaugurating the beginning of the construction of the canal in person, the climax of enthusiasm was reached, and on the 8th of September, 1879, a decree was published by the President of Colombia, providing for a brilliant official reception of the illustrious visitor upon his arrival at Aspinwall. * * *

I have also taken occasion in my previous dispatches on the subject to bring to your notice the reasons why, in my opinion, the construction of a canal under the contract now held by Mr. de Lesseps should be discouraged by the United States. In addition to these reasons, permit me to state that the organization of the company to be formed by Mr. de Lesseps, although advertised as international, will be French in everything that affects any question, except the contribution of money, for the company must have a domicile somewhere, and must be subject to the jurisdiction of some government. A canal constructed by such a company will be nothing less than the planting of a French colony on the isthmus. To show the local influence which an enterprise of such magnitude is able to exert, it is only necessary to examine the history of the Panama Railroad. It is owing to the construction of that road that the English language has become common at Aspinwall and Panama, and if it were not for the fact that every management of that corporation attends solely to its legitimate business without interfering in local politics, and that the protection afforded to the road by the Government of the United States is confined to the narrow limits of preventing; any interference with its operations arising from the frequent local political disturbance, the population of the State of Panama would have long ago looked for a political connection with the United States. If the construction of a canal under the present contract should be proceeded with serious differences must necessarily arise between the company and the Colombian Government, and notwithstanding the provision as to the submission of such differences to the Supreme Court of the United States of Colombia, supposing the decision of that tribunal to be unjust or only against the company, does anybody at all familiar with the course of the relations of European governments with this and the other Spanish-American republics, suppose for one moment that the intervention of the government of the company would not be invoked, and that it would not be freely exercised. Nor is it an answer to this statement that the contract provides against such intervention. Reasons could easily be found why it should take place, and, as against the pressure of a foreign government Colombia is powerless and helpless at the Isthmus of Panama; it is more than probable that the good offices of the Government of the United States would have to be invoked by the Government of Colombia, and we should thus be in a fair way of having an Egyptian question on this continent, while every consideration of reason and policy would dictate that it should be avoided, by making the construction of a canal under the present contract impossible.

The foregoing observations apply perhaps with equal force to any attempt at constructing the canal by a company organized under the jurisdiction of a European government. Notwithstanding the great advance in the civilization of the world made in this country, the time has not yet come when, in the consideration of great undertakings like an interoceanic canal, the future can be regarded without taking into account the jealousies and frictions between nations which have always existed and probably always will exist. Industry is being organized nationally throughout the entire world, tariffs are being established, and treaties are being concluded for the purpose of securing to one or the other nation an advantage over its competitors, and irrespective of the merits of the political questions involved, the proposition does not need much argument that the commerce of the United States would be at a disadvantage if the management of an interoceanic canal should be in the hands of a European company. This principle appears to have been recognized in England in connection with the Suez Canal, and the purchase of the shares of the Khedive of Egypt by the British Government was an act of policy for the purpose of securing a voice in the management of that canal.

In the consideration of this subject another question ought not to be lost sight of by the Government of the United States, and that relates to the differences which will undoubtedly arise between the canal company and the shipping using the canal. As it is probable that the larger part of the shipping which will avail itself of the canal will belong to the United States, it is a matter of the greatest importance that no doubt should prevail as to the courts which are to take cognizance of such differences. Is the American shipper, owner, or master to apply to the courts at Bogota for a remedy, or is he to go to Europe to seek redress from the courts, of the country where the company has its legal domicile? In either case the difficulties arising from distances alone would work a practical denial of justice. Can the Government of the United States permit their shipping to be placed at this disadvantage?

The more this subject of the construction of an interoceanic canal is examined the more it becomes apparent that the Government of the United States cannot view with indifference the construction and management thereof by a European government, or by a company subject to the jurisdiction of such government.

I am, sir, your obedient servant,

ERNEST DICHMAN.

Denmark.Denmark.

[163] . Mr. Cramer to Mr. Evarts.

Legation gf the United States, Copenhagen, November 21, 1878. (Received December 13.)

[164] . Mr. Evarts to Mr. Cramer.

Department of State, Washington, December 10, 1878.

[165] . Mr. Cramer to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Copenhagen, January 4, 1879. (Received January 20.)

[166] . Mr. Cramer to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Copenhagen, May 20, 1879. (Received June 4.)

[167] . Mr. Cramer to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Copenhagen, May 27, 1879. (Received June 11.)

[168] . Mr. Cramer to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Copenhagen, August 11, 1879. (Received August 28.)

[169] . Mr. Seward to Mr. Cramer.

Department of State, Washington, August 11, 1879.

[170] . Mr. Cramer to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Copenhagen, August 29, 1879. (Received September 12.)

No. 141. Mr. Cramer to Mr. Evarts. [Document 163]

No. 141.
Mr. Cramer to Mr. Evarts.

Legation gf the United States,
Copenhagen, November 21, 1878. (Received December 13.) No. 490.]

Sir: In studying the recently published statistics relating to the trade and commerce of Denmark, it will be found that this country has also been affected, during the past few years, by the commercial depression that has affected, and is still affecting, so many other countries. The following figures give the exact amounts, in Danish pounds, of the exports and imports during the years 1870 and 1877: Exports. Imports.

Pounds. Pounds.

In 1877 915,000,000 3,087,000,000

In 1876 1,079,000,000 3,034,000,000

The following figures show the exact value, in Danish crowns (at 26¼ cents gold per crown), of the exports and imports during the years 1874–1877: Exports. Imports.

Crowns. Crowns.

In 1877 164,300,000 225,400,000

In 1876 180,667,000 228,901,643

In 1875 172,102,800 228,152,600

In 1874 179,876,746 232,767,645

In the above figures are not included the amounts of gold and silver, in coin and bars, exported and imported during the same period. The following figures give, however, more or less, the exact amounts of exported and imported precious metals during the years 1875–1877, effected by the Post-Office Department and the National Bank of Denmark, though it is not known whether such exports and imports have been effected by any other means: Exports of gold and silver in coin and bars. Imports of gold and silver in coin and bars.

Crowns. Crowns.

In 1877 15,700,000 18,500,000

In 1876 36,600,000 31,700,000

In 1875 6,900,000 14,600,000

Of the foreign countries with which Denmark stands in commercial relations, Germany and England take the precedence. From 1874 till now, about two-thirds, both as to quality and value, of the entire commerce of Denmark with foreign countries has been carried on with these two countries; but so far as the quantity is concerned, England takes the precedence, and, as to value, Germany. The reason of this lies in the nature of the articles exported and imported to and from these countries. So far as Germany is concerned, more is imported from it than exported to it, and as for England, the exports to it exceed the imports from it.

Next in importance to Germany and England are Sweden and Norway, the imports from which, as to quantity, exceed those from Germany, but as to value they fall below them. The reason of this is also to be found in the nature of the articles imported, consisting largely of wood and iron.

Next in commercial importance to the four countries named above are the United States and South America. The exports from Denmark to the United States, as to value, amounted to, in 1874, 380,571 crowns; in 1875, to 132,993 crownsand in 1876, to 15,141 crowns; while the imports from the United States to Denmark amounted to, in 1874, 4,478,826 crowns; in 1875, 2,107,012 crowns; and in 1876, 6,730,000 crowns. The imports in 1877 amounted to as much, if not more, as in 1876, though I have not been able to procure the exact figures. The imports into this country from the United States consist chiefly in petroleum, corn, lard, bacon, butter, cheese, agricultural machines and implements, and more recently hardware and tools. I have the satisfaction to know that since the publication of my dispatch No. 443, of October 31, 1877, on the enlargement of the commerce between the United States and Denmark, the imports from the United States to this country have been increased, not only of the articles just mentioned, but of new articles as well.

And here I cannot but renew the suggestion I made in the dispatch referred to, namely, the adoption by the American dairymen and butter shipping firms of a uniform method of preparing and packing butter. From the want of such a uniformity arises the inequality in the quality and durability of American butter; and this is the great drawback in the European market. I have been informed that butter imported from the United States to this country is here “reworked” and “repacked,” and then sold and exported as “Danish butter” for a much higher price than was originally paid for it. The employment by the principal dairymen and butter-shipping firms of the United States of Danish experts in “butter making” and “packing” would, I fully believe, in a comparatively short time not only repay all expenses connected therewith, but greatly enlarge the butter exports from our country. Indeed, we could soon command the butter market of the world. In this age of national and international conventions, conferences, and congresses I see no reason why state conventions, and subsequently a national convention of American farmers, dairymen, and butter and cheese shippers may not be held for the purpose of discussing and adopting the best methods, first, for improving the grazing-land and stall-feeding of cattle, especially of cows, and, second, for making and packing butter and cheese of the best quality for export. It is of the greatest importance that, no matter to what country, and under what latitude, cheese and butter may be shipped, their freshness and agreeableness to the taste should be preserved. The scandalous adulteration of butter in some parts of Europe is a notorious fact, and a matter of great complaint. Hence, really good, well-prepared, and well-packed butter is in great demand and always commands a good price.

It is stated that in England, for instance, nine-tenths of the highest priced butter comes from abroad; but it is well known that, as in the tea and the wine trade, the greater part of the really fine sorts is used for mixing with the inferior. So says a writer in the October number of the British Quarterly Review. While in such cases the public, to a great extent, are powerless to protect themselves, it lies within the power of American butter producers and shippers to supply the European market with such a quantity and quality of butter as to render this adulteration unnecessary.

The preceding suggestions and observations have been made after having conferred with persons competent to speak intelligently on the subject.

* * * * * * *

I have, &c.,

M. J. CRAMER.

No. 142. Mr. Evarts to Mr. Cramer. [Document 164]

No. 142.
Mr. Evarts to Mr. Cramer.

Department of State,
Washington, December 10, 1878. No. 273.]

Sir: The treaties of extradition which have been thus far concluded between the United States and the countries of Europe embrace, with but five exceptions, the entire continent. For more than twenty years past, this government has shown its appreciation of the international benefits to be derived from the widest possible extension of the system of extradition; and, by gradually narrowing the circle of the States with which no conventions exist to that end, the exceptions to the rule are, year by year, brought into greater prominence. Among them, Denmark is regarded as especially deserving of attention. The geographical position of that country, and its accessibility by land from the territory of Germany, and by sea by the lines of steam communication between its ports and those of the neighboring countries, are likely in the absence of a treaty of extradition to commend it as an asylum for fugitives from the justice of the United States.

It; is thought that, in the interest of the repression of crime, the conclusion of a treaty of extradition between the United States and Denmark would be of mutual advantage to the two countries. You are requested, therefore, to sound the government of His Majesty the King, with a view to ascertaining whether it is disposed to enter upon negotiations for such a convention. Discreet and judicious arguments in favor of such a course will, doubtless, readily suggest themselves to you as likely to produce a favorable impression upon the minds of the enlightened statesmen who rule the councils of Denmark. Should you find them inclined to welcome the suggestion, you may inform them of the scope of the conventions already concluded by this government with other foreign powers. Copies of two recent conventions of extradition are herewith transmitted for examination, if desired.

An early report from you will be awaited with interest, and if, as is hoped, it shall prove favorable, the necessary powers and instructions will be sent to enable you to conclude and sign a treaty.

I am, &c.,

WM. M. EVARTS.

No. 143. Mr. Cramer to Mr. Evarts. [Document 165]

No. 143.
Mr. Cramer to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Copenhagen, January 4, 1879. (Received January 20.) No. 501.]

Sir: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your dispatches numbered 273 and 274, and dated respectively December 10 and 11, 1878.

In reference to the contents of your No. 273, the proposed conclusion of a treaty of extradition between the United States and Denmark, I have to say that on the 2d instant I had a conversation on that subject with the Danish minister for foreign affairs, and I found that his views coincide with yours as expressed in your dispatch. He also expressed an “a priori willingness” (to use his words) of concluding such a treaty of extradition referred to by you. I then informed him of the scope of the conventions already concluded by the United States with other foreign governments, and handed him the copies of the two recent conventions of extradition which had been inclosed in your dispatch. He was glad to receive them; and said that before he could give me a definite answer he would be obliged to consult his colleagues and the king; in a few days he would communicate to me the result in a note.

The impression I received from this brief interview is that the Danish Government is willing to enter upon the negotiation of an extradition treaty with the Government of the United States. As soon as I learn the result I will communicate it to you.

I am, &c.,

M. J. CRAMER.

No. 144. Mr. Cramer to Mr. Evarts. [Document 166]

No. 144.
Mr. Cramer to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Copenhagen, May 20, 1879. (Received June 4.) No. 530.]

Sir: Referring to my despatch No. 487, of the 4th of November last, giving a brief account of the riots at Santa Cruz, Danish West Indies, I have now the honor to further inform you that during the past winter a commission of three competent gentlemen was appointed by the Danish government, whose duty it was to proceed to that island, inquire into the causes of those riots, investigate the general condition of affairs there, and suggest such measures as in their judgment will be conducive to the improvement and prosperity thereof.

On the 18th ultimo these commissioners returned and delivered their report to the government. But for some reason—* * * it has not been published. It is rumored, however, that it describes the state of affairs there in gloomy colors. What some of the proposed measures are, may be inferred from the fact that the Minister of Finance introduced a bill into the Rigsdag, proposing to furnish aid to the sufferers in the form of a temporary loan. This loan will no doubt be granted. * * *

I am, &c.,

M. J. CRAMER.

No. 145. Mr. Cramer to Mr. Evarts. [Document 167]

No. 145.
Mr. Cramer to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Copenhagen, May 27, 1879. (Received June 11.) No. 531.]

Sir: A member of the Danish Rigsdag, in a speech recently delivered in that body, advanced the idea of a general European tariff-league for the protection of their agricultural interests as against those of the United States, as well as of levying differential duties on American products. This idea has been reported to the Hamburger Nachrichten,—a widely circulating paper,—which (paper) states that that idea finds a favorable consideration among the agricultural and manufacturing classes of Germany.

This is only one of the methods suggested to prevent American agricultural and industrial products from successfully competing in the world’s market with those of European countries. Judging from the tone of a large portion of the European press, as well as from the casual expressions of European agriculturists, manufacturers, and merchants, it is evident that the latter feel an apprehension that the United States will yet outstrip them in the race for agricultural, industrial, and commercial supremacy. Here in Denmark I have heard many complaints from estate holders, farmers, and manufacturers that American products are already underselling their own, and are, on account of both their cheapness and their superior quality, gradually driving theirs from the market. This is especially the case with regard to bacon, butter, cheese, oils, cotton and woolen fabrics, to say nothing of several kinds of cereals, corn, petroleum, agricultural machines and implements, mechanics’tools, and other articles of hardware. Even American watches are now being imported, they being cheaper and in every respect of as good a quality as the celebrated Jtirgensen Urban watches manufactured in this city.

As leather and ready-made boots and shoes command a high price here, I see no reason why these articles, especially ready-made boots and shoes, might not find a profitable market in Denmark, the materials and facilities for manufacturing them are so much better in the United States than here.

Another thing, I have been credibly informed that adulterated cotton-fabrics manufactured in England are sold here as “American goods,” the latter having heretofore enjoyed the reputation of possessing superior qualities, and thus injure their well-earned reputation. As an illustration of the superior qualities of American cotton fabrics over those of English make, I may mention the fact that the secretary of the British legation in this city told me recently that the inhabitants, native and European, of the British colonies in South Africa show a decided preference for American cotton fabrics, for the reason that their quality is superior to that of articles of the same class manufactured in England. It is a matter for congratulation that American goods of every description enjoy, as a general thing, an excellent reputation for their good qualities. They bid fair to command the market of the world.

In view of the fact that articles of an inferior quality, manufactured abroad, are sold as “American goods,” and thus bring an unjust reproach upon them tending to drive them from the world’s markets, I take the liberty to suggest that conventions having for their object the protection of trade-marks, especially those of American goods, be concluded between the United States and those countries between which no such conventions as yet exist. By this means the reputation for excellent quality of American fabrics would, I think, be protected, if not entirely, yet, to some extent, at least.

I have, &c.,

M. J. CRAMER.

No. 146. Mr. Cramer to Mr. Evarts. [Document 168]

No. 146.
Mr. Cramer to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Copenhagen, August 11, 1879. (Received August 28.) No. 547.]

Sir: Referring to your dispatch No. 297, relative to a rumor now current at St. Thomas, of negotiations now pending between Denmark and some government not named, but presumed to be that of Great Britain, I have now the honor to inform you that to-day (Monday) at 3 o’clock p.m., I called at the Danish foreign office, and excusing myself to the minister for foreign affairs for calling on him at this unusual time—the weekly diplomatic conferences being held on Thursdays—I broached the subject by saying that a rumor was current in St. Thomas concerning negotiations being carried on between His Majesty’s Government and some other government not positively named, for the transfer of that island, and that, as the Government of the United States could not but feel a deep interest in the matter, I would be both pleased and grateful if his excellency would kindly inform me whether or not there is any truth in the report.

The minister replied with perfect candor that there is no truth in the report, and that no negotiations are pending with any government on the subject in question. * * *

I am, &c.,

M. J. CRAMER.

No. 147. Mr. Seward to Mr. Cramer. [Document 169]

No. 147.
Mr. Seward to Mr. Cramer.

Department of State,
Washington, August 11, 1879. No. 302.]

Sir: Your dispatch No. 504, on the subject of negotiating a convention of extradition with Denmark, was duly received and has had careful consideration.

You therein report that the Government of His Danish Majesty is favorably disposed to respond to the overture of the United States for the conclusion of an extradition treaty, and is prepared to conclude such a treaty when desired, conducting the negotiations at Copenhagen. The Danish minister of foreign affairs, however, suggests three particulars in which a departure from the model of the existing conventions of extradition of the United States with foreign powers, would be acceptable to Denmark: First. An increase in the list of crimes, especially under the head of forgery, but without specifying any particular crimes;

Second. To have criminals provisionally arrested by telegraphic orders to the consuls at the ports where such fugitives may be supposed to land; and

Third. The curtailment of expenses connected with the arrest and delivery of fugitives.

In illustration of the character of the treaties already concluded between Denmark and foreign powers, and as showing what kind of a treaty would be acceptable with the United States, the minister has furnished you with copies of the treaties with Belgium, France, Great Britain, Italy, and the Netherlands. Of these that with Great Britain so nearly approximates to the treaties of the United States in its schedule of offenses for which extradition is provided, that but little trouble need be found in attaining an agreement on that point. The other treaties mentioned contain many offenses in their respective schedules not found in the treaties of the United States, or more specific definition and extension of crimes already provided for under our general terms. Such exactness and diffuseness of subdivision doubtless responds to the similarity of the codes of European countries one to another, and the analogies of their systems of government, but it is believed to be unnecessary in a treaty with this country, if not also positively prejudicial to the aim of such a treaty and the ends of justice by admitting room for uncertainty in the interpretation of specific provisos, which would in many cases be found comprised in a general enunciation. For example, “wounds or injuries preventing work for more than 20 days,” “involuntary maiming or permanent injury resulting from willful assault,” and the like, are, in most proper cases, covered by the broad definition of “assault with intent to commit murder,” found in our conventions.

So far, therefore, as the enumeration of extraditable crimes is concerned, the treaty between the United States and Spain may be taken as the most modern of our conventions, and as indicating the latitude of negotiation in this respect.

With regard to the suggestion that provisional arrest be provided for by authorizing a telegraphic demand, it may be observed that the procedure is already followed as an act of courtesy in most cases arising between the United States and foreign countries, although not expressly stipulated in the treaties therewith, except in the solitary instance of Peru.

The proviso suggested by the minister for the curtailment of expenses is not fully understood here, either on his statement or upon examination of the Danish treaties you submit. It would seem proper that any proposal on this point should come from the Danish Government as a specific amendment, which, if offered, will be carefully considered with every disposition to a favorable result.

In view of the foregoing you are authorized to confer with the Danish minister for foreign affairs, or such other person as may be designated for the purpose, to the end of agreeing upon a draft of a convention of extradition between the two countries in substantial accord with that between the United States and Spain, enlarging, if desired, the defined offense of forgery to include the forgery of private cheques not commercial. When such a draft is agreed upon it may be reduced to the form of a provisional protocol, which, after signing, shall receive the consideration of the respective governments, with a view to its adoption, after amendment if necessary. When the two governments shall have reached a substantial agreement as to the scope and text of the proposed convention, full powers will be transmitted to you to sign it.

You will keep the Department fully advised of all negotiations on this subject, transmitting especially dated copies of all drafts exchanged between you and the Danish representative, whether they be of the treaty in extenso, or of simple amendments thereto.

I am, &c.,

F. W. SEWARD.

No. 148. Mr. Cramer to Mr. Evarts. [Document 170]

No. 148.
Mr. Cramer to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Copenhagen, August 29, 1879. (Received September 12.) No. 550.]

Sir: Again referring to your dispatch No. 297, relative to a rumor current at St. Thomas of negotiations now pending between the Danish Government and that of some other country—presumed to be that of Great Britain—for the transfer of that island, and also to my No. 547, of the 11th instant, in which I informed you that the Danish minister of foreign affairs denied the existence of such negotiations, I have now the honor to further inform you that yesterday, it being the day for the weekly diplomatic conference, I called at the foreign office. In the course of our conversation the minister of foreign affairs voluntarily asked me whether I had communicated to my government the conversation we had on the 11th instant, concerning the above-mentioned rumor. I replied that I had communicated to you his unqualified denial as to the existence of the negotiations referred to. He then said that since the 11th instant nothing had reached him on the subject; “but,” he added, “we do not know what England may do. Our islands in the West Indies, especially Santa Oruz, have of late been, suffering much. England would be strong enough to help and protect them.” To this I said nothing, except that I agreed that Santa Oruz had suffered much from partial failures of the sugar-crops, as well as from the riots of last October.

* * * * * * *

I am, &c.,

M. J. CRAMER.

France.France.

[171] . Mr. Noyes to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Paris, January 11, 1879. (Received February 3.)

[172] . Mr. Noyes to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Paris, January 24, 1879.

[173] . Mr. Noyes to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Paris, January 31, 1879. (Received February 17.)

[174] . Mr. Noyes to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Paris, February 7, 1879. (Received February 24.)

[175] . Mr. Noyes to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Paris, March 14, 1879. (Received March 28.)

[176] . Mr. Noyes to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Paris, March 28, 1879. (Received April 12.)

[177] . Mr. Evarts to Mr. Noyes.

Department of State, Washington April 25, 1879.

[178] . Mr. Noyes to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Paris, May 30, 1879. (Received June 11.)

[179] . Mr. Hunter to Mr. Noyes.

Department of State, Washington, July 17, 1879.

[180] . Mr. Noyes to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Paris, August 20, 1879. (Received September 4.)

[181] . Mr. Seward to Mr. Noyes.

Department of State, Washington, August 29, 1879.

[182] . Mr. Noyes to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Paris, September 3, 1879. (Received September 17.)

[183] . Mr. Hitt to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Paris, November 1, 1879. (Received November 20.)

No. 149. Mr. Noyes to Mr. Evarts. [Document 171]

No. 149.
Mr. Noyes to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Paris, January 11, 1879. (Received February 3.) No. 180.]

Sir: I have the honor to inclose herewith, for transmission to the proper quarter, a circular from the president and secretary of the International Bureau of Weights and Measures, informing those governments which are parties to the metric convention, that the bureau is prepared to make in their behalf comparisons of old with the new standard, and that, if the Government of the United States wishes to avail itself of this facility, it is desirable that the standard to be verified should be sent to the bureau early in the beginning of the year.

The president and secretary of the bureau request to be informed of the intentions of our government in relation to this matter.

I have, &c.,

EDWARD F. NOYES.

[Inolosure in No. 180.—Translation.]

International Committee on Weights and Measures,
Madrid and Newchdtel, December 23, 1878.

Mr. Minister: The International Committee on Weights and Measures, in its session of the 8th October last, unanimously adopted the following resolution:

Whereas the construction of the new metric prototypes requires more time than was originally supposed; and whereas the committee has had measuring bars and kilogrammes made of pure iridized platinum, which can be used as temporary standards; and whereas the work of construction is now at an end at the International Bureau, and the main apparatus will be in working order before the close of the year;

“Therefore the committee authorizes its bureau to inform the high governments that, by the beginning of next year, the International Bureau will be prepar make comparisons of the old standards of the mètre à trait with its temporary standards in the interest of the weight and measure service of the contracting States.”

Of course such comparisons cannot give the equations of the old standards as regards the definitive metric unit, which will he fixed hereafter by the sanction of the new prototypes now being manufactured; but in the present state of uncertainty as to the precise length of the metres serving as standards in the different countries, it will be of great utility to be able to have compared by the International Bureau, at least with one another, the old metric standards (à traits) of the different weight and measure services, by means of a single temporary standard belonging to the International Bureau.

The same is the case as regards standard kilogrammes, which the governments of the contracting States may desire to have compared by the International Bureau, by the aid of a temporary staudard kilogramme made of pure iridized platinum under the supervision ot the committee and belonging to the International Bureau.

In communicating this resolution to the governments of the high contracting parties, we have the honor to add that the discussion which has taken place in the committee with regard to this proposition has demonstrated that there would be great utility in thus furnishing to the weight and measure service of the contracting states at least, the relative equations of their present metric standards, until they can be placed in possession of the new prototypes.

If your government, Mr. Minister, desires to avail itself of this first advantage that the common establishment can procure to the states, that created it, it would be desirable for it to send its standards to the International Bureau by the beginning of next year, at which time it will be possible to begin the work of comparing.

We beg you to be kind enough to inform us whether your government decides to-send its metric standards to the International Bureau.

Be pleased to accept, Mr. Minister, the assurance of our highest consideration.

General IBANEZ,
President.

Dr. Ad. Hirsch, Secretary.

His Excellency the Minister of the United States of America,
Paris.

No. 150. Mr. Noyes to Mr. Evarts. [Document 172]

No. 150.
Mr. Noyes to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Paris, January 24, 1879. No. 188.]

Sir: I have the honor to transmit herewith four copies of the second report of the Committee of Weights and Measures, for the year 1878.

I have the honor to be, your obedient servant,

EDWARD F. NOYES.

[Inclosure in dispatch No. 188.—Translation.]

report for the fiscal year 1878 of the international committee on weights and measures to the governments that signed the metric convention.

The International Committee on Weights and Measures, after having presented to all the contracting governments, January 12, 1878, the first report for the fiscal years of 1876 and 1877, had the honor to send to them, on the 20th of April of this year, the volume of the reports of proceedings for 1877, together with six accompaniments, the first of which reproduces tne above-mentioned report, the others being scientific papers written by various members of the committee upon subjects connected with our work, to wit:

On the analysis of iridized platinum, used by the French section of the International Metric Commission in the manufacture of prototypes, by Messrs. H. Sainte-Claire Deville and J. S. Stas;

Specific weights and coefficients of diction of platinum and of the metals which accompany it, as likewise the alloys of these metals, by O. O. J. Broch;

Second memorandum on the results obtained by the system introduced in the bureau of weights and measures at Berlin, for the production and maintenance of certain temperatures in observation rooms, by W. Foerster;

On the influence of the placing in a focus of the micrometer of a microscope, by A. Hirsch;

Memorandum on the influence of the placing in a focus, and of the inclination of microscopes on micrometric measures, by W. Foerster.

The committee, in now presenting the second report for the fiscal year of 1878, continues to communicate to the governments important documents and information relative to the ulterior development of the international scientific enterprise whose direction they have been pleased to intrust to it.

I.—Buildings.

The hope which we expressed in our first report, that, in consequence of an understanding with the architect, the modifications and supplementary labors decided upon by the committee would be terminated by the spring of this year, has, unfortunately, not been realized, and the negotiations with which we had charged the bureau have dragged through the entire winter. For the purpose of furnishing an account of this, it will be well to transcribe the circular addressed to the committee by the bureau on the 19th of March. It is as follows:

“In its session of the 22d of September last, the committee instructed its bureau to continue, with the aid of M. Perrier, the negotiations with the architect, M. Bouchot, with a view to carrying out all the changes and modifications, as well as to completing the supplementary works above mentioned, which were marked out in the report presented by M. Perrier and approved by the commission.”

The bureau set to work at once, but notwithstanding that it was animated by the best intentions, and that it consented to make many concessions in the course of the long negotiation, it was not until quite lately that it succeeded in making an arrangement with the architect. We will not here enter into the details of those tedious negotiations, an account of which we propose to give hereafter in a report to the committee; we will here content ourselves with giving a general sketch of the progress of the negotiations, in order to explain their unfortunately long duration and the result in which they have culminated.

In the first place, M. Bouchot was absent on account of his health, so that M. Perrier was obliged to leave Paris in the month of September, leaving written proposals for M. Bouchot, to which that gentleman did not reply until early in November. The correspondence between the secretary and the architect having revealed numerous differences of views on essential points, we insisted upon an interview.

On the 12th of December, the architect sent the advocate Bouchot, his nephew, to Neuohatel, furnished with full powers, and accompanied by M. Joannis, his inspecting architect, in order to settle the basis of an arrangement in a conference with Messrs. Hirsch and Perrier. In that conference an understanding was reached on the essential points, through the granting of mutual concessions. A few days afterward, however, M. Bouchot refused, by letter, to approve the basis of the arrangement made with his agents.

We then drew up, with the aid of M. Perrier, a complete draft of a supplementary treaty designed to secure the completion of the works according to the decisions of the building commission, and assuming, to be defrayed by the committee, a supplementary expense of 56,618 francs for the modifications and the new works. The architect replied by a counter-draft, raising the supplementary expense to be borne by the committee to nearly double the amount estimated by us; this went beyond not only the bounds of equity, but also the resources at the disposal of the committee.

After numerous fruitless efforts to make the two plans agree, and seeing that no progress was made, the bureau of the committee, for the purpose of avoiding, if possible, a rupture involving a lawsuit, finally caused to be submitted, in the month of February, another proposition providing for an amicable rescission of the contract of July 22, 1876, whereby the committee agreed to accept the work in its present condition, in consideration of the deduction of 29,410 francs for the unperformed or unfinished work.

We allowed M. Bouchot to choose between these two plans, and on the 25th of February we sent M. Perrier to Paris to facilitate an understanding on the basis of one or the other draft.

It was not until the 14th of March, in a conference between the two parties, M. Boucliot not being willing to agree to finish the work save in consideration of the supplementary sum of 68,000 francs, and without even engaging to commence it at once, that it was finally agreed to rescind the contract; but in order to reach this agreement we were obliged to consent to diminishing the sum to be retained by 2,500 francs.

We sincerely regret that M. Bouchot was not willing to undertake to complete the buildings on acceptable conditions and within a satisfactory space of time; nevertheless an amicable rescission, in consideration of a sum which is far, it is true, from representing the value of all that we were entitled to, appeared to us preferable to a lawsuit, which, even if it would have perhaps diminished the expenses of the committee, would certainly have considerably retarded the resumption of the work.

The question now is to secure the completion of the work as speedily as possible by another architect, for it seems to us beyond question that the committee can have it, done en régie.

We propose to the committee to confide this delicate task to Mr. Perrier, who, having prepared the plans and estimates for the supplementary work, and having followed the course of the negotiations, is thoroughly acquainted with, all the details of the work, and who has, moreover, already given the committee indubitable evidence of his honesty and technical competency.

We therefore ask the committee to authorize us to conclude a contract with M. Perrier on the following basis: The buildings already commenced to be completed and the supplementary work to be performed, according to the plan submitted to M. Bou-chot, in the space of three months, for the sum of about 84,000 francs, which is equivalent to the sum of 56,600 francs which the committee had offered to M. Bouchot to take under its charge, plus the sum of 27,000 francs which is refunded to the committee by the abrogation of the contract of July 22, 1876.

Should the committee authorize this arrangement, the work would be commenced immediately, and might be finished in the month of July.

In view of the importance of a speedy resumption of the work, we beg you, esteemed colleague, to be pleased to inform us, with as little delay as possible, whether you will vote for the authorization requested, and we have the honor to offer you the assurance of our highest consideration.

The President:
General IBAEZ.

The Secretary:
Dr. Ad. Hirsch.

We add the text of the contract of rescission: Contract supplementary to the contract concluded July 22, 1876, between the same parties.

M. Bouchot, architect, of Paris, on the one hand, and the International Committee on Weights and Measures, represented by General Ibafiez and Dr. Hirsch, on the other, have agreed, in order to put an end to the difficulties that have arisen between them in regard to the execution of their contract, to rescind it on the following terms: Article 1. The committee agrees to receive all the work, without further inspection or examination, in the condition in which it now is, and not to require the completion of that which is not yet executed or terminated.

Art. 2. The architect agrees to the deductions stipulated in the annexed table, which are to be made from the sum of 64,560 francs which would have been due him according to the contract of July 22, 1876, after the completion and inspection of all the work, which sum is thus reduced to 37,650 francs.

Art. 3. Immediately after the signing of this contract, the committee shall pay to M. Bouchot the sum of 37,650 francs in full settlement of all its indebtedness to him, and both parties thus expressly renounce all rights that they might have asserted according to the contract concluded by them July 22, 1876.

List of the deductions to be made from the sum of 64,560 francs, constituting the last payment according to article 6 of the old contract.

Francs.

A. Of the sum of 12,011.22 francs, which is given in article 2 of the old contract as intended to serve for the objects therein mentioned, there have been used, 1st, for the canal between the machinery building and the observatory, 1,500 francs; 2d, for an asphalt sidewalk around the observatory, 2,860 francs: thus showing as being due to the committee the sum of. 7,651 22

B. Observatory building:

1. For isolating the pipes of the furnaces of the observation pillars, and for the admission of external air 600 00

2. For completing the work of the lights 1,500 00

3. For the doors of the two vaults:

Wood (see estimate, p. 25 [Pg. 25 includes portions of Doc. 23 and Doc. 24]) 223 40

Iron, estimated at 176 60

400 00

4. For disinfecting the vault 2,500 00

5. For repairing the retaining-walls of the hill 5,000 00

6. Zinc. For laving and replacing the zinc alreadv laid 1,000 00

For coating the walls of the six rooms 500 00

For painting in oil the zinc of the six rooms 1,137 25

For the laving not vet accomplished 5,000 00

7,637 25

Total for observatory building 17,637 25

C—Buildings of the pavilion and of the outhouses:

Francs.

Work to be finished according to the memorandum handed in September 21, 1877 1,943 13

D.—The total amount of the deductions for work not performed or not finished, being thus 27,231.60 francs, a proportional reduction of the fees 2,178 52

Total 29,410 12

From which sum must be deducted by way of compromise for the zinc laid at Breteuil, &c., that of 2,500 00

Or a total of 26,910 12

Done in duplicate at Paris on the 16th day of March, 1878.
J. BOUCHOT.
General IBAÑEZ.
Dr. AD. HIRSCH.

All the members of the committee, with a single exception, having approved the proposal of the bureau, the latter concluded on the 15th of April a contract with M. Perrier, architect, which was brought to the knowledge of the committee by the following circular:

The vote by correspondence which we solicited by our circular of the 19th of March last in relation to the arrangement to be made with M. Perrier for finishing the buildings at Breteuil resulted in the granting to us of the authorization which we asked for by all the members of the committee except one, who, for various reasons, would have preferred another combination, Consequently, on the 15th of April last we concluded the following contract with M. Perrier:

The following agreement has been made for the finishing of the buildings for the International Bureau of Weights and Measures between the International Committee of Weights and Measures, represented by General Ibañez, Dr. Hirsch, and Dr. Pernet, on the one hand, and M. Louis Perrier, an architect, of Neuehatel, on the other hand:

Article 1. M. Perrier pledges himself to finish the work intrusted to M. Bouchot by a contractfconcluded between the latter and the committee on the 26th of July, 1876, and canceled by mutual consent by the agreement of March 16, 1878. M. Perrier further pledges himself to make the modifications in these buildings and the additions thereto that were in principle decided upon by the International Committee in its session of September 22, 1877, on the report of M. Perrier, who was then acting as the technical adviser of the committee.

Art. 2. This final work and the work of erecting the supplementary buildings shall be performed according to the plans and estimates annexed to this contract and signed by both parties.

The following is a recapitulation of the estimates: Francs.

A. Work of completion 44,588 65

B. Supplementary work 40,186 35

Total 84,775 00

Art. 3. M. Perrier engages to perform all that is provided for in the plans and estimates, in such manner that, the work being finished, the committee may receive it without being obliged to pay anything to anybody in addition to the sum above stated.

Art. 4. The committee may, during the performance of the work, introduce such alterations in the building as it may think proper. If these alterations necessitate additional expense, such expense shall be defrayed by the committee. M. Perrier may, in his turn, propose alterations which shall be submitted to the approval of the committee. Nevertheless, if M. Perrier and Dr. Pernet, the acting director of the International Bureau, shall agree as to the utility of modifying any of the details of the execution, M. Perrier is authorized, without applying to the committee, to introduce such alterations in the plans, provided they do not entail increased expenditure.

Art. 5. The work must be entirely finished three months after the signing of this contract, that is to say, on the 15th of July, 1878. In case the architect shall not have finished the work by that time, the committee reserves the right to cause them to be finished by some one else, at M. Perrier’s expense.

Art. 6. The work shall be well done, and according to the rules of art. The committee may, if it think proper, cause the work to be overseen during its performance. Dr. Pernet, who has charge of the general surveillance, shall give M. Perrier all the explanations and directions that he may ask for.

Art. 7. The committee shall pay to M. Perrier one-third of the stipulated price when the contract is signed, that is to say, 28,000 francs; one-third on receipt of the work, 28,000 francs; and the rest, to wit, 28,775 francs, within one year from the time when the contract is signed, with interest at the rate of 5 per cent., and computed from the date of the reception.

Art. 8. The parties select Paris as their domicile as far as regards the execution of this contract.

Art. 9. This contract shall not he registered. The expense of registration, in ease of a dispute that would necessitate such registration, shall be borne by the party judicially declared to be in the wrong.

Done at Paris in duplicate April 15, 1878.
General IBAÑEZ.
Dr. AD. HIRSCH.
Dr. PERNET.
PERRIER.

We will add that the special plans and estimates have likewise been signed and that the work has been resumed.

Be pleased to accept, highly honored colleague, the assurance of our highest consideration.

The president:
General IBAÑEZ.

The secretary:
Dr. Ad. Hirsch.

This work was immediately resumed and prosecuted under the direction of M. Perrier, jr., and the surveillance of Dr. Pernet, according to the plans and estimates Nevertheless, for reasons independent of the will of the architect, which we will state when we report the modifications introduced in the system of heating and ventilation, it became necessary to extend the term allowed for completing the work.

In the course of construction, moreover, in consequence of experiments made with heating apparatus, the necessity of a certain amount of supplementary work became apparent, the plans and estimates for which, amounting to 14,637.22 francs, were agreed upon and signed on the 4th of August by M. Perrier and the bureau of the committee.

All this work having been completed before the meeting of the committee in the month of September, the committee accepted and unanimously adopted the recommendation made in the report of a commission of five members, who, after having inspected the buildings in detail, declared “that the work decided upon has been performed in a manner entirely satisfactory,” and proposed “to thank the bureau, Dr. Pernet, and M. Perrier, the architect, for the conscientious manner in which they have performed their task.”

Thus it is that the mission of the committee to cause the construction of the International Bureau of Weights and Measures may be considered as happily accomplished notwithstanding the numerous difficulties which it has met with, by reason of the very special nature of the buildings, of the necessity of changing architects, and of the limited means at its disposal.

In accordance with the proposal of the special commission on buildings, the committee has decided to have plans-made in detail of the buildings. They will be prepared on a scale sufficient for the service of the establishment, but the privilege is reserved of reducing the scale for the drawings to be communicated to the governments and to be used for our publications.

The most difficult part of our work has been the adoption of a system of regular heating and refrigeration; the problem of producing at all seasons, in a series of large observation-rooms, any temperature comprised between zero and 30°, and of afterwards maintaining that temperature constant during the observations, and of getting it uniform throughout the room—this problem was a new one which presented serious difficulties, and was not at once satisfactorily solved.

The first system, which was based on a circulation of air, either cold or warm, behind metallic walls, proved insufficient, especially in respect to refrigeration; the useful effect was for heating only one-half and for refrigeration only one-quarter of the effect produced by machinery. In spite of all the precautions taken to isolate the air conductors properly, a very large part of the heat and cold was lost before it reached the observation-rooms on account of the feeble capacity of the air for heat. Finally, inconsequence of serious defects in the construction, the walls of the rooms did not isolate sufficiently to maintain the temperatures and to render it possible to heat and cool two adjoining rooms simultaneously.

After having ascertained, by many experiments and observations, this insufficiency and these defects, we at first caused the walls to be considerably strengthened as regards thermic isolation, and we acted on the recommendation of the builders, Messrs. R. Pictet & Co., of Geneva, to substitute water for air as a means of conveyance for temperature, it being thought that water, with its much greater capacity for heat, would not be exposed to the injurious losses of heat during the passage. Nevertheless, our bureau insisted, before introducing the new system into the entire establishment, upon trying it first in one of the rooms, in which Messrs. R. Pictet & Co. had offered to make the test at their own expense; it was not until this had been completely successful, on the 22d of July (when it was found possible to lower the temperature of the room more than 20° in a few hours) that the bureau concluded the following contract:

Supplementary contract between the International Committee of Weights and Measures and the firm of Eaoul Pictet & Co.

statement.

The apparatus introduced by Messrs. Pictet & Co., in the building of the International Bureau of eights and Measures, according to the contract of November 27, 1876, having been found unsatisfactory, the committee orders of the firm (which accepts) the new apparatus which is described in detail below.

Article 1. The price of the modifications to be made by common consent is fixed between the parties at 15,600 francs.

The new apparatus is to be entirely finished and in working-order in all the rooms twenty days after the signing of this contract, at the latest.

Messrs. Pictet & Co. engage to cause the work to be overseen daily by their engineers, in order to secure its completion at the time fixed.

Art. 2. The said apparatus is intended to bring in from the ice machinery and the calorifere, currents either of cold or of warm water, so that at least one room may be heated and the other cooled simultaneously.

The currents of water are to fall from a pipe going round the rooms by way of the ceiling, between zinc-walls, with which Messrs. Pictet & Co. engage to furnish the four walls of the six rooms and the wall of undulated zinc with which they are to be furnished according to the old system.

The water is to be collected at the bottom, so as to return either to the ice-machine or to the calorifere.

It is understood that this circulation of water shall be entirely separated from the interior of the rooms, by hermetical closures of the two zinc-walls; the upper closure shall be so arranged that it may be possible to inspect and clean the pipes which lead the water in.

Art. 3. The apparatus shall consist of, 1st, two principal lead conductors, going from the machinery building to the six observation rooms, and of two return conductors with the necessary cocks; 2d, two exhausting and force pumps to maintain the two circulations in any room; 3d, a condensing apparatus for warming water by the steam of the boiler; this apparatus shall consist of a cast-iron tube or of a copper-worm, in which the steam shall circulate; the dimensions shall be sufficient to raise the temperature of two rooms to thirty degrees, simultaneously at any season of the year; 4th, the upper closure, by means of cemented glass and the zinc of the ceiling, so as to send back the water against the inside face of the partition of undulated zinc, and so as to render it possible to open the glasses and clean the holes of the pipe that may happen to be stopped up; 5th, the gutters of zinc,, forming a socket (socle), and situated below the zinc partitions to collect the circulating water; these gutters shall be hermetically soldered; 6th, the zinc basins with two pipes leading to the external conductor and stop-cocks; two conductors with branches to receive the voidance of each room; 7th, two filters of 0mq.25 each, of wire gauze, placed between the pump and the rooms, and so arranged that they can be cleaned; 8th, for each room, two cleansing cocks at the extremity of each lateral branch, with a descent pipe in the emptying basins; 9th, a joining of strong zinc placed between the ice-receptacle (which is to be constructed by the side of the machinery buildings) and the cold-air pipe; this joining shall have a paddle-door and a lateral tube closed with a lid, so that tile outside air or the air from the ice-house may be admitted at will.

Art. 4. The old cold and hot air apparatus, in the rooms and behind the zinc partitions, shall remain intact, so that the circulation of air and water may be used at will.

The payment shall take place as follows: 5,000 francs at the time of signing this contract; 5,000 francs on the examination (reconnaissance) of the work, which shall take place in the month of September, 1878; and the rest in the month of February, 1879, at the latest.

Done in duplicate at Paris, July 31, 1878.
For the International Committee, the president:
General IBAÑEZ.
The secretary:
Dr. AD. HIRSCH.
For the director of the bureau:
Dr. PERNET.
For the firm of R. Pictet & Co., by authority:
TURRELTINÉ.

The bureau not being able to submit this contract to the committee beforehand for its approval, asked for bill of indemnity for the initiative taken, which the committee granted, after experiments made during the session had demonstrated that it was really possible to refrigerate (cool) a room in a short time, while heating the next room to 30 degrees. The building commission, in proposing in its report that the bureau and Dr. Pernet should be thanked for the painstaking zeal manifested by them in solving this difficult problem, showed at the same time that the expense incurred for this apparatus and for the investigations made to insure its proper working were not at all unreasonable.

The committee, on its part, in acknowledging the success of this enterprise, declares that it is indebted therefor in a great measure to the disinterested perseverance of the builders, who, as scientific mechanics, made it a point of honor to prove that desired temperatures can now be produced and maintained in large spaces. We feel confident, moreover, that the slight defects of execution that have been revealed by experiment will soon disappear; not until these defects have been remedied, and the leaks which still exist have disappeared, as well as the obstructions of the draining holes, will the whole thing be finally received.

II.—Instruments.

Three of our large comparing instruments, that of Baron Wrede for measuring dilation, that of Messrs. Brurmer Brothers for comparing meters (à traits) and finally that of Mr. Stollenreuther for comparing meters (à bouts) according to Steinheil’s system, have been received, and will be put in place as soon as the drying of the rooms, which is now going on, shall be completed.

For the fourth, the universal comparing instrument, we have at length been able to conclude the following contract with Messrs. Starke & Kammerer, of Vienna, which guarantees its construction in a year and a half:

Contract between the International Committee of Weights and Measures, on the one hand, and Messrs. Starke and Kammerer, constructing mechanics, at Vienna, Austria (No. 11 Wieden Karlsgasse), on the other, for the construction of a universal comparator for the International Bureau of Weights and Measures at Paris.

Article 1. Messrs. Starke & Kammerer agree to construct a comparator for the purpose of comparing line and end standard (etalons à traits et à bouts) of different lengths, up to and including the length of two metres, according to the drawings submitted-by the constructors, which have been adopted by the committee with some modifications, and appended to this contract.

Art. 2. The comparator shall be furnished with two micrometric microscopes, movable and susceptible of being fixed at any desired distance upon a prismatic stone bench. The dimensions of these microscopes shall be nearly the following: distance of the microscopic threads from the optical center of the objective, 0m.5; distance of the objective, 0m.08; amplification of the objective, 6m.25.

A slide (chariot) with a transverse movement on shove-boards contains two light buildings (bâtis) furnished with all necessary corrections, and intended to carry the two comparing standards; it contains, moreover, a bronze measuring-bar two metres in length, divided, on the neutral plane, in centimetres throughout its entire length, and at one of its ends by a length of 0m.l, divided into millimetres; the lines of division shall be drawn on flies (mouches) of gold, and, for the last decimetre, on a lamel of gold. This measuring-bar shall be furnished with three thermometers, the reservoirs of which shall be inserted in the body of the measuring-bar.

The comparator shall he inclosed in a wooden cage, furnished with glasses on its upper surface, and on the longitudinal surface turned in the direction opposite to the observer, so as to permit the interior to be lighted; nothing shall come out of it save the micrometers of the two microscopes, the three reading glasses for the thermometers, and the keys for making the movements and the necessary corrections.

Art. 3. The comparator shall be accompanied by the following auxiliary apparatus: 1st. An apparatus for comparing end standards (étalons à bouts) with line standards (étalons à traits), and for comparing end standards with one another; also for copying line standards.

2d. Two auxiliary apparatuses for examining errors in division, the construction of which is indicated in the annexed description, one of which shall be furnished with two micrometric microscopes which can be placed at distances varying from 0m.025 to 0m.5.

3d. A copper trough with double sides and double bottom for making comparisons in a liquid whose temperature can be varied.

Art. 4. In case Messrs. Starke & Kammerer shall, during the construction, meet with unexpected difficulties in certain details, as they are indicated in the annexed drawings, they reserve the privilege of making such alterations as may he found necessary for the better attainment of their object.

Art. 5. Messrs. Starke & Kammerer agree to deliver the comparator and the auxiliary apparatus in the space of one year and a half from the day of the signing of this contract.

Art. 6. The price of the comparator and its auxiliary apparatus is fixed at the sum of 30,000 francs, which is divided as follows: Francs.

The comparator, with its microscopes, stone prism, cage, &c., 18,000 francs 18,000

The divided measuring bar, with the thermometers and reading glasses 5,000

The auxiliary apparatus, described in article 3 7,000

Total 30,000

Nevertheless, in view of the complicated construction of the instrument, Messrs. Starke & Kammerer reserve the right to ask, in case of need, for an addition to the stipulated price of 30,000 francs, such addition not to exceed 20 per cent. of the entire amount, provided that they shall furnish evidence, to the satisfaction of the committee, that special difficulties of execution warrant this increased charge.

Art. 7. The payments shall be made at Vienna, as follows: 10,000 francs when this contract is signed; 10,000 francs when the instrument is received; the remainder three months after the receipt of the instrument.

Done in duplicate at Paris, the 28th day of August, 1878.
The above writing is approved.
For the International Committee of Weights and Measures, the president:
General IBAÑEZ.
For the constructors:
STARKE & KAMMERER.

The secretary:
Dr. Ad Hirsch.

The geodesic comparator now alone remains, for which Messrs. Brunner Brothers have submitted plans and estimates, which have been approved by the committee with some modifications, so that it will not be long before the bureau will conclude the contract with these constructors.

As to the scales the bureau has already received the largest of these for the transposition of weights, by Mr. Ruprecht; the three others, by the same constructor, will be delivered soon.

The bureau also possesses three balances of Mr. Sacré, one of which is for hydrostatic weighing. These have already been tested, having been used by Messrs. Stas, Broch, and Deville.

After Mr. Foerster had ascertained that his balances for weighing in rarified air worked remarkably well, he was authorized to conclude the following contract with Mr. Bunge, in the name of the International Committee.

Contract between Dr. Foerster, of Berlin, acting in the name of the International Committee of Weights and Measures, on the one hand, and Mr. P. Bunge, a mechanician of Hamburg, for the furnishing by the latter of a philosophical balance for weighing in vacuo, to the International Bureau of Weights and Measures at Paris.

Article 1. Mr. Bunge agrees to construct a philosophical balance of a capacity of from 1,000 to 1,200 grammes for each basin, according to the designs annexed to this contract, reserving the privilege of modifying certain details during the course of the construction, after obtaining the consent of Dr. Foerster. The balance is to be completed in time to be put in place, in working order, by April 1, 1879, in the building of the International Bureau of Weights and Measures.

Art. 2. The construction of the balance and of its auxiliary apparatus is to comply with the following essential conditions: 1st. Under the maximum charge, and under the most favorable external conditions that the auxiliary apparatus will render it possible to realize, the deviations of the results of numerous successive weighin gs are to be comprised within such limits that the probable error of any weighing shall not exceed 0.05 of a milligramme.

2d. The cover (cloche) of the balance must close so tightly that the manometric measures of pressure existing on the inside will show, during one working day, only such variations as can be explained by the changes of temperature that have taken place.

3d. It must be possible to evacuate the cover to such an extent that the tension will correspond only to the height of a few millimetres of mercury.

4th. The construction of the balance must be such that the oscillations can be read with the aid of a glass at the distance of about two metres and, moreover, it must be possible, at the same distance, by means of suitable keys: a. To “déclancher,” and stop the balance;

b. To change the weights from one basin to the other;

c. To add small supplementary weights in either basin; yet, notwithstanding these manipulations, the tension under the coyer (cloche) must not vary in a manner appreciable by the manometer, and, in order to change the weights, it must not be necessary to have recourse to auxiliary basins.

5. Besides reading the oscillations it must be possible to read, with the aid of the glass, the thermometer and hygrometer which are placed under the cover (cloche).

Art. 3. For furnishing this balance at the specified time, there shall be paid to Mr. Bunge the sum of 7,000 marks, or 8,750 francs, in the following installments: 3,125 francs at the signing of the contract; 2,500 francs on the delivery of the balance; 3,125 francs three months after the delivery.

Mr. Bunge, in case he shall not deliver the instrument at the time agreed upon, consents to a reduction of the latter installment, the amount of which deduction shall be fixed by the president of the International Committee.

Moreover, if the balance shall not perfectly fulfill the conditions enumerated in article 2, Mr. Bunge agrees to take back the defective parts, and to replace them by serviceable ones which shall insure hermetical closing.

In case of a difference of opinion, Mr. Bunge declares in advance that he will submit to the decision of the president of the International Committee.

Done in duplicate at Paris and Hamburg, October 15, 1878.
Dr. W. FOERSTER.
PAUL BUNGE.

The committee has already purchased two series of weights of iridized platinum from the kilogramme to the milligramme, by Mr. Oertling, and a series of quartz weights, from Mr. Laurent.

It has also procured the essential accessory instruments, such as barometers, thermometers, manometers, cathetometers, &c.; others have been ordered, and the committee has just decided upon the purchase of a certain quantity of apparatus which is required by the philosophical and chemical laboratories.

Finally, the bureau received, in the month of July, Mr. Laurent’s apparatus for measuring dilation according to the Fizcau system; this appaiatus is now undergoing an examination.

It is thus seen that the International Bureau is already provided with the instruments and apparatus which are essential to enable it speedily to begin its metrological labors. Unfortunately the time cannot yet be foreseen when the committee will receive the prototypes that will permit it to begin the principal work, i. e. the comparison and verification of the new prototype line meters and of the prototype kilogrammes.

III.—Prototypes.

The important question of the manufacture of prototypes, as set forth by us in de tail in article III of our first report, has not yet been definitely settled.

To this effect, the following correspondence has passed between the French government and the Bureau of the International Committee.

In the first place, we received the following reply to the last letter that we had the honor to address, in 1877, to the French Government: “Ministry of Foreign Affairs,
“Direction of Consulates and Commercial Affairs,
“Paris, January 14, 1878.

“Mr. President: You were pleased to communicate to my predecessor, on the 4th ultimo, the observations which have been suggested to the International Committee of Weights and Measures by the arrangements made for the manufacture of metre and kilogramme prototypes. The minister of agriculture and commerce, to whom these observations were transmitted, informs me that he has brought them to the notice of the French section.

“Mr. Teissereno de Bort adds that, as regards the kilogramme, the French section, anticipating the desire of the International Committee, has recently decided, with the approval of the minister, upon the preparation of three kilogrammes of iridized platinum. An arrangement has been concluded for the purchase of the metals necessary for the preparation of these kilogrammes and of the new metres.

“Accept, Mr. President, the assurances of my high consideration.

“WADDINGTON.

“To General Ibañez,
“President of the International Committee of Weights and Measures, Madrid.”

Early in the month of July we wrote to the French Government as follows: “International Committee of Weights and Measures,
“Madrid and Neucâtel, July 6, 1878.

“Mr. Minister: Your excellency was pleased by your communication of October 6, 1877, to inform us that the French Government had requested the French section to prepare three new metres of pure iridized platinum, and, by your communication of January 14, 1878, we were informed that the preparation of three kilogrammes of iridized platinum had been decided upon.

“The International Committee of Weights and Measures, which will meet on the 16th of September next in reglementary session, would be glad to receive at that time these three metres and these three kilogrammes in order to subject them, at the building of the International Bureau, to the necessary examinations and comparisons.

“Be pleased to accept, Mr. Minister, the assurance of our high consideration.

“The president:

“General IBAÑEZ.

“The secretary:
“Dr. Ad. Hirsch.”

In reply to the above letter, we received the following communication: “Paris, September 6, 1878.

“Mr. President: By the letter which you did me the honor to write me on the 6th of July last, you informed me that the International Committee of Weights and Measures, referring to the instructions which had previously been given to the French section for the preparation of three new metres and three kilogrammes of pure iridized platinum, would be glad to receive these prototypes at the time of its next meeting in ordinary session, on the 16th day of September, so as to be able to subject them, at the International Bureau, to the necessary examinations and comparisons.

“I hastened to communicate the wish of the committee to the minister of agriculture and commerce, who addressed a communication in this sense to the president of the French section. It appears from the reply of Mr. Dumas that Messrs. Matthey &Co. have already prepared the three kilogrammes, that they have also prepared the metric measuring bars, and, finally, that they have examined and adopted a process suitable for the construction of X metres. Mr. Dumas adds, however, that, in consequence of an observation made to Messrs. Matthey & Co. by the French section with a view to avoiding all difficulties, those gentlemen have decided to recast the three kilogrammes as well as the experimentary measuring bars, so that all the standards delivered to the French section may be obtained from the same casting.

“As soon as the kilogrammes and the first measuring bars shall have been delivered the president will inform the French section, so that it may in turn inform the International Committee.

“Accept, Mr. President, the assurances of my high consideration.

“WADDINGTON.

“To General Ibañez,
“President of the International Committee of Weights and Measures.”

This letter having been communicated to the International Committee during its session of September 23, the bureau replied as follows: “International Committee of Weights and Measures,
“Paris, October 2, 1878.

“Mr. Minister: We have had the honor to receive your communication of September 6, whereby you were pleased to inform us that the construction of the three metres and the three kilogrammes of iridized platinum is well advanced, and that the International Committee will be informed as soon as the kilogrammes and the first measuring bars shall have been delivered.

“The International Committee of Weights and Measures, which is now in session at Paris, has instructed us to thank the French Government for this information. It affords it the more satisfaction to learn that the standards will soon be delivered to it, inasmuch as the buildings of the International Bureau of Weights and Measures are completed, and the apparatus has, for the most part, been put in place so that work can shortly be commenced. The demand for new definitive metric prototypes is, moreover, so general and pressing, especially for metres, that it is important to satisfy it as speedily as possible.

“Be pleased to accept, Mr. Minister, the assurance of our high consideration.

“The President:

“General IBAÑEZ.

“The secretary:
“Dr. Ad. Hirsch.

“To His Excellency Mr. Waddington,
“Minister of Foreign Affairs of France, Paris.”

Happily the efforts of the scientific manufacturers to whom the French Government has had recourse and the conclusive experiments of our type commission have demonstrated the possibility of manufacturing prototypes of pure iridized platinum. We have even learned that one of the three meters is already entirely finished, prepared, and polished, as well as the three kilogrammes.

As, moreover, the apparatus of the French section for the tracing of metres, which the International Committee, in pursuance of a courteous invitation, recently had occasion to see at the Conservatoire des Arts et Métiers appear to be pretty well advanced, it would seem that no more technical or scientific difficulties stand in the way of the satisfactory accomplishment of the task which the French section has undertaken to perform.

In order to bring to the solution of the problem the co-operation for which the Metric Convention provides, the International Committee has instructed a special commission, composed of two of its members and of that distinguished chemist, a member of the French section, who has done most for the examination of platinic metals, to procure for us two metres and two kilogrammes (types) of pure alloy. This commission, with the assistance of the manufacturers who furnish prototypes to the French Government, has accomplished its task in a very complete manner; it has discovered new methods of analysis and of purification, and in a memorandum which will be annexed to our reports, it has discussed and elucidated the methods of manufacture which render it possible to give to the standards the form prescribed by the International Committee, without the introduction of iron and without endangering their homogeneity; finally, by its care, the committee is now in possession of two metres and two kilogrammes (types) which will not only be utilized for the examination and rectification of our instruments, but which, pending the delivery of the prototypes which has been announced by the French Government, may be used in important metrological researches.

The committee adopted the following resolution, on motion of one of its members, during its session of October 8th:

“Whereas the construction of the new metric prototypes requires more time than was originally expected, and the committee has caused to be constructed certain measuring bars and killogrammes of pure iridized platinum, which may be used as temporary standards; and whereas the buildings are finished at the International Bureau, and the principal apparatus will be ready for use before the close of the year:

“Therefore, be it resolved that the committee authorizes its bureau to inform the high government that, at the beginning of the coming year, the International Bureau will be ready to compare old standards of the metre (à traits) with its temporary standards, for the benefit of the weight and measure services of the contracting States.

“It is understood that such comparisons cannot give the equations of the old standards as regards the definitive metric unit, which will be fixed hereafter by the sanction of the new prototypes now in course of construction; but, in the present state of uncertainty as to the precise length of the metres which are used as standards in different countries, it will be a great advantage to be able to have the old metric standards (à traits) of the various weight and measure services compared, at least with one another, by the International Bureau, by means of one and the same temporary standard belonging to the International Bureau,

“The same is the case with the kilogramme standards which the governments of the contracting States may desire to have compared by the International Bureau by the aid of a temporary standard of the kilogramme, constructed of pure iridized platinum under the direction of the committee, and belonging to the International Bureau.”

On bringing this resolution, by our circular of December last, to the knowledge of the high governments, we added:

“The discussion that has taken place in the committee on this proposal has clearly shown that there would be a great advantage in thus being able to furnish to the contracting States the relative equations at least of their present metric standards, until they can be put in possession of the new prototypes.

“Those governments that may desire to avail themselves of this advantage are requested to send their standards to the International Bureau of Weights and Measures, which will be able to compare them early next year.”

IV.—Appointments.

Two adjuncts have been appointed according to the regulations, as appears from the two following circulars: “Madrid and Neuchâtel,
December 10, 1877.

“Highly Esteemed Colleagues: In its session of the 21st of September last, the committee decided to appoint, in three months, by correspondence, two adjuncts for the International Bureau of Weights and Measures.

“Consequently, we have the honor, by this circular, to open the vote for this appointment. In order that the balloting may take place with the necessary secrecy, we propose to you to send your letter, signed, to the secretary, but to inclose in that letter a slip, in a closed envelope, without any address on the outside, containing your ballot, without signature. The secretary will thus collect all the closed ballots and will send them together, unopened, to the president, who will open them and ascertain the result, which will immediately be communicated to the committee.

“During the same session of September 21, the bureau communicated, in alphabetical order, the following list of the candidates inscribed: “1st. M. René Benoît, doctor of medicine and doctor of sciences, of Paris.

“2d. Mr. Wenzel Marek, assistant professor of astronomy and geodesy at the polytechnic school of Vienna, and adjunct of the Austrian bureau of weights and measures, at Vienna.

“3d. Mr. Rozé, instructor in geodesy at the polytechnic school of Paris.

“Since then no new candidacy has occurred.

“The committee having decided that the adjuncts should be appointed at the be ginning of the new year, it is necessary to fix a time for them to enter upon the discharge of their duties. Now, not only will the apparatus and instruments not be delivered sufficiently by the 1st of January, 1878, to give occupation to the adjuncts, but it is probable that the observation rooms will not be ready before the 1st of April. It therefore seems that, for the time when the adjuncts are to enter upon the discharge of their duties, we must choose between two dates, viz, January 1 and April 1, 1878, and your bureau submits this question also to the vote of the committee.

“Consequently, you are requested to write upon your ballot, first, the two names that you select for the two adjuncts, and, next, the time which you prefer for their entrance upon the discharge of their duties, whether January 1 or April 1, 1878, so that your vote may be sent in the manner described to the secretary as speedily as possible.

“Be pleased to accept, highly-esteemed colleague, the assurance of our highest consideration.

“The president:

“General IBAÑEZ.

“The secretary:
“Dr. Ad. Hirsch.”

“Madrid and Neuchâtel,
“January 31, 1878.

“Highly Esteemed Colleague: We have the honor to communicate to you the result of the vote asked for by our circular of December 10, 1877, for the appointment of the adjuncts.

“It appears that eight members voted for M. Benoît as first adjunct; eight members voted for M. Marek as second adjunct; 1 member voted for M. Pernet as first adjunct; one member voted for M. Benoît as second adjunct.

“General Morin thought proper to abstain from voting, refusing to make any selection, which, for the present, he considered premature.

“Consequently, Dr. René Benoît, of Paris, is appointed first adjunct; M. Wenzel Marek, of Vienna, is appointed second adjunct of the International Bureau of Weights and Measures, both according to article 6 of the regulations adopted in the session of April 29, 1876, for one year, and, if they perform their duties to the satisfaction of the committee, they will be confirmed for the same time as the director.

“April 1, 1878, has been fixed upon as the time for the adjuncts to enter upon the discharge of their duties by eight votes against one, which was in favor of February 1.

“Be pleased to accept, highly-esteemed colleague, the assurance of our highest consideration.

“The president:

“General IBAÑEZ.

“The secretary:
“Dr. Ad. Hirsch.”

These gentlemen have performed their duties remarkably well, and have shown great scientific ability and zeal, so that the committee, in pursuance of the recommendation of its bureau, resolved, in its session of October 9 last, to make their appointment permanent on the 1st of January next.

Inasmuch as the international establishment will, with the incoming year, enter into the phase of its full scientific activity, it seemed to the committee that the time had arrived to appoint, at least temporarily, a director of the International Bureau. Consequently, the committee unanimously resolved, in its session of October 8, to appoint one of its members, to wit, Dr. Broch, of Christiania, as director ad interim of the International Bureau of Weights and Measures.

Dr. Broch announced his acceptance of the office, subject to the approval of his government;* as, however, he cannot enter upon the discharge of his duties before ebruary 1, 1879, the committee has decided that Dr. Pernet shall continue to act as director until that time. In recognition of the services rendered by Dr. Pernet in this capacity, a gratuity of 2,000 francs has been allowed him in addition to his regular salary.

In order to retain the useful assistance of Dr. Pernet at the International Bureau, the committee has decided that Dr. Pernet shall remain attached to the bureau in the capacity of scientist having charge of special work, according to the provision contained in article 6 of the regulations of the convention. He is to receive a salary of 25 francs per diem.

Finally, we think it proper to mention in this paragraph, that the international committee unanimously resolved, in its session of September 27, on motion of the president, to complete the number of its members by the choice of two gentlemen as such, in lieu of Messrs. Chisholm and Bosscha, who declined to serve when their governments refused to adhere to the convention.

It has seemed to the committee that it would be well to exercise the power granted in this respect by article 14 of the regulations of the convention, at the time when the building and the apparatus of the International Bureau being finished the scientific work is about to begin.

In pursuance of the provisions of the article referred to, and of article 10 of the regulations, this election of two members will take place by correspondence three months after all the members of the committee shall have been notified by the bureau.

V.—Library.

The request which we addressed last year to the members of the committee, and through them to the governments and learned societies, in behalf of the infant library of our establishment, has not been without effect. We have already received some highly valuable gifts, for which, in the name of the International Committee, we return thanks to the generous donors.

Other works have been purchased, few in number, it is true, and the principal scientific reviews that possess any interest for metrology have been subscribed for.

As, however, we are yet far from possessing the principal works on metrology and its kindred sciences, many of which are official publications, which it would be very difficult, if not impossible, to procure in the ordinary way, we take the liberty to renew our request to the governmental and scientific authorities of the various countries that they will donate copies of such metrological works, monographs, and official publications as have appeared in their countries.

VI.—Ratifications.

With regard to the ratifications, we have to communicate the following documents:

At the beginning of the year, the bureau requested the French Government to grant its mediation with a view to regulating the situation as regarded the two governments whose ratifications had not yet been given.

The following is the bureau’s letter: “International Committee of Weights and Measures,
“Madrid and Neuchdtel, February 6, 1878.

“Mr. Minister: Among the governments that signed the metric convention, there are two, viz, that of the United States of America and that of Venezuela, that have not yet ratified the convention which they signed May 20, 1875.

“It is not for the International Committee to set forth the reasons which should induce these two governments not to leave those of the other states in doubt as to their final adhesion; the International Committee, however, which has charge of the execution of the convention, is under the necessity, in order that this duty may be performed, of obtaining from the governments interested a speedy solution of this question.

“The delay of the two states referred to has deprived the committee of a large part of the means which were secured to it by the convention, on which it was obliged to rely in making its arrangements and engagement for the building and organization of the International Bureau of Weights and Measures, and it will not be possible to divide the deficit among the other contracting states, according to the rules laid down by the convention, until the question of ratification of the two states shall have been settled. Now the committee, being obliged to settle the building accounts of the International Bureau, should be able to dispose of this portion of its resources.

“These considerations have induced the committee to request the French Government, which has taken charge of the exchange of the ratifications, to be pleased to take such steps near the Washington Government and that of Caracas as it may deem calculated to bring about, as speedily as possible, the ratification of the convention of May 20, 1875, and, as a consequence, the payment of the contributions due for the fiscal years of 1876, 1877, and 1878, or at least a final decision that will permit the contracting governments to regulate the situation of the scientific establishment which they have created in common.

“The International Committee would be very grateful to your excellency if you would inform it, as speedily as possible, of the result of the steps which the French Government shall think proper to take, so that the committee may have time to consult as to the adoption of the measures required by its financial situation.

“Be pleased to accept, Mr. Minister, the assurance of our highest consideration.

“The president:

“General IBAÑEZ.

“The secretary:
“Dr. Ad. Hirsch.

“To His Excellency Mr. Waddington,
“Minister of Foreign Affairs of France, Paris.”

In reply we received the following communications from the French Government: “Ministry of Foreign Affairs,
“Paris, February 15, 1878.

“Mr. President: I have received the letter which you did me the honor to address me on the 6th instant in relation to the delay of the Governments of the United States and that of Venezuela in exchanging the ratifications of the metric convention.

“In compliance with the desire expressed by you, I have requested our diplomatic agents at Washington and Caracas to take the necessary steps near those governments to obtain a final decision from them, of which I shall not fail to inform you.

“Accept, Mr. President, the assurances of my high consideration.

“WADDINGTON.

“To General Ibañez,
“President of the International Committee of Weights and Measures, Madrid.”

“Ministry of Foreign Affairs,
“Paris, April 30, 1878.

“Mr. President: As I had the honor to inform you on the 15th of February last, I instructed the minister of France at Washington to make inquiry in regard to the definitive intentions of the Government of the United States in relation to the ratification of the metric convention. I have just received from Mr. Outrey the note addressed to him by the Secretary of State in reply to one from him, and I have the honor to inclose to you a translation of this document. It appears, therefrom, that the attention of the proper committee was at once called to this matter. Mr. Outrey adds, moreover, that he will not fail to request Mr. Evarts to do all in his power to hasten a decision of the matter by Congress.

“As to Venezuela, I shall take care to communicate its reply to you as soon as it shall have been received.

“Accept, Mr. President, the assurances of my high consideration.

“WADDINGTON.

“To General Ibañez,
President of the International Committee of Weights and Measures, Madrid.”

“Department of State,
“Washington, March 25, 1878.

“Sir: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your note of the 6th instant, and the copy which accompanied it, of a communication addressed to the minister of foreign affairs of France by the International Committee on Weights and Measures, relative to the apparent delay which has occurred on the part of the Government of the United States in ratifying the metrical convention of May 20, 1875, and requesting to be informed as to the intentions of this government in connection therewith.

“In reply I have to state that on the 10th of March, 1876, the President submitted for the consideration of the Senate, with a view to its ratification, the metrical convention together with certain papers therein referred to. The matter is still pending before that body, no action having been taken thereon.

“I inclose herewith, for your information, a printed copy of the President’s message transmitting the papers to the Senate.

“The attention of the proper committee of Congress will at once he recalled to the matter.

“Accept, sir, a renewed assurance of my very high consideration.

“WM. M. EVARTS.

“Mr. Maxime Outret, &c., &c.”

“Paris, August 5, 1878.

“Mr. President: Referring to the letter which I had the honor to address to you on the 30th of April last, I hasten to announce to you that, on the 2d instant, I exchanged the ratifications of the metric convention with the chargé d’affaires of the United States of America.

“I have, moreover, received the reply of the chargé d’affaires of France at Caracas, to the instruction which I addressed to him relative to the ratification of Venezuela. It appears from the note received by him from the minister of foreign relations of that republic, a copy of which is herewith inclosed, that a new plenipotentiary, Dr. Antonio Parra Bolivar, has been selected to bring this matter to a termination. Dr. Bolivar, however, who is now at Paris as the commissioner of Venezula to the international exhibition, has declared that no communication relative to the metric convention has been received by him from his government.

“Accept, Mr. President, the assurances of my high consideration.

“WADDINGTON.

“To General Ibañez,
“President of the International Committee of Weights and Measures, Madrid.”

[Translation.]

“Caracas, May 9, 1878.

“The minister of foreign relations has laid before the government the communication of the chargé d’affaires of France of the 28th of March, relative to the metric convention signed at Paris, May 20, 1875, which has not yet been ratified by Venezuela.

“As to the letter which accompanied it, the undersigned would refer to the observations made in the reports of this ministry in 1877 and 1878. It is therein stated that when the convention was approved, the term of six months which had been fixed for the exchange of the ratifications having expired, nothing could be concluded. In this state of things, a new article extending the time for the exchange became necessary, and the plenipotentiary who had represented Venezuela was instructed to submit this question to the other parties interested; unfortunately, however, the steps taken by the government have produced no result.

“Under these circumstances, the great democrat, the president of the republic, wishing to place no obstacle in the way of these projects, has appointed a new plenipotentiary, viz, Dr. Antonio Parra Bolivar, with instructions to bring this matter to a termination. The delay which has occurred is due to the fact that the time of the meeting of the Venezuelan Congress was not taken into consideration when the date of the ratification was fixed.

“The undersigned renews, &c., &c.,

“S. CASAÑA.

“To Mr. Victor L’Hôte,
“ Chargé d’Affaires of France.

It appears from these documents that the United States of America having definitively adhered to the metric convention, the international organization of weights and measures is thus extended directly over one of the principal; states of the Anglo-Saxon world, which tends to preserve the universal character of the convention of May 20, 1875, and greatly to increase the chances of a final and general unification of weights and measures.

VII.—Accounts and Contributions.

We give, in the first place, a table of accounts for the fiscal year of 1877, as fixed by the commission of accounts, and presented, after a detailed examination of all the accounts and the evidence in relation to them, in the session of October 1, 1878, to the International Committee, which approved it and released the director from further responsibility in the matter.

receipts.

Francs.

Brought forward from the fiscal year of 1876 180,160 76

Payment of the contributions of—

January 19. Switzerland 467 00

February 2. Italy 7,472 00

February 7. Germany 11,488 00

February 16. Belgium 1,494 00

February 26. Spain 7,172 50

March 1. Norway 374 00

March 2. Sweden 374 00

March 8. Russia 7,192 00

March 15. Portugal 10,958 00

March 15. Austria-Hungary 9,994 00

April 30. Denmark 187 00

July 21. France 11,488 00

September 10. Argentine Confederation 2,741 00

71,401 50

Interest paid by the “Caisse des Dépôts et Consignations” 3,668 29

75,069 79

expenses.

I.—Expenses of the establishment.

a.—Buildings and Apparatus.

Francs.

January 5. To M. Bouchot, architect, third installment 58,240 00

September 22. To M. Pictet, second installment 8,500 00

October 10. To M. Frieländer, for books 165 55

October 10. To M. Meyer, for books 347 00

November 25. To M. Delavigne, for furniture 8,900 00

November 15. To M. Delavigne, for furniture 190 00

December 31. To M. Perrier, inspecting architect 1,250 00

77,592 55

b.—instruments.

Francs.

March 19. To M. Sacré, for two balances 2,705 00

April 5. To Messrs. Matthey & Co., for platinum and iridium 1,575 00

May 5, December 17. To the Geneva Philosophical Instrument Company, for the normal barometer 1,200 00

May 16. To Messrs. Matthey & Co., for platinum and iridium for the trivet of the apparatus of Fizeau 642 00

May 19. To M. Stollenreuther, first installment for the Steinheil comparator 4,978 00

August 10. To M. Sörrensen, for the comparator of M. Wrede 3,623 53

September 19. To M. Chevallier, for a glass 70 00

September 20. Expense of journey to inspect the Steinheil comparator 138 00

October 26. To the imperial German commission of weights and measures, for standard thermometers 262 50

15,194 03

92,786 58

II.—Annual expenses.

A.—Salary of the Director and Indemnities.

Francs.

July 11. M. Broch, indemnity and traveling expenses 4,832 00

August 1. To M. Stás 2,450 00

October 1. To the director, from January 1 to October 1 11,250 00

December 31. To the office-boy, from October 1 to January 1 375 00

August 13. To M. Pernet, traveling and lodging expenses 305 00

December 31. To M. Pernet, indemnity for July-December 3,249 95

22,461 95

March 5, April 2. To M. Gauthier-Villars, for printing reports 886 05

August 9. To M. Waldheim, for printing 93 75

September 15. To M. Hirsch, expenses of secretaryship 696 20

December 31. To M. Hirsch, expenses of secretaryship 427 05

December 31. Office expenses 130 20

December 31. Keeping of buildings, &c., in repair 760 05

December 31. Keeping engine in repair 38 95

December 31. Water for engine (concessions of) 187 80

December 31. Fuel 1,523 70

December 31. Gas 76 05

December 31. Tools 12 60

December 31. Sundries 477 20

September 19. To Mr. Chevallier, for packing, &c 32 00

December 31. Presents 70 00

December 31. Banker 113 12

December 31. Stamps 12 00

6,634 72

C.—Salary of Secretary.

Francs.

For the year 1877 6,000 00

Annual expenses, total 35,096 67

Total expenses 127,883 25

Balance 127,347 30

255,230 55

After having sent, on the 15th of December, 1877, the list of the contributions for the year 1878, based on a budget of 100,000 francs, to the governments of the high contracting parties, the bureau of the committee, with a view to explaining the necessity of having recourse to the maximum of the contributions provided for by the convention, addressed the following statement to the governments:

Statement of the financial situation of the International Committee of Weights and Measures

In its circular of the 15th of December last, whereby it had the honor to communicate the list of the contributions for the fiscal year of 1878 to the governments of the contracting states, the Bureau of the International Committee of Weights and Measures referred to the reglementary report which was to be sent at the same time, by way of explaining the decision of the committee to raise the budget of the present fiscal year to 100,000 francs.

In consequence of unforeseen circumstances the printing of the report was delayed for several weeks, so that it could not be sent until the 12th of January last. As the sending of the volume containing the report of the transactions of the last session of the International Committee, in which the reasons are given for the decision of the committee, is likewise delayed by the printing of the scientific memoranda annexed to that volume, the bureau of the committee deems it its duty to explain to the governments of the high contracting parties the reasons which induced the committee to exercise the right conferred upon it by article 6 of the regulations appended to the metric convention.

We avail ourselves of this opportunity to present, at the same time, to the contracting governments a statement of the pecuniary situation in which the International Committee was placed by the delay which occurred in the payment of a considerable portion of the contributions provided for by the convention of May 20, 1875.

The committee was obliged by the convention to divide the cost of the establishment, as well as the annual expense of the International Bureau, among all the states that signed the metric convention. Now, two of those states, the United States of America and Venezuela, have not yet ratified the convention, and, consequently, have not yet paid their contributions for the fiscal years of 1876 and 1877; and even if, as we hope, the ratification takes place this year, the payment of the contributions now due will probably not be made by those states before the year 1879.

Owing to this cause the resources of the committee have been diminished by the following sums:

Contributions of the United States. Contributions of Venezuela. Total.

Francs. Francs. Francs.

1876 46,143 2,958 49,101

1877 7,285 467 7,752

1878 9,714 623 10,337

Total 63,142 4,048 67,190

Moreover, of the states that have ratified the convention, Peru has not yet paid in its contributions for the fiscal years of 1876 and 1877, to wit, 5,479 francs, nor has Turkey paid its contribution for 1877, to wit, 7,285 francs, which together constitute an arrearage of 12,764 francs.

The result is that there is a deficiency of 79,954 francs, upon which sum the committee was, nevertheless, obliged to count in the arrangements made for the construction and organization of the International Bureau. It was not allowable for the International Committee to ask the contracting governments to divide this deficit among themselves, according to the scale fixed by the convention, as long as the two states above mentioned had not definitively refused to ratify that instrument, and before we were officially informed that the payments of Turkey and Peru had not been made at the Paris Caisse des Dépôts et Consignations, at the close of the year 1877.

The International Committee, being thus deprived of a large part of the resources secured to it by the convention of May 20, 1875, finds itself in a rather difficult pecuniary situation, which, although temporary, seriously embarrasses it, inasmuch as it is obliged to meet, in the course of this year, the engagements which it has made with the contractors and constructors of the buildings and instruments for the International Bureau of Weights and Measures, and as it is obliged to provide for a supplementary expense for completing the buildings. It consequently finds itself under the necessity of deferring until next year all expenditures that are not absolutely indispensable, among them an order for several much-needed instruments.

Yet, even with the strictest economy, the committee would not be able to meet all its obligations in 1878 if it had not taken the precaution to fix its budget for this year at 100,000 francs, which would certainly not have been necessary if the 80,000 francs of the contributions due had not failed it.

The commission of accounts, on presenting its report to the International Committee in its session of September 15, 1877, showed that the sum of only 59,021 francs was then available. In view of this fact, the director of the International Bureau made during the session of September 21 the following proposition:

“In view of article 6 of the regulations annexed to the convention of May 20, 1875, which provides that the annual budget of the bureau may be modified as need may require by the International Committee on motion of the director, but it shall in no case exceed the sum of 100,000 francs;

“Whereas the sums already pledged for payment for the work of construction and for heating and ventilating apparatus, furniture, instruments, &c., and for the salaries of the employés of the bureau will absorb a large part of the available funds;

“Whereas other expenditures will have to be made for the alteration of certain parts of the building as desired by the committee, and it will be necessary to introduce water and gas into the establishment, &c.:

“I have the honor to propose to the committee that the annual budget for the year 1878 be increased from 75,000 francs to 100,000 francs.”

This proposition was unanimously adopted by the committee.

In order to show how necessary this precaution was, if the committee did not wish to run the risk of being unable to meet its absolutely necessary expenses, we here give a summary of the budget for the year 1878, as we have been able to prepare it according to the situation of the 31st of December last, reserving details for our next reglementary report:

Assets. Expenses.

Francs. Francs.

Balance on hand at the Caisse des Dépôts et Consignations, December 31, 1877 117,447 I. Annual reglementary expenses:

Balance with banker, same date 11,681 a. Salary of employés 26,000

Contributions for the year 1878 100,000 b. Purchase and keeping in repair of apparatus, fuel, gas, &c 24,000

Deducting the quota of the United States 9,714 50,000

Deducting the quota of Venezuela 623 II. Engagements made by contract and payable in 1878, for buildings and instruments 113,038

89,663

Probable interest from the Caisse 1,000 III. Supplementary expense for completion of buildings, about 56,000

Total 219,791 Total 219,038

It appears from the above that, even if the payment of all the contributions of the states that have ratified the convention were to be relied upon, the means at the committee’s disposal in 1878 would only be barely sufficient to meet unavoidable expenses.

In conclusion, the bureau of the committee desires to express its confident hope that this precarious situation will be brought to an end by next year, when the question of the ratification will be definitively settled, and when the arrearages shall have been paid, and it thinks it may assert that, being then able to dispose of the 80,000 francs which have hitherto been lacking, the committee will be able to satisfy all demands for the execution of the task intrusted to it by the governments of the high contracting parties.

Madrid and Neuchatel, February 7, 1878.
The President:
General IBAÑEZ.

The Secretary:
Dr. Ad. Hirsch.

The hope expressed at the end of the circular has not been a vain one, for the United States of America, having ratified the convention, have paid in the amount of their contributions for the previous years, and Turkey has paid in a lump the amounts due from it for 1877 and 1878. Peru is now the only state (that has ratified the convention) whose payment is still to be made, and this was promised in the month of February last by a communication from the Peruvian legation at Paris; the contributions of Venezuela will doubtless be paid immediately after the ratification of the convention by that state.

The following list shows the order in which the different states paid their contributions in 1878: Francs.

January 10. Switzerland 623 00

January 21. Italy 9,963 00

January 26. Austria 7,472 00

January 31. Germany 15,318 00

February 12. Hungary 5,853 00

February 16. Argentine Confederation 498 00

February 22. Belgium 1,992 00

February 27. Sweden 498 00

February 27. Norway 498 00

March 29. Spain* 8,736 50

April 27. Denmark 249 00

May 29. France 15,318 00

June 28. Portugal 1,992 00

August 12. Russia 9,589 00

August 27. Turkey† 16,999 00

October 8. United States of America‡ 63,142 00

In order to reach a thorough understanding of the pecuniary situation of the International Bureau, and in order to be able to fix the budget for the year 1879 on a solid basis, the committee instructed its commission of accounts to prepare, with the assistance of the director, a statement of the condition of its finances at the present time, that is to say, at the time of the session of the committee, together with an estimate of the expense that would be necessary up to the close of the year 1878 and the draft of a budget for the year 1879.

It appears from the labors of our commission, the details of which may be found in the reports of the session of October 9, 1878,§ that the available balance on hand on the 8th of October, 1878, was 10,324.80 francs, and that, counting the payment of the United states, already announced, the total amount of available resources was 73,462.80 francs. As the necessary expenses until the close of the year for the establishment, or for the service, were estimated at 66,295 francs there remained available at the close of the year 1878 a balance of 7,168 francs.

Now, as we are still obliged to expend on the budget of next year balances of cost of construction and instruments amounting to 45,339 francs, and as the annual cost of the service has been estimated at 61,829 francs, it has been necessary to exercise the right reserved to the committee by the convention, and to raise the budget of the next fiscal year to 100,000 francs.

We have given the reasons for this decision in a special report, which the bureau of the committee had the honor to lay before the governments as early as the 21st of October last, and which we think it well to reproduce here.

draft of a budget and tabular statement of the quotas of the different states for the international bureau of weights and measures for the fiscal year of 1879.

The International Committee of Weights and Measures, in its session of the 9th October last, unanimously resolved, on motion of Dr. Pernet, acting director of the International Bureau, and in consideration of the report of its commission of accounts, to fix the annual budget for 1879 at 100,000 francs, according to article 6 of the regulations appended to the metric convention.

The committee at the same time instructed its bureau to bring this resolution, with the reasons therefor, to the notice of the governments of the high contracting parties, and to fix the quotas for 1879 accordingly.

We have the honor to perform this duty and to explain in this special report the reasons which have obliged the International Committee again to exercise the right reserved to it by article 6 of the regulations. In order to be able to send to the governments, with as little delay as possible, the list of the quotas with its justification, we have not thought proper to wait until the general report is ready, which is to be sent by the committee to the contracting states at the close of the year. Nevertheless, we shall refer to that general report and to the reports of our sessions, which will soon be printed, for the details of the information of which we have the honor to give a summary in this statement.

The United States of America having ratified, this summer, the convention of May 20, 1875, and the Washington Government having recently caused to be paid the sum of 63,142 francs, which is the amount of its contributions for the years 1876, 1877, and 1878, the committee is no longer hampered by the difficulties to which it was obliged to refer in the statement of its pecuniary situation which it addressed to the governments in the early part of the year, and it has been able to meet all its engagements and pay the necessary expenses for construction and service; so that according to the accounts prepared on the 8th of October and the estimates made for the rest of the year 1878, by the commission of accounts, which are to appear in our general report, we shall have at the close of the year an available balance of 7,168 francs.

On the other hand, we have not yet received the contributions of Peru, which amount for the three years to 6,475 francs, nor those of Venezuela, amounting to 4,048 francs, which constitutes a deficit of 10,523 francs. Even supposing, however, that these amounts are paid in the course of the coming year, the committee must still ask the contracting states for the entire amount of the contributions provided for by the convention.

The first phase of our international establishment, the phase of construction and organization, is nearly at an end; the buildings are finished, the finishing touches are being given to the heating and cooling apparatus, and the main instruments will shortly be introduced. During this period of construction the annual expenses were, of course, less, having amounted to 18,707 francs in 1876; to 35,097 francs in 1877; and to 49,397 francs in 1878. The number of scientists and of other persons employed was not complete, and the expenses for repairs, fuel, gas, &c., were comparatively insignificant. The committee was thus able, during these first years, by exercising the right of transfer allowed by article 6 of the regulations, to use a part of the annual resources to pay the cost of establishment, construction, apparatus, and instruments, for which the insufficient sum of 400,000 francs had been provided in the regulations, inasmuch as precise data were then wanting for a correct estimate. It was with a view to avoiding the serious inconvenience of just such an insufficiency that a door of safety was reserved for the committee by the allowance of the right of transfer, as appears from the discussion which took place in the commission of special delegates.

With next year the scientific work is to begin; the personnel will be nearly complete $ the experiments will involve expense and the regular service will call for outlays for fuel, gas, &c., so that the estimated annual expenses for 1879, as they will presently be specified, amount to about 62,000 francs.

On the other hand, the committee will still have to meet from the budget of next year a portion of the cost of establishment for the buildings, instruments, laboratory, &c.; the commission of accounts has made a calculation of the expenditures that will be necessary for these things in 1879, and fixes it at 45,339 francs.

On examining and comparing these figures the committee became convinced that it was absolutely necessary to fix the budget for 1879 at 100,000 francs. It will thus be able to meet its engagements and all the demands of the service, as will appear from the following approximative tabular statement: Receipts in 1879. Expenses in 1879.

Francs.

Balance available January 1, 1879 7,167 80 I. —Establishment expenses:

Contributions of the contracting states 100,000 00 Francs.

a. Buildings 22,075 00

b. Philosophical heating apparatus 5,000 00

c. Instrument apparatus, library 14,764 00

d. Laboratory 3,000 00

e. Furniture 500 00

45,339 00

II. —Annual expenses:

Francs.

a. Salaries 27,000 00

b. Indemnities repairs, &c 28,828 80

c. Secretary of the committee 6,000 00

61,828 80

Total 107,167 80 Total 107,167 80

It is, therefore, on the basis of the budget of 100,000 francs that the committee has been obliged to fix the contributions for 1879, which is thus the same as that of last year, and which we have the honor to append to this report.

Madrid and Neuchatel, October 21, 1878.
The president:
General IBAÑEZ.

The secretary:
Dr. Ad. Hirsch.

Tabular statement of the quotas of the states for the International Bureau of Weights and Measures for the fiscal year of 1879.

Contracting states. Population. Coefficient. Factor of distribution. Annual expenses 100,000 francs; unit, 124.53 francs.

Francs.

1. Germany 41,010,150 3 123 15,318

2a. Austria. 20,136,283 3 60 7,472

2b. Hungary 15,508,575 3 47 5,853

3. Belgium 5,253,821 3 16 1,992

4. Argentine Confederation 2,000,000 2 4 498

5. Denmark 2,000,000 1 2 249

6. Spain 24,236,590 3 73 9,091

7. United States of America 38,925,598 2 78 9,714

8. France 40,943,120 3 123 15,318

9. Italy 26,801,154 3 80 9,963

10. Peru 2,500,000 3 8 996

11. Portugal 5,400,000 3 16 1,992

12. Russia 76,500,000 1 77 9,589

13a. Sweden 4,341,559 1 4 498

13b. Norway. 1,795,000 2 4 498

14. Switzerland 2,669,147 2 5 623

15. Turkey 39,000,000 2 78 9,714

16. Venezuela 1,784,194 3 5 623

350,805,191 803 100,001

In the name of the International Committee of Weights and Measures, the president:

General IBAÑEZ.

The secretary:
Dr. Ad. Hirsch.

* We learn that Dr. Broch’s acceptance has just been approved by the Norwegian Government.

* The payment of Spain, in 1878, was 354.50 francs less than its real share, which was 9,091 francs. This was because the payment made by it in 1877 was 354.50 in excess of the amount really due, owing to an error.

† Contributions of 1877 and 1878.

‡ Contributions of 1876, 1877, and 1878.

§ The report of the session of 1878 are now in the press, and we hope to be able speedily to present them to the high governments.

No. 152. Mr. Noyes to Mr. Evarts. [Document 173]

No. 152.
Mr. Noyes to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Paris, January 31, 1879. (Received February 17.) No. 194.]

Sir: The telegrams to the American press will have informed you in detail of the change in the French Presidency long before this dispatch reaches Washington.

The marshal, greatly dissatisfied with the demand of his ministers that certain changes should be made in the command of several of the corps d’armie, refused to sign the decrees therefor when submitted to him by the ministry, and as the temper of the majority in the chamber of deputies had been clearly manifested recently in the debate and vote on the declaration of confidence in the ministers, it was impossible for them to recede. The decrees proposed were regarded as measures carrying out the engagement made by the ministry in accepting the conditional vote of confidence.

Mr. Dufaure and the whole cabinet continuing firm, it only remained for the marshal to yield or resign. He chose the latter alternative. At a quarter past three o’clock yesterday afternoon his resignation was read to the senate, and at the same moment to the chamber of deputies, addressed in each case to the presiding officer, as follows: Versailles, January 30, 1879.

Mr. President: At the opening of the session the ministry presented a programme of measures which appeared, while giving satisfaction to public opinion, of a nature to be adopted without danger to the security and good administration of the country.

Setting aside all personal feeling I gave it my entire approval, because I did not sacrifice any principle to which my conscience engaged me to remain faithful.

At the present moment the ministry, believing that it responds to the opinion of the majority in the two chambers, proposes to me, relative to the chief commands, general measures which I regard as opposed to the interests of the army, and consequently to those of the country.

I cannot give my consent to them. In presence of this refusal the ministry retires.

Any other cabinet selected from the majority of the assemblies would impose on me the same conditions.

I therefore think it my duty to shorten the duration of the mandate which was confided to me by the national assembly. I give in my resignation as president of the republic.

In quitting power I have the consolation of thinking that, during the fifty-three years which I have devoted to the service of my country as a soldier or a citizen, I have never been guided by other feelings than those of honor and duty, and of absolute devotedness to the country.

I request you, Mr. President, to communicate my decision to the senate.

Accept the expression of my high consideration.

Marshal De MACMAHON,
Duke de Magenta.

At half past four the two houses, in conformity with the constitutional provision, met in national assembly to elect a president to succeed Marshal MacMahon, 776 senators and deputies being present. Mr. Jules Grévy received 563 votes, including all the republicans, and, it is understood, many of the Bonapartists; 99 votes were cast for General Chanzy; 63 members did not vote. Mr. Grévy was at once proclaimed president of the republic for seven years, by Mr. Martel, president of the senate, who presided over the national assembly.

While this important event was regarded with the profoundest interest, there was no inordinate excitement and no disturbance of any kind. The bourse remained strong; the rentes rose to a higher figure than has been reached for a long time. Mr. Grévy’s well-known views on public questions, his moderation, his deep convictions as a republican, his calm strong character, and his eminent public services made the transition easy and natural from the presidency of the chamber of deputies to the presidency of the republic. There is a general expression of satisfaction and even relief that the entire government is now in the hands of the republicans, and all parts will work together peaceably and harmoniously. There will undoubtedly be numerous changes in the various departments of the government in the direction demanded by the people, as expressed in the recent elections and formulated by the chamber of deputies in the conditional declaration of confidence in the ministry.

It is uncertain whether the present ministry will remain intact or not; probably a majority of its members, and possibly all of them, will retain their positions; meanwhile all goes on calmly and smoothly, the regularly organized machinery of the constitution having done its work so quietly and so well, that this people, accustomed for a century to see changes accomplished only by armed force and blood, or by revolutionary struggles, congratulate each other as they meet, that they can scarce feel that any change has taken place.

I have, &c.,

EDWARD F. NOYES.

No. 152. Mr. Noyes to Mr. Evarts. [Document 174]

No. 152.
Mr. Noyes to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Paris, February 7, 1879. (Received February 24.) No. 195.]

Sir: The administration of President Grévy is now fairly organized and in operation. The cabinet has been reconstituted, with M. Waddington as premier, most of the members of the last ministry being retained.

Mr. Dufaure, the veteran statesman, who had borne himself in the recent crisis with a masterly ability and a firmness worthy of his austere and authoritative name, when he saw the new president inaugurated, and all the parts of the government at last thoroughly republican and bidding fair to work together harmoniously, determined to retire to the tranquility which his great age required, saying that the new era which had opened required new men. He takes with him into his retirement the respect of all France.

Mr. Waddington, who was charged by the President with the formation of the new cabinet, and who is therefore prime minister, retains his portfolio of minister of foreign affairs, to the general satisfaction of the diplomatic corps, and becomes president of the council.

Mr. Le Royer, life senator, is minister of justice, and keeper of the seals, the portfolio held by M. Dufaure. He is a distinguished advocate, was a prominent member of the national assembly, where he took an active part in framing the constitution. He is an effective orator, a clear thinker, a moderate but very decided republican.

Mr. Marcère remains minister of the interior, to which the department of public worship has been temporarily added, being detached from public instruction.

Mr. Lèon Say and General Gresley continue at their respective posts, finances and war.

Vice-Admiral Jauréguibery takes the place of Vice-Admiral Pothnan, as minister of the marine and the colonies.

* * * * * * *

Mr. Jules Ferry, one of the most brilliant members of the chamber of deputies, orator, author, and advocate, is minister of public instruction and fine arts, replacing his friend M. Bardoux, whose retirement is viewed with regret by all friends of education and culture, notwithstanding the acceptability of the new incumbent.

Mr. Freycinet remains minister of public works, and will thus continue Ms policy of amalgamating the minor railroads under the control of the state.

Mr. Lepère, deputy, is minister of agriculture and commerce in place of Mr. Teisserenc de Bort. He belongs to the extreme left, was a determined opponent of the empire, and has been an able member of the national assembly and of the chamber of deputies.

A new portfolio has been created, and Mr. Cochery, member of the chamber of deputies, has been appointed minister of post-offices and telegraphs, this department having been detached from the ministry of finances. He is a veteran in politics, was a distinguished functionary in the republican government of February, 1848, defended the liberal journals in trials which drew universal attention. He was a stern enemy of the empire, voted against the war with Prussia, and on the memorable 4th of September, 1870, aided Mr. Grévy to prevent the chamber from being invaded, whence they went in the name of the corps legislatif to the Hotel de Ville to the support of the provisional government.

It maybe said generally that the cabinet, as reorganized, makes a step of progress towards the left. It represents the political position of the new president pretty fairly, and may be considered as in advance of Mr. Dufaure, and a little behind Mr. Gambetta, and the majority of the republicans in the chamber; as Mr. Gambetta remarked, it approaches more nearly than the former ministry the political center of gravity.

The president’s message was read to the chamber yesterday by Mr. Waddington, and its brief, dignified, and simple character receives general commendation. It is rather a declaration of principles than a programme of measures, and leaves to the ministers, where it belongs under this parliamentary system, the duty of proposing the laws necessary to carry out the policy and perfect the harmony of the government and the republican institutions of France. The French have so long been accustomed to personal government, avowed or indirect, that the tendency of the people is to look up for direction 5 and this respectful reserve on the part of the President is a hopeful and healthful sign that the self-government is becoming a reality.

Gambetta, on yesterday, also took the chair as president of the chamber, succeeding Mr. Grévy, and assumed his new functions with a short speech, of which, as well as of the message, I send you here with translations.

I have, &c.,

EDWABD F. NOYES.

[Inclosure 1 in No. 195.—Translation.]

president grévy’s message.

Messieurs: In raising me to the presidency of the republic, the National Assembly has imposed great duties on me. I shall apply myself unremittingly to their accomplishment, and shall be happy if, with sympathetic support of the Senate and Chamber of Deputies, I may be able not to remain beneath what France has the right to expect from my efforts and devotedness. Sincerely submissive as I am to the grand law of parliamentary rule, I will never enter into contest with the national will as expressed by its constitutional organs. In the bills which it will present to the chambers, and in the questions raised by parliamentary initiative, the government will take heed to the real needs, the certain wishes of the country, in a spirit of progress and appeasement; it will more particularly pay attention to the maintenance of tranquillity, security and confidence—the most ardent among the wishes of Prance, the most imperious of her necessities. In the application of the laws which give to general policy its character and direction, the government will be guided by the idea which dictated them. It will be liberal, just toward all, the protector of every legitimate interest and the resolute defender of those of the state. In its solicitude for the great institutions which are the columns of the social edifice, it will give a large portion to our army, the honor and interests of which will be the constant objects of its most cherished regards, taking a just account of required rights and services rendered, now that the two great powers of the state are animated by the same feeling, which is that of France 5 it will see that the republic shall be served by functionaries who will not be either its enemies or its detractors; it will continue to cultivate and develop the friendly relations which exist between France and the foreign powers, and thus to contribute to the consolidation of the general peace. By such a liberal and really conservative policy the great powers of the republic, always in harmony and animated with the same spirit, and ever advancing with prudence, will cause its natural fruits to be borne by the government which France, taught by her misfortunes, has adopted as the only one that can secure her tranquillity and promote the development of her prosperity, strength, and grandeur.

[Inclosure 2 in No. 195.—Translation.]

gambetta’s speech.

The president said:

In taking possession of the post of honor which the vote of the house has confided to me, I wish to express my deep gratitude. Permit me to add that the historic circumstances which preceded and determined this mark of your confidence have rendered it all the more precious, and at the same time more formidable to me. I succeed, in fact, a great citizen—to the man whom the suffrages of the representatives of the country have spontaneously called to the presidency of the French Republic, to which functions he is followed by the unalterable fidelity of Parliament, and the esteem of the world. If he is to-day the chief of the nation, he remains to be our instructor and our model. (Cheers.) We shall follow his lessons and his footsteps without the pretension of replacing them, but with the firm intention of reproducing the principal characteristics of his magistracy; a vigilant attention to all your discussions, impartiality to all parties (cheers), a scrupulous adhesion to our regulations, and a jealous observance of the freedom of the tribune. (More cheers.)

Elected by the Republican majority, the resolute guardian of your rights and prerogatives, I know my duties of protection towards the minorities. I hope to secure their alliance to the respect which each here present owes to the constitution and the powers of the republic. (Loud applause.)

We can and ought at the present moment to feel that the governments of combat have had their day. Our republic, at length, issuing victoriously from the strife of parties, ought to enter in an organic and creative period. (Approval.) Therefore, Messieurs, I would more particularly invite you to concentrate your ardor, foresight, talents, all your efforts, on the great scholastic, military, financial, trade, and economical questions which are before you, the solution of which is legitimately expected by the young generation, the army, the workers, the producers—in a word, by the nation. (Approval.) Representatives by the twofold consecration of universal suffrage, you have obeyed its chief wish in saving the republic. (Cheers.) You will execute the others in assuring for the nation, in accord with the government, the benefits of peace, the guarantees of liberty, and the reforms claimed by opinion and founded on justice. (Prolonged applause.)

No. 154. Mr. Noyes to Mr. Evarts. [Document 175]

No. 154.
Mr. Noyes to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Paris, March 14, 1879. (Received March 28.) No. 208.]

Sir: Last evening the Chamber of Deputies, which is now the real seat of power in Prance, disposed finally of the question of the impeachment of the De Broglie and Rocheboüet ministries, after an animated debate of six hours, by rejecting the proposition of impeachment by 158 majority, and then passing a severe censure upon those ministries.

It is now fifteen months since the utter discomfiture and retirement of the two successive ministries which endeavored to carry out a reactionary movement in accordance with what is known as the policy of the 16th of May, and during all that time the question of their impeachment has been before the public. As the passions of the hour died out it diminished in interest, and few watched the proceedings of the committee charged with the question until a few days ago, when the committee was about to report in favor of the impeachment, it suddenly developed into a matter of cardinal importance by the declaration of Mr. Waddington, the prime minister, that the present ministry would oppose the impeachment as inopportune and unwise, and would resign if the proposition was not defeated, and defeated by a vote which should include a majority of the Republicans. There has been no doubt for some time that the impeachment would be defeated, for the whole of the members belonging to the Eight were sure to vote against the impeachment of their former chiefs; but whether the majority against it would be so great as to include also a majority of the whole of the groups of the Left, has been doubted. Hence the great anxiety with which this debate has been watched by business men and the general public, who care less for ordinary political struggles, but dread ministerial crises and changes.

By the French constitution the impeachment of a cabinet for political acts, whether it is proposed while it is in power or after it has retired, must be directed against the whole cabinet jointly. Individual members can only be impeached for individual acts. The impeachment resotion reported by Mr. Brisson from the committee, therefore, provided for the impeachment and trial before the senate of all the members of the De Broglie ministry, as well as their immediate successors, the Rocheboüet ministry, who for a short time continued the policy of the 16th of May.

The chamber met at 2.30 p.m. as usual, and nearly five hundred members were in their seats from the first moment. Every possible place in the galleries was occupied long before.

Mr. Gambetta, the president of the chamber, reminded the members at the opening of the debate that they were sitting as the national grand jury.

Two ineffectual attempts to divert or prevent the debate were made by members of the right—Mr. Lenglé, a Bonapartist, who tried to introduce an attack upon the minister of finances, Mr. Léon Say; and Mr. Baudry-d’Asson, who demanded the previous question, which was not supported.

Mr. Léon Renault then ascended the tribune. His clear and incisive eloquence and his personal character as a conservative republican who has rendered great services to the cause of free government insured him the attention of the house. It must not be understood, however, that by giving attention to a speaker a French assembly keeps silence. On the contrary, the interruptions of approval, the strong murmurs of dissent, the animated and loud responses to every utterance of the speaker are the disorderly and noisy marks of attention which sometimes extinguish for a moment the voice of the orator. He spoke against the impeachment of the De Broglie and Rocheboüet ministries as ill-timed and ill-advised, which he could do without suspicion of favoring their acts, as he had denounced them at the time, from that very tribune while those men were in power, with unsparing severity. He sustained the present ministry in the position it had taken so promptly and boldly; he cited the authority of the recent prime minister, Mr. Dufaure, in support of the same view, and he appealed to the chamber to govern and not agitate the country.

Mr. Brisson, the author of the committee’s report, and of the resolution of impeachment, followed in a forcible and ingenious speech of an hour, denouncing the iniquities of the De Broglie ministry, its conspiracy to overturn the republican government which it had been charged to administer, and protesting against the intervention of the Waddington cabinet as an attempt to change what was really a purely judicial question into a ministerial issue. He replied to Mr. Renault by citing his speeches declaring that the De Broglie ministry was amenable, and ought to be brought to justice. He created a sensation when he produced certain telegrams, found only the day before at the war department, which disclosed the imminence of a coup d’etat; one was an instruction from General Rocheboüet, minister of war and head of the cabinet, issued to the generals of the army when the country was in profound tranquillity, directing the immediate organization of light, vigorous, movable columns to be constantly ready, the putting aside of officers who were fatigued or “hesitating.” This was done, the instruction said, in view of “the circumstances through which we are passing, [December 8, 1877,] and the rapidity with which strikes and troubles spread, a few weeks ago, throughout the United States.” He read the manly response of a corps commander, General Aymard, to this remarkable instruction: “No officer will be ‘hesitating’ if the government remains within the law and the constitution.”

Mr. Waddington, the president of the council, then addressed the chamber in a brief speech, defining and justifying the position of the government. He recognized the fact that there was much which was criminal in the course of the ministries of the 16th of May; the manner in which they had tortured the words of the law to justify unlawful measures, the oppression of private citizens, of the functionaries of the government, of magistrates, of the press—all this was true, and the report of Mr. Brisson would remain a document for history. He pointed out for especial reprobation the perversion of the moral sense that was attempted, the false and unhappy position in which the humblest employé’s of the government were then placed, the trouble brought into families, the sinister influence upon society—offences that will long remain unforgotten and unpardoned by France. But while a prosecution may be in accord with abstract justice, it is not well now to revive the passions and hates that have slumbered for so many months, by a great trial, and excite an agitation which it may be difficult to check, and which is certain to last for a long time. It will hinder the chamber from applying itself to the great public works which just now demand attention, and the injury it will do to the general course of business in the country will certainly be charged by the people to the account of republican government. Happily, all the departments, executive and legislative, of the government are now cordially in harmony; the republic is quiet and strong; all its machinery is working peacefully and well. The country does not want new strife. It is tired of purely political struggles, and expects the government-—and this is the programme of the cabinet—to do all that can be done to relieve industry now suffering, to organize and perfect education so as to include all the people, to modify the tariff, to improve the condition and efficiency of the army, to watch over and foster the material interests of the people at home and the honor and interests of France among other nations. The Republican party should look forward and not backward, to reforms in the future and not to revenges in the past. And what in fact can be added by way of punishment or reprobation to the solemn verdict of universal suffrage condemning these men?

Mr. Floquet, of the extreme left, spoke earnestly for impeachment; Mr. Le Père, the minister of the interior, supported the views of Mr. Waddington; Mr. Madier de Montjan closed the debate by a violent appeal to the most radical views of the left, to which he belongs.

The right took no part in the debate.

The vote stood 159 in favor of impeachment and 317 against, majority, 158; of the republicans about 50 majority against impeachment.

Two other questions still remain, after this signal success, to trouble the ministry—one, regarding the removal of the capital from Versailles to Paris; the other, the proposed attachment of the police system, now under the control of the municipal authority, to the general government, which will be insisted on by the ministry.

I have &c.,

EDWAED F. NOYES.

No. 155. Mr. Noyes to Mr. Evarts. [Document 176]

No. 155.
Mr. Noyes to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Paris, March 28, 1879. (Received April 12.) No. 211.]

Sir: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your instruction, No. 135, of the 5th instant, inclosing a sealed letter addressed by the President of the United States to the president of the French republic, in answer to one received from him under date of the 2d of February last, announcing his elevation in the above-mentioned character; an office copy of the same was also inclosed.

On the same day on which I received it, the 25th instant, I delivered the office copy to the minister of foreign affairs, with a request that he would indicate in what manner the original should be communicated to President Grévy.

On yesterday I received from the foreign office a note informing me that the president of the republic would receive me to-day, Friday, at two o’clock, at the palace of the Elysée, in private audience, for the delivery of the letter of the President of the United States.

Accordingly, at two o’clock to-day, I repaired to the palace where I was cordially received by the president. In delivering the letter of the President of the United States I said it gave me pleasure to be the instrument of communicating the congratulations of our President and to assure President Grévy that the friendly sentiments towards the French republic, and the good wishes for himself therein expressed were those entertained by all our people.

President Grévy thanked me for the expression of good will towards himself, and said he was deeply sensible of the kindly expressions of the President of the United States; he said, “the friendly feeling of the two governments and of the two peoples is ancient, but it has never been warmer or more justly founded than to-day, when they are both republics and have so many sympathies and interests in common; nothing that I can do to cement and continue these relations will be omitted”

I have &c.,

EDWAED F. NOYES.

No. 156. Mr. Evarts to Mr. Noyes. [Document 177]

No. 156.
Mr. Evarts to Mr. Noyes.

Department of State,
Washington April 25, 1879. No. 148.]

Sir: The President having been informed by Mr. Ferdinand de Lesseps that an international conference, under the auspices of the Geographical Society of Paris, is to meet at that place on the 15th proximo, and invited to send delegates on behalf of the United States, has concluded to designate Rear Admiral Daniel Ammen and Civil Engineer A. J. Menocal, of the United States Navy, for that purpose, especially as the conference proposes to discuss the various projects which have been suggested for the construction of an interoceanic canal across the Isthmus of Panama.

The conference is understood not to partake in any way of an official or diplomatic character, but to be simply an informal gathering of scientific men who desire to interchange views regarding the best mode of executing a scheme in which the whole civilized world is necessarily deeply interested. These gentlemen, therefore, thus commissioned by the President, will have no official powers or diplomatic functions, and are not authorized to hold official communication with the French government or its officers, except such as may by virtue of their connection with the French Geographical Society, or as delegates ad hoc, take part in the proceedings of the conference. Furthermore, they are not empowered to state what will be the decision of this government in regard to the points involved, or the line of action it will pursue.

A copy of the instructions by which the delegates are expected to be governed is herewith inclosed for your information. I inclose an open letter, addressed to Mr. de Lesseps, accepting the invitation extended to the United States, which I will thank you to cause to be sealed and delivered or forwarded to that gentleman after you shall have read it.

I am, &c.,

WM. M. EVARTS.

No. 157. Mr. Noyes to Mr. Evarts. [Document 178]

No. 157.
Mr. Noyes to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Paris, May 30, 1879. (Received June 11.) No. 228.]

Sir: I beg leave to congratulate you, and through you the President, upon the magnificent manner in which the representatives of the United States acquitted themselves in the Interoceanic Canal Congress, which has just closed its session in Paris.

In a congress composed in considerable part of the most learned and experienced civil engineers of the world, by common consent it is admitted that no government appeared to better advantage than our own. Rear-Admiral Ammen presented the general considerations pertaining to the subject with great force and attractiveness, while Mr. Menocal, civil engineer, exhibited the maps and explained the details of our surveys in a manner which convinced the leading scientific members of the congress, and commanded the admiration of all. Other American representatives also took prominent part in the discussions.

As to the final determination, the practicability of the plan adopted, and the inducements which controlled the decision, I do not feel at liberty to speak. But all that will, of course, be embodied in the report which will be made by your delegates.

For the first time, the civil engineers and others in Europe know something of what has been done by the United States Government in the matter of the interoceanic canal across the American isthmus.

I have, &c.,

EDWARD F. NOYES.

No. 158. Mr. Hunter to Mr. Noyes. [Document 179]

No. 158.
Mr. Hunter to Mr. Noyes.

Department of State,
Washington, July 17, 1879. No. 163.]

Sir: I transmit herewith for your information, and with a view to the ascertainment of the facts therein reported, a copy of a dispatch recently received from the United States minister resident and consul-general at Monrovia, informing the Department that the French consul general at that place had offered to the Liberian government the protection of that of France. A recent dispatch from Commodore R. W. Shufeldt, who, with the Ticonderoga has lately visited the west coast of Africa on a special mission, gives the report in substantially the same dress.

When it is considered that this government founded and fostered the nucleus of native representative, government on the African shores, and that Liberia, so created, affords a field of emigration and enterprise for the lately emancipated Africans of this country, who have not been slow to avail themselves of the opportunity, it is evident that this government must feel a peculiar interest in any apparent movement to divert the independent political life of Liberia for the aggrandizement of a great continental power which already has a foothold of actual trading possession on the neighboring coast.

You are doubtless aware that the policy of the adjacent British settlement of Sierra Leone has of late years been one of encroachment, if not of positive unfriendliness, toward Liberia, and it may prove that the policy of France in this matter may be merely antagonistic to British encroachment, and designed rather to aid that feeble republic to maintain its independent status, with development of trade with France and French possessions, than to merge Liberia in the outlying system of that country. If so, it is desirable at least that the United States should be cognizant of the true tendency of the movement.

You are, therefore, instructed to make such judicious and confidential inquiries as shall, without communicating undue importance to the matter, put you in possession of the facts, Your report thereon is awaited with interest.

I am, &c.,

W. HUNTER,
Acting Secretary.

No. 159. Mr. Noyes to Mr. Evarts. [Document 180]

No. 159.
Mr. Noyes to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Paris, August 20, 1879. (Received September 4.) No. 256.]

Sir: Referring to the confidential dispatch from the Department of State, No. 163, of date July 17, 1879, I have the honor to report that immediately upon receipt of said communication, careful and judicious inquiries were instituted by this legation in well-informed quarters as to the facts suggested in the dispatch of the Acting Secretary of State, and set forth in that of Mr. Smyth, United States minister resident and consul-general at Monrovia. The result of this investigation is as follows: 1st. The French Government has no diplomatic or consular representative of any grade in Liberia, hence the French consul-general at Monrovia could not have offered to the Liberian Government the protection of that of France.

2d. The French Government has never proposed or expressed a desire that Liberia should be placed under its protectorate; it has, on the contrary, declined to entertain any scheme looking to such result.

3d. The proposition referred to originated with the Liberian consul-general at Bordeaux, Mr. Car ranee, and was perhaps seconded by the Liberian consul at Paris, Mr. Huart, the former having the advantage of superior rank, and the latter as “nearer the throne.” These officials are both Frenchmen, but are not believed to be persons of such standing and influence as to attach to their movements any considerable importance. They are doubtless animated by the very laudable ambition to figure in the diplomatic world, and to be known to fame as the prime movers in a great governmental enterprise, but their success hitherto has not been very pronounced.

For months Mr. Carrance has besieged the French foreign office to represent and advocate the advantages which would accrue to France by extending her protectorate over Liberia. He has pressed this scheme not only at the foreign office but also at the ministry of commerce, at the chamber of commerce of Bordeaux, and before Mr. Gambetta.

It can be safely stated that he has nowhere met with any encouragement. At the foreign office he was told that such protectorate could hardly benefit French commerce, and, moreover, that it would not probably be satisfactory and agreeable to the Government of the United States, whose susceptibilities the French Government would always desire to respect. Indeed, I think I am justified in saying that the persistency of the Liberian consul-general has been so annoying, that he is not likely to be hereafter received by the minister for foreign affairs in audience upon this subject.

Mr. Huart, the Liberian consul here, admits that he has endeavored to secure the “commercial protection” of France for Liberia, but denies having had anything to do with the political scheme of Mr. Carrance, which he considers as unwise. I am informed that Mr. Huart’s time recently has been largely occupied in efforts to induce the Government of Liberia to create an order of nobility, and to provide decorations for distinguished public service, one of which, it is to be hoped, will hereafter adorn the person of the able Liberian consul.

In conclusion, I have the honor to say that I am satisfied there is no cause for apprehension that the French Government will for a moment listen to the propositions of these intermeddling and superserviceable officials, who, I strongly suspect, in this matter represent nobody but themselves.

I have, &c.

EDWARD F. NOYES.

No. 160. Mr. Seward to Mr. Noyes. [Document 181]

No. 160.
Mr. Seward to Mr. Noyes.

Department of State,
Washington, August 29, 1879. No. 178.]

Sir: The earnest efforts now being made by the French Government to extend the commercial influence of France toward the rich interior of Africa, southward from the Mediterranean and eastward from the Atlantic coast north of the equator, are, at the present time, deserving of serious attention, as indications of confidence in the existence there of great commercial opportunities. The activity displayed on all hands to this end, the large internal improvements of railways and highways in Algeria, the tentative movement recently to gain an influential foothold in Tunis, the late successful intervention in the affairs of Egypt, jointly with Great Britain, to procure the deposition of Ismail Pacha, the interest taken in France in even the wildest engineering schemes looking to the commercial opening-up of the interior of North Africa to French traders and French goods, such as the projected conversion by French capital of the Desert of Sahara into an inland sea, and the still bolder scheme of a desert railway from Algiers to the French settlements on the Senegal, all these point strongly to a conviction in the minds of thoughtful Frenchmen that a great opportunity for trade lies back of the African coast, which will, in great measure, fall to the nation having the foresight to open such a trade, the chance to develop it, and the ability to produce, at the cheapest, but still sufficiently remunerative rates, the wares to be bartered for native products.

In connection with this subject, attention may be given also to the rapid growth of French influence on the west coast from a mere trading-station on the Senegal River to the present occupancy, with more or less of colonial rule, of the adjacent territory, and to the very recent offer of a protectorate over Liberia, with the apparent idea of sandwiching Sierra Leone between two outposts of French trade, and so diminishing or neutralizing British trade and influence.

A reason for this activity is not, it is thought, far to seek. France is almost the first among the countries of Europe to show signs of recovery from the era of commercial disaster which began in 1873, and which, while touching France more lightly than her neighbors, still checked her production by diminishing the markets for her products. With the anticipated revival of trade, a renewal and increase of production is necessary, and for this markets must be found, if not among the already producing countries which are yet suffering from the widespread depression, then among the new countries accessible to French trade, and needing particularly those classes of manufactures which France can most cheaply and profitably supply.

The same considerations, however, should apply to the United States with nearly the same force as to France. Emerging, like her, from the recent gloom, our mills, looms, and furnaces resuming their work, and a growing demand for skilled labor apparent, with an abundant harvest to support our labor, besides responding to the foreign demand for breadstuffs, the country seems about to enter upon a period of renewed prosperity and increased production. Like France, we need new markets, where the quality and price of our wares will insure ready sale or profitable barter. Rivaling England and France in their own home manufactures, with American cutlery and agricultural hardware on sale in Sheffield, and American cottons finding buyers in the Cotes du Nord, it would seem no impossibility to compete with those great manufacturing powers on new ground almost equally accessible to all alike, or with only a few days or weeks of sea-voyage in favor of the nearer over the remoter trader.

Consideration, therefore, of appropriate means for gaining a share in the commerce of the Mediterranean and interior districts of North Africa, is comprehended in the general schemes for the extension and remunerative maintenance of our long stagnant commerce which have for some years past so engrossed the attention of this department, and in general respect to which the files of your legation contain comprehensive instructions.

Observing the prominent part which the influence of France in particular among the Mediterranean countries of Europe plays in the relation of Europe with the peoples on the opposite African coast, it would seem that, if the United States are to look hopefully for a share of the yet undeveloped trade which France appears so anxious to secure, the most natural initial step should be to cause American influence to be felt in those Mediterranean countries, if not in the same emphatic manner as in the early part of this century by Preble and Decatur, at least in a way potential for the material good of commerce and civilization.

The consular representation of the United States in those countries is necessarily limited in its scope by geographical and political bounds, the channels of diplomatic influence are barred to it, and it must perforce follow the existing course of events rather than initiate any effective and far-reaching movement.

In view of the foregoing suggestions and considerations, it is deemed advisable that a careful examination be made on the spot by some one not alone qualified to judge and report what may be necessary to open and extend the commerce of the United States along the Mediterranean and perhaps the west coast of Africa, but who shall also be enabled by his ability and position to cause American influence to be authoritatively felt, not in one country, but in all which he may visit, and to enter upon any needful commercial negotiation with the autonomous or independent States. These requisites are thought to be combined in you, and by the President’s direction you are delegated to perform this important public service, for which you are fitted, as well by the dignity of the office you fill as by your intimate and useful personal insight into and knowledge of the policy of France with respect to her African possessions. For this purpose the period of three or four months will probably be sufficient, but if you find otherwise your request for an extension will receive favorable consideration. As you are already a salaried officer of the government, no other compensation or allowance will be made to you than that you now receive.

You will set out upon this journey as soon as your preparations for the work may be conveniently completed. You will visit the principal towns and stations of trade on the accessible parts of the African coast, penetrating to the interior if you deem it necessary to do so, in order to report fully and understandingly on the needs and opportunities of American commerce there. You will confer freely with the native authorities and with the United States consuls in the ports you may visit, and will omit no proper method to subserve the main object in view. If, in your conferences with the native authorities, you are enabled to attain any general or special understanding which may be beneficial to American commerce, you are authorized to reduce it to the form of an official protocol, subject to the approval of this government.

You will from time to time, as may be convenient, report the progress of your journey, and on its conclusion you will embody its results in a comprehensive report to the department, with expression of your own views and judgment in the matter. Whatever communications you may address to the department in relation to the business of this special mission may be marked “separate,” to distinguish them from the regular series of your legation.

Anticipating good results from the service thus asked of you by the President,

I am, &c.

F. W. SEWARD,
Acting Secretary.

No. 161. Mr. Noyes to Mr. Evarts. [Document 182]

No. 161.
Mr. Noyes to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Paris, September 3, 1879. (Received September 17.) No. 263.]

Sir: On receipt of your instruction No. 132, of date February 18, 1879, I immediately addressed a note to Mr. Waddington, informing him of the important inquiry with which the commission, of which Mr. Charles Francis Adams, jr., is chairman, was occupied in regard to the methods of taxation as respects railroad securities, and requesting information in answer to the seven questions set forth in your instruction.

I have this morning received a reply from Mr. Waddington transmitting three notes which have been prepared by the various departments to which the subjects treated belong, and which are believed to answer the questions propounded by the commission.

I have the honor to inclose these documents with a copy and translation of Mr. Waddington’s letter.

I have, &c.,

EDWARD F. NOYES.

[Inclosure 1 in duplicate No. 263.]

Mr. Waddington to Mr. Noyes.

Paris, August 30, 1879.

General: In the letter which you did me the honor to write me on the 4th of March last, you expressed the wish to receive, on behalf of a commission appointed by the delegates of the railway companies of the United States, precise information in regard to the system of taxation applicable to the French railways.

The three notes inclosed, which emanate from the different competent administrations, will furnish an answer, General, to the questions you have propounded.

Accept the assurances of the high consideration, &c.

WADDINGTON.

Note.

[undated].

Ministry of Finance. Direction of the Office of Employment and General Inspection. Control of Financial Affairs. Department of Registration, Domains, and Stamp Duties. Taxation of Railways.

Railway companies are subject to the following regulations as regards taxes payable to the department of registration, domains, and stamp duties.

I. Railway grants to private companies are subject to the fixed registration tax only. All schedules of clauses and conditions contain a formal clause on this subject.

The sale of the grant by the company to a third party is, however, subject to the 2 per cent. tax established for the sale of personal property.

II. Documents furnishing evidence of the purchase of the necessary lands for the construction of railways are stamped and registered gratis, whenever such lands are purchased directly by the State (law of 22d Frimaire, year VII, art. 70, § 2, No. 1. Dec. Min. Fin., June 11, 1823), or when, being purchased by a company receiving a grant, this is done (as is almost always the case) by virtue of the law of May 3, 1841, concerning dispossession on the ground of public utility. Adjudications or transfers of works or supplies made by the government for railways without grants and not in operation are subject only to the fixed graduated tax (law of February 28, 1872, art. 1, No. 9). Adjudications or transfers of the same kind, made by companies that have received grants, are governed by the common law.

They are consequently subject to a tax of 2 or of 1 per cent. on the principal, according as they do or do not convey ownership of personal property (law of Frimaire 22, year VII, art. 69,§ 3, No. 1, and§ 5, No. 1), but the case arising, the law of June 11, 1879, may become operative; this law permits provisional registration, at the fixed rate, of transfers having the character of commercial transactions.

III. As to documents, &c., connected with their operation, railways are likewise subject to the common law. Thus, passage tickets and baggage checks or receipts pay, like receipts of individuals, a stamp duty of 10 centimes when the sum paid by the debtor exceeds 10 francs. (Law of August 23, 1871, art. 18.)

One exception, however, should be noticed; unlike other carriers by land or by water, for whom the freight list is purely optional, railway companies are obliged to deliver a stamped receipt for each shipment (law of May 13, 1863, art. 10), and the intermediate agents who unite packages sent to different destinations in one or more shipments are obliged to give a similar receipt for each person to whom the packages are addressed. (Law of March 30, 1872, art. 2.) But railway companies and package-men pay for each receipt, whatever be the dimensions of the paper, only 35 centimes (express) or 70 centimes (freight), including the stamp duty and the receipt of the party to whom the goods are addressed (laws of August 23, 1871, art. 2, February 28, 1872, art. 11, and March 30, 1872, art. 1), while other carriers must have all the papers that they think proper to draw up stamped, to wit, receipts on which the tax is 10 centimes, and other papers at a tax rate varying from 50 centimes to 3 francs, the décimes according to the dimensions of the paper. (Law of July 2, 1862, art. 17, and August 23, 1871, art. 2.)

Railway companies are also obliged, like other carriers, to give a stamped receipt at 35 centimes for the real or fictitious transportation by them of money or valuables. (Law of February 19, 1874, art. 10.)

IV. The shares and bonds issued by railway companies are subject to the same taxes as similar documents of other companies.

They are subject to a stamp duty, which is fixed at 50 centimes or 1 franc per cent., according to the duration of the company’s existence, and for bonds at 1 franc per cent. invariably. This tax may, by agreement, be converted into an annual tax of 5 centimes per cent. (Law of June 5, 1850, arts., 14, 22, 27, and 31.)

The titles of shares and bonds are further subject to a transfer-tax of 50 centimes per cent., which is replaced for non-registered titles, and bonds, by an annual and obligatory tax of 20 centimes per cent. (Laws of June 23, 1857, art. 6, and June 29, 1872, art. 3.)

Finally, shares, bonds, and loans of railway companies are subject to a tax of 3 per cent. on the income which they yield. (Law of June 29, 1872, arts. 1, 2, and 3.)

V. Railway companies are obliged, under penalty of a fine of from 100 to 1,000 francs to exhibit their books, registers, titles, receipts, expenditures, and accounts to the officers of the department of registration, so that the latter may convince themselves that the stamps and registry laws are faithfully executed. (Laws of August 23, 1871, art. 22, and June 21, 1875, art. 7.)

VI. Railways operated by the government are subject to the same regulations as roads having received a grant, as regards taxes of all kinds.

Note.
Taxes paid by railway companies.

Department of Direct Taxes. [undated].

The first three questions propounded by the minister of United States in his letter of May 4 are the only ones that concern the department of direct taxes.

1st. On what principle is the tax based; that is, if a tax is paid by railways in France?

Railway companies are subject to the various direct taxes (principal and additional centimes), and thus contribute to the payment of the public burdens according to the amount of their presumptive income, in conformity with the principle of proportionality, which forms the basis of the laws governing direct taxes in France.

2d. To what extent are railway companies taxed as owners of real estate?

Railway companies are held to the payment of the land tax—a tax levied upon land not occupied by buildings, according to the net income which it yields. (Law of Frimaire 3, year VII.)

On lands occupied by the railway line and its dependencies, estimated on the same footing as the best tillable lands in the commune in which they are situated.

On depots, stations, buildings, &c., according to their net rentable value, which is determined by comparison with that of other property containing buildings, and situated in the same commune.

They pay, moreover, as a mortmain tax, which represents the rights of transmission between parties living and by decease (law of February 20, 1849), an amount, in addition to the land-tax, 0 fr., 87 c., 5 per franc on the computed amount of the land-tax established upon real estate, constituting in their hands an ordinary alienable property, and forming part neither of the railway nor of its dependencies.

They are subject to the door and window tax (law of Frimaire 4, year VII), which is levied upon the apertures of the dwellings of the employés of all the offices connected with their management, upon those of the waiting and refreshment rooms, repair shops, sheds for freight, &c. The income is presumed to be according to the importance of the premises, which importance depends upon the rentable value (land tax) and number of the apertures (door and window tax) to be assigned to them.

3d. What license do they pay?

Each company pays a fixed tax of 240 francs, and also a variable tax of 24 francs per myriametre, and a proportional tax calculated at the rate of one-twentieth of the real rentable value of the lodgings of the representatives of the company and of the offices, and at the rate of one-fortieth of that of the articles and buildings necessary for the operation of the road, and forming part of its industrial establishment, without diminishing the general additional centimes of the department and commune. The state is obliged to pay the same taxes as the companies on the lines operated by it.

Note.
Taxes paid by railway companies.

Department of Indirect Taxes. [undated].

The first and the sixth questions are the only ones of those propounded by the minister of the United States in his communication of the 4th of March last that concern the department of indirect taxes. The law of the 9th of Vendémiaire, year VI, imposed, in a general way, an indirect tax upon all articles for transportation by land and water. This tax is computed in proportion to the price paid by travelers for the seats which they occupy. The law of Ventôse 5, year XII, extended this levy to the price paid for the transportation of goods by public land conveyances. These laws, which were passed at a time when there were no railways, were, in virtue of their general character, applicable to these means of communication as soon as they came into use.

Subsequently, railways were specially designated in the laws of July 14, 1855, and September 16, 1871.

Under the laws of Vendémiaire, year VII, and of Ventôse, year XII, the indirect tax was 10 per cent. of the amount paid by fare as travelers, and likewise 10 per cent. of that paid as freight. The law of Prairial 16, year VII, added 1 per cent. as a war tax, and the law of July 14, 1855, also added 1 per cent., which increased the tax successively to 11 and 12 per cent.

Finally, the law of September 16, 1871, imposed an additional tax of 10 per cent. on the passage money paid by railway travelers and by persons traveling by stage and steamboat, and likewise upon the amount paid for the transportation of baggage and goods, (by express) by the same means of conveyance. According to the provisions of the said law, however, this additional tax is not collected upon amounts less than 50 centimes.

The principle that has governed the fixing of the tax on railways is that that tax should leave intact such sums as, according to the tariffs established by the conditions and the total, form the amount paid by the traveler. On this amount the companies retain the equivalent of their tariffs, and pay to the government, whose agents they become in this respect, the tax which they have collected for its account.

Hence it appears that the tax bears only upon the net receipts of the companies. This, however, is true only as regards the tax of 10 per cent. established by the laws Vendémiaire, year VII, and of Ventôse, year XII, and as regards the dècimes established by the laws of Prairial, year VII, and July, 1855.

According to the law of September 16, 1871, the additional tax of 10 per cent. established by that law bears, by way of exception, upon the net receipts of the companies increased by the first tax of 10 per cent. plus the two décimes. It is proper to add, however, that this additional tax does not affect tickets, the price of which is 50 Centimes and upward.

In short, on a net sum of 100 francs, received by the railway companies for their own account, and consisting of prices of tickets at 50 centimes and upward, the amount of tax due to the treasury and that of the sums collected from the public are established as follows: Francs.

Net receipts, company’s tariff 100.00

Former tax (principal, 10 francs; décimes, 2 francs) 12.00

112.00

Additional tax 11.20 francs 11.20

Duty, 23.20 francs on 123.20

price charged the public.

When the price of the tickets is less than 50 centimes, the additional tax established by the law of 187 L is not collected, as already remarked. The tax is then regulated as follows: Francs.

Net receipts for tickets sold at a price less than 50 centimes, company’s tariff 100

Former tax (principal, 10 francs; décimes, 2 francs) 12

Duty, 12 francs on 112

price charged the public.

The duty now collected by the office of indirect taxes on transportation by rail is therefore 23 francs 20 centimes per cent. on the net receipts, and 18 francs 83 centimes per cent. on the gross receipts for tickets sold at 50 centimes and upward, and 12 per cent. of the net receipts, or 10 francs 71 centimes per cent. of the gross receipts, for tickets sold at a price less than 50 centimes.

It is computed, not upon the amount that would be yielded if the entire capacity of the cars were occupied, but upon the amount actually received by the companies for places really occupied and for freight actually carried. It is collectible every six days, and is regulated at the expiration of every ten days according to the registers of the companies themselves, and under the supervision of an upper officer of the department of finance.

The tariffs above indicated are applied to large companies with roads of considerable extent.

Mere local railways, however, whose business is confined to the interior of certain large cities or within a limited radius around those cities, have the privilege, if they find the proportional duty, computed as above, too burdensome, of claiming the benefit of a law bearing date of June 28, 1833, modified by that of July 11, 1879, which has substituted for that proportional duty a fixed duty in favor of cars, which, in their regular trips from one fixed point to another, do not go beyond the limits of one city or beyond a radius of 40 kilometres from said limits. The tariff to be enforced under such conditions was fixed as follows by law of 1833, above referred to, and by that of July 11, 1879:

per car.

Of one and two places, 50 francs per year, principal and décimes.

Of three places, 75 francs per year, principal and décimes.

Of four places, 100 francs per year, principal and décimes.

Of five places, 120 francs per year, principal and décimes.

Of six places, 137.50 francs per year, principal and décimes.

For each place above 6 up to 50, inclusive, 12.50 francs per year, principal and décimes.

For each place above 50 up to 150, inclusive, 6.25 francs per year, principal and décimes.

For each place above 150, 3.125 francs per year, principal and décimes.

The fixed duty which is payable by railways not extending beyond a radius of more than 40 kilometres is collectible monthly in advance.

A law bearing date of March 21, 1874, established (as an extraordinary and temporary measure) a tax of 5 per cent. on the price of transportation of merchandise sent by slow trains. This tax was considered as being opposed to the development of industry and commerce, and it was declared inoperative on and after July 1, 1878, by the law of March 26 of the same year.

It may be interesting to know the indirect yield of the railways in France. The results of the years 1875, 1876, 1877, and 1878, were as follows: Years. Francs. Francs. Francs.

1875 55,566,210 13,475,782 69,041,992

1876 57,902,008 13,994,242 71,896,250

1877 57,457,166 14,645,322 71,502,488

1877 67,143,357 14,065,643 81,209,000

During the four years that it was in force (from March, 1874, to July, 1878) the tax of 5 per cent. on the price of transportation by slow trains yielded an average of from twenty-three to twenty-four millions per annum.

No. 162. Mr. Hitt to Mr. Evarts. [Document 183]

No. 162.
Mr. Hitt to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Paris, November 1, 1879. (Received November 20.) No. 285.]

Sir: After the receipt 6f your instruction No. 171, of date August 9, 1879, in reference to Mormon immigration into the United States from France, inquiry was made from time to time by General Noyes, before his departure for the East, of persons who, it was thought probable, would know the facts on the subject, but without eliciting anything more than negative information.

Reports in reply to your circular of August 30, 1879, to the consuls have been received from Mr. Catlin, commercial agent at La Rochelle, Mr. Herzberg, commercial agent at St. Etienne, and Mr. Gould, consul at Marseilles, all concurring in the statement that they could learn of no emigration from those districts to Utah.

I may here mention also the information I have received from a very intelligent young gentleman named McKnight of Mormon origin and sympathies, born in Utah, a nephew of Brigham Young, now temporarily resident in Paris. I believe he is the correspondent of the Saint Louis Globe-Democrat. He says there is no Mormon mission how in France, and no recruits are going from here; that many years ago Brigham Young, jr., was here and tried to establish a mission, but the authorities interfered; that Young was asked to lecture before some association on the Mormon system of colonization, but replied that it was impossible to explain it without going into the doctrines of the church, as the doctrines and the system of emigration and colonization were inseparable; there are numerous French-speaking members of the Mormon church, but they are mostly from Louisiana; no French-speaking Mormon missionaries are now at work anywhere. When the effort to establish a French mission was made, twenty-five years ago, John Taylor, now the president, then an elder, of the Mormon church, was at Boulogne, but failed, the English church there opposing him vehemently, and the authorities there suppressing the movement. No attempt has since been made in France. This statement is confirmed by Mr. Alfales Young, a son of Brigham Young, who is pursuing legal studies in Paris, and whom I have seen.

In consequence of the absence of Mr. Waddington from the capital during the long parliamentary vacation almost all the time, it was not convenient for General Noyes to call Iris attention personally to this subject.

Yesterday, in an interview with Mr. Waddington, at the foreign office, I stated to him the purport of your circular, the character of the Mormon immigration, and the legislation by Congress against polygamy; and added that the recent activity of Mormon immigration into the United States from various countries, especially those of the North of Europe, and the fact that this movement was organized by men who avowed the purpose of incorporating these people into a community where polygamy was practiced in defiance of law, had made it seem fitting to you to have the subject presented to the attention of European governments, and that of France among the rest, with a view of checking the organization of these criminal enterprises, and preventing the departure of men proposing to violate our laws; that I was not aware that such a movement was being attempted in France, and had been informed that there was none; and therefore did not ask for any action on his part now, but that I would take pleasure in communicating to you any expression of opinion or disposition which he might choose to make.

Mr. Waddington said the Mormon movement was one which he thought had never made any headway in France; he had not heard of their doing anything, and did not think it probable. The French people do not take to such attempts at religious innovation nor to schemes of emigration of any kind. They take no interest in an appeal to fanaticism, and cannot easily be led to enter into it. If anything of the kind came to our knowledge, he would like to be informed of it. He continued:

“As to the practical question of preventing the departure of a person who proposed to emigrate, there may be difficulties; for if a Frenchman has satisfied all the requirements of our military laws, I do not know just how we can keep him from going away; but as to their preaching or inculcating polygamy, we have a prompt remedy. Polygamy is a crime under French law as much as it is a crime under American law, and if any one is caught advocating it, we will have him arrested and punished or expelled from France. I think it is improbable that French people can be drawn into any Mormon schemes of emigration. They care nothing at all about the Mormon religion.”

* * * * * * *

He said that he understood that General Noyes, of whom he made very kind inquiries, in his present trip to the East, and North Africa had a special mission from our government. I replied that the general proposed to collect information in regard to the commerce of those countries with which we have now little trade, and to inquire as to the possibility of increasing it; that North Africa was now a region of vague possibilities, and I mentioned the reported meeting of engineers, at the department of agriculture and commerce the day before, to consider and arrange a preliminary survey or reconnaisance of the route of the trans-Saharien railway from Algiers to Timbuctoo.

* * * * * * *

After other conversation on personal topics I took my leave of Mr. Waddington, he remarking on parting: “Please let me know if you learn of the Mormons commencing any efforts in France; and you will be more likely than I to hear of it. We will soon stop them if they say anything about polygamy, and, if you choose, will banish such persons from the country.”

I have &c.,

R. R. HITT.

Germany.Germany.

[184] . Mr. Taylor to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Berlin, November 8, 1878. (Received November 27.)

[185] . Mr. Taylor to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Berlin, November 18, 1878. (Received December 4.)

[186] . Mr. Everett to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Berlin, December 21, 1878. (Received January 9, 1879.)

[187] . Mr. Everett to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Berlin, January 6, 1879. (Received January 27.)

[188] . Mr. Everett to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Berlin, January 9, 1879. (Received January 27.)

[189] . Mr. Everett to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Berlin, February 15, 1879. (Received March 6.)

[190] . Mr. Everett to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States. Berlin, February 17. 1879. (Received March 6.)

[191] . Mr. Everett to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Berlin, March 13, 1879. (Received April 5.)

[192] . Mr. Everett to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Berlin, March 21, 1879. (Received April 12.)

[193] . Mr. Everett to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Berlin, April 23, 1879. (Received May 8.)

[194] . Mr. Everett to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Berlin, May 5, 1879.

[195] . Mr. Everett to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Berlin, May 5, 1879. (Received May 22.)

[196] . Mr. Everett to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Berlin, May 19, 1879. (Received June 11.)

[197] . Mr. Everett to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Berlin, June 2, 1879. (Received June 19.)

[198] . Mr. White to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Berlin, June 25, 1879. [Received July 18.]

[199] . Mr. White to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Berlin, June 30, 1879. (Received July 18.)

[200] . Mr. White to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Berlin, July 3, 1879. (Received July 23.)

[201] . Mr. White to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Berlin, July 12, 1879. (Received August 6.)

[202] . Mr. White to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Berlin, August 15, 1879. (Received September 4.)

[203] . Mr. White to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Berlin, September 9, 1879. (Received September 24.)

[204] . Mr. White to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Berlin, October 15, 1879. (Received November 3.)

[205] . Mr. Schlözer to Mr. Evarts.

Imperial German Legation, Washington, December 2, 1878. (Received December 3.)

[206] . Mr. Evarts to Mr. Schlözer.

Department of State, Washington, December 17, 1878.

[207] . Mr. Schlözer to Mr. Evarts.

Imperial German Legation, Washington, March 2, 1879. (Received March 5.)

[208] . Mr. Evarts to Mr. Schlözer.

Department of State, Washington, April 17, 1879.

No. 163. Mr. Taylor to Mr. Evarts. [Document 184]

No. 163.
Mr. Taylor to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Berlin, November 8, 1878. (Received November 27.) No. 54.]

Sir: I herewith transmit to you a copy of the Exceptional Law (Ausnahme Gesetz), for the suppression of the social democratic movement, adopted by the Imperial Parliament on the 19th ultimo, together with a complete translation of the same (inclosure A).

The discussion of this law occupied forty-one days, and its passage, in spite of a strong popular opposition, was finally brought about by a union of the moderate-liberal and free-conservative native elements in the Parliament—the two extremes, progressists and social democrats on the one side, and ultra-conservative, ultramontane, and Polish, being united against it. The vote by which it was adopted, 220 yeas to 149 nays, may therefore be considered as not only a government victory, but also as expressing the sentiment of the most prudent, conscientious, and patriotic members of the legislative body. The end, however, was not attained until the imperial council had consented to make important modifications in the original project of the law, especially in limiting the period of its operation to the 31st of March, 1881, or a little less than two years and a half from the time of its promulgation.

The law is now in the process of enforcement in all parts of the empire. Although the government had allowed the impression to be disseminated that the suppressive measures would be enforced in a liberal and charitable spirit, they have thus far been carried into effect with the utmost rigor. All protest is overwhelmed, and the social-democratic party for the present passively submits to the assault. The mass of the German people is awaiting further results, but without any very strong feeling of confidence. It is probable that the present quiet will continue for some time before any new movement, which may be fermenting beneath the surface, shall betray its character.

I have, &c.,

BAYARD TAYLOR.

[Inclosure in No. 54.—Translation.]

Law against the endeavors (constituting a common danger) of the social democracy.

We, William, by the grace of God German Emperor, King of Prussia, &c., decree in the name of the empire, the consent of the Federal Council and of the Imperial Parliament having been first obtained, as follows:

§ 1. Societies which aim through social-democratic, socialistic, or communistic endeavors at the overthrow of the existing state or social order, are to be prohibited. This applies also to societies in which social-democratic, socialistic, or communistic endeavors aiming at the overthrow of the existing state or social order, are manifested in a manner dangerous to the public peace, and particularly to the harmony of the classes of the population.

All kinds of associations stand on the same footing as societies.

§ 2. § 35 of the law of July 4, 1868, concerning the legal status of industrial and economistic associations (Imperial Law Bulletin, page 415 ff.), applies to registered mutual associations in the case of § I, subdivision 2.

In the same case, § 29 of the law concerning registered aid associations of April 7, 1876 (Imperial Law Bulletin, page 125 ff.), applies to registered aid associations.

§ 3. Independent treasury associations (not registered) which aim according to their statutes at the mutual aid of their members, are in the case of § I, subdivision 2, primarily not to be prohibited, but only to be placed under an extraordinary state control.

Where several independent associations of the above-mentioned description are affiliated, the severance from the affiliation and the placing under control of one of them in which the endeavors described in§ I, subdivision 2, are manifested, may he decreed.

In the same manner the control may be confined to a branch association in which such endeavors are manifested.

§ 4. The authority invested with the control is entitled: 1. To attend all sessions and assemblies of the society.

2. To call and conduct general assemblies.

3. To inspect the books, papers, and funds, and to demand information as to the relations of the society.

4. To forbid the carrying out of resolutions which are calculated to further the endeavors described in § 1, subdivision 2.

5. To intrust to suitable persons the performance of the functions of the head or other leading organs of the society.

6. To take charge of and manage the funds.

§ 5. In case the general assembly, the head or another managing organ of the society act in opposition to the decrees of the controlling authority made within the scope of its privileges, or in case the endeavors described in § 1, subdivision 2, are manifested after the institution of the control, the society may be prohibited.

§ 6. The prohibition and the decree placing under control, appertain to the state police authority. The prohibition of foreign societies appertains to the imperial chancellor.

The prohibition is in all cases to be made known through the Imperial Advertiser, and the prohibition by the state-police authority, in addition, through the journal of the place or district employed for official publications.

The prohibition is valid for the entire empire and embraces all affiliations of the society, as well as every pretended new society which appears in reality to be but the old one.

§ 7. On the ground of the prohibition, the society funds, as well as all objects destined for its uses, are to be seized by the authority.

After the prohibition has become final, the managing authority designated by the state police authority must intrust the liquidation of the business of the society to suitable persons, and watch over the same, and must also make known the names of the persons liquidating.

The determination of the managing authority takes the place of the determination by the general assembly provided for by the laws or statutes.

The liquidated property of the society is, without detriment to the legal claims of third parties, and of the members of the society, to be applied in accordance with the statutes of the society, or, as the case may be, with general legal provisions.

The period when the prohibition becomes final is to be considered the period of the dissolution or closing of the society.

Against the decrees of the authority appeal lies only to the supervising authorities.

§ 8. The prohibition decreed by the state police authority, as well as the establishment of a control, is to be made known to the head of the society in case there be one within the state, in writing, with the reasons therefor. Against such decree the head of the society may appeal as provided in§ 26.

The appeal must be made within a week after receipt of notice of the decree to the authority from which it emanated.

The appeal has no retarding effect.

§ 9. Assemblies in which social-democratic, socialistic or communistic endeavors which aim at the overthrow of the existing order of the state, or of society, are manifested, are to be dissolved.

Assemblies with regard to which the assumption is justified by facts that they are intended to further the endeavors described in the first subdivision, are to be prohibited.

Public festivities and processions are to be treated in like manner as assemblies.

§ 10. Prohibition and dissolution appertain to the police authority. Appeal lies only to the supervising authorities.

§ 11. Printed matter in which social-democratic, socialistic, or communistic endeavors aimed at the overthrow of the existing order of the state, or of society, are manifested in a manner calculated to endanger public peace, and particularly the harmony of all classes of the population, are to be, prohibited.

In the case of printed matter published periodically, the prohibition may extend to further publication as soon as the prohibition of a single number has ensued, pursuant to this law.

§ 12. The prohibition appertains to the state police authority, and, in the case of printed matter published within the empire, the state police authority of the district in which it appears. The prohibition of the further distribution of periodical printed matter published abroad appertains to the imperial chancellor.

The prohibition is to be made known in the manner prescribed in § 6, subdivision 2, and is valid for the entire empire.

§ 13. The prohibition of printed matter by the state police authority is to be made known in writing, with the grounds of the same, to the publisher or editor, and in the case of printed matter not periodic, to the editor named in the same, where the persons in question are within the empire.

Against this decision the publisher, or editor, or author has the right of appeal. (See § 26.)

The appeal must be submitted to the authority from which the decree has emanated within a week after its receipt.

The appeal has no retarding effect.

§ 14. On the ground of this prohibition, the printed matter affected thereby is to be seized wherever found for the purpose of being distributed. The seizure may extend to the plates and forms, to be used in reproduction; in the case of printed matter in a more restricted sense, an expurgation of the objectionable part, instead of a seizure, may take place upon the request of the person affected. The printed matter, plates, and forms seized are to be made unserviceable when the prohibition becomes final.

Appeal lies only to the supervising authorities.

§ 15. The police authority is entitled to seize provisionally, printed matter of the character described in § 11, as well as plates and forms to be used in its reproduction, before the declaration of a prohibition. The printed matter seized is to be lodged with the state police authority within twenty-four hours. The latter must at once either direct the restoration of the matter seized, or issue a decree of prohibition within a week. If the prohibition does not ensue within this period the seizure becomes void, and the different pieces, plates, and forms must be restored.

§ 16. The collection of contributions for the furtherance of social, democratic, socialistic, or communistic endeavors aiming at the overthrow of the existing order of the state, or of society, as well as a public appeal for such contributions, are to be prohibited by the police authorities. The prohibition is to be publicly made known.

Appeal lies only to the supervising authorities.

§ 17. Whoever takes part as a member in a prohibited society (§ 6), or displays activity in its interest, is to be punished by a tine of not more than live hundred marks or with imprisonment not exceeding three months. The same punishment is to be inflicted on him who takes part in a prohibited meeting (§ 9), or who does not at once depart after the dissolution of a meeting by the police. Imprisonment of not less than one month, and not more than one year, is to be inflicted on those who take part in the society or meeting as chairmen, leaders, agents, orators, or treasurers, or who invite to attend the meeting.

§ 18. Whoever furnishes to a prohibited society or meeting a place of assembly is to be punished with imprisonment of from a month to a year.

§ 19. § 19. Whoever distributes prohibited printed matter (§ § 11, 12), or printed matter provisionally seized, or continues or reprints the same, shall be punished with fine not exceeding a thousand marks or with imprisonment not exceeding six months.

§ 20. Whoever acts in violation of a prohibition under § 16, is punishable with fine not exceeding five hundred marks, or with imprisonment not exceeding three months. Moreover all that has been received in consequence of the prohibited collection or invitation, or its value, is to be declared the property of the poor of the place of collection.

§ 21. Whoever without knowledge of the prohibition, but after publication of the same in the Imperial Advertiser (§§ 6, 12), shall commit one of the acts prohibited by § § 17, 18, 19, is punishable by fine not exceeding 150 marks or by arrest.

The same punishment shall be inflicted on him who after publication of a prohibition under § 16, acts in contravention of such prohibition. The concluding provision of § 20 applies.

§ 22. Against persons who make a business of the agitation of the endeavors described in § 1, subdivision 2, judgment may be rendered as to the admissibility of a limitation of their right of sojourn in addition to the punishment of imprisonment, in case of a condemnation for acts in contravention of § § 17 to 20.

On the basis of such judgment a sojourn in particular districts or places may be refused the condemned by the state police authority; in his place of legal residence, however, only when he has not been residing there for a period of six months. Foreigners may be expelled from the empire by the state police authority. Appeal lies only to the supervising authorities.

Acts in contravention are punishable with from one month to a year’s imprisonment.

§ 23. Under the conditions described in § 22, subdivision 1, hotel-keepers, bar-keepers, persons carrying on a retail business with brandy or liquors, book publishers booksellers, or proprietors of circulating libraries or reading cabinets, may, in addition to imprisonment, suffer the punishment of an interdiction of the continuation of their avocations.

§ 24. From persons who make a business of furthering the endeavors described in § 1, subdivision 2, or who have been legally condemned to a punishment by virtue of a provision of this law, the state police authority may withdraw the privilege of a professional or non-professional public distribution of printed matter, as well as the privilege of an itinerant trade in the printed matter. Appeal lies only to the supervising authorities.

§ 25. Whoever acts in contravention of a judgment pronounced under § 23, or of a decision made under § 24, is punishable by fine not exceeding 1000 marks, or by arrest or imprisonment not exceeding six months.

§ 26. A commission is to be formed to decide upon the appeals in the cases of § § 8, 13. The federal council elects four members from its own number, and five from the membership of the highest courts of the empire or of the separate states thereof.

The election of these five members is for the period of the duration of this law, and for the period of their sojourn in their judicial office.

The Emperor names the chairman and his substitute from out of the number of the members of the commission.

§ 27. A quorum of the commission shall consist of five members, of whom at least three shall be of the number of judicial members. Before a decision upon the appeal, opportunity is to be afforded the appellant to plead in support of his motion verbally or in writing. The commission is entitled to take proof in the fullest scope, and particularly through sworn witnesses and experts, or to procure it to be taken through a demand upon an authority of the empire or of an individual state thereof.

As regards the obligation to testify as a witness or as an expert, as well as regards the punishment to be inflicted for disobedience, the laws of civil procedure of the place where the commission sits, or where the authority called upon resides, obtain. The decisions are based upon free opinion and are final.

For the rest the manner of conducting business on the part of the commission is to be regulated by rules prescribed by itself, which are to be subject to the approval of the federal council.

§ 28. For districts or places the public safety of which is menaced by the endeavors described in § 1, subdivision 2, the following regulations may be decreed, in case they be not already permitted by local law, with the assent of the federal council for a period not exceeding one year.

1. That assemblies may take place only after the consent of the police authority shall have been obtained; this limitation does not extend to assemblies called, after direction, for the purposes of an election to the Imperial Parliament or to the representation of a state.

2. That the distribution of printed matter shall not take place on public roads, streets, squares, or other public places.

3. That a further sojourn in districts or places of persons from whom danger to public safety or order is to be apprehended, may be forbidden.

4. That the possession, carrying, the importation and the sale of weapons may be forbidden, limited or made to depend on certain conditions.

The Imperial Parliament must be accounted to at once, id est—upon its first reassembling, for any decree under the foregoing provisions that may have been issued.

Whoever acts in contravention of these regulations, or of the decisions based thereon, knowingly or after public notice of the same, is to be punished by fine not exceeding one thousand marks, or with arrest or imprisonment not exceeding six months.

§ 29. Which authorities, in each particular state of the empire, as are to be understood by the designation state police authority, will be made known by such state.

§ 30. This law becomes of force upon the day of its proclamation and remains in force until March 31, 1881.

Done, &c.

Berlin, October 19, 1878.

No. 164. Mr. Taylor to Mr. Evarts. [Document 185]

No. 164.
Mr. Taylor to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Berlin, November 18, 1878. (Received December 4.) No. 56.]

Sir: I have the honor to inclose the translation of a letter received from the committee of the German Fisheries Society, together with the programme (and translation) of an international exhibition proposed to be held in Berlin in 1880, to which the attention and co-operation of the United States Government is invited.

The present condition of the German fisheries will be found briefly set forth in the able report of our consul-general at Berlin on page 270 of the volume of Commercial Relations for 1877. It is the object of the German Fisheries Society to aid in developing this branch of the national industry, as also the science of pisciculture, which is now receiving much attention in this country.

As the United States are known as one of the first and most successful nations in pisciculture, their participation in this proposed exhibition would be greatly appreciated here, and the expense incident to it would probably be slight compared with the great international advantages to be derived from a general exchange of the latest views on this important question.

I have, &c.,

BAYARD TAYLOR.

[Inclosure 1 in No. 56. Translation.]

Letter of the committee of the German Fisheries Society to Mr. Taylor.

Berlin, November 8, 1878.

To Mr. Bayard Taylor,
Envoy Extraordinary and Minister Plenipotentiary:

Excellency: Under the patronage of his imperial and royal highness the Crown Prince, as patron of the German Fisheries Society, there will be held, about the end of April, 1880, in this city, a second international exhibition of products and utensils of the sea and inland fisheries, regarding which the inclosed programme will furnish your excellency with full information.

We expect thus again to attract universal attention to the fishery industry, and to awaken a wider interest in the intelligent management of waters as well as a practical pisciculture. While the first exhibition of this kind of the society with the above-named object was attended with very gratifying results, and as the connections of the society have extensively widened, it is to be expected that the proposed exhibition will attain a completeness which can but result in stimulating and benefiting all the aims of the fishery industry. Our object consequently would be, the wider we extend our circle, the more to subserve the interests of all civilized nations.

The great growth which the fisheries have enjoyed in the United States of America makes it desirable for us to see them very fully represented at our exhibition.

We address ourselves, therefore, to your excellency with the urgent request to lend your powerful support to our undertaking, and to bring it to the knowledge of your government, and in the respective districts of the United States, to invite an active participation in our exhibition.

For the committee of the German Fishery Society:

VON BEHR.

[Inclosure 2, in No. 56. Translation.]

Under the patronage of his imperial and royal highness the Crown Prince of the German Empire and of Prussia.

international exhibition of products and implements of ocean and inland fisheries at berlin in april, 1880.

Honorary president.—Minister of State—Dr. Friedenthal.

Committee.—Von Behr, Dr. von Bunsen, Dr. Peters, Baron von Baumbach, &c., &c., &c.

PROGRAMME.

Class I.

Water animals.

1. Living or preserved in alcohol or in drawings.

2. Prepared or dried, salted, smoked, powdered, in tin cans, &c., and in various processes of preparation, especially— a. Sponges. (Bath sponges, according to localities and kinds.)

b. Corals, rough and worked.

c. Mollusks: Oysters; specimens of shells from the best known localities; anatomy of oysters on a magnified scale; muscles of all kinds; pearl oysters; working of mother-of-pearl; pearls arranged according to their market value; copies of the most celebrated pearls; river pearls, mother-of-pearl, and samples.

d. Echinoder mata. (Star fish, sea urchins.)

e. Worms.

f. Insects. (Larvæ of insects as destroyers of spawn, or as food of fishes.)

g. Crustaceans. (Different species of crabs.)

h. Fishes of all kinds and of all zones.

i. Amphibia: Turtles, edible kinds; tortoise-shell in different stages of manufacture as far as combs or inlaid furniture (for comparison, imitation tortoise-shell), salamanders, frogs (spawn of frogs), serpents (serpents’ skins).

k. Water birds. (All the birds injurious to fisheries, sea-gulls, herons, cormorants, &c.

l. Mammals (seals, whales), and their products. The mammals in sweet waters injurious to fishes.

3. All the products of water animals.

Class II.

Fisheries.

a. Fishing-tackle of all kinds and of all nations, originals or models.

b. River and sea fishing craft of all nations in models or drawings.

c. Materials for fisheries in different stages of manufacture.

d. Machines and implements for working the raw material.

Class III.

Artificial breeding of sea animals.

a. Breeding apparatus: All kinds of contrivances and apparatus for the artificial breeding of fish, crabs, and muscles; also, vessels for bedding the young in sand.

b. Models or drawings of approved breeding systems.

c. Models or drawings of contrivances for the protection or for the perfection of water animals (salmon ladders, &c., &c).

d. Aquariums of all kinds.

e. The history of the growth of some of the principal water animals (oysters, salmon, herring, crabs, &c.) Exhibition of the same at different ages.

Class IV.

Contrivances for the preservation, and for the bedding in sand, of fresh-water animals in the original or models. (Transport of fish by railroads.)

Class V.

Contrivances for preparing, dressing, or keeping fishery products by drying, salting, smoking, &c., for commerce (i. e. models of smoke-houses, &c), as also for household use (as fish-kettles, fish-dishes).

Class VI.

Models of fisherman’s houses and costumes, also of fishing utensils, not included in the preceding classes.

Class VII.

Examination of waters in reference to the condition of fish; physico-chemical examination; examination of the bottom; samples of bottom; botanical investigations (water plants with reference to fish culture, characteristic selection of plants, herbariums, &c.), specimens of fauna (lower animals in spirits, preparations, &c.), methods and apparatus for this study.

Class VIII.

History of fisheries.

Implements for fishing in the original or in drawings, from the earliest times, also models, pictures, documents, seals, emblems of old fishing guilds, &c.

Class IX.

The literary statistics of fisheries and surveys of the geographical extent of fishes.

conditions of the exhibition.

1. The objects to be exhibited must be announced by the 1st January, 1880, to the committee of the German Fisheries Society, which decides regarding the admission, with a note, specifying the corresponding class of the programme and a statement of the space (wall, floor, tables) which is required.

2. The costs of the arrangements of the location and of the whole setting up, are borne by the committee of the German Fisheries Society.

3. The objects to be exhibited must be sent prepaid in the month of March to this committee. The expenses that may accrue for the transportation from the railway station in Berlin to the exhibition grounds will be borne by the committee of the German Fisheries Society.

The exact details as to time and the address are reserved for future communication. Very perishable objects can be accepted during the exhibition.

4. The supervision and protection of the objects will be assumed by the committee, without any responsibility for accidental loss or damage, for theft, or fire. If requested, the committee will have an insurance effected against loss by fire at its own expense.

5. The objects exhibited will, after the close of the exhibition, be returned to the exhibitor free of expense. An exception is only made as regards perishable objects, concerning which an arrangement will be made in Berlin between the committee and the exhibitor.

6. In regard to a possible reduction of freight and the awarding of prizes a further announcement is reserved.

7. The objects exhibited must, as far as possible, be marked with the name and residence of the exhibitor. In all cases where the return of the objects is desired, an exact specification of them is to be sent to the committee.

No. 165. Mr. Everett to Mr. Evarts. [Document 186]

No. 165.
Mr. Everett to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Berlin, December 21, 1878. (Received January 9, 1879.) No. 62.]

Sir: I have the honor to acknowledge a telegraphic message from you received early this morning, in answer to one I transmitted to you on the afternoon of the 19th instant, to inform you of the late Mr. Bayard Taylor’s death at his residence in Berlin on that day.

I had the mournful satisfaction of being with him in his last moments. My last conversation with him was on my reaching the legation at 11 a.m., when he inquired if any letters had come requiring his attention, and seemed relieved on hearing that there had not. He was then on his bed, which had been moved into his office, and it was evident that he could not last through the day. I did not see him again until three in the afternoon, when Mrs. Taylor called me to him. He was then apparently asleep in his arm-chair and breathing heavily, with a feeble pulse. In this state he remained until four o’clock, when he quietly breathed his last without awaking from his sleep, and a few moments before the physician arrived.

Mr. Taylor had not left his house for over six weeks, but there have been only two days during his illness when he has not been able to attend to the business of the legation and affix his name when necessary. His last signature was to a note addressed to the foreign office in pursuance of instruction No. 36. Two days before, he had draughted a note to Mr. von Bülow expressing his gratification and gratitude for a kind message sent him by the Emperor through the minister of foreign affairs, in consequence of Mr. Taylor having been obliged, on account of illness, to excuse himself from accompanying the other chiefs of missions to congratulate His Majesty on his safe return to Berlin.

The cause of Mr. Taylor’s death was dropsy, which followed very rapidly on the derangement of the liver which he appears to have had when he arrived in Berlin, and for which he had been ordered to go to Carlsbad, when more serious symptoms developed themselves and prevented. He had undergone two surgical operations, and a third had been decided on for the day of his death, but which he was too weak to endure.

* * * * * * *

I took the earliest occasion to address a note to the minister of foreign affairs, informing him of the death of the American minister, and that I had assumed the charge of affairs ad interim. I have received a sympathetic note in reply from his excellency, of which I enclose a copy in English, as was the original.

I have duly informed the two consuls-general of the sad event, with the request that they would make it known in their respective jurisdictions.

The funeral services for the late minister will take place at the legation on Sunday the 22d instant, and his remains be taken to a temporary place of deposit in Berlin, immediately after the ceremonies. The national flag will be hoisted at half-mast over the legation during the day of the funeral obsequies.

I have, &c.,

H. SIDNEY EVERETT.

[Inclosure in No. 62.]

Mr. von Bülow to Mr. Everett.

Foreign Office,
Berlin, December 20, 1878.

The undersigned has the honor to acknowledge the receipt of the note, dated this day, of Mr. Everett, charge d’ffaires of the United States of America, conveying the melancholy intelligence of the death of Mr. Bayard Taylor. He has not failed to bring the sad event to the knowledge of His Majesty the Emperor, who will be deeply afflicted by the loss, equally concerning Germany and the United States, of so distinguished a representative of his country.

The undersigned begs to add the expression of his personal grief at the premature decease of a man long admired for his high attainments, and then endeared by official intercourse. The announcement of the death of Bayard Taylor, the wise and graceful expounder of German literature, will be received with sorrow throughout Germany.

The undersigned avails himself of this opportunity to renew to Mr. Sidney Everett the assurances of his high consideration.

Von bülow.

H. Sidney Everett, Esq.,
Charge d’Affaires of the United States of America.

No. 166. Mr. Everett to Mr. Evarts. [Document 187]

No. 166.
Mr. Everett to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Berlin, January 6, 1879. (Received January 27.) No. 67.]

Sir: I have the honor to inclose the resolutions on the death of the late minister passed at the meeting of American residents in Berlin, held in the American chapel on the 22d December, 1878. A duplicate copy of the same is in the archives of the legation.

I am, &c.,

H. SIDNEY EVERETT.

to the memory of bayard taylor.

At a meeting of the Americans in Berlin, on Sunday, December 22, 1878, after public worship in the American Chapel—during which the Rev. Charles Wood had made a fitting allusion to the loss sustained in the removal by death of Mr. Taylor—Dr. Joseph P. Thompson being chosen president and Francis Brown secretary, the following resolutions were proposed by Prof. William D. Whitney, of Yale College, New, Haven, and, according to the motion of Hon. Herrmann Kreismann, consul-general of the United States, supported by Messrs. Everett and Coleman, secretaries of the United States legation in Berlin, were unanimously adopted by a rising vote of the ladies and gentlemen present:

Resolved, That we, the Americans in Berlin, deeply deplore the death of Bayard Taylor, our minister at this court, the distinguished traveler, orator, and author, whose deeds and words have made him dear to our whole people, and famous wherever the English language and its literature are known, in whose character and repute his countrymen have felt a just pride, and at whose elevation to the high station he has lately filled all rejoiced, most of all we, who promised ourselves from his presence among us, both in an official and in a private character, greatly increased enjoyment and profit in this foreign land;

That we feel with all those who, at home and abroad, are now lamenting his untimely loss; and especially with his family, to whom we tender the expression of our respectful and heartfelt sympathy.

It was further voted that copies of these resolutions be transmitted to the family of Mr. Taylor, to the State Department at Washington, to the United States legation and to the United States consulate in Berlin.

JOS. P. THOMPSON,
President.

Francis Brown,
Secretary.

No. 167. Mr. Everett to Mr. Evarts. [Document 188]

No. 167.
Mr. Everett to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Berlin, January 9, 1879. (Received January 27.) No. 70.]

Sir: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your instruction of December 4, 1878, in relation to the case of Wilhelm Steffan.

In reference to the subject, I would say that an answer was anticipated by Mr. Taylor’s dispatch, 59, of the 7th December, informing the Department that he had applied to the imperial foreign office for Steffan’s pardon. I have now also to report that no answer having been received from the foreign office to this note, I called yesterday in person upon Mr. von Bülow and brought the subject to his attention. His excellency replied that the note from the legation had been sent to the minister of justice as soon as received, and that as yet no answer had been returned, but that he would at once write again and urge an early reply.

I at the same time called his excellency’s attention to the sudden increase and alarming character of the cases of fine or detention of naturalized Americans, on the ground of evasion of military duty, no less than four having come to the knowledge of the legation since the 23d October, in two of which, those of Frank Lutz and Iver Iverson, occurring within a fortnight 5 the Americans in question are actually in confinement. Another case of fine which had been referred to the foreign office as long ago as the 18th June, had received no answer.

His excellency seemed much concerned at this, and immediately made a memorandum of what I had stated, and promised a speedy investigation. I had, likewise, taken with me for personal delivery to his excellency an official note requesting the release of Iver Iverson (one of those above mentioned), a native of Denmark, and a naturalized American, who had been forcibly enrolled in an infantry regiment, and subsequently, in consequence of refusing to take the military oath, imprisoned in the fortress of Magdeburg. His excellency read it, and in reply said, that many troublesome cases had arisen since the annexation of Schleswig Holstein, in consequence of the inhabitants not having properly complied with the proclamation in regard to opting between Denmark and Germany as their residence, and he supposed this was one. This in reality should make no difference as regards the arrest of a person provided with an American citizen paper, for even in the event of his having been a German citizen at the time of emigration, this legation has never conceded the right of the German Government to enroll Americans in the army as a punishment for an alleged evasion of military duty previously to emigration, except in an actual case of desertion from the ranks.

The real cause of the numerous eases of annoyance is the ignorance and officiousness of the subordinate local, civil, and military authorities in distant provinces, who disobey, or have never received, the government decrees annexed to the treaty of 1868 requiring a report of all emigration cases liable to punishment to the minister of justice, before the execution of the punishment. A long time generally elapses before the victim has a chance to get back the papers proving his citizenship from the local authorities, and to complain to the legation. Owing also to tedious circumlocution, and some lack of perfect accord between the foreign office and the ministries of war and justice, a long time elapses between the application of the legation to the foreign office and the receipt of the answer to the same, especially where, as in the case of fines, relief can only be obtained in the form of a pardon under the Emperor’s own hand. Some delay occasionally occurs also in consequence of the ignorance and carelessness of the returned emigrants themselves as regards papers, names, and dates.

I hope, in consequence of my earnest remonstrance with Mr. von Bülow, to have news very soon of the release of Lutz and Iverson, but should there be an unreasonable delay I shall report both these cases for the energetic intervention of the department.

I can assure the department that no vigilance or zeal on the part of the legation shall be lacking in endeavoring to protect the rights of American citizens.

I have, &c.,

H. SIDNEY EVERETT.

No. 168. Mr. Everett to Mr. Evarts. [Document 189]

No. 168.
Mr. Everett to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Berlin, February 15, 1879. (Received March 6.) No. 85.]

Sir: I have the honor to inform you that I was present, on the 12th instant, at the opening of the Imperial Reichstag, in the White Hall of the old Schloss. It had been announced beforehand that the Emperor would attend the ceremony, and read the speech from the throne. This circumstance, while it gave an additional interest to the occasion, caused the absence of the leading opposition members of the Reichstag. The diplomatic corps was not very fully represented. Punctually at the appointed hour, the members of the Bundesrath, or federal council, entered, with Prince Bismarck, in the full uniform of a general of the Life Guards, at their head; and, after a short interval, the Emperor came in, followed by the princes and officers of state, and took his position in front of the throne. After three hearty cheers had been given to His Majesty, the chancellor handed him the manuscript of the speech, which covered many pages, and was written in huge characters to be easily read in the somewhat faint daylight. The Emperor appeared in excellent health, and his voice, though quite audible, was somewhat tremulous, from the nervousness which always troubles him on such occasions. I inclose the official copy of the speech, with a translation.

Immediately on the conclusion of the speech, the chancellor stepped forward and declared the session opened by royal command; three hearty cheers were again given for the Emperor, who then retired, followed by the court; the Reichstag and spectators dispersed, and the ceremony came to an end.

The topics touched upon in the speech, and their treatment, has been known for some time previously through the debates in the federal council; and the legislative measures indicated had already been argued in direct appeals by the chancellor, whose hand is plainly visible in the speech, the first and last paragraphs being probably the only ones from the Emperor’s own hand.

The very rigorous measures which were adopted by act of Parliament after the second attempt on the Emperor’s life, with the almost universal consent of all but the social democratic citizens, appear to have had the quieting effect intended; though, as regards the suppression of newspapers and free speech in public, a needless severity may have been exercised in some cases.

It is difficult to criticise impartially the measures of self-preservation adopted by the monarchical governments of Europe in face of the recent universal socialistic demonstrations and excesses.

The chancellor’s new proposals for increased taxation and protective duties, are doubtless the most difficult questions with which the present Reichstag will have to deal, though the proposed law, alluded to in the royal speech against obstructive members of the Reichstag, will probably be the cause of some very stormy debates. It has had the approval of the federal council, with the exception of the clause subjecting the members to civil punishment and loss of their seats, which, however, is the real object aimed at by the chancellor, who is anxious to get rid of a few radicals who increase the vigor of their personalities the more they perceive that the prince is sensitive to them.

The law levying restrictive duties on imported products meets with great opposition, and its injurious effect in a country which, like Germany, is able to produce so little of its own food, and is dependent on others for the raw materials of its manufactures, would seem to be self-evident. It is in reality a desperate attempt to resist the competition of the cheap produce and manufactures of the United States and Great Britain, and to make up in a false way for the great loss of capital and labor in Germany resulting from the heavy drain on the muscular and mental resources of the, nation caused by a huge standing army, and the doubt and loss occasioned in business by incessant Continental wars and rumors of wars. As the reports of our consuls here show, much of the working capital of Germany is idle, and several branches of industry, which supported whole districts, such as the hop culture and the lead pencil and wooden toy manufacture, are becoming steadily of less importance or leaving the country altogether.

The alarm caused by the plague epidemic seems to be abating in Germany, and the vigorous measures of quarantine, and the prompt consultation and action of the international medical committee sent to the infected districts, have arrested the mortality. In fact, much of the excitement appears to have beep groundless, and though there were perhaps a few cases of genuine Asiatic plague, which had found their way into Russia from Turkey, yet in the majority of the Russian villages, from which reports have been received here, there appears to have been only a species of malignant fever which is often the result of a great war, aggravated by the filth of the Russian villages, and the--diseases: brought from Turkey by prisoners and the returning Russian soldiery.

The imperial speech passes as lightly as possible over the recent annulling of the fifth clause of the Treaty of Prague of 1866.

This provision of the treaty, which held out to Denmark the hope of eventually recovering the provinces of Schleswig and Holstein, is said to have been originally inserted rather reluctantly on the part of Prince Bismarck during the preliminary negotiations of the Treaty of Prague under the coercive influence of the Emperor Napoleon, to whom, in despair, Denmark appealed for help after having entirely failed to derive any assistance, beyond good advice, from England. The public press, especially of Denmark, has been endeavoring to make as much out of this as possible, and to establish a connection between this act of Germany and the recent marriage of the Duke of Cumberland. But there is probably nothing beyond a coincidence in this, and the real explanation is to be found in the stereotype words of the convention: “that His Majesty the Emperor of Austria and King of Hungary, wishing to give a proof of his desire to draw still closer the ties of friendship which exist between the two powers,” &c. In other words, Austria makes a concession long since coveted by Germany in return for the support given by Germany to Austria during the manufacture of the Treaty of Berlin, in acquiring Bosnia and Herzegovina. This new convention was made between Austria and Germany on the 11th of October, 1878, during the regency of the Prince Imperial, and signed by the Emperor on his resuming the reins of government.

I have, &c.,

H. SIDNEY EVERETT.

[Inclosure in No. 85.—Translation.]

Speech from the throne on the opening of the German Reichstag, February 12, 1879.

Honored Gentlemen: While bidding you welcome, I feel impelled from this place also to reiterate my thanks for God’s mercy, which has shielded me in danger and made me whole from grievous suffering. I must at the same time again also express my thanks to my son, the Crown Prince, my recognition for the way in which he conducted the business of the government; and again I thank you, honored gentlemen, for the support you have rendered the allied governments in their effort in the path of law to put a stop to an agitation directed against the foundations of our political and intellectual life. I may, therefore, I think, reckon on your co-operation in equal measure in the future in so far as the cure of our social evils should prove incomplete.

The allied governments are considering what means might be afforded by legislation to remove or lessen evils under which we suffer in the domain of finance and economy.

The proposals I have partly made to my confederates and partly mean to make aim primarily, by the creation of fresh sources of imperial income, at enabling the individual governments to cease from raising those taxes which they and their parliaments find most difficult to realize. I am likewise of opinion that our economical activity in its entire range has full claims to the support which legislation in the matter of taxes and customs can give it, and which, in the countries we trade with, is given perhaps more than is needful. I therefore hold it to be my duty to strive for this end, that at last the German market may favor national production as far as this is consistent with our united interests, and that accordingly our customs legislation may again return to those approved principles whereon the prosperous activity of the Zollverin reposed for nearly half a century, and which have been essentially abandoned in our commercial policy since the year 1865. I am not able to perceive that substantial results have accrued from this change of our customs policy. Bills in the direction indicated will be submitted to you as soon and as far as the allied governments can agree upon the same.

As for this year’s internal reichsbudget, which will be laid before you without delay, it has been impossible to provide new sources of income, and, in order, therefore, to round off the budget till the 1st of April, it is proposed to cover the deficit by assessing the respective governments (Matricularumlagen). I think I may hope that during the present session the allied governments will be able to submit to you proposals for substituting their respective contributions by other sources of revenue.

May I recommend to you as a pressing subject for your consideration and approval the commercial treaty with Austria, concluded on the 16th of December last?

The treaties by which the General Postal Union, founded at Berne in 1874, is strengthened and by which, in accordance with its leading principle, all trading countries are made more easily accessible, will be laid before you for approval. The bill, likewise, against adulteration of foods and drinks will be anew submitted to you, as will, also, the measures for supplementing the judicature acts.

In order to render it possible for the Reichstag to protect the honor of those citizens, who do not belong to it against the attacks of individual members, and in order to give full meaning to its authority whenever set at nought or misunderstood within itself, the allied governments have prepared for your acceptance a bill, by the passing of which the powers of the Imperial Parliament in the matter of regulating its internal discipline, conferred upon it by article 27 of the constitution, would derive an extended legal basis.

Disquieting news as to the outbreak of the plague in the east of Europe has imposed on us the regrettable necessity of taking measures which weigh heavily upon commerce. The latest intelligence, however, encourages the hope that the extinction of the disease, at least in Russia, will speedily ensue from the energetic steps of the imperial Russian authorities. As soon as this is the case, border intercourse will be restored to the neighborly footing becoming the political relations of two friendly nations.

The uncertainty in which the concluding stipulation of article 5 of the Treaty of Prague of 1866 kept the future of the inhabitants of the northern districts of Sehleswig caused me, after the failure of repeated attempts to settle this question with Denmark, to enter into negotiations with His Majesty the Emperor of Austria and King of Hungary concerning a modification of that article. In conformity with the mutually friendly relations of both empires, an understanding between the two courts in the sense desired was come to and ratified on the 11th of January last, the text whereof will be laid before you.

The hopes expressed by me at the beginning of the last regular session of a speedy ending of the war in the East are fulfilled, the assembled representatives of the great powers having last summer succeeded in agreeing on measures from the execution of which the protection of the Christians, the assurance of quiet in the Turkish Empire, and the preservation of peace among the powers of Europe may be expected.

To further these peaceful relations of foreign countries with Germany and with each other, which have been consolidated by the Berlin treaty, must still be and remain our task, in the service of which I will employ the great power gained by the unification of Germany as long as it is in my hands. If God grants me the fulfillment of this task, then will I look back on the bitter experiences of the past year with a feeling of thankfulness that my reign has hitherto been richly blessed.

No. 169. Mr. Everett to Mr. Evarts. [Document 190]

No. 169.
Mr. Everett to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States.
Berlin, February 17. 1879. (Received March 6.) No. 86.]

Sir: Referring to your instruction No. 36, of the 25th November, 1878, I have the honor to inclose a note, with inclosure, received from the imperial foreign office on the subject of laws against counterfeiting the paper currency of the United States. In applying for this information I also took the liberty to inquire as to the laws concerning counterfeiting postage and revenue stamps of the United States, as complaints and specimens of such counterfeiting have been brought to the notice of the legation by the principal postage-stamp collector of Berlin. For this species of fraud there seems to be little chance of redress under German law, according to the reserved ruling of the foreign office.

I have, &c.,

H. SIDNEY EVERETT.

[Inclosure in No. 86.—Translation.]

Memorial concerning the question whether the imitation or counterfeiting of American paper currency and American postage and revenue stamps is threatened with punishment by the laws of the German Empire.

The legal provisions relating to the subject are contained in 146 and 275 of the imperial penal code, and read as follows: § 146. “Whoever imitates domestic or foreign metallic or paper money in order to use or otherwise put into circulation the imitated money as genuine, or whoever, with the same purpose, gives to genuine money, by an alteration thereon, the appearance of a higher value, or to obsolete money, by an alteration thereon, the appearance of existing validity, shall be punished with imprisonment in the penitentiary (at hard labor) of not less than two years; police surveillance is also admissible. In case of extenuating circumstances the punishment will be imprisonment (without hard labor).”

§ 275. “With imprisonment of not less than three months shall be punished, whoever, 1, knowingly makes use of false or falsified stamped paper, of false or falsified stamped seals, stamped forms, stamped impressions, postage or telegraph stamps, or stamped letter envelopes; 2. Whoever manufactures with the purpose of using as genuine counterfeit stamped paper, counterfeit stamped seals, stamped forms, or stamped impressions for playing cards, passports, or other printed matter or documents, as also postage or telegraph stamps or stamped letter envelopes; 3. Whoever falsifies with the purpose of using at a higher value genuine stamped paper, genuine stamped seals, stamped forms, stamped impressions, postage and telegraph stamps or stamped letter envelopes.”

In accordance with the plain text of § 146, the inquiry as to American paper money is to be answered in the affirmative.

On the other hand, it is disputed whether the punishment threatened in § 275 of the imperial penal code applies when the acts contemplated therein have been committed with reference to foreign stamps, stamed seals, &c. The Prussian supreme court has, under the rule of § 253 of the former Prussian penal code, which substantially conforms to § 275 of the present code, repeatedly declared the falsification of foreign postage stamps to be punishable (see Oppenhoff, decisions of the Prussian supreme court, vol. 10, page 806, ff., vol. 11, page 496). The arguments for this view derived from the absence in the law of an expression of the distinction between the home country and foreign countries, from the history of§ 253, and from its insertion in the penal code under the “title” concerning the falsification of records, also hold good as regards the imperial penal code; and the greater number of the commentators on the imperial penal code have adopted the view of the Prussian supreme court (Oppenhoff, Schwarze; see also Dambach, in the “Gerichtssaal” (court-room), vol. 23, page 265, ff., and Herkel in v. Holtzendorff’s Treatise, vol. III, page 809.)

On the other hand, others (see Rüdorff, in his Commentary on the Imperial Penal Code, on § 275) have eon tended for the limitation of § 275 to domestic stamps, seals, &c., and for the reason principally that in this class of offenses it is purely a question of injury to fiscal interests.

It cannot he denied that the latter view is supported by reasons of great weight. That the purpose of the penal provisions in question is to secure to the state the receipt of certain dues and fees would seem evident from the peculiar relations of these provisions to the home state. Nor does the placing of § 275 under the title “falsification of records,” of itself alone justify the assumption that the principles applying to the falsification of records (§§ 267 to 270, Imperial Penal Code), and in particular the equality of domestic and foreign records, acknowledged in § 267, should be extended to the offenses treated of in § 275.

Finally, the remark in the “motives” to § 276 of the imperial penal code (Stenographic Reports of Imperial Parliament, session 1870, page 80) might not be unworthy of consideration; pursuant to it, particular directions concerning the use of postage and telegraph stamps that have become invalid are here—i. e., as regards § 276, in contra-distinction to § 275—considered to have been indispensable in view of the penal provisions affecting the same subject contained in the law concerning postal matters of the North German Union of November 2, 1867, § 30 (“Bundes” Law-Bulletin, page 68), and in the “Bundes” law concerning telegraph stamps, of May 16, 1869, § 2 (“Bundes” Law-Bulletin, page 377). This remark would be of but partial application if it had been the purpose of the proposed law to afford in §§ 275 and 276 penal protection to foreign stamps and seals also.

What the judicial decisions would be in cases that might occur involving the interpretation of § 275 cannot, therefore, be stated with certainty.

No. 170. Mr. Everett to Mr. Evarts. [Document 191]

No. 170.
Mr. Everett to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Berlin, March 13, 1879. (Received April 5.) No. 92.]

Sir: Since the opening of the Reichstag, of which I gave an account in my dispatch No. 85, of the 15th February, that assembly has been principally occupied in debating the commercial treaty with Austria and the parliamentary discipline bill.

The Austrian treaty passed regularly through its three readings on the 20th February, the 22d February, and the 26th February, and met with no serious opposition, as only a formal consent of the legislature was required to a prolongation of the old treaty ratified in December last by the Austrian Government, whose parliament was then in session, and signed by the Emperor of Germany in anticipation and on condition of the approval of the present Reichstag, in order that it might go into operation on the 1st January, 1879. The occasion of the readings was utilized, however, to attack Prince Bismarck for his new protectionist principles. In his defense he fell back on his right, from his long services and his position, to have opinions of his own on economic questions, to which he had given less attention in former years. He concluded his speech with the following words: I remember that at the time I became minister the liberal papers of the day said of me, “How could they confer the first place in the empire on that person?” with a characteristic picture of my person. I do not know if this first place in Germany, which was then given to me, and which I have since occupied for seventeen years—a longer time than any constitutional minister has held office in face of publicity with its attacks and criticisms—I do not know, I say, if this place has been filled in a satisfactory manner, whether the deputy, Mr. Richter, will be approved by his contemporaries and by posterity for the cutting and disdainful opinion he pronounces of me, or whether they will recognize my right, after seventeen years passed at the head of public affairs, to have an opinion on economic questions. On that point I await with confidence the judgment of my fellow-citizens. I will not speak of posterity; it is too pathetic for me.

The law for the punishment of the members of the Reichstag, of which I inclose the bill as finally presented to that assembly on the 4th of March, somewhat softened from its original draft as laid before the council, was the occasion of much acrimonious debate. The ultimate rejection which it eventually received by a very large majority was generally anticipated from the fate which befel, a few days before, the efforts of the government to carry out a sentence of arrest, on taking their seats, against two of the social democratic members who had been expelled from Berlin before the Reichstag opened, under the operation of the law for the repression of social democracy.

The debate on the discipline bill gave rise, as usual, to a personal altercation between the Deputy Lasker and Prince Bismarck. The prince claimed that the members of the council having their seats in the chamber were without the legal safeguards accorded to the members of the Reichstag; he doubted the power of the president of the Reichstag always clearly to appreciate and decide breaches of order against the members of the council. A grave fact also, in his opinion, was the publicity allowed to the remarks, of members, which were often made expressly with a view to this publicity; and he thought that the patriotic views of the Reichstag, as shown by their passing the anti-socialist law, had greatly cooled, their recent action being a severe check to the good work of repressing socialism. While admitting that he had in 1870 approved the law exempting deputies from all prosecution for remarks made in debate, he claimed that circumstances had since changed by the consolidation of the German Empire. The prince also cited England, France, and the United States as having much more stringent rules for the discipline of their members, and assured the house that without some such measure as the one the government had proposed, the law against the social democrats could not be carried into effect.

* * * * * * *

On the second reading (4th March) the clauses of the bill were first voted down individually, and then the bill as a whole was negatived and replaced by an amendment, proposing to refer the whole question to a standing committee of the Reichstag, which should decide whether further legislation was necessary.

Such a signal defeat of a ministerial measure in any other kingdom would have cost the ministry their places, or the Parliament would have been at once dismissed, but the chancellor prefers in this respect to imitate our republican institutions, by allowing the ministry and the Parliament to remain in opposition. I was told by good authority that he had in his pocket authority from the Emperor to dissolve the Parliament if the vote were unfavorable. As, however, the protective tariff scheme is soon to be brought forward, it is generally supposed that the chancellor prefers to wait till he sees how the Reichstag will treat him on that question.

* * * * * * *

I have, &c.,

H. SIDNEY EVERETT.

[Inclosure in No. 92.—Translation.]

The Discipline Law.

§ 1. To the Reichstag belongs a penal power over its members in regard to every breach of propriety committed by them in the exercise of their duty.

§ 2. This penal power shall be exercised by a committee composed of the president, the two vice-presidents, and ten members. These last are elected at the beginning of the session immediately after the election of the president for the whole duration of the session.

§ 3. The punishments which the committee can inflict according to the gravity of the offense are: 1st. A reprimand before the assembly. 2d. An apology or retraction before the assembly. 3d. Exclusion from the Reichstag for a certain time, which may be extended to the end of the session.

§ 4. If the punishment in § 3 is inflicted for an expression or for the substance of a speech, the expression or the speech as a whole, or the portion of the speech considered improper, will not be reproduced in the stenographic report.

§ 5. The committee acts: 1st. When the president requests it to; 2d. When twenty members at least of the Reichstag demand it. This request or demand must be made within the space of three days after the offense has been committed.

§ 6. The committee deliberates and decides under the presidency of the president, and in case of his unavoidable absence, of the first vice-president, with the assistance of at least seven members. The order of proceeding is established by rules drawn up by the committee and submitted to the approval of the Reichstag.

§ 7. The decision of the committee is final. Nevertheless, if exclusion from the Reichstag is decreed, the excluded member may, within eight days after the sentence, appeal from it in writing to the decision of the Reichstag.

§ 8. The president has the right to forbid temporarily the reprinting in the stenographic report of improper expressions of members, as also to forbid temporarily any other publication of the words by the public press. Such a temporary interdict expires if, in the space of three days, the committee has not received an invitation or a demand to give a decision in regard to the words in question.

§ 9. Any infraction of the regulation contained in§ 4, as also of the temporary interdict of the president authorized in§ 8, will be punishable with imprisonment from three weeks to three months, if, according to the substance of the publication of such words, there is no occasion for a more severe punishment.

§ 10. Any questions brought before the committee, which have not been decided at the close of a session, shall be transferred in the state they may be to the committee of the next session of the Reichstag.

No. 171. Mr. Everett to Mr. Evarts. [Document 192]

No. 171.
Mr. Everett to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Berlin, March 21, 1879. (Received April 12.) No. 95.]

Sir: I have the honor to inclose a report of such cases of naturalized Americans as have required the intervention of the legation with the German foreign office from the 3d October, 1877, to the 3d December, 1878—24 in all.

The favorable operation of the treaty of 1868, under which the legation has claimed an exemption from German laws in these cases, is shown by the fact that in only three of them—Kokett, Wackermann, and Steffan—has our intervention been unavailing.

Kokett’s case was one of forfeiting his bail on a charge of inciting to emigration, and did not bring him within the scope of the treaty. Wackermann would not have been expelled from Germany had he applied in time to the legation for aid; and the case of Steffan was one of Lèse Majesté, for which he was condemned to a long imprisonment, and the terms of the treaty could not be invoked in his behalf. Owing to the political excitement in Germany, resulting from a recent attack on the Emperor’s life, the government refused to grant any remission of his sentence.

Two men, Klagges (7) and Ganzenmüller (9), voluntarily resumed their German nationality while the legation was intervening in their behalf.

Thus it may be said that in every ease of timely intervention, based on the treaty of 1868, the legation has been successful in securing the rights of American citizens.

Besides these 24 cases, the legation sent in, on the 24th December, the case of Frank Lutz, forcibly enrolled at Jülich, but as this case is still undecided, it is not here included.

Since the 6th January of the current year, there have been added seven new cases, which are not here inserted, as only one of them is definitely decided, and the end of the year 1868 seemed to be an approximate chronological limit for the list.

I have, &c.,

H. SIDNEY EVERETT.

[Inclosure in No. 95.]

list of military cases requiring intervention.

1. Martin Zimmer.—A native of Hesse-Darmstadt, emigrated to the United States October, 1868, at the age of fourteen, with written permission from the authorities; married in the United States; was naturalized there in 1877; returned to Germany in September, 1877, to visit his parents; on the 23d September, 1877, was arrested and forcibly enrolled in the One hundred and eighteenth Prussian Regiment as an “unsafe person liable to military service.” Zimmer had also, during his absence in America, been sentenced to a tine of 150 marks for evasion of military service. The case having been substantiated by the proper affidavits before the United States consul at Mayence, the legation sent it in to the minister of foreign affairs on the 3d of October, 1877, with a request for Zimmer’s liberation. On the 26th of November, 1877, a note was received from the foreign office saying that Zimmer was discharged from military service on the 15th October, which the legation had for over a month already known through the consul, and had reported to the Department of State in dispatch No. 12, of the 29th October, 1877, approved in Instruction 409.

2. Benjamin Becker.—Born in Minversheim 26th February, 1854; emigrated to the United States in 1872; declared Ms intention 8th May, 1875; was naturalized 30th October, 1877; returned to Germany 1st December, 1877: was ordered to leave Alsace by the royal kreiss director of Strasbourg 3d December, 1877; sent his statement to the legation 6th December, 1877; and again wrote on 17th December, 1877, to say that the local officials ignored the copy of the ministerial decrees sent by the legation, and ordered him to leave in eight days. On the 19th December the legation represented the case to the German Government, and on the 31st December received a reply from the foreign office that the local authorities had been ordered to desist from annoying Becker while the case was being examined into; and again, on the 6th March, 1878, that Becker would be allowed to remain for the present. This result was duly communicated to Becker. Since then nothing more has been heard from him. The case being quickly decided, and not involving personal liberty, was not reported to the Department.

3. C. A. F. Weibezahl.—This case came originally to the legation from the Department of State by Instruction 411, on the 5th of December, 1877. Weibezahl was a German citizen, residing in New York, occupied as a teacher, without any intention of being naturalized as an American citizen, but looking forward to eventually returning to Germany to enjoy an inheritance. He applied through the Secretary of State to be released from military obligation in Germany on account of bad sight. The legation sent in the request to the foreign office on the 21st December, 1877, and on the 28th February received a reply that Weibezahl must furnish a certificate of defective sight from a certain German physician in New York, after an examination in the presence of the German consul. This having been reported to the Department, the required certificate arrived in Berlin on the 2d May, 1877, was forwarded the same day to the foreign office, and on the 20th June a reply was received from the German Government that Weibezahl had been put on to the list of reserves, which was at once communicated to him through the Department of State, in dispatch No. 24, of the 28th of June, 1877. This case is only remarkable as being that of a person not only having no claim to be considered an American citizen, but even positively refusing to be naturalized, and yet expecting the American Government to intercede in his behalf to avert the penalty of avoiding military service in his own country.

4. Hermann Labischinsky.—Born in Gnesen, Germany, 4th October, 1854; emigrated to the United States 18th May, 1871, at the age of seventeen; was naturalized 20th September, 1876; returned to Germany 22d August, 1877; was fined soon after arrival for evasion of military duty, and paid his fine on the 3d December, 1877. He had no intention of remaining in Germany. The legation was informed of the case on the 19th December, sent it in to the foreign office on the 28th December, and on the 28th April of the following year only was informed by the German Government that Labischinsky was pardoned, and that his fine was remitted. By that time Labischinsky had left for America. The legation, on the 29th April, 1878, informed him of his pardon, and has heard no more of him, so it is presumed that the money was repaid to > his relatives.

5. Ernst Eggers.—Was born at Edemssen, Hanover, 25th March, 1846; emigrated to the United States in May, 1867, at the age of 21; declared his intention to become a citizen 16th October, 1868, but was not naturalized till 1st February, 1878. He wrote to this legation from Appleton, Wis., 5th October, 1877, to say that his property in Germany had been attached, to the amount of 1,050 marks, for violation of military duty. As soon as satisfactory evidence in support of his case had been received, it was sent to the German Government, and on the 29th March, 1878, an answer was received from the foreign office, that the attachment had already expired by limitation, of which Eggers was at once informed. This is the only case on the records of the legation of the statute of limitation annulling a military fine.

6. Jacob Kowalski.—Was born at Kamen, West Prussia, 28th July, 1850; emigrated to the United States 17th April, 1869, when nearly nineteen years of age; was naturalized 2d September, 1877, after a residence of eight years; was fined 300 marks in his absence by the Prussian authorities, for desertion. As soon as satisfactory proofs of his statements had been received, the legation made a representation in his favor to the German Government. After nearly seven months, a reply was received from the foreign office, that Kowalski had been pardoned by the Emperor, and his fine remitted, of which he was at once informed. Nothing has since been heard from him, and his case, presenting no points of difficulty or interest, was not reported to the Department.

7. Frank Klagges.—Was born in Westphalia, in 1837; emigrated to the United States in November, 1864, and was naturalized about ten years later. In 1875, he returned on a visit to Germany for his health, and in March, 1878, was informed by the local authorities of Meerholtz, near Frankfort-on-the-Main, that he must become a German citizen within four weeks or return to the United States. The case was strongly recommended to the legation by the consul-general at Frankfort-on-the-Main, who ascertained that Klagges was a quiet, inoffensive man, in delicate health, with a wife and newly-born child, who was unable to cross the ocean so soon. As Klagges had exceeded the two years visit allowed by the treaty, the legation could only ask as a favor of the German Government, which it did on the 5th of April, 1878, that he might be allowed to remain until his wife was strong enough to travel. The foreign office, on the 19th July, 1878, in answer to this appeal, informed the legation that Klagges had decided to become a German citizen. This case is noticeable only as being one where the German authorities have required a naturalized American over the military age to leave the country, and also where a naturalized American has voluntarily relinquished his acquired citizenship after eleven years’ residence in the United States.

8. Philip Flatan.—Was born at Czarlowitz 1st October, 1854; emigrated to the United States 1st September, 1872; was naturalized 15th October, 1877. He returned to Germany 15th February, 1878, to visit his parents, at Parlin, near Mazilno Posen, and soon after his arrival presented himself to the local authorities as an American citizen on a visit there. To his astonishment he was informed that his citizen papers and passport were of no value, and that he must furnish a certificate of baptism and be mustered into military service. As he did not comply with this, an order for his arrest was issued, in consequence of which he was in great distress, and appealed to the legation for assistance on the 12th April, 1878. His case was sent to the foreign office on the 15th April, and on the 9th May a reply was received, that he would not be annoyed during the investigation of his case, and finally, on the 9th June, a second note from the foreign office informed the legation that no more proceedings would be taken against him, of which he was at once notified.

9. Karl Ganzenmüller.—Was born at Linsheim, Grand Duchy of Baden, in 1851; emigrated with the permission of the authorities in 1869; was naturalized 12th July, 1875; returned to Germany 17th July, 1875, and had resided at his old home ever since, ostensibly to take care of his parents. On the 11th April, 1878, he was ordered to leave Germany, on the ground that his example was prejudicial to the public safety, or to turn German and perform military duty. He based his right to stay over two years on the fact that the separate treaty between Baden and the United States does not contain the two years clause of the general treaty. He appealed for protection to the legation, and on the 30th April, 1878, Mr. Everett, then chargé d’affaires, called the attention of Mr. von Bülow to this case, and especially to the new precedent established, of allowing a local police regulation to override an international treaty.

No answer being received from the German Government, and Ganzenmüller continuing to inform the legation that he was ordered to leave, in spite of the representation of the United States consul in the town where he resided, the case was reported by Mr. Bayard Taylor to the Department of State on the 15th June, 1878. The case was complicated by the fact that Ganzenmüller had exceeded the two-years’ stay allowed by the general treaty of 1868, though that point was not adverted to until later.

On the 13th June, 1878, a note was received from the German foreign office, inclosing the reply of the Baden authorities, which confirmed the decree of expulsion, on the ground that Ganzenmüller was a foreigner, because the special Baden treaty did not have the two years’ clause of the general treaty in it, and that he was expelled because his example in emigrating to avoid military service and then returning to stay was a dangerous one, though they offered him the choice of remaining and becoming a German citizen again. This note was immediately replied to by Mr. Taylor, who repudiated this doctrine in the most energetic terms, as showing that American citizenship in itself was dangerous, and rendering useless the treaty between the two countries. The answer was at once forwarded to the Department of State in Mr. Taylor’s dispatch of 15th June, 1878, and the views of the Department requested.

On the 3d August, a note was received at the legation from Mr. von Phillipsborn, in charge of the foreign office, saying that Ganzenmüller had decided to become a German citizen again, of which the Department was immediately informed in dispatch 37, of 12th August, and the case was thus brought to an end.

This case is interesting on account of the distinction made by the Baden Government between their treaty and the general one, and also because they expelled a naturalized foreigner for setting a bad example, and, in their own words, that “the practical success obtained in the evasion of military duty, without final emigration, may be as practically set aside.”

10. Albert Kokott, a naturalized American citizen, wrote to the legation on the 8th May, 1878, from Glasgow, saying that as he was passing through Berlin, on his return to America after visiting his relatives in Germany, he was beset by a party of emigration agents, who, on his refusal to buy their tickets, had him arrested and taken to prison, from which, after being confined two days, he was released only on giving bail in 500 marks to reappear to answer charge. Mr. Kokott also stated that he was obliged to return at once to America on account of the ill health of his wife. The legation sent a statement of the case with Mr. Kokott’s citizen-papers to the foreign office on the 14th May, 1878, and on the 19th July received a reply that Mr. Kokott was arrested on a charge of inciting to emigration, and not for failure in military duty, as the legation had supposed. On the 28th August a letter was received from Mr. Kokott in America, asking what had been done in his case, and the legation replied that his case not coming under the treaty, and having forfeited his bail, there did not seem to be any means of helping him. Since then nothing more has been heard of him.

11. Julius Baumer’s case was received on the 17th May, 1878, from the Department of State (Instruction 442, 30th April, 1878), which directed the legation to inquire from the foreign office into his case of expulsion from Germany, and to request that measures might be taken to avoid similar cases in future, and also that Baumer might be reimbursed for his losses. The case was as follows:

Julius Baumer was born in Westphalia in 1848; emigrated to America in February, 1868, at the age of twenty, with written permission to emigrate, and released from all allegiance to the King of Prussia. He was naturalized 6th of November, 1876, in Illinois, returned to Germany on a visit in 1877, and was informed on the 12th of October, 1877, that he must leave Germany in eight days or perform military duty. Baumer appealed to the ministry of the interior, without success, but did not apply to the legation. The legation addressed a note to the foreign office on the 18th May, 1878, and on the 25th May received a long reply, to the effect that Baumer, in answer to his appeal, had been allowed to remain over a year longer, and that he did not avail himself of this permission, but voluntarily left Germany in January, 1878; also, that he would have been allowed to remain had his case been brought at once to the notice of the government through the legation, and was at liberty to return at once to Germany if he wished, but that all indemnity for his expulsion was refused. This reply was forwarded to the Department, and subsequently printed in response to a resolution of Congress of 5th December, 1878, calling for the correspondence in the case. Since then nothing more has been heard at the legation of Baumer.

The important point of this case is that the German Government, apart from the peculiar circumstances of this particular case, justified the measure of expulsion itself, on the ground that every sovereign state is entitled under international principles from actuating motives of internal state police or state policy to refuse to foreigners the privilege of sojourn, and that a renunciation of this right is nowhere contained in the treaty of 22d February, 1868. To judge of the sufficiency of their motives in a special case appertains to the constitutionally appointed powers of the state so exercising its sovereign rights.

12. Joseph Wackermann. —A native of Alsace; emigrated to the United States in 1872, at the age of 16; was naturalized on the 8th March, 1877, and in the same year returned to visit his family in Germany. The police authorities, however, of his native place, in May, 1878, notified him that he must leave the country within 14 days. He complained to the legation on the 14th May, 1878, and inclosed a testimonial to his good conduct from the burgomeister; and after a due investigation of his case the legation sent it, on the 29th May, to the foreign office, with a request that the order for his expulsion should be rescinded. The first effect of this was a telegraphic order to the authorities to desist from proceedings against Wackermann till his case could be investigated; and on the 23d August an answer was received from the foreign office justifying the expulsion on the same grounds as that taken in the case of Ganzenmüller, viz, that his example in returning after emigration was injurious to the young men of the place. The minister at once protested energetically against this argument, and reported the case to the Department of State 2d September, which approved his course. On the 25th September Wackermann is supposed to have left. On the 24th January, 1879, the legation received a note from the foreign office, in reply to Mr. Taylor’s arguments, and adhering to their sentence of expulsion, on the ground that the burgomeister who granted a testimonial in Wackermann’s favor was a near relative of his and did not state the truth; asserting, also, that Wackermann was dissipated, spending his time in taverns, perpetrating wild mischief, and in one of his excesses shooting himself in the hand, and that he generally set a bad example to other youths in the place. This note was sent, with a translation, to the Department of State on the 27th January 1879.

13. John Gottfried Berude.—Was born in Prussia 24th April, 1849; emigrated to America in August, 1870, but was shipwrecked on the way and did not arrive in California till December, 1871. There he was naturalized in 1877, and came to Germany on a visit in May, 1878, intending to be in San Francisco again by the end of July of the same year, to take command of a ship.

Soon after his arrival at Litzmandorf he was arrested for non-payment of a military fine of 30 thalers, and subsequently taken to Brieg, and on the 28th May, 1878, forcibly enrolled in the Fifty-first Regiment of Prussian Infantry. His appeal for protection reached the legation on the 1st June, 1878, and after proper investigation into the truth of his case, a demand for his release was made to the foreign office on the 6th June. On the 21st August a preliminary answer was received, saying that Berude was released, which the legation had already heard on the 28th June from Berude himself, who, with unexampled courtesy, thanked the legation for their successful intervention, and left for California to take command of his ship. On the 9th November a second note from the foreign office informed the legation that the fine was wholly remitted under the Emporer’s pardon.

14. Gustav Weil.—Born at Steinsfurth, Grand Duchy of Baden, 27th July, 1855; emigrated to the United States 20th September, 1872, at the age of seventeen; was naturalized 18th February, 1878; returned to Germany 5th May, 1878, with the intention of only remaining a few months. On the 23d May he was told he must leave the country in fourteen days under a local law, as in the preceding case of Ganzenmüller, for setting a bad example to other young men. As soon as the case could be investigated in person by the consul at Manheim, Mr. Bayard Taylor sent in a strong remonstrance to the foreign office on the 14th June, and on the 3d August received an answer that Weil would be allowed to remain two years, of which he was informed on the 5th August, and his citizen paper returned to him, since when nothing has been heard from him. This case was reported to the Department of State, together with the Ganzenmüller case, on the 15th June. According to the report made to the legation by the consul, the said Weil would not have been troubled by the local authorities if, on his arrival, he had shown his citizen paper and announced his intention of soon returning to America; but their action at the same time in the Ganzenmüller and Wackermann cases would seem to render this somewhat doubtful.

15. Christian Henkes.—Born 10th May, 1853; emigrated to the United States 10th March, 1869, at the age of sixteen; was naturalized 28th November, 1874; did not return to Germany, but on the 1st October, 1875, was fined 600 marks by the court of Aix-la-Chapelle, which his father paid in April, 1878. The case was brought to the notice of the legation in April, 1878, by Mr. Du Bois, United States commercial agent at Aix-la-Chapelle, and after the requisite papers substantiating the case had been received from America, the legation called the attention of the foreign office to it, 15th June, 1878, but owing to the troubles in Germany during that summer no answer was received till the 5th February, 1879, when the foreign office informed the legation that the fine was remitted as usual by special pardon of the Emperor, which was at once communicated to Mr. Henkes through the commercial agent at Aix-la-Chapelle, since when no more has been heard from him.

16. Alex. F. Wallner.—Was born at Saint Petersburg, Russia, on the 19th (7th) November, 1848; emigrated to the United States 16th September, 1871; was naturalized 6th October, 1876, and returned the same month to Germany. On the 1st June, 1878, he was compelled under penalty of imprisonment to pay a fine of forty-two marks; On the 18th June, 1878, the legation sent a note to the foreign office, with Wallner’s citizen paper, requesting that the fine might be remitted and repaid. On the 3d September a favorable answer was received from the foreign office, of which Wallner was informed, and his citizen-paper at the same time returned to him. The citizen-paper was acknowledged by his agent, and nothing more has been heard of him.

17. Gustav Folte, jr.—A native of Sommerfeld, Germany; emigrated to the United States 9th March, 1873, at the age of eighteen, and after five years’ residence there was naturalized on the 9th April, 1878. In the same month he returned to Germany, intending to remain only a few months. Soon after his arrival he was registered as a recruit, and sentenced to a fine of 185 marks, or an imprisonment of 30 days, for neglect of military duty. The fine was paid, and the legation was appealed to for protection. On the 13th July, 1878, the legation petitioned the foreign office for repayment of the fine, and in December, 1878, was informed in reply that it would be repaid. Folte had, in the meantime, become very impatient, and, after addressing several reproachful letters to the legation, had left for America, leaving his address behind him. The reply of the German Government was sent to him as soon as received, and his citizen-papers returned to him. But, subsequently, another note had to be addressed to the foreign office on account of delay and official formalities in the way of payment, brought by Folte to the notice of the legation.

18. F. E. O. Klein.—Was born at Jastrow, in Prussia, on the 17th August, 1851; emigrated to the United States in June, 1869; was naturalized 3d April, 1877; returned to Germany 26th April, 1877, and on the 17th August had an execution for a military fine levied upon him, and his watch and chain taken from him. The legation brought the case to the notice of the foreign office on the 17th August, 1877, and on the 13th September received a reply that Klein’s effects would not be sold, of which Mr. Klein was informed on his presenting himself at the legation just before his departure for America. He desired the effects to be sent to his father when returned.

On the 28th September another note was received at the legation from the foreign office, to the effect that the pardon of Klein had been recommended to the Emperor, and on the 13th November another note was received announcing his pardon and the remission of his fine. On the 29th December, however, the legation received a letter from Klein’s father, complaining that the jewelry had not been restored, and in June of the following year another letter from Klein himself, in America, to the same effect. On the 8th July, 1878, the legation again brought the case to the notice of the foreign office, and received a reply on the 16th August that the effects should be restored, of which Mr. Klein was at once informed. Notwithstanding this, on the 5th December, 1878, another letter from Klein, in America, was received, saying that his father had not yet received the jewelry. The legation at once wrote to the father, telling him to go and demand it of the local authorities, and to inform the legation of the result. His application proving to be unavailing, the legation, for the third time, brought the case to the notice of the foreign office, 21st January, 1879, with an earnest request for the return of the jewelry, and supposed that this would end the case, but on the 19th February the legation was informed by him that his property had been sold, which opened the correspondence again, and the case is still unsettled.

19. Emil David complained to the legation July 11, 1878, that a fine of 177 reichmarks had been wrongfully collected from him for the alleged evasion of military duty, pleading his rights as a naturalized American, visiting Germany. On the same day the legation wrote to him, inclosing the “military case” forms to be filled out, with the date needed by the legation, before intervening. From his answer it appeared that he emigrated to the United States in 1864, at the age of 21; was naturalized in 1871, and came back to Germany in April, 1878, after a residence of fourteen years in the United States, for a short visit to his native place, with the intention of returning to his adopted country in the month of August following. The case was immediately presented to the foreign office, and dispatch urged, as Mr. David intended soon returning to America. On December 6 the foreign office informed the legation that the fine was remitted. As Mr. David had in the meanwhile returned to America, the fine was repaid to his father, as he had requested.

20. Mr. George Wehrung, a naturalized citizen of the United States, informed the legation, in a letter from America, received on the 14th June, 1878, that his property in Germany had been attached for alleged violation of military duty. On the same day the legation wrote to him for such particulars as would enable it to intervene in his behalf with the German Government. Being in possession of the necessary facts, after some further correspondence, the legation, on August 19, presented his case to the German foreign office.

From Mr. Wehrung’s statements it appeared that he was born March 14, 1845, emigrated in 1871 to the United States, where he was naturalized October 7, 1876, and where he still resides. Attention was called to a probable confounding of his name with that of his brother, owing to an erroneous entry on the military rolls. Mr. Wehrung was at once informed of the steps taken by the legation. On the 17th December following, the foreign office notified the legation that the attachment on Mr. Wehrung’s property had been removed, and Mr. Wehrung was at once informed of the successful result of the legation’s efforts in his behalf.

21. Johannes Kehr emigrated to the United States in June, 1868, at the age of 19; he was naturalized in November, 1876, and came to Germany on a visit in August, 1877, with the intention of returning to America in 1879. On September 2, 1878, the legation received a letter from Mr. I. Kehr, stating that his son, Johannes Kehr, a naturalized citizen of the United States, had, on the 27th ultimo, after a sojourn in Germany of only a year, been arrested by the authorities of the Grand Duchy of Hesse, and forcibly enrolled in the army, notwithstanding his plea of American citizenship. The legation immediately wrote for more particular information and for Mr. Kehr’s certificate of naturalization, inclosing at the same time a “military case” form to he filled out. After some delay, occasioned by the father failing to return the military form as directed, he having preferred to first make some personal efforts for his son’s release, the form containing the necessary statement of facts was received by the legation on October 11. On the same day the legation addressed the Imperial Government in behalf of Mr. Kehr, and on the 25th of October received a note in reply, to the effect that Mr. Kehr had been released. A bill of damages was soon after sent to the legation by Mr. Kehr’s father, for presentation to the German Government. The legation declined to comply with this request unless instructed to do so by the Department of State.

22. Elie Bloch.—Was born at Isdenheim, Alsace, July 23, 1851; emigrated to the United States in September, 1872; was naturalized June 27, 1878, and returned to Germany on September 11 following. On the 4th of October, 1878, the legation received letter from Mr. Bloch, informing it that he was a naturalized citizen of the United States, revisiting his native Alsace, and complaining that during his absence in America an attachment had been placed on his property to cover a judgment obtained against him for alleged violation of military duty, and that he had left his native place for the time being and gone to Switzerland, being apprehensive that proceedings would be instituted against his person also. The legation immediately wrote to him for papers and particulars, inclosing “military case” form to be filled out. On the 23d of October, after receiving the needful information from Mr. Bloch, the legation addressed the Imperial Government in his behalf. The legation advised Mr.’ Bloch to return to his native place pending the investigation of his case, and on January 27 informed him that the Imperial Government had, under date of the 25th instant, notified the legation that Mr. Bloch would be permitted to reside for the unexpired period of two years’ visit at his native place, unmolested in person or property.

23. William Krotz.—On the 9th October, 1878, the legation received a letter from a Mr. Koelker, a notary public in New York, informing it that Mr. William Krotz, a naturalized American, still residing in his adopted country, desired the intervention of the legation to procure the removal of an attachment placed on his property in Würtemberg, to cover a judgment obtained against him for violation of military duty in Germany. Mr. Koelker was at once written to, and the “military case” form inclosed to be filled out with the necessary particulars in the case. Having on the 26th of November following received the information called for, the legation at once presented Mr. Krotz’s case to the Imperial Government, although apprehensive from the statement of facts made to it that he might be held to be technically, at least, a deserter.

It appeared from Mr. Krotzs’ statement that he emigrated at the age of twenty-two to the United States, in 1865, after having served as a soldier in the Würtemberg army for about a year and a half, when he furnished a substitute to serve a year for him, and received a leave of absence for one year. After his arrival in the United States he concluded not to return to Germany at the expiration of his leave and was naturalized in October, 1872. On Februarys following, the legation received a preliminary reply from the Imperial Government, informing it that as far as the investigation had then proceeded it appeared that Mr. Krotz had been condemned in contumaciam for desertion, and promising a further reply when the investigation should have been concluded. On the 17th February, a further reply was received from the German Government, informing the legation that Mr. Krotz, who had gone abroad on a leave of indefinite length, had, in 1866, in contumaciam been found guilty of desertion, and that his property had, therefore, pursuant to Würtemberg law, been attached until his return or until the expiration of the term established by the law of limitations. The legation was also informed that under this law the attachment would cease with the end of the year 1879, when Mr. Krotz’s property would be at his free disposal. The legation notified Mr. Krotz of the result.

24. William Steffan.—On July 17, 1878, the legation received a letter from one Joseph Schnitz, stating that his brother-in-law, William Steffan, had been condemned to two years’ imprisonment for insulting His Majesty the German Emperor, and asking his intervention to procure the remission of his punishment. The legation at once wrote to the American consul at Cologne, near which city the offense had been committed, asking him to investigate and report on the case.

On the 19th of October following, a communication was received from the Department of State, instructing the legation to use, under certain circumstances, its good offices in behalf of Steffan. The legation immediately wrote a second time to the consul at Cologne for information in the case. Owing probably to a change in the consular office at that city, which had occurred in the interval and also to the temporary absence of the consul, a report was not received until the 27th of November. The consul informed the legation that he had only been able to ascertain that Steffan had been convicted of insulting the Emperor; that the offense was considered grave. The legation at once addressed the Imperial Government, asking its clemency on the ground of its suggestions contained in the instruction from the Department of State. On December 20 a note was received from the foreign office expressing regrets at its inability to recommend a pardon for Steffan, owing to the aggravated nature of his offense, and inclosing a copy of the proceedings, showing the exact nature of that offense. The result was at once reported to the Department of State and a copy and translation of the papers transmitted.

No. 172. Mr. Everett to Mr. Evarts. [Document 193]

No. 172.
Mr. Everett to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Berlin, April 23, 1879. (Received May 8.) No. 105.]

Sir: I have the honor to report for your consideration to occurrence which I have felt obliged to make the subject of a representation to the German foreign office.

During the past week William Knoth, who has been the messenger of this legation for nearly five years, was summoned to appear before the military authorities for duty on the reserve list. He reported himself Accordingly, duly provided with the official certificate of his position in the legation, which has heretofore always been sufficient to secure his immediate discharge. On this occasion, however, he returned with a note from the military authorities to the effect that he could no longer be exempted, and that he must report himself for twelve days’ military duty on the 22d instant.

I immediately addressed a note (Inclosure 1) to Mr. von Bülow requesting the servant’s discharge as the legation could ill dispense with his services. To this a prompt verbal answer was brought by one of the secretaries of the foreign office to the effect that Mr. von Bülow had been unable to obtain from the military authorities any concession in favor of Knoth. I then addressed a private note to Mr. von Bülow repeating the appeal more in detail, but his answer only encouraged me to hope that by addressing him another official note I might obtain a diminution of our messenger’s term of service.

I accordingly have to-day sent the note (Inclosure 2) to the foreign office which I trust will have the desired effect. I shall forward the reply to you as soon as received.

* * * * * * *

There might be various reasons why the representatives of nations immediately bordering on Germany should submit to this military requisition to avoid raising any international difficulties in addition to those already existing between them and Germany, but I cannot think it well for the United States, which are so liberal to foreigners in this respect, to allow this to pass without protest, and a distinct statement from the German Government as to what we have a right to expect from them in the way of diplomatic privileges.

I have, &c.,

H. SIDNEY EVERETT.

[Inclosure 1 in No. 105.]

Mr. Everett to Mr. von Bülow.

Legation of the United States,
Berlin, April 21, 1879.

The undersigned, charge d’affaires ad interim of the United States of America, has the honor to request his excellency Mr. von Bülow, imperial minister of foreign affairs, will take measures to have William Knoth, who has been for nearly five years the servant of this legation, dispensed from military service for which he has been summoned on the 22d of April. His absence would be a serious inconvenience to the legation, and in previous years there has been no difficulty in obtaining his exemption as a matter of official courtesy, but by the inclosed letter his excellency will perceive that the usual certificate, &c., from this legation has proved unavailing this year.

The undersigned, hoping that this matter will receive the speedy attention of his excellency in view of the shortness of the notice, avails himself of this occasion to renew to his excellency the assurance of his most distinguished consideration.

H. SIDNEY EVERETT.

His Excellency Mr. von Bülow, &c., &c., &.

[Inclosure 2 in No. 105.]

Mr. Everett to Mr. von Bülow.

Legation of the United States,
Berlin, April 23, 1879.

The undersigned, charge d’affaires of the United States of America, has the honor to express his regret to his excellency Mr. von Bülow, imperial minister for foreign affairs, that the request of this legation on the 21st instant for the release of its servant, Wilhelm Knoth, from military service could not be complied with, and the undersigned would respectfully request to be furnished with an official statement of the fact, heretofore unknown to the legation, that the servants of the legation are not exempt from military service.

The undersigned, in view of the great inconvenience suffered by the legation from being now without a messenger would be glad if his excellency would obtain a diminution of the time of Wilhelm Knoth’s service, without, however, intending thereby to concede the right of the military authorities to deprive the legation, even for a short time, of its messenger.

The undersigned, subject to the superior instruction of his government, to which he has reported this occurrence, cannot but regard this action of the military authorities as a compulsory demand on the legation for one of its servants, and therefore as inconsistent with the principles of international law as expounded by German as well as English and American jurists.

The undersigned would call the attention of his excellency to the fact that the servants of the legation, and of the families of both ministers and secretaries, have heretofore been exempted from taxation on the production of official proof of their service, and the undersigned fails to perceive why a distinction should be made as regards military obligations.

His excellency must be fully aware of the very liberal privileges accorded by American statute law as to the servants of foreign missions, and the mere fact that obligatory military service is not a part of the American Constitution would hardly seem to be a reason for a want of reciprocal international concessions on the part of the German Government.

The undersigned, while awaiting further instructions from his government in regard to this matter, gladly avails himself of this occasion to renew to his excellency, Mr. von Bülow, the assurance of his distinguished consideration.

H. SIDNEY EVERETT.

His Excellency Mr. von Bülow,
&c., &c., &c.

No. 173. Mr. Everett to Mr. Evarts. [Document 194]

No. 173.
Mr. Everett to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Berlin, May 5, 1879. No. 107.]

Sir: Referring to my dispatch No. 105 of the 23d April, concerning the case of Wilhelm Knoth, the legation messenger, taken away from the legation for military service, I have now the honor to inclose (inclosure 1) the answer, with a memorial of his excellency Mr. von Bülow, of the 29th ultimo, to my note to his excellency of the 23d ultimo, as also a note from his excellency of 3d instant on the same subject (inclosure 2), with translations.

It will be seen that the memorial denies the justness of the claim of ex-territoriality advanced by me on behalf William Knoth on the following grounds: 1. That the Prussian Government had, as long ago as 1821, requested of the various legations in Berlin that German citizens in their service might be allowed to perform military service. If such a request has ever been to the American legation, it is at present not to be found on our files. The point might also be conceded as a favor in answer to a request, without necessarily conceding it as a right in answer to a demand.

2. That no objection had hitherto been raised by foreign missions against this principle. In reply to this I can only say that it does not coincide with the information I have obtained from my colleagues, who tell me that they have repeatedly tried in vain to have their servants freed from military service, and they have encouraged me in protesting against the forcible removal of my own.

3. That the Prussian legislation is not contrary to international law, and that “there is a lack in international law of positively generally recognized principles concerning personages of a legation who are subjects of the state to which they are accredited.”

In reply to this argument I beg leave to quote those passages from well-known international law writers which led me to think that I was correct in my view.

Wheaton’s International Law, 8th edition, 1866: § 224. From the moment a public minister enters the territory of the state to which he is sent, during the time of his residence and until he leaves the country, he is entitled to an entire exemption from the local jurisdiction both civil and criminal.

§ 225. This immunity extends not only to the person of the minister, but to his family and suite, secretaries of legation and other secretaries, his servants, movable effects, and the house in which he resides.

§ 226. The wife and family, servants, and suite of the minister participate in the inviolability attached to his public character.

§ 241. The privilege of exterritoriality consists in the right of the diplomatic agent to be exempt from all dependence on the sovereign power of the country near the government to which he is accredited.

Phillimore’s International Law, 2d edition, 1871, vol. ii, p. 193: § 153. Thirdly, the right of inviolability applies to whatever is necessary for the discharge of ambassadorial functions, “nam omnis coactio abesse a legato debet, tarn quae res ei necessarias, quam quae personam tangit, quo plena ei sit securitas.” (Grotius II, c. xviii, § iv.)

§ 186. p. 218 [Pg. 218 is part of Doc. 128]. With these exceptions all civilized nations unanimously accord to ambassadors complete exemption from the civil jurisdiction of the country in which they resie. These exterritorial privileges are also extended by positive international la w, as much as the rights of inviolability to the family, and especially to the wife of the ambassador; his suite and train (comites) are also entitled to these privileges, a violation of which in their persons affects the honor, though in a less degree, of their chief.

§ 188. * * * Difficulties have arisen from persons perhaps not subjects of the state from which the embassy is sent, claiming without sufficient warranty to belong to it. It has therefore been enacted by the municipal laws of some countries, and it ought to be the usage of all to require a list of the persons composing the suite, to be delivered to the minister for foreign affairs, or other proper officers.

(This was done in the case of William Knoth.)

§ 190. * * * The servant need not lie in the house, although he must do some service there. He must be a real and not a nominal servant.

§ 194. Provisions in England.

§ 195. Provisions in the United States.

§ 196. Provisions in Prance.

§ 197. Provisions in Spain.

§ 198. Provisions in Portugal.

§ 199. Provisions in Russia.

§ 200. Provisions in Austria, Bavaria, and Prussia.

The Prussian code enacts that all persons belonging to the embassy shall be entitled to those immunities which international law and existing treaties have conferred on them. (See Allgemeines Landrecht für die preussischen Staaten Einleitung, §§ 36, 37, 38, 39.)

Heffter: Das europaische Yolkerrecht der Gegenwart, 6 Ausgabe, Berlin, 1873: [Translation.]

§ 42. Exterritoriality is in general the exemption by international law of certain persons and things connected with them from the state authority in that territory within which they are bodily present.

§ 221. Among those persons who belong to the entourage of a minister, and thereby participate in certain rights and privileges, and especially in those of personal inviolability and exterritoriality, the following are the chief: a, ——; b, ——: c, ——; d, ——; e, ——; f, the liveried servants and domestics of the minister.

It is now undoubted that all the above-named persons, even if they were subjects of the foreign state, are themselves included in the exterritoriality of the minister, and therefore in particular exempted in like manner from the criminal and civil jurisdiction of this foreign state, and hence subject to the jurisdiction of the accrediting state in case such jurisdiction has not been delegated to the minister himself.

[Note 3 to the above.]

Modern state practice in general in its adhesion to this principle * * * as well as the authority of the chief publicists, * * * as regards Prussia, see General Judicial Ordn., part I, title 2, §§ 63, 67, and following. See, also, United States Revised Statutes, 4062–66; as regards England, act of Parliament of 1709.

Bluntschli: Das modern Volkerrecht der civilizunten Staaten, 3 edition, 1878: [Translation.]

§ 145. The exemption from local state authority extends also to the family officials, suite, and servants of the exterritorial personage.

§ 212. Immunity from the penal authority of the state to which the minister is accredited, and subjection to the penal authority of the accrediting state, extends also to such servants of foreign ministers as are subjects of the former state.

Alt. Handbuch des europäischen Gesandtschaftsrecht, &c., Berlin, 1870: [Translation.]

§ 130. To the private servants, who may be divided into three classes, belong firstly the minister’s own private physician, his private secretary, his house teachers, then his house officers (officiers de la maison), and finally his liveried servants (gens à livrée). By the term house officials are meant butlers, stable-masters, cellar-masters, equerries, valets, swiss; and among liveried servants are reckoned runners, cooks, coachmen, postillions, stablemen, chasseurs, lackeys, heiducken. All these stand, as already mentioned, under the particular protection of international law and enjoy the privilege of exterritoriality.

Mirus: Das europäische Gesandtschaftsrecht, Leipsic, 1847: § 239. p. 264 [Pg. 264 is part of Doc. 146]. All persons in the private service of a minister, including liveried servants, &c., stand like the rest of the suite under the particular protection of international law, and are not subject to the authority of the state in which the minister is accredited.

Vattel: Droit des Gens (Ed. Pradier Foderé, Paris, 1863), vol. iii livre iv, chapter ix: § 120. De la suite de l’Ambassadeur. La inviolabilité de l’Ambassadeur se communique aux gens de sa suite, et son independance s’etend à tout ce qui forme sa maison. Toutes ces personnes lui sont tenement attachés qu’elles suivent son sort. Elles dépendent de lui seul immediatement et sont exemptes de la juridiction du pays oil elles ne se trouyent qu’avec cette reserve L’Ambassadeur doit les protéger, et on ne pent les instilter sans l’insulter lui-même.

Si les domestiques et route la maison d’un ministre étranger ne dependaient pas de lui uniquement, on sent avec quelle facilité il pourrait être moleste, inquiété et troublé dans l’exereice de ces fonctions. Ces maximes sont reconnues partout aujourdhui, et confirmées par l’usage.

These authorities might be multiplied but seem sufficient to show that a servant, even when a subject of the country to which the minister is accredited, is exempt from the jurisdiction of that country. As regards the case of taxation, cited by Mr. von Bülow, in the United States, as evidence against me it appears to me that something is left out. The Revised Statutes, §§ 4062–4066, appear to agree with my claim as far as they go.

The servant in question, William Knoth, has now returned from his twelve days’ military service, and is not liable to be called on again except in case of war, and therefore the immediate consequences of the incident cease. I leave it for the Department to decide whether any answer shall be sent to the note of his excellency Mr. von Bülow of the 29th April, embodying the above authorities for the protest which I thought it my duty to make.

I have, &c.,

H. SIDNEY EVERETT.

[Inclosure 1 in No. 107.—Translation.]

Foreign Office, Berlin, April 29, 1879.

The undersigned has the honor, referring to the esteemed note of the chargé d’affaires of the United States of America, Mr. H. Sidney Everett, of the 23d instant, to transmit herewith a memorial concerning the principles which govern in the matter of the employment in the military service of this country of Prussian or German subjects who are in the private service of the foreign missions here.

While the undersigned at the same time takes the liberty to remark that he has in the appropriate quarter made known the wish of Mr. H. Sidney Everett as to the shortening of the military service of the servant Wilhelm Knoth, and that he purposes making a further communication as soon as the shortly-to-be-expected decision shall have been reached, he avails himself also of this occasion to renew the expression of his distinguished consideration.

von BÜLOW.

Mr. H. Sidney Everett,
Chargè d’Affaires of the United States of America.

[Translation of the memorial accompanying the foregoing inclosure.]

Memorial concerning the employment in the military service of the country of Prussian or German subjects who are in the service of foreign missions.

In Prussia the principle has always been maintained that Prussian subjects who are in the service of foreign ministers accredited here, or of members of foreign legations, are subject to military service in this country.

In accordance herewith all the ministers at that time accredited here were, by a circular of July 7, 1821, requested to discharge as soon as it should become necessary the Prussian subjects in their service in order that they might be enrolled in the standing army, and, in case they should belong to the reserve or “Landwehr,” to instruct them to punctually perform the military duties thereby entailed. German military legislation has made no change affecting this principle.

No objection has hitherto been raised by foreign missions here against the application of this principle; on the other hand, several foreign ambassadors and ministers have expressly recognized the justice of the position assumed by this country. In the year 1866 two coachmen of the then French ambassador were summoned to the flag; in the year 1870–’71 servants of the then Italian minister and of the English secretary of embassy, O’Connor, as well as a garcon de chancellerie of the Belgian legation, were called to the army. In none of these cases did the chief of mission make objections. This legislation and practice which obtains in Germany and Prussia is not in conflict with international law. The latter, it is true, accords to ministers, as against the government to which they are accredited, a claim to immunity from the jurisdiction and from public burdens and taxes; a like exemption is, as a rule, conceded to the suite and servants.

As regards the materially different case, where personages of a legation are subjects of the state to which they are accredited, there is a lack in international law of positive generally recognized principles. It must therefore be left to the legislation of the individual states to fix the legal status of such persons, and in so far as no particular status has been accorded them by legislation in this country, the common law of their state will also apply to them. They are therefore subject to military duty in Germany, as German military legislation accords them no exemption.

For the correctness of this view the practice of other states also speaks. In Russia, Austria, Switzerland, and other states the privileges of exterritoriality are not conceded to subjects of the country who have entered the service of foreign missions. Nor does this appear to be the case in the United States of America. The imperial minister at Washington had in the year 1872 addressed to the government there the inquiry as to whether according to American legislation and practice American citizens in the service of foreign legations were required to pay direct municipal taxes. The Treasury Department, to whom this question was submitted for its opinion, thereupon expressed itself in a communication to the imperial minister dated May 20, 1872, as follows: “I reply to the inquiry of the German minister that the freedom from taxation by the government to which he is accredited enjoyed by a foreign minister is not understood to extend to citizens of the United States employed in the business of the legation.”

Berlin, April, 1879.

[Inclosure 2 in No. 107.—Translation.]

Berlin, May 3, 1879.

The undersigned, in reverting to his note of 29th April, has the honor to inform Mr. H. Sidney Everett, chargé d’affaires of the United States of America, that he has just received a communication from the proper authorities to the effect that the wish expressed in a note of 23d April, that the time of military service of the servant Wilhelm Knoth may be diminished, cannot under existing laws be complied with.

The undersigned has also the honor to state that the time of service of said Knoth expires to-day, and to avail himself of this occasion to renew the assurance of his most distinguished consideration.

von BÜLOW.

No. 174. Mr. Everett to Mr. Evarts. [Document 195]

No. 174.
Mr. Everett to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Berlin, May 5, 1879. (Received May 22.) No. 109.]

Sir: Referring to your instruction No. 54, directing the legation to procure for the use of a committee appointed at a recent convention, at Columbus, of boards of railroad commissioners, certain information concerning the taxation of railroads and railroad securities in Germany, I have the honor to inclose, with translations, copies of the note and accompanying memorial received from the German Government in response to the legation’s request for the desired information, and to be, sir,

Your obedient servant,

H. SIDNEY EVERETT.

[Inclosure in No. 109. —Translation.]

Mr. von Bülow to Mr. Everett.

Berlin, April 28, 1879.

The undersigned has the honor to state, in reply to the respected note of March 8 of Mr. H. Sidney Everett, chargé d’affaires of the United States of America, that the taxation of railroads and railroad bonds has as yet not been uniformly regulated in Germany, but that, on the contrary, it varies in the different German states.

Since, of all the states in question, Prussia alone possesses private railroads of considerable extent, the undersigned, in transmitting the desired information, thought proper to confine himself to the regulations in force in Prussia.

A more detailed review of the above will be found in the memorial inclosed, and respectfully placed at the disposal of Mr. Everett by the undersigned, who also takes this occasion to renew the assurance of his most distinguished consideration.

von BÜLOW.

H. Sidney Everett,
Chargé d’Affaires of the United States of America.

[Translation of the memorial accompanying the foregoing inclosure.]

Memorial concerning the taxation of railroads in Prussia.

i.—state taxes.

It was already prescribed by the law of November 3, 1838, concerning railroad enterprises (§ 38), that railroads were to pay a tax, the regulating of which was, however, reserved for a later period. The law at the same time provided “that railroad companies should remain free from license taxes (Gewerbesteuer).” § 38.

The introduction of the tax provided for ensued through the law of May 30, 1853, concerning the tax to be paid by railroads. Pursuant to the same, railroads are required to pay the state a percentage of their annual net receipts. Details will be found in §§ 3 and ff.

On March 16, 1867, a law was passed concerning the taxation of all railroads not owned by the state or by home railroad stock companies, the provisions of which are in unison with those of May 30, 1853.

Railroad bonds are not taxed as such by the state, but are subject, like all other evidences of indebtedness, to a single stamp tax, the proceeds of which flow into the state treasury.

ii.—other than state taxes.

The question as to whether, and to what extent, railroads and railroad bonds may be taxed by municipalities, circuits, and other communal associations, is not settled in Prussia by any legislative provisions.

The answer to this question depends rather, as railroads belong either to the state or to stock companies, upon the provisions which obtain as regards communal taxation of the fisc and of stock companies, which are different in different parts of the country. To the six questions contained in the esteemed note of the 8th ultimo, an answer applying uniformly to the whole state can only be given with reference to the following points: (To 2.) In so far as the realty of railroads is subject to the State realty or buildings tax, which is not the case as regards the road-beds, the same are required to pay the taxes on realty imposed on the municipal and other communal associations in particular, with additions to the State realty and buildings tax.

(To 3.) As in Prussia, municipal and circuit taxes are nowhere levied in the form of a property tax, there is no distinct taxation of railroads as owners of personalty.

(To 4.) Railroads are only entitled to immunity from taxation as regards road-beds in so far as it is a question of the levying of communal real-estate taxes. (Compare with “To 2.”)

As regards the unjustifiable imposition of a communal income-tax upon them, more particular information will be furnished under “To 6.”

(To 5.) The stock belonging as well as the dividends accruing to holders are everywhere subject as their personalty to the income tax of municipalities, circuits, &c. The right of deduction is also not at present conceded to holders in those municipalities in which a railroad as such is subjected to an income tax.

The interest accruing to owners of railroad bonds is taxed as their personal property, in the same manner as the dividends of the stockholders; a tax upon the bonds as such is nowhere imposed.

(To 6 and. 1.) Communal and district taxes are nowhere imposed on gross receipts. In cases in which income taxation is imposed on railroads at all, the net receipts alone-are regardedas subject to taxation.

The surplus of the annual revenues over and above the annual expenditures is considered the net receipts; as expenditures, are regarded also the customary annual loss by use of buildings, utensils, &c. Further, the necessary additions to the renovation fund, as well as the amounts expended to pay interest on debts and commissions to officers and members of the supervision and ministerial councils, but not the amounts added to the capital reserve fund, or used for improvements, &c., or enlargements of buildings.

Such taxation of the net receipts of railroads, however, only takes place on the-basis of the special provisions contained in the regulations of the respective city and rural communities in the city-communities of the provinces of East and West Prussia, Brandenburg, Pomerania, Silesia, Saxony, Sleswic-Holsatia, Westphalia, and Ehineland, in the city of Frankfort-on-the-Main; and as regards private railways in the city communities of the province of Hanover, than in the rural communities of the provinces of Westphalia and Ehineland, and, further, on the basis of§ 14 of the circuit regulation of December 13, 1872, as regards the private railroads in the circuits in the provinces of East and West Prussia, Brandenburg, Pomerania, Silesia, and Saxony.

As entitled to tax are regarded only those communities and circuits in which there is a station, and not those communities through which the road merely lies.

The apportionment of the entire net receipts of the railroads among the individual communities and circuits entitled to tax is based on the proportion of the gross, receipts of the individual stations (internal business) to the entire gross receipts.

Berlin, April, 1879.

No. 175. Mr. Everett to Mr. Evarts. [Document 196]

No. 175.
Mr. Everett to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Berlin, May 19, 1879. (Received June 11.) No. 111.]

Sir: I have the honor to inclose a copy of the treaty between Germany and the Samoan Islands, signed the 24th January, 1879. It is, taken from the Norddeutche Allgemeine Zeitung, and may consequently be assumed to be essentially correct, but, if possible, I will obtain an official copy.

I have, &c.,

H. SYDNEY EVERETT.

[Inclosure in No. 111.—Translation.]

Treaty between Germany and Samoa.

Treaty of friendship between His Majesty the Emperor of Germany and King of Prussia, &c., &c., in the name of the German Empire, and their excellencies the members of the Taimua, in the name of the Government of Samoa.

His Majesty the Emperor of Germany and King of Prussia, &c., &c., in the name of the German Empire of the one part, and their excellencies the members of the Taimua, in the name of the Government of Samoa, of the other part, led by the desire to forward their friendly relations and secure their mutual interests, have concluded to enter into a treaty of friendship.

To this end they have appointed their plenipotentiaries, viz:

His Majesty the Emperor of Germany and King of Prussia, &c., &c., his imperial 1 captain, Karl Bartholomäns von Werner, commander of His Majesty’s corvette Ariadne, knight of the order of the crown, third class, and of the order of the red eagle, fourth class, and his imperial consul for the islands of Samoa and Tonga, Theodor August Ludwig Weber, and their excellencies the member of the Taimua, the member of the Taimua Tuia, and the member of the Taimua Lemana, and the under secretary of state, Meisake, who, after a mutual communication of their authority, found to be in good and proper form, have agreed upon the following articles:

Article I. There shall be peace and perpetual friendship between the German Government, on the one part, and Samoa on the other part, as well as between their respective subjects without distinction of persons or places.

Art. II. The subjects of both of the contracting parties shall receive the fullest and continued protection of their persons and property in both countries, and further, the Germans in Samoa, and the Samoans in Germany, shall be exempted from all war contributions, military requisitions, or military services, and especially the Germans in Samoa from having their houses, lands, and plantations occupied by belligerent parties.

Art. III. Germans sojourning in Samoa and Samoans sojourning in Germany shall enjoy complete liberty of conscience, and shall in no way be disturbed or molested on account of their faith or on account of the exercise of their religious ceremonies within their houses or churches. Subjects of the contracting parties shall have the right to inter their countrymen, dying in Germany or the Samoan Islands, in places acquired and prepared for such purposes, and shall in no way be molested in the exercise of their church or funeral rites, nor shall their graves under any pretext be injured or destroyed. In all these cases the Samoans in Germany shall be subject to the laws and regulations of the country, and shall conform to the customs and usages as well as observe religious decorum. Germans in Samoa shall be held subject to such laws and regulations as may hereafter be agreed upon between the contracting parties. They shall in the meantime do nothing in violation of the laws and regulations of their own country.

Art. IV. German subjects shall have unrestricted liberty of commerce within the entire jurisdiction of Samoa. They shall freely enter all places, ports, and waters of Samoa, with their ships and cargoes of every description, to sell, land, or store their ladings, as well as to ship and send away domestic productions or other objects of any nature belonging to them. German citizens shall not be subject to any duties or restrictions upon their incoming or outgoing ships or cargoes, nor for the carrying on of traffic, as long as such have not been agreed upon between the contracting parties. German citizens, however, shall, in such cases, enjoy the same rights and privileges in Samoa as the Samoans or the subjects of the most favored nation.

Art. V. German warships shall be allowed to enter the harbor of Saluafata, to anchor, remain, take in provisions, and to repair; and the German Government shall be free to erect such stations in each port for the use of German ships of war and their crews as may seem necessary.

The Samoan Government farther allows the German Government to erect buildings on the shores of said harbor of Saluafata for the purpose of storing coal or any other requisites for the use of German war-ships and their crews.

The German Government shall be further permitted to hoist the German flag upon the shores where such stations have been erected. This shall, however, in no way tend to interfere with or impair the supreme authority of the Samoan Government over the harbor of Saluafata. On the other hand, the Government of Samoa promises to do nothing whereby the privileges accorded the German Government in this article may be impaired or rendered worthless. Nor shall the privileges accorded the German Government in this article prevent war-ships or trading vessels of other nations, to which the Samoan Government has opened its ports, from entering the harbor of Saluafata. Nevertheless, the Samoan Government shall not grant to other nations the same rights and privileges regarding this harbor and its snores as are accorded the German Government.

German war-ships shall also be at liberty to enter any other port, place, or water, under the jurisdiction of Samoa, for the purpose of anchoring, shipping provisions, remaining, or undergoing repairs, subject to laws which may yet be agreed upon between the contracting parties. And the Samoan Government hereby promises further not to accord to any other nation, in any respect, privileges not accorded the German Government, with regard to the harbor of Apia and its shores, but that the German Government shall enjoy equal privileges with other nations.

Art. VI. Citizens of both the contracting parties shall have full liberty to travel, reside, traffic, purchase, or lease lands, cultivate for their use, build houses, stores, or shops thereon, within the territories of the contracting parties. In such cases the Samoans in Germany shall be subject to the laws and regulations of the country; shall meet the same requirements, pay the same taxes, imposts, contributions, as its citizens. In like manner the Germans in Samoa shall conform to the laws and regulations; shall pay such taxes and imposts to the Samoan Government as may hereafter be decided upon between the parties to this treaty. German citizens in Samoa shall always enjoy the same rights and privileges as Samoans or the subjects of the most favored nation. The Samoan Government does hereby especially guarantee to German subjects the peaceable possession of all lands which they have heretofore purchased in Samoa, in legal form, and under existing laws and customs, and secure them against any and all future claims. German citizens shall therefore be permitted to utilize such land purchased from Samoans in Samoa undisturbed; to establish plantations thereon to employ all necessary labor for this purpose, as well as for their wharves, workshops, and houses.

Art. VII. The determination of the jurisdiction to which German subjects residing in Samoa are amenable, in all legal disputes arising among themselves, as well as crimes and offenses committed among themselves, is left to the regulation and discretion of the German Government. However, the regulation of the jurisdiction and procedure respecting legal disputes between German resident and transient citizens, living in Samoa, on the one side, and Samoans on the other, as well as with regard to crimes and offenses committed by citizens of one of the treating governments against the citizens of the other, including also the necessary regulations for the infliction of punishment upon convicted persons, and the compulsory attendance of witnesses in judicial proceedings, is reserved for consideration between the contracting parties. In the mean while, and until such regulations shall have been agreed upon between the contracting parties, all legal disputes arising between German citizens in Samoa and Samoans shall be decided, as has heretofore been customary, before the German consul, or his representative, in conjunction with an officer of the Samoan Government.

Art. VIII. All laws and regulations to which German resident and transient citizens are to conform, as well as the payment of taxes and duties levied by the Samoan Government: also the means to secure the proper observance of such laws and regulations on the part of German citizens in Samoa, shall be discussed between the German consul or other person authorized by the German Government with officers of the Samoan Government. Yet all such laws and measures as may be discussed and agreed upon between the said officers of the contracting parties shall not be valid until they have received the sanction of the German Government. Any agreements, however, which may have been entered into between the officers of the contracting parties regarding municipal ordinances, police quarantine, and Apia harbor regulations, as well as with regard to the prohibition or regulation of the sale of, or trading in spirits or intoxicating liquors, to Samoans or natives of other islands in the Pacific Ocean, through Germans, shall immediately be placed under the supervision of German subjects, so long, at least, as the German Government has not refused the confirmation. German citizens shall in the mean while, and in all these cases, enjoy the same rights and privileges as the Samoans, or the subjects of the most favored nation in Samoa, and shall be subject to no laws and measures by which a discrimination is made against them, as compared with the subjects of other nations.

Art. IX. Besides the different agreements contained in the foregoing articles, the regulation of civil affairs and of other relations not yet discussed, concerning resident and transient citizens of one of the contracting parties during their stay in the territory of the other, as also the termination of the rights, powers and duties of the respective consular officers and other unsettled questions respecting commerce, is reserved for mutual agreement between the contracting parties.

Art. X. The Government of Samoa promises not to permit any monopoly, indemnities, or special privileges within its jurisdiction injurious to German commerce, or the flag and the citizens of the German Empire.

Art. XI. The Government of Samoa promises that the German Government shall be accorded, all the rights and privileges enumerated in the foregoing articles, as well as granted the same rights as are granted to the most favored nation, or as may yet be granted them in the future.

Art. XII. The present treaty shall go into force and be valid from the day it has been signed, provided, however, that the same shall be null and void if the ratification thereof on the part of the German Government shall not have followed within the period of twenty-four months from the date of signing.

Art. XIII. The present treaty, consisting of thirteen articles, shall be ratified, and the ratification thereof shall be exchanged at Apia, as soon as possible. The ratification, however, on the part of the Samoan Government shall immediately follow the signing of this treaty, and the records of it be placed in the care of the German consul at Apia until the arrival of the ratification hereof from the German Government, with this proviso, that the record of the ratification of the Samoan Government shall be returned to it in case the German Government shall not ratify said treaty within the time specified.

In witness whereof the respective plenipotentiaries have signed and sealed the present treaty in duplicate.

Done at the consulate of the German Empire at Apia on Upolu on the 24th day of January, one thousand eight hundred and seventy-nine.
[l. s.] V. WERNER.
[l. s.] TH. WEBER.
[l. s.] TUIA.
[l. s.] LEMANA.
[l. s.] MEISAKE.

No. 176. Mr. Everett to Mr. Evarts. [Document 197]

No. 176.
Mr. Everett to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Berlin, June 2, 1879. (Received June 19.) No. 114.]

Sir: I have the honor to acknowledge your instruction No. 2, of the 14th ultimo, addressed to Mr. White, in reply to my No. 105 on the subject of Wilhelm Knoth.

As Mr. White has not yet reached Berlin, and as the department may have some further instructions to send after receiving my No. 107 on the same subject, I have thought it best to leave the execution of the above instruction No. 2 to the minister himself when he shall arrive.

In the mean time, I beg leave, in pursuance of the same subject, to call your attention to a new law of the German Empire, an extract and translation of which I inclose, signed by the Emperor in July, 1878, but which does not go into effect until October 1, 1879.

By the terms of section 19 of this law it would appear that only non-Germans in legations will be exempt from state authority, and, consequently, by implication, that the German servants of the legation are not so exempt.

This would seem to indicate pretty clearly what we have a right to expect for the future.

I would also state that during a conversation I had with the minister of foreign affairs, on occasion of presenting the President’s letter of condolence on the death of Prince Waldemar, his excellency discussed the case of Wilhelm Knoth, and, while expressing his regret that the legation had suffered any inconvenience by his loss for twelve days, which he thought he might possibly, had he known of it sooner, have spared us by special request of the military authorities, was sure that the German Government could not admit such a release, as a claim in conflict with the provisions of their constitution requiring every man to perform a certain amount of military duty.

* * * * * * *

I will call the attention of Mr. White, when he arrives, to the clause of the new law referred to, in case he should think it best to discuss it with M. von Bülow, as I was not aware of it when I had my last interview with his excellency, nor did I mention it.

I have, &c.,

H. SIDNEY EVERETT.

[Inclosure in No. 176.—Translation.]

§ 18. Internal jurisdiction does not extend to the chiefs and members of missions accredited to the German Government.

If such persons are citizens of one of the confederated states, they are exempted from internal jurisdiction in so far only as the state of which they are citizens has renounced its jurisdiction over them.

The chiefs and members of missions accredited to one of the confederated states are not subject to the jurisdiction thereof.

The same applies to members of the Bundesrath, not citizens of the state where the Bundesrath meets. (14.)

§ 19. The foregoing regulations also apply to members of the families, business officials, and servants of the persons mentioned in§ 18 who are not Germans.

14 Comp., § 19. Internal jurisdiction is that of all German tribunals. (Mot., p. 5.)

The exterritoriality of diplomatic missions rests upon the principles of international law; it is extended to imperial and municipal law.

“When diplomatic persons are in the condition of continual citizenship to the state to which they are accredited, they are exempted from the jurisdiction of that state only in so far as it has renounced its jurisdiction over them. In their relation to the German Empire, the being subject to the empire must be considered as conclusive.” (Mot., p. 55.)

This opinion is expressed in the second section. Under section 18 is included the whole diplomatic body; therefore, also, ministers resident, chargés d’affaires, secretaries of legation, and attachés. (Mot., a. o. O., p. 55.) The second clause bears upon foreign (not German) diplomatic persons accredited to a confederated state, and upon such persons whom one confederated state has accredited to another state of the confederation. These are subject to imperial jurisdiction only.

The non-Prussian members of the Bundesrath are under diplomatic protection. (Art. 10, Imperial German Statutes; compare Hartman, Zeitschrift, a. o. O., vol. 2, p. 13–16.) For legal relations of the imperial diplomatic corps, compare imperial laws of 31st March, 1878, §§ 19, 20, 21, 22 (Imp. Laws, Bl., p. 61, Kamgieszer and o’ O., p. 85, 15). The term “servant” also includes teachers, butlers, &c. (Mot., a. o. O., p. 55.)

No. 177. Mr. White to Mr. Evarts. [Document 198]

No. 177.
Mr. White to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Berlin, June 25, 1879. [Received July 18.] No. 12.]

Sir: I have the honor to transmit a translation of portions of speeches recently delivered in the Reichstag regarding the standard of coinage in the German Empire. The question asked of the government was doubtless prompted by a recent debate in the English Parliament, in which Mr. Goschen made certain statements, said to be based upon the best authority, regarding the intentions of the German Government as to changes in the currency. The debate in the Reichstag was very long, Prince Bismarck making two speeches. From the beginning he expressed great regret that the question had been asked, and his remarks were largely concerned with the attitude of those who had asked the question; hence the debate took a strongly personal character. I spare you as much of these personal details as possible, giving only those parts of the debate of direct interest to our own government. There are some discrepancies between the reports of the speeches in the newspapers, but I have compared different accounts, and think the translation is as close as possible.

I have, &c.,

AND. D. WHITE.

[Inclosure 1 in No. 12.—Translation.]

report of debate in the reichstag.

Berlin, June 19, 1879.

With reference to a report that the German Government proposed to suspend the sale of its silver and adopt a double standard in its currency, the deputies Dellbrück, Bamberger, and Harnier asked: “Does the government intend to make any changes in the present laws regulating the currency?”

In the course of a reply the imperial chancellor, Prince Bismarck, said:

“I do not hold it to be advantageous to the State that a question of such weight and of such importance to our credit, trade, and manufactures should, without the least occasion, be dragged forward to be discussed in academical style, in order that the government might be placed en demeure, and be obliged to make an official statement on the subject.* * *

“When fifty-eight gentlemen of the position of those who by their signatures have supported this question admit that they are skeptical of the aims of the government, then the opinion must take root that, as they are initiated, have technical knowledge, know more than the general public do, there must surely be reason to doubt the government; otherwise, financiers and statesmen of their position, men who have daily had confidential intercourse with each of the ministers who might readily have dispelled all their misgivings, would never have put any such question without just cause, would never have expressed doubts, would never have sanctioned the expression of doubts which are but created by being expressed.

“The problem of banishing these doubts which they have themselves created, they now place before me, adding the remark that mistrust is antagonistic to our industrial prosperity; an observation in which I quite agree with them, Yet, if they are convinced of this, they should not have expressed their mistrust by a question supported by so numerous an array of signatures. They now expect me, they put back upon me, the task of clearing out of the way a difficulty of their own creating. But if I say, in reply, it is not my intention to change the currency laws, is it not possible that another may have that intention? If I say I am not convinced of the advantage of a change in our coinage, might I not by a closer study of the question, by hearing the explanations of technical men, by the results of an adoption of the change by other countries, be brought over to quite another opinion? Is my simple negative to the effect that at present it is not my intention to change the coinage, adequate to destroy so far-reaching and so strongly pronounced a misgiving as that supported by so important and imposing an array of witnesses as the fifty-eight gentlemen here represented by their signatures?

* * * * * * *

“In reply to this question I can only supply you with the facts as to the business position of the matter as it comes to my knowledge. I can assure you that from no quarter, neither from the federal council nor the Prussian ministry, has there come any proposal to change our coinage; nor has the question whether a change be necessary ever been touched upon from any side by a single word. The one connecting fact, the crystallization point, around which really this whole legend inclosing the question has formed itself, consists in the request I made to the bank directors that they discontinue for a time the sale of silver, because I am responsible for the continuance of and for the increase in the losses we are suffering, from the fact that the price of silver has fallen to 47, while its nominal value is 61, and because I refused to be any longer personally responsible for this.

“It was my intention in doing this to take the responsibility for the suspension upon myself until next session, for I would not involve the suspension with other new and important questions; and then next session to lay the facts before you in order to discover whether the legislature would give the heads of the executive directions to follow a new policy or to continue that which it has already sanctioned. I had thought that my not introducing the matter in the present session would have gained for me your thanks, as, in my opinion, we already have quite enough business and business quite important enough.

* * * * * * *

“What, however, has connected itself with this suspension of the sale of silver is the great displeasure of those bankers and other business men who gained by that sale. These ‘gentlemen financiers,’ as they are called in the letter of the English ambassador, or rather these financiers, and so far as I remember not financiers in Germany generally, hut financiers particularly in this capital—these gentlemen have made it appear to the English ambassador that they know more about the intentions of the government than anybody else. My honored friend and diplomatic coworker, Lord Odo Russell, dutifully sent these reports, when they reached his ears, to England, just as our representatives abroad very often send us, as such, reports current in London or Paris concerning the intentions of the English or French Governments; and in all this there is nothing extraordinary. But what does surprise me is the fact that a rumor with no better authentication than the present should have formed the subject of public official indorsement. I, for my part, have always, when reports have gone the round of the town of the intentions of a foreign power, and especially of a power having such close friendship with us as the English, when such reports have reached me I have held them back until I had verified them. It is not for me to suggest reasons why the English Government should have made such use of these reports, coming presumably to them in a ‘private letter’ from Lord Russell, so prominently as they have done. But I cannot admit that even if the English Government had observed a gradual going astray on our part in certain particulars that that would practically change, so far as our state government is concerned, the character and effect of the interrogation now put.

“I wish very much that the question had never been asked, or that I had first been asked, as might easily have been done, and as is often done by many of my most honored acquaintances, who have daily access to me. What kind of answer will you make; will you reply with a categorical ‘No, under no circumstances whatever’? But that, too, would have had its inconvenience as a reply. We would like the price of silver to rise. If, however, I reply ‘No’ to the question it will be said, ‘Good, we will wait; they must come to us with their cheap silver, as they evidently intend to come by and by, to sell it; we will take care that the price does not rise; we can raise a loud cry at every private sale that can possibly be traced to the German bank or to the German Government, and thus we will soon pull down the price of silver again, the moment the government desires to sell a single lot of the melted-down silver they have still on hand.’

“That, then, is the embarrassment in which these gentlemen have placed me by their question; and I should have been very thankful had they spared me it. No member of the collective federal council or the Prussian ministry has any doubt, such as is suggested by the question, of the stability of our legislation. I, however, will take leave to draw the attention of the gentlemen to the fact that no change whatever can be made in the law without the concurrence of the Reichstag. Every legislative proposal must receive its sanction. Our present coinage principles are based on law, and if we desired to introduce a new law, you need not fail for want of time and means to prepare an opposition, for it would soon attain publicity on the first mention of the subject in the federal council, or (which would be the surest way) through a circular addressed to the various governments whose opinions would have to be taken. I can assure you that hitherto I have not sounded a single German government upon this question, not even the Prussian, and that in spite of the doubts which are being loudly expressed, and of the newspaper reports (upon which, for my part, I place no reliance whatever), I never once saw any need to consult my Prussian colleague and finance minister on the matter.

* * * * * * *

“If I had any desire to change the law, the very first thing I would do would be to consult the Prussian minister of finance, for without the seventeen Prussian votes I can do very little, and, of course, for those I should be dependent on the Prussian finance minister.

* * * * * * *

“I beg of you, gentlemen, to put to rest any doubt as to the stability of our legislation by passing over this question; not necessarily to the orders of the day, but by preventing its giving rise to any further discussion. If, however, you should desire it, I am ready for discussion, but I ask you, in any case, in order that you may be in a position to judge whether I did rightly in suspending the sales of silver to wait and hear the arguments of the bank president, which led me to that step.”

[Inclosure 2 in dispatch No. 12.—Translation.]

report of debate in the reichstag.

Berlin, June 19, 1879.

Speech of Herr von Dechen, commissioner of the federal council and president of the Reichs Bank.

Gentlemen: If I had to attribute a motive for the suspension of the sales of silver, I should be obliged (I confess much against my wish) to examine more closely the result of the sales hitherto made. I will, however, restrict myself to the most important points in the question.

Up to the present we have melted down silver coins to the amount of, in round numbers, 629,000,000 marks, by the sale of which we realized 539,000,000 marks, about one-third being sold by the German Bank during the first four years since 1873, and the remaining two-thirds in the years 1877 and 1878, by the State Bank. The loss on those sales was 141/5 per cent.; that is, 89,484,073 marks; of this, however, 24,572,000 marks must be deducted for deterioration, cost of Coinage, &c., leaving the real loss on the sales 64,911,980 marks. The silver was sold at an average price of 54⅛ pence per standard ounce, cost of sale deducted. Since that time the price of silver has fallen considerably, and during the last seven months, between October 14 and May 19 last (the day on which the sales were suspended), the price was only 50 pence per standard ounce, and since then it has fallen to 48⅞ pence. That gives a loss on our sales of 21 per cent., and this we have had to bear. On the silver sold within the present year, amounting to about 28,000,000 marks, we have consequently had a further loss of 7,000,000 marks. Thus our entire loss has been 96,500,000 marks, or a net total loss of 72,000,000 marks. What quantity of silver the country has still to sell, and what it will yet lose upon it, cannot in the nature of things be statistically stated, for no one can know precisely how many of the thalers coined since 1750—and the whole matter has to do with thalers alone—how many of these thalers have already been melted down or lost. A tolerably safe estimate, however, can be made from our experience, in the withdrawal from the currency of the old two-thaler pieces, which once served in the place of the present thaler. It was found by that withdrawal that 17 per cent. of those coins were never returned—at least not within the specified time. If we apply this result proportionately to the thalers now current, we find that we have yet to receive and to sell about 476,000,000 marks, upon which there would be a further loss of between 90,000,000 and 100,000,000 marks, if we sold the silver at the price-we sold our silver during the last five months; as undoubtedly we should have to do.

Gentlemen, I am used to formidable calculations, and I can readily understand that reforms in coinage cannot be made without heavy sacrifices; but I still am startled by these figures, and believe that there are few here who do not share my feeling in that respect.

It is possible that this estimated loss may be reduced in the reality, but this reduction cannot be considerable. In 1873, when the coinage law was discussed here, the price of silver in London stood at, as it had done for the last twenty-five years, between 60¼ and 62 pence. As a result of that discussion, it sank from 61 to 59¾ pence, and, although a further reduction was then expected, I do not believe that any one anticipated so enormous a fall as has occurred. I have consequently considered it my duty to call the attention of the imperial chancellor to the matter, and strongly to recommend to him a suspension of the sale of silver.

That this was a measure well adapted to the end in view, has not yet, I maintain, been disproved. Whether it is to result in permanently raising the price of silver to its former height is, of course, an open question. Financiers of all countries have been saying that it is chiefly our fault that the price of silver has fallen as it has done, because we put a large quantity into the market, and we are told that if we cease to send out enormous quantities, the price would long ago have reached its former point again. Whether that be true or not, will now soon be proved. We shall, in any case, lose nothing by suspending our sales, as we should, even without any formal suspension, have sold none of our silver, because the only large buyer during recent years, Austro-Hungary, has withdrawn from the market.

Within a few days the published price of the standard ounce has risen about 6 per cent. (from 49⅞ to 53 pence), and the price maintains itself at between 52 and 53 pence. This shows how great has been the effect of the German silver poured into the market, and that we shall do well to wait a while to see what the future state of the market will be.

I believe that the saving of 100,000,000 marks, or even 80,000,000 marks is quite enough to warrant us in thus waiting; and in my opinion you will do well in supporting the policy of the government on this point. You would do the country and the whole world real service if you permanently saved the silver market from the fear it has of German silver; and, further, if you allow no more silver to to be sold, Germany is losing nothing by the thalers still among the currency, and I am convinced that even South Germany would bear with them a few years longer when it is seen that we can thereby save the country a considerable expense; and foreign countries will thank us if we take the burden, which has for more than six years weighed heavily upon all classes and conditions, permanently away from them.

I can, in conclusion, only again earnestly recommend that the arrangements which have been adopted be left as they are.

No. 178. Mr. White to Mr. Evarts. [Document 199]

No. 178.
Mr. White to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Berlin, June 30, 1879. (Received July 18.) No. 16.]

Sir: I have the honor to forward you, inclosed herewith, translations of the most important parts of the debate in the Reichstag on the 13th instant, upon the treaty of friendship between Germany and the Samoan Islands, the articles of which the Reichstag approved.

I have, &c.,

AND. D. WHITE.

[Inclosure in No. 16.—Translation.]

report of debate in the reichstag, berlin, june 13, 1879.

The Reichstag considered for the first time the Treaty of Friendship concluded between the German Empire and the Samoan Islands.

Foreign Minister Von Bülow. The memorandum subjoined to the treaty is probably more explicit than is necessary to enable one to judge the treaty itself. But the government considered it part of its duty, and necessary to the matter in hand, that no leading point, no modifying particulars, nor the ultimate result of the whole transaction should be left unexplained. Should it happen (which God forbid) that German mariners at some future time shall lose, as once the way was lost to the Fortunate Isles, the track to these happy islands, or should all that German work has there sown and planted be gathered by other hands, then the contents of this memorandum will still show the lucid, complete, and able report made by our naval officers on the traffic of the South Sea, from which a world wide commerce can, and will, one day spring; and then the position of these islands, lying as they do between the mighty and growing west of America and Australia, China, and Japan, will insure for these documents an honorable place among the archives of the realm, inasmuch as they give evidence of the fact that the government endeavored in a degree commensurate with its strength, and sense of duty, to further the interests of the empire in those distant, and, until very recent years, almost unknown regions. It is only within about the last six years that this matter, in its entirety, came officially to the knowledge of the government. The German settlements on the Samoan Islands, of whose existence we had heard only through the reports of the vessels trading in those parts, had, it was said, extended themselves bayond expectation; they had also, to a certain extent, become the competitors of other seafaring and trading nations, to whom the importance of the islands now appeared much clearer than it had done before, so that the peace of the islands was apparently endangered.

In order to inform itself of the position of affairs, the government applied to the admiralty, requesting that in future one of its vessels cruising yearly on the west coast of America, through the Pacific Ocean and to the east of Asia, should from time time show its flag at the Samoan Islands as an expression and guarantee of the interest the mother country has for people of its nationality. The commanders of these vessels have on each occasion carried out this order most satisfactorily. We have since considered it our duty to inform the plantation owners that their right of title to the ownership of any landed property which they had become possessed of from the inhabitants must be legally established; and, further, that, notwithstanding our interests in the settlements, and with every desire to protect them, it was possible for us to aim only at the maintenance of law and order, and so far to organize their government that treaties could be entered into with them by us, which treaties, however, should have for their object the preservation of equal rights for all, and should work not for the creation of any monopoly for ourselves nor to the exclusion of others.

They were further informed that no responsibility would be allowed to fall upon us as a consequence of their settlement, but that they could claim from us only this, that what had there been founded and happily developed by faithful German industry and honorable, capable enterprise, should not suffer through any restrictions injurious to German commerce or to the settlements. That throughout has been the leading idea. Incidentally, various other points have arisen. The islands had in part no government whatever, in part too much government, but, for the most part, such as they had was of a kind with which it was impossible to conclude any arrangements regarding equality of jurisdiction, tariffs, the acquisition of landed property, the safety of the person, settlement, &c.

From these difficulties we have been au last fortunately relieved by our able and experienced consuls, aided by our naval officers. From all sides, even from those who competed with us in that quarter, we have received the acknowledgment that the German arrangements are worthy of imitation, not only because of their favorable results so far as trade and the growth of the plantations are concerned, but also on account of the humane and judicious treatment of the laborers employed. Enforced labor has no existence, and free labor is gradually attained upon a basis of voluntary contracts with reasonable provisions. The difficulties, too, in the way of granting: equal rights to various nations have been as far as possible overcome for the present.

The disturbances on the islands have, happily, so far ceased that the legislative bodies of the republic, the senate and house of deputies, were convoked, and on January 24th last signed the treaty now before you.

The treaty is the result of the voluntary action of both parties, and contains provisions which we, according to our knowledge of the condition of things in the South Sea, hold to be indispensable for the maintenance of right. We shall therefore probably adopt the same measures with regard to other treaties which may be made.

I regard it as a happy sign of the success of our efforts that, simultaneously with our conclusion of this treaty, we received from both the great and peaceably related powers who are also represented in Samoa, a friendly acknowledgment of the fact that treaties of this kind are the only means of preventing a competition which can result in no one’s advantage. It is just the granting of equal privileges without interfering with internal affairs further than is necessary for the maintenance of the treaty; the securing of civil rights and free ingress and egress, which forms the only remedy for the great competition between different nations which is constantly developing itself in the South Sea, because it is there that the traffic of the world will find its home. All we desire is to reap the fruits of the silent German industry and valuable labor which have found a place there, and to retain a free scope for them.

Treaties with the small surrounding islands will be framed on the principles laid down in this. We do not desire to establish a colony nor to gain any monopoly; we want only just and equal rights for German shipping and trade.

The results of the treaty with the King of Tonga are in the main satisfactory. The news we have from Samoa since 24th January last gives promise of a peaceable development of affairs there if no tares from without are sown among the wheat.

In consideration of the great importance of the matter to German traffic, in just recognition of the work which the officials of the empire have accomplished in Samoa, and in acknowledgment of the honorable precedents and endeavors of our marine officers and the officials of the foreign office, I ask you to give your approbation to this treaty.

Deputy Mosle. The Reichstag has every reason to be satisfied with the explicit and weighty manner in which the memorandum is placed before it. In March, 1877, the government laid before us two similar documents, viz, the treaty with the Tonga Isles and an agreement with Spain concerning the trade of the Sulu (Sooloo) Archipelago, situated on the other side of the Pacific Ocean, the latter of which documents has enabled the German Government, in co-operation with Great Britain, to attain in the Sulu district unconditional freedom for trade and shipping. I quite agree with the proposal that our government should not acquire any trade monopoly in Polynesia. Should it, however, find it desirable, in carrying out this policy, whether it be in Polynesia or any other part of the world, to advance from treaties of friendship to treaties of protection, to occupying, or even to possessing, for the formation of colonies, other groups of South Sea Islands, I should hail such a step with pleasure. I represent a constituency which would receive from such a policy immediate benefits, and would have the satisfaction of knowing that the government has already begun this policy energetically and with good results so far, aiding considerably in the protection of German commerce and shipping, especially in those districts winch have not yet passed into the possession of other powers. If the government has put aside its past policy with regard to colonization, it is yet highly desirable, and even necessary, for the prosperous development of the German Empire in general—not for industry and trade alone, but for all interests—that it should, under certain conditions, found colonies. The contrary opinion, that a colonial policy is an impossible one for Germany, and an old and abolished fogyism, I take to be highly foolish and altogether without good reason.

This treaty with the Samoan Islands insures us against the disadvantages German commerce must suffer from in foreign colonies and upon islands of this character which, by reason of prior treaties, are prevented from according to us the right of the most favored nation. How valuable this right is can be seen from the rapid progress of the Tonga Islands. German trade, pure and simple, carried on under the German flag, has suffered wherever a most-favored nation clause could not be obtained—in the Hawaiian Isles, as also in the English colony of New Zealand, and in the Fiji Islands. It is not the Hamburg house of Godeffroy alone which has large possessions in the Samoan Isles; in Fiji and Hawaii the principal traders are natives of Bremen. Of these I may mention Messrs. Hockfeld & Co., and Hennings Bros., who are engaged very largely in trade and shipping, but are suffering from the fact that these islands have already concluded treaties with England, and especially with America.

If I am rightly informed, the Imperial Government is endeavoring to bring about a treaty with Hawaii. In the Tahiti and Paumoto Islands German interests are suffering from the there prevailing French influence. Long before the Fiji Islands were annexed by England, Germans had settled there and acquired large tracts of land. But their title to this property was not respected by England in the annexation treaty. On the contrary, the whole of their property was taken possession of as crown land, and nothing more was done but to appoint a commission, which was to investigate the titles and talk matters over. I should like to be informed how far this plan succeeded, and whether the Germans, especially Consul Hennings and those belonging to him, are likely to recover their rights. At the same time, I would express the hope that the consul-general who is to be sent to the Samoan Islands be authorized to extend the sphere of his official duties to the neighboring Fiji Islands.

As regards Samoa, the treaty before us supplies the security for property which has hitherto been wanting there; but while the good results of this are still growing, the English and Americans are making strenuous efforts to bring into existence powerful land companies in order that they may, with the aid of abundant capital, compete successfully with the German traders. In London the proposal to form a Fiji bank has been renewed. It is to be a kind of funded credit company, and is to extend its sphere of operations from Fiji to the adjacent islands, and of course to Samoa and Tonga. It is to be hoped that German business men will know how to meet this competition, although the British Government is to exert itself on behalf of the proposed institution.

Remembering the confidence which our government has shown in that of England, I hope that the latter will endeavor in the future to see that the rights acquired by Germany through this treaty are not encroached upon by any desire for annexation on the part of the English. We Germans have always respected English possessions, and even supported them with personal aid. We have never attempted to drive the English from their possessions, and I hope, therefore, that our cousins across the channel will respect the rights which Germany now acquires. I would add a few words on another part of the subject. Our imports of colonial produce from the Samoan Islands and from the Tonga Isles, and our exports thither, might be materially increased if the government were to bestow in its tariffs certain advantages upon imported products which have been acquired in those islands by Germans. I cannot ask for an exemption from duty, but I ask only for a diminution of the duties on such goods. It was in this way that other nations fostered their colonies.

As a consequence of our former impotence as a state, customs have taken root with us which a national self-consciousness can endure only with difficulty. I allude to the false reverence we have had for what is strange. This, as well as the former economical isolation of the Hanseatic towns which developed itself through no fault of theirs, must now, according to my ideas cease, and make way for the new era in which the welfare of the whole empire as well as that of each integral part shall be fostered. Krefeld, for instance, exports a large portion of its productions to Polynesia, but only through the agency of English merchants, and if you examine the statistical reports you will find no mention of German imports, although Krefeld alone exports to Polynesia goods to the value of from 4,000,000 to 6,000,000 marks. A large number of German mercantile firms are established in London, Amsterdam, &c., which carry, on business only with Germany and for German firms. These emigrated countrymen must be drawn back to us, and I shall, therefore, always support measures which tend to raise a national feeling in trade, in which I include the introduction of higher tariffs as against indirect imports. And I fondly hope that sooner or later I shall find this idea recognized as a sound policy by the thinking part of the nation.

As regards the Samoan Islands, the postal department must take steps to introduce steamship communication with Polynesia, China, and Japan, and the department must not fear to devote large grants to this. This treaty forms an important step towards the protection of German trade and shipping, and moreover, is evidence of the interest the imperial chancellor takes in the commerce of the realm. I beg you, therefore, to give it your support.

Federal Commissioner and Private Counselor of Legation, von Kuserow. The previous speaker justly acknowledged the protocol of the treaty with Tonga as regulating the ocean traffic with the Sulu (Sooloo) Archipelago, and was correct in pointing out the similarity which that system has with that which the government has consciously followed in the treaty, the purposes of which Herr von Bülow has just now explained. The government sympathizes with the desire for the establishment, in order the better to equip Germany for trade, of a direct line of steamship communication. Wishes of that kind have been expressed again and again by those immediately interested in the matter, but have not always been so favorably received as was desirable for the interests of trade.

With regard to the previous speaker’s proposal to favor the products of the South Sea Islands in our import tariff, he must introduce a motion to that effect to the tariff committee, who will investigate it thoroughly. According to the latest consular reports from Samoa the total traffic has risen considerably, that is to say, the German portion of it, during 1878. While the total number of vessels decreased from 136 to 120, the number of German vessels among them increased from 65 to 72. In 1870, of 70 vessels plying there, only 28 were German. This probably unprecedented rate of increase shows that German trade finds better and freer scope for development in districts not as yet belonging to great colonial powers, or which have not yet made most-favored-nation treaties, as Hawaii has, with America. As regards the treaty between Hawaii and the German Empire, in which Bremen is most interested, a treaty was concluded as early as 1870. From our side this was duly ratified; but not so on the side of Hawaii, which had in the mean time entered into negotiations with the United States concerning a so-called reciprocity treaty, by which Hawaii was to receive many advantages from America, in consideration of which Hawaii undertook to forego certain privileges with regard to the free admission of a large number of articles from other countries.

At the time the treaty with us was ratified on our side, notice was received by the Hanse towns to terminate the treaties between them and Hawaii, so that Germany would be entirely without any treaty relations with Hawaii, and would, in comparison with other countries, which, with the exception of America, had treaties of the kind Germany had had, be placed at great disadvantage. In order to reduce this disadvantage, the Hawaiian Government sent us last year a minister to negotiate a treaty with us. A preliminary protocol was signed with him; and this, in the beginning of the present year, obtained the sanction of the federal council. Treaty documents based on this protocol were sent to Hawaii to be signed and ratified. It appears, however, from a report received some days ago from the consul at Honolulu, that the decree of the foreign office, containing the necessary directions for the conclusion of the treaty, has arrived alone, the draft of the treaty itself not having come to hand, so that the signing and ratifying cannot possibly take place. According to this, it is doubtful whether our hope to be able to lay the treaty before the Reichstag during the present session will be fulfilled. Still, the government has, in order to provide against this contingency for the benefit of German commerce, ordered the consul to request that the agreement to the protocols—which come immediately into force, and insures for Germany the right of the most favored nation, with the one exception of America—should remain in force for one year longer, so that we shall not be materially affected if the treaty is not completed within the present year.

The previous speaker has dwelt upon the destiny of the German settlements on the Fiji Islands, and with regard to this I may mention that the government availed itself of the presence in London of the governor of those islands (Sir Arthur Gordon), in order to arouse to action the land commissioners, who, during three or four years back, have rested from their labors; and it is to be hoped that the German settlers will soon again be in a position to realize on their landed property, which is a difficult problem so long as an investigation of their title to the land hangs over their heads. If the previous speaker has shown himself concerned regarding Tonga, fearing that our agreements with subordinate English officials will be prejudiced through their arbitrary preferences, I can assure him, should that prove to be so, that the loyal manner in which the English Government has always expressed itself on the subject, justifies us in the confident expectation that the English Government will never knowingly allow any such preferences on the part of its servants. The readiness with which that government has co-operated with us in this as in other questions of transatlantic interest, absolves us from all fear in that direction. I believe that from this point of view there can be no danger as regards the treaty, and ask that you approve it.

In a subsequent part of the debate, Deputy Dr. Bamberger declared that to come to the point, the object of the treaty was to prevent other states from incorporating themselves with these territories on which German industry and ability had been applied for the last thirty years; and the interests of the Germans there would assuredly be damaged if America or England fixed themselves as colonial powers upon those territories.

Still later in the debate, when Article V of the treaty, which provides that German ships of war shall be free to enter the harbor of Saluafata, was being discussed, the foreign minister, von Bülow, stated that the American Government had also established a harbor for itself, and that consequently this article of the treaty could give no offense.

The Reichstag then approved each separate article of the treaty without alteration.

No. 179. Mr. White to Mr. Evarts. [Document 200]

No. 179.
Mr. White to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Berlin, July 3, 1879. (Received July 23.) No. 17.]

Sir: The new import tariff has now been before the Reichstag several weeks, and is for the most part being, adopted in the form in which it has already been transmitted to you. Many of the proposed duties have given rise to animated discussions, and as a specimen of these I have the honor to forward to you the inclosed translation of an abstract of the debate on the duty for an important article of American home production, which our traders have hitherto exported in large quantities, and upon which the Reichstag has resolved to levy a tariff of 10 marks ($2.38) per 100 kilog. (200 pounds).

The debate may also be of interest, as serving to inform you on some of the reasons urged here for and against the adoption of the increased duties.

I have, &c.,

AND. D. WHITE.

[Inclosure to dispatch 17.—Translation.]

report of debate in the reichstag.

Berlin, June 24, 1879.

The new tariff was considered for the second time.

In the item 26c, under which fats are classed, a duty of 10 marks ($2.38) per 100 kilog. (200 pounds) was proposed on pig and goose lard.

A debate ensued.

Deputy Richter (from Hagen) who asked that this article should be admitted free of duty, pointed out that the question concerned the poor, who consumed it largely, and also affected the American lard, which was much cheaper than the native product. Inasmuch as the price of this is increased, large classes of the population who are unable to purchase butter, but can afford cheap lard, will be debarred from using it. In many districts American lard is consumed, mixed with that of home production. The opinion that American lard of all kinds is a competitor of German lard is proved to be a mistaken one by the reports of the Bielefeld Chamber of Commerce, that is to say, reports from a district in which pig-rearing and all connected with it flourishes more than anywhere else. It is stated in those reports that, in spite of the American, the Westphalian lard, on account of its umivalled good quality, is in such demand that a supply commensurate with the demand cannot be obtained. Three-fourths of the lard consumed by us is of American production, and if we calculate the quantity supplied by each pig, we find that Ave should need to kill yearly from 4,000,000 to 6,000,000 more pigs than we have, in order to fill the place of the quantity now brought from America.

According to the latest calculations we have within our borders only 7,000,000pigs; and if we assume that of these, 3,000,000 are slaughtered yearly, we should, in order to supply the present demand for lard, have in future to kill twice or thrice as many, which is a manifest impossibility. Only one-tenth of the rearers of pigs are persons of small means, and they are precisely those who themselves consume them. Therefore, it is not the petty dealer who will be protected. The tariff will be essentially one for revenue purposes, realizing about 5,000,000 marks. We have to deal with a considerable enhancement of the cost of living among the industrial population of the Rhine province and Westphalia; and these, without American bacon and lard, will find themselves deprived of an-important article of diet.

It has been calculated by Herr Baare, of Bochum, that a family would consume about 15 pfennige (3.57 cents) worth of butter and lard daily, and a tax on this of 12 per cent. amounts to 6 marks a year. It is said, when tariffs on goods coming from the east are being discussed, that they are necessary for the railway interest; but here we have articles imported across the sea from America, where natural wealth, an intelligent, industrious race, and the triumphs of science have made its cheap productions available to all the world. But by these tariffs all such advantages are to be neutralized.

The next speaker was the Federal Commissioner and Privy Councilor Rothe, who said: Whatever one may think of the tariff, it has this advantage: it will produce important financial benefits. The money to produce these must, of course, be paid by some one; but whether the consumer alone will pay it, is as yet very doubtful, even though it be admitted that he will pay a considerable part of it. If the previous speaker believes that one pig supplies only from 15 to 20 pounds of lard, he does the pigs an injustice, for in America it is calculated that one pig will produce about 20 kilog. (40 pounds) of lard. The importation of American lard has greatly increased of late, and very perceptibly affected prices. Thus the tariff will insure a certain protection to the rearers of pigs. That the poor man will not be greatly burdened by the tariff, can be gathered from the fact that he is not only a consumer but also a producer, and, therefore, has little to do with the imported article.

Deputy Count Udo Stolberg said that, as the object of the tariff was to ensure higher wages for workingmen, these would be able to afford a few pfennige more for their lard. But the matter concerned not only the interest of one poor man, but the interest of two poor men, the one who reared the pigs and the one who consumed them. Thus the tariff would supply, even for small owners of landed property, a sure protection; for, even if the duty was one for revenue purposes, it would still have the nature of a protective tariff. If Deputy Richter was of opinion that the German pig-rearing trade was not capable of development, he was in error. It was exactly that trade which could easily be developed to an extraordinary extent.

Deputy von Schorlemer Alst remarked that if the Bielefeld chamber of commerce had declared in favor of the importation of American lard, it was because that chamber was the mouth-piece of the manufacturers and traders who are interested in cheap lard. The most dangerous competition German agriculturists had to meet came from America. When the cheap corn coming thence was complained of by them they were told to fall back on cattle rearing, but now the Americans come with cheap lard, bacon, ham, and even with cheap butter. The Americans were a practical people, and if they desired to ruin any industry, they did not hesitate to sell below cost till they had accomplished their object. This it was that made a change in the tariff absolutely necessary.

On the proposition in favor of the duty being put to the Reichstag, there were for the duty 184 votes, and against it 79.

No. 180. Mr. White to Mr. Evarts. [Document 201]

No. 180.
Mr. White to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Berlin, July 12, 1879. (Received August 6.) No. 26.]

Sir: Everything that I can learn from various influential quarters here confirms the impression made upon me, * * * that Germany will not sell any more silver, but that she will make reissues. I find this to be the opinion of influential members of the German Parliament with whom I have recently conversed, an opinion not born especially of hope, since it is shared by many who are most opposed to the policy.

I have, &c.,

AND. D. WHITE.

No. 181. Mr. White to Mr. Evarts. [Document 202]

No. 181.
Mr. White to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Berlin, August 15, 1879. (Received September 4.) No. 40.]

Sir: The session of the Reichstag, which has been one of more than usual activity, was closed on the 12th ultimo by a formal decree from the Emperor.

During the first few days of its sittings, which began on. February 12, the socialist law of October, 1878, was the main topic of discussion. The question arose whether two social democratic members could be ordered out of Berlin while fulfilling their parliamentary duties for an alleged breach of paragraph 28 of that law. Finally the Reichstag decided by a large majority, and against the opinion of the government and the conservative parties, that no member in his place in the Reichstag could be held responsible to the police authorities for any breach of the paragraph referred to.

On May 2 a bill framing a new tariff was introduced, and the consideration of this measure was the principal work of the remainder of the session. Prince Bismarck opened the discussion by stating that the Imperial Government was in need of further revenues, and that, as the direct taxes of the empire were already very heavy, and their incidence in some respects unjust, there was no way but the indirect one of tariffs whereby the financial condition of the empire could be improved. The chancellor declared the object of the bill to be primarily financial, its protective influence upon the industries of the country being so adjusted that the general interest of the community should not suffer. Much party spirit was developed in the course of the debates on this bill.

It was soon apparent that the chancellor, to succeed in his legislative effort, must obtain the support either of the national liberal party or of the ultramontane central and particularist party. From which side he would obtain this support became known on June 25, when, in the tariff committee of the Reichstag, the central party joined with the imperial and conservative parties in adopting a resolution, moved by Freikerr von Franckenstein, by which the proceeds of the tariffs and the tobacco tax, over and above 130,000,000 marks per annum, were to be divided among the federal states. The liberal party strongly opposed this motion. Its organs reminded the chancellor of his suggestion that the imperial treasury should receive the entire proceeds of the new sources of revenue, thus enabling the empire to dispense with the contributions at present received from the federal states, and thereby further consolidating the fabric of German unity.

The agitation increased when it became known during the same week that three ministers—Herr Hobrecht, of finance; Dr. Falk, of public worship and education; and Dr. Friedenthal, of agriculture—had resigned.

* * * * * * * *

The air was not cleared of these rumors until July 9, when the Franckenstein motion came before the Reichstag as a paragraph of the tariff bill, and gave rise to a debate. The chancellor, following after speakers on the liberal and ultramontane sides, declared that there never had been any agreement between the ministerial parties and the central party for the adoption of the Franckenstein policy. He entered into details to show that its acceptance would not tend to disunite the German Empire, and vigorously defended his policy in this matter and the tariff question, which had been directed, he asserted, as all his past policy had been directed, to the attainment and strengthening of German unity. Herr Lasker, as spokesman for the national liberal party, pointed out the undesirableness of continuing the contributions from the states if, at the same time, the empire was to furnish them with a surplus of the tariff revenue.

On a division being taken, a large majority, in which were the ultramontanes, voted with the government for the adoption of the paragraph. It was seen that the crucial point in the discussions of the bill was passed, and from this date to the 12th, when it became law, and the session was closed, little of interest occurred. The new tariff, which is expected to yield an additional sum of 74,000,000 mark per annum, is being translated by Mr. Kreismann, the consul general at Berlin, and will shortly be forwarded to you.

It is impossible definitely to predict the results of a measure so complicated in its relations to native and, foreign industry and commerce. * * * Although the power of the United States in competing with the German agriculturists for the supply of food products will be somewhat diminished, it may be expected that certain foreign markets, which have hitherto taken German manufactures, will be opened to the enterprise of our own people. That other nations, especially those of Europe, will retaliate with new tariffs does not, at present, seem likely. Some ill-feeling has been shown by Russian traders; but, so far, this has resulted only in a diversion of the line of traffic.

The resignation of Dr. Falk, the minister of public worship, which has attracted the most attention, was not wholly unexpected. About a year ago ray predecessor informed you that Dr. Falk had requested the Emperor to relieve him of his duties, a request which was at that time refused.

Since then the difficulties of Dr. Falk’s position have increased. The important measure of March, 1872, whereby the state took entire control of the elementary schools, making only temporary engagements with the clergy to impart religions knowledge, has been a continual thorn in the flesh to many Lutherans, to the Evangelicals, and especially to the Roman Catholics. They have not failed to use their influence in the highest quarters to obtain a repeal, or at least a modification, of this law; and they are also strongly opposed to a plan proposed by Dr. Falk, whereby children of parents of different denominations shall be taught together in one school. This is a question which threatens to reawaken the old struggle between church and state; and, taken together with the withdrawal of Dr. Falk and the support given by the center to the tariff bill, gave rise to the report that the German Government intend to give back to the Roman Catholic Church what the “Kulturkampf” of the last seven years wrested from it.

This report, however, is probably without foundation. The German Government can hardly have any real intention of re-establishing the supremacy of the Roman Church in matters of education; and the German people, if one may judge from opinions expressed by individuals and by the press, consider such a step impossible. Dr. Falk’s resignation, nevertheless, has been generally lamented. He has initiated into Germany the principle in the relations between church and state, which prevails in the United States. He has done this at the cost of incessant toil; he has borne the bitterest abuse of ultramontane journals, and he has struggled with the various sections of religious parties in his own country. But his work is a reality. The standard of efficiency for teachers has been raised; the number of their training colleges increased; and last winter there were 4,000 more schoolmasters and 400,000 more children in the schools of Germany than there were six years ago, when he took office. The schools, moreover, are more efficiently conducted and more systematically inspected. In other questions between church and state Dr. Falk was also active, particularly in the matter of a civil marriage law, for the repeal of which the clergy are now asking.

The acceptance of his resignation was officially announced on July 14, and on the same day Herr Von Puttkamer, chief president of Silesia, was appointed in his place. Dr. Falk had voted, it may be remarked, in favor of the Franckenstein motion; so had also his colleague, Dr, Friedenthal. The resignation of the latter is ascribed to increasing physical infirmity, after fulfilling with much success the position of minister of agriculture for nearly twenty years. He voted for the various items of the new tariff with the exception of the increased duties on corn. Dr. Lucius, a large landed proprietor, has been appointed to his office; and Herr Bitter, the under secretary of state in the home office, has taken the position relinquished by Herr Hobrecht, whose opposition to the financial policy of the chancellor had increased of late very considerably. These selections appear to have been made with a view to secure safe men rather than ministers who will launch out into any new lines of policy; and there is no reason to suppose that any of the principles adopted by their predecessors will be changed.

Among other noteworthy enactments of the session was a measure dealing with the constitution of Alsace and Lorraine, which grants them a representative parliament, of course with limited powers, and raises them to the dignity of a state under the presidency of a statthalter, a position which General Field Marshal Von Manteuffel has been entrusted with.

The report of a committee on the laws of usury was also received, and among its recommendations was one to the effect that the adoption of a fixed maximum rate of interest should not be returned to; but it was suggested that an addition be made to the criminal law, by which moneylenders who live on the ruin of minors, and systematically practice extortion, should be liable to imprisonment. The interesting question of a resuscitation in a new form of the ancient trade guilds has also been before the German Parliament, and is one the future development of which cannot be too attentively watched.

As has already been stated in my previous dispatches, a debate occurred on the silver sales of the German Government, in which the chancellor stated that the government had determined for the present to retain whatever silver it is still possessed of. The treaty of friendship with the Samoan Islands was adopted, after some discussion. A translation of this document has also been forwarded to you.

* * * * * * *

The national liberal party has considerably diminished as a result of the differences of opinion regarding the new tariffs, and a declaration of the chancellor in his recent speech, that if milder treatment towards the Roman Catholic Church, while keeping intact the principles acted upon during the “Kulturkampf,” would serve a useful purpose, he would be ready to adopt it, has increased the antagonism between the progressive and the central and conservative parties. The late election at Sreslau, at which a social democrat was returned by a large majority over a national liberal, showing that the ultramontane sections had voted with the social democrats, and the proposal made by the chancellor to increase the budget periods and the duration of the parliaments, have brought further elements of discord into German politics.

The government continues to purchase the railroads of the country, and one of its latest acts has been the establishment of a separate department for the control of those already belonging to it. The anti-socialist law has now been in operation about nine months. It has undoubtedly checked the flow of revolutionary publications and treasonable talk; but, as was only to be expected, the law has not satisfied the discontented. * * * Their complaint that they are not allowed to agitate seems to have been their most powerful means of agitation, and unless the industrial prosperity of the empire is soon regained, there is Mill cause to regard the discontent of the working population, whether it shows itself in the form of socialism, social democracy, or nihilism, with much anxiety.

In the leading enactments, as in several of the principal organs of public opinion, a tendency towards isolation, a desire for greater national independence, as it is called, has found expression. There are some who see in the new protective tariffs nothing but a necessary step to a reorganization of German industry. The idea appears to be that this industry shall exist for Germany alone; that the government shall protect it from foreign competitors, while it clothes itself in some new forms of guilds, with the object, of course, of improving the condition of both operatives and employers. This policy of isolation as regards Prussia has increased since the military successes of 1870, and it is further strengthened by the necessity the German Government considers itself under of maintaining a huge standing army. * * *

In spite of this apparent reactionary tendency of the chancellor and his separation from his former supporters, it is not unlikely that the breach may be healed at no distant day. Although the debates in the Reichstag were very warm, the tone of some who took a leading part in them against the chancellor is, outside of the hall, not at all bitter. In conversing with some of them, I found that, so far from showing bitterness, they acknowledge that the motives of the chancellor are patriotic, and declare that his past services, as well as his present evident desire to strengthen German unity, should protect him from too bitter an oppositition. They still claim to respect and admire him, and evidently hope that they may be able to support his measures hereafter.

I have the honor, &c.,

AND. D. WHITE.

No. 182. Mr. White to Mr. Evarts. [Document 203]

No. 182.
Mr. White to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Berlin, September 9, 1879. (Received September 24.) No. 48.]

Sir: Referring to your instruction No. 7 of the 23d of May last, calling for certain information for the Secretary of the Treasury, respecting the amount of gold and silver coin and bullion and paper currency in Germany, I have the honor to state that the legation applied to the imperial foreign office for the information desired, on the 17th of June last, and that a reply, under date of the 30th ultimo, has been received to its communication.

Copies of this correspondence, as well as copies of the inclosures accompanying the foreign office note, together with translations of such of them as are not in print, are herewith inclosed.

I have, &c.,

AND. D. WHITE.

[Inclosure 1 to No. 48.—Translation.]

Foreign Office,
Berlin, August 30, 1879.

The undersigned has the honor to inclose to Mr. Andrew D. White, envoy extraordinary and minister plenipotentiary of the United States of America, a memorial together with four inclosures, containing the information regarding German coinage, the production of gold and silver, and commercial relations respecting these metals in Germany, as requested in his esteemed note of the 17th of June last.

The undersigned avails himself of this occasion to renew to the envoy the assurances of his most distinguished consideration.

(Signed) Von BÜLOW.

[Inclosure 2 to No. 48.—Translation.]

Memorial.

1. The amount of gold coin and bullion in the imperial treasury, in the banks, and in circulation in Germany?

2. The amount of silver coin in the imperial treasury, in the banks, and in circulation in Germany?

The changing of the coinage in Germany, occasioned by an act of December 4, 1871 (Imperial Statute Book, page 404), and July 9, 1873 (Imperial Statute Book, page 233), has been so far completed that now only the one thaler pieces of the old coin of the country yet remain in circulation, whereas the withdrawal and demonetization of all the other old gold and silver coin of the country has been furnished.

More complete information concerning the carrying out of the German coinage laws will be found in the seventh memorial laid before Parliament by the imperial government on the 15th February last, two copies of which are herewith inclosed. Concerning this memorial, the following is remarked:

Heretofore the total sum of old gold and silver coin of the country withdrawn amounts to 90,948,480 marks in gold coin, and 1,079,734,456 marks silver coin, viz:

Old coin of the country

In gold coin. In silver coin.

Marks. Marks.

To the end of 1873 21,813,632 59,779,188

To the end of 1874 69,134,848 89,161,909

To the end of 1875 217,556,636

To the end of 1876 276,537,625

To the end of 1877 302,891,176

To the end of 1878 107,120,557

To the end of 1879 26,687,365

(to the end of May.)

Total 90,948,480 1,079,734,456

The amount of one thaler pieces not yet withdrawn cannot be stated.

According to page six of the subjoined memorial the number of one thaler pieces coined amounts to 395,537,532, of which 195,432,540 thalers had been withdrawn and demonetized at the close of the year 1878, so that, at that time, 200 million thalers remained to be withdrawn. From this amount a deduction would have to be made on account of the disappearance of one thaler pieces from circulation, caused by smelting, loss, &c., and could not therefore be considered at the withdrawal. It is impossible to fix this amount before the withdrawal has been completed.

Besides this, a large portion of the “Veriens thaler” and “Veriens doppelthaler” coined in Austria until the close of the year 1867, to the amount of 31,115,849 thalers, are, under an act of the 20th April, 1874 (Imperial Statute Book, page 35), current in Germany and still in circulation.

Respecting the circulation of imperial gold and silver coin, there has been coined at the German mints: In imperial gold coin (partly on account of the empire, partly on account of private persons). In imperial silver coin (on account of the empire).

Marks. Marks.

To the end of 1873 1,015,837,020 2,350,295

To the end of 1874 93,507,380 46,331,621

To the end of 1875 166,420,850 115,558,995

To the end of 1876 159,424,280 210,080,236

To the end of 1877 112,539,475 46,222,943

To the end of 1878 124,970,080 6,564,974

To the end of 1879 25,019,850

(to the end of May.]

Total 1,697,718,935 427,109,064

In estimating the actual amount of gold and silver coin in circulation, the amount of 120 million marks coined, and under an act of the 11th of November, 1871 (Imperial Statute Book, page 403), deposited as a war fund, and the amounts exported to foreign countries, must be deducted. The latter, according to information gathered on the subject, amounted, at the end of the year 1878, to about 173,840,000 marks, of which about 102,970,000 marks have been melted down in foreign mints, whilst the remaining 70,870,000 marks, at the close of the year 1878, was in foreign banking houses.

According to the statement, after deducting the 120 million marks deposited as a war fund, from the amount of imperial gold coined before 1873, and the sum of 173,840,000 marks in equal parts, which passed into foreign countries from the imperial gold coin coined in the years 1875, 1876, 1877 and 1878, there would remain in circulation in Germany, in gold and silver coin (together with the funds in public treasuries and banking-houses), a total estimated, for the few years past, as follows: Gold coin, marks. Silver coin, marks. Total marks.

Old. Imperial. Old. Imperial.

At the close of the year 1878 1,378,859,085 399,000,000 427,109,064 2,204,968,149

At the close of the year 1877 1,297,349,005 506,120,557 420,544,090 2,224,013,652

At the close of the year 1876 1,228,269,530 809,011,733 374,321,147 2,411,602,410

At the close of the year 1875 1,112,305,250 1,085,549,358 164,240,911 2,362,095,519

At the close of the year 1874 989,344,400 1,303,105,994 48,681,916 2,341,132,310

At the close of the year 1873 69,134,848 895,837,020 1,392,267,903 2,350,295 2,359,590,066

Respecting the cash of the imperial treasury and banking institutions, it must be remembered that the imperial treasury holds no cash of its own, as its business is conducted by the Imperial Bank (Reichs bank), from whose cash it is never separated.

In estimating the cash of the Imperial Bank and the other German banks issuing notes, the amount of current German gold in coin and in bars or foreign coin, the pound fine must be counted at 1,392 marks, according to§ 8 of the law of the country, of May 14, 1875 (R. G. Lb., p. 177).

The balance in cash of the banks referred to, averaged— Marks.

In the year 1876 640,231,000

In the year 1877 618,465,000

In the year 1878 579,803,000

In the year 1879 621,439,000

(to the end of May.)

How this cash on hand is divided, as regards coined and uncoined metal, cannot be stated, since the banking-houses make no reports upon the subject.

3. The amount of outstanding paper currency in Germany?

Upon this point the law of April 30, 1874 (R. G. B., p. 40), comes under consideration, according to which the withdrawal of the paper currency issued by the individual German states is ordained for July 1, 1875, at the latest, and the Imperial Government authorized to issue imperial bank-notes. In consequence of this authorization, there have been issued, up to the present time, 163,097,900 marks, in imperial bank-notes, of which— Marks.

60,396,800 marks, in notes of 5

50,858,140 marks, in notes of 20

51,842,900 marks, in notes of 50

Of this currency (imperial bank-notes) nevertheless, according to a provision of § 3 of the above-mentioned law, 43,097,900 marks are to be gradually withdrawn by 1891.

The circulation in imperial bank-notes, which is regulated by the law of the country of March 14, 1875, already mentioned, amounted on the average, to— Marks.

In the year 1876 946,957,016

In the year 1877 909,137,684

In the year 1878 820,607,263

In the year 1879 801,592,160

4. The amount of gold produced annually from mines in Germany?

5. The amount of silver annually produced from mines in Germany?

The information asked for in questions 4 and 5, concerning the yearly production of gold and silver in Germany, will be found in inclosure A.

6. The amount of silver annually coined, imported, exported, and consumed in the arts and manufactures in Germany?

Respecting the amount of silver coined in Germany, to the information contained in 1 and 2 is added, that in coining all kinds of imperial silver coins, according to article 3, § 1, of the coinage laws of April 9, 1873 (R. G. L. 233), one pound fine of silver is contained in 100 marks.

For the production of the 427,109,064 marks coined by the government up to the end of May last, about 4,271,091 pounds of silver fine have, therefore, been consumed.

A summary of the import and export of crude and coined silver in Germany, according to information obtainable, will be found in inclosure B.

Respecting, finally the annual consumption of silver for industrial purposes in Germany, the desired information cannot be given, since no researches have been made upon this point.

Berlin, August 30, 1879.

[Translation of A to inclosure 2 of No. 48.]

A.

The production in Germany, according to official statistical investigations, amounted to:

A. in Gold.

Kilos.

In the year 1850 3.8

In the year 1851 9.4

In the year 1852 13.6

In the year 1853 19.5

In the year 1854 12.9

In the year 1855 15.7

In the year 1856 8.7

In the year 1857 14.7

In the year 1858 15.2

In the year 1859 20.5

In the year 1860 43.0

In the year 1861 28.5

In the year 1862 9.8

In the year 1863 46.0

In the year 1864 42.1

In the year 1865 35.4

In the year 1866 105.1

In the year 1867 84.8

In the year 1868 115.1

In the year 1869 79.0

In the year 1870 68.1

In the year 1871 82.3

In the year 1872 327.5

In the year 1873 315.0

In the year 1874 365.1

In the year 1875 332.3

In the year 1876 281.3

In the year 1877 307.9

In the year 1878 308.7

(According to present results.)

The above figures refer only to gold obtained in smelting houses, but not from private refineries (especially from smelting old silver coin).

Of the gold obtained from German smelting houses, there was produced from imported foreign ores: Kilos.

In the year 1874 105.5

In the year 1875 55.1

In the year 1876 94.2

Since the year 1877 no distinction is made as regards the production from foreign or native ores.

B. in silver.

Period. No. of.
years. Total. Proportionally each year.

Kilos. Kilos.

1851–1855 5 244,800 48,960

1856–1860 5 307,550 61,510

1861–1865 5 341,640 68,320

1866–1870 5 445,620 89,125

1871–1875 5 715,400 143,080

In the year 1876 139,778.5

In the year 1877 147,612.1

In the year 1878 166,911 (* )

The increase in the production of silver in Germany since the year 1871, was caused principally by the smelting of foreign ores (derived chiefly from the western shores of America) which, however, has again decreased since the year 1874. From foreign silver ores, there were produced in Germany: Kilos.

In the year 1871 7,424

In the year 1872 26,265

In the year 1873 84,957

In the year 1874 46,032

In the year 1875 23,152

In the year 1876 16,633

In the statistics for 1877 and 1878, no distinction is made between the production from foreign or domestic ores.

[Translation of B to inclosure 2 to No. 48.]

B.

Statement of the imports and exports of crude and coined silver in Germany.

Years. Imported,
Kilograms fine. Exported,
Kilograms fine. Remarks.

1872 923,500 382,000 1872–1877, inclusive. To the amounts of exports as stated in the official statistics of commerce, the silver exported on account of the empire is added. The exports and imports of silver on account of the State, occasioned by the payment of the French war indemnity, has not been considered, because that portion of the silver which flowed into Germany through the war indemnity, as far as it consisted of French coin, was soon again returned by the government to France, and as far as it consisted of German coin, had probably been taken there by German troops.

For 1878, the official statistics have not yet appeared. The statement is, therefore, confined to the exports on account of the empire.

1873 1,035,500 1,260,000

1874 312,500 1,610,000

1875 189,500 316,000

1876 147,500 1,826,500

1877 191,500 5,592,000

1878 2,312,000

* According to present results.

No. 183. Mr. White to Mr. Evarts. [Document 204]

No. 183.
Mr. White to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Berlin, October 15, 1879. (Received November 3.) No. 60.]

Sir: The elections to the Prussian Landtag, or house of deputies, were held on the 7th instant, and the result is of more than usual interest, inasmuch as it shows an increase in the strength of the Conservative parties unprecedented in the history of constitutional Prussia. The following numbers of supporters of the various parties were elected: Conservatives, 115; Free Conservatives (that is Conservatives who are not per se supporters of the government), 50; Roman Catholics, 96; National Liberals, (that is, men of liberal ideas who are willing at times, to subordinate their aims as a party for the sake of national unity), 105; Progressionists, 34; Poles, 19; those unattached to any party, 14. These figures, compared with the result of the previous elections, show that the Conservatives and Free Conservatives have, together, gained 88 seats, while the National Liberals and Progressionists, have lost 92. The Roman Catholic, or Center Party, has an addition of 7 seats; and the Polish party, of 4 seats. But these last named results are insignificant in view of the relative positions of the Conservative and Liberal factions. The assembly in which, during former sessions, the Liberal party predominated, will, in the coming legislative period, be commanded by a majority composed of Conservatives, and, judging from present appearances, the Roman Catholics; the latter, a party generally supposed to have strong reactionary intentions as regards education and the relation between church and. state. There is not, however, much reason to believe that such intentions will be carried into effect, since the Liberal and Progressionist parties, judging from the expression of their organs in the press, would willingly coalesce with the Government Conservatives to refuse the Center Party any serious alterations in existing laws. The government can choose whether it will take supporters to form a commanding majority from the Liberal or the Roman Catholic ranks. On whichever party its choice may fall, a working majority will be secured for it.

These changes in the Prussian Landtag will not, of course, directly affect the imperial legislation of the Reichstag, but they are symptomatic of tendencies among the people which will, in all probability, make themselves felt in the Imperial Parliament. They indicate above all the powerful influence of the personality of Prince Bismarck upon the Prussian people, who, in thus sending to the Landtag so large a number of men pledged to be his supporters, have expressed their full confidence in his recent financial and commercial policy. Indeed, it may almost be taken for granted that whatever legislative proposals the chancellor may in the future think it right to make will be indorsed by the nation. In the next session of the Prussian Landtag, which is to be opened on the 28th instant, the immediate result of this decided popularity of the chancellor’s policy will, in all probability, be, among other things, the enactment of new laws for church government—modifying somewhat those framed by Dr. Falk, the late minister of public worship and education—financial reforms, and further steps toward completing the purchase of the railroads by the state.

It may also be inferred from the results of these elections that in any views regarding a return to the mixed or double currency standard which the chancellor may put forward in the coming sessions of the Reichstag, he will have little to fear from the opposition of “theorists” or “doctrinaires.” There seems no reason to suppose that the nation would not follow his lead in these as in other matters of public policy.

I have, &c.,

AND. D. WHITE.

No. 184. Mr. Schlözer to Mr. Evarts. [Document 205]

No. 184.
Mr. Schlözer to Mr. Evarts.

Imperial German Legation,
Washington, December 2, 1878. (Received December 3.)

Esteemed Mr. Secretary of State: It sometimes happens that goods imported from abroad, on which the legal import duty has been; paid, are subsequently re-exported and returned to the parties who sent them.

My government is now desirous to know whether, according to the laws of this country, the import duty is, in such cases, refunded to the sender.

I think I am not mistaken in the belief that this duty is refunded only in case the goods have been uninterruptedly in the custody of the custom-house officers, but I beg you, esteemed Mr. Secretary of State, to have the kindness to furnish me with official information on this point.

Accept on this occasion a renewed assurance of my most distinguished consideration.

SCHLÖZER.

No. 185. Mr. Evarts to Mr. Schlözer. [Document 206]

No. 185.
Mr. Evarts to Mr. Schlözer.

Department of State,
Washington, December 17, 1878.

Sir: With reference to your note of the 2d instant, in which you request to be advised, for communication to your government, whether the duty paid upon goods imported into the United States is, under the laws thereof, afterwards refunded, if the articles are returned to the original foreign shipper, I have now the honor to inclose herewith, for your information, a copy of a letter which has been received from the Secretary of the Treasury upon the subject, dated the 12th instant.

Be pleased to accept a renewed assurance of my high consideration.

WM. M. EVARTS.

Mr. Kurd von Schlözer.

[Inclosure in Mr. Evarts’s note of December 17, 1878.]

Mr. Sherman to Mr. Evarts.

Treasury Department,
December 12, 1878. (Received December 14.)

Sir: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your letter of the 7th instant, transmitting a copy of a communication dated the 2d instant, from the German minister, in which he requests to be informed if, under existing laws, the duties paid on imported goods, which are afterward exported, can be refunded.

In reply, I have to state that, under sections 2977 and 3037 of the Revised Statutes, a drawback of the duties paid on imported merchandise, less one per centum to be retained for the use of the United States, is allowed and paid upon the exportation of the merchandise, provided that it has remained in, and is exported from, the custody of the government, and is exported within three years from the date of importation.

Under the provisions of sections 2978 and 3025 of the Revised Statutes no drawback or return of the duties can be allowed on the export of any imported merchandise, after it has been removed from the custody and control of the government, except in the cases of articles wholly manufactured from imported materials as provided for by sections 3019, 3020, 3022, and 3028, Revised Statutes.

Very respectfully,

JOHN SHERMAN,
Secretary.

No. 186. Mr. Schlözer to Mr. Evarts. [Document 207]

No. 186.
Mr. Schlözer to Mr. Evarts.

[Translation.]

Imperial German Legation,
Washington, March 2, 1879. (Received March 5.)

Esteemed Mr. Secretary of State: On the 5th ultimo, Carl Weinrebe, a cook on board of the Bremen Lloyd steamer Mosel, was arrested on a charge of smuggling, by United States Marshal MacDonald, at Jersey City, in pursuance of a warrant issued by United States Commissioner Whitehead, of Newark, N. J. Previously to the arrest, the cabin and effects of Weinrebe were searched by Fr. Cochen, inspector of customs of the port of New York.

Article XII, paragraphs 2 and 3, of the consular convention concluded between Germany and the United States, in the year 1872, stipulates as follows: The judicial authorities and custom-house officials shall in no case proceed to the examination or search of merchant vessels without having given previous notice to the consular officers of the-nation to which the said vessels belong, in order to enable the said consular officers to be present.

They shall also give due notice to the said consular officers in order to enable them to be present at any depositions or statements to be made in courts of law, or before local magistrates, by officers or persons belonging to the crew, thus to prevent errors or false interpretations which might impede the correct administration of justice. The notice to consuls, vice-consuls, or consular agents shall name the hour fixed for such proceedings. Upon the non-appearance of the said officers or their representatives, the case may be proceeded with in their absence.

Such notice, however, was not given to the imperial consul-general at New York in this instance, either by Mr. Whitehead or Mr. Cochen.

The imperial consul-general, on receiving information of the occurrence, caused a protest to be made against the proceeding, through Messrs. Salomon & Burke, attorneys-at-law, on the ground that he had not been duly notified.

The case was tried before United States Commissioner Whitehead, at Newark, on the 6th and 7th ultimo.

The ground was taken by the United States district attorney that no notification of the imperial consul-general was necessary, inasmuch as the search of merchant vessels, which is mentioned in Article XII, does not refer to cases of this kind, since the custom-house officers in this case had not searched the vessel, but merely the personal effects of the accused, and since the treaty, moreover, requires no previous notice when an arrest is contemplated.

The United States commissioner, in his decision, shared the vie w taken by the district attorney.

I am unable to think as did the United States commissioner and the district attorney, for Article XII says, “the judicial authorities shall in no case proceed to the examination or search of merchant vessels without having given, previous notice to the consular officers,” and the question whether the entire vessel or only a cabin is to be searched is not, in my opinion, to be considered in interpreting this stipulation.

I should be very much obliged to you, esteemed Mr. Secretary of State, if you would have the kindness to give me your opinion in relation to this question, in case something similar should occur in future, and to state whether you think that the imperial consul-general should in this instance have been notified.

Accept, esteemed sir, a renewed assurance of my most distinguished consideration.

SCHLÖZER.

To the Hon. William M. Evarts,
&c., &c., &c.

No. 187. Mr. Evarts to Mr. Schlözer. [Document 208]

No. 187.
Mr. Evarts to Mr. Schlözer.

Department of State,
Washington, April 17, 1879.

Sir: Referring to your note of the 2d of March last, and to the reply of this Department of the 12th of that month, in relation to an alleged violation of Article XII of the consular treaty with the German Empire, in the arrest of Carl Weinrebe, cook of the steamer Mosel, on a charge of smuggling, and the search of his quarters on that vessel, without notification to the consul-general of Germany at New York, I have the honor to state that a letter dated the 14th instant has been received from the Secretary of the Treasury, accompanied by a copy of a report from the collector of the port of New York, to whom the matter was referred for investigation.

It appears from that report that on or about the 3d of February last two of the customs officers at New York received information that Carl Weinrebe was in the habit of furnishing a grocery-keeper in Hoboken, N. J., with smuggled goods, and that, upon an examination of the store being made, such goods were found, whereupon complaint was made to the United States commissioner, and warrants issued for the arrest of several parties concerned therein; that upon repairing on board the Mosel the officers found Weinrebe absent therefrom, and, upon his return to the vessel, they made inquiry whether he had any smuggled goods in his possession, in reply to which he brought from his bunk a small quantity of cigars and declared that they were all he had. Upon further inquiry being made, Weinrebe informed the officers that they might examine for themselves, which they did, and the search resulted in the discovery of a quantity of snuff, tobacco, cigars, and cochineal, none of which articles were stamped, or found upon the manifest of the vessel. The officers then seized the goods above named, and procured a warrant for the arrest of Weinrebe, which was executed by the United States marshal.

It also appears that when the customs-officers went on board the Mosel they were received by one of the officers of that vessel, who accompanied them during the whole time they were there, and who not only made no protest against such examination of Weinrebe’s effects, but, on the contrary, assisted those officers while engaged in such search.

It further appears that whenever an occasion arises for making such search of a German vessel, as would fall within the treaty, it has always been the rule of the customs authorities to notify the German consulate to that effect, and that usually an acknowledgment in writing of such notice has been obtained from the imperial consul-general at New York.

In view of the facts stated in the report alluded to, the conclusion is reached: 1st. That the customs authorities did not go on board to search the vessel or any part thereof, but that when on board the examination of the cook’s quarters was invited by him and officers of the vessel.

2d. That the examination was not such a search as is contemplated in the treaty inasmuch as neither the vessel nor the owner’s interests were, or could have been prejudiced thereby.

3d. That, with respect to the omission to give preliminary notice to the German consul-general, the present case does not come under the provisions of the third paragraph of Article XII of the treaty, which only requires such notice in the event of depositions, or statements made by persons of the ship’s company. In the present instance, the depositions which led to Weinrebe’s arrest were made by parties wholly unconnected with the vessel.

In conclusion, I have to say that the German Government may rest assured that, in all cases where a search of a vessel of that nationality is to be instituted by the judicial or customs authorities of the United States, ample opportunity will be afforded to the proper consular officer of the Imperial Government to be present at such examination.

Accept, sir, a renewed assurance of my very high consideration.

WM. M. EVARTS.

Mr. Kurd von Schlözer,
&c., &c., &c.

Great Britain.Great Britain.

[209] . Mr. Welsh to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, London, December 6, 1878.

[210] . Mr. Welsh to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, London, January 31, 1879. (Received February 17.)

[211] . Mr. Evarts to Mr. Welsh

Department of State, Washington, February 18, 1879.

[212] . Mr. Welsh to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, London, March 18, 1879. (Received March 29.)

[213] . Mr. Welsh to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, London, March 19, 1879.

[214] . Mr. Evarts to Mr. Welsh.

Department of State, Washington, March 25, 1879.

[215] . Mr. Evarts to Mr. Welsh.

Department of State, Washington, April 2, 1879.

[216] . Mr. Welsh to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, London, April 10, 1879.

[217] . Mr. Welsh to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, London, April 15, 1879. (Received April 26.)

[218] . Mr. Welsh to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, London, June 10, 1879. (Received June 20.)

[219] . Mr. Welsh to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, London, June 17, 1879. (Received June 30.)

[220] . Mr. Welsh to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, London, July 11, 1879. (Received July 23.)

[221] . Mr. Evarts to Mr. Welsh.

Department of State, Washington, July 11, 1879.

[222] . Mr. Welsh to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, London, July 18, 1879. (Received July 30.)

[223] . Mr. Evarts to Mr. Welsh.

Department of State, Washington, July 29, 1879.

[224] . Mr. Welsh to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, London, August 5, 1879. (Received August 18.)

[225] . Mr. Hoppin to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, London, September 4, 1879. (Received September 17.)

[226] . Mr. Hoppin to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, London, September 5, 1879. (Received September 17.)

[227] . Mr. Hoppin to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, London, September 19, 1879. (Received October 8.)

[228] . Mr. Hoppin to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, London, September 20, 1879. (Received October 2.)

[229] . Mr. Hoppin to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, London, October 8, 1879. (Received October 22.)

[230] . Mr. Hoppin to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, London, October 11, 1879. (Received October 22.)

[231] . Mr. Hoppin to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, London, October 18, 1879. (Received October 30.)

[232] . Mr. Hoppin to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, London, October 25, 1878. (Received November 6.)

[233] . Mr. Evarts to Sir Edward Thornton.

Washington, December 17, 1878.

[234] . Mr. Drummond to Mr. Evarts.

Washington, January 13, 1879. (Received January 14.)

[235] . Sir Edward Thornton to Mr. Evarts.

Washington, January 23, 1879. (Received January 24.)

[236] . Mr. Evarts to Sir Edward Thornton.

Department of State, Washington, January 30, 1879.

[237] . Sir Edward Thornton to Mr. Evarts.

Washington, February 3, 1879. (Received February 4.)

[238] M. de Lesseps to Sir J. Stokes.

Paris, August 14, 1878.

[239] . Mr. Evarts to Sir Edward Thornton.

Department of State, Washington, March 15, 1879.

[240] . Sir Edward Thornton to Mr. Evarts.

Washington, March 25, 1879. (Received March 26.)

[241] . Mr. Evarts to Sir Edward Thornton.

Department of State, Washington, April 10, 1879.

[242] . Mr. Evarts to Sir Edward Thornton.

Department of State, Washington, April 19, 1879.

[243] . Sir Edward Thornton to Mr. Evarts.

Washington, May 15, 1879. (Received May 16.)

[244] . Mr. Evarts to Sir Edward Thornton.

Department of State, Washington, May 27, 1879.

[245] . Mr. Evarts to Sir Edward Thornton.

Department of State, Washington, June 13, 1879.

[246] . Sir Edward Thornton to Mr. Evarts.

Newburyport, June 18, 1879. (Received June 20.)

[247] . Mr. Seward to Sir Edward Thornton.

Department of State, Washington, July 3, 1879.

[248] . Mr. Evarts to Sir Edward Thornton.

Department of State, Washington, July 14, 1879.

[249] . Sir Edward Thornton to Mr. Evarts.

Washington, July 14, 1879. (Received July 14.)

[250] . Mr. Evarts to Sir Edward Thornton.

Department of State, Washington, July 30, 1879.

[251] . Mr. Evarts to Sir Edward Thornton.

Department of State, Washington, August 5, 1879.

[252] . Mr. Seward to Sir Edward Thornton.

Department of State, Washington, August 9, 1879.

[253] . Mr. Seward to Sir Edward Thornton.

Department of State, Washington, August 11, 1879.

[254] . Sir Edward Thornton to Mr. Seward.

Newburyport, August 12, 1879. (Received August 14.)

[255] . Mr. Seward to Sir Edward Thornton.

Department of State, Washington, August 16, 1879.

[256] . Sir Edward Thornton to Mr. Seward.

Newburyport, September 8, 1879. (Received September 9.)

[257] . Sir Edward Thornton to Mr. Hunter.

Newburyport, September 9, 1879. (Received September 10.)

[258] . Sir Edward Thornton to Mr. Evarts.

Washington, September 30, 1879. (Received October 1.)

No. 188. Mr. Welsh to Mr. Evarts. [Document 209]

No. 188.
Mr. Welsh to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
London, December 6, 1878. No. 183.]

Sir: I have the honor to inform you that I am requested by Lord Salisbury to bring to your notice the inclosed circular of Sir M. E. Hicks Beach, Her Majesty’s secretary of state for the colonies, in which it is announced the British Government have decided to make it a rule that in future public officers shall not be allowed to act in a consular capacity for other states.

I have the honor to be, with great respect, your obedient servant,

JOHN WELSH.

[Inclosure in No. 183.]

circular.

Downing Street, October 24, 1878.

Sir: An application having been recently made for the recognition of an officer in the government service of one of the colonies as consul of a foreign state, I have the honor to inform you that Her Majesty’s Government are of opinion that such appointments are undesirable, and have decided to make it the rule in future that public officers will not be allowed to act in a consular capacity for a foreign state.

I have the honor to be; sir, your most obedient, humble servant,

M. E. HICKS BEACH.

The Officer Administering the Government of——.

No. 189. Mr. Welsh to Mr. Evarts. [Document 210]

No. 189.
Mr. Welsh to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
London, January 31, 1879. (Received February 17.) No. 217.]

Sir: Referring to my No. 214 of the 25th instant, I have the honor to state what you have probably already heard through the newspapers, that the frigate Constitution, after her disaster, was hauled off the shore by Her Majesty’s tug Malta and other vessels belonging to private owners, the Malta rendering the chief and more efficient aid. For these services, I am informed that the private parties demanded an extravagant compensation, but a settlement was effected with all of them excepting the proprietors of the tug Admiral, who refused the £200 which was offered to them by Captain Badger, and which is stated to have been a very liberal allowance.

On Monday evening, the 27th instant, at about half-past six o’clock, after the offices of the legation were closed, a notice, of which I transmit a copy, was left with a person in charge of the building, to the effect that a motion would be made in the admiralty division of the high court of justice on the morning of the 29th instant, for a warrant to arrest the Constitution and her cargo to answer the claim of the owners of the tug Admiral for salvage services, as above mentioned.

On the 28th instant, Paymaster Allen, of the Constitution, appeared at the legation, bringing a letter from Captain Badger, which stated that he had received a similar notice of motion, and requested me to interpose to prevent the arrest of his ship.

You will observe that in this notice the national character of the ship was not mentioned. It seemed to me that it would be only necessary to bring this fact to the knowledge of the court in an authoritative manner, in order to obtain the dismissal of the application; and as the interval before the motion was to come on was so short, I thought it best to cause counsel to be immediately instructed to present this point at the hearing without waiting for such action as might be taken by the foreign office in the matter.

I accordingly addressed a letter to this effect to Messrs. T. Cooper & Co., the solicitors who had already been employed by Captain Badger in this business.

Afterward, on the same day, I wrote to Lord Salisbury on the subject and heard from Lord Tenterden in reply, that the matter was under the consideration of the government.

At the hearing on the 29th instant, the counsel instructed by Messrs. Cooper appeared, as well as Dr. Deane on the behalf of the attorney-general, and the proceedings took place which are detailed in a cutting from the Morning Post, which I inclose. The application for a warrant was refused as I expected it would have been.

I transmit herewith a copy of the essential parts of the correspondence in relation to this matter, and I hope that my action therein may meet with the approval of the Department of State.

I have the honor to be, with great respect, your obedient servant,

JOHN WELSH.

[Inclosure 1 in No. 217.]

Notice of motion, 1879. O, No. 40.

In the high court of justice, admiralty division.

Between the owners, master, and crew of the steam-tug Admiral, plaintiff, and the ship Constitution, her cargo and freight, defendant.

ship constitution.

We, Clarkson, Son, & Greenwell, solicitors for the plaintiffs in their case, give notice that we shall, by counsel, at 10.30 o’clock’ in the forenoon on the 29th day of January, 1879, move the judge in court to order a warrant to issue for the arrest of the vessel Constitution, and for a further warrant to arrest her cargo, and, if necessary, to deliver the same, to answer the claim of the plaintiff for salvage services rendered to the Constitution, her cargo and freight; and further to take notice that leave has been given by the court to serve short notice of this motion.

Dated the 27th day of January, 1879.
CLARKSON, SON & GREENWELL.

[Inclosure 2 in No. 217.]

Mr. Badger to Mr. Welsh.

United States Frigate Constitution,
Portsmouth, England, January 27, 1879.

Sir: I have already made you acquainted with the extortionate claims of certain parties that gave this ship assistance on the occasion of her late disaster, and that acting under advice of counsel awards were made and sent to each, which were thought to be very liberal. One party was satisfied, two others received the money, and the fourth returned it. The party least entitled to an award, if any, for reasons, that can be shown, has, through his solicitor, made a motion before the admiralty court to seize this ship and contents and hold her for salvage. This comes up on Wednesday next, at 10.30 a.m. The notice calls her the ship Constitution, not the United States frigate of that name, and the court, or clerk, who authorized the notice to be sent, could not be aware from the face of the papers, that she is a government vessel. All the authorities that have been consulted state that such proceedings cannot be taken against a government vessel.

I expected to be ready to sail, and intended to do so, on the very day this motion is to be made.

I am not very well myself, and I have directed Paymaster Allen, of this ship, who is familiar with all that has been done, to proceed at once to London to confer with you and also with the solicitor formerly consulted, a copy of whose opinion is lodged with you. I desire to do what is right, and all the experts, everyone Englishmen, here, say that most liberal payment has been made or tendered. These are small tugs with trifling power. The work was really done by the government tug sent to our aid. I cannot commit the Navy Department, or admit for one moment such preposterous claims.

I have the honor respectfully to request that you will interpose and prevent any such act as arresting this ship for the purposes indicated.

Mr. Allen has with him the correspondence which has taken place with these parties, and will explain all the matters connected therewith.

I suppose it will be best to employ counsel to combat the motion on the ground that she is a national vessel.

I have the honor to be, &c.,

O. C. BADGER,
Captain Commanding.

Hon. John Welsh,
Minister of the United States, London.

[Inclosure 3 in No. 217.]

Mr. Welsh to Messrs. Thomas Cooper & Co., Solicitors, &c.

Legation of the United States,
London, January 28, 1879.

Gentlemen: The accompanying notice marked A having been left at this legation with the janitor after the office was closed last evening, I shall be obliged to you to instruct counsel to be present in court to-morrow morning to inform the right, honorable the judge of the admiralty court that the ship against which the warrant has been applied for by the owners, master, and crew of the steam-tug Admiral, is the United States national ship of war Constitution, regularly commissioned by the Government of the United States, and that the Constitution at the time of the alleged salvage services was engaged in the national service of the United States for public purposes and in pursuance of a special act of Congress passed in that behalf.

You will please also instruct counsel to inform the judge that the so-called cargo consists of property of which the United States Government has, for public purposes, charged itself with the care and protection. Under these circumstances I, as the representative of the Government of the United States, cannot recognize that the high court of justice has any jurisdiction whatever in this case.

I am, respectfully yours,

JOHN WELSH.

Counsel will be good enough to inform the learned judge that application should have been made to the Marquis of Salisbury, secretary for foreign affairs, had time permitted it.

[Inclosure 4 in No. 217.]

Mr. Welsh to the Marquis of Salisbury.

Legation of the United States,
London, January 28, 1879. Immediate.]

My Lord: At half-past six last evening, after the legation was closed, a notice, of which the inclosed is a copy, was left with the janitor of the building in which our offices are situated.

I have the honor to inform your lordship that the ship against which a warrant has been applied for by the owners, master, and crew of the steam-tug Admiral, is the United States national ship of war Constitution regularly commissioned by the Government of the United States, and that the Constitution at the time of the alleged salvage services was on a voyage from Havre to New York, under the orders of the Secretary of the Navy, and engaged in the national service of the United States for public purposes connected with the late exposition at Paris, in pursuance of a special act of Congress.

The so-called cargo consists of property of which the United States Government has, for public purposes, charged itself with the care.

I beg to add, for your lordship’s information, that I am informed that the actual and efficient services rendered to the ship in assisting her off the shore, were those of Her Majesty’s tug Malta, and that for such services as were rendered by the tug Admiral, I am advised that a liberal and handsome sum has been offered on behalf of the Navy Department of the United States.

I have, &c.,

JOHN WELSH.

P. S.—I have no doubt that, upon the receipt of this note, your lordship will take the necessary steps in the matter.—J. W.

Inclosed: Copy of a notice of motion.

[Inclosure 5 in No. 217.]

Lord Tenterden to Mr. Welsh.

Foreign Office, January 28, 1879. Immediate.]

Sir: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your letter of this day’s date respecting the application about to be made to the admiralty division of the high court of justice for leave to arrest the United States frigate Constitution, and her cargo, in a suit for salvage instituted on behalf of the owners, master, and crew of steam-tug Admiral; and I have to inform you that the matter, having already been brought to the notice of this department by the solicitors of the claimants, is receiving the attention of Her Majesty’s Government.

TENTERDEN.

(In the absence of the Marquis of Salisbury.)

[Inclosure 6 in No. 217.]

Marquis of Salisbury to Mr. Welsh.

Foreign Office, January 29, 1879.

Sir: With reference to my letter of yesterday’s date respecting the motion made in the admiralty division of the high court of justice for leave to arrest the United States frigate Constitution on a claim for salvage, I have the honor to inform you that it was thought proper that Her Majesty’s Government should be represented by counsel, on the motion being made, and that the judge of the admiralty division dismissed the motion this morning.

I have the honor to be, &c.,

SALISBURY.

[Inclosure 7 in No. 217.]

Mr. Welsh to Marquis of Salisbury.

Legation of the United States,
London, January 30, 1879.

My Lord: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of Lord Tenterden’s note of the 28th instant, and your lordship’s communication of yesterday, in relation to the motion made in the admiralty division of the high court of justice, for leave to arrest the United States frigate’ Constitution, and I have to express my thanks for the action taken by her Majesty’s Government in this matter.

I have, &c.,

JOHN WELSH.

[Inclosure 8 in No. 217.]

[The Morning Post, Thursday, January 30, 1879.]

law intelligence.

High court of justice, probate, divorce, and admiralty division,—Wednesday (before Sir R. Phillimore).

The action against the United States Government.

To-day an argument took place on the motion made on Monday last in an action brought by the owners of the steam-tug Admiral, of Cowes, in the Isle of Wight, against the United States frigate Constitution, which grounded near Swanage, to recover the sum of £1,500 for salvage remuneration. A sum of £200 had been tendered by the defendants, but rejected by the plaintiffs; and it may be remembered that when the matter was originally brought forward Dr. Phillimore stated that the Constitution was. about to leave the country, that the plaintiffs were anxious to obtain some legal status, in a salvage suit in respect to recent services, and that he asked for leave to serve a notice of motion upon the captain of the Constitution and upon the United States consul at Portsmouth.

Sir Robert Phillimore then pointed out that some care should be taken in the mode of dealing with a ship of war belonging to a state which was at the time upon amicable relations with Her Majesty.

This morning Mr. Milward, Q. C., and Dr. Phillimore appeared for the owners of the steam-tug Admiral; Mr. E. C. Clarkson, for the American minister in London; and Dr. Deane, Q. C., for the attorney-general, as representing the crown. Mr. Milward said the application which he had to make to his lordship was that he should order two warrants to be issued, one for the arrest of the vessel Constitution, and the other for the arrest of her cargo. The steam-tug Admiral was telegraphed for from Swanage when the Constitution had got ashore near that place. The Admiral in answer to the request went from Cowes and succeeded in getting the Constitution off in safety Some question arose as to the amount of salvage re-ward which should be paid to the salvors, and after an offer of £200 had been made and refused, the present proceedings were taken in the form of the motion now made to arrest the Constitution and her cargo. In the ordinary course of things the registrar would have issued the necessary warrants, but in the present case this had not been done, and consequently the present application was now made to his lordship.

Sir Robert Phillimore remarked that it was simply a question as to whether the court in which he sat had any jurisdiction in the matter.

Mr. Clarkson said notice of the proceedings of Monday last had been given to the minister of the United States in this country, and he had been instructed to appear in court in accordance with a communication which he might be allowed to read. That communication was in the following terms: “ Legation of the United States,
“London, January 28, 1879.

“To Messrs. Cooper & Co., Solicitors.

“ Gentlemen: The accompaning notice marked A having been left at the legation after the office was closed last evening, I shall be obliged to you to instruct counsel to be present in court to-morrow morning to inform the right honorable the judge of the admiralty court that the ship against which the warrant has been applied for by the owners, master, and crew of the steam-tug Admiral is the United States national ship of war Constitution, regularly commissioned by the Government of the United States, and that the Constitution, at the time of the alleged salvage services, was engaged in the national service of the United States for public purposes, and in pursuance of a special act of Congress passed in that behalf. You will please also instruct counsel to inform the judge that the so-called cargo consists of property of which the United States Government has, for public purposes, charged itself with the care and protection.

“Under these circumstances I, as the representative of the Government of the United States, cannot recognize that the high court of justice has any jurisdiction whatever in the case.

“I am, &c.,

JOHN WELSH.

“Counsel will be good enough to inform the learned judge that application should have been made to the Marquis of Salisbury, secretary for foreign affairs, had time permitted.”

Dr. Deane said that, as representing the attorney-general, he had to inform the court that Her Majesty’s Government recognized the public character of the Constitution as being engaged upon a public employment. He was instructed to protest against the arrest of any property belonging to the United States.

Sir Robert Phillimore said it rested with Mr. Milward to show that the court had power to act in the matter.

Mr. Milward said it was not desired that anything offensive should be done to the Government of the United States; but he argued that his lordship’s court had jurisdiction over the Constitution, and that there was no pretense for saying that her cargo was not liable to salvage.

Sir Robert Phillimore. But in order to get at the cargo you must go on board the vessel.

Mr. Milward submitted that there was power to go on board a man of war which had prize property. In the present case it was not suggested that the property on board belonged to the American Government, but simply that it was under the government’s care. He would, at all events, ask the court for an order for bail to be given by the defendants, and so prevent the judgment which might otherwise be given from having the effect of depriving the plaintiffs of the only source of remedy against this vessel.

Dr. Phillimore followed in a similar strain.

Mr. Clarkson said the American Government desired to render the court every possible courtesy and assistance in deciding the matter. It appeared to him that the case was a very simple one. He quite admitted that there might be cases where a foreign sovereign threw off his sovereignty and became a trader; but his lordship had no such state of things to consider in the present instance. The Constitution was admittedly a foreign ship of war, having on board certain goods for national purposes, and it was perfectly apparent that those goods could not be got at without going on board the vessel, and that there could be no distinction drawn between the goods and the ship. He contended that the Constitution was exempt from the jurisdiction of the court.

Dr. Deane said, so far as Her Majesty’s Government were concerned, they regarded the case very much in the light in which his learned friend, Mr. Clarkson, had put it. The two countries, Great Britain and the United States, were at peace with each other; and by the comity of nations there was an implied contract between them that their public vessels of war should be free from civil jurisdiction. That understanding had not been interrupted, and he asked his lordship whether there was any ease upon record in which a civil court had exercised the jurisdiction which this court was asked to exercise in regard to the Constitution.

Sir Robert Phillimore said he had no desire to interrupt the learned counsel but he might state that at present he was disposed entirely to agree with him.

Dr. Deane remarked that he had great regard to his lordship’s time and the time of the court, and after what had just fallen from the bench, he had nothing further to say.

Mr. Milward briefly replied, reiterating his former argument.

Sir Robert Phillimore, in giving judgment, said that on Monday last an application was made to the court to allow a warrant to issue, of a peculiar character, a warrant which was to be served upon a ship of war belonging to an independent state at amity with Her Majesty. The court then directed the case to stand over, and suggested that it would be proper that notice should be given to his excellency, the American minister in London, and to Lord Salisbury,, as secretary for foreign affairs. The court had reason to congratulate itself that it took that step, for the result had been that he had had the advantage of hearing the opinion of counsel on behalf of the United States, and of the learned gentlemen representing the Crown. It appeared from telegrams which had passed in the case that a claim had been made by the owner of the tug for £1,500, hut that the American consul at Portsmouth had forwarded simply a check for £200, in recognition of the services it had rendered. The owner of the tug was dissatisfied with that amount, and consequently made an application to this court for an order to issue a warrant to arrest the Constitution and her cargo. The question raised under these proceedings was whether the court had any jurisdiction in the matter of a foreign ship of war belonging to an independent state in amity with our sovereign. It was admitted, and could not be denied, that if he were to exercise the jurisdiction which was craved in the present case, he should be doing that for which there were no legal grounds or precedents.

There could be no doubt as to the general proposition that ships of war belonging to another nation with whom we were at peace were exempt from the civil jurisdiction of the ports which they might enter in this country; and he had listened in vain for any peculiar circumstances which would lead him to take this case out of that general proposition.

It had happened to him more than once to have been requested by foreign states to sit as arbiter, and to make awards in cases which had arisen between them. Had such an application been made in the present instance he should have gladly undertaken the duty sought to be imposed upon him; but that was not the state of matters he had now to consider. He had merely to consider the question of jurisdiction; and he was clearly of opinion it would be very wrong and improper to assent to the request made to him on the part of the owner of the steam-tug. He might add that he saw no distinction between refusing the issue of the warrant prayed for in the case of the ship and the issue of the warrant in the case of the cargo, and he refused the request made to him equally in both cases. It might be alleged that this decision might be attended in future cases with considerable hardship, and with danger to the property of the United States on subsequent occasions when salvage services might be required. He could not, however, alter the law; and he had no reason to suppose that the United States, or any other government, would not take steps toward granting a proper amount of remuneration to salvors. He must dismiss the motion.

[Inclosure 9 in No. 217.]

Mr. Cooper to Mr. Welsh.

21 Leabenhall street,
London, January 29, 1879.

Sir: Agreeably to the instructions contained in your excellency’s letter to us of the 29th instant, we arranged that counsel should attend in court this morning upon the hearing of an application to the judge of the admiralty court to issue a warrant against the United States ship Constitution and the cargo on board her, and counsel accordingly attended and informed the court of the facts contained in your excellency’s letter relating to the Constitution.

The admiralty advocate, instructed by Her Majesty’s Government, was also present, and on the part of the government of this country protested against any jurisdiction being exercised in the case.

After hearing a lengthy argument from the counsel for the applicants, and a few words from the counsel we instructed, and a short argument from the admirality advocate, the learned judge dismissed the application with costs.

As we have carefully abstained from appearing in any way to the proceedings on behalf of the ship, there is some question whether the judge could make any order as to costs in the matter.

THOMAS COOPER.

Note.—This order was finally made without costs.

No. 190. Mr. Evarts to Mr. Welsh [Document 211]

No. 190.
Mr. Evarts to Mr. Welsh

Department of State,
Washington, February 18, 1879. No. 233.]

Sir: At a recent convocation of boards of railroad commissioners held at Columbus Ohio, a committee was appointed to examine and report upon the methods of taxation as respects railroads and railroad securities now in use in the various States in the Union, as well as in foreign countries.

Mr. Charles F. Adams, jr., of Boston, the chairman of that committee, has requested the co-operation of this Department with a view to obtain the information desired from abroad. As the object in view is deemed to be one of national interest, I have to request you to obtain and transmit to the Department, at your earliest convenience, such statements in detail as are obtainable, and as may be necessay for a correct understanding of the systems of railroad taxation in use in Great Britain. The information should especially cover the following points, namely: 1st. On what general recognized principle, if any, is the railroad taxation of Great Britain based”?

2d. In how far are the railroad companies taxed as holders of realty?

3d. In how far as holders of personalty?

4th. In how far are they subject to a franchise tax?

5th. In how far is their stock taxed as personalty to its owner?

6th. What taxes are levied on the receipts of the companies, whether net or gross?

I am, &c.,

WM. M. EVARTS.

Note.—A similar instruction pent to the minister to Austria-Hungary, Belgium, France, Germany, Italy, Russia, and Switzerland.

No. 191. Mr. Welsh to Mr. Evarts. [Document 212]

No. 191.
Mr. Welsh to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
London, March 18, 1879. (Received March 29.) No. 247.]

Sir: I have great pleasure in complying with the request of J. R. Hind, esq., F. R. S. and F. R. A. S., foreign secretary of the Royal Astronical Society, expressed in a letter to the secretary of this legation, a copy of which is herewith inclosed, and to send by the dispatch-bag to-day the box stated to contain the gold medal therein mentioned.

I presume that the society have already communicated in a more formal way to Professor Hall their courteous action in this matter.

I have, &c.,

JOHN WELSH.

[Inclosure 1 in dispatch No. 247.]

Cambridge Park, Twickenham, March 12, 1879.

Sir: I take the liberty of addressing you in my capacity of foreign secretary of the Royal Astronomical Society. The council of the society have awarded their gold medal to Prof. Asaph Hall, Naval Observatory, Washington, for his discovery of the satellites of Mars, and I am requested by our President Lord Lindsay to ask if, in order to insure the safe delivery of the medal to Professor Hall, you could conveniently forward it to Washington. Should you be able to do the society this favor, the medal shall be left at the United States legation immediately.

I have, &c.,

J. R. HIND.

The Secretary of the United States Legation.

No. 192. Mr. Welsh to Mr. Evarts. [Document 213]

No. 192.
Mr. Welsh to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
London, March 19, 1879.

Sir: I inclose a cutting from the Pall Mall Gazette of yesterday in relation to a ruling of Sir Robert Phillimore which may interest you.

* * * * * * *

Very truly, yours.

JOHN WELSH.

Sir Robert Phillimore has given judgment in the case of the steamer Parlement Beige, in a sense which may raise some difficulties between this country and Belgium. He held that the Parlement Beige, a steamer belonging to the Belgian Government, and carrying the mails between Dover and Ostend, washable to be arrested at the suit of an English subject. The judge’s decision rested on two grounds: First, that the Parlement Beige, being neither a ship of war, nor the pleasure yacht of a sovereign, and carrying packets of small articles in addition to the mails, could not claim immunity from arrest on the general principles of international law; the second ground was, that though article 6 of the postal treaty of 1876 between Great Britain and Belgium gives to the mail packets the status of ships of war, and exempts them from arrest or detention, yet as this treaty has never been sanctioned by Parliament, it was so far void that it could not take away the actual rights of a British subject, one of which was that he had a right to arrest a wrong-doing ship for damages done by it to his property. As the Belgian Government refuse to acknowledge the jurisdiction of the court, and did not appear, their case being voluntarily argued by the law officers of the Crown, the matter is not likely to rest as it stands.—(Pall Mall Gazette, March 18.)

No. 193. Mr. Evarts to Mr. Welsh. [Document 214]

No. 193.
Mr. Evarts to Mr. Welsh.

Department of State,
Washington, March 25, 1879. No. 258.]

Sir: I inclose herewith copy of a dispatch of the 3d January last, No. 42, from the United States consul at Zanzibar, and of the correspondence which accompanied it, between that officer and the British consul-general there, relating to the seizure, on the ground of their being slaves, of three negroes from on board the American whaling bark Laconia, of New Bedford, Mass., by order of Captain Earle, senior naval officer of Her Majesty’s fleet on that station.

You are instructed to bring the matter to the attention of the British Government, and to state that the search for the purpose herein named appears to have been without probable cause, and as it was made in violation of the provisions of the first article of the treaty of 1862, it is expected that the British officer who ordered the search will be held accountable therefor by his government.

I am, &c.,

WM. M. EVARTS.

[Inclosure in Instruction No. 258.]

Mr. Hathorne to Mr. Hunter.

United States Consulate,
Zanzibar, January 3, 1879. No. 42.]

Sir: I have the honor to transmit a copy of the correspondence between Dr. Kirk, Her Britannic Majesty’s consul-general for Zanzibar, and myself regarding the seizure of three negroes from the American whaling hark Laconia, of New Bedford, Mass., by the orders of Captain Earle, the senior naval officer of Her Britannic Majesty’s fleet on this station; said negroes claimed to be slaves by Captain Earle.

I caused them all to appear before me and examined them under oath, which examination is appended herewith, together with that of the officers and some of the crew of the Laconia.

Each and every one of the alleged slaves were only too glad to continue in the vessel, and I therefore shipped them; and, according to my views of the case, having (unlike the officers of Her Britannic Majesty’s ship London) no pecuniary interest in detaining the vessel, I allowed her to go to sea on January 1, 1879, and she was to cruise for whales toward the United States, and would probably reach New Bedford some time in May next.

I have heard it rumored that an American, a Dr. Wilson, sugar planter on Johanna Island, is the owner of slaves, but cannot vouch for the truth of such reports. With the sincere wish that the steps I have taken in the inclosed matter may meet with the approbation of the Department,

I have the honor, &c.,

W. H. HATHORNE,
United States Consul.

[Inclosure 1 in Mr. Hathorne’s No. 42.]

Mr. Hathorne to Mr. Kirk.

United States Consulate,
Zanzibar, December 26, 1878.

Sir: It has come to my knowledge that the American bark Laconia, of New Bedford, now lying in this port, was boarded last evening by an officer of Her Majesty’s ship London, who took two men from her to the London.

As this vessel’s papers are deposited in this consulate, she is consequently under my control, and without now going into details as to whether Article I of the treaty of 1862, between the United States of America and Her Britannic Majesty, has or has not been violated by the officer of the London in boarding the Laconia “within the limits of a settlement or port” in the manner he did, I must herewith request that the men above mentioned be delivered over to me forthwith.

I have, &c.,

W. H. HATHORNE,
United States Consul.

[Inclosure 2 in Mr. Hathorne’s No. 42.]

Mr. Kirk to Mr. Hathorne.

Zanzibar, December 27, 1878.

Sir: Your letter of 26th instant was delivered to me this morning. I at once forwarded a copy to Captain Earle, of Her Majesty’s ship London.

I am now informed that the negroes referred to by you have been sent back to the American bark Laconia, and that a full report of the circumstances of the case will be prepared for your information.

I have, &c.,

JOHN KIRK,
Her Majesty’s Agent and Consul-General.

[Inclosure 3 in Mr. Hathorne’s No. 42.]

Mr. Hathorne to Mr. Kirk.

United States Consulate,
Zanzibar, December 27, 1878.

Sir: Your letter of this day’s date, wherein you inform me that the negroes referred to (unlawfully taken from the American bark Laconia to Her Britannic Majesty’s ship London by the officers of the latter vessel) have been returned to their ship, is received, and in reply thereto would state that I shall be glad to receive the report of the circumstances of the case referred to.

I wish to correct the date of my letter delivered you this morning, which was by me erroneously written December 26, and should have been December 27.

I have, &c.,

W. H. HATHORNE,
United States Consul.

[Inclosure 4 in Mr. Hathorne’s No. 42.]

Mr. Kirk to Mr. Hathorne.

Zanzibar, December 28, 1878.

Sir: In continuation of former correspondence, I beg to forward for your information copy of a letter received from Captain Earle, of Her Majesty’s ship London, stating the circumstances under which three negroes were received from the American bark Laconia with the consent of the master.

I have, &c.,

JOHN KIRK,
Her Majesty’s Agent and Consul- General.

[Inclosure 1 in Mr Kirk’s note of December 28, 1878.]

Captain Earle to Mr. Kirk.

Her Majesty’s Ship London,
Zanzibar, December 27, 1878.

Sir: I beg to forward you, for the information of the United States consul, the circumstances under which three negroes, with the consent of the master of the Laconia, were brought on board this ship to be examined by interpreter officers.

It came to my knowledge that there were three slaves on board the Laconia; this information was obtained voluntarily from one of the crew of the Laconia.

I gave Lieutenant Johnson the necessary authority under the treaty to search the Laconia. When he arrived alongside the master was on shore. Lieutenant Johnson went to the master at his hotel and showed him his authority; the master said he would go off; he said he knew what it was about: he did not object to be searched; he supposed some of his crew had been talking about the negroes on board.

The master said the negroes were not on the ship’s books; he also said they smuggled themselves on board at Johanna; he could not enter them there because there was no consul, but that he was going to enter them here. Lieutenant Johnson found out from the negroes that two of them were fishermen who were fishing on the beach, and they were taken by force at night against their will, covered up with a sail and taken on board the Laconia; the other one states that he was sold to the master of the Laconia by a merchant at Johanna, but the slave did not know the merchant’s name.

These slaves not being on the books of the Laconia, Lieutenant Johnson asked the permission of the master to let them go to the London to be examined, which leave the master gave on condition that Lieutenant Johnson would be responsible for their safety. Lieutenant Johnson informed him that the negroes would be examined on board the London in my presence by the interpreter officers, and he presented my compliments and said I should be glad to see him on board if he would like to be present; he said he would wish to be present; but this morning I received a note from him, informing me that he did not intend to come to the investigation.

These slaves have been examined by Lieutenants Cut field and O’Neill, interpreters in Swahile language, and a signed statement of their evidence is attached.

The three negroes have been returned to the Laconia, as you have already been informed.

I have the honor, &c.,

HAMILTON EARL,
Captain and Senior Officer, East Coast of Africa.

[Inclosure 2 in Mr. Kirk’s note of December 28, 1878.]

Her Majesty’s Ship London,
Zanzibar, December 27, 1878.

Statement of three slaves given to me, this 27th day of December, 1878.

First slave, M’Cassi:

I am the slave of Captain ———, of the American bark Laconia. I was bought by him some six months ago from an American merchant at Johanna, who I used to work for at the sugar-mills. I did not wish to leave him, but was placed by force on board the Laconia by Captain———, where I was made to work against my will. I have worked in the ship for six months, and have not received any pay.

Second slave, Similla:

Some six months since, I was fishing upon the beach of Johanna, near the house of my master; at the time the Laconia was lying there, and the captain came on shore in the whale-boat and asked me if I wanted to go on board his ship, saying he would give me money and clothes. I told him “no”; he (the captain) then took hold of me and forced me into the boat, and also my companion, covering us over with a sail in the bottom of the boat, and when we got on board we were placed down in the main hold, and when the ship got under way, which was shortly afterwards, we were then taken on deck and told off for work. We have been at sea six months and have never received any pay.

Third slave, Uladi, gives precisely the same story as Similla.

H. E. O’NEILL,
Lieutenant.

H. McA. CUTFIELD,
Lieutenant, R. N.

[Inclosure 5 in Mr. Hathorne’s No. 42.]

United States Consulate,
Zanzibar, December 28, 1878.

Sworn statement of Capt. R. W. Gifford, of the American bark Laconia, of New Bedford, Mass., regarding three negroes on board the said bark, claimed to be slaves, by the British senior naval officer on the east coast of African station.

My name is Rufus W. Gifford, and I am the master of the whaling-bark Laconia, of New Bedford, Mass., and now lying in the harbor of Zanzibar.

When I was at Johanna, on or about the 10th of July last, I was at Dr. Wilson’s house, a sugar-planter, and there saw the negro Fereggie, who then had chains on his feet; the planter said to me, “There is a man you may have if you will take him away; he is good for nothing, and I shall be glad to get rid of him.” I replied that I should be glad to take him, as I was short-handed; accordingly the negro was sent to the beach, where my boat lay waiting for me, via the blacksmith’s shop, where he went to have his irons struck off, one of the planter’s black men accompanying. A short time after, I left for the beach myself, and when I got near it I saw the other two men (Semilla and M’Cassa in the evidence) and asked them if they would like to go in the ship; they said they would, and one of them took my valise (that I had up to that time been carrying myself) from me, and both started for the boat, wading off quite a distance to get into her, as the water was very shoal.

A short time after the other man (Fereggie above named, who had stopped at the blacksmith’s to have his irons struck off) came down, a black man with him, as far as the banking of the beach, and from there he came alone, and without my addressing a word to him, he waded off to the boat as the Other two had done before him and got into her. There was no force of any kind used; the man was pleased to go on board the ship. About the same time one of our own men came from the boat for me. I got on his back and he waded me off to where the boat lay; we pulled off on board the ship, and the same night when the breeze came we got under way and went to sea.

The next day I had clothing, tobacco, &c., served out to these three negroes (mentioned above), and I told them at the time that I should ship them at the first port I visited where there was a United States consul, at which they seemed much pleased. I do not know whether they were slaves or not; I certainly have not treated or considered them as such since they have been on board. I only know I was short-handed and that these men were glad to get away and join my ship. Further than that 1 did not stop to consider, but I most solemnly swear that I did not buy or steal either of these men.

On the evening of December 26, 1878, while my vessel was lying at anchor in this port of Zanzibar, and while I was sitting in one of the rooms of the Victoria Hotel in the town of Zanzibar, a British officer, armed and in full uniform, walked into where I was sitting and showed me a document which he read to me, purporting to come from Captain Earle of Her Britannic Majesty’s ship London, authorizing him to search my vessel for slaves, and he told me he had been on board to do so, but my first officer had told him he had better come on shore and see me first, which he had done, and he would like to have me accompany him on board the Laconia and give him permission to search the vessel. I accordingly went on board with him, where I found there was another armed officer in uniform in charge of the quarter-deck.

Mr. Johnson (I believe that was the name the other officer addressed him by) asked to see my ship’s papers. I told him they were deposited at the United States consulate, and I suggested to him that it would be as well for him to let the matter rest until I could see the consul, to which he replied that I must not blame him, as he had his orders and must execute them; he then asked me to have all hands called, which was done, and after everybody had been mustered he asked me to point out “the three negroes that came from Johanna,” which I accordingly did, when he and his interpreter began to talk to them in a language I did not understand, and from all appearances they did not; then another negro was picked out from the crew by them, but as this man was regularly shipped in Mahé, I told them they had better let him alone.

The three Johanna negroes were then told to go aft (more by motions than by the language used, I should judge). I tried to explain to the officers that the men were not slaves, as far as I was concerned, even taking them below and showing them my account-book, where their names were entered for clothing and tobacco drawn by and charged to them. I also told them that I had reported the whole matter to the United States consul the day of my arrival at this port, and requested him to put the men on the ship’s papers.

We then came on deck and Mr. Johnson went abaft where I stood, and after having some conversation with his interpreter, came to me and said he should have to take those three Johanna negroes on board the London before Captain Earle, to which I objected. He then asked me to state my objections in writing. I told him I did not know the form and did not see any necessity for so doing, and again told him he had better let the matter rest, and before going any further, report it to the United States, consul, who held my ship’s papers.

He said he should have to take the men, for which I told him I should hold him responsible. Accordingly he ordered the men into the boat and left, leaving the other officer and the cockswain of the boat on board. As the boat pulled away I asked him how long before he would return; he said in half an hour or less, and before that length of time had expired he came back with the boat with Captain Earle’s compliments, and that he should have to detain the three men until the morning (27th December) for examination.

I then told Mr. Johnson that I wished to be present at the examination, also sending Captain Earle my compliments, and that he had better apply to the United States consul before taking any further steps. I then got into Mr. Johnson’s boat and he landed me on the beach.

I was not present at the examination, by the advice of the United States consul.

Above and foregoing statement made before me under oath this 28th day of December, 1878.
W. H. HATHORNE,
United States Consul.

Edward S. Ripley’s sworn statement.

My name is Edward S. Ripley; I am second officer of the bark Laconia, and was officer of the boat waiting for the captain at Johanna, on the 10th of July last, about 7 o’clock p.m.; it was about this time, I should judge, when I heard the captain hailing the boat from the beach, upon which I ordered the men to pull in. As soon as the boat struck the sand, which she did, I should judge, about; 40 feet from the water-mark, as the water was very shallow, the boat had no sooner struck than two men (Similla and M’Cassa, identified as being the same ones) came off and clambered into the boat of their own accord, and lay down in the bottom of the boat;. they had to wade off at least 40feet in the water; I saw them coming, but didn’t know what for, but thought very likely they might be runaways; I said nothing to them, as I knew we were short-handed; after the men had got into the boat, not hearing anything more of the captain, I ordered the boat to be pulled off in a little deeper water, but hardly got her turned around when I again heard the captain’s voice hailing the boat, and we again put for the beach, where the captain was standing, and as we neared the beach another negro came wading off and got into the boat that was at least 40 feet from the water-line on the beach; one of our own men then went and took the captain on his back and waded him off to the boat.

This man Fereggie attempted of his own accord to pull one of the oars going off, but as he knew nothing about it, I ordered him to give it up to one of our men, which he did. I most solemnly swear there was no force or coercion used to get either of the men into the boat, or on board the ship; they seemed only too glad to get away.

Again, while lying at anchor in Zanzibar harbor, on the evening of December 26, 1878, a boat from Her Britannic Majesty’s ship London came alongside with two officers-in her, who came on board to search the vessel, which Mr. Cornell, our chief officer, refused to let them do without the captain’s orders; so one of the officers, whom I think I afterwards heard called Mr. Johnson, said to the other, “I will leave you here in charge, and I will go ashore and find the captain.”

I had no idea these three Johanna men were slaves, and I did not consider or treat them as such; they were and have been, treated exactly the same as the rest of the sailors. About 9 p.m., I should judge, the captain and Mr. Johnson came on board,, all hands were turned out of their berths, and one of the officers searched the forecastle; then the three negroes from Johanna were pointed out to Mr. Johnson, and after some conversation with the captain, which I did not hear (being on the other side of the deck), they were finally taken in the boat to Her Britannic Majesty’s ship London, one officer and a cockswain remaining on board the Laconia, after which I knew nothing more of the matter, as I went to my bed.

George Antonio, boatsteerer, sworn:

I am a boatsteerer on board of the bark Laconia, and was steering the boat on the evening of July 10, 1878, when we were lying just off from the beach waiting for the captain. I remember very distinctly of the three Johanna men coming off to the boat and clambering in of their own accord.

The rest of this man’s statement is the same in substance as that given by the captain and Mr. Ripley, second officer, he like those two most solemnly swearing that there was no force of any kind used to get the men into the boat or ship.

Squer S. Cornell, first officer, sworn:

I am first officer of bark Laconia, of New Bedford, now lying at anchor in Zanzibar Harbor.

About 8 o’clock p.m., on the evening of December 26, a boat from Her Britannic Majesty’s ship London, with two armed officers in uniform in her, came on board and wanted to see the ship’s papers as well as to search the ship for slaves. I told them the ship’s papers were deposited at the United States consulate, and if they wanted to search the ship, they had better see the captain first; so one of the officers got into the boat and started for the shore, saying to the other one whom he left on board, “I will leave you here in charge” (or words to that effect) “and go on shore to find the captain;” this was about 8 p.m. I should judge.

At about 9 p.m. the boat returned with the captain and Mr. Johnson (I believe), who asked the captain to allow him to search the vessel, to which the captain assented; accordingly all hands were called on deck, after which Mr. Johnson went into the forecastle and searched it himself, then came out, looked over the men, and picked out four of them, but finally only selected three, whom he ordered aft.

Mr. Johnson (?) and the captain then went below and had some conversation together, after which they again came on deck, and Mr. Johnson (?), through the interpreter, ordered the three negroes into the boat; I heard Mr. Johnson (?) ask the captain if he had any objection to his taking them, and the captain said he had, and that he should hold him responsible for the men if he took them away; the boat then pulled for Her Britannic Majesty’s ship London, leaving an armed officer and the cockswain of the boat on board of the Laconia.

About half an hour afterwards the same boat and officer returned, and took the officer and the cockswain, whom he had left on board, and returned to his ship.

The next day (27th, about 12 o’clock noon), Mr. Johnson (?) brought the three negroes back to the Laconia, he coming on board, and requested a receipt for the three men, which I gave him. I asked him what he had made out of the case, and he replied, “It was all right;” which, as I understood it, the affair was there ended.

Frank S. Webster sworn:

I am the steward of the American bark Laconia, of New Bedford, Mass., now lying at anchor in this harbor of Zanzibar.

On the evening of the 26th December the captain came down in the cabin with an armed officer, whom I afterwards ascertained came from Her Britannic Majesty’s ship London; the captain, as he came down, woke me up and ordered me to get out his account or slop-chest book, and which he showed to the officer, with the accounts therein.

The officer had some conversation with the captain about writing his objections to the three Johanna negroes being taken out of the ship to Her Britannic Majesty’s ship London, the captain saying he did not know what form the objections ought to be written in, as I understood it, but after some talk the officer said he would be responsible for the men, and then the captain said he would have nothing further to say; as the conversation was not addressed to me, I would not swear the above was all that was said, but only that it was all that I heard. I distinctly remember, however, hearing the captain say, “I do object to it,” meaning taking the men out of the ship, and he also said that before any more steps were taken in the matter, he wanted it reported to the American consul, where the ship’s papers were then deposited.

The officer then went on board the London for orders, leaving another officer and the cockswain of the boat aboard. I do not know what time he came back, or whether he took the three negroes with him the first or second time.

I went to my bed shortly after the boat started for the London the first time.

The above and foregoing statements were made under oath before me this 28th day day of December, 1878.
W. H. HATHORNE,
United States Consul.

United States Consulate,
Zanzibar, December 28, 1878.

Sworn statement of three negroes unlawfully taken by the officers of Her Majesty’s ship London from the American bark Laconia, of New Bedford, Mass., to Her Majesty’s ship London, for examination; said negroes claimed to be slaves by the captain and senior officer of Her Britannic Majesty’s east coast of African fleet.

Similla examined:

I am not a native of Johanna; I am a “Makuwa,” and have been on the American bark Laconia, Captain Gilford, for the past six months; I went on board of my own accord, and there was no force of any kind or description used in getting me there. I was fishing on the beach, when the captain of the Laconia came down and asked me if I would to go off in his ship—he saying he would give me pay and clothes if I would; so I got into his boat, and the sailors then covered me over with a sail. I was not at all afraid.

Since I have been on board of the Laconia I have been treated well and served with the same food as the other sailors, and the captain has always treated me well, and I think he is a good man; though the first officer has sometimes slapped me in the face with the flat of his hand (illustrated by witness), and he used to do the same to all the other sailors on board. I have had liberty once since we have been lying here, when the captain gave me three rupees ($1.50), the whole of which I did not spend, having a little of it left when I went on board at night. I am perfectly willing to go in the ship, if to be discharged at either St. Helena or New Bedford, Mass., but not to be landed at Johanna, where I do not care to go again.

Question put by the consul. What questions were put to you yesterday on board of Her Majesty’s ship London, and what were your answers?

Answer by witness. They asked me if I was seized by force on shore or on the beach at Johanna, and I told them I was standing near the beach, throwing my fishnet, when the captain of the Laconia passed and said to me that he would give me money and clothes if I would go in the ship; so I went and got into his boat; there was no force of any kind or description used whatever. They also asked me whether I would like to remain on the London or go on the beach, to which I made no reply.

Question by the consul. Night before last, while you were still on board of the Laconia, who ordered you to get into the London’s boat?

Answer by witness. The officer in uniform, with a sword.

Question (by Captain Gifford to witness). When I saw you near the beach at Johanna, and asked you if you would not like to go in my vessel, did you not say yes, and take my carpet-bag or valise from my hand and run ahead of me and get into my boat, some little time before I did?

Answer. Yes; I did.

Question. Was any force of any kind or description used in getting you into the boat or on board the vessel?

Answer. No; none whatever.

Question. After you got into the boat, did you not lay down under the thwarts to hide yourself from any of the people belonging to the shore that might be about?

Answer. Yes, I did, as some of the men in the boat told me to do so, after which they covered me over with a sail.

Question. The very next morning after leaving Johanna, did I not give you soap to wash yourself and new clothes to wear, telling you at the time that I should charge it to you in your account?

Answer. Yes, you did.

Question by the consul. Can you speak Kiswaheli?

Answer. I understand very little in this language, as it is not my own; I do thoroughly understand Auzwan or Johanna and Makuwa languages.

M’cassa examined:

This youth tells exactly the same story as Similla as regards going on board the Laconia of his own free will and accord, but states that he has had liberty twice since the ship arrived at this port, the captain giving him 5 rupees ($2.50) in all. This man or youth, like Similla, was and is perfectly willing to continue on in the ship after being regularly shipped, provided that he is landed at either Seychelles, St. Helena, or New Bedford, and not on any account to be landed at Johanna.

Fereggie examined:

I am a Makuwa, but for a long time have been residing at Johanna. I went on board the Laconia because the captain bought me and I had to go with him.

Question by the consul. How do you know the captain bought you; did you see him pay your master any money?

Answer. No, I did not; I was in chains when the captain of the Laconia came to my master’s house, and after they had been there a while, talking in a language I could not understand, I was sent to have my irons taken off, when my master told me to go down to the captain’s ship, and for these reasons I thought I was sold to him.

Question. How many times and for what reasons did your master put you in irons?

Answer. I have been in irons twice, both times for not attending to my work.

Question. Were you pleased or not at the idea of going in the ship?

Answer. Yes, I was much pleased.

Question. Since you have been on board the Laconia h as your food and treatment been the same as the other sailors?

Answer. Yes, just the same.

Question. Was force of any kind or description used in getting you into the boat or ship at Johanna?

Answer. No, none whatever.

Question. Have you had liberty since you have been in this port?

Answer. Yes, twice.

Question. How much money did the captain let you have each time?

Answer. The first time 3 rupees ($1.50), the second time 2 rupees ($1.00).

The balance of this youth’s testimony regarding treatment, &c., while on board is the same as that given by Similla and M’cassa, and he, like them, is willing and glad to continue on in the Laconia, to be discharged at St. Helena or New Bedford, but he will not consent to go on any account if to be landed at Johanna.

The above and foregoing taken before me this 28th day of December, 1878.
W. H. HATHORNE,
United States Consul.

[Inclosure 6 in Mr. Hathorne’s No. 42.]

United States Consulate,
Zanzibar, December 31, 1878.

Sir: I have to acknowledge the receipt of your letter of December 28 on that date? and which I have neglected to answer until the present time, that I might forward for your information a copy of the sworn statements of the three negroes claimed to be slaves by Captain Earle, of Her Britannic Majesty’s ship London, as well as the sworn statements of Captain Gifford, his first and second officers, one of the boat-steerers, and the steward, all of the Laconia.

In the first place, you will observe, according to the statements of the first and second officers, that one of the London’s armed officers had charge of the Laconia, as Lieutenant Johnson said to him as he left the ship’s deck, “I’ll leave you here in charge, and I will go ashore and find the captain.” (This was before they had got the captain’s consent.)

You will also observe that Captain Gifford emphatically denies, under oath, that he gave his consent to the men being taken out of the the ship to the London, as Captain Earle in his letter states he did. Again, the boarding-officers did not examine the ship’s papers, as they were deposited with me, and he did not call on me for that purpose, as no doubt he should have done, neither did he make any entry in the Laconia’s log-book; consequently he did not “adhere strictly to the exact tenor of the aforesaid instructions,” as provided in the treaty. Again, the captain of the Laconia several times said he wished the matter referred to me, of which, apparently no notice was taken; and yet Captain Earle could not have been ignorant that the Laconia and her ship’s company were all under my jurisdiction while lying in this harbor.

Again, Lieutenant Johnson, or his interpreter, was at fault in stating the negroes were taken by force from the beach at Johanna, of which you will find proof to the contrary in their own statements, as well as that of Captain Gifford, his second officer, and the boat-steerer who was in the boat at the time; and, also, that the negro who states he was sold to Captain Gifford really knew no more about the matter than that he thought so, or supposed he was; he had no other reason for thinking the master of the Laconia bought him than that his irons were struck off and he was ordered on board of the vessel by his master, or the man who had control of him, whom, by the captain’s evidence, was a Dr. Wilson, a sugar-planter on the island.

Regarding the “slaves,” who are “Wamakuwa,” and not “Waswaheli,” their statements, as given over Lieutenants O’Neill’s and Cutfield’s names, “interpreters in Swaheli language,” being so entirely different from those taken before me, I can only attribute to the fact that the negroes could understand but a very little of the “Kiswaheli” language, and, such being the case, not much weight can be attached to the interpretation of their statements as rendered by Lieutenants O’Neill and Cutfield.

I attempted to examine them in Kiswaheli, but found they knew so little about it I was obliged to employ a Makuwa interpreter in order to understand them thoroughly,

You will observe that in their statements as given before me that each and every one of them distinctly states that no force of any kind was used upon them, and also if there is any one thing they particularly dread more than another it is that they may be sent back to Johanna; they all were willing to sign the vessel’s articles to be discharged at any port but Johanna.

I can hardly reconcile Captain Earle’s letter to his actions in this matter, having, as he states, received permission from the captain of the Laconia to take the men on board the London for examination, during which, according to his interpreters, he ascertained they were slaves, why he should in such a case have sent them back to their ship?

I would state that the captain of the Laconia notified me of the fact that these three men were on board the day after his arrival here, and requested me to ship them, and which I intended to do. I would also state that inasmuch as Captain Earle knew there was a consular officer of the United States located here, it appears to me, under such circumstances, the proper course for him to have pursued would have been to have directed the boarding officer first to make application to me, as the representative of the United States Government, to examine the papers and to search the ship.

I would inform you that the three negroes under discussion have been shipped of their own free will, according to law, in the Laconia for New Bedford, their wages or “lay” dating back to the night of July 10, 1878, when they ran away from Johanna to join the vessel.

In the statement given by the negroes on board the London much stress is laid on their not receiving any money. How could the captain give them money when he had none, and of what use would it have been to them at sea if he had?

In whale-ships it is customary to ship by the “lay,” and as the Laconia has been peculiarly unfortunate during the past six months in her catch, their wages do not amount to as much as the clothing and tobacco they have drawn, or at least such is the captain’s statement.

All these men, though in debt to the vessel, have had money and liberty on shore twice since arriving in this the first port since leaving Johanna on the 10th of July last.

I have the honor, &c.,

W. H. HATHORNE,
United States Consul.

John Kirk, Esq.,
Her Britannic Majesty’s agent and consul-general, Zanzibar.

[Inclosure 7 in Mr. Hathorne’s No. 42.]

From John Kirk, esq., Her Majesty’s agent and consul general, Zanzibar.

Zanzibar, January 2, 1879.

Sir: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your letter of the 31st December last, with inclosures, relative to the visit and search, by order of Captain Earle, commanding Her Majesty’s ship London, of the American bark Laconia.

It is not necessary for me to discuss the legality or illegality of Captain Earle’s action on this occasion. I must, however, be allowed to express regret that if, under the circumstances, the search was illegal, it should have ever taken place; and that, on the other hand, if legal, a vessel against which, on the admissions contained in the statements which accompany your letter under acknowledgment so strong a primafacie proof of slave-trading existed, should not have been taken to a court of adjudication.

I have the honor, &c.,

JOHN KIRK,
Her Majesty’s Agent and Consul-General, Zanzibar.

W. H. Hathorne, Esq.,
United States Consul.

No. 194. Mr. Evarts to Mr. Welsh. [Document 215]

No. 194.
Mr. Evarts to Mr. Welsh.

Department of State,
Washington, April 2, 1879. No. 264.]

Sir: Referring to your dispatches, Nos. 242 and 245, of the 8th and 18th ultimo respectively, in relation to the recent orders of Her Britannic Majesty’s privy council restricting the importation into Great Britain of live cattle shipped from the United States, and to the previous correspondence on that subject, I now transmit to you a copy of a communication which I have recently received from a number of well-known citizens of the United States, all of whom, no less than the important corporation and companies which they represent, are deeply interested in the question under consideration.

In your note of the 28th of February last to Lord Salisbury, a copy of which forms one of the inclosures to your dispatch No. 245, you correctly foreshadow the results which must follow from the continuance and enforcement of the order of Her Majesty’s privy council of the 10th of February, 1879, subjecting’ live cattle entering the ports of Great Britain to immediate slaughter.

Under the rigid conditions of that order, it will, as you observe, bring to an end the live-cattle trade between the United States and Great Britain. Such a result will of necessity, in the first place, compel the great cattle-herders of the West to seek other markets, other outlets not yet discovered, for the products of this industry, which, if found, as they doubtless would be, even though turning out to be less profitable, they may be slow to abandon for a resumption of British markets, presenting so much uncertainty and risk from the possibility of restrictive regulations, which may at any time be renewed without a moment’s notice, and when cargoes of great value may be in transit on the ocean.

Again, the main lines of railroad from the Missouri River to New York, Philadelphia, and Boston are seriously affected by any unnecessary interruption in this important traffic, and the interest of the transatlantic steamers, chiefly British bottoms, in which the cattle are transported directly to England, is one that cannot well be lost sight of in any calm consideration of the subject.

The pertinency of these observations is at once apparent from a glance at the rapid growth of the cattle-export trade of the United States and the magnitude which it has already attained. In 1871 the export of cattle on the hoof from the United States to all countries amounted in value to only $403,491, while for the year 1878 the same export to all countries reached in value $3,896,818; and of this export in 1878, the proportion shipped to Great Britain was in value $2,408,843, while in fresh beef or slaughtered cattle, the export of which from the United States maybe said to have commenced in 1874, the value of that article exported to Great Britain in that year was almost nominal, being only $12,661. The export of the same article in 1878 foots up a total to all countries of $5,009,856, the proportion to Great Britain being $4,966,152. With the almost limitless capacity for cattle-raising now available in the vast regions of otherwise unoccupied pasture lands west of the Mississippi River and north of the 37th degree of north latitude, the increase of the business in the immediate future cannot well be estimated, nor can its economic interests to the working classes of Great Britain have wholly escaped the attention of Her Majesty’s Government.

In connection with the explanations which you were instructed to lay before Lord Salisbury regarding the few cattle of the cargo of the Ontario, you may properly and opportunely bring to his lordship’s attention the fact that subsequent to the arrival of the Ontario at Liverpool, which occurred in January, and up to the date of your note of the 18th of March, no less than six ocean steamers had arrived at Liverpool from the United States with cargoes of cattle on the hoof, all of which were found, upon the most rigid examination, by the officers of Her Majesty’s privy council, to be entirely free from pleura-pneumonia or other disease, and were landed in a perfectly healthy condition, although transported from the United States to the seaboard and thence across the Atlantic during the severe winter months. This circumstance of itself goes far to show that the disease now creating so much anxiety, not unmixed with alarm, in Great Britain (pleuro-pneumonia), so far as it may have been found to exist at all in the United States is sporadic in its character, and is not found in any part of the country to have assumed the form of a cattle-plague or epidemic. Indeed, as in the case of the few head found to be infected among the cargo of the Ontario, the rare and exceptional cases of that disease developed during the past winter among the cattle of the United States may be traced immediately to the exposure and the want of care, and irregularity in supplying them food and water while in transit.

The season has been unusually severe, and remarkable for heavy snow-falls all over the Northern, Middle, and Western States, and extending as far south as the States of Mississippi and Alabama; and the consequent delay of heavy freight-trains on the great east and west lines of railroad over which cattle are shipped rendered this partial neglect in a great measure unavoidable.

In like manner, the reports which found their way into the newspapers of this capital and also of New York during the autumn of 1878, in regard to the then alleged prevalence of the disease similar to the rinderpest among the cows in the District of Columbia, and portions of the States of Maryland and Virginia, and which formed the subject of a note of the 16th of January last from Sir Edward Thornton to this department, were found, upon careful inquiry by experts, at the instance and under the direction of the Secretary of the Treasury, to be almost, if not wholly, destitute of foundation.

While occasionally there might be found at that time, as there may be found at any time, a diseased cow on a plantation in the region referred to, no such disease as the rinderpest or any kindred malady was found to exist among either milch cows or those being fed for the market.

None is known to exist now, although careful scrutiny is still being exercised. The report itself, when traced to its original source, was discovered to have emanated from a superserviceable and interested individual who sells milk in Washington and possesses some small dairy farms in Virginia, in the neighborhood of this capital, and who, from motives that are but too obvious, desired to impress milk-consumers with the belief that all milch cows in the localities referred to, outside of his own domain, were infected with rinderpest, or some other mortal disease, which rendered the use of their milk deleterious to the public health.

Upon a careful perusal of the correspondence between Lord Salisbury and yourself, transmitted in your dispatch of the 18th ultimo, as well as that which has taken place between the Department and the British legation at this capital, I am impelled to the belief that a very great degree of misapprehension on the subject prevails in. the public mind of Great Britain, and that such misapprehension is to a less extent shared by the officers charged by Her Majesty’s privy council with the delicate but arduous duties of the inspection of American cattle on their arrival in British ports.

In the hope of at least in part removing this apprehension, I submit for your own information, and such use as you may find it necessary and convenient in the course of your further discussion of this important question to make of them, a few facts. These facts, I may add, without even a seeming reflection on British intelligence, while they are perfectly familiar to the government and people of the United States, cannot reasonably be expected to be equally well known in England.

In the first place, it may be stated with the nearest possible approach to correctness that among the live cattle shipped from the United States to Great Britain few or none are raised for or prepared for market east of the Mississippi River.

The cattle raised and fed in the State of the Ohio Valley and in the Northwestern States bordering on the great lakes, find a ready home market in the cities and large towns in the immediate neighborhood of their feeding, and in the New England States, where cattle-feeding cannot be profitably pursued, and are found, it is believed, insufficient for this home demand.

The cities of Cincinnati, Saint Louis, Chicago, Milwaukee, Detroit, Cleveland, and others of only less importance, furnish more than a sufficient market for all the cattle fed in the States referred to, and it is a well known fact that the State of New York, vast and fertile as it is in area, does not find it profitable to raise beef in sufficient quantities for the supply of the people of that State. So with equal accuracy it may be alleged that the cattle destined for foreign markets, including the market of Great Britain, which is sure not only to be the principal of these but greater in its demand than all other countries together, are fed and prepared for exportation in the States and Territories of the republic north of the 36th degree of north latitude, and west of the Mississippi River, embracing the States of Kansas, Nebraska, and Colorado and the Territories of Wyoming, Montana, and Southern Dakota, the prairies and river valleys of which are noted as furnishing the richest and most healthy pasture lands of the world. It is under these exceptionally favorable conditions that the American cattle trade has so suddenly reached its present almost marvelous proportions, and yet the enterprise may be said to be but in the infancy of its development, for the vast plains of Northern Dakota (through which the Northern Pacific Railroad is projected and partly constructed), reaching west to the Red River Valley, as yet untouched, are known to offer even greater inducements to the herdsman than the lands already occupied.

It would seem needless to argue that cattle fed under such conditions, with unbounded range of pasture, pure air, and running water from the streams fed by the mountain snows, must as a rule be healthy and much less liable to contagious disease than those prepared for market in close pastures or stall-fed. Moreover, the facilities for introducing and enforcing sanitary measures are greatly increased. If a disease makes its appearance in a herd, the herd can be at once assorted and separated by such a distance as will tend to prevent its spread; the infected cattle can be at once slaughtered, as they would be, for no one knows better than the herdsman that such present sacrifice is most likely to secure him ultimately against more serious pecuniary loss.

A few words are also necessary to bring fully to your attention the precautionary measures which have already been adopted in the different sections of the Union, under the authority of the Federal and the different State governments, and in some instances under city municipal regulations.

Leavenworth, Kans., and Omaha, Nebr., are the two great entrepots at which the cattle for exportation are first received by the great railroad transportation lines, those shipped at Leavenworth coming from Kansas and Colorado, and at Omaha from Nebraska, Wyoming, Montana, and Southern Dakota; at each of these two shipping points, Leavenworth and Omaha, there has been established an inspection, provided for under the laws, respectively, of Kansas and Nebraska, and no cattle infected with pleuro-pneumonia or other disease are permitted to be forwarded thence to Chicago, while at the latter city, under the regulations of its board of health and the municipal authorities, these cattle again undergo inspection before being shipped for the port of embarkation at the seaboard. With the arrangements made for inspection at New York, Philadelphia, and other Atlantic ports by the Secretary of the Treasury, you are already familiar. With such precautionary measures, enforced with a reasonable degree of faithfulness and energy, as I have no doubt they are (for it is not the interest of the exporter to send to market even a doubtful article), it is quite improbable that any cattle can leave the ports of the United States that are not free from contagious or other disease.

The question is one of great interest to the citizens and Government of the United States, and, it is believed, not devoid of interest to Her Majesty’s subjects in Great Britain.

In the discussion of it with the Marquis of Salisbury you have exhibited commendable discretion and prudence, and your course meets with the unqualified approval of the Department. Guided by the suggestions of this instruction so far as you may deem, it essential to avail yourself of them, it is desired that you will take the earliest opportunity of representing to Lord Salisbury the earnest desire of the President that Her Majesty’s Government may see the importance and propriety of revoking the order of the 10th of February last, subjecting live cattle from this country to immediate slaughter at the port of arrival, thus removing the present serious interruption to the great element of commerce between the United States and Great Britain, and in which the people of both countries feel so deep an interest.

I am, &c.,

WM. M. EVARTS.

No. 195. Mr. Welsh to Mr. Evarts. [Document 216]

No. 195.
Mr. Welsh to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
London, April 10, 1879. No. 257.]

Sir: Referring to your dispatch No. 244, of the 11th ultimo, I have the honor to inclose herewith copies of regulations relative to the entry of private students in the royal naval college at Greenwich, which I have received from Lord Salisbury. By desire of the lords commissioners of the admiralty, I have been informed that the number of foreign private students admitted to the royal naval college at one time is limited to two of each nationality.

I have, &c.,

JOHN WELSH.

royal naval college.—private students of naval architecture and marine engineering, scholarships, and free studentships.

Admiralty, May 23, 1878.

My lords commissioners of the admiralty are pleased to issue the following regulations for private students of naval architecture and marine engineering who may he allowed to study at the royal naval college at Greenwich, also respecting scholarships and free studentships at the college:

1. A limited number of students unconnected with the naval service will be permitted to receive” instruction at the royal naval college in the course laid down for acting second-class assistant engineers and dock-yard apprentices.

2. The full course will be for three sessions of nine months each j and no private student, except under special circumstances, will be allowed to remain longer.

3. The fee (payable in advance before entry) is £30 for each session, or £75 for the full course.

4. Students who have already paid one fee of £30 will be allowed to compound for the next two sessions by a payment of £50 at the commencement of the second session.

5. Students not connected with the naval service will reside outside the precincts of the college.

6. Facilities for visiting the dock-yards during the vacations will be afforded to all private students, being British subjects.

7. Applications for admission to the college should be addressed to the secretary of the admiralty, Whitehall. Foreigners should apply through their ambassadors.

8. My lords reserve entire discretion in the selection of the candidates to be admitted.

entrance examinations.

9. Private students will be examined before entrance in the following subjects, viz: (a.) The ordinary rules of arithmetic.

(b.) Algebra up to quadratic equations, the tlnee progressions, the binomial theorem, and the use of logarithms.

(c.) The subjects of the first four books of Euclid’s Elements. Proportion and similar figures, or the definitions of the fifth book, and the subjects of the sixth book of Euclid’s Elements.

(d.) The definitions and fundamental formulae of plane trigonometry, including the solution of plane triangles.

(e.) Elements of statics, dynamics, and hydrostatics.

(f.) Elements of co-ordinate geometry (right line and circle).

(g.) Geometrical drawing.

(h.) Practical ship-building or marine engineering.

10. This examination will be held at the royal naval college on the last Tuesday of May in each year, and candidates who pass it satisfactorily will be allowed to join the college on the 1st of October next ensuing.

scholarships and free studentships.

11. A limited number of free studentships will be offered to private students who, having passed the entrance examination, pass satisfactorily a further examination to be held at the royal naval college on the first Monday in June, in the following subjects, and stand highest in order of merit: (a.) Algebra, exponential and logarithmic series, and the elements of the theory of logarithms.

(b.) Elementary plane and solid geometery, including the subjects of the first six and of the eleventh and twelfth books of Euclid’s Elements.

(c.) Plane trigonometry up to De Moivre’s theorem and trigonometrical series.

(d.) Plane and co-ordinate geometry up to the general equation of the second degree.

(e.) Elements of differential and integral calculus.

(f.) Applied mathematics, including kinematics, kinetics, and hydrostatics, with easy applications of differential and integral calculus.

(g.) Physics and chemistry.

(h.) Practical ship-building or practical marine engineering.

12. These free studentships will be tenable for three sessions, provided the ordinary college examinations at the end of each session be passed satisfactorily.

13. To the candidate who comes out first in order of merit among those who gain free studentships a scholarship of £50 a year, tenable for three years, will be awarded, subject also to the condition that the college examination be passed satisfactorily.

14. Should a free studentship become vacant before the three years, during which it was tenable have expired, it may be awarded to a student who failed to gain one on entry, and who has since distinguished himself by his progress and his position in the college examinations, and be held by him during the remainder of his course at the college, subject to the above-mentioned condition as to examination. This possibility shall also apply to any scholarship that may lapse.

By command of their lordships.

ROBERT HALL.

No. 196. Mr. Welsh to Mr. Evarts. [Document 217]

No. 196.
Mr. Welsh to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
London, April 15, 1879. (Received April 26.) No. 261.]

Sir: Referring to your dispatch No. 233, of the 18th of February last, I have now the honor to inclose herewith a copy of a report of the commissioners of inland revenue concerning taxation of railroads in this country, which has just been received from Lord Salisbury.

I have, &c.,

JOHN WELSH.

[Inclosure in dispatch No. 261.]

Report of commissioners of inland revenue as to railroad taxation in Great Britain.

Inland Revenue, Somerset House, W. C., March 27, 1879.

May it Please your Lordships: We have the honor to return the papers referred to us by your lordships on the 18th instant, wherein the minister of the United States seeks information as to the taxation of railways in this country, and we beg to submit the following replies to the questions put as we understand them:

1. The taxation of railroads in Great Britain appears to have been based on the previous taxation of stage carriages, which had been in existence from the year 1779.

The railroad tax does not extend to Ireland.

When the tax was first imposed, in 1832, the charge was one-half penny per mile for every four passengers, the proprietors being required to keep accounts and pay duty monthly. The development of railway traveling soon rendered necessary a simpler mode of assessing the duty, and in 1842 the charge was made 5 per cent. on the gross receipts from all passengers. In 1844 a concession was made on behalf of the poorer class of travelers, and all fares not exceeding a penny per mile by trains stopping at every station were allowed exemption from duty.

The duty on stage carriages was repealed in 1869, but railroads having now obtained a practical monopoly in carrying passengers, and the tax having become an important branch of revenue, it is still maintained.

2, 3. Railways are only subject to the usual stamp duties in dealing either with real or personal property.

4. A franchise tax is not known in this country.

5. Railroad stock or debentures bear no tax as such.

6. Railroad proprietors, like other trading persons or companies, are liable to income tax on their net annual profits, and such tax is paid before any dividend is paid.

We have, &c.,

C. J. HERRIES.

ALGERNON WEST.

W. S. NORTHCOATE.

No. 197. Mr. Welsh to Mr. Evarts. [Document 218]

No. 197.
Mr. Welsh to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
London, June 10, 1879. (Received June 20.) No. 294.]

Sir: I inclose a slip from the Times of June 7, containing a letter from Mr. Thomas Brassey, one of the first unprofessional authorities in this country upon matters connected with naval architecture.

The letter has some remarks upon the United States ship of war Trenton, which may be of interest to the Navy Department.

I have, &c.,

JOHN WELSH.

[Inclosure in No. 294.]

[From the Times, Saturday, June 7, 1879.]

A naval reserve of ships.

To the Editor of the Times:

Sir: Having lately been permitted to offer some suggestions in your columns on another subject of naval policy, it is with hesitation that I ask you to give me the privilege of addressing the public on the organization of a reserve of cruisers in our mercantile marine. I have called attention to this question in a recent speech, delivered on the banks of the Mersey, at the headquarters of the great shipping interest, and I desire to take advantage of a momentary lull in Parliamentary business for the purpose of creating a more general interest in the same important topic.

The whole mercantile marine of Great Britain should be regarded as part of our navy. Every ship which is convertible into a vessel of war and every British seaman should be looked upon as part and parcel of our naval reserve. We have already created a reserve of men; it is necessary to complete the work by forming a reserve of ships. It should be one of the leading principles of our ship-building policy to limit the ship-building for the navy, as far as possible, to types which do not exist in the mercantile marine.

We must build a sufficient number of cruisers to furnish the necessary reliefs for our squadrons on foreign stations; but the fleet of cruisers which we maintain in peace could be expanded into a fighting fleet from our reserve of ships in the merchant service.

An attempt has already been made to create such a reserve. The government has signified its willingness to enter all vessels fulfilling certain structural conditions in an official list. This is a step in the right direction. But no pecuniary consideration is offered to shipowners who respond to this appeal; and unless some substantial encouragement is given, it is not reasonable to suppose that any considerable number of vessels will be built with such modifications as would be required to make them easily convertible into fighting ships.

Mr. Burns has pointed out the inadequacy of the present proposal. The necessary adaptations of structure should be introduced in the original design. Alterations are always costly and often unsatisfactory. Shipowners should be invited to communicate with the admiralty when they contemplate building new vessels of a certain tonnage and speed. The designs should be examined, and if they were found to be easily adaptable to war purposes, owners would probably consent to arrange bulkheads, water-tight compartments, and bunkers, in accordance with the requirements, and, of course, at the expense of the government.

The ships, having been fitted for the emergency of war service, would be entered in the list of cruisers in reserve, and would be held at the disposal of the admiralty in consideration of a fair annual payment. Should a vessel be required for active service as a cruiser, the additional sum to be paid for the purchase or charter should be previously agreed upon. It may be objected that the modifications which the admiralty would probably require would interfere with the accommodation for passengers or the stowage of cargo. I do not think the difficulty would be serious. Bunkers could be so placed as to afford complete protection to the boilers against all but the heaviest projectiles, without in the slightest degree interfering with the facilities for stoking. The multiplication of bulkheads might cause considerable inconvenience in a merchant steamer, but frames could be constructed at certain intervals apart to receive additional bulkheads, which could be easily fitted if the ship were required for war service. In certain cases a shelf-piece might be fitted to receive a moderate thickness of armor-plating, which might be kept in store in readiness to be fixed.

I am well aware of the difficulty of securing attention to new suggestions. Naval officers are unwilling to see any portion of the money voted for the navy expended on ships which may never carry the pendant. Their aim is to make the royal navy sufficient by itself to meet all the naval requirements of the country. It is a natural, but an impracticable ambition. Public attention is with difficulty attracted to any subject not directly connected with the passing events of the day. Without the recurrence of disastrous shipwrecks, Mr. Plimsoll would have failed to catch the ear of the public, and until our commerce is cut up by some future Alabama, it is possible that no effectual effort will be made to provide those additions to the cruising strength of the navy which would certainly be demanded on the outbreak of a war, and in the absence of which our shipowners would probably be compelled to transfer their vessels wholesale to the Hag of the United States.

I cannot close this letter without a passing allusion to certain foreign ships of war which I have lately had an opportunity of visiting. As an example of an almost perfect cruiser, I may quote the Trenton, of the United States Navy, with which I have been in company at Villafranca. The Trenton is a spar-decked frigate of 3,800 tons, armed with 11 powerful guns, capable of steaming 14 knots, maintaining a high, average speed with reduced boiler-power, and carrying sufficient coal to make a passage across the Atlantic under steam. This vessel is fully rigged, and quite successful under canvas, and is described by her officers as possessing admirable sea-going qualities. When compared with our own largest unarmored frigates, such as the Inconstant, the Raleigh, or the Shah, the Trenton seems to combine every point of naval efficiency which they possess, whether for the protection or destruction of commerce, while the tonnage of the American ship is less than half the tonnage of our own vessels. As a cruiser of the first class in war and a training-ship in peace, I commend the Trenton to the attentive study of the admiralty. As the ship will shortly visit the Thames, the officers of the controller’s department will doubtless avail themselves of the opportunity of inspecting her.

Among the many ships now assembled at Toulon, the Tourville is one of the most interesting. In this and the sister ship, the Duquesne, the French contractors have sought to rival, and even to surpass, the English ships of the same type. The displacement is 5,440 tons, the nominal horse-power 1,800. A speed is claimed exceeding that attained in our own ships prior to the trial of the Iris, and certainly, in beauty and symmetry, the French designs cannot be excelled. As a man-of-war, however, the Tourville, in common with the ships of the same type which we have ourselves constructed, possesses only one conspicuous quality—namely, that of speed—and I remain unconvinced, even by the common action of the French and English constructors, that the policy is sound of building ships so costly with so little fighting power. Ocean steamers could always be obtained for the exigency of war with scarcely inferior speed and greatly superior coal-endurance. The advantages of the Tourville, the Shah, and even the Iris over the ocean steamers which navigate the Atlantic with such remarkable success in all weathers, lie mainly in the arrangement of their coal-bunkers and the multiplication of bulkheads. These are modifications which could easily be introduced in a large number of ships in the mercantile marine. A valuable addition might thus be made to the strength of the navy in reserve, while the cost would be small in comparison with the results which would be gained.

I am, &c.,

THOMAS BRASSEY.
Gibraltar, May 28.

No. 198. Mr. Welsh to Mr. Evarts. [Document 219]

No. 198.
Mr. Welsh to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
London, June 17, 1879. (Received June 30.) No. 298.]

Sir: Referring to your dispatch No. 258, of the 25th of March last, concerning the seizure, in the harbor of Zanzibar, of three negroes from on board the American whaling-bark Laconia, on the ground of their being slaves, by order of Captain Earle, senior naval officer of the British fleet on that station, I have the honor to inform you that, immediately upon its receipt, I addressed to Lord Salisbury a note containing the substance of your dispatch, and transmitting copies of its inclosures. I inclose a copy of that note. I inclose also a copy of a note from Lord Salisbury, acknowledging its receipt, and I inclose a copy of his final reply, stating the disapproval of the British Government of Captain Earle’s action, expressing regret at its occurrence, and requesting that this expression should be conveyed to the United States Government.

I have, &c.,

JOHN WELSH.

[Inclosure 1 in No. 298.]

Mr. Welsh to the Marquis of Salisbury.

Legation of the United States,
London, April 9, 1879.

My Lord: I have the honor to inclose herewith a copy of a dispatch from the United States consul at Zanzibar to the Department of State, and of the correspondence which accompanied it, between that officer and the British consul-general there, relating to the seizure, on the ground of their being slaves, of three negroes from on board the American whaling-bark Laconia, of New Bedford, Mass., by order of Captain Earle, senior naval officer of the British fleet on that station.

I am instructed by my government to bring the matter to your lordship’s attention, and to state that the search for the purpose herein named appears to have been without probable cause, and that, as it was made in violation of the provisions of the first article of the treaty of 1882, it is expected that the British officer who ordered the search will be held accountable therefor by his government.

I have, &c.,

JOHN WELSH.

[Inclosure 2 in No. 298.]

The Marquis of Salisbury to Mr. Welsh.

Foreign Office, April 24, 1879.

Sir: I beg leave to acknowledge the receipt of the letter which you did me the honor to address to me on the 9th instant, on the subject of the removal by direction of the commander of Her Majesty’s ship London, on the ground of their being slaves, of three negroes from the United States whaling-bark Laconia, in Zanzibar harbor, in the month of December last; and I beg leave to acquaint you that this matter is under the consideration of the proper department of Her Majesty’s Government, and that I shall have the honor of addressing you further on the subject in a few days.

I have, &c.,

SALISBURY.

[Inclosure 3 in No. 298.]

The Marquis of Salisbury to Mr. Welsh.

Foreign Office, June 14, 1879.

Sir: With reference to the letter which I had the honor to address to you on the 24th of April last, on the subject of the boarding of the United States bark Laconia, in Zanzibar harbor, by a boat from Her Majesty’s ship London, and the removal therefrom of three negroes on suspicion that they were slaves, I now beg leave to inform you that, having carefully considered the circumstances of the case, Her Majesty’s Government have come to the conclusion that Captain Earle was not justified in taking measures to search an American vessel or to inquire into the status of negroes who might be on board in a harbor where there were constituted and responsible local authorities, and where moreover there was a resident American consul.

The conduct of the commander of the London in this case will, therefore, be disapproved, and he will be admonished to be more careful in future.

In informing you of the decision come to by Her Majesty’s Government in this case I have at the same time to express the regret of Her Majesty’s Government at the occurrence, and to request that you will be good enough to convey this expression of regret to the United States Government at Washington.

I have, &c.,

SALISBURY.

No. 199. Mr. Welsh to Mr. Evarts. [Document 220]

No. 199.
Mr. Welsh to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
London, July 11, 1879. (Received July 23.) No. 317.]

Sir: Referring to your dispatch No. 296, of the 23d May last, directing that information be obtained for the Secretary of the Treasury, respecting the amount of gold and silver coin and bullion and paper currency in Great Britain, I have the honor to say that your inquiries were duly transmitted to the British Government. Pending their reply, I requested a report from Mr. George McHenry upon the same subject. I send herewith a copy of Mr. McHenry’s letter to myself, and of the tables inclosed by it.

I have, &c.,

JOHN WELSH.

[Inclosure in No. 317.]

Mr. McHenry to Mr. Welsh.

5 Kensington Crescent, W., June 30, 1879.

My Dear Mr. Welsh: You will perceive by the inclosed tables that “annual” figures would be no guide. For that reason, I begin with 1858, the year in which this country first required the imports of gold and silver to be registered. The statistics of England are not nearly so complete as those of the United States. Even the board of trade returns are not “the thing.” They first give the imports of gold, valued at £3 17s. 9d. per ounce in bullion, or if in sovereigns £3 17s. 10½d per ounce. Then the next table contains the imports of silver, without giving quantities, only market values at the time of arrival. Then comes the “total of gold and silver.” No one cares about such a “total.” Then comes the exports of gold and silver. I have, therefore, altered the modus operandi, by putting the gold imports and exports in one table, showing the balances each year, and the silver imports and exports in another table, with the balances. It is unfortunate that our $5 piece is not of the exact weight and fineness of the sovereign. If it were, we would save the three half pence per ounce on all the gold we export and import. We only get, as you will see, £3 17s. 9d. per ounce, and have to pay £3 17s. 10½d. per ounce. If the two coins were of the exact value of each other, they would circulate side by side, just as the Australian sovereigns rank with those of England.

Yours truly,

GEO. McHENRY.

His Excellency John Welsh.

[Inclosure in Mr. McHenry’s note of June 30, 1879.]

the united kingdom of great britain and ireland.

Answers to Mr. Welsh’s questions.

There is no gold or silver coin or bullion in the treasury, excepting a small amount for petty cash. All the government receipts and payments are made through the Bank of England, including salaries, which are paid quarterly.

The weekly government balances in the Bank of England in 1878 were: January 3 £5,903,097 July 4 £7,539,039

10 4,384,488 11 4,757,974

17 3,663,542 18 4,030,627

24 3,705,653 25 3,567,759

31 3,679,555 August 1 3,567,542

February 1 4,758,947 8 3,622,089

14 5,697,255 15 3,534,304

28 6,524,776 22 3,055,549

28 6,884,911 29 3,441,090

March 7 10,140,493 September 5 3,436,435

14 11,312,460 12 4,425,152

21 11,824,027 19 4,583,838

28 12,287,814 26 4,674,065

April 4 9,852,358 October 3 4,502,795

11 9,110,105 10 4,141,753

18 7,241,867 17 3,156,132

25 7,895,587 24 2,929,211

May 2 7,357,757 31 2,715,768

9 7,085,313 November 7 3,389,729

16 6,726,485 14 2,662,003

23 6,250,787 21 2,946,356

30 6,743,142 28 3,111,753

June 6 6,951,475 December 5 3,595,752

13 7,184,754 12 4,484,391

20 7,470,884 19 5,123,410

27 7,940,265 26 5,577,109

[The public deposits m the Bank of England during 1878, owing to the war troubles, were somewhat smaller than usual. I should say that they averaged 25 to 30 per cent. less than usual. But I selected 1878 as the latest whole year.—G. McH.]

In 1858 the amount of gold in circulation was estimated at £90,000,000

In 1872 the amount of gold in circulation was estimated at 107,637,000

In 1875 the amount of gold in circulation was estimated at 118,112,000

In 1876 the amount of gold m circulation was estimated at 112,368,000

(See Report of Silver Committee, Appendix, p. 1.)

The amount of gold now in circulation is probably £133,000,000.

In 1860 the amount of silver in circulation was estimated at £14,799,000. In 1875 (December 31) the amount of silver in circulation was estimated at £19,536,000. (See Report of Silver Committee, Appendix, p. 1.)

The amount of silver now in circulation is probably £20,000,000.

The amount of paper money in circulation is about £46,000,000. (See Statistical Abstract, pp. 119–121.)

Previous to 1858 there was no registry kept at the custom-house of the imports of gold and silver, only of the exports. The subjoined tables will, therefore, date from that year.

Amount of gold and silver, also copper, annually coined.

Years. Gold. Silver. Copper.

1858 £1,231,023 £445,986 £13,440

1859 2,649,509 647,064 8,512

1860 3,121,709 218,403 37,990

1861 8,191,170 209,484 273,578

1862 7,836,413 148,518 352,800

1863 6,997,212 161,172 158,648

1864 9,535,597 535,194 58,069

1865 2,367,614 501,732 57,493

1866 5,076,676 493,416 50,624

1867 496,397 193,842 33,301

1868 1,653,384 301,356 16,328

1869 7,372,204 76,428 20,832

1870 2,313,384 336,798 32,704

1871 9,919,656 701,514 7,616

1872 15,261,442 1,423,836 47,413

1873 3,384,560 1,081,674 46,218

1874 1,461,565 890,604 65,632

1875 243,264 594,000 69,813

1876 4,696,648 222,354 61,450

1877 981,468 407,882 51,146

1878 2,132,245 614,426

The gold sent to the mint is coined, without charge, into sovereigns and half-sovereigns, at the rate of £3 17s. 10½d. per ounce. Practically, however, the bank of England is the mint’s only customer. The bank by its charter is obliged to purchase the gold at £3 17s. 9d. per ounce; and importers prefer to so dispose of it rather than await the time occupied in the process of coinage. When there happens to be a simultaneous export demand for gold bullion with the imports, gold in the open market commands a fraction over £3 17s. 9d. per ounce. The gold coinage of the kingdom is supplemented by Australian sovereigns. Silver is coined solely on behalf of the government at large annual profits, notwithstanding it redeems the worn silver coins at par. Part of the profit on silver is lost by the expense and waste connected with the gold coinage.

gold.

The imports of gold were not registered at the custom-house before 1858. The subjoined table shows the imports and exports since then.

Years. Imports. Exports. Excess imports. Excess exports.

1858 £22,793,126 £12,567,040 £10,226,086

1859 22,297,698 18,081,139 4,216,559

1860 12,584,684 15,641,578 £3,056,894

1861 12,163,937 12,138,372 25,565

1862 19,903,704 16,011,963 3,891,741

1863 19,142,665 15,303,279 3,839,386

1864 16,900,951 13,279,739 3,621,212

1865 14,485,570 8,493,332 5,992,238

1866 23,509,641 12,742,059 10,767,582

1867 15,800,159 7,889,430 7,911,129

1868 17,136,177 12,708,508 4,427,869

1869 13,770,812 8,473,699 5,297,113

1870 18,306,728 10,013,521 8,793,207

1871 21,618,924 20,698,275 920,649

1872 18,469,442 19,148,916 1,279,474

1873 20,611,165 19,071,220 1,539,945

1874 18,081,019 10,641,636 7,439,383

1875 23,140,834 18,648,296 4,492,538

1876 23,475,975 16,515,748 6,960,227

1877 15,441,985 20,361,386 4,919,401

1878 20,872,216 14,968,507 5,903,709

391,007,412 303,997,043 96,266,138 9,255,769

303,997,043 9,255,769

Excess imports 87,010,369 87,010,369

silver.

The imports of silver were not registered at the custom-house before 1858. The subjoined table shows the imports and exports since then.

Years. Imports. Exports. Excess imports. Excess exports.

1858 £6,700,064 £7,061,836 £361,772

1859 14,772,458 17,607,664 2,835,206

1860 10,393,512 9,893,190 £500,322

1861 6,583,108 9,573,276 2,990,168

1862 11,752,772 13,314,228 1,561,456

1863 10,888,129 11,240,671 352,542

1864 10,827,325 9,852,561 974,764

1865 6,976,641 6,599,192 377,449

1866 10,777,498 8,896,552 1,880,946

1867 8,020,888 6,435,487 1,585,401

1868 7,716,418 7,511,706 204,712

1869 6,730,179 7,903,829 1,173,650

1870 10,648,940 8,906,169 1,742,771

1871 16,521,703 13,062,396 3,459,507

1872 11,138,570 10,586,945 551,625

1873 12,988,066 9,828,065 3,160,001

1874 12,298,169 12,211,957 86,212

1875 10,123,955 8,979,746 1,144,209

1876 13,578,269 12,948,334 629,935

1877 21,710,814 19,436,173 2,274,081

1878 11,549,274 11,718,039 168,765

232,696,972 223,568,576 18,571,935 9,443,539

223,568,576 9,443,539

Excess imports 9,128,396 9,128,396

It is impossible to tell what quantity of gold and silver is consumed annually in the arts and manufactures. There are no reliable data in respect thereto.

The excess of gold imports over exports, 1858 to 1878, may thus be accounted for: Increase in circulation, say £43,000,000

Increase in stock of bullion, say 5,000,000

Gold plate manufactured, say 2,000,000

Arts and manufactures, say 20,000,000

Emigrants and other passengers, say 17,000,000

87,000,000

The excess of silver imports over exports, 1858 to 1878, may thus be accounter for: Increase in circulation £5,000,000

Arts and manufactures 4,000,000

9,000,000

No. 200. Mr. Evarts to Mr. Welsh. [Document 221]

No. 200.
Mr. Evarts to Mr. Welsh.

Department of State,
Washington, July 11, 1879. No. 328.]

Sir: I inclose herewith, a copy of a dispatch recently received from A. C. Litchfield, esq., consul-general of the United States at Calcutta, in relation to the case of one John Anderson, an ordinary seaman on board the American bark C. O. Whitmore, who, it appears, stabbed and killed the first officer of the ship on the 31st of January last, while that vessel was on her way from New York to Calcutta, sixteen days from her port of departure, and on the high seas in latitude 25° 35’ H. and longitude 35° 50’W.

You will preceive that the consul-general invoked the aid of the local police authorities in securing the safe custody of the accused, who was a prisoner of the United States, until he could complete the necessary arrangements for sending him to this country for trial, against whose municipal laws only he was accused of having offended, and that while thus in the temporary custody of the local police, the colonial authorities took judicial cognizance of the matter, claiming, under the advice of the advocate-general of the colony, that, under a colonial statute which confers upon the courts of the colony jurisdiction of crimes committed by a British subject on the high seas, even though such crimes be committed on the ship of a foreign nation, and that inasmuch as the accused, although appearing on the ship’s articles under the name of John Anderson, subject of Sweden, had declared that his real name was Alfred Hussey, and that he was a native of Liverpool and therefore a British subject, the case came within the jurisdiction of those courts.

The matter is now believed to have reached that point in the judicial proceedings where effective measures for asserting the jurisdictional rights of the United States would be unavailable in this particular case. And whilst I entertain no doubt that the accused will receive as fair a trial in the high court of Calcutta, where it is understood he is to be tried, as he would in the circuit court of the United States, in which tribunal he would be arraigned, were he sent here for trial, I deem it proper, at the same time, to instruct you to bring the question to the attention of Her Majesty’s Government, in order to have it distinctly understood that this case cannot be admitted by this government as a precedent for any similar cases that may arise in the future. No principle of public law is better understood nor more universally recognized than that merchant vessels on the high seas are under the jurisdiction of the nation to which they belong, and that as to common crimes committed on such vessels while on the high seas, the competent tribunals of the vessel’s nation have exclusive jurisdiction of “the questions of trial and punishment of any person thus accused of the commission of a crime against its municipal laws; the nationality of the accused can have no more to do with the question of jurisdiction than it would had he committed the same crime within the geographical territorial limits of the nation against whose municipal laws he offends. The merchant ship, while on the high seas, is, as the ship of war is everywhere, a part of the territory of the nation to which she belongs.

I pass over the apparent breach of comity in the proceeding of the colonial officials as being rather the result of inadvertence and possible misconception on the part of the government law officer of the colony, than any design to question the sovereignty of the United States in this or cases of a similar nature.

You will take an early occasion to present the views expressed in this instruction to Her Majesty’s Government, and inform the Department of the result of your proceedings.

I am, &c.,

WILLIAM M. EVARTS.

[Inclosure in Instruction No. 328.]

Mr. Litchfield to Mr. Seward.

Consulate-General, U. S. A.,
Calcutta, May 23, 1879. (Received June 30.) No. 262.]

Sir: I have the honor to inform you that Captain Shillaber, master of the American hark C. O. Whitmore, reported that during his passage fom New York to Calcutta, on the 31st day of January, 1879, when sixteen days out from New York, in latitude 25° 36’ N., and longitude 35° 50’ W., an ordinary seaman, whose name appears on the ship’s articles as John Anderson, stabbed the chief officer, Mr. William C. Moffett, in his left side, causing his death a few hours afterwards.

Intelligence regarding this occurrence first reached me by telegraph from Diamond Harbor, a station about —— miles below Calcutta on the Hoogly River. The telegram read as follows: “Murder has been committed on board the C. O. Whitmore. Please make necessary arrangements.”

This reached me on the evening of the 12th instant, after office hours, and, as it gave me the impression that the murder might have been committed that day, and that prompt measures might be necessary to secure the offender and prevent further trouble, I immediately sent a note to the superintendent of police with a copy of the telegram and requested him to take necessary measures to secure the accused upon the arrival of the vessel. The next day I received from the port officer a copy of an extract from the report of the captain of the C. O. Whitmore giving the particulars above referred to, copy of which is herewith inclosed.

Upon receipt of this information I wrote at once to the commissioner of police requesting him to have the accused taken ashore and imprisoned till such time as I should find it expedient to send him to the United States for trial. (Copy of this letter, No. 252, under date of May 13, inclosed.)

When on board the ship on the following morning the captain received a note from a sergeant of the river police requesting him to appear at the police court with the American consul with him. I accompanied Captain Shillaber to police headquarters, and had an interview with the deputy commissioner of police, who informed me that “the case” had been made over to the government solicitor, and the accused would be taken before the magistrate at once, and if I had any objections to his trial here I must appear before the magistrate and make them. I then called upon the government solicitor and expressed doubts regarding the jurisdiction of the local courts, and upon his suggestion the magistrate postponed the examination until the opinion of the law officer of the government could be obtained.

On the 20th instant I received a communication from the deputy commissioner of police to the effect that the question of jurisdiction had been referred, through the government solicitor, to the advocate-general, who had decided that the accused should be tried before the high court of Calcutta in its admiralty jurisdiction. (Copy of this letter, No. 1767, inclosed.)

Accordingly the examination before the magistrate was proceeded with.

On the 21st instant I sent a letter to the deputy commissioner of police requesting a copy of the advocate-general’s opinion. Shortly after, upon the same day, I received a letter from the deputy commissioner, inclosing a copy of said opinion. (Copies inclosed.)

From the nature of the application upon which the honorable advocate-general based his opinion, I felt convinced that he had misapprehended the nature of the case, and by reason thereof had given an opinion, which, if followed, would result in a violation of the rights of the United States. I therefore appeared before the magistrate yesterday and told him I could not concur in the opinion expressed by the advocate-general, and wished him to note the fact lest my presence during all the proceedings, without protest, might be construed as indicating my approval.

Upon my return to the office I wrote to the honorable secretary to the government of India, foreign department upon the subject, copy of which is inclosed.

The reasons therein stated for not concurring in the opinion of the advocate-general, viz: 1. That the crime was committed on board an American vessel on the high seas clearly within the jurisdiction of the United States.

2. That the accused, signed the shipping articles as a Swede, and I must regard him as such; or in case he denied that he was a Swede and claimed any other nationality, I must, in the absence of proof, regard him as an American.

3. That the accused, having been brought to Calcutta in irons on an American ship, was virtually a prisoner in my custody, and had not been surrendered to the local authorities, nor had I asked to have him delivered to me.

4. That the accused was not a “fugitive from justice,” and that I had reason to believe from the nature of the application for the opinion of the advocate-general, that he had been led to misapprehend the nature of the case, seemed sufficient for referring the matter to the Government of India and urging its careful consideration.

The accused says he signed the name John Anderson to the shipping articles and told the shipping commissioner he was a Swede at the suggestion of his boarding-house keeper in New York, and asserts that his real name is Alfred Hussey; that his home is in Liverpool, and gives the name and number of the street where he says both his parents are now living, but he furnishes no proof of these assertions.

If the accused is able to prove that he is a British subject I do not understand that the courts here would have jurisdiction, as he was not arrested on shore or surrendered for trial; and even then I am told by the government solicitor there is no Indian act by which offenses committed by a British subject within the limits of a foreign state are made punishable here.

As regards this particular case I feel confident that trial here would be as impartial and as satisfactory in its results as one held in the United States, and would be attended with far less trouble, and there are no special reasons that I am aware of why a trial in the United States should be desired if the courts here have jurisdiction; but as establishing a precedent it appears to me to be of the greatest importance to have it carefully considered and wisely decided.

I shall be thankful for any suggestion regarding the course I ought to pursue when similar cases arise in the future.

I am, &c.,

A. C. LITCHFIELD.

[Inclosure 1 in No. 262.]

Extract from the arrival report of the American Bark C. O. Whitmore, dated May 11, 1879.

In latitude 25° 35’ N., 35° 50’ W. long., an ordinary seaman, named John Anderson, stabbed the chief officer, Mr. Moffett, in the left side, thereby causing his death Friday, January 31, 1879, at 5.45 p.m. Man placed in irons still on board.

J. R. SH1LLABER,
Commander American bark C. O. Whitmore.

No. 2667. Memo.—Forwarded with the compliments of the undersigned to the consul-general United States America for information. The commissioner of police has been communicated with on the subject.

FRED. WARDEN,
Officiating Port Officer.
Fort William Port Office,
Calcutta, the 13th May, 1879.

[Inclosure 2 in No. 262.]

Mr. Litchfield to the commissioner of police, Calcutta.

Consulate-General, U. S. A.,
Calcutta, May 13, 1879. No. 252.]

Sir: Late yesterday afternoon, I received the following telegram from the captain of the American bark C. O. Whitmore, sent from the Diamond Harbor, at 3.45 o’clock p.m.: “Murder has been committed on board. Please make the necessary arrangements.”

Because of the lateness of the hour at which I received the dispatch, the nature of which indicated that prompt measures might be necessary, I took the liberty to communicate with the superintendent of police, requesting him to arrest and imprison the accused upon arrival of the ship.

I am now in receipt of the annexed from the officiating port officer, containing an extract from the report of Captain Shillaber, master of the Whitmore, from which it appears the murder was committed in the high seas by an ordinary seaman, named John Anderson. I therefore have the honor respectfully to request that you will please cause the said named seaman to be arrested, brought on shore, and imprisoned until I can find it expedient to send him to the United States for trial. I shall proceed on board the vessel early to-morrow morning, and take the depositions of the officers and crew.

I am, &c.,

A. C. LITCHFIELD.

[Inclosure 3 in No. 262.]

J. Lambert, esq., to Mr. Litchfield.

Calcutta, May 20, 1879. No. 1767.]

Sir: With reference to your letter No. 252, of the 13th instant, regarding a murde committed on the high seas on board the American bark C. O. Whitmore, I have the honor to imform you that I have, through the solicitor to the government, obtained the opinion of the advocate-general, who states that the accused, John Anderson, should be tried by the high court of Calcutta in its admiralty jurisdiction. The case will therefore be placed before the presidency magistrate of the southern division this day at 2 p.m.

I have, &c.

J. LAMBERT,
Deputy Commissioner of Police.

[Inclosure 4 in No. 262.]

Mr. Litchfield to deputy commissioner of police, Calcutta.

Consulate-General, U. S. A.,
Calcutta, May 21, 1879. No. 254.]

Sir: Referring to your letter No. 1767, under date of the 20th instant, relative to the alleged murder committed on the high seas on board the American bark C. O. Whitmore, I have the honor respectfully to request that I may be furnished with a copy of the opinion of the advocate-general regarding the jurisdiction of the high court of Calcutta in the case.

I am, &c.,

A. C. LITCHFIELD.

[Inclosure 5 in No. 262.]

J. Lambert, esq., to Mr. Litchfield.

Calcutta, May 21, 1879. No. 1797.]

Sir: With reference to your letter No. 252, of the 13th, and in continuation of my letter No. 1767, of the 20th instant, I have the honor to forward a copy of the opinion of the advocate-general on the case of John Anderson, charged with murder on board the American bark C. O. Whitmore, on the high seas.

I have, &c.,

J. LAMBERT.

[Inclosure 6 in No. 262.]

Opinion of the advocate-general.

My opinion is asked for on the following case: Empress vs. John Anderson.

A British subject serving on board an American merchant ship is accused of committing murder on board that ship, when on the high seas. The ship comes to Calcutta, and the prisoner is handed over for safe custody to the police. The American consul claims to have the man delivered to him for trial in America. Does the case come within the provisions of the extradition law, or should the man be tried here?

The Indian act of 1872 as to extradition, gives me no help in this case. The act, in my opinion, applicable to the case, is the English extradition statute of 1870. Although there has been no order of Her Majesty’s council extending that act to the American treaty of extradition (and which, although stated by the American President as one that the United States are not inclined to continue to recognize, has never been formally revoked, and has in fact been since that speech acted upon by England), still, section 27 of that act does not seem to require an order in council in the case of America.

The sixteenth section of that act provides for crimes committed at sea, and the interpretation clause as to the words “fugitive criminal of a foreign state,” would at first sight seem in the case of crimes committed on board an American ship, that being a place in the “jurisdiction “of America, to include crimes committed by British subjects as well as others.

The decision in the Queen vs. Wilson (32 B. Div. 42), would also appear to make it necessary, unless the treaty expressly excludes the British subject to give up to the foreign nation a British subject who has committed a crime in the foreign jurisdiction.

But my opinion is that the case in question would not apply where the English or Indian courts also have jurisdiction, but only to cases where the foreign court has exclusively jurisdiction.

If a British subject commits a murder on American soil he cannot be tried in England, and I read the acts as intended to prevent a criminal from escaping from justice. But if he commit a crime, such as murder, on the high seas, even in a foreign vessel, he offends against the English law as well as the law of the ship on which he sails, and he can be tried by the high court here in its admiralty jurisdiction.

The point might be considered to have been settled by the opinion of the law-officers in England of the 25th of October, 1887 (1868 For Dep. Political A. proceeding’ January, No. 100), but as that opinion was given before the new statute and the decision of the Queen vs. Wilson, I have stated my reasons at length.

The man should, if the evidence be sufficient, be sent for trial before the high court, and he ought not to be delivered to the American consul.

J. D. BELL.
May 17, 1879.

[Inclosure 7 in No. 262.]

Mr. Litchfield to the secretary to the Government of India, foreign department.

Consulate-General, U. S. A.,
Calcutta, May 22, 1879. No. 255.]

Sir: I have the honor of bringing to your notice the annexed copies of letters and their inclosures which have passed between the deputy commissioner of police and myself relative to a murder alleged to have been committed on board the American bark C. O. Whitmore, when on the high seas, as follows: 1. Copy of my letter, No. 252, under date of 13th of May, to the commissioner of police.

2. Copy of a letter from the deputy commissioner of police. No. 1767, under date of 20th May.

3. Copy of my letter, No. 254, under date of May 21, to the deputy commissioner of police.

4. Copy of a letter from the deputy commissioner of police, No. 1797, under date of May 21, with accompanying opinion of the honorable advocate-general, regarding the case as represented to him.

The examination of the accused before the magistrate was concluded to-day, and he was committed for trial before the high court on the 26th instant, I believe.

Regarding the proceedings in this case thus far, I regret that I cannot approve of the course pursued by the deputy commissioner of police, or concur in the opinion submitted by the honorable advocate-general, for the following reasons: 1. The crime was committed on an American vessel on the high seas, clearly within the jurisdiction of the United States.

2. The person accused of the crime appears on the shipping articles of the vessel as a Swede, and I feel obliged so to regard him; or in case he denies that he is a Swede, and claims any other nationality, in the absence of proof to establish his claim I must regard him as an American.

3. The accused was virtually a prisoner in my custody when he arrived at Calcutta on an American ship and in irons; and my request to the commissioner of police to take him ashore to a place of greater security, till I could find it expedient to send him to the United States for trial, was not a surrender of the prisoner to the local authorities, but a request for a favor, which, I presumed, it was usual to grant under such circumstances.

4. The application for the opinion of the advocate-general appears to me to have assumed without proof that the accused was a British subject, and to have represented me as having claimed his surrender for trial in America, whereas no such claim had been made by me.

Furthermore, by raising a question regarding the extradition laws, it may have conveyed the idea that the accused was a “fugitive from justice,” who had been arrested here, whose extradition I had asked for.

I fear that by reason of a misapprehension of the nature of the case, the honorable advocate-general gave an opinion quite different to what it would have been had he fully understood the facts concerning it.

Action in accordance with the opinion given, it appears to me would be in violation of the rights of the United States, and establish a precedent at variance with the accepted interpretation of international law both in England and the United States.

Were there proof to establish the claim of the accused to be a British subject, and had he escaped from the American vessel, and subsequently been arrested here, or had he come regularly into the custody of the local authorities otherwise than by my request, I should not have felt called upon to raise the question of jurisdiction.

Inasmuch, however, as I am impressed with grave doubts regarding the regularity of the proceedings referred to, and feel assured that the Government of India is equally desirous with my own that no mistake should be made from lack of a clear understanding of the question at issue, I respectfully submit the matter for your consideration, and have the honor to request as early attention thereto as may be convenient on account of the limited time before the date fixed for the trial.

I have, &c.,

A. C. LITCHFIELD.

No. 201. Mr. Welsh to Mr. Evarts. [Document 222]

No. 201.
Mr. Welsh to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
London, July 18, 1879. (Received July 30.)

Sir: I send you copies of two communications on bi-metallism by George McHenry.

I think you will find these papers interesting.

I have, &c.,

JOHN WELSH.

Correspondence.

[From the Bullionist of July 12, 1879.]

bi-metallism.

To the Editor:

Sir: Most persons who argue in favor of a bi-metallic currency fail to recognize the fact that, except during the period of transition from silver to gold in the last century, there has never in reality been any standard of value but one. The transformation, so long as it was taking place, disturbed values, and rendered them uncertain and fluctuating. A double standard is, and has ever been, a legal fiction, a sheer delusion. Scales took the place of barter, and coinage was invented to take the place of scales. Although gold as well as silver coins were manufactured from the outset, the gold coins for ages were merely tokens of the standard of value—silver. In 1490, the first gold token was coined in England; it contained 240 grains of fine gold, and represented 20 silver shillings, then coined at the rate of 45 to the pound weight. As the silver shillings were reduced in weight, to suit the financial exigencies of the state, so were the gold tokens. In 1545, the gold unit contained only 192 grains, 48 shillings being then coined out of a pound weight of silver. In 1605, the gold unit contained 155 grains, with silver at the rate of 62 shillings to the pound weight. In 1612, gold rose 2 shillings an ounce above the mint price, and ceased to circulate. In 1620, without any alteration in the silver coinage, a new gold coin was emitted weighing 140 grains. In 1661, the gold tokens were declared to be worth 23 shillings and sixpence. In 1663, the gold imported from Guinea was coined into “pounds” of 119 grains each and nicknamed “Guineas.” Soon afterwards, as the silver coins were getting worn, the “Guineas” rose to 22 shillings and sixpence, and, as the silver coins became clipt, the “Guinea” touched 30. This was in 1695. The light-weight silver coins were called in, and with the complete restoration of the full-weight silver coins in 1698, the “Guineas” fell to 22 shillings. In 1717, they further fell to 21 shillings, were declared of that value, and gold for the first time was made a legal tender equally with silver. This was the origin of the double standard, which, as will be shown, did not work in practice. The “Guineas” used in settlement of large transactions varied in price, generally at a premium, partly owing to the impossibility of fixing a relative value of silver and gold, and partly owing to the silver coins again becoming worn and dipt, and being only fit for small transactions. Consequently, in 1774, silver was declared to no longer be a legal tender, in sums above £25, except by weight—62 shillings to the pound. This was the first step toward the overthrow of silver as a standard of value. As a further and conclusive step in the gold direction, England, in 1816, ordered the sovereign to be coined, with one shilling less gold in it than the “Guinea,” and the legal tender in silver was restricted to 40 shillings—66 to the pound weight. This was the earliest creation of silver token currency.

England was the first country to adopt the double standard, the first to abandon it, and the first to make gold the sole standard of value. The transformation occupied precisely a century, during which time England had become the center of finance. At the end of the period gold found itself, as it has remained ever since, the international money of account, having in that respect completely exchanged places with silver. It is a mistake to suppose that all the loanable capital in England belongs to Englishmen. As Philippi, Venice, Genoa, and Amsterdam, each in turn, were, London is now, and has been for the best part of a century, the banker of the world. The “balances” remaining here no more belong to the people here than the deposits in the London and Westminster Bank belong to that bank. The entire foreign commerce of North and South America, of the East and West Indies, of China and Japan, and of a large portion of Continental Europe, is conducted through bills on London. Outward cargoes no longer pay for inward ones, as in former times, the exporters now being a different class of persons from the importers. Hence the cargoes both ways are paid for at London, and the “balances” here are consequently greater than under the old supercargo system. Bills are remitted to meet bills, and they are drawn against gold as much as upon any article that is solely merchandise. But gold, being the standard of value, is never exported when the exports of other articles are equal in value to the imports. This is even so with the United States—a gold-producing country. The “balance of trade” is nothing more nor less than a balance of an imaginary international account current, and that balance must be paid in gold. If there were anything else to pay it with, the gold would not come forward.

Although the East Indies, like all other countries, had from the earliest times gold as well as silver coins, silver was the only standard of value there until 1768, when the gold “mohur,” an ancient token coin, was made legal tender with the silver rupee, at the rate of 1 to 16. India was thus the second country that made gold a standard of value. The United States, in 1792, was the third, by adopting the double standard—1 to 15. France, in 1803, was the fourth, when she ordered gold to be coined and made legal tender in the proportion of 1 to 15–½ of silver. Belgium, at the same time, was the fifth, and acted on the same basis. Gold, however, ceased to be a legal tender there in 1850, but was restored to that function in 1861. Nearly all the other countries of Europe have since adopted gold as a standard of value, some of them as the sole standard. The relative values of gold and silver in India were altered in 1793 to 1 to 14.861, and again in 1818, to 1 to 15, the valuation there becoming the same as that of the United States; but in 1834 the United States adopted the original appraisement of India—1 to 16. In 1835 India recurred to silver as the sole standard of value, when her gold coins became, as previous to 1766, token currency. The double standard failed as thoroughly in India and the United States as in England. When gold was valued in India at 1 to 16 for silver, gold was practically the sole standard of value there. When it was valued at 1 to 15, silver became practically the sole currency. In like manner, when gold was valued in the United States at 1 to 15, silver was practically their sole standard, and when gold was altered to 1 to 16, it took the place of silver. In other words, between 1792 and 1834, gold would not remain in circulation in the United States. After the alteration, in the latter year, of the ratio from 1 to 15 to 1 to 16, the silver coins gradually disappeared, and were replaced by light Mexican coins. To remedy this, in 1853 the half-dollars and lesser silver coins were reduced in weight 6.91 per cent., and their legal tender was restricted to five dollars. In 1873, the silver dollar of 412½ grains—1 to 16—which had become obselete as a circulating coin, was demonetized. In 1877 it was remonetized, but practically it is only a token—as much so as the half-dollars and lesser silver coins.

From 1803, when France “fixed” the relative value of gold to silver at 1 to 15½, until 1873, silver varied in value only about 2½d. per ounce. Notwithstanding this slight variation, silver sometimes, and gold at other times, commanded a premium in France. But for her yearly imports and exports of both metals there would have been no fixity of value at any moment between them. The depreciation since 1873 has been owing in great degree to the appreciation of gold, caused partly by lessened production and partly by the German bank reserves and military chest supplies being in gold instead of silver as formerly. There is as much silver in actual circulation as before; it has not been demonetized, in fact, only as a legal tender, except for limited amounts.

Gold has been the real standard of value in all countries since Great Britain, the clearing-house of the world, made it so in 1816, as international transactions since then have been on a gold basis. This may seem strange to the uninitiated, but it is nevertheless true, as every one familiar with first class commerce well knows. Export values always determine internal values, and, as export values are based upon gold prices—international money, so to speak—so must be internal values, whether expressed in greenbacks, paper lire, or rupees. The purchasing power becomes precisely the same when depreciated currencies are reduced to the only true standard of value—gold. There is never any margin, taking freights and charges into account, between prices at the exporting and the importing points. The importing points, in fact, dictate prices to the exporting points, more so now than ever, in this telegraphic age, the cables acting as levelers of values. Commercial transactions are based upon prospective rises in values; hopes that are frequently disappointed. Hence the introduction of the new term in commerce, “futures,” there being nothing to go upon in the present. The idea in the minds of theorists that first class commerce is carried on, like retail trade, with an assured profit, is erroneous. Even bankers, as a rule, are not well “up” in this respect.

It is asserted that gold suits countries wherein the transactions are large, and silver suits those wherein they are small. It so happens that all countries have both large and small transactions, and the assertion, therefore, is founded on a fallacy. Silver is still used and will continue to be used to as great an extent as ever for the hand-to-hand transactions of life. Gold is never hoarded where it is the acknowledged standard of value. If the silver and paper money countries would adopt gold openly as their standard, their gold hoardings would reappear, and, possibly, would be equivalent to several years’ production of that metal. This in itself would raise the value of all commodities, silver included. With the reappearance of the gold hoardings of India, and a more extended paper currency than now exists, issued on a gold basis, and convertible into gold at the financial centers—an operation facilitated by the telegraphic system—the silver rupees, restricted to proper limits as to legal tender, would soon become token currency for their full face value. To fix the present relative value of gold and silver for India would be futile and mischievous, as it would have to be refixed over and over again. Such “fixing” would cause the natives, not well-informed in the science of finance, to believe that they were not getting their money’s worth. In any circumstances the rupee ought to be retained as the unit token of value, for the people have been long accustomed to it as such. It is not necessary that the money unit should be represented by a coin of full legal tender. Great Britain had no such coin until the sovereign appeared in 1817. The francs of France, Belgium, and Switzerland, the lira of Italy, the drachma of Greece, the peseta of Spain, are merely tokens, and only legal tender to the extent of 50. Their single as well as their double units are 0.835 fine, while the full tender silver pieces are 0.900. The mark of Germany is a silver token, only legal tender to the extent of 20. The crowns of Denmark, Sweden, and Norway are silver tokens, and legal tender in sums of 20 when in 1 and 2 crown pieces, and in sums of 5 when in smaller coins.

In the Bankers’ Magazine (New York, November, 1876), Mr. Goschen wrote: “Silver and gold have been in partnership for the purpose of doing the work of circulation for thousands of years, and I think that it is not in the interest of the world that the whole weight of the burden should be borne by gold alone.” These remarks of Mr. Goschen were written only a short time after the report of the committee on the depreciation of silver, of which he was chairman, was submitted to the House of Commons. He does not seem to have been much benefited by the testimony taken by that committee. It is true that “silver and gold” have been “in partnership” as currency for many centuries. It is not, however, proposed to dissolve that partnership, only to alter the style of the firm to “gold and silver.” Under the new firm, as already stated, there will be as much silver in circulation as under the old, for notes, checks, bills, and bookkeeping only economize the use of gold, not silver. To repeat, gold has become the standard of value, and silver, therefore, must take a back seat, and good-naturedly permit gold to go to the front, the place to which it is now fairly entitled.

Your obedient servant,

GEORGE McHENRY.
5, Kensington-crescent, W., July, 1879.

Correspondence.

[From the Bullionist, July 19, 1879.]

bi-metallism.

To the Editor:

Sir: As supplementary to my letter of last week, may I ask space to present a few further facts and remarks on the silver and gold question, particularly with reference to India?

The subjoined figures, in sterling money, are based upon an assumed valuation of the silver rupee, ten to the sovereign. They commence with the time (1835) when India discarded gold as a legal tender, and retained silver as the sole standard of value. To this retrograde movement may be traced the present condition of affairs, of which nothing would have been heard if gold had then been proclaimed the sole standard and silver had been reduced to token currency, or even if the policy just before adopted by the United States had been imitated. Both countries, it will be seen, were in the same monetary difficulty; one acted wisely, the other unwisely. When India, in 1766, made gold a standard of value, it was at the rate of 1 to 16 for silver. The United States in 1792 fixed it at 1 to 15. India, in 1793, made it to 14.861, and in 1818 exactly 1 to 15. Gold being thus undervalued in the East and in the West would not circulate freely as currency. The United States in 1834 “took the bull by the horns,” and fixed the ratio at 1 to 16, or, to be precise, 1 to 15.980. This caused large importations of gold from Europe, and a large outflow of silver thereto. India, instead of following suit, the next year, in 1835, demonetized gold, leaving silver in possession of the field.

The total imports of silver, mostly in bullion, into India, were as follows: 1835 to 1877, inclusive £242,949,096

The total exports of silver same time 44,730,529

Surplus imports of silver over exports 198,218,567

The silver coined, 1835 to 1877, inclusive, amounted to £219,482,551

Of which was old silver recoined 21,457,534

198,025,017

Excess of silver imported over coinage 193,550

A large portion of the silver coined has been converted into ornaments; that is to say, the coins themselves are linked together for necklaces, bracelets, &c. The surplus imports of silver within the period may be thus classified, in order to show the values before and after the discovery of gold in California and Australia: 1835 to 1847 £22,845,408

1848 to 1877 175,273,159

198,218,567

The world’s production of silver since 1848 was about £360,000,000; so India absorbed nearly one-half.

The total imports of gold, mostly in sovereigns, into India, were as follows: 1835 to 1877, inclusive £108,119,339

The total exports of gold same time 5,118,284

Surplus imports of gold over exports 103,001,055

The gold coined 1835 to 1877, inclusive, amounted to 2,224,163

Excess of gold imported over coinage 100,856,892

A large portion of the surplus imports of gold into India, as is the case with silver, is in use as ornaments; the remainder is hoarded, and used to settle transactions entered into upon a gold basis. The people of India are fond of personal decoration; the upper classes adorn themselves with jewels and gold, and the peasantry with silver. Although the peasantry live in wretched houses, the value of the ornaments they possess oftentimes exceeds that of their furniture and utensils.

The surplus imports of sold within the period may be thus classified: 1835 to 1847 £4,688,224

1848 to 1877 98,312,831

103,001,055

The world’s production of gold since the year 1848 was about £600,000,000; so India absorbed over one-sixth.

The European and United States mints are open to the public for the coinage of gold. Except in the cases of the United States trade dollar, which is not a legal-tender, nor even a token—coined only for export—and of the mints of Mexico and South America, the coinages of silver on both sides of the Atlantic are on account of the respective governments. The Indian mints are open to the coinage of both metals. The fixed charge for coining is 2 per cent., supplemented by other charges, which run the cost up to about 2½ per cent. The silver imports, being, mostly in bullion, nearly all pass through the mints; while the gold imports, being mostly in sovereigns, render it unneccessary to incur that expense in respect to them.

It is right that gold, being now the international standard of value, should be coined on account of all comers, and that the wastage in connection with the handling of it, slight as it is, should be borne by those who use it. On the other hand, it is right that the respective governments should fabricate the money of the masses—the silver token currency—make the profit on the same, and redeem the coins when worn. This example, set by England in 1816, is a gain to the governments, for the profit on silver is greater than the losses by wear and expense of recoinage, and a saving to the community, who suffer no loss by the use of token currency, which answers their purposes as well as if it were the standard itself. Virtually, it is convertible into the standard, being equivalent to a government “promise to pay” in gold.

If India were to adopt gold as her sole standard of value, the transition from silver would be no more disturbing (if as much) than was the reversion from greenbacks to gold in the United States, as the discount on silver is not so great as that upon greenbacks was. Actual values would not be affected, There would, of course, be an apparent shrinkage for awhile, but the purchasing power on the gold basis would be precisely the same as on the silver basis, no more, no less. If a 10-rupee gold piece were coined of the exact value of the sovereign, it would circulate side by side with it as the Australian sovereign does. All accounts between the United Kingdom, Australia, and India would then be simplified. The silver rupees would become tokens of the value of the English florins, or near enough for all practical purposes, as for facility of calculation, it is only necessary that the marks or measures or weights, so to speak, of the standard of value, should divide and multiply with exactitude. The rupee is 180 grains standard; the florin 174.18, both with l-12th alloy; and as the Indian mints do not redeem the worn coins as the mints of Europe and the United States do, the rupees in circulation may be no heavier than the florins, or not even so heavy. Let the Indian Government take the profit on all the future coinage of silver and redeem the coins when worn, and thus save the loss to the peasantry, who can badly afford it. That loss tends to keep up the system of barter in India, which retards the absorption of silver, and thereby prevents a rise in its intrinsic value as compared with gold. The silverists, in their blindness, do not see this; neither do they see that if India were to adopt the gold standard the large amount of gold hoarded there would reappear, and would aid in restoring the values of all other commodities, silver included. Among the gold hoardings of India there must be at least 15,000,000 unpunched sovereigns which would answer for a like number of 10-rupee gold pieces without recoinage, or 150,000,000 gold rupees. Punched sovereigns to the number of 35,000,000 more would probably find their way to the mints for recoinage into 350,000,000 gold rupees, making a total of 500,000,000. These, with the paper currency, to which reference will presently be made, will be sufficient to conduct all the large transactions. The payments to actual producers in India are so small that silver will continue to be largely used, even when the currency is placed upon a gold basis. The present silver circulation cannot be over 1,400,000,000 rupees. They will all be needed, and more too, as when the worn silver coins become redeem able for full weighted coins or receivable for taxes they will gradually displace “cowries” and barter. As things are, one-fourth the people of India never see a coin. The adoption of gold as a standard of value would cause no drain from other parts of the world, and the surrender of the gold hoardings would create a large amount of potential capital. It is gold, not in use as hand-to-hand currency, but which might at any moment become so, that forms that capital. Gold is never hoarded in countries where it is the recognized standard of value.

The government paper currency of India, introduced March 1, 1862, is on the increase. It is secured by government bonds and coin and bullion, just like that of the Bank of England. The amount of notes in circulation in India is about £12,000,000. Were gold the sole standard of value in India, the paper money would be greatly increased, as paper represents and economizes the use of gold in large—not silver in small—transactions.

When the coinage act of 1835 was adopted, there were two kinds of silver rupees in circulation—the sicca and the sunnut—both of greater value than the new rupees. 100 sicca rupees were equal to 106f, and 106⅔ sunnut rupees to 104½ new rupees. Agreements, therefore, which were based upon “siccas” or “sunnuts” were carried out in accord with their respective values in the new rupees. So, if India adopts the gold standard, a similar arrangement can be made without injustice to any one, debtor or creditor.

No less than thirteen European countries have assimilated their gold coinages, namely, France, Italy, Belgium, Switzerland, Greece, Austria, Hungary, Sweden, Denmark, Norway, Finland, Roumania, and Spain. Their gold coins are 0.900 fine, and are exactly 310 to a kilogram. The gold pieces of Holland are nearly so; but a miss is as good as a mile. The standard legally in Great Britain, Germany, Portugal, and Turkey, and practically in the United States and Japan, is gold; but their coins do not assimilate with those of the other countries mentioned, although, practically, their standard of value—gold—is the same. When coinages of the standard do not assimilate, weighing comes virtually into practice. In paper-currency countries, where the premium on gold does not exceed 15 per cent., silver is at a discount as compared with paper money. This proves that gold, whether legalized or not, is the real standard of value, and that depreciated paper money merely represents it in an inflated manner. The silver coins of many countries of Europe, the United States, and South America are identical in intrinsic value; but, excepting in the countries of the Latin Union, the respective silver coins do not circulate outside their own localities. This is another evidence that gold is, after all, the real standard of value.

Your obedient servant,

GEORGE McHENRY.
5 Kensington-crescent, W., July, 1879.

No. 202. Mr. Evarts to Mr. Welsh. [Document 223]

No. 202.
Mr. Evarts to Mr. Welsh.

Department of State,
Washington, July 29, 1879. No. 341.]

Sir: Referring to my instruction No. 328, of the 11th instant, in relation to the case of John Anderson, alias Alfred Hussey, and the claim of jurisdiction advanced and exercised in relation thereto by the high court of Calcutta, a British tribunal, notwithstanding that the accused was a seaman upon the American bark C. O. Whitmore, and the crime for which he was tried was committed on the high seas, I have now to transmit for your further information, and as material to the intelligent discussion of the points involved, should Her Majesty’s Government provoke argument thereon, copy of an additional dispatch, dated the 10th ultimo, received from Consul-General Litchfield, in which the later proceedings of the high court, comprising further assertion and exercise of jurisdictional power in the premises, are so fully set forth that it is found unnecessary to your understanding of the case to send you transcript of the voluminous appendices transmitted by the consul-general.

Pending the reply of Her Majesty’s Government to the dispassionate representations you have already been directed to make, I have no further observations to add to those of the consul-general than to remark that, while the verdict of the jury, convicting the man of manslaughter, seems to have been technically right as to the degree of the crime committed, the partiality and unfairness of the proceedings, which this government had confidently hoped would be marked by the most signal impartiality and fairness, cannot but be deduced from the result of the trial. I refer especially to the keeping back of the testimony of witnesses who would have shown aggravating circumstances of guilt; in the notably strong recommendation to mercy and, more than all, in the character of the sentence, a purely nominal punishment, such as would be usually inflicted for a slight contempt of court, and unheard of before in any British court as a measure of the penalty for manslaughter, the conviction for which rested on the verdict of a jury, the prisoner having been set free within forty-eight hours, without even the form of executive clemency. These facts are here thought to justify what might otherwise seem to be the heated and indignant comments of Mr. Litchfield on the affair and should the assumption of British jurisdiction in the case be defended by Her Majesty’s Government, the circumstances adverted to would seem proper to be brought to Lord Salisbury’s attention, with all the temperance of representation permitted by the facts themselves, and as justifying the ground taken, with respect to such assumption of jurisdiction, in my previous instruction No. 328.

I am, &c.,

WM. M. EVARTS.

[Inclosure in Instruction No. 341.]

Mr. Litchfield to Mr. Seward.

Consulate-General, U. S. A.,
Calcutta, June 10, 1879. (Received July 18.) No. 263.]

Sir: Referring to my dispatch No. 262, under date of 23d May, relative to the murder upon the high seas of Mr. William Moffett, mate of the American hark C. O. Whitmore, by John Anderson, an ordinary seaman, I now have the honor to inform you that, in the absence of any instructions from the Government of India to the contrary, the trial of the accused was proceeded with in the high court on the 27th of May, resulting in a verdict of manslaughter accompanied with a strong recommendation to the mercy of the court on account of the excessively cruel treatment received at the hands of the mate (as appeared from the evidence).

The prisoner was sentenced to imprisonment during the remainder of the “sessions,” which terminated the following day, since which time he has been at large. Subsequent to Anderson’s release, the deputy commissioner of police sent him to me with a written request that I would have the goodness to state if I had any objections to pass an order for the delivery of Anderson’s clothing, which was still on board the ship. I replied that I regretted I could not at present order the delivery to Anderson of anything that might have been his before he killed the mate of the C. O. Whitmore.

On the 2d day of June I wrote to the deputy commissioner of police requesting him to cause John Anderson to be returned on board the C. O. Whitmore, which he declined to do on the grounds that Anderson had passed out of his custody. (Copies of these letters inclosed.)

It is a matter of painful regret to me that the confidence expressed in one of the closing paragraphs of my dispatch of the 23d of May, that the trial here of the accused would be impartial and satisfactory in its results, proved to have been entirely misplaced; and I left the court-room with a deep conviction that had there been an intention, it could not have been more skillfully contrived for the purpose of concealing the real facts of the case concerning the vital points upon which the actual guilt of the prisoner hinged, viz, the nature of the treatment received by him at the hands of the mate, and the amount of provocation just prior to the stabbing.

In order that you may understand my reasons for entertaining, much against my will, such deep convictions of the unfairness of the trial, I respectfully submit copies of the depositions of the captain, the second mate, and eight of the crew of the C. O. Whitmore, from which you will observe— 1. That the captain states that Anderson used insulting language to the mate; that he is sure the mate did not strike him when on top of the cabin or in the boat; that there were no marks on his face to indicate that it had been jammed or pressed against anything,-or that it had received heavy blows.

2. That Thomas McDonald, who was at the wheel near to and facing the affair, testifies that the mate shook Anderson; that he never saw him strike any one on board the vessel; that Anderson called the mate a ———; and that when the mate was bleeding to death lying on the poop, Anderson stood and looked at him and said, “You’ll kill me, will you?” Furthermore he did not notice any blood on Anderson’s face, and is positive it couldn’t have escaped his attention had there been much.

3. Peter Hopp, an able seaman, a German, who was at work on the top of the cabin close by the scene, says he did not see the mate strike him; he heard Anderson call the mate a ———; and he furthermore testifies to the uniform good character of the mate.

4. Thomas Brown, an able seaman, who was sitting on top of the house near to them, stated that he did not see the mate strike Anderson at that time, nor at any time. He heard Anderson call the mate a ——— and a ———.

5. I may add that Mrs. Shillaber, the captain’s wife, who did not witness the killing but came on deck shortly after the affair and confronted the murderer face to face, says she has a very vivid recollection of his appearance; that there were no bruises on his face, only a little blood from one nostril dried on his lip, and something resembling a pin-scratch on the side of his chin and neck. I may remark that her delicate condition caused me to delay taking her deposition for a time.

You will observe that all the witnesses testify that the captain separated them when quarreling, and nearly all, that the accused rushed after the mate when he was removed some distance from him.

You would naturally suppose that these facts would have been brought out in the trial, but such was by no means the case. Two of these witnesses, Peter Hopp and Thomas McDonald, remained on board the ship during the trial in the high court, while Thomas Brown, though present in the high court, was not called to give his evidence. When the examination before the magistrate was being held, I requested Mr. Fink, who was conducting the prosecution, to call Hopp and McDonald, but he declined on the plea that it was unnecessary, at the same time giving me an assurance that all would be examined when the case was tried in the high court, and it was not till I discovered that these witnesses were not present, that my suspicions were excited, and but little then, as I knew that they might have been detained on board the vessel and could come the next day, not for a moment thinking that so grave a case would be dispatched like a trial for petty larceny, and they were not fully aroused until the government prosecutor arose to close the case, when I told him and his adviser that the principal witnesses for the prosecution—those on top of the cabin and nearest the scene—had not been called, and that so far as I could see the witnesses had been mainly for the defense.

The prosecution was conducted in this manner. At first a police boat was sent to prevent the men from deserting from the ship, hut before the day appointed for the examination it was withdrawn. Three men deserted, but they were not lost sight of by a sergeant of the river police, himself formerly a deserter from an American ship, but were produced by him, and, strange to say, were made the leading witnesses for the prosecution.

Their testimony was substantially as in the printed report annexed, and the natural result—shall I say the desired result—was that public opinion was at once turned in favor of the prisoner, and one heard everywhere “It served the mate jolly well right,” which expression was made the peroration of the argument for the defense, with this addition, “and the only regret is that he did not stick the knife into him sooner.” As I said, these three deserters were made the leading witnesses for the prosecution, and when I requested the prosecuting officer to ask any questions to invalidate their testimony, I was told “We can’t cross-question them; they are our witnesses.”

Moreover the evidence of the men who were examined differed materially from what they deposed before me, being allowed to state only so much as they chose, and not being questioned to any extent by the prosecution.

For instance, you will observe in the deposition of Charles Radford that he stated that he saw the mate jam Anderson’s face on the thwarts of the boat, and kick him while in the boat, and yet I convinced him, by taking him to the spot, that from where he stood he could not possibly have seen what he testified to, and by his request modified his statement. Yet that man went into the stand in the high court and repeated the same statement that the mate jammed Anderson’s face on the thwarts of the boat, and explained how he was able to see into the boat by saying that the boat was on the lee side of the ship, and as the ship was listed over he stood higher and could see in, when, as a matter of fact plain to be understood by any one who has been to sea, any change in the position of the ship does not change the relative position of a man standing on deck to a boat lashed and immovable in davits above him This man’s evidence ought to have been thrown out and he punished for perjury, having sworn to what he knew to be false; but no, he was one of “the witnesses for the prosecution.” One, be it noted, who said, “Keep up good spirits Fred, I’ll do what I can for you.” No wonder the defense called no witnesses.

When the trial was ended, I felt that a great injustice had been done; that the well-deserved reputation of a British court of justice had been disgraced by officers whose duty it was to have maintained its purity. Would that I could have found excuses for such gross mismanagement, but I could not, because I had kept before the government prosecutor the great importance of testimony which they seemed wilfully and persistently to ignore.

Inasmuch as Anderson was set at liberty when I considered him a criminal deserving of punishment, and subject only to the jurisdiction of the United States, I wrote to the honorable secretary to the Government of India, foreign department (copy inclosed), requesting the apprehension of John Anderson and his delivery to me under the extradition treaty, at the same time submitting in a respectful manner my protest against the manner in which the trial was conducted, and charged Mr. Fink, the official who conducted the prosecution before the magistrate, with having neglected to call witnesses whom he assured me would be examined in the high court, and without whose evidence he must have known there could be no fair trial.

I have received no reply to this communication sent to Simla on the 3d of June, nor to my first dispatch on the subject under date of the 23d of May. Meantime John Anderson came to me for a discharge from the CO. Whitmore, for the balance of his wages, and for his clothes. He received two and one half month’s wages in advance, and killed the mate when sixteen days out. I declined to give him anything except my order to go on board.

He did go on board on the 8th, doubtless with the idea that he could obtain possession of his clothes and get away again, but I directed the captain to keep all the clothes that were his under lock and key, and give him but one suit at a time.

Yesterday I sent the following telegram to the foreign secretary: “Referring to letter June 2, John Anderson, now on board Whitmore, will government arrest him and put on board American bark Chalmette, sails Thursday for America,” but as yet have received no reply. I still have such confidence in the purpose of the Government of India to do only what is just and right, that I feel certain a careful investigation will convince them that there has been a grave mistake made which they will endeavor Without hesitation to correct, while they will seek to vindicate the integrity of their courts of justice by holding to strict account those officers who have been recreant to the trust committed to their charge.

I fear, however, that the time is so short before the departure of the Chalmette that they may not be able to comply with the request I made yesterday. I inclose several letters and one editorial relative to the case, as published in the leading English newspapers here, to which there have up to the present time been no replies.

I am, &c.,

A. C. LITCHFIELD.

No. 203. Mr. Welsh to Mr. Evarts. [Document 224]

No. 203.
Mr. Welsh to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
London, August 5, 1879. (Received August 18.) No. 334.]

Sir: I have the honor to inclose herewith a statement respecting the amount of gold and silver coin and bullion and paper currency in Great Britain, transmitted to me by Lord Salisbury in answer to my note written in accordance with your instruction No. 296, of the 23d May last.

The statement gives—

The amount of gold and silver coin and bullion in the banks and in circulation at the close of the years 1876, 1877, and 1878.

The amount of outstanding paper currency to the latest date in each of the above-named years, in which returns are received by the British Government.

The amount of gold and silver coined, imported, and exported during the years 1876, 1877, and 1878.

With regard to the amount of gold and silver consumed in the arts and manufactures, Lord Salisbury regrets that there are no means of obtaining accurate statistics, but adds that the select committee of the House of Commons, which was appointed, in 1876, to inquire into the causes of the depreciation of silver, took considerable pains to investigate the question, and that the information on the subject contained in pages xlviii and xlix of the inclosed report appears to be the best which can be obtained.

I have, &c.,

JOHN WELSH.

[Inclosure 1 in No. 334.]

Amount of gold and silver coin and bullion in the banks and in circulation.

December 31, 1876. December 31, 1877. December 31, 1878.

Gold coin £119,115,000 £120,037,000 £125,318,000

Gold bullion 18,430,000 11,316,000 13,666,000

Silver coin 19,091,000 19,107,000 19,102,000

There can scarcely be said to be any stock of silver bullion in the United Kingdom, as all that is produced or imported is disposed of with as little delay as possible, and the quantity kept at any refinery for trade purposes is so variable as not to be worth noticing.

There is no reserve of coin or bullion at the treasury; the exchequer balance is included in the returns from the Bank of England.

Amount of outstanding paper currency.

Bank of England:

December 27, 1876 £27,898,255

December 26, 1877 26,797,985

December 25, 1878 33,110,790

Other banks in England:

Average of four weeks to December 30, 1876 4,591,226

Average of four weeks to December 31, 1877 4,398,946

Average of four weeks to December 31, 1878 3,901,331

Scotch banks.

December 30, 1876 £6,558,947

December 29, 1877 6,139,612

December 28, 1878 5,798,494

Irish banks:

December 30, 1876 7,409,342

December 29, 1877 7,051,217

December 28, 1878 6,667,627

Amount of gold and silver annually coined, imported, and exported.

1876. 1877. 1878.

Gold coined £4,696,648 £981,468 £2,265,069

Gold imported 17,369,000 6,881,000 17,756,000

Gold exported 12,741,000 10,187,000 10,612,000

Silver coined 222,354 420,948 613,998

Silver imported 13,000,000 20,000,000 11,000,000

Silver exported 14,000,000 19,000,000 11,250,000

No. 204. Mr. Hoppin to Mr. Evarts. [Document 225]

No. 204.
Mr. Hoppin to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
London, September 4, 1879. (Received September 17.) No. 39.]

Sir: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt on the 25th ultimo, of your instruction No. 354, to Mr. Welsh in relation to Mormon emigration from this country to the United States.

I lost no time in transmitting its contents to Lord Salisbury, and I herewith inclose a copy of my letter. To this I have not as yet received any reply.

Your instruction stated that the United States consular officers in this country had been directed to communicate to this legation such information in regard to the subject in question as might come to their knowledge. I have not, however, up to this time, heard anything from them in relation to it.

I have, &c.,

W. J. HOPPIN.

[Inclosure 1 in No. 39.]

Legation of the United States,
London, August 25, 1879.

My Lord: The annual statistics of immigration into the United States show that large number of emigrants come to that country every year, from the various nations of Europe, for the avowed purpose of joining the Mormon community at Salt Lake, in the Territory of Utah, under the auspices and guidance of the emissaries and agents of that community in foreign parts. This representation of the interests of Mormonism abroad, which has been carried on for years, is understood to have developed unusual activity of late, especially in Great Britain among other countries where it has unfortunately obtained a greater or less foothold.

The system ot polygamy, which is prevalent in the community of Utah, is largely based upon and promoted by these accessions from Europe, drawn mainly from the ignorant classes, who are easily influenced by the double appeal to their passions and their poverty held out in the flattering picture of a home in the fertile and prosperous region where Mormonism has established its material seat.

Inasmuch as the practice of polygamy is based upon a form of marriage, by which additional wives are “sealed” to the men of that community, these so-called “marriages” are pronounced by the laws of the United States to be crimes against the statutes of the country, and punishable as such.

On the 1st of July, 1882, the Congress of the United States passed an act, chapter cxxvi, expressly designed, as appears from the title, “to punish and prevent the practice of polygamy in the Territories of the United States, and other places,” &c., That act remains the law of the land as to its continuing provisions, which, in the revision of the statutes of the United States, made in 1874, reads as follows:

“Sec. 5352. Every person having a husband or wife living, who marries another, whether married or single, in a Territory or other place over which the United States have exclusive jurisdiction, is guilty of bigamy, and shall be punished by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars, and by imprisonment for a term of not more than five years; but this section shall not extend to any person, by reason of any former marriage, whose husband or wife by such marriage is absent for five successive years, and is not known to such to be living; nor to any person by reason of any former marriage which has been dissolved by decree of a competent court; nor to any person by reason of any former marriage which has been pronounced void by decree of a competent court on the ground of nullity of the marriage contract.”

Whatever doubt, if any, has heretofore existed as to the efficiency of the law above cited, and the intent of the general government to enforce it, has now been terminated by the recent decision of the Supreme Court, the highest judicial tribunal of the land, sustaining the constitutionality of this legislation, and affirming the conviction and punishment of offenders against that law.

Under whatever specious guise the subject may be presented by those engaged in instigating the European movement to swell the numbers of the law-defying Mormons of Utah, the bands and organizations which are got together in foreign lands as recruits cannot be regarded as otherwise than a deliberate and systematic attempt to bring persons to the United States with the intent of violating their laws and committing crimes expressly punishable under the statute as penitentiary offenses.

No friendly power will, of course, knowingly lend its aid, even indirectly, to attempts made within its borders against the laws and government of a country wherewith it is at peace, with established terms of amity and reciprocal relations of treaty between them; while, even were there no question involved of open penal infraction of the laws of the land, every consideration of comity should prevail to prevent the territory of a friendly State from becoming a resort or refuge for the crowds of misguided men and women whose offences against morality and decency would be intolerable in the land from whence they came.

Mr. Evarts, in his instruction to Mr. Welsh upon this subject (which has arrived since Mr. Welsh’s departure), after mentioning the above-recited facts and conclusions, further states that it is not doubted, when the subject is brought to its attention, that the Government of Great Britain will take such steps as may be compatible with its laws and usages to check the organization of these criminal enterprises by agents who are thus operating beyond the reach of the law of the United States, and to prevent the departure of those proposing to go thither as violators of the law by engaging in such criminal enterprises, by whomsoever instigated.

Mr. Welsh was, therefore, instructed, and I have the honor, as the chargé d’affairs of the United States ad interim, to present the matter to the Government of Great Britain through your lordship, and to urge earnest attention to it, in the interest, not merely of a faithful execution of the laws of the United States, but of the peace, good order, and morality which are cultivated and sought to be promoted by all civilized countries.

I may, probably, have the honor, in some future communications, to fortify my representations on this subject, by citing such facts and details as may come to my notice concerning emigration of this character from Great Britain, and I beg to bespeak for them your lordship’s careful attention.

I have, &c.,

W. J. HOPPIN.

No. 205. Mr. Hoppin to Mr. Evarts. [Document 226]

No. 205.
Mr. Hoppin to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
London, September 5, 1879. (Received September 17.) No. 41.]

Sir: I have the honor to inclose herewith an extract (in duplicate) from the Daily News of the 3d instant, in relation to our claim for damages arising out of the transactions in Fortune Bay.

I have, &c.,

W. J. HOPPIN.

[The Daily News, Wednesday, September 3, 1879.]

Simultaneously with the return of Mr. Welsh, the late minister of the United States in this country, to America, the public was enigmatically informed from New York that his successor would be “a great dealer in fish.” Among us it is no new thing for a “fishmonger” to occupy a high place in the state, to sit on the bench, or to be a member of the cabinet, but no similar usage was known to prevail in America. The puzzle is now explained, and what is meant is that one of the most important duties of the new minister of the United States on his arrival among us will be to state the views of his government as to the condition in which the fishermen of his country are placed by the joint operation of the treaty of Washington and the acts of the Canadian Government, and to claim a substantial indemnity for injury which, it is affirmed, they have sustained. The newspapers both of the Union and of the Dominion are publishing their respective views on the subject with much of the warmth of sentiment and luxuriance of imagery which usually characterize these discussions. The United States Government, however, has not yet made its final demand, as before doing so it wishes to complete an inquiry which it has instituted in the waters where the difficulty has arisen. It has, however, claimed of our foreign office the sum of $103,000 on account of damages alleged to have been done to a small American fishing fleet at Fortune Bay, Newfoundland, in January, 1876. A correspondence, setting forth both the American and the Canadian accounts of this collision, was published by the foreign office shortly after its occurrence, and it is sufficient here to say that it was of the contradictory character to which we are-accustomed in descriptions of frays between rough men who regard one another with jealousy. The American fishermen were interfered with in Fortune Bay on the ground that they had violated a local law, which forbids the taking of fish on Sunday “and the fastening of seines to the shore. Upon the occasion complained of, the Newfoundland men interfered, destroyed the American nets, and prevented the intended take. During the conflict one American master drew his revolver, and only in this manner secured his fish.

It certainly seems as though a dispute arising out of an affray of this kind might be settled without any great diplomatic parade. It must be remembered, however, that soreness of feeling respecting these fisheries has been manifested as long as any one now alive can remember, and that it was increased by the recent award of the Halifax Commission, under which the United States have paid $5,500,000 as the value on balance of the fishing privileges secured to them by the treaty of Washington. The people and Government of the Union believe, and have maintained in formal documents and before the Halifax Commission, that the privileges accorded to British subjects under Article XVIII of that treaty are vastly greater than any that have been or will be realized by citizens of the United States under the fishery clauses of the same instrument. The United States Government do not indeed call the Halifax award in question, and disavow all intention of asking that it may be reconsidered. Still it is always important to know under the influence of what views and feelings any demand is pressed. When we look a little further into the matter, we find the impatience of the Americans relates more to provincial; that is, Canadian, pretensions than to any terms by which they are bound to this country. Their chief complaint is that when they have made a bargain with us, by which, be it bad or good, they are ready to abide, the advantages secured to them are annulled by the manner in which the Canadians apply the stipulations. How far this complaint can be substantiated remains to be ascertained. The local laws of the maritime British provinces of America are of course framed with a view to the protection of the fisheries, which are a most valuable property, and no claim that might be set up to fish in a manner to injure them permanently could be allowed. But inasmuch as since the Halifax award the Americans must be considered to have bought of us and paid for their right to fish, it is not to be expected that they will permit the Canadians to alter the conditions of the contract. Their jealousy of the Dominion Government on this point is shown by the demand made by the American journals, that in any negotiations that may become necessary between Great Britain and the United States Canada shall not be allowed to participate. This requirement appears to have originated in a misconception. On the one hand, inasmuch as the interests which we are called to defend are Canadian, it is impossible that they should not be considered; and, on the other, inasmuch as treaties on this subject can only be made by the Queen’s government, the American demand to negotiate directly with us is conceded before it is made. After what has happened, indeed, it would be most unwise to make any Canadian prominent in the negotiation, and it would be well if the Canadian administration could be dispensed with in the construction and enforcement of any terms that may be further agreed on. That there will be abundant opportunity of considering the future working of the inshore fisheries in all its breadth may be regarded as quite certain; for although the Americans do not challenge the Halifax award, their objection to the manner in which the local laws are enforced against their fishermen raises the whole question. How are the relations between the British and American fishermen to be regulated in future? The whole subject bristles with difficulties, which are not to be got rid of by taking a merely legal view of the rights of each party, and leaving the local courts to apply it. The object of both governments should be to arrive at some working arrangement likely to be permanent. The contention of the Americans that the Canadians shall not have it in their power to nullify their rights is one that is sure to be persisted in, and our government should therefore be prepared to consider the matter. Whenever it does so, it should also be ready to deal with the old dispute respecting the headlands, with which the Halifax Commission declined to meddle.

The American objection to permit Canadian public men to take part in the coming negotiations may be overstrained, but it is intelligible. Canada cannot be made responsible to the United States as one European state is politically responsible to another. England speaks for it whenever its acts are called in question; with England, therefore, the Americans wish to negotiate, and with her alone. But if this claim is good, it follows that with just as much right the American Government may object to the laws by which the use of the fisheries is regulated being enacted without the sanction of the imperial government. And even if not, still from the point of view of our own national convenience it is unreasonable that the American should come to us to complain of the operations of a law as to the reasonableness of which we were not consulted. Of course no claim on the part of a foreign government to prescribe or even suggest the manner or process of our legislation could be listened to; but inasmuch as our foreign office will have to maintain the closest communications with the Canadian Government during the impending negotiations, it will have opportunities of pointing out the propriety on the part of the local governments of the Dominion taking care that their laws affecting foreigners to whom we have conceded treaty rights shall be such as we can justify in case of need. Of course the relevancy of these considerations depends entirely upon the Americans being able to show that they have a case, and that the laws enforced against them are unreasonable and destructive of their rights. This, however, has yet to be proved. The people of this country desire, on the one hand, that the important material interests of the Canadians in their fisheries may be upheld, and, on the other, that the engagements into which we have entered with the United States shall be honorably fulfilled. Every English government, whatever its origin or complexion, must have the same desire. We may, therefore, expect that whenever the time comes for dealing practically with this question, it will be dealt with in a spirit of conciliation, and with no other desire than to remove once for all every cause of difference arising out of the fisheries of the Dominion, and to place the relations of the hardy and industrious people of the two countries who meet in the waters of Canada upon a permanent and satisfactory footing.

No. 206. Mr. Hoppin to Mr. Evarts. [Document 227]

No. 206.
Mr. Hoppin to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
London, September 19, 1879. (Received October 8.) No. 53.]

Sir: I have the honor to transmit herewith reports (in duplicate) from the Daily News of this date, of speeches lately delivered by the Earl of Beaconsfield, Earl Derby, and others, in relation to the prevalent agricultural and commercial distress in Great Britain.

I have, &c.,

W. J. HOPPIN.

[Inclosure 1 in dispatch No. 53.]

Lord Beaconsfield at Aylesbury.

Aylesbury, Thursday Evening.

[The Daily News, Friday, September 19, 1879.]

The speech of the evening—the work of an hour and ten minutes—was devoted, as will be seen from the subjoined report, to the subject of agricultural depression, and was really an elaboration of the Mansion House speech, in which the English land system was contrasted and held to be superior to some continental systems of peasant proprietorship. In the hour of their adversity the premier thought it did not become him to be absent from the gathering of his agricultural friends. His counsel to them was not to think too much of American competition, not to conclude that what might only be transitory was permanent, and not to take precipitate steps. On a high authority he assured the company that Canada expected to beat the United States out of the European market. He counseled aid between landlords and tenants, based upon a reciprocal acquaintance with each other’s duties and necessities. Ten per cent. reduction of rent might in some cases be a very agreeable Christmas-box, but he knew instances in which this reduction would be utterly insufficient. This was a sentiment very emphatically cheered, whereupon Lord Beaconsfield, with what was hailed as sly touch of humor, added that he knew other cases in which even 10 per cent. reduction was not necessary. Subsequently defending the agricultural holdings act against the assertion that it is a sham, he declared that quite a stream of mendacity had flowed, on the subject of that statute. For an effective conclusion the premier chose a diatribe against a party whom he accused of hostility to the agricultural interest. Their first step, he said, had been to agitate agricultural laborers against their employers, but the absurdity of the attempt to represent them as unprosperous was too great. The same party he accused of now attempting to set tenants against landlord. These classes were not thus, however, to be devoured singly; and England would recognize that in the just cause of the agricultural interestwas the best security for liberty and law.

[By telegraph.]

The annual meeting of the Royal and Central Bucks Agricultural Association was held to-day at Walton Grange, near this town, under the presidency of the Earl of Beaconsfield.

The Earl of Beaconsfield. Gentlemen, I have now to propose our good wishes for the prosperity of this association. I cannot say that it is an easy task. I have had the honor of filling this chair before. I have—at a period which cannot be remembered by any occupant of the gallery, for it is between forty and fifty years ago—[laughter]—I have assisted at the birth and formation of this institution. I have witnessed its fortunes under many different circumstances and at different conjunctions, but I cannot conceal from myself that I never met my friends the farmers of Buckinghamshire under circumstances more difficult and desponding than the present. [Hear.] I did not form that opinion from the exhibition which we examined this morning near the agreeable residence to which we all repaired. I thought it gave some evidence of the prosperity, or at least of the pluck—that great characteristic of the British farmer—for all that we saw was much to be admired; some was to be more than admired, and recognized as excellent. Our show to-day was one which I confess somewhat surprised and greatly pleased me. I was also glad on that account to find that our cottage contributors had sent their beautiful offerings to our exhibition, and I saw in those flowers, and in those fanciful creations of their horticulture, evidence that even at this moment, when the strain upon rural life is great, they at least are not insensible to the charms of nature. It would be affectation if I did not avow some consciousness at least of the feelings which must permeate almost all our bosoms. I was elected, much to my gratification, last year to this post, and I feel the honor, coming from those whom continuously for thirty years I had the honor to represent in the House of Commons, and it is a duty to fulfill which, without affectation, is often inconvenient to one who, from whatever cause it may be, occupies the position I now do. Under ordinary circumstances I might have asked you to excuse me, but in the hour of your adversity I did not think it becoming to be absent. [Cheers.] Gentlemen, there can be no question that there is at this moment in the agricultural interests of this country a strain, certainly unprecedented in the lives of all present, and probably not easily to be equalled even in the records of our history. It has been announced, and it has been intimated as a subject fit for popular suggestion by one who may be considered a high authority, that the present unsatisfactory state of affairs may perhaps be traced to the constitution of our system, and that the agricultural system has, to use the words which you are now familiar with, broken down. It has broken down, we are told, because there are general expressions of discontent with the situation, and because there is undoubtedly considerable distress.

Well, gentlemen, a year ago, when a bank in the commercial capital of Scotland suddenly broke, when it shook that highly civilized country to its very center, when it affected some of the greatest commercial houses, houses carrying on the greatest commercial business in the world, when it produced a state of affairs, a distress, which I can hardly describe—a condition of desolation—nobody went about and said that this was proof that the commercial system of this country had broken down. [Hear, hear.] And a few years before that I remember that there was a clay of deepest anxiety for this country, a day still remembered as Black Friday, when the commercial credit of this country had ceased for four-and-twenty hours to exist. Nobody then went about and said that the commercial system of England had broken down. [Hear, hear.] Why, if you were to pursue the subject further, which at this moment it may not be convenient for want of time to do, I remember even an earlier period when one of the highest authorities in this country said that we were within four-and-twenty hours of a state of barter, this great country with its many resources. But nobody went about and said because there was this strain and distress that the commercial system of England had broken down. For the moment, however, there is distress on the part of the agricultural interest, and I am sorry to say there are some who seem eager to recognize not only signs of distress, but of decadence and destitution Then we find them going about and announcing that these circumstances are symptomatic of the breakdown of the agricultural system. Gentlemen, I think it is of the utmost importance that upon this subject there should be clear opinions. I presume to indicate what I think is the wisest course for us—all classes of the agricultural interest— to pursue at the present moment, but I think it of great importance that clear ideas as to your situation, as to your position, as to your responsibility, should prevail, because you may be hurried into conclusions and into conduct which, if you had been better informed, or had given further thought to the matter, you would not perhaps have sanctioned and adopted. Now it has been intimated by a great authority that the cause of our agricultural system having broken down may probably be that it is unlike the agricultural system of any other country, that it is founded upon an unnatural principle, that it is essentially artificial, and that the essence of its artificial character is that in this country three classes are dependent upon the produce of the soil, who are, according to that system, necessary to its cultivation. I have taken an opportunity, the earliest I had with convenience, to meet opinions which I think are most fallacious and must be most disadvantageous to the country. I have laid it down as a principle which can be demonstrated in the most complete and satisfactory manner, that whatever may be your tenure of the land, whatever may be the number of classes concerned in its management and cultivation, there must be what are now familiarly termed three profits obtained from the land. The cultivator of the soil, who does the manual labor, naturally says, “I will not cultivate the soil without my being fed, and clothed, and nourished for my pay,” and that I take to be a reward which is called wages. Then the cultivator of the soil—whatever he may be called, farmer or otherwise—who furnishes the floating capital which is to stock the soil, and who must have a return for his investment and then there is the capitalist who finds the capital, which, like that of the farmers, must have a return, or the capital never would be advanced. In the third instance I say that whether the cultivator of the soil pays for his farm from his savings, or, as is usually the case under such circumstances, by borrowing his interest or the return for his capital is in fact rent. When we are told that the agricultural system has broken down because three profits, by our system, are required from the soil, it is as well to show that in a system the most contrary to the system which has existed in this country—namely, that which prevails in some continental countries in the shape of peasant proprietorship—although only one individual takes the three profits, still the three profits must be claimed. I do that because it has been said I was very unfair, in alluding to a distinguished man who had touched on these subjects, to say that it was his wish to introduce peasant proprietorship as the cure of evils in this country. Now that reasoning, that view of the case, has been questioned; but I could adduce overwhelming evidence, had the opportunity justified it, on this subject—one most interesting and most vital in our consideration of the agricultural position. You have all heard of, and many have known, the Association for the Benefit of Agricultural Laborers. The newspapers have circulated their views and express them with energy and propriety. I read one of these journals, and learned their scheme for the elevation of this country. What is that? I will put it before you briefly, because on an occasion like the present I know that brevity must be studied. It is their opinion that this country ought to institute a vast body of small proprietors. They have fixed the amount of the proprietorship at twelve acres. They have worked it out in complete detail, and call upon the country, upon the government of the country, to carry it into effect. Now, what are these details? I mention the most important and the most interesting. It is calculated, according to the society, that a quantity of land, amounting to twelve acres, with a farmstead and necessary buildings, may be obtained for a little more than £600 or for £610, and they propose that a sum of £40 per annum should be paid for 30 years for the holding; at the end of the payment of that sum it would become freehold. But they are not sanguine that those who embark in those speculations will agree to pay £40 a year, which I will not call rent, but on which you can form your own opinions. They expect that the £800 in round numbers would be arranged at 4 per cent., that is, at £24 a year. They are paying £24 a year for 12 acres—that is, £2 an acre. Is that rent or is it not? It is not the average rent of the county of Buchingham, as that is 25s. You see what the scheme is of those who would protect the land, but they propose also, that being done, the country should supply each holder of those 12-acre farms with £120, to stock the farm, and also they call upon him not merely to return interest, but they look to him to supply what we may call the wear and tear of that stock. What is that but the duty which the farmer is now fulfilling Well, having bought his land under these circumstances, paying a heavier rent than is usual, and obtaining a floating capital by the credit of the state, no doubt the man may probably cultivate 12 acres with effect. But while he cultivates these 12 acres he will expect to be paid, he will expect to be lodged, he will expect to be clothed, and the third profit will appear in the shape of wages. Therefore according to the very accounts and the very estimates of those who are offering their wild schemes as the cure for one evil, three profits must arise from the land. I know, gentlemen, that these are questions which require some attention. Your position is critical at this moment, and you must give your minds to these questions. I know it may be said that after all we don’t care, we don’t fear the competition of Europe, but we do fear the competition of America. [A voice, “Hear, hear.”] Well now, first let me show you for a moment what is the competition of-Europe. If this new system, this new theory is adopted, that the assumed breakdown of the agricultural system of England is occasioned by its having to support three classes, and I have shown you that, whether there is one class or three classes, equally three profits must be received—and myself I believe that it is much more advantageous to a country that the three profits should be divided among three classes than that they should be received by one. It has given to this country an independent class; it has, I think, worked well for the liberty of England and its order; it has given us in the farmer the most important portion of the middle-class, which all wise men have looked upon as one of the best elements for the security of the state—[hear, hear]; and it has given you an agricultural peasantry which, whatever they may say—and the charges against us with respect to their position are generally made by those who are not acquainted with it—I know myself, from my own experience, happens to be that portion of the agricultural hierarchy that at this moment is most prosperous and content. [Cheers.] Well, now, I say, before I touch on America, which my friend, naturally interested, wished me to do, let me make one remark on this subject of peasant proprietors. I introduced originally the question of peasant proprietors, where one individual obtains the three profits, as the complete answer to those who said that because three profits were obtained the unsatisfactory state of the agricultural interest might be explained. But in France, we know on the highest authority, the question of peasant proprietorship has been, tried upon the greatest scale. There are by the best accounts in France 5,000,000 peasant proprietors who do not hold more than six acres of land—that is, 30,000,000 of acres. The experiment has been tried upon 30,000,000 acres; and what is the result of the experiment? You may refine and explain as you like; but what is the result of the experiment of these 5,000,000 proprietors, occupying a superfices of 30,000,000 acres, compared with what our 500,000 farmers have done? Remember what you are trying this test on. France has a most fertile soil, while that of England is ungrateful. You are trying it when that fertile soil is managed by the most ingenious and thrifty nation in the world—that can make something out of nothing—[laughter]—that spend in its management the greatest ability. But what is the result? It is that the production of England per acre is double that of France. The average of England is 28 bushels per acre; in France it is 14. I say that these are subjects that ought to be well understood by all classes of the agricultural interests.

The summing up is this, that when we are told that our agricultural system has failed in consequence of three classes being sustained by the land, I say that is a complete fallacy, for whatever may be your tenure the same results will occur. Three profits under all circumstances must be obtained from the land, and the question arises whether it is not better that the amount of profit should be represented by three classes rather than by one class. Proceeding in this argument, let me refer to the exclamation of a gentleman respecting America. I do not deny the great difficulties we have to encounter, and I should have been glad at once to avert to them, but with your permission I would make some brief remarks on the American question. We hear every day that it is impossible to compete with America. [Hear, hear.] There may be other causes which have prostrated our energy at the present moment, but I will not give any decided opinion on that matter. It is a singular circumstance that at this moment the greatest apprehension is felt in the United States that they cannot compete with Canada. [Laughter.] The taxation in America is so high, the rates of wages are so high, that it is impossible, according to some of the best American authorities, that they can any longer continue to successfully compete with Canada. What is the position of Canada? If we are to be fed by Canada, it is at least satisfactory that we shall be fed by our fellow subjects. But let us look for a moment at the situation of Canada, which is most peculiar. Since the surrender of the Hudson Bay Company and the settlement of their affairs, the dominion of Canada became possessed of what I might almost describe as an illimitable wilderness, and a wilderness of fertile land. Now, it is a peculiar circumstance, one to be noted, that the dominion of Canada is not in favor of peasant proprietorship. What the dominion of Canada is anxious for is a great yeoman class. It has legislated with that purpose. Its legislation is now an influence for that purpose; and let us see what is their legislation. Every harvestman, every man of fair character who comes to Canada, has a right to apply to the government to claim and to obtain what is called a quarter-section of land. That quarter-section of land consists of 160 acres. He receives those 160 acres on condition that at the end of three years he will reduce them to perfect cultivation, and that in the interval he will raise a substantial and real building upon the land. At the end of those three years the government inspector visits the allotment, and if it is found that the farmer has fulfilled the conditions, that he has completely cultivated the 160 acres and raised the necessary buildings, he is permitted to receive an equal quantity, that is to say, another quarter-section of 160 acres, on the payment of a dollar an acre, and no greater payment, even if the value of land in the interval had greatly increased. You will observe from the first moment that this is not a scheme of small peasant proprietors. It is not likely that a man will be able to reduce 320 acres to cultivation and erect buildings on the land through his own efforts. He must begin and proceed with hired labor. What is hired labor in Canada? Hired labor is less than hired labor in the United States. The rudest laborer will get 12s. a day, and a skilled laborer 16s. or 18s. The first thing that the new yeoman does—What I say I say on the highest authority—is to calculate the value of his freehold. The value of his freehold depends on the amount he has to pay during those six years in hired labor, in buildings, and the amount lie paid for the last quarter-section; and at four per cent. he writes off interest. What is that but rent? Now, there is another very curious circumstance which I will venture £o mention on this occasion, because I have heard it from as high an authority on the subject as can be conceived, and that is, that the sudden cultivation years ago of the extreme Western States of the United States, which first, I think, alarmed this country and drew its attention to it, and, no doubt affected prices; that in that country the production, which was extreme at the commencement, has been reduced one-third, generally speaking, and in some provinces one-half; and that the chief pioneers who advanced so greatly the cultivation of the extreme Western States of the United States have all sold, or to a great degree have sold their farms, and have sold them, allow me to say, at $30 and $40 an acre, showing, as an essential thing, that there was a basis of rent included in the arrangement, inseparable to the tenure. They have sold their farms, and they are now repairing to the illimitable wilderness of Canada. You will ask me what is my inference. My inference is a practical one. It may not be an interesting one. It may not be a satisfactory one; but I think you will, on reflection, deem it a wise one, that, placed where you are, as far as foreign competition is concerned, it is wise not to take—I speak to the landlord and the occupier equally—it is wise not to take precipitate steps. Take care that you do not conclude that that is permanent which is only transitory, though upon that subject I give no opinion, because I think it would be presumption in any one of us to give any opinion. But still I feel convinced that where you have to deal with new circumstances, that where you find them of so transitory a nature that the very land that four or five years ago, by its extraordinary produce of fifty bushels an acre, affected the market in England and frightened all those who are competent to think, to ponder, and to form an opinion upon it, I say it is wise when you see circumstances so transitory that the very place of competition is doubtful, and when you hear—and you hear through me, I will not say from me, oh high authority—that Canada expects completely and successfully to beat the United States from the European markets, it is wise for us not to take any precipitate steps. [Loud cheers.] There is another reason why I think, in considering the present position of the agricultural interests, it is unwise to act with precipitation. Let us for a moment dismiss from our minds all external considerations. Let us look at what has passed in our own country during the last five years. And has nothing passed which may account for a great deal of distress and suffering? Is it not a fact that for five years the farmer has sought in vain for a quick and matured produce to his labors? Is it not a fact, I venture to say in the memory of any man in this hall, that there is no instance in our recollection of such continuous dearth as there has been in England during the last five years? We have had bad harvests; we have had as bad harvests as any men have had to encounter, but we have not had a cluster of bad harvests. You have gone on and on, fairly hoping that nature would reassert itself; and if you had one or two bad harvests you have always believed that the time would naturally come in which you would find a remedy. Well, that is not the case; but it is necessary that we should be conscious of it, for there is a strain upon the proprietors of the land which they have not in our experience ever endured. Well, what is the natural course that we should take; what is the step we should pursue under such circumstances? I cannot doubt what is the course we ought to take. The rents of England have been calculated upon a fair average of nature. Our experience of the results of what has happened during he last five years has been entirely contrary to those calculations, and to my mind it is the duty, and, for all I hear, it may be the willing duty of the proprietors of the soil to come forward, to stand by that class with regard to whom there had never been any want of affection and duty and devotion. [Cheers.] I say that I believe the landlords of England are prepared to do their duty on this occasion, but what I want to impress upon you, and if I may presume to do so, upon members of the agricultural interest who are not present in this hall, is, that it is of vital importance that they should thoroughly comprehend the present state of affairs and act in a manner which is necessary, and in a spirit which is indispensable. [Cheers.] Now, I do not want to take refuge in general expressions. I say for one that reduction of rent calculated on the uniform percentage of the rent does not appear to me to be a panacea for the evils which we have to encounter, or the remedy for those calamities which most of us experience and all acknowledge. When I consider the variety of the soils in this country, the variety of climes even, I would say, in this island; when I remember the peculiar circumstances of districts, I would even say the peculiar circumstances of estates; when I mention what I know is a fact, and which many of you must know, that in the same district, with the same conditions, with the same soil, with the same climate, with the same amount of labor, the rents are very different as to the rate at which they are apportioned; it seems to me there is only one conclusion to arrive at, that we should examine every individual instance, and that the aid which landlord and tenant should give each other should be from reciprocal acquaintance of each other’s duties and necessities. Ten per cent. reduction of rent may be in some instances a very agreeable Christmas-box if it comes at the time, but I know instances in which ten per cent. reduction of rent would be utterly insufficient to the circumstances of the case. [Cheers.] Allow me to say, however—I consider myself in a judicial position, and therefore you will permit me to say—that there are some cases in which even ten per cent. reduction of rent is not necessary. [Laughter and cheers.]

Gentlemen, this is the spirit in which I think the present state of affairs ought to be encountered. I would not too curiously inquire upon the question of the competition of America, and I will tell you why: I have had an opportunity lately of some conversation on this subject with one who may probably be considered the highest living authority on such matters—which are almost as political, I may say, as statistical—and he told me that he was quite perplexed, after the deepest and most minute inquiry, as to what would be the result to Canada of 200 millions of the acres of the wilderness being gradually brought into cultivation. He said he saw there were some who believed—and he shared that opinion—that under all circumstances the market of the United States would be destroyed, but as regarded Canada itself, he said if the influx of population were to go on as it was going on now—but that we can’t expect—in consequence of these fertile acres being placed at their disposal, he could not tell what might be the consequences. That population would demand itself not only sustenance but extravagant and extreme sustenance, as always happened in California, when even money was made quickly; and for his part he should not be surprised, with the impulsive character of humanity of the United States, if that wilderness which so now alarmed us was not soon occupied by consuming millions. Therefore, I say that it is not wise at this moment to attempt to take into precise consideration the influence of those markets. When that influence is ascertained it will be recognized, and we must act upon it. But we ought to take into consideration the influence of unfruitful seasons in this country. This is a subject which we cannot avoid, which is fatally and painfully precise. It has had an effect upon the condition of the farming class that never was anticipated, and never could have been wished by the owners of land. We have always heard that their interests were identical, that between the landlord and the tenant there were feelings of regard and affection, and I have always had a most solemn and sincere belief in this operation; but if ever there were a case in which that sympathy should be shown it is the present. It would be not merely a great danger for ourselves, but it would be a great danger for England that the farming class should be reduced either in influence or in numbers. [Cheers.] I would make one more remark upon the position in which we are placed with reference to the want of precise information as to the effect of American produce on our position in England. I may remind you that we have, by a royal commission sent to the United States and Canada, two men of your own class—men of considerable ability—men who have had the advantage of enlightened opportunity in the House of Commons for many years to become acquainted with those principles on which a state ought to be governed. These two men—two great ornaments of the farming class in this country, are visiting America, and I await with confidence and interest their communications. But let me say there is no reason why, because we are placed in an indefinite position with regard to foreign supplies, and have taken all these means to obtain information, farmers of England should not take every legitimate step to make their position more satisfactory if they have occasion to complain. I want to remind you of a subject which is sometimes forgotten—the introduction by the present government of the agricultural holdings act. That bill is described by a stupid word generally used by stupid people. The bill is called a sham [laughter] by those who have never read the act and never studied it, and never profited by it. [Laughter.] I will show you in a sentence or two that that act is a living act. It is an act of the utmost advantage to the farmers already, and if they were wise it would be productive of great future advantage. That act in the first place, for the first time in English legislation, gave the presumption of all improvements in the land to the credit of the farmer and not to the landlord. That alone was a very great affair. That act secure compensation to the farmer for unexhausted improvements, and it did it in a manner which met the wants of different classes of improvements. It gave the best security that no dissension and quarrels should occur between the landlord and occupier. That act also extended the period of notice to quit from six to twelve months. You may say, and I know it will be said by those who know nothing about it, that all the world have contracted themselves out of this act. A great many persons have contracted themselves out of that act who ought not to have done so, and a great many men are now ashamed of having contracted themselves out of it; but I let that pass. Such an extraordinary stream of mendacity has been poured on this act that I need not dwell on the point at length. It was said, for instance, that the noble duke who brought the bill forward had contracted himself out of the act. My noble friend, the Duke of Richmond, has always given leases to his tenants. He prefers leases. Therefore it was impossible for him to contract himself out of the act. The other minister who brought it forward in the House of Commons was a gentleman who was a member for the county of Buckingham, and I defy any one to say that any of his tenants contracted themselves out of it. [Laughter.] I have seen a great many of these contracts, and they deal with the varying conditions of the soil and climate of England, and we find cases where the contracting parties, knowing nothing about it, have made contracts agreeing to all the vital points in the act, and the only disadvantage the occupier and tenant have is that the contracts are drawn up in a manner which may involve them in litigation, whereas if they had stuck to the act of Parliament they would have avoided that. [Laughter.] In most of these contracts I find that notice to quit is increased to one year. That is not as far as I would wish to go, as I have often said, but no doubt the arrangement was a prudent one. Most of their contracts agree, as a matter of course, that the tenant is to be compensated for his investment in the soil. Gentlemen, before I sit down I must make one remark, and I ought to apologize for having spoken at this length—you will remember that one gets garrulous when one meets one’s old friends. You will not forget the various scenes that have taken place with reference to this society—the struggles we have had, and the contests that we have had to encounter—and you will never forget that for a term, longer than a generation, you intrusted to me the greatest honor of my life, the honor of being your representative. [Cheers.] I did not think I should be doing my duty to-day in merely meeting you at a time of strain and trial like the present, and indulging only in a few commonplace remarks. There is no doubt that there is a party in this England—I don’t believe a very numerous party, but a very busy one—who always view with feelings of hostility the agricultural interests. They do so because they are opposed to the free and aristocratic government [cheers] that still prevails in this country, and which it is to the interest of the agriculturists to maintain. You may get rid of it, gentlemen, but you will have either a despotism that ends in a democracy or a democracy that ends in despotism. [Cheers.] A year ago, when the pressure was first touching us, in addition to the general sufferings of the country, when it began to be whispered that the agricultural interest was suffering, that party sprung immediately to their heels. They saw a golden opportunity, as they thought, and their first step was an attempt to agitate among the agricultural laborers of the country. Fortunately, those men who attempted to agitate in rural England were thorough cockneys. [Laughter.] They were not, perhaps, born in London, but they were born in another town that often makes a greater noise. If they had known anything of country life they would have known they had got the stick by the wrong end; that if there were any class connected with the land in England that was unusually prosperous it was the agricultural laborer. But when those meetings were held and the dreadful news was announced that agricultural laborers in some parts of England were only getting 14s. a week, the absurdity of the whole affair was too ludicrous for contemplation. Even the agricultural laborers who made those complaints could scarcely keep their countenances. They knew well that during the last 40 years their wages had been raised 40 per cent. They knew very well that with those increased wages their purchasing power of all that was requisite for life was immensely increased. They knew very well that throughout England to a great extent their habitations were greatly improved—in themselves a source not only of health but of income—and, in fact, the agitation founded upon data so fallacious quickly evaporated. But another year has passed, and the strain upon the farmers of England is excessive and lamentable. But a year ago they were setting the agricultural laborers against the farmers, now they are attempting to set the farmers against the landlords. It will never do. The Government of England will always be supported by those who know the spirit of justice and liberality on which it is based. We will not consent to be devoured singly and alone. We have stood together Under many trials, and England has recognized that in the influence, the best influence, of the agricultural interest there is the best security for liberty and law. [Loud cheering.]

Mr. Terry proposed “The health of the Earl of Beaconsfield,” not only as president of the association hut as prime minister of England. [Loud cheers.]

Lord Beaconsfield. If I am prime minister of England, next to the favor of my sovereign I owe it to the county of Bucks. [Cheers.] I have already trespassed on your time, therefore I will merely say that I hope always to live in your affections. [Loud cheers.]

[Inclosure 2 in No. 53.]

Lord Derby and Mr. Cross at Southport.

Liverpool, Thursday Night.

[The Daily News, Friday, September 19, 1879.]

Southport was favored to-day with very fine weather on the occasion of the cutting of the first sod of its important promenade extension, and the laying of the foundation stone of the New Market Hall, for both of which ceremonies the services of the Earl of Derby had been secured.

After luncheon at the town-hall the party visited the glaciarum and the public baths, and in the evening were entertained at a banquet given by the mayor.

Lord Derby, in responding to the toast of his health, proposed by the mayor, said: Mr. Mayor, my lords, and gentlemen, I should be more indifferent than I ever have been, or than I hope I ever shall be, to the good opinion and to the kindly feelings of my friends and neighbors in Lancashire, if I could listen unmoved to the kind expressions which have been used by the mayor, and to the cordial response which you have given to the words that fell from him. I know that any public man in this country, by the nature ‘and necessity of his calling, must make enemies as well as friends [hear, hear], but I always have observed this, that the English people are ready to put not only a just but a generous construction upon the sayings and doings of any public man whom they believe to be sincerely and disinterestedly anxious to promote the public weal. [Hear, hear.] Of course, in times of excitement, there will be a little mud thrown on all sides, and if a man engaged in public life objects to a few splashes of mud, I should say he is no more fit to be a politician than he is to be a fox-hunter. [Hear, hear.] But I am sure of this—that no man ever for a series of years endeavored to serve England, putting the interest of England first and his own in the second place, who lost by it in the long run, if, as I believe, the only thing really worth gaining in public life is the esteem and approbation of your fellow-men. [Cheers] Well, gentlemen, the wise man never talks about himself if he can help it, and for my own part I have very often been reminded of a passage which struck me in the American Franklin’s “Memoirs,” in which he says casually, “I have observed that if a man prefaces what he is going to utter with these words, ‘I may without vanity’, you may be sure that a very notable piece of vanity is being put forward.” [Applause.] I am not going to fall into that trap, and I turn from the personal part of the question. And now, gentlemen, I proceed to discharge the very agreeable duty with which, by permission of the mayor, I have been intrusted—that of proposing the toast of “Prosperity to the town and trade of Southport.” The noble lord then referred to the rapid growth of Southport, the population of which in 1861 was only 9,000, compared with 18,000 in 1871, and 33,000 in the present year, the ratable value of the borough having increased from £30,000 in 1841 to upwards of £200,000 at the present day. His lordship continued: It is hardly possible now to meet upon any public occasion without reference to that which is in all our minds, and which occasionally is brought home to many of us in a very practical way—I mean that general depression in all branches of industry of which we cannot flatter ourselves that we have yet seen the end. It is some satisfaction to be able to trace out the causes of that depression, because in so doing we have the best assurance that many of them at least are not of a permanent character. [Hear, hear.] We have had in the last three years weather affecting our harvests which we may fairly call exceptionally bad. We have had in the same time two small wars on hand, and apprehensions of war on a greater scale. Now, we may feel tolerably sure that the bad weather will not continue indefinitely, and I hope we maybe sure that the unfavorable circumstances to which I have referred are not such as will be of perpetual duration. [Cheers.] Then, again, during the last few years we, as a nation, have burnt our fingers pretty handsomely with foreign loans, and I sup-. pose we have learnt wisdom enough to know that despotic and half-barbarous governments are not to be trusted with other people’s money—[loud cheers]—in fact, that about the only governments which are fit to be trusted with money are those who very seldom want it. Better harvests, peaceable times, and a stoppage of the draw upon our savings by foreign loans will go a long way to bring about better times; and although I do not wish to take an unduly optimist view of the situation, and although I do not deny in the least the reality and severity of the distress that exists in many employments, still there are some facts which I frankly own I cannot, for my part, altogether reconcile with what I see and hear. There has been no doubt a falling off in the consumption of articles subject to duty during the last twelve months, as you see by the weekly returns. It is a falling off, no doubt, sufficient to be inconvenient to the chancellor of the exchequer, and therefore inconvenient in its consequences to us. But it is not enough, so far as it has gone yet, to indicate any large decrease of consuming power on the part of the working classes as a whole. Well, so again the returns of the savings banks deposits up to the last few months show no diminution, but, on the contrary, an increase. It is a very slight increase, but still it is not a falling off. I was told the other day by a person who is in a position to know what he was talking about, that in the very largest business center of all this country, where, if anywhere, one might expect to feel the consequences of a general depression, he had seen the income-tax returns (including a portion of this year), and they showed not a diminution, but on the whole a slight increase on those of the year before. That is a fact of which necessarily I can only speak second-hand; but if you look at the public returns, which are accessible to all the world, you will see that, although incomes liable to taxes have declined a little in the last year, still, if you go back a little further, and include the last ten years, you will find an enormous increase, an increase from 430 to 570 millions, showing 140 millions to the good. Now, gentlemen, I give you these facts for what they are worth. I know perfectly well what there is to be said, and there is a great deal to be said, on the other side. [Hear, hear.] I found no theory upon that. All that I want to do is to protest against that which 1 think is becoming far too common among us the habit of jumping hastily and headlong to sweeping conclusions on the most important subjects on very inadequate data. [Applause.]

Five years ago prosperity was at its height, and not one person in a hundred cared to observe that which nevertheless was sufficiently obvious—that a great deal of the enormous apparent increase of our wealth was only due to a fall in the purchasing power of money, making everything salable seeming to be a great deal more than it had been, and necessarily entailing upon holders of fixed incomes a corresponding amount of loss. [Hear, hear.] Now, because we have had four or five bad years, half the people you talk to are in the opposite extreme, and begin to speculate on the decline of English commerce and wealth. They may be right; it is impossible to prove they are not. Some time or other the turning point between advance and decline must arise in the history of every nation; but it would be very easy to show, if any one cared to, that the same kind of language we habitually hear now has been used at least in every generation for the last century and a half. [Laughter.] I wish that those who are inclined to despond as to the industrial future of the country would look back sixty years to the time which immediately followed the close of the great European war. That was really a time of trial. We were very glorious, we were very victorious, and by an unfortunate combination, which perhaps is not rare in history, that state of things was accompanied by a discontented and pauperized population and an almost desperate condition of finances. That was a time when, if ever, men might have been excused if they desponded. The annual income of the nation was certainly not above one-half, probably not more than one-third, of what it is now. The debt at that time pressed therefore as heavily upon those who had to pay the interest as a debt of two thousand millions does in the present day. Every article was taxed to the utmost it would bear, and beyond; and that not in substitution of, but in addition to, an income tax of ten per cent. There were circumstances a good deal more unpleasant than we find now; but we endured and persevered, and we know the result. No other country than England has grown so rapidly in wealth in the last 60 years, and I say it is unmanly, it is unworthy, to talk now in a desponding strain because we have had a few losses and because we may have a few more. Take two great divisions of our industry —agriculture and manufacture. As to agriculture, I do not deny, and I do not attempt to minimize, the severe suffering which has fallen both upon landlords and upon their tenants; but I may note in passing, that so far as I have been able to observe, the condition of the third class concerned in agriculture, that of the laborer, has not been depreciated to the same extent. [Hear, hear.] I take it that upon the whole the agricultural laborer throughout England is better off than he was a generation ago. [Hear, hear, and applause.] His wages are higher, and there is labor tor every one if he chooses to work. But returning to the other two classes concerned, what of their future? [Hear, hear.] I do not understand the language of those—although I have heard it pretty often—who talk about the possibility of the land of England going out of cultivation. The last three years have been altogether exceptional in point of weather, and we cannot judge by them. [Hear, hear.] But when that exceptional time is over we shall be able to judge better than we can at present what the real effect of foreign competition has been upon our agriculture; and, therefore, what will be in the future a fair settlement as between landlord and tenant. But observe this, the tenant can only suffer for a time. [Hear, hear.] When existing contracts are run out it is his own fault if he renews the engagement on any terms disadvantageous to himself. [Hear, hear.] Therefore, speaking of the class as a whole, and speaking of their powers and interest, I say whatever the depreciation in the value of land may be, the tenant will not be a considerable loser in the long run. [Hear, hear.] Whatever loss there is must fall in the end—I do not say exclusively, hut mainly—on the owner of the soil. [Hear, hear.] Now, I am a landowner myself, and naturally I sympathize with my friends who are in the same position, and think there may probably be a large, possibly a very large, reduction of agricultural rents throughout England; but if we look at the matter from a national point of view, I cannot help saying that the reduction of rent duty, and the lower price at which food can be obtained by the population, is not for the entire community an unmixed or unqualified evil. [Hear, hear.] No doubt the producer of food, or rather the owner of the land upon which it is produced, would lose, but consumers gain, and after all they are the majority. [Hear, hear, and applause.] That, therefore, is my summary of the agricultural situation—probably heavy loss falling upon One class, but probably, also, if you cast the balance, considerable compensation for that loss in a national point of view by the greater cheapness of food. [Applause.] As to our manufacturing industries, it is a far more difficult and complicated question, and I think no one can doubt that if we are to be prevented from drawing from foreign markets, and not only from foreign markets, but from those of our own colonies, by protective tariffs, that will be one of the heaviest blows which this country has ever felt. Is that really to be apprehended? In the United States, as we know, the principle of protection reigns supreme; but Americans are about the quickest-witted people that now exist upon the earth, and they are the most receptive of any new ideas, and I can hardly bring myself to believe that they will be likely long to create and maintain at the public expense a privileged class of manufacturers and producers as on the Continent. But it is hardly accurate to say, as is often stated, that protectionist ideas have obtained the ascendency. The fact is that the great monarchies of Europe care little about protection or free trade. Emperors and field marshals don’t concern themselves with such vulgar themes. [Laughter.] They want money, they want to keep up those gigantic armaments, and they must have the money from some quarter. They find it difficult to get it and they don’t much care how they get it, whether it is by protection or not. [A laugh.] This condition of things cannot last forever. [Hear, hear.] It is not for me to predict how or when it is likely to end; but that it must end before many years are over seems to be beyond a doubt. [Applause.] I know it is hard to say to men who are suffering, and know better than I do what they are suffering from, that there is nothing for you but to wait; but still, whatever losses there are you had better trust in tried remedies than in remedies which may only aggravate the complaint, and exercise severe economy, private, and, I will venture to say, public also—[applause]—as a duty and necessity. I think also it will be well for those who act as leaders of the workingman to consider whether in the case of industries which are not likely soon to revive there is not a better chance for the men beyond the seas than in this country. [Applause.] They will do very little good by strikes, but they may really do some good to themselves and to their mates by limiting their numbers, and those who go will have the satisfaction of thinking that they assist those who stay behind. [Hear, hear.] Now, gentlemen, I ought really to apologize to you for the length with which I have addressed you. My only excuse is, that as you called upon me to address you, I thought you would rather that I gave you a serious opinion upon the questions of the day, whether you agree in what I have said or not, than that I should confine myself to mere compliments and commonplaces. [Applause.] Gentlemen, I beg to give you the toast which I have been authorized to propose, “Prosperity to the town and trade of Southport.” With that toast I couple the name of Mr. Alderman Nicholson, the ex-mayor, and Mr. Alderman Griffiths. His lordship sat down amidst great cheering.

The next toast was that of “The members of Parliament and the high sheriff of the county.”

Lord Houghton, in responding to the toast, and speaking Of the House of Lords, said he had not been in the House very long, but he had been there long enough to feel the influence of the house of Derby. When he first entered the House it was a despotic influence, now it was a prevalent influence, and he believed in every case it was for the good of this country. He had learned the lesson that the House of Lords was as much a representative assembly as the House of Commons. By indirect means, by influences which permeated through the minds of educated men, the House of Lords became as conscious of the sense of the public opinion of England as the House of Commons. [Hear, hear.] And this they would allow him to say, that if by any government whatever changes were proposed in the legislation of this kingdom, he might almost say in the constitution of this kingdom, changes in the land laws, changes in the order of succession, changes in the game laws, changes in other forms of legislation which he believed would be as inevitably produced by the present state of things in this country as was the repeal of the corn laws by the famine in Ireland, he did not believe that any government that had the courage to produce those measures before the House of Lords would find any invincible or even difficult resistance. [Hear, hear.]

Mr. Cross, the home secretary, responded on behalf of the House of Commons. Having expressed his sense of the cordiality of the welcome given to him, and his pleasure at meeting Lord Derby, one of his oldest friends, and one whom he knew to be one of the kindest of neighbors, and the best of landlords, he said that he agreed with much that had fallen from his lordship’s lips on the subject of the depression of trade in this country, and he wished to supplement one or two remarks that he had made. When they spoke of this depression they ought to remember that they were comparing it with a time of the greatest possible inflation—an inflation of all commercial communities, and what he called an undue inflation—which existed four or five years ago. He thought that that had much to do not only with the gloomy view which people had now taken of the present depression, but also with the production of the depression itself. Another evil that it had produced was the leading in all ranks of life to a too high scale of living. People had come to think that those things which were really only luxuries were necessaries, and that because they were making large incomes then they must always continue to do so. This had caused a great amount of distress now that there was a depression in trade. He sincerely hoped that before long this depression would diminish, and trade naturally revive. It was reviving in America at the present moment, and it had always revived in America before it had done so here, and he thought they might confidently look for a turning in this long lane. [Hear, hear.] There were anticipations of even greater suffering in the coming winter than in the last one, owing to diminished means, but still he sincerely hoped that the English character would be sufficient, not only to help them in heart and spirits through the winter, but also that better days were still in store for them. He would only say that there was no person who more heartily wished that they should have neither great wars nor little wars than himself. There would never have been any great war but for the vast armaments to which Lord Derby had alluded, and, so far as the government was concerned, he was quite certain that his lordship would say that in the last war—the Zulu war—it was not begun by the government themselves, and that when undertaken by them it was undertaken with no spirit of aggression. He sincerely hoped that these wars would soon be ended and that they should be able to devote several sessions of Parliament to matters more nearly touching the hearths and homes of those whose guardians they were, in the effort to promote their health and comfort. [Cheers.] The right honorable gentleman again thanked the assembly for its hearty greeting of him and his colleagues, and indorsed the observations of Lord Derby, that while it was no easy thing to hold a public position, they had the satisfaction of knowing that if a man tried to do his best for the country the people were willing to overlook his faults, and condone his failures. Mr. Cross concluded by proposing the health of the mayor of Southport, which was duly acknowledged.

The proceedings shortly afterwards closed.

No. 207. Mr. Hoppin to Mr. Evarts. [Document 228]

No. 207.
Mr. Hoppin to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
London, September 20, 1879. (Received October 2.) No. 54.]

Sir: I have the honor to ask your attention to a subject which seems to me of importance to the interests of the United States at the present time.

The general depression of trade and industry, and particularly the distress in the agricultural districts caused by a succession of short crops and the competition of foreign nations, have turned the attention of a class of people in this country who have not heretofore entertained such ideas to the advantage of emigrating to the United States. These persons are not clay laborers, who desire to go to America chiefly for the reason that they can obtain better wages there than here. They are intelligent and well-informed persons of respectable position, and many of them in possession of a little money which they are willing to invest in the United States. All of them, however, are anxious to procure full and accurate information on the subject before taking the important step of abandoning their native country.

We have already received letters at this legation asking for such information, and particularly if we can furnish any pamphlets treating of stock-farming in Nebraska, Colorado, California, and Texas, and giving the cost of land, the nature of the soil and climate, and various other interesting details. We have been obliged to disappoint our correspondents by stating we had no such documents to communicate, and referring them to encyclopedias and other general sources of knowledge.

It is unnecessary to urge the importance of encouraging emigration of the character I have indicated, and for this purpose it seems to me desirable that the representatives of the United States in Europe should be furnished with the means to answer fully such questions as I have mentioned.

It is remarkable how ignorant even the educated classes in this country are of the geography, history, and the agricultural, industrial, and vital statistics of the United States, and how few books can be found here within the reach of persons intending to emigrate which will satisfy their reasonable curiosity in respect to the routes they should take after landing on the other side; the expense of traveling and house-building; the locality of unimproved lands; the cost and mode of purchase, and many other important points.

I am aware that this matter is already attracting attention in several States, and particularly in Texas, Missouri, Wisconsin, Florida, and Virginia, and that boards have been appointed and agencies established to promote emigration, and for that purpose to give information to parties intending to emigrate. But so far as I can ascertain, Texas is the only State thus represented in London, and I do not know how far that agency may be sanctioned by the State authorities.

It is possible also that several railway corporations are taking steps to bring their loans into market, and may have correspondents in Europe who may furnish such particulars as intending purchasers may desire to know.

But all such agencies, whether of States or corporations, and however honestly and efficiently conducted, will never command for their statements the same confidence which would be extended to the impartial and more comprehensive information which might be communicated under the authority of the general government.

It would be impossible here, in the absence of the necessary documents, to prepare such a description of the location and prices of lands, the character of the soil and productions, the laws of citizenship, descent, and taxation, the routes and cost of travel, and other particulars which would answer the purpose above set forth.

I venture therefore most respectfully to suggest that such a pamphlet should be prepared and printed under the authority of one of the departments of the general government, and numerous copies of it sent to our diplomatic and consular representatives abroad, for them to communicate the same to the public journals, and to parties desiring to emigrate to the United States. I am satisfied that such a publication would be welcomed by philanthropists here who are now occupied with the serious question of providing food for this vast population, a problem the difficulty of which will be diminished in proportion to the decrease of the number of mouths for which food is to be provided.

If I may be permitted to enumerate some of the points upon which, judging from the inquiries which have been made at this legation, such a pamphlet should touch, I should say that it ought to furnish, under the head of each State or Territory in which there are considerable bodies of unimproved lands, the following details: 1. The amount of public lands, location of land offices, modes of purchase, nature of soil, and productions and cost.

2. The lands belonging to the State and to railway corporations, with the same particulars as above.

3. An outline of the laws of the particular State regulating citizenship and the rights of aliens, and the descent and distribution of property.

4. An approximate statement of taxation.

5. Religious and educational advantages, character of the climate, and sanitary statistics.

6. The principal routes by which the lands may be reached and the markets found for the produce, an approximate statement of the prices which may be obtained, and also of the cost of provisions and labor, and the expense of traveling to such lands from the seaboard.

An inexpensive outline map should accompany each copy of this pamphlet showing in different colors the chief production of each region,, such as wheat, tobacco, cotton, and Indian corn, and giving also the leading lines of railway communication between the principal masses of the unimproved territory and the Atlantic ports.

Trusting that in the suggestions I have made above I may not be thought to have transcended my diplomatic duty,

I have, &c.,

W. J. HOPPIN.

No. 208. Mr. Hoppin to Mr. Evarts. [Document 229]

No. 208.
Mr. Hoppin to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
London, October 8, 1879. (Received October 22.) No. 66.]

Sir: Referring to my dispatch No. 39, of the 4th of September last, I have the honor to inclose a copy of a note, which I received this morning from Lord Salisbury, in reply to the one I addressed to him on the 25th of August last, upon the subject of Mormon emigration from this country to the United States.

I have, &c.,

W. J. HOPPIN.

[Inclosure in Mr. Hoppin’s No. 66.]

Mr. Salisbury to Mr. Hoppin.

Foreign Office, October 6, 1879.

Sir: I referred to Her Majesty’s secretary of state for the home department your letter of the 25th of August, conveying to me the wish of your government that steps should be taken by Her Majesty’s Government to prevent the adoption of the doctrines of Mormonism by persons in this country, and the emigration to the United States of persons emigrating for the purpose of joining the Mormon community at Salt Lake, in the Territory of Utah; and I have the honor to acquaint you that a reply has been received, stating that Her Majesty’s Government have no authority to place any restraint on emigration or to interfere with regard to the opinions which may be held by British subjects on questions of religion or morality so long as no act is committed which is a breach of the law of England, and that they are therefore powerless to carry out the measures suggested by you.

I have to add, however, that Mr. Cross will cause a notice to be inserted in the newspapers, cautioning persons against being deceived by Mormonite emissaries, and making generally known the law of the United States affecting polygamy, as set forth in your letter, and the penalties attaching to infringement thereof.

I have, &c.,

SALISBURY.

No. 209. Mr. Hoppin to Mr. Evarts. [Document 230]

No. 209.
Mr. Hoppin to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
London, October 11, 1879. (Received October 22.) No. 72.]

Sir: I have the honor to inclose herewith a copy of an editorial from the London Times of October 8, 1879, upon American agriculture.

I have, &c.,

W. J. HOPPIN.

[Inclosure in Mr. Hoppin’s No. 72.]

Editorial from the London Times of Wednesday, October 8, 1879.

Our special correspondent at New York sends us an account of American farming as he has seen it on the road between New York and Boston. Of farming, indeed, in the ordinary sense of the word, he has not much to say. The progress of corn-growing in the Western States of the Union, and the facilities given for the transport of grain by rail and by water carriage, have had the effect we might look for from them on the regions by the Atlantic seaboard. Corn has been well-nigh driven out of the field, and its place has been taken by produce of some other kind, better suited to the country, less threatened by the tremendous competition of the West, and, in the near neighborhood of large centers of demand, more likely to be remunerative. The American, we are told, has an instinctive aversion to the pursuit of an unprofitable calling. Where he cannot, therefore, grow corn to advantage, he turns his land and his labor to account in some other way. In New England he tries dairy farming, and keeps New Haven, and Hartford, and Boston supplied with butter and milk. Round and; about New York vegetable-growing and fruit-growing are the chief country industries. Long Island, for sixty miles from the city, is covered with market gardens very highly farmed. Up the Hudson River, and inland for seventy miles or more, the same state of things is to be found. For corn, and for butchers’ meat, the East is content to be dependent on the West. For fruit, and for vegetables, it can rely on its own resources. Florida, far away to the south, sends up its strawberries in April. Maine, to the far north, keeps back its strawberries until July. New York, happily placed between if two such friendly fires, enjoys the advantage of all climates. For all that can be grown near and far, there is a full and constant demand. The taste for good vegetables and fruit has increased enormously in America during the past ten years. New York has as much of both as it could wish. Boston is somewhat less well furnished; but, even so, Boston rejoices in a profusion which Londoners will hear of with some envy. Grapes, peaches, melons, and pears were abundant and cheap at the date of our correspondent’s letter. Fruit was on sale everywhere; and with half a bushel of peaches to be bought for a couple of shillings, the laboring classes were among the most forward to avail themselves of the chance offered them. The report from Boston is that the quantity, quality, and variety of the fruit and vegetables are astonishing; while New York is stated to be better furnished still. Quantity, quality, and variety may all be found in London, but at a price which prohibits the enjoyment of them to all but the tolerably well-to-do classes. The taste exists widely enough, as the trucks; and street barrows which minister to it show. But half a bushel of peaches for a couple of shillings would be looked at with suspicion by the most hardy of the well-seasoned customers who venture to buy their fruit in the streets. They must pay a higher price than this for any poor stuff which they purchase with the hope of eating it afterwards.

As between the English and the American consumer there is thus no question which of the two is the better off. New York and Boston, too, are shown in our correspondent’s letter as the very paradise of vegetarians. His purpose, however, is not merely to dangle before our eyes the vision of an abundance which we are not permitted to share. It is to the producer that he is addressing himself. Go and do likewise is the lesson to which his remarks lead up. He qualifies it, indeed, by the admission that English farmers cannot hope to do all that American farmers are doing. The climate is not equally favorable to them, and there is a further hint that they are not equally capable of doing the best that circumstances allow. But, granting that they are willing to learn and to do the best they can, let us see what they are bidden to look for as the reward of their obedience. It is to this that they will be likely to look first. To increase the health and advance the sobriety of the British public are noble objects; but as stimulants to hard work they must take a secondary place. We could wish, from this point of view, that rewards of successful farming industry in the eastern States of America were greater than our correspondent’s letter describes them to be. Of market gardening we are not told much. In Long Island, men who have ten acres of their own can hope to pay expenses, to keep themselves and their families, and to clear their hundred a year afterwards. English market gardeners, who have to pay rent for their land, would have, on this computation, little or nothing over at the year’s end. Ten pounds an acre is no high rent for land suitable for market gardening; and ten pounds an acre would exactly slice off the whole profit which the American freeholder enjoys. Of dairy-farming the statistics are more fully given, and they are even less attractive. With hard work, hard living, and constant thrift, the New England dairy farmer has not been doing well. The most energetic of the young men are not satisfied with the prospect which their fathers’ business offers them. Some betake themselves to the West and to grain-growing; others to town life and manufactures. We have, in short, a reproduction in the western hemisphere of many of the essential features of English life. In England, too, the towns are found competing with the country districts and drawing off the best and most promising hands. The vast Western States, which have their attraction for the cramped and competition-driven inhabitant of the eastern seaboard, are looked to with no less hope by some English cultivators who find it difficult to make a living at home. The distance is greater and the plunge a somewhat more desperate one; but the trial is, nevertheless, made, and will be made still more frequently if the returns of farming continue to be what they have been during the past few years. In other ways, too, our correspondent’s letter shows us points in common between England and America. The sketch it gives of market gardening in New York, developed and maintained by help of the fertilizing matter which the vegetable vans bring back with them on their return journey; the successful men who go to market with their own produce; the market itself, with its varied stores of all sorts of vegetables—all these are just as truly English as American subjects. The chief difference seems to be in the greater distance from town to which American market gardening has extended. On the American scale all England would not more than serve for this one use. As grain crops fail to be remunerative, the experiment remains of growing vegetables further and further away from the markets in which they are to be sold. But the market gardener in this country will have to create the taste by which he is to live. The supply already is as great as the effectual demand, and, with a large increase of supply, the demand must, be raised too if market gardening is to continue the profitable affair it has been.

There are other lessons which America may teach us, besides the advantage of producing milk and butter and vegetables in the place of corn. This we shall learn in due course, as it seems likely to be of service to us. Cultivation which ceases to pay expenses and to yield a fair profit over will be abandoned in favor of some other form of industry, either in this country or abroad. Market gardening and dairy farming will obtain their just share of recruits, with some danger of a diminished rate of profits both to new and to old lands. But from the machinery for saving labor which has been adopted in America we may take lessons with more certainty that they will be of value to us. America can send us corn at a low price, not only because she can grow corn more easily than England can, but scarcely less because she has learned to economize both time and labor at every stage in the transmission of it. The letter, we published lately from our correspondent gives some important instances to this effect. A vessel which has been loaded with corn at New York in a single day takes ten or twelve days to unload when she arrives at an English port. The loading has been done by machinery. The unloading is done by hand work, at a considerably greater cost, and with a delay which stands, of course, for so much extra expense in ship hire, or, in other words, in freightage. The exportation of corn has been made a great commercial business in America, and this to an extent with which there is nothing in this country to correspond. Railways and merchants lay themselves out for it, and do their utmost to facilitate it. A keen appreciation of novelty, a readiness to adopt improved processes, and the extensive application of machinery, are, our correspondent says, important elements in the industrial successes of the United States. We are no strangers in England to the application of machinery to the industrial arts. But the supremacy we claim in this matter might be maintained more certainly if it were aided by the mental habits our correspondent finds in Americans, and which are, perhaps, not equally conspicuous in ourselves. Englishmen of all classes go well in a groove; but change they dislike of all things. The result is that they are sometimes unpleasantly made aware that they live in a changeful world, and that they are bound under heavy penalties to suit themselves to its ever-varying conditions. An instinctive aversion to the pursuit of an unprofitable calling may be a less distinctively American feeling than our correspondent appears to fancy it. Englishmen as little as Americans love to carry on business at a loss. But in the capacity for accommodating himself to circumstances the American may be granted to excel. The Englishman may at least learn to follow at his own pace where he is not willing to take the lead. He may thus retain his dislike for novelty in the abstract, and surrender it where novelty comes to him with its first shine worn off it, and where there is already precedent to be urged for it.

No. 210. Mr. Hoppin to Mr. Evarts. [Document 231]

No. 210.
Mr. Hoppin to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
London, October 18, 1879. (Received October 30.) No. 78.]

Sir: I have the honor to inclose herewith copies of an extract from to-day’s Times, containing a report of the speeches delivered by Lord Salisbury at Manchester yesterday in defense of the government.

I have, &c.,

W. J. HOPPIN.

[Inclosure in Mr. Hoppin’s No. 78.—Extract from the Times of Saturday, October 18, 1879.]

Lord Salisbury at Manchester.

The visit of the Marquis of. Salisbury to Manchester yesterday to attend the conservative banquet gave an opportunity to the chamber of commerce to thank his lordship for the services he had rendered to the public in commercial matters and to address him upon the subject of tariff negotiations with foreign countries. A memorial, in which these and other matters were briefly referred to, was presented to Lord Salisbury by the secretary of the chamber, Mr. Browning, in the presence of a large meeting. Mr. Benjamin Armitage, president of the chamber, occupied the chair.

The president, in his opening remarks, said the Manchester Chamber of Commerce did not in any way serve the purpose of party politics. It had been conspicuous in its past history for complete impartiality in this respect, and desired only to enter into the discussion of questions which directly affected the commercial interests of the community. The character and tone of the address presented to his lordship would, therefore, be of a purely business kind, avoiding such topics as at other times formed the subject of debate and controversy. It was not the habit of commercial associations like this to address Her Majesty’s ministers, except for purposes of placing before them the complaints and wants of members. They were altogether a trading people in these parts, and, knowing how dependent we were for the life of our commerce on that security and confidence which were the fruits of peace and quiet, they regarded with grave anxiety the necessity, whenever it arose, for government to discontinue their friendly relations with other countries, upon which our commercial prosperity was based. [Loud cries of “Hear, hear.”]

Lord Salisbury, in reply to the memorial, said: Mr. President and Gentlemen: I have before this had the honor of receiving a kindly-worded memorial, such as that; for which I now thank you, at the hands of this chamber; but on former occasions when I had the pleasure of meeting you and addressing you I was officially connected with only one branch of those political matters in which, as a commercial community, you take especial interest. The office I at present hold brings me into a more close connection with your interests and your aims upon a great variety of subjects, and the duty of doing—I am afraid it is little enough—what is in the power of government to forward those interests and to secure the accomplishment of your wishes is the most interesting and agreeable part of the duties I have to perform. [Cheers.] In one sense I may say that it is the whole of the duties I have to perform, for the foreign office and the diplomatic service of this country exist for the purpose, either directly or as an ultimate result, of securing the peace of the world, which is essential to the conduct of your industry and commerce, and of which the prosperity of that industry is the fairest fruit; and this connection, which extends through all the branches of the foreign office in one sense, and which is constantly present to our minds in the discharge of all our duties, I will venture to say must continue in whosesoever hands the discharge of the functions of the foreign office rests. I do not desire to speak in detail with reference to the question of the appointment of a minister of commerce, to which your memorial alludes. It is a matter which is occupying the deep attention of Her Majesty’s Government. [Cheers.] But until the determination of the government shall be formed in detail, it is obvious that I cannot enter more clearly into the matter. I will only say that without attempting to pass an opinion upon the arguments which were used in commending that proposition to the House of Commons, or the arguments referred to in your address to-day, I believe that ultimately there is more to be done by the action of voluntary associations such as this than by the action of any government department whatever. Constantly in the course of our business we feel the necessity of the assistance of the chambers of commerce and the knowledge which they alone can furnish in order to guide our action intelligently. We have always received a sympathetic response when we have appealed for that assistance. But yet I would take this opportunity of pressing upon this chamber, and upon any other chambers of commerce whom my remarks may reach, the extreme importance of giving to the foreign office freely, even if it be at the cost of some little labor, that minute information with respect to the particular interests of particular trades and their bearing upon the tariffs of foreign nations which only can be possessed by those who pursue those avocations, and without which it is perfectly impossible that the foreign office can do its duty. But, in any case, supposing your minister of commerce appointed and all his functions marked out, the foreign office must still retain a close connection with the industries and prosperity of communities such as this, because all the communications which Her Majesty’s Government make, whatever instrumentality is used for framing them, must be addressed through the foreign office to foreign powers, and foreign powers will not listen to more than one voice proceeding from the government of this country; and the duty we have to perform in these days assuredly is difficult enough. Everywhere our business is, if we can, to keep open the avenues of commerce, and everywhere we see rising round us a thick wall of protection cutting those avenues off. I ventured, in answer to a deputation which came partly from this chamber in the early part of the year, to express the opinion that this increase of the system of protection is not merely due to the prevalence of faulty theories. If that were the case, we might hope that the spread of sounder doctrines and the increase of communication would induce peoples and governments to give up theories the hollowness of which has been proved. [Hear, hear.] The real cause of the increase of protective duties is the establishment of those gigantic military forces which are increasing every year in every one of the larger countries of this hemisphere, which constitute a permanent drain on the forces of industry, a permanent danger to the interests of commerce, and which impose upon the governments which feel themselves bound—and if one government does it all governments have to do it—in order to maintain these forces the necessity of finding money in some way that shall not too heavily gall the interests and susceptibilities of their people. Indirect taxation, it is well known, is more readily paid than direct taxation, because its amount is not so easily recognized; and it is the necessity of finding the sustenance of those vast armaments that forces governments to have recourse to indirect taxation, and they naturally avail themselves of the political support which is to be obtained from those trades that wish for protection in order to carry their policy into effect. I do not, therefore, look for a very early remedy of the present state of things from the mere spread of more enlightened doctrines. In one or two countries I confess I am surprised that more enlightened doctrines have not hitherto had some effect on legislation. In the Austro-Hungarian Empire, for instance, whatever tendency there is towards free trade comes from Hungary, which is a large agricultural country, and which, therefore, naturally feels the necessity of free trade; but it is always to me a matter of extreme surprise that that other far greater agricultural country of the world, the United States, consents to submit for the sake of a small portion of its citizens to so heavy a species of voluntary taxation. I cannot help thinking that the time will come when the farmers of the United States will prefer cheap cotton to dear, and cheap iron to dear, and when that time comes none of these obstacles to which I have referred will prevent the United States from entering upon a sound policy of fiscal and commercial legislation. [Hear, hear.] But with respect to other countries of the world, I have no such immediate hope. In the address which has been placed before me we are recommended to try and foster the interests of commerce by the conclusion of treaties which shall remove fiscal obstacles which now arrest the now of commerce. Undoubtedly it is our duty to do so, and undoubtedly we shall make the utmost efforts we can so to do wherever we have the material in our hands; but we are in the position—the well-known position—of being asked to make bricks without straw. We have to open the doors to the access of trade when the keys have unfortunately been thrown away by the mistakes of our predecessors. [No, no.] By our predecessors, do not understand that I am talking party politics—I mean our predecessors of a generation ago. [Hear, hear.] Now the doctrine of free trade, which has obtained so complete a victory in this country, has passed through two phases; there have been two different versions of it. There was the theoretical version of it, when there was no practice to guide us, which was sanctioned by Sir Robert Peel; and there is the more practical version of it which was sanctioned by Mr. Gladstone. [Hear, hear.] In the days of Sir Robert Peel it seems to have been generally believed that free trade was so axiomatic, so evidently true, that no sooner should it have been proclaimed by this country than all the other nations of the world would, hasten to adopt it. An experience of some 15 years convinced Mr. Cob den and Mr. Gladstone that the assumption had been too hastily made, and the subsequent experience of some 20 years has shown us that it was entirely groundless. But under the influence of that belief treaties of commerce were looked upon as a species of economical heresy, and vast numbers of duties were thrown away, were repealed, which would have boon repealed all the same, but which might have been made conditional on reciprocal repeals in other countries [Hear, hear, and No, no]; and, of course, steps of that kind once taken obviously never can be retraced. But the result is that the materials which are in our hands for the conclusion of treaties of commerce are exceedingly meager. If you have a heavily burdened tariff and a great number of reductions to make, obviously you have the opportunity of bargaining for a great number of corresponding reductions elsewhere. If you have very few such articles to deal with, the reductions that you can hope to make are correspondingly few. Something was said with reference to the state of the trade with Spain. That is a matter which has been under the consideration of the House of Commons, and must come under, the very careful consideration of the government. [Hear, hear.] There is no doubt that those duties are not in a satisfactory position; but I will say in passing that they are duties to be handled carefully. You must remember that our treaty with France is under denunciation also, and you must be very careful that you do not handle your wine duties in respect of Spain in such a manner as to make France less disposed to follow the liberal policy which up to this moment she has pursued. [Hear, hear.] I will not say more on that point, except, in illustration of my general argument, to warn you that the wine duties, though I trust they may be the means of obtaining some relaxation in the extravagantly protective character of the Spanish tariff, are yet not in themselves large enough to place that or any other negotiation upon the footing which we should absolutely desire. The president was good enough to say that the attitude of this chamber towards a minister must be that of presenting grievances; the attitude of a minister towards the chamber must be that of showing why he cannot redress those grievances. [Laughter.] But do not imagine because I use that tone, as it is my duty to do, that we shall be the less earnest in seeking every means and taking every opportunity that lies in our power of carrying out the wishes which you have expressed. [Applause.]

But there are one or two reflections which arise from the present state of the world. I am touching dangerously near upon party politics, but I will touch it lightly. In the first place, we must all remember that, whereas with the great and powerful countries of the world you have no motive that you can bring to bear upon them to induce them to alter their tariff, except that of offering reciprocal reductions, which in very few instances you have the power to do, yet, in respect of the very large portion of the world with which your trade is constantly growing, and which may be called semi-civilized, your commercial facilities must depend very much upon the influence or the consideration which the power of England retains. [Hear.] Do not, therefore, run away with the idea that the lower of England is a matter which merely concerns politicians and emotional feelings. It is a matter which, in respect to all those regions, concerns the commercial interests of this country as closely as anything can do. But when you look at the map of the world, you see that all we trade with is not foreign country, that an enormous tract of it owns the sovereignty of Her Most Gracious Majesty, and we naturally ask, are there there these same insuperable obstacles, this same dead wall of protection, this same hopelessness of the spread of sound economic doctrine? I speak in a moment of deep discouragement, because one of the most important dependencies of the Crown—Canada—has adopted a policy which we all must deeply regret. [Hear, hear, and a voice “Lend her no money.”] The opinion has been expressed by a distinguished statesman, with whom I do not ordinarily agree, that this action of the people of Canada will make a deep impression on the minds of the people of this country, and from that judgment I cannot dissent. [Hear.] I think it will make a deep impression upon their minds, and I think it will modify their feelings. But, passing from this, and hoping that our brethren beyond the sea will take a wiser and more liberal view of the tie that unites us and the commercial advantages which a wider estimate of our relations may secure for both, I pass on to a dependency over whose action we have a direct and predominant influence, which has been alluded to in the memorial that has been placed in my hands. When last I had the pleasure of meeting you we discussed a good deal the question of the Indian cotton duties. I then expressed the opinion, which I have long entertained, that those duties were in principle wrong, and ought not to be allowed to continue; but that, of course, like all other things politic, is subject to such qualifications as the imperial circumstances of the day may apply. Since that time there has been a gigantic famine—a famine such as has not been known in 100 years in the experience of India, and the action of the Indian Government has necessarily been modified by that consideration. But, though it has been hitherto impossible entirely to give effect to your just demands, I would urge you on the one hand to exercise all the consideration and patience which men of the world will necessarily apply to subjects so large and communities so extensive, and also I would urge you not to give up pressing the demand which you so righteously made. That the demand will be answered immediately, of course, I cannot promise. It is for the people to lay down general principles; it is necessary for the government to apply them in particular details, according to the necessities of the moment; but that the demand will be ultimately successful I have no doubt whatever, and it is the more necessary you should urge it, because from time to time unexpected voices have been raised defending the maintenance of these duties on one ground or another. The outcry has not had the slightest influence on either house of Parliament, and overwhelming majorities would have affirmed the principle for the justice of which you contend; but the result of such representations has been that they have acted as a banner round which the protectionists of Bombay can muster. Manchester has been accused, it seems to me most gratuitously, of selfishness in urging this claim. You might as well accuse any interest in this country, which presses its demands upon the government, of selfishness. The wise conduct of our policy results from the pressure, the outspoken pressure, of individual interests laying their claims and the reasons for these claims before the community. Manchester, of course, feels the evils of these duties, and therefore it is the duty of Manchester to bring them home to the conscience and feelings of the government of the country. I cannot help thinking that those who use the term “selfishness” have entirely forgotten all the arguments and all the doctrines which were urged and were accepted on the subject of corn in the year 1846. [Cheers.] The necessities of the people of India are mainly two, for they have few luxuries, and their climate makes few demands on them. They want food and they want clothing. Will anybody tell me that if you could really consult the 250,00,000 of the population of India, really put before them all the facts which economic science teaches us, really bring home to them that those duties had a possible effect in raising the price or deteriorating the quality of the half of their necessities—will anybody tell me that they would accuse those who seek to relieve them of selfishness? [Cheers.] The truth, of course, is that the public opinion of India means a very different thing from the public opinion here. You see newspapers written in denunciation of these claims, and you hear that, meetings are assembled; but these newspapers and meetings do not represent, as they would here, the feelings of a large proportion of the population, but the veriest fraction. We may be quite sure that in pursuing this work of freeing from taxation one of the first necessities of the Indian people we are doing that which is not only best for the trade of this country, but the kindest and most generous act to the multitudinous inhabitants of our Indian Empire. [Hear, hear.] However, gentlemen, I have wandered away rather into matters which concerned my old office than those falling within the range of my duties now. I will only conclude by assuring you that, difficult as is our task in smoothing the paths of commerce between this and other countries in these days of exaggerated expenditure and consequent protective tariffs, and difficult as our task is to work against the interests which foreign countries have, who have to keep up these large establishments and maintain these vast military forces, you may be quite sure that we shall give to it the utmost attention we can. We shall always consider that the first duty of our foreign office and our diplomacy is to subserve the interests of the industry and commerce of this country. [Cheers.]

Lord Salisbury and the Lancashire members of the Ministry were last night entertained at a banquet in the Manchester Free Trade-hall.

The Chairman proposed the toast of “Her Majesty’s Government,” coupled with the health of the Marquis of Salisbury. The toast was drunk with great enthusiasm.

Lord Salisbury rose amid continued cheering and said: Mr. President, ladies and gentlemen, I can hardly find words to express the gratification which I feel at the splendid reception which you have given to the toast, and if I am allowed to claim any personal part in the cordial greeting which you have given us, it is an additional pleasure to feel that this hearty reception comes from the countrymen of my mother. [Hear, hear.] Though on ordinary occasions I should say that the foreign secretary was, perhaps, not the best person to answer to this toast, it is impossible to deny that in the present feeling of the country foreign affairs occupy the greatest amount of attention. The selection may, therefore, not be inappropriate. I conclude that foreign affairs occupy the greatest attention by studying the evolutions of our opponents. [Hear, hear.] They have worked very hard to get up a domestic question; they have tried to make a land cry; they have tried to make a church cry, but at last they have given the matter up-in despair, and all their speeches are directed to foreign affairs. Therefore it is on foreign affairs that I must request your attention to-night. [Cheers.] There is no doubt a considerable difficulty in knowing precisely what charge to answer, because the political views of Her Majesty’s opposition upon foreign affairs differ as you go from month to month, or from speaker to speaker. [Cheers.] At the beginning of last year the key-note of the opposition was to defend all that Russia did, and to denounce every measure that Her Majesty’s Government might take to restrain anticipated aggression. [Cheers.] Now I see the tune has changed, and that Lord Hartington and Sir William Hare our blame us not because we have resisted Russia, but because we have not resisted her enough. [Hear.] They have suddenly been taken with a great affection for a document in which I have a paternal interest—the circular which it was my duty to issue on the day I assumed the office I at present hold. I find that Lord Hartington and Sir William Harcourt were unknown but enthusiastic admirers of the composition [cries of “Bravo”]; but they carefully concealed their love at the time [laughter], and they allowed Mr. Gladstone to expend upon it the limitless resources of his sophistry, they allowed Mr. Bright to call it infamous [hisses and cheers], and they never hinted for a moment that it was the one thing they ad mired. [Laughter.] However, now at last their affection, though late, is declared. They come forward to blame us, because, as they express it, we have abandoned the sound doctrines which the circular contained. [Cheers.] Although that is a matter somewhat of detail to deal with before such an assembly as this, it is a challenge which, on account of my paternal relation to the said document, I cannot disregard. I am quite sure that neither Lord Hartington nor Sir William Harcourt would willingly misquote anything, but I feel convinced, from their entire and blank ignorance of what that document contained, that they had entirely omitted to read it before their recent speeches. [Laughter.] That circular, which was a good deal commented upon at the time, may be briefly described in this way: It enumerated a considerable number of points, nineteen or twenty circumstances, of which the tendency was, according to the provisions of the treaty of San Stefano, to place Russia in a dominant position over Constantinople and the Ægean Sea. It further pointed out that government over the Turkish Empire and over parts of the Turkish Empire in which England was especially interested would be attended in three ways by the effect of the Russian conquests and arrangements—upon the position of Constantinople on land, by its effect in placing the Black Sea at the disposal of Russia, by the influence which the conquest of certain Armenian strongholds might have upon the populations of Mesopotamia and Syria, and what it especially said was—and this is a matter which it is unnecessary I should read to you, and which it is more simple to paraphrase—that it was not one point or two points of the treaty of San Stefano to which we objected; what we objected to was the result of the combined operation upon the inhabit ants of the Turkish Empire. [Cheers.] With respect to the Armenian conquests, of which so much has been made, they may be briefly dismissed. The objection taken was not that the conquests in Armenia would give a strategical position dangerous to Constantinople, but that they would, by their notoriety and by the position and power in which they left the Government of Russia, give Russia an overwhelming influence and power over the Asiatic portion of the Turkish Empire. The people who inhabit Mesopotamia and Syria are undoubtedly and naturally opposed to the advance of Russia; but they are waiters upon Providence. They belong to the class who are partisans of the inevitable [laughter], and if they were once persuaded that there is no alternative in the future except to assure an unresisted advance of Russia, they would have made up their minds to have accepted her dominion and would have become her partisans. [Cheers.] Our business there should be that which should convince them that her advance would not be unresisted. [Hear, hear.] We did that by renewing the engagement which we had already taken to Austria and France—by renewing to Turkey the engagement that we would resist any further intrusion of Russia upon the dominions of the Sultan. [Cheers.] Men are much more readily persuaded by acts than by words, and therefore we occupied the island of Cyprus to show our intention of maintaining our hold in those parts. There has been a very great deal of absurd criticism upon the occupation of Cyprus. Some ingenious people think that they have entirely disposed of the policy of the Queen by finding out that, in a very rainy year, fever prevailed upon its coasts. [Laughter.] Fever prevailed in Malta, on the coasts of Greece and Africa, and it prevailed throughout the Mediterranean in that year; but the occupation of Cyprus was merely following out the traditional policy of the English Government for a long time past. [Cheers.] When the interest of Europe was centered in the conflicts that were waged in Spain, England occupied Gibraltar. [Hear, hear.] When the interest of Europe was centered in the conflicts that were being waged in Italy, England occupied Malta; and now that there is a chance that the interest of Europe will be centered in Asia Minor or in Egypt, England has occupied Cyprus. [Great cheering.] There is nothing new in the policy; we do not claim to have anything new in our policy. Our claim is that we follow the tradition that has be 311 handed down to us, with but one very disastrous interruption, for along succession of governments. [Cheers.] Well, so much for the question of Asia Minor. Now, with respect to the Black Sea; it was in the Black Sea, I think, occurred the only one instance in which any point mentioned in the circular was not complied with, and that was the question of the cession of Bessarabia by Roumania; but when we had satisfied ourselves that no other power was inclined to take up the cudgels in that matter, and Roumania was not very much in earnest on the subject, we did not think the matter was one of first-rate importance. [Hear, hear.] With respect to the Black Sea generally, we have carried out entirely the views which were expressed in the circular. Two great dangers were indicated, one, that the Greek coast of the Black Sea would be absorbed in the new Bulgaria; the other, that the harbor of Batoum would be created a dangerous arsenal. By the treaty of Berlin the greatest amount of the Greek coast, including the important harbor of Bourgas, was handed back to Turkey, and the harbor of Batoum was declared to be only a commercial harbor. [Hear, hear.] An arsenal, therefore, could not be created there without a breach of the treaty. But, after all, these were secondary points. The head and front of the offending of the treaty of San Stefano was what was called “the big Bulgaria,” a vast Slav province extending to Salonica on one side and to Adrianople, and, at the time of the arrangements as to Servia and Montenegro, stretching a Slav principality across from the Black Sea to the Adriatic. It was absurd to suppose that if such an arrangement had lasted Constantinople could have been independent. [Hear, hear.] It was absurd to suppose that if, as this treaty of San Stefano provided, Russia would have dominant influence in the modeling and starting of the principality, that Russia would not have been the dominant power at Adrianople and at Salonica. Well, if you tell me the circular has been abandoned, I ask you, what have we done? We have pushed this Bulgaria back from Salonica; we have pushed it back from Adrianople; we have pushed it behind the Balkans and left the Balkans in the military possession of Turkey as a bulwark for the protection of Constantinople. [Cheers.] I know that there are some people who say that because Turkey has not already occupied four or five practicable passes of the Balkans there is no reality in the provision of the treaty of Berlin. People only go to great expense for the purpose of defense when they have a reasonable prospect of aggression to resist. [Hear, hear.]

In the present circumstances of the Russian Empire I do not think that Turkey has any reasonable prospect of having to resist Russian aggression. [Cheers.] England for a great many years—for twenty years—had the right to place her garrisons all over the principality of Beloochistan. She never did it, but nobody ever doubted her right to do it; nobody ever doubted the value of the provision; and when the twenty years were over and causes arose which made it necessary to occupy the town of Quettah, then the value of the treaty provision sprang into activity and the town of Quettah was occupied. But I see and hear a good deal of criticism is expended because the Turkish Empire is not reforming as rapidly as we could wish. Now, in the first place, it is fair to say that, after as exhaustive a war as any country ever suffered under, when revenue has been all but destroyed, the introduction of reforms and the introduction of a gendarmerie, which necessarily costs money, may very probably be delayed for a short time without casting doubt upon the good faith of the sovereign who delays it. But I do not wish for a moment to deny that there is in the internal condition of Turkey much that we must regret. I fear that in high places there is feebleness and fanaticism allowed an influence which ought to be denied to it, and that Turkey may be entering upon a path of resolute resistance to reform which can only ultimately end in her ruin. [Applause.] But what I think should be carefully considered by the English people is, that however important it is that Turkey should be reformed, and though they will rightly require of their government that every exertion should be made in order to carry out these reforms, yet the question of a reformed or unreformed Turkey does not affect the necessity of keeping Russia from Constantinople and from the Ægean. In past time we have not inquired what the government of a country was in deciding to protect great strategic positions which it was necessary for the interests of England and Europe should be kept from an overwhelming power. The constitution of Poland was about as detestable as any constitution could be imagined to be, yet Poland was followed by the sympathy and exertions of liberal Europe for half a century, not for her own merits, but because she was a bulwark against the advance of a power that was feared. Spain, again—when Napoleon invaded Spain, the Government of Spain was the most detestable of all the governments which the corruption of the last century left to us; yet we never hesitated for a moment to spend the blood and treasure of this country in defending Spain against Napoleon, and we were never hindered by the thought that her government was bad. The merits of governments are a matter of transitory existence which any influence may change or modify. The sympathy or repulsion which we may feel for any particular system does not justify us in handing over to any power whose aggression threatens the happiness or the interests of the world strategic positions which it can use in furtherance of that aggression. But pushing Bulgaria behind the Balkans was not the only thing that was done by the treaty and protocols of Berlin and the Anglo-Turkish convention. There was another evil to be corrected, and that was the stretching of a Slav principality practically from sea to sea, and for that purpose was employed a power of very different stamp from the Turk. Europe delegated to Austria the duty of putting an end to that arrangement. [Cheers.] If you do not trust the Turk, who is on the rampart of the fortress, at least you must trust the Austrian sentinel who is at the door. [Cheers.] I know that in speeches which have recently been made and in many speeches in Parliament we have been blamed because we have not used homogeneous nationalities in order to resist the advance of Russia. My reply to the recommendation to use homogeneous nationalities to prevent the advance of Russia south of the Balkans is similar to the reply which the mayor of Ivry gave to Henry IV, when he apologized to him for not giving up the keys of the town. The first apology was that there were no keys. There are no homogeneous nationalities to set up. [Cheers.] They are mixed inextricably together—Mussulmans, Greeks, and Slavs—and no ingenuity could set up a homogeneous nationality in order to impede invasion from the north. But even if the homogeneous nationality existed, it is a mere chimera to imagine that such an instrument could serve your purpose. I do not wish to speak in any but kindly language of the struggling nationalities of the Balkan peninsula. For many reasons they appeal to our sympathies and they excite our admiration. We have with them associations of classical learning and sympathies of religion. But those things do not alter the broad, hard fact that they are mere unorganized populations, totally unequal to contend with the resources of a military empire. You may admire a horse very much, but if you are going to ride it what you would ask is, not whether the horse is beautiful, but whether it will carry you. [Laughter.] And if the weight which you have to put on is considerable, no amount of beauty will compensate for its weakness. [Cheers.] That is the state of the case with respect to the nationalities of the Balkan peninsula; with all they had to appeal to our sympathies they had no organization, no administrative traditions, no tried cohesion; they were mere infants or embryos, they had not grown into a state. Until they have grown into a state it is idle to suppose that they could resist the advance of a monarchy now in its fourth century of conquest. [Cheers.] But if you wish not for theories but for facts, look at the case of Roumania. In Roumania there was every motive to resist the passage of the Russian armies. The Roumanians had no Slavonic sympathies, they had an independent guarantee by Europe; and yet we know that they not only—I do not blame them, their weakness left them no other choice—did not resist the passage of the Russian armies, but in the most difficult moment of war they came to the assistance of Russia. [Hear, hear.] In judging of the conduct of the government with regard to this great Eastern question, you must ask yourselves what was the danger and what were the materials which were in the hands of the government in order to apply a remedy. The danger was that Russia should threaten the independence of Constantinople or of the shores of the Black Sea or that a Slav state should stretch across from the Black Sea to the Adriatic. The remedy that we have applied depends in the first instance upon the Turk, and, whatever other demerits may be cited against the Turks, no one can say that, badly led and badly officered as they may have been, they have not fought like heroes. [Cheers.] They have a military power to which no other race on the Balkans can attain, and as long as their existence lasts—and if they will only consent to reform their administration their existence may be of long duration—their military strength will remain, and they will be far the most powerful barrier of all the populations we could set up against the advance of Russia. If the Turk falls, remember that Austria is now at Novi Bazar and has advanced to the latitude of the Balkans, and that no advance of Russia beyond the Balkans or beyond the Danube can now be made unless the resistance of Austria is conquered. [Cheers.] Austria herself is powerful. I believe that in the strength and independence of Austria lie the best hopes of European stability and peace. [Cheers.] What has happened within the last few weeks justifies us in hoping that Austria, if attacked, would not be alone. [Continued cheering.] The newspapers say—I know not whether they say rightly—that a defensive alliance has been established between Germany and Austria. [Loud cheers.] I will not pronounce any opinion as to the accuracy of that information, but I will only say this to you and all who value the peace of Europe and the independence of nations—I may say without profanity—that it is “good tidings of great joy” [loud cheers]; and if you ask us how we have discharged our stewardship, I will ask you in return to compare the state of affairs with what it was on the morning that the San Stefano treaty was signed. Look at the military position of Russia then and now; look at the territorial position of Turkey then and now; look at the sympathies expressed by Austria and still more by Germany, and I think you will acknowledge that, as far as Her Majesty’s Government have had any share in the shaping of these events, an adequate guard has been provided for the interests and for the position which it was their duty to protect. Now, let us turn to another part of the same great subject; let us turn to Afghanistan. [Cheers.] On the subject of Afghanistan, when first the recent news came to this country, the extraordinary language used against me almost appalled me, and I began to think that so many excellent and omniscient persons could not possibly have used all this language of me unless in some way I deserved it; but I will submit as briefly as I can the real state of the case with respect to Afghanistan, and I think you will see that Her Majesty’s Government had no choice but to pursue the course into which they were led. How stands Afghanistan with regard to India? Some people talk of our splendid mountain frontier, as presented by the Suliman Mountains. A mountain frontier is a splendid thing I quite admit, but on one condition, and that is that the mountain belongs to you [laughter and cheers], or at least, that the crest of the mountain belongs to you. But if the mountain from the top to the bottom, where it melts into the valley, belongs to some one else, and that some one else happens to be the person against whom you wish to protect yourself, I say, even in the presence of the distinguished military authorities you see assembled here this evening, that mountain position in that sense is the worst frontier you can possibly have. That was the state of things with respect to Afghanistan. As long as Afghanistan was in the possession of endless fighting tribes, with no particular connection with any power outside their borders, no doubt such a frontier was quite sufficient; but as time went on a great European power advanced to Khiva and to the base of the Caspian Sea, and that to a very great extent modified the problem. And when we came into office we found this state of things in existence all over the world that wherever the enormous territories that own Her Majesty’s rule bordered on the territories of any other power, and, in fact, wherever they did not, the powers cheerfully received the representatives of Her Majesty at their courts, and there was not one exception, barbarian or semi-civilized, wherever the English Government desired that its representatives should be received, with the solitary objection of Afghanistan, no objection was made throughout the world. Well, in that exception from the practice of all nations there was no doubt something startling in itself; but if Afghanistan had been simply isolated it would have merely been an exhibition of churlishness, and we might have left the ruler of Afghanistan to sulk as much as he liked. But it was also obviously capable of another interpretation. It was possible that all the time he refused to receive our emissaries he was receiving the emissaries of others. It was possible that all the time intrigues were going on, and the result would ultimately have been to place Afghanistan practically in the power of a foreign potentate, and those mountains, constituting an adverse and hostile frontier, and frowning down upon the plains of India, would have been practically in the power of at least a rival and possibly a hostile empire. We very early came across indications which convinced us that the unfavorable view of where Ali’s character was the correct one, and we were also sure that if it was not correct we should easily ascertain the truth by asking him to do as every other potentate in the world, civilized and uncivilized, does, and to receive an officer at his court. Unfortunately, our orders were delayed. The Government of India was in the hands of a very able man, but a man not wholly sympathetic with ourselves [hear, hear], and the result was that a year and a half passed away before our orders could be executed, and during that time a great change came upon the political horizon. When our orders were issued everything spoke peace; when at last they were executed the Servian invasion by Russia had commenced, and a strong probability of the Russo-Turkish war was patent to the world.

I cannot help believing that if what we recommended had been done at once, the Ameer would have accepted our embassy, and alb the evils which subsequently followed would have been averted; but that unfortunate delay destroyed and ruined everything. The opportunity was passed, but the Ameer thought he saw a prospect of Russia and England going to blows, and he thought it was possible to defy us. Well, what reason did he give for refusing to receive an embassy from England? The reason, if you read it in the light of his subsequent conduct, is almost comical, especially when people ask you to believe in his sincerity. He objected to receiving the English embassy because it might force him to receive a Russian embassy. The very next year he received a Russian embassy and declined to receive an English one. We have since ascertained that he was in constant communication with the Russian authorities, and that the unfavorable view of his character was the right one. And was it to be wondered at? What sort of man was it whom we are blamed for not trusting? It was a man who had by solemn oaths allured his own son to come and pay him a visit, and who then, breaking all those oaths, threw him into prison, and but for the interposition of the Indian Government would have put him to a cruel death. [Hear, hear.] That, however, was the man with whom we had to deal. We recommended to him strongly that he should receive an embassy, not at Cabul, because he said, and rightly said, that was a dangerous place, but at some other part of his dominions, and when he refused it we did not attempt to press it upon him by force. There was no threat or exercise of force. But a year after that negotiation was held a Russian embassy presented itself at his doors, was received with enthusiasm, was admitted to his court, and remained there till our troops entered his country. I cannot conceive of any English authority who imagines that it would have been our duty to have allowed this chief, possessing a strategic position so dangerous for India, to have received the embassy of an empire at that time hostile to, or at least in diplomatic conflict with, our own, and to refuse to receive ours altogether. If we had done so, Afghanistan would have been at the disposal of the embassy which he had received, and we, in the sight of Asia, should have acknowledged that our power was unable to cope with either that of Afghanistan or of Russia. [Cheers.] Well, you know what happened—the war occurred, the Afghans were conquered; and when we came to negotiate terms of peace, we were disposed, as we had been before, rather to prefer Candahar or some other place, as the position which our embassy should take. Yakoob Khan insisted that we should send it to Cabul, for at Cabul he could fully protect himself. Whether that assurance has been belied simply by his incapacity or by some other worse quality, it is too early for me to decide. [Hear, hear.] Everybody has joined in a tribute to the great merits of the unhappy envoy who was destroyed by the mutinous troops, and has lamented the loss of his services to the Indian Empire. [Hear, hear.] For the future it is too early for me to speak; we have not yet received full information from General Roberts or from the Viceroy of India, and we cannot at present indicate the precise policy in all its details which it would be our duty to pursue; but the policy in its main lines bas not altered. It is defense, not dominion, that we seek. [Cheers.] We wish to defend the borders of our Indian Empire, and with that view alone every measure that we take will be devised. [Hear, hear.] There is no doubt, as my friend Mr. Cross has told you, that the present Parliament is hastening on to an inevitable term. Whenever that term may arrive, the interval cannot be very long, and, therefore, it is natural that you should scrutinize carefully the acts of those who hold the reins of power, and that you should examine what their title is to the renewal of your confidence. You will doubtless have observed the remarkable circumstance which I think has been alluded to to-night—that almost alone among all former ministers we have retained to the end of a long term unabated confidence [loud cheers]; but, strangely enough, it is made a matter of blame to us. [Laughter.] Mr. Goschen is angry with us because we have not spent our majority. [Laughter.] Now, spending a majority means carrying matters so far that you not only trample down all the objections of the minority, but you even disgust your own friends. [Laughter.] I shall not apologize to Mr. Goschen for not spending our majority, but I wish rather to inquire curiously upon what measures he proposes, if he is successful in the ensuing election, to spend any majority he may obtain. [Laughter.] Upon this subject there is a wonderful dearth of information. The brilliant orators who adorn the opposition are fertile in criticism, but when it comes to positive suggestion they are singularly dull. I am not surprised that it should be so. When the Liberal party select a policy they have to do it on much the same ground as some neighboring nations select a government. They have to select not a policy which unites them most, but the policy which divides them least [laughter], and consequently there are a great many subjects which are forbidden ground for their orators to tread upon. But even upon the few subjects which they have ventured to discuss you will notice in successive speakers a variation of treatment which indicates an extreme uncertainty as to the way in which the majority of the party may ultimately go. [Laughter.] When Mr. Chaplin’s motion was before the House of Commons Lord Hartington used some very mysterious and ambiguous language, indicating that he was prepared to enter upon some great reconstruction of the present division of landed property. I do not know whether he intended the interpretation which was universally put upon his words. His more extreme and enthusiastic followers said, “Now, at least, the declaration is made. There is a new departure in English politics. The words have been spoken and cannot be retracted. Lord Hartington is for land reform.” But when Lord Hartington came to speak on that subject he found it necessary entirely to withdraw all the magnificent prospects which he had held out [laughter], and it turned out that his whole contribution to the reform of the land laws, which is to entirely remedy the terrible sufferings under which the farmers have groaned, is confined to a commission that was to ascertain whether there are any laws which specially prevent the creation of peasant proprietors. [Laughter.] Of course there are no such proprietors, but if there were I do not see why we should be afraid. Peasant proprietors, if they can be got, are a great support to conservative statesmen. But, as far as I can understand Lord Hartington and Mr. Childers, all they propose in the way of reform of the land laws, and their only remedy for farmers’ evils, is that if a man should die without making a will—which in the case of a sane man happens very seldom [laughter]—then his property should be divided differently from what it is now, and when a man is settling on the marriage of his eldest son, instead of settling property on the marriage he must wait until the first child is born. [Laughter.] That is the whole, as far as I can understand, of the projected reform of the land laws, and the only result will be—I hope it will be a good solution for the farmers to look forward to—that some three years hence in some particular instance the farmer will have to pay his rent to two squireens instead of one squire. I doubt whether that will be a solution for whatever mishaps he may be suffering from at the time. [Laughter.] Then there is the church, which requires very delicate handling. It is not safe to attack the Church of England, but you may attack the Church of Scotland [laughter], because, perhaps, the dissenters from it are more numerous. You may say that you were misunderstood and never meant to attack the principle of establishment. Then you have on the other side those who ask you whether you have deserted the good old plan. [Laughter.] There is a general embarrassment, in which we cannot sympathize, with our friends the Liberal party, that when they try to put forward a programme they are bound to satisfy the feelings of two sets of people whose objects are diametrically opposed. [Laughter.] There is no more curious literature in the world than the various speeches in which Liberal members addressing Scotch constituencies have contrived to evade the question of Scotch disestablishment. Sometimes they say they will not press it, but at other times they say they will not put it off; at other times they say they wait for the united voice of the Scottish people; but they cannot be got to say in plump words whether they like disestablishment or disendowment. But there is one form of words which they use which has a historical interest. Mr. Adam, who speaks on behalf of Mr. Gladstone in this matter, being pressed upon the subject of disestablishment, said he did not look upon it as coming within the range of practical politics. [Laughter and cheers.] Fourteen years ago Mr. Gladstone, being pressed upon the subject of Irish disestablishment, said he did not look upon it as coming within the range of practical politics. [Laughter.] Mr. Gladstone made that statement at a time when, unable to retain his seat in the south of England, he was seeking the suffrages of South Lancashire. Whether in consequence of that statement or not I do not know, but South Lancashire elected Mr. Gladstone, and three years later, when he had declared for Irish disestablishment, found it necessary to part with him. [Loud cheers.] I wish our friends in Midlothian to lay this matter to heart. The same formula has been used with respect to the Scotch Church. Again Mr. Gladstone, unable to retain a seat in a southern constituency, is seeking the suffrages of Midlothian; and it may be that the parallel will be carried out to the end—that if Mr. Gladstone should be returned for Midlothian and should possess political power, in three years the subject which is now outside the pale of practical politics will become the burning subject of the hour; a new up as tree will be cut down and the Scotch Church disestablished. Forewarned is forearmed. [“Hear, hear,” and cheers.] Is shrewd Lancashire misled? Midlothian boasts that it is more canny than Lancashire. Let us see whether Midlothian will also be misled. [“Hear, hear,” and laughter.] There is a more burning subject, perhaps, than any of these, though it is not a very easy subject to speak upon, but in respect to which I cannot help admiring the ability and sympathizing with the distresses of the Liberal leader—I mean the question of Ireland. In regard to Ireland, if any Liberal leader said that he was prepared to concede what the Irish agitators demands, the Liberal party would have small chance in any English constituencies. But what Liberal leaders may not do Liberal followers may very expediently do [laughter]; and there may be constituencies where the members of the Liberal party, following Lord Hartington, no doubt guided by the authorized organs of the Liberal union, will yet, for the purpose of obtaining the Irish vote, make a compromise which is equivalent to surrendering the question of Home Rule. I cannot help feeling that on that point it is desirable we should have more distinct statements than we have yet received from the Liberal leaders At least, this will be an unsatisfactory result. Supposing the Liberal leaders were to go back to power warmly denouncing Home Rule, but supported by a large number of their followers who, in order to obtain Irish votes, had accepted Home Rule. When the matter came on for division in the House of Commons, which do you think of those two influences would prevail? If you are in any doubt, I would ask you to consult the records of the last session with respect to the army bill. [Cheers.] Precisely the same state of things occurred. The Liberal leaders intrenched themselves in one position, and their Liberal followers took up another; but when the division bell rang the Liberal leaders disposed of their objections and voted in the same lobby as their Liberal followers. With respect to this Irish question you cannot but feel the gravity of the occasion on which you will be called upon to vote at the next election. It is now eleven years ago that there were the same phenomena to deal with. There was a great excitement of Irish opinion, there was no great danger of irreligious education, and then the Liberal party professed that they had a panacea, professed that they had a remedy, and on that profession they were intrusted with power. They had a majority which carried everything before it. They dealt with the Irish Church and with the Irish land according to their will. The laws which they then passed have been allowed uninterrupted operation. I need not say that what was then done cannot be reversed, but we must study the results of their policy for our future guidance. [Cheers.] Have their promises been fulfilled? Is Ireland more contented than she was? [No, no.] Is it not rather the case that the separatist movement has obtained proportions to which it never reached before, and that, encouraged by the principles which were sanctioned in the Irish land acts, doctrines which have never before been seriously raised in any civilized states are propounded from Irish platforms. [Cheers.] Again I ask you to take warning by the past. [Cheers.] If you trust the same hand to deal with the same complaints you will see in a worse form the evils which now stand before you. [Cheers.] But the election which is impending, deeply as it will affect certain interesting questions of home politics, is more important still in respect of foreign politics. It is their doing that it is so. They have so framed the issue that if a Liberal ministry, returns to power every state in Europe will understand that, in Lord Hartington’s language, the policy of the present government is to be undone. Every state in Europe will understand that England retires from the position which she occupies, and accepts the abdication of power to which she submitted in 1871 and 1873. When we are blamed for what has been done, or when the results of our foreign policy are questioned, it is fair to ask what our opponents would have done. We know something from their professions in the present and something from their performances in the past. Then we may judge of the way in which they would have dealt with the Eastern question by the way in which they dealt with the sudden claim of Russia to abrogate the Black Sea clauses of the Treaty of Paris in 1871. We may conclude that they would have allowed Russia to occupy Constantinople, that they would have then exacted from her an abstract statement that it is very wrong for a power to occupy a town without being allowed to do so by the other powers, and then they would have confirmed her in the possession of what she had gained. [Laughter and cheers.] That is precisely what they did in 1871, and I see no reason for believing they would not have done it in 1878. With respect to Afghanistan, what policy do they propose? Lord Hartington tells us that we must retire behind our frontier—go back to this adverse mountain frontier which I have described to you. If General Roberts went out by the Khyber Pass, evacuating all that British valor during the past year has gained, I venture to predict that somebody else would walk in by the passes of Hindoo Koosh, and that Afghanistan would become in peace a difficulty, in war a danger of the first, magnitude, to the Indian Empire. [Cheers.] We have had other remedies. Sir William Harcourt tells us that we should have relied on a friendly Afghanistan—we should have relied for the dearest interests of our Indian Empire on the proposed friendship of the most perfidious nation that has ever existed on the earth. [Cheers.] I have heard, though I have not seen it, that a very venerable organ of Whig opinion, has recently announced that the proper defense of English interests in Afghanistan is to be confined to the action of the English fleet. [Laughter.] Well, gentlemen, I feel sure that the electors of this country will not be blind to the gravity of the issue which events have placed before them. If they neglect the teaching of the past they may have more exasperating legislation, separating class from class, and encouraging new enterprises against property and order. They may have more abdication of the proper position of England, and more trusting to isolation, and to the friendship or to good-will of the powers before whom they kneel. All over the world we shall have masterly inactivity [laughter], except only if there should be some ancient institution to overthrow at home. [Renewed laughter.] I feel sure that the electors of this country will prefer the legislation which combines classes rather than that which separates them [hear, hear]; that they will prefer to hold high the standard of English traditions and English honor, and that they will prefer to maintain a firm front at home in order that, with the co operation of worthy allies, we may be able to maintain peace and right abroad. [Great cheering.]

No. 211. Mr. Hoppin to Mr. Evarts. [Document 232]

No. 211.
Mr. Hoppin to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
London, October 25, 1878. (Received November 6.) No. 83.]

Sir: Referring to ray dispatch No. 54, of the 20th ultimo, I have the honor to inclose herewith a copy of an extract from the Times of October 24, containing a letter of Mr. Andrews, formerly United States minister-at Stockholm, concerning the advantages held out by the northwestern portion of the United States to British emigrants, which may perhaps be of interest in connection with the subject of my above-mentioned communication.

I have, &c.,

W. J. HOPPIN.

[Inclosure in Mr. Hoppin’s 83.—Extract from The Times of Friday, October 24 1879.]

Land in the United States.

To the Editor of The Times:

Sir: As considerable importance has been assigned to the wheat-growing capacity of this part of the Northwest and the extensive “wheat-belt” beyond in recent addresses and articles by British statesmen and writers—notably in a speech by Mr. Bright—it may, perhaps, be useful to some of the readers of The Times to be informed of the way in which the wild or uncultivated lands of the United States in this wheat-producing region can be obtained on the cheapest terms with a view to immediate occupation and cultivation. The advantage of acquiring land under the homestead law of the United States is the cheapness by which it can be thus obtained. Under this law the land must be taken in contiguous “government subdivisions” of 40 acres each. The minimum quantity which a person can take is 40 acres, unless the tract happens to be fractional from adjoining a body of water that has been meandered in the public survey, in which case a smaller tract maybe taken. 40, 80, 120, or 160 acres may be taken at the person’s option. It is usual for a settler to take 160 acres for his homestead, because the cost of obtaining such a quantity is but a trifle more than for obtaining 40 or even 80 acres. The only money which a person has to pay in acquiring a homestead is $5 (£1 0s. 6½d.) to the government if the tract be 80 acres or less, or if it exceeds 80 acres $10 (£2 ls. l¼d.), and $4 (16s. 5¼d.) to the register and receiver of the land office ($2 to each) at the date of the “entry” of the homestead tract on the records of the office, and a like sum of $4 to those officers at the date of final proof, making in all for amaximum tract of 160 acres the sum of $18 (or £3 13s. 11¾d. English money). Beside, the register and receiver are allowed jointly to receive at the rate of 15 cents per 100 words for testimony reduced by them to writing, consisting of the homestead applicant’s own affidavit and the depositions of two witnesses showing his compliance with the homestead law. This is offered at the end of the five years’ occupancy, is called the “final proof,” and the fees which the land officers receive for such service amount to about $2.25 (9s. 3d). The whole amount of money, therefore, from first to last, that the homestead settler would be required to pay at the government office would be about $20.25 (£4 3s. 2d). I have said that a settler is allowed to take as a maximum quantity 160 acres. That constitutes a complete quarter section; but it sometimes occurs that a quarter section, like a smaller subdivision, is fractional, and exceeds by from 10 to 20 acres the usual quantity; and in every such case the settler gets the excess without any additional payment, except a few cents more in the way of commissions to each of the two land officers. There is another contingency which might add a little to the fees, requiring, by way of preface, a little explanation. After the public lands of the United States have been surveyed and offered at public sale to the highest bidder, all which remain unsold and which are unoccupied by lawful settlers are open to everybody, foreigner, as well as citizen, to purchase at “private entry” and in unlimited quantities at the minimum price of $1.25 an acre. But where grants of alternate sections have been made in aid of railroads, say, for a width of five or ten miles on each side of the railroad, it has been the practice of the government, as required by law, to raise the price of the remaining lands within such railroad limits to double the minimum price—namely, to $2.50 per acre. In case, then, a homestead should consist of these double-priced lands, the commissions to be paid the land officers would be $8 more for a 160–acre tract than are required where the homestead is on minimum priced land. It is owing partly to the smallness of the money consideration that the obtaining of land in this way is called the free homestead system; partly, also, no doubt, to the liberality with which its benefits are accorded to people. All foreigners, except the Chinese, who are not eligible to citizenship, can take the benefit of the homestead law. But, before a foreigner can proceed in the matter, he must have duly made his declaration of intention to become a citizen of the United States. Any single person who has arrived at the age of 21 years, and any head of a family, though under the age of 21 years, can take the benefit of the law; also, any woman who is the head of a family, or who, if single, is above the age of 21 years.

A person having made entry of his homestead tract at the land office of the district in which the land is situated, is required, in order to hold it, to commence improvements upon it in good faith as soon as he reasonably can, and to reside upon it. He is not permitted to leave it for more than six months at a time; but there is no specified value of improvements required to be made. Everything depends on the circumstances and facts showing the party’s good faith. If he is poor and can improve his condition by working out for wages, he can safely be absent from his homestead the greater part of the time, but, as before stated, not more than six months at a time. After five years’ occupation of the homestead—five years from date of entry—he can go to the land office with two witnesses, make his final proof, pay the fees that have been mentioned, and will then receive a certificate from the receiver of the land office, which is evidence of his absolute title in fee simple to the land. In due time this certificate can be exchanged for a patent, which is a more formal certificate of title on parchment, and containing the great seal of the United States.

Whether a settler obtains an ordinary or a first-rate tract of land depends on his enterprise. If he will go a little farther upon the frontier than those who have preceded him, he has a wider field for selection. For those who will make careful search there are yet in all our frontier States and Territories very many excellent tracts whether of wood-land or prairie, that are open to homestead settlement and not many-miles distant from railroads. Besides the lands belonging to the United States there are in Minnesota several million acres of good land belonging to the different railroad companies, and which they are ready to sell at an average price of about $5 (£1 0s. 6½d.) per acre. If one buys railroad land, he can naturally accommodate himself better in respect of being near older settlements.

The general appearance of the Northwest is attractive. The surface is moderately undulating, watered by an abundance of clear streams and lakes, which are generally skirted with a variety of hard-wood trees, and in many places presents a landscape decidedly park-like and handsome. The thickness of the soil, which is a black loam, with bluish tinge, varies from a few inches to several feet, the lightest resting upon gravel and the richest upon clay. A strip of country some miles wide, bordering on Lake Superior, has a strong, red-clay soil. For 100 miles southwest from Lake Superior is a continuous and splendid forest of alternate bodies of pine and hard-wood trees. The principal bodies of pine forest in Minnesota are on the headwaters of the Mississippi.

Assuming that a person is in possession of 160 acres of prairie land, which, in its original state, is ready for the breaking plough, and purposes cultivating 100 acres in wheat, what expense must he incur in order to proceed with his work to the best advantage? The breaking is usually done in the months of May and June, and would cost $2.50 per acre, or say £50 for breaking the 100 acres. As the seed cannot be put in till the following spring, no further expense will be required the first year unless it be in the erection of buildings. The next year, then, he will need to buy a harrow, costing $14 (£2 17s. 6d.), a pair of horses for $250 (£51 7s. 5d.), a pair of harnesses, $28 (£5 15s. 1d); 125 bushels of seed wheat, $125 (£25 13s, 8d.); a roller, $12.50 (£2 12s.); a seed-sowing machine, $65 (£13 7s. 1d.)—which will sow ten acres a day; a harvester machine, $150 (£30 16s. 5d.)—which, with two men to ride and bind, will cut ten acres a day; a double wagon, $60 (£12 6s. 7d.); a cross plow, $18 (£3 13s. 11d.); and buildings, $1,000, or say £200, making altogether £398 9s. 8d. There will, of course, be some additional items for labor, subsistence, and for a few small tools. If the land has been taken under the homestead law, the outlay for that, as we have seen, will have been but a trifle. The crop should yield at least 15 bushels to the acre, and it might reach 25 bushels to the acre. The yield seems to depend about as much on the care in cultivating as upon the soil. I happened to hear lately of a farm in the valley of the Red River of the North which yields this year 47 bushels of wheat per acre. On the other hand, the reports are that in townships only a few miles from here, in a neighboring county of average fertility, the yield is only from seven to eleven bushels per acre. Wheat has this year been affected by blight, though not so seriously as last year.

In case, however, one practices a diversified agriculture, which has advantages over exclusive wheat raising, crops of hemp, maize, potatoes, and the like could be grown on land the same season it is broken. The abundance of natural meadows renders the dairy, stock-raising, also wool-growing (peculiarly favored by the dryness of the atmosphere) profitable branches of agriculture. Hop-raising, bee-keeping, &c., are also remunerative. Thirty years ago it was doubted if apples could be grown in this State; but now several years’ experience in the growing of apples shows that a number of good varieties can be produced in abundance. The market here has for a couple of weeks been supplied with large, juicy, and delicate-flavored apples grown in this immediate vicinity the present season, and which have steadily maintained the very high price of $2 a bushel, they being much preferred to any brought from a distance at this time of the year.

Though there is generally a good demand for farm labor, harvest hands getting as high wages as $3 a day and board, and though an industrious and frugal settler, beginning with no other capital than his hands and his health, could manage by working out part of the time to improve and acquire a homestead, yet the poor who come from country life in Europe to settle on the public land of the frontier, may expect some privations. It is likely they will miss many objects, associations, and comforts, which were attractive in their native spot and which seem all the dearer when once they have been abandoned. But those who come from Northern Europe will find some compensating circumstances in the new and larger vegetable kingdom which opens around them. In the little inclosure surrounding the rude cabin of a poor homestead settler may be seen, the first summer of his settlement, vines yielding the watermelon, the mush and nutmeg melon; also the tropical-looking and rustling maize, which, planted the 1st of May, yields its ears for the table by the 1st of August, and which our well-known Dr. Warren, of Boston, esteemed in its season, when boiled, wholesome for breakfast and dinner; and among the little flower-beds which the thoughtful housewife has arranged, and which lend charm to the lowliest cot, may be seen in perfection those Oriental plants, the costly saffron and the luxuriant castor bean.

The European who settles in the Northwest can very soon acquire as independent a standing politically, and, if he is well behaved, socially, as if his ancestors had come over in the Mayflower. Such a person, being a male and 21 years of age, and having resided in the United States one year, and in this State four months, can enjoy the privilege of voting at any public election in this State, provided he has duly declared his intention to become a citizen of the United States. He thus becomes also eligible to any office in the State from constable up to governor. He exercises his political privileges with perfect freedom and security, and without the slightest manifestations of jealously or ill-will on the part of any native American. Two or three foreigners usually hold State offices in this and other of our Northwestern States; quite a number are returned to every legislature, and they are largely represented in the well-paid county offices of trust. The United States granted to Minnesota when she was organized as as Territory two sections of land, being 1,280 acres, in every township, in aid of common schools. These lands are sold at auction from time to time, but not under five dollars per acre; and the permanent fund arising from them thus far amounts to $4,000,000, and will eventually amount to $12,000,000. The interest from this fund is annually allotted to the different districts in proportion to the number of children therein of school age. The school fund has hitherto been faithfully administered, and common schools sustained principally by local taxation are, as a rule, well maintained. There are in this young State three well-equipped normal schools for the training of teachers, a State university also well-sustained, and a flourishing college. There is one State superintendent of public schools and a superintendent for every county.

“Which is the shortest route to Liverpool?” has for some time been a leading question among the occupants of this northwestern wheat belt, and its agitation has acquired new impulse from the recent sale of the railway from Saint Paul and Minneapolis to Duluth, on Lake Superior, to parties who are interested in having it combine rather than compete with the Chicago route. Meetings have lately been held here by influential citizens to induence public opinion in favor of opening an all-rail route to the seaboard. The unfavorable discriminations and fluctuations of freight charges which are alleged against the Chicago railways are well calculated to foster this agitation. The proposed all-rail route to the Atlantic, which is most favored here, would in a direct line traverse the territory bordering the south shore of Lake Superior, crossing the “Sault” St. Mary, thence through Ontario in the direction of Montreal. The most available. Atlantic terminus of such a route in the United States would probably be Boston, by the way of Ogdensburg and over the Adirondack Plateau, it being a little shorter than to New York. Portland has also been favorably mentioned as a terminus. This proposed outlet via Sault St. Mary would give the wheat producers of Central and Northern Minnesota and Dakota and the region beyond, a considerably shorter transit to Liverpool than they now have. That portion of it west of Sault St. Mary, in Michigan, would run through a country of pine and hard-wood forests, and of medium fertility, while the territory it would traverse in Ontario is considered as having fair agricultural promise. If any such outlet for the Northwest shall be opened, it would be desirable that it be under government control.

I am, &c.,

C C. ANDREWS,
United States Minister Resident at Stockholm, 1869–1877.
Saint Paul, Minn..

No. 212. Mr. Evarts to Sir Edward Thornton. [Document 233]

No. 212.
Mr. Evarts to Sir Edward Thornton.

Washington, December 17, 1878.

Sir: The advent of the winter season, usually so fruitful in disasters to life and property on the great lakes between the United States and Her Britannic Majesty’s dominions in North America, constrains me again to invite your earnest attention to the subject of my notes of July 15 and August 26 of the current year, in relation to the reciprocal aiding of vessels wrecked or disabled in those waters.

I am not unmindful of the fact that your replies to those two communications informed me that the matter had been laid before the government of the Dominion of Canada, with a view to considering the question of legislation to meet that of the Congress of the United States as embodied in the act approved June 19, 1878. But since the date of my recent notes certain additional facts have come to the notice of this government, which, in the judgment of the President, require that prompt action should be taken to the end of putting the mutual relations of the United States and Her Majesty’s American dominion, in that respect, on a footing more consonant with the practice observed heretofore, with the common interest of the two countries, and with the necessary principles of humanity.

While the incident of the Champion, to which I adverted in my note of August 26 last, seemed of itself abundantly sufficient to show the need of a change in the system at present followed, other facts have since been reported which not merely confirm the representations heretofore made, but call for immediate action thereon.

Inquiries having been made through the revenue officers of the United States along the line of the lakes and the Canadian frontier, for the purpose of ascertaining what statutory or other provision of law authorizes the present Canadian procedure, which visits heavy penalties upon any vessel of the United States which may extend relief to a vessel in distress within the line of demarkation, it is found that Her Majesty’s collectors of customs there are supposed to have no other warrant for this action than such as is contained in a circular numbered 210 and dated March 8, 1878, which reads as follows: CIRCULAR No. 210.

Customs Department,
Ottawa, March 8, 1878.

No. 3.]

Sir: I am now instructed by the minister of customs to call your attention to the bearing of the customs law upon the treatment of wrecked vessels or property in Canadian waters, which provides in effect that no vessel, foreign or Canadian, has a legal right to interfere with wrecked vessels or material in Canadian waters unless permitted by the collector of customs at the nearest port, after reporting to him, and no foreign vessels should receive such permission, as it is contrary to the customs law, and should be placed under detention in case of violation.

I have, &c.,

J. JOHNSON.

To Collector of Customs.

Careful inquiry has failed to show the existence of a “customs law” which has any “bearing,” in the manner which the circular seems to contemplate, upon wrecked vessels or material in Canadian waters.

It will not, I think, be disputed by the Dominion Government that uninterrupted custom and usage for a long series of years, from the beginning of this government until within a very recent period, have sanctioned as the rule of action, founded upon the IIId and XIVth Articles of the treaty of 1794, and reaffirmed by the VIIth Article of that of 1842, that a vessel of either nation, wrecked or in distress, shall not be debarred from receiving, from whatever quarter, the succor which should be prompted by the first instincts of humanity. For ninety years this just rule has been observed. Canadian vessels have been freely welcome to give assistance to the end of saving life or property in cases where a ship may be in peril in waters within the jurisdiction of the United States, and in like manner aid has been generously rendered and received in cases of marine disaster within the jurisdiction of the Dominion.

The United States have always stood, and still stand, ready to extend the freest liberty to the vessels of the Dominion, and, rather than hamper them in their humane work, to give grateful acknowledgment of the services which they may render. Such a course is the unwritten law of this country; and if it has become apparently necessary to limit and define it, as in the act of Congress of June 19, 1878, it is because the recent action of the authorities of the Dominion renders it necessary to reach a precise understanding in the matter.

The severe construction placed upon the circular, even assuming that it is issued in due form of law and is binding as an international rule of action, is inconsistent with common humanity and intolerable to good neighborhood, as a few facts will, I am confident, suffice to show.

Although the circular No. 210 refers only; in express terms, to “wrecked vessels or material in Canadian waters,” its operation has been extended to embrace even the most trifling and legitimate assistance to prevent wrecks, as well as those acts of succor which civilization makes obligatory upon all.

For instance, in the case of the Champion, with which you are already familiar, the action of a towboat in merely pulling off one of its own tow which had grounded for a brief time, is visited with an onerous fine and vexatious detention, although I am happy to learn the fine of $400 imposed was subsequently refunded.

The tug Winston, of Detroit, having on three occasions pulled off vessels which had simply grounded while on their regular trips, and which proceeded on their journey without any injury whatever being sustained, is now debarred from plying in waters common to both countries, or entering the jurisdiction of the Dominion, under menace of seizure and heavy fine.

The tug J. H. Martin has been officially declared liable to seizure and a like heavy penalty, for taking in tow a schooner which was lying at anchor in the Saint Clair River, opposite Sarnia.

These are but a few among many instances in which no wreck or pretense of wreck has been shown. On the other hand, the cases which have occurred of actual wreck and loss of life are equally striking, as illustrating the hardships and inhumanity of the course prescribed by the Canadian authorities. One instance will suffice.

The affidavit of the master of the steam-tug Bryant, of Buffalo, shows that the American schooner Augustus Ford, of Oswego, was driven ashore near Grand River, Canada, in November, 1874; that his tug was requested to come to his assistance, and arriving before any other vessel, the master of the Bryant took off from the wreck the frozen dead bodies of the captain’s wife and others and saved a part of the cargo of grain; that there was no Canadian vessel present capable of rendering the required succor, and that, for this simple humane service, the Bryant was seized by the Canadian authorities and subjected to thirty days’ detention and a fine of $100 in gold, only a part of which fine was subsequently remitted.

I may add that the commander of the United States revenue steamer Fessenden has reported to this government that the Canadian authorities purpose serving process upon this public vessel, if found engaged in the duty of relieving any craft in distress within Canadian limits.

The practical consequences of such a policy are easy to foresee. If vessels and crews during the perilous winter season are so unfortunate as to be driven upon these Canadian shores, even though an American tug or tugs maybe at hand with all the appliances for a speedy saving of the vessel or crew, yet under the enforced provisions of the Canadian circular no “interference” is to be allowed, but the vessel, cargo, and crew must await the coming of some Canadian tug before rescue can reach them, if rescue then be not too late. That this last contingency may happen at any time is only too likely, in view of the notorious insufficiency of the steam life-saving service on the Canadian shores, and the wide intervals between the stations from which help must be awaited.

I submit that it would be difficult to imagine a state of things less in accordance with the spirit of our civilization and the age, when the sufferings of even a state of war between nations are sought to be alleviated by all the means within the power of either party.

If the information which I have been able to obtain respecting the origin of the circular in question, or of the action which seems to have preceded it be well founded, and I may remark that it comes from the Canadian officers themselves, it would appear that no legislation is necessary to remove the cause of complaint. The fines, forfeitures, and seizures of American vessels on the boundary inland waters common by treaty stipulations to the vessels of both nations, are shown to rest on no act of the Imperial Parliament, neither on any act of that of the dominion, nor on any law of the provincial legislature of Ontario.

If a simple order of a subordinate provincial officer is their sole support, a simple order from his superiors should be sufficient to revoke it. It is understood that a provision of the constitutional organization of the dominion gives to the governor and council ample power, even if legislation were needed, to decree orders during the recess of the Parliament, which shall have the force of law, and certainly no better opportunity for the exercise of this wise prerogative could be found than the prompt resolution of the question now presented. I trust that the Dominion Government will not hesitate to meet the frank expression of the views of this government by at once taking steps to place the saving of life and property on the lakes upon the firm basis of reciprocity contemplated by the recent act of Congress.

I have, &c.,

WM. M. EVARTS.

No. 213. Mr. Drummond to Mr. Evarts. [Document 234]

No. 213.
Mr. Drummond to Mr. Evarts.

Washington, January 13, 1879. (Received January 14.)

Sir: Lord Salisbury has transmitted to Sir Edward Thornton a copy of a dispatch from Her Majesty’s ambassador at Berlin upon the subject of the funeral of Mr. Bayard Taylor, late United States minister at the court of Berlin. As it may be of interest to the United States Government to know the opinion of one of his former colleagues in respect to the estimation in which he was held by all who knew him in Germany, I give myself the pleasure of inclosing to you a copy Lord Odo Russell’s dispatch.

I have the honor, &c.,

VICTOR DRUMMOND.

[Inclosure.]

Lord Odo Russell to Lord Salisbury.

Berlin, December 22, 1878.

My Lord: The diplomatic body, including myself and the other members of Her Majesty’s embassy, attended to-day the funeral services for the late American minister, Mr. Bayard Taylor, at the United States legation.

The ministers of state, von Billow and von Philipsborn, represented the German Government. The Emperor sent his aide-de-camp, General Count Scherdorff, and the Crown Prince, Colonel von Panvitz. There were, besides, several distinguished representatives of the Reichstag and of German literature and science. Almost all the Americans in Berlin were present, and an impressive and eloquent oration was delivered by the Rev. Mr. Thompson, followed by a speech from Berthold Auerbach, who had been one of Mr. Bayard Taylor’s oldest friends in Germany.

His death has caused sincere regret to all who knew him or his works.

I have the honor, &c.,

ODO RUSSELL.

No. 214. Sir Edward Thornton to Mr. Evarts. [Document 235]

No. 214.
Sir Edward Thornton to Mr. Evarts.

Washington, January 23, 1879. (Received January 24.)

Sir: With reference to your note of the 20th of November last, I have the honor to transmit herewith copy of a dispatch, and of its inclosures, which I have received from the governor-general of Canada relative to the forcible removal of the American steamtug Crusader from Fairport, Dhio, to Sarnia, in Canada.

I have the honor, &c.,

EDWD. THORNTON.

[Inclosure 1.]

Governor-General Lorne to Sir Edward Thornton.

Sir: With reference to your dispatch No. 58, of the 21st November, addressed to General Sir Patrick McDougall, inclosing a copy of a note from the Secretary of State of the United States complaining of the forcible removal of the American steamtug Crusader from a United States port, when in charge of officers of justice, and carried be Port Sarnia, Ontario, I have the honor of transmitting to you herewith, for the information of the United States Government, a copy of an approved report of the privy council on the subject, to which is appended a copy of a report of the collector of customs at Sarnia, who was instructed to make full inquiries into the circumstances of the case.

I have the honor, &c.,

LORNE.

[Inclosure 2.]

Copy of a report of a committee of the honorable the privy council for Canada, approved by his excellency the governor-general on the 17th January, 1879.

On a report, dated January 9, 1879, from the honorable the minister of justice, having reference to the dispatch from Sir Edward Thornton, dated November 21, 1878, relating to the American steam tug Crusader, alleged to have been taken by force in a United States port from the officers of justice, in whose hands it was, and carried to Port Sarnia, in Ontario.

The minister reports that, in pursuance to a request made in that behalf, the collector of customs at Sarnia made inquiry into the circumstances of the case, and on the 7th instant reported the result of this inquiry to the commissioner of customs here. The minister recommends that a copy of the collector’s report be transmitted to Sir Edward Thornton for the information of the United States Government, and he thinks Sir Edward Thornton should be informed that this government presumes that, in view of the statements contained in that report, further action in the matter is unnecessary.

The committee concur in the foregoing minute, and recommend that a copy thereof be transmitted to Sir Edward Thornton.

Certified.

W. A. HIMSWORTH,
Clerk Privy Council, Canada.

[Inclosure 3.]

Report of collector of customs at Sarnia.

Custom-House,
Sarnia, January 7, 1879.

Sir: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your letter of the 17th ultimo, inclosing a copy of a dispatch from the United States Secretary of State to Her Majesty’s minister at Washington, complaining of the forcible removal of the American steamtug Crusader from Fairport, Ohio, while in charge of a United States marshal, under libel for debt, and instructing me to investigate and report upon the case. I would, therefore, respectfully submit the following meager details, which, after considerable trouble, I was able to procure from the captain in charge of the Crusader at the time of the occurrence. He states substantially as follows, viz:

“We had run into Fairport for coal, and just as we were ready to leave a fellow came aboard claiming to be a United States deputy marshal, who took possession of the boat. I asked him to show his authority, which he refused to do, and, leaving a man in possession, he went away. I claimed that the latter party had no right on board my vessel, slipped my moorings, and left for Sarnia, calling at Windsor and Port Huron on my way up. On arrival at Sarnia I put the man on the dock.”

The above is all I could learn from the captain.

The next phase of the case seems to have been the appearance of the United States district attorney from Cleveland, who ran alongside the Crusader with a tug, intending to remove her to the American side. He, however, found that she was in the custody of a posse of Canadian sheriff’s officers, who were holding her under a process for debt incurred on “this side,” and, of course, refused to allow her to be taken away. Considerable altercation ensued, during which the United States attorney made an attempt to draw a revolver, whereupon he was disarmed by the bystanders and brought before the mayor of the town on a charge of carrying concealed weapons. He was, however, released, and, after settling the claims of the creditors, in whose behalf the sheriff was in possession of the boat, she was quietly delivered over, all parties (the owner included) consenting, and taken to Detroit. In point of fact, the whole matter has been amicably arranged, and the parties to the squabble are, apparently, the best of friends.

I have, &c.,

G. H. MATHESON,
Collector.

J. Johnson, Esq.,
Commissioner of Customs, Ottawa.

No. 215. Mr. Evarts to Sir Edward Thornton. [Document 236]

No. 215.
Mr. Evarts to Sir Edward Thornton.

Department of State,
Washington, January 30, 1879.

Sir: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your note of the 28th instant, communicating a copy of an instruction addressed by the Marquis of Salisbury to Her Majesty’s chargé d’affaires at Bogotá, directing him to protest against the law passed by the Colombian Congress requiring all vessels arriving at the free ports of the republic to deposit their registers with the principal national local authority, to be returned by that officer when the vessel should clear for sea. You further express the hope that such instruction’s may be sent to the minister of the United States at Bogotá as may induce him to co-operate with Her Majesty’s chargé d’affaires in this matter, as far as it may be proper for him to do so.

In reply, I have to state that the legislation complained of has given rise to difficulty at various times since 1854. It was thought, however, that the diplomatic arrangement of the 27th of July, 1876, to which this government was a party, would operate to remove the cause of complaint.

The more recent case of the American schooner “Lorine,” which was seized at Aspinwall (Colon) under peculiarly aggravated circumstances, revived the question as between this government and that of Colombia; and, on the departure for his post of Mr. Ernest Dichman, the newly-appointed minister of the United States at Bogotá, the subject was made the occasion of specific instructions to that officer, who was informed that this government was not aware of any modification, executive or legislative, of the diplomatic accord of 1876; that even were that agreement annuled, we could not freely assent to the delivery of the registers of national vessels into the custody of another government, and that such custody was regarded as contrary to the principles and usage of commercial international law.

Mr. Dichman was therefore instructed to bring the matter anew to the notice of the Colombian Government, and to ask that steps be taken to complete the arrangement of 1876, and remove the conflict then acknowledged to exist between the law and the practice of nations, and especially to instruct the local authorities in such terms as to prevent a recurrence of vexatious and arbitrary acts like the proceedings had with regard to the “Lorine.”

Mr. Dichman replied, under date of October 27, 1878, that he had already brought the subject to the notice of the Government of Colombia, and had been assured that no desire existed to deviate from the diplomatic agreement of 1876; that the inspector of the port at Aspinwall had been changed, and that application would be made to Congress to have the law repealed.

Inasmuch as the interests of the United States Government in this matter are, in the main, identical with those of the other countries concerned in the agreement of 1876, Mr. Dichman will be instructed to exert himself, in harmony with his colleagues, to bring about a definite settlement of the question in the manner contemplated in his previous instructions.

A copy of your note and its inclosure will be sent to him for his information.

I have, &c.,

WM. M. EVARTS.

No. 216. Sir Edward Thornton to Mr. Evarts. [Document 237]

No. 216.
Sir Edward Thornton to Mr. Evarts.

Washington, February 3, 1879. (Received February 4.)

Sir: In compliance with an instruction which I have received from the Marquis of Salisbury, I have the honor to inclose copy of a correspondence between Sir J. Stokes and Monsieur C. de Lesseps, from which it will be seen that the Suez Canal Company have formally undertaken to extend to shipping under all flags the benefit of the arrangements in regard to tonnage measurement recently made with the company on the part of Great Britain.

I have the honor to be, with the highest consideration, sir, your obedient servant,

EDWARD THORNTON.

[Inclosure in Mr. Thornton’s dispatch of February 3, 1879.]

Sir J. Stokes to M. de Lesseps.

Chatham, August 8, 1878.

Mr. President: In the replies of the various maritime governments to the communications addressed to them by the government of Her Britannic Majesty, the object of which was to induce them to accept the arrangement agreed upon between us on the 8th of January, and accepted by the board of management on the 12th of March last, the question is asked by almost all of them whether the interpretation given to the powers of examining the papers of vessels, or their certificates, in the correspondence which took place between the company and the English managers under date of the 6th, 16th, and 19th of February, extends to all flags.

It is true that that correspondence had reference to English vessels only; hut, considering that the terms of its grant oblige the company to treat all flags on a footing of perfect equality, I feel convinced that it is your intention to give to every vessel, whatever flag it may carry, the same interpretation of the paragraph concerning examination as you have admitted for English vessels.

Before replying in this sense to my government, I shall be happy to receive an official communication from you authorizing me to give the desired assurance.

Be pleased, &c.,

J. STOKES.

M. de Lesseps to Sir J. Stokes. [Document 238]

M. de Lesseps to Sir J. Stokes.

Paris, August 14, 1878.

Colonel: In reply to the letter which you did me the honor to address to me on the 10th of August, I can only confirm to you our intention (which is, in feet, obligatory) to treat every vessel, whatever flag it may carry, as we treat English vessels. It is, therefore, not to be doubted that the interpretation given to the powers of examining a vessel’s papers or certificates, in the correspondence exchanged between the representatives of the government of Her Britannic Majesty and our company on the 6th, 16th, and 19th of February last, will be extended to all vessels. You may give official assurance of this to your government.

Be pleased, &c.,

For the president:

CH. A. de LESSEPS.

No. 217. Mr. Evarts to Sir Edward Thornton. [Document 239]

No. 217.
Mr. Evarts to Sir Edward Thornton.

Department of State,
Washington, March 15, 1879.

Sir: I have the honor to state that information of a trustworthy character has reached this department to the effect that there are about 2,500 armed and hostile Indians, at present under the command of Sitting Bull, near the border line between the United States and the British possessions, Sitting Bull himself being encamped on the British side, but his followers are to be found engaged in hunting buffalo at various points on the American side. From the best information received, it is feared that hostile demonstrations will be made by this force during the coming spring, or whenever the grass has grown sufficiently to warrant an aggressive movement.

It further appears that Sitting Bull has sent emissaries to all the various affiliated tribes in Montana and Dakota Territories for the purpose of enlisting them in his behalf should actual hostilities occur.

In view of the gravity of the situation, it is thought proper to request you to be good enough to bring the facts as herein stated to the notice of the Dominion Government, with an expression of the hope on the part of this government that all necessary precautions may be promptly taken to avert the consequences arising from the possible outbreak of an Indian war.

I have, &c.

WM. M. EVARTS.

No. 218. Sir Edward Thornton to Mr. Evarts. [Document 240]

No. 218.
Sir Edward Thornton to Mr. Evarts.

Washington, March 25, 1879. (Received March 26.)

Sir: I have the honor to inform you that I forwarded to the governor-general of Canada copy of the note which was addressed to me by Mr. Seward on the 13th ultimo, relating to a concentration of Indians from British Territory in Bear Paw Mountains.

In reply, his excellency has transmitted to me for the information of the Government of the United States copy of a report of a committee of the privy council of Canada, appointed by him on the 17th instant, accompanied by a memorandum upon the subject signed by the Canadian minister of the interior, copy of which two documents I have the honor to inclose.

I have the honor, &c.,

EDW’D THORNTON.

[Inclosure 1.]

Copy of a report of a committee of the honorable the privy council for Canada, approved by his excellency the governor-general on the 17th March, 1879.

The committee of council have had under consideration the dispatch of the 14th February last from the right honorable Sir Edward Thornton to your excellency, on the subject of an alleged concentration of Indians of various tribes in the Bear Paw Mountains, within the United States territory.

They have also had before them a memorandum dated 28th February, 1879, from the honorable the minister of the interior, to whom said dispatch has been referred, and they concur in the views and recommendations contained in said memorandum, and submit the same for your excellency’s approval, and recommend that a copy of this minute, and of the memorandum, be transmitted to Sir Edward Thornton for the information of the United States Government.

Certified:

W. A. HIMSWORTH,
Clerk Privy Council, Canada.

[Inclosure 2.]

Memorandum from the minister of the interior.

Department of the Interior,
Ottawa, February 28, 1879.

In the matter of the dispatch of the 14th instant, from the right honorable Sir Edward Thornton to his excellency the governor-general, on the subject of an alleged concentration of Indians of various tribes from British territory in the Bear Paw Mountains, within United States territory, the undersigned has the honor to report for the information of his excellency that he has caused inquiry to be made of the officer in command of the Northwest Mounted Police at Fort Walsh as to the facts, and has further requested, in the event of such gathering having occurred, that all the information obtainable be furnished as to the object of the movement.

In the mean time, pending the receipt of the information asked for, the undersigned begs to express the conviction that the reason alleged in the communication of Mr. Seward to Sir Edward Thornton, under date of the 13th instant, for the general convergence of all these Indians toward that section of country will be found to be the true one—that is to say, the pursuit of the buffalo, which they claim is nowhere else to be found north of the Missouri River.

The undersigned is further of opinion, should the alleged movement be shown to have taken place, that it will prove to have been the result of necessity on the part of the Indians to follow the buffalo across the boundary line and into the United States territory, in order to procure food for themselves and their families, the herds having been driven south by the incessant warfare waged upon them for actual subsistence by large numbers of foreign Indians at present within Canadian territory in addition to our own Indians.

The undersigned avails himself of this opportunity to mention the anxiety which he feels respecting the anomalous and critical condition of Indian affairs in the southwest portion of the territories of Canada, in consequence of the continued presence there of large bodies of Indians who crossed the boundary for refuge from United States troops in 1876. The formidable character of this element, and its disturbing tendencies considered in relation to our own Indians, and its effect upon their only source of food supply, must continue to excite serious apprehensions as to the ultimate consequences, should such an arrangement not soon he made as will result in the return of the foreign Indians to their own country.

The best authorities agree in representing five years as the maximum period for which the food wants of the Indians of the plains may he to any reasonable extent supplied from the buffalo, and the situation is rendered all the more critical from day to day during the period, in consequence of the risk of a collision between our own Indians and those of the United States within our territory, increasing as that risk does in exact proportion to the decrease of this means of sustenance.

Had it not been for the excellent temper shown throughout by our Indians during the past two years and a half, in view of the presence among them of such large numbers of foreign bands, whose only means of subsistence has been drawn from their food supply, disturbances seriously compromising the two governments might before now have occurred.

It is only fair, however, to Sitting Bull and the other principal chiefs of the United States Indians who took refuge in our territory to say that their conduct has been of a character to which no exception whatever can be taken. But it is hardly reasonable to suppose that the next few years can be got over without, to say the least, great inconvenience being caused to the two governments from the ebb and flow of the Indians of both countries across the boundary. The Dominion will be called upon immediately—indeed the question has already forced itself upon us—to determine how our Indians of the plains are to be subsisted when the supply of food afforded by the buffalo shall have been exhausted. The difficulty of carrying out any policy with such view will, it is not necessary to say, be enhanced to a serious extent by the presence in the territories of large numbers of United States Indians having no means of living, and who, therefore, cannot be regarded in any other light than as a marauding element, and consequently antagonistic to the peace of the country.

It is hardly necessary for the undersigned to remind his excellency that the Canadian Government are in no way responsible for the condition of affairs under discussion. The Indians in question were driven into Canadian territory after having been worsted by United States troops, with whom they had come into collision in consequence, it is said, whether rightly or wrongly, of difficulties arising out of unjust treatment they had received at the hands of agents of the government in the matter of treaty promises. The nomadic habits of these Indians, and the facility with which they move from place to place, render it impossible for the Government of Canada to drive them back, and the only way out of the difficulty, which suggests itself, is for the Government of the United States to take such measures as may induce them to return to their proper allegiance and their own country. It may be said that efforts already made with that view have been unsuccessful. It is equally true, however, that these efforts were made very shortly after the Indians arrived in Canada, before the feeling of bitter animosity entertained by them to the United States troops and government had had time to be at all softened, and especially at a time when buffalo were abundant in Canadian territory. There is some reason to believe that a different spirit might be exhibited by Sitting Bull and the other leading chiefs were they approached at the present time in a friendly way by the Government of the United States with propositions of a similar, and, if possible, more lenient character than those formerly rejected, and the undersigned respectfully recommends that this course be strongly urged upon the United States Government, and, should they be willing to make another attempt to obtain the removal of these Indians back to their own territory, the undersigned feels sure that the Dominion Government will cheerfully cooperate, so far as can be reasonably expected, in bringing about so desirable a consummation.

Respectfully submitted.

JOHN A. MACDONALD,
Minister of the Interior.

No. 219. Mr. Evarts to Sir Edward Thornton. [Document 241]

No. 219.
Mr. Evarts to Sir Edward Thornton.

Department of State,
Washington, April 10, 1879.

Sir: I have the honor to inform you that a dispatch, dated the 16th of March last, has been received from the consul of the United States at Victoria, Vancouver’s Island, which is accompanied by a communication addressed to that officer by Commander H. Holmes à Court, commanding Her Majesty’s ship Osprey, in relation to the situation of affairs at Sitka.

In view of the threatening attitude assumed by the Indians in that vicinity toward the white inhabitants of Sitka, it was deemed advisable to appeal to the captains of any of Her Majesty’s ships at Esquimault, that being the nearest point where a man-of-war of any nationality is stationed, for immediate assistance in order to prevent an attack upon the town, which had been threatened by the Indians. On the 1st of March the Osprey reached Sitka, and her commander reports that the arrival of that vessel changed the aspect of affairs, the fear of an immediate attack having passed away. On the 2d of the month above named the revenue steamer Oliver Wolcott arrived from Port Townsend, and it being understood that she alone was inadequate for the proper defense of the place, and that if the Osprey left that port affairs would resume their former condition, the commander of that vessel decided to remain until the arrival of the California, by which ship further assistance was expected.

Commander à Court expresses his firm conviction that in the presence at the port of Sitka of the Osprey and Oliver Wolcott a most serious calamity was averted.

The Government of the United States, fully appreciating the action taken by Commander a Court in the premises, is desirous that an expression of its best thanks for the same maybe communicated to Her Majesty’s Government, with the request that an acknowledgment on the part of this government of the important service rendered on that occasion may be made to the above-named officer.

I have, &c.,

WM. M. EVARTS.

No. 220. Mr. Evarts to Sir Edward Thornton. [Document 242]

No. 220.
Mr. Evarts to Sir Edward Thornton.

Department of State,
Washington, April 19, 1879.

Sir: I have the honor to inclose herewith, for your information, a copy of a communication from General A. H. Terry, United States Army, commanding Department of Dakota, which has been received through the Secretary of War, representing that large quantities of ammunition are being shipped to Manitoba, which, it is feared, may find a market with the hostile Sioux Indians now in that territory.

I have, &c.,

WM. M. EVARTS.

[Inclosure l.]

Mr. McCrary to Mr. Evarts.

War Department,
Washington City, April 15, 1879.

Sir: I have the honor herewith to inclose copy of communication from the commanding general Department of Dakota reporting reliable information received that large quantities of ammunition are being shipped to Manitoba, which, it is feared, may find their market with the hostile Sioux Indians now living in that territory.

Very respectfully, your obedient servant,

G. W. McCRARY,
Secretary of War.

The Hon. Secretary of State.

[Inclosure 2.]

Letter from General Terry.

Headquarters Department of Dakota,
Saint Paul, Minn., April 2, 1879.

Sir: I am in receipt of trustworthy information that Messrs. H. C. Tellinghast & Co., No. 141 Kinzie street, Chicago, are shipping to Winnepeg, Manitoba, cartridges and shells for cartridges, and that the Hudsons Bay Company is importing such large amounts of goods of similar character that the British custom-house officer at Winnepeg has called the attention of his government to the fact. These goods, it is stated, are procured for trade with Indians.

As this importation of unusually large amounts of cartridges may be due to the market for them afforded by the hostile Sioux, who have found a refuge in British territory I deem it my duty to inform you of the fact.

I am, &c.,

ALFRED H. TERRY,
Briqadier General, Commanding.

The Assistant Adjutant-General,
Headquarters of the Military Division of the Missouri, Chicago, Ill.

[First indorsement.]

Headquarters Military Division of the Missouri,
Chicago, April 8, 1879.

Respectfully forwarded to the Adjutant-General of the Army.

The firm named in this connection is engaged in the raw-hide business in this city, and has a good standing in the mercantile community.

P. H. SHERIDAN,
Lieutenant-General.

No. 221. Sir Edward Thornton to Mr. Evarts. [Document 243]

No. 221.
Sir Edward Thornton to Mr. Evarts.

Washington, May 15, 1879. (Received May 16.)

Sir: In compliance with an instruction which I have received from the Marquis of Salisbury, I have the honor to transmit herewith copy of a report by Commander à Court, of Her Majesty’s ship Osprey, which has been received by his lordship from the lords commissioners of the admiralty, on the situation of the people of Sitka.

I have the honor, &c.,

EDW’D THORNTON.

Commander à Court reporting proceedings.

Her Majesty’s Ship Osprey,
Sitka, March 10, 1879.

Sir: I have the honor to report proceedings since the date of my last letter, 18th February, 1879.

2. Having decided to make the passage as far as Cape Decision by the inner channels, so as to insure smooth water, I requested the American consul to furnish me with an experienced pilot, and I left Esquimaut at noon On the 18th February.

3. The next morning, in consequence of thick blinding snow storms I was compelled to anchor on Oyster Bank till the afternoon; when I weighed and proceeded through the Seymour Narrows, and had to anchor again in Plumper Bay that evening for the same reason.

4. I left at half past four the next morning, and had to anchor again in the afternoon in Alert Bay; where I remained until half past seven the next morning.

5. The same afternoon I had to anchor in Safety Cove. I left the next morning at four o’clock, and had to anchor again in the afternoon in Carter’s Bay, which I left again at seven o’clock next morning, the 23d, and continued the voyage till the afternoon of the 24th.

6. On the afternoon of the 24th I anchored in Ward’s Cove, a secure anchorage in Rivella Cigebo Channel (not marked in the chart). I weighed the next morning, but was compelled to anchor in the afternoon in Port Protection.

7. I attempted to leave the next day, but, in consequence of a strong wind and heavy sea, had to remain at anchor till the morning of the 28th, when I weighed and arrived off the entrance to Sitka Sound in the evening, and anchored in the harbor the next morning.

8. During the whole passage very boisterous and thick weather with blinding snow storms were encountered, delaying the voyage and rendering the navigation dangerous.

9. I inclose a report of the state of affairs at Sitka.

10. The California arrived yesterday, but brought no further assistance nr intelligence from the United States Government, which is accounted for by the telegraph wires being out of order between Washington and Port Townsend. I therefore, for reasons stated in my report, consider it necessary that I should for the present remain here, for the protection of the people, until the man-of-war, that I believe has been dispatched from San Francisco, shall have arrived.

11. The engineer in charge of the ship being in hospital at Esquimaut, leaving the ship with only one on board, and the passage requiring a good deal of hard steaming, before my departure I ordered Mr. White, jr., engineer of the Rocket, to be temporarily lent for duty to this ship.

I have, &c.,

H. HOLMES à COURT,
Commander.

Rear-Admiral A. F. R. de Horsey,
Commander-in-Chief, Her Majesty’s Ship Triumph.

[Inclosure 2.]

Report of Commander à Court on the situation of the people of Sitka.

Her Majesty’s Ship Osprey,
Sitka, March 10, 1879.

While the garrison remained at Sitka the Indians were kept in check by authority, and the place was in a state-of defense, there being a strong stockade between the Indian village and the town. The troops were withdrawn in June, 1877, and with them disappeared all vestige of power. Since that time the Indians have been growing more and more turbulent and troublesome, and more excessive and extravagant in their demands on the white people. They tore down a great part of the stockade and carried off the wood. The government buildings were despoiled of everything valuable, and some torn to pieces for sake of the lumber. The citizens were subjected to insolence, the Indians making no scruple of saying that the United States Government did not care for Sitka, that it was left to them, and that they should do as they liked. This ill feeling has been steadily increasing, and the following circumstances have, I think, brought matters to their present state: 2. Towards the end of last year an Indian who had been on a long debauch forced himself into a miner’s room, and finding soma whisky drank himself into a stupor from which he never recovered, dying that night. The miner was held responsible for his life, under their system of retaliation, by demand of money compensation, and $2,000 were demanded. The miner fearing that trouble might come on the whole town, as they threatened to take the lives of two white men if their demand was not satisfied, offered them (in the absence of the collector of customs) $250, which was accepted and paid. I am given to understand that there have been several minor cases of blackmailing.

3. About the 1st of January an American citizen called Thomas J. Brown, who kept a kind of hotel at the Hot Sulphur Springs, about twelve miles distant, was found murdered in his house. The murderers (two) were known, and the chiefs were informed that unless they were given up they would be held responsible. They were given up and sent to Portland for trial.

4. At this time it became known that a young man who had recently succeeded to the position of chief or head of the family was getting very violent in his threats of retaliation in case of the arrest of these men; that he was using all his influence to excite his relations and others to join him in an attack on the town for the purpose of insuring their release, sacking the place, and murdering the inhabitants, holding out as an inducement that they could get enough of plunder in the town to enable them to live three or four years in the mountains, and that it would be better to let their houses go and have their revenge on the white man.

5. On the 24th of January another pretext for exciting trouble was brought forward. In July, 1878, five out of six Indians who had shipped in a schooner trading to the western waters were, with the captain and mate, drowned through the swamping of a boat.

6. On becoming aware of this a deputation called on the collector and demanded payment for their lives, stating that they were relatives of the deceased, and that if money was not forthcoming “there would be a fuss.” This deputation was found out afterward to be an experimental embassy from the turbulent chief.

7. A few days afterward he appeared to be satisfied; said that he had talked foolishly when drunk; admitted that the men who had killed Brown should be punished, and requested that they should be hung at once in front of the Indian village. He also stated that he had no claim for the lives of the Indians drowned, but asked the collector to try and get what wages were due to them, which the collector promised to do.

8. All this time, however, he was endeavoring to incite his people to attempt a rescue; and the very night on which he made these protestations he assembled his clansmen, with as many more as he could induce to follow him, and in a large force and armed was proceeding in the execution of his threats, when he was met at the gate of the stockade by several of the friendly chiefs, who, after much persuasion, induced him to return, using as their strongest argument that the white men had heard of his intention and were prepared for him. This occurred on the 6th February.

9. On the 9th of February the surviving Indian from the schooner arrived and told them that the master of the schooner had contracted with them for $5 a day if they would remain with him after the fall of 1877. This is evidently a mere pretext for blackmailing (the regular wages being only $13 a month). The chief has, however, given it out that he will not be satisfied with less, and that unless he is paid within a short time he will take it out of the Sitka stores, and that he is only waiting until the snow goes off a little to enforce his demands.

10. After this he left the place, saying that he was going to Wrangel; but from information which admits little doubt it is certain that he has gone to the north to attempt to incite the various tribes of Indians settled there, with whom he has relatives by marriage, to join him for the sake of the plunder to be gained from the town, and it is estimated by the Indians, and also the people here, that, should he succeed, he would be able to bring at least fifteen war canoes, each holding twenty men, thus increasing his fighting power by 300 men.

11. Sitka, from the nature of the ground, is composed of a number of straggling houses, those best adapted for defense being in the part of the town nearest the Indian village.

12. The following is an extract from a report furnished me at my request by Colonel Ball, the collector of customs:

“Immediately adjoining the town and stretching along the shore to the westward lies the Indian village of 61 lodges or dwellings. These have an average occupation of 15 to 20 each, but a capacity of from 50 to 100. The population properly belonging to this village is just about 1,000, dwindling down to 500 or 600 in the summer time when the hunting parties are out, but in the winter frequently reaching 2,000 when the visitors from the northern tribes come in. Of the 1,000 Indians belonging here the male portion capable of bearing arms is variously estimated. They themselves fix it at 600, and there may be a preponderance of men owing to their girls having been sold or married off. It is certainly not less than 300 always present. Sitka is, moreover, the most northerly white settlement on this coast. It is 160 miles from Wrangel, with only monthly communication, as stated. To the northward, along the inner passages between the islands and as far as the head of Chilcaht Bay, are numerous other tribes, among them the Ahks, Tahkoos, Hootznoos, Chilcahts, Hoonahs, Cakes, Koyoos, Tahketats, Nitoushknis, Chilcoats, and others. These are distant from one to ten days’ run by canoes. There is a close relationship by frequent marriage between the Sitka Indians, and several of the most powerful of these, notably the Chilcahts, Cakes, Tahkoos, and Ahks. They number, in the opinion of the most intelligent Indian I know here, fully 8,000 men, and are fierce and warlike. I am sure of the accuracy of his means of knowledge, and I can imagine no motive for his misstatement under the circumstances which his information was given. Thus then has stood the situation here since the withdrawal of the troops. The total force of white men capable of bearing arms is 68, but the men who could be relied on to use them efficiently in case of outbreak will not reach 50. Distributed among these are 50 breech-loading United States Springfield rifles (an excellent arm), and ammunition. There ai’3 also a few Winchester rifles and other arms. The Indians belonging here outnumber us, as we have seen, our effective fighting force, six to one, with friendly reserves of thousands to draw from in case of trouble once begun or decided on, and that it has been gradually culminating ever since the withdrawal of the troops I am firmly persuaded.”

13. The white population of Sitka is estimated at about 320 whites, about 250 being Russian born subjects who have become United States citizens, the remainder being, with few exceptions, born citizens of the United States.

14. From the above causes, viz, the straggling nature of the town, the proximity of the Indian village, the preponderance of fighting power in favor of the Indians, which, should this chief be successful in his endeavors, would be increased to about twelve to one, the absence of the stockade, and the fact that the castle, as it is called, which might be made impregnable to any assault from the Indians (the only difficulty being the procuring of water) is out of repair, convince me that an attack made quickly and silently and with any system of organization would result in the destruction of a large portion of the women and children before they could be placed in safety, unless timely notice had been received.

15. This I believe to have been the state of affairs when the inhabitants, finding their situation insupportable, decided to appeal to the captain of any of Her Majesty’s ships at Esquimaut for immediate assistance, as being the nearest port where a man-of-war of any nation is stationed.

16. On my arrival at Sitka, which, from bad and thick weather, was delayed until the 1st March, I found the inhabitants in a state of great anxiety and alarm, the chief being expected back, by the computation of the Indians, the next day, when there is no doubt an immediate attack would have taken place, as he would either have to fight so as to allow his followers to gain their plunder or else pay them himself.

17. I am inclined to think that this alarm has not been caused by any undue fear, but that the inhabitants were fully alive to the helplessness of their situation.

18. The arrival of this ship changed the aspect of affairs. The fear of immediate attack passed away. The inhabitants were enabled to sleep in comparative safety and peace, and the tone and manner of the Indians changed.

19. The chief has not returned, either because he is unable to stir up his relatives, or, what is more likely, he has been informed by his friends here of the presence of a man-of-war, and that, under the circumstances, he is not prepared either to fight or to pay them.

20. On Sunday, the 2d of March, the revenue steamer Oliver Woolcot arrived from Port Townsend. The next day I met Captain Selden in the collector’s office, by appointment. After talking the matter over, they both expressed so strong an opinion (in which I fully concurred), that the Oliver Woolcot alone was inadequate for the defense of the place, and that if I left affairs would assume their former state, that I decided to remain, at least until the arrival of the California, by which ship I was in hope some further assistance would be sent.

21. My reason for arriving at the conclusion that the Oliver Woolcot is insufficient for the protection of the inhabitants is that, although she would be able to destroy the Indian village (carrying three 24-pounders), yet, in consequence of the small number of their crew (in all, I believe, 30), she would be unable to afford any material assistance for the protection of the women and children, or to check the Indians in sacking the town. I also am of opinion that the destruction of the Indian village is a matter that admits of question, as there are a great number of friendly Indians who have lodges and property there, the destroying of which, and probably the loss of some of their lives, would tend to make them cast in their lot with the others, even if the threats or persuasion of their relatives had not compelled, or their love of plunder induced them to do so previously.

22. The Indians are fully aware of the weakness of the Oliver Woolcot, and on her arrival openly said that they were not afraid of her.

23. In conclusion, I beg to state, that I feel certain that the presence of the Oliver Woolcot and this ship has averted a serious calamity, and that it is my firm conviction that nothing but permanent protection and some sort of government having authority will enable the white people to live here without molestation from the Indians, to carry on their trade and develop the resources of the country, and, if I may venture to do so, without being thought presumptuous, I would suggest that the protection should take the form of a man-of-war in preference to troops (although they might be combined with advantage), as, being movable, a ship could at various times visit the numerous tribes and villages scattered along the coasts, and also be usefully employed in surveying the inner channels, of which little is known at present.

H. HOLMES À COURT,
Commander.

Rear-Admiral A. F. R. de Horsey,
Commander in Chief; Her Majesty’s Ship Triumph.

No. 222. Mr. Evarts to Sir Edward Thornton. [Document 244]

No. 222.
Mr. Evarts to Sir Edward Thornton.

Department of State,
Washington, May 27, 1879.

Sir: Referring to the correspondence which has been exchanged between us in relation to the movements of the lately hostile Indians under the lead of Sitting Bull, I have now the honor to bring to your attention the substance of recent information received through the responsible agents of the Department of the Interior, and to invite earnest consideration of the important points thereby suggested.

This government has been informed that companies of hostile Indians from Sitting Bull’s camp have been and are scattered about, in groups of lodges of varying numbers, throughout the entire northern part of the Indian reservation having Fort Peck, on the Poplar River, in Montana Territory, for its headquarters and agency. The peaceable resident Indians of the reservation have daily come into the agency with bitter complaints of the encroachments of Sitting Ball’s men on their special hunting grounds. They say that they find Uncapapas from Sitting Bull’s camp everywhere, driving and scattering the buffalo and other game, and stealing their horses and running them over the boundary line, thus in every way diminishing the ability and opportunity of the agency Indians to maintain themselves. There is every reason to believe that Sitting Bull himself was, so late as the 19th ultimo, within the territory of the United States, and had been camped south of the boundary line since February last, and that practically all his Indians had crossed to the southward of our northern boundary, there being, as they claimed, no game for their subsistence on the Canadian side. This state of things naturally gives rise to disquietude, notwithstanding the later information communicated to me by you in a recent conference, that Sitting Bull and his chief lodges of warriors were at last advices again on British territory.

It is true that these wandering movements of an irreconcilable and declaredly unfriendly Indian force from one side to the other of the frontier, do not indicate any determinate purpose, or any disposition even, on their part to abandon a residence under British protection, or to renew the state of warfare with the Government of the United States, whose active hostilities were only arrested by the refuge sought and afforded on the soil of a neighboring state. Yet the situation now existing on both sides of the border cannot but be regarded as one requiring the most urgent and careful attention of both governments, lest by uncertainty as to the precise scope and definition of their obligations towards each other, and indecision in their treatment of the Indians domiciled within their jurisdiction, undue and unnecessary difficulties may grow out of the present attitude of these tribes which have, in the most formal manner possible to their savage state, renounced their rights in the one country and rejected terms of security, subsistence, and peace to seek and receive asylum and residence in the other.

Should these erratic movements continue, this government may at any moment be brought face to face with the necessity of suppressing the marauding operations of the hostile Indians under Sitting Bull’s lead, or even of resorting to active military operations to repel open attacks upon the lives and property of its own people.

It has, as it conceives, a perfect right to regard as a menace to domestic peace and tranquility the presence within its borders of a warlike body of disaffected Indians, who have explicitly defied its jurisdiction and by their own act embraced the protection of another power. It may be that, in the interest of the security and well being of both friendly Indians and white natives in the border-land, this government may feel constrained to enforce submission upon those who, after openly denying its laws and power, and withdrawing themselves therefrom, may return within its jurisdiction, with or without apparent hostile intent. Should this government decide to compel a submission of any of these Indians appearing on the southern side of the frontier line, it would look upon a new recourse for asylum across the line as calling for prompt and efficient action by the British Government to repulse them, or to disarm, disable, and sequestrate them under a due responsibility for them as a component part of the territorial population of the British-American dominion.

The importance of a distinct understanding on this point is apparent. It is impossible to give countenance to any line of argument or assumption by which these savages may quit and resume allegiance and protection at will, by the mere circumstance of passing to the one side or the other of a conventional line traced through the wilderness. Before the era of hostilities began they were undoubtedly subject to the jurisdiction of the United States as much as the land they then occupied, and even though their migrations in peaceable search of food might, at times, carry them temporarily across the frontier, they were, therefore, none the less a part of the population of the United States, and alien to British rule. But when hostilities began, and the armed force of the United States was summoned to enforce their submission, they sought and received asylum and protection across the border. The significance of their acts of submission to British protection, as they themselves understood and intended them, admits of no doubt as to the extent of their intention to assume the character of inhabitants of British domain, and their belief that they had done so; and no act of Her Majesty’s authorities in the North American possessions of Great Britain has looked toward denial of this rudely asserted right to British protection, and still less toward enforcement upon them of submission to the authority of the United States, or of subjecting them to the treatment usually observed toward revolted aliens on the territory of a friendly power.

In this aspect of their relations to the British Government, this government conceives that it is bound now to regard the Indians of Sitting Bull’s command as British Indians. Should they therefore make incursions of a hostile character, and should their movements threaten the property, the domain, or the means of subsistence of the friendly Indian tribes of the United States, dwelling peaceably on their assigned reservations, or should active military operations on the part of the United States against them become for any cause inevitable, I beg to call the attention of Her Majesty’s Government to the gravity of the situation which may thus be produced, and to express a confident hope that Her Majesty’s Government will recognize the importance of being prepared on the frontier with a sufficient force either to compel their surrender to our forces as prisoners of war, or to disarm and disable them from further hostilities, and subject them to such constraints of surveillance and subjection as will preclude any farther disturbance of the peace on the frontier.

I have, &c.,

WM. M. EVARTS.

No. 223. Mr. Evarts to Sir Edward Thornton. [Document 245]

No. 223.
Mr. Evarts to Sir Edward Thornton.

Department of State,
Washington, June 13, 1879.

Sir: With reference to previous correspondence in regard to the system of wrecking pursued upon the Great Lakes, and to our conversation of January 22d last upon the subject, I desire to inquire what action has thus far been taken by the Canadian Government in the matter, and to present to your attention an additional case which occurred recently.

On the 19th of last month the American tug John Owen cleared for Tawas, Mich., with a raft in tow, containing over 2,000,000 feet of lumber, owned by a citizen of the State of New York, and valued at $20,000. Shortly after passing Pointe Pelée, Lake Erie, a severe storm was encountered, and the raft breaking loose drifted ashore on Point Pelée Islands, before recovery could be made. The tug Kate Williams, of Detroit, being present, desired to assist in saving the raft, but the Canadian officials refused to allow any American tug to haul the raft off the island, or take any part in doing so further than to simply assist tugs belonging to the Canadian Towing and Wrecking Company at Windsor, about seventy-live miles distant, and said that if they did so they would render themselves liable to seizure for violation of the Canadian wrecking law. The owners of the raft were consequently obliged to let it remain on the island, exposed to great peril, for over thirty hours before aid reached there.

The question at issue is one of great importance to the shipping interests of the United States, as you are well aware. There is a large amount of traffic on the lakes, and it is very desirable that the present unsatisfactory condition of the wrecking system in vogue upon them should give place to something better and more in accord with international comity, and the terms of treaties between the United States and Great Britain. It is therefore earnestly hoped and expected that the Dominion Government will shortly come to some definite and satisfactory conclusion upon the subject.

I have, &c.,

WM. M. EVARTS.

No. 224. Sir Edward Thornton to Mr. Evarts. [Document 246]

No. 224.
Sir Edward Thornton to Mr. Evarts.

Newburyport, June 18, 1879. (Received June 20.)

Sir: On the receipt of your note of the 13th instant, relating to the question of American tugs being allowed to render assistance to American vessels in distress on the Canadian coasts of the Great Lakes, I forwarded a copy of it to the Governor-General of Canada.

I have to-day received from his excellency a communcation transmitting copy of a report and accompanying documents upon the same subject, copy of which I have the honor to inclose for the information of the Government of the United States. You will readily perceive that these documents were dispatched from Canada before the Marquis of Lorne could have received my dispatch transmitting copy of your note of the 13th instant.

I have the honor, &c.,

EDW’D THORNTON.

[Inclosure.]

Copy of a report of a committee of the-honorable the privy council for Canada, approved by his excellency the governor-general, on the 6th June, 1879.

The committee have had under consideration a dispatch from Her Majesty’s minister at Washington to your excellency of the 18th of December last, and inclosures, relating to the regulations in force on the lake coast of Canada, respecting the treatment of wrecked vessels and property in Canadian waters.

The honorable the minister of customs, to whom the above-mentioned dispatch and inclosures were referred, reports that the question appears to be misunderstood by the authorities at Washington, owing, he believes, to the fact that the action of the customs department has been presented to them not only in an exaggerated but a very erroneous light.

That as it respects the departmental circular of March 8, 1878, a copy of which he submits, it was, he states, addressed to collectors of customs only, and was intended to remind them of the proper bearing of customs law upon wrecked property actually stranded upon the Canadian shores, and this they thoroughly understood.

That no Canadian officer ever interpreted the circular or the law as justifying interference with the efforts of vessels of any nationality to succor vessels in distress and save human life or property, while there was a possibility of preventing their loss, nor has any case of such interference ever occurred.

That in the matter of the steam-tug Sarah Bryant, wrecked in November, 1874, alluded to by Mr. Evarts, it is plain that the circular could have had no influence upon the officers concerned, as it was not issued until about three and one-half years after the occurrence, and that the assertion made by the master of the Bryant that he took off “the frozen dead bodies of the captain’s wife and others” is not justified by facts, there being living witnesses and documentary evidence of the most unquestionable character to prove that the living and the dead were taken from the wreck by a Canadian boat’s crew before the tug arrived at the scene of the disaster. The correspondence upon which point he also submits

That in the case of the Champion it has been freely admitted that the officer who seized her did so under a mistaken impression as to the nature of the act, and that he was simply, as he supposed, enforcing the law prohibiting foreign vessels from towing in Canadian waters; that this description of work has never been allowed by the United States customs to Canadian vessels in their waters; that the vessel, however, was not detained an hour, and the only inconvenience suffered was leaving a deposit for a short time with the collector of customs of the sum of $400, which was promptly returned as soon as the commissioner of customs became acquainted with the facts of the case.

That the desire of the Government of Canada has always been, and still is, to effect a mutual arrangement by which the coasting laws might be so ameliorated on both sides as to enable them to dispense entirely with the present unpleasant and inconvenient restrictions upon the movements of the vessels of either nation, but that in the mean time the laws must be respected; and, while the claims of humanity have been, and always will be, duly recognized, it is the special duty of the department of customs to protect the rights and interests of the Canadian commercial marine against the encroachments of all parties.

That the Government of Canada is not only willing but anxious that the most liberal interpretation should be given to the laws relating to the navigation of the inland lakes and rivers, and are ready to enter into negotiations with the Government of the United States with a view to the adoption of a more liberal policy in this respect; but that they cannot consent to any measure which would give United States ship-owners privileges in Canadian waters not secured in equal proportion to Canadian ship-owners in United States waters, nor can any partial system of reciprocity be accepted which, in its practical operations, would favor the latter at the expense of the former.

The committee concur in the foregoing report, and advise that a copy of this minute, when approved, be transmitted by your excellency for the information of the United States Government.

Certified:

W. A. HIMSWOETH,
Clerk Privy Council, Canada.

[Inclosure 2.]

Circular to the collector of customs.

Customs Department,
Ottawa, March 8, 1878.

I am now instructed by the minister of customs to call your attention to the bearing of the customs law upon the treatment of wrecked vessels or property in Canadian waters, which provides in effect that no vessel, foreign or Canadian, has legal right to interfere with wrecked vessels or materials in Canadian waters, unless permitted by the collector of customs at the nearest port after reporting to him; and no foreign vessel should receive such permission, as it is contrary to customs law, and should be placed under detention in case of violation.

I have, &c.,

J. JOHNSON.

To the Collector of Customs.

No. 225. Mr. Seward to Sir Edward Thornton. [Document 247]

No. 225.
Mr. Seward to Sir Edward Thornton.

Department of State,
Washington, July 3, 1879.

Sir: I have the honor to submit herewith, for your information, a copy of a letter of the 16th ultimo, addressed to the Commissioner of Indian Affairs by W. L. Lincoln, United States Indian agent, Fort Belknap, Montana Territory, which has been received from the honorable Secretary of the Interior, narrating the invasion of the territory of the United States by several tribes of British Indians and half-breeds, and to request that you will invite the attention of the Canadian authorities to the fact complained of in Agent Lincoln’s letter, with a view to their adopting proper precautionary measures for preventing a similar recurrence thereof in the future.

I have, &c.,

F. W. SEWARD,
Acting Secretary.

[Inclosure.]

Mr. Lincoln to Mr. Hayt.

Fort Belknap Agency, Montana,
June 16, 1879.

Sir: I have the honor to report that the Gros Ventres, Assinaboine, and Crow Indians belonging to this reservation have all come in from their hunt, having been frightened away from the buffalo by the presence of hositle Indians. In fact, the Gros Ventres had a skirmish with them, in which the Gros Ventres lost one killed, and the hostiles three. My Indians were badly frightened, and stampeded for the fort as fast as they could, throwing away in their flight most of the meat they had secured.

They claim to be short of ammunition; that the hostiles were in heavy force, and that they could not fight them with any hope of success.

The Crows are badly demoralized, and desire to get back across the Missouri River.

The Lower Milk River country, besides being covered with Sioux, is also overrun with British Blackfeet, Bloods, and Piegans. In fact, there have been within the last ten days 50 lodges of foreign Indians at this post on their way to the buffalo country. There are also about 100 lodges of British half-breeds in the same neighborhood, who may be considered as semi-hostile to the United States authorities, and it is really a fact that our own agency Indians are practically debarred from hunting on their own territory from the presence of hostile British Indians.

I feel this to be a great wrong to our Indians, and the more so since the subsistence furnished by the government is only sufficient to feed them but a portion of the year, so that an actual necessity compels them to secure with the rifle the game necessary to subsist them through the year, and it seems to me that it is quite time that British subjects should be made to remain upon their own territory, and cease to dominate upon territory belonging to the United States, and set apart for the Indians of this agency.

I am, &c.,

W. L. LINCOLN,
United States Indian Agent

Hon. E. A. Hayt,
Commissioner Indian Affairs, Washington, D. C.

No. 226. Mr. Evarts to Sir Edward Thornton. [Document 248]

No. 226.
Mr. Evarts to Sir Edward Thornton.

Department of State,
Washington, July 14, 1879.

Sir: Referring to your note of the 9th of May last, and my acknowledgment thereof on the 13th of the same month, in relation to the Haytian tariff of consular fees under the decree of August 23, 1877, and to the protests of the representatives at Port au Prince of the United States, Great Britain, Germany, and France, and the reply of the Haytian Government thereto, I have now the honor to communicate to you, in conformity with the desire expressed by the Marquis of Salisbury, the views of this government in relation to that question.

The Government of Hayti, prior to the reply of the 6th of March last to the foreign representatives named, had seen fit on the 4th of February to transfer the discussion of the question to Washington, so far as this government was concerned, by a very fall and argumentative note, addressed to me by Mr. Stephen Preston, the Haytian minister in this country. Although much more extended, the note of Mr. Preston in the main merely repeats and reaffirms the reasoning and conclusions of the communications made to the foreign representatives by M. Ethéart, and, like those, they appeared to this government, as well as to that of Her Majesty, as appears from your note, to be altogether unsatisfactory, and reply was so made to Mr. Preston on the 13th ultimo. In that reply the Haytian minister was informed, with respect to that portion of his note which related to the authentication by the consular officers of Hayti in this country of the invoices of the cargoes of vessels bound to the ports of that country, that the charge of one per cent. on values for that proceeding is, after the most deliberate consideration, believed to be unduly exorbitant, and tantamount to an export tax, which it does not comport with the dignity of this government to allow to be exacted by any foreign authority within the jurisdiction of the United States. It was asserted that, even if the exaction in the form in which it is imposed were moderate and unobjectionable as to amount, still, if it were once acquiesced in, this would be a bar to any objection which this government might make if the consular fee were afterward to be much augmented. The inexpediency of subjecting exports from this country to Hayti to a tax of the kind was further illustrated by the consideration that, owing to the dangers of the sea and other causes, many cargoes do not reach their destination.

The Government of the United States being, by its Constitution, expressly prohibited from levying an export tax, it cannot allow any foreign power to exercise here, in substance or in form, a right of sovereignty denied to itself. No denial was made of the right of the Haytian Government, at its discretion, so far as this may not have been limited by treaty, to impose duties on the cargoes of vessels from this country arriving in Haytian ports, but it was complained most positively that the present grievance of a consular fee of this character exacted in our ports is, in its form, derogatory to the sovereignty of the United States, and that this character was not removed from it by the Haytian citation of the axioms of political economy that all duties are ultimately paid by the consumer. In view of all this, it was hoped that the Haytian Government would see the expediency of changing its regulations upon that subject without any unnecessary delay.

To the note, thus briefly summarized, no reply has as yet been received from Mr. Preston.

I have, &c.,

WM. M. EVARTS.

No. 227. Sir Edward Thornton to Mr. Evarts. [Document 249]

No. 227.
Sir Edward Thornton to Mr. Evarts.

Washington, July 14, 1879. (Received July 14.)

Sir: On the receipt of your note of the 19th of April last, transmitting copy of a communication from General Terry, representing that large quantities of ammunition were being shipped to Manitoba, which, it was feared, might find a market with the hostile Sioux Indians now in that territory, I forwarded a copy of your note and of its inclosure to the governor-general of Canada.

I have now received from his excellency copy of a report of a committee of the privy council for Canada, of the 28th ultimo, of which I have the honor to inclose a copy, and from which you will perceive that it is believed that the ammunition alluded to is not in quantity in excess of what may be fairly considered to be required for the legitimate trade of the territory of which Winnepeg is at present the only port of entry, and that, consequently, the minister of the interior felt himself not justified in detaining it any longer.

I have the honor, &c.,

EDW’D THORNTON.

[Inclosure.]

Copy of a report of a committee of the honorable the privy council for Canada, approved by his excellency the governor-general on the 28th of June, 1879.

On a memorandum dated 16th June, 1879, from the honorable the minister of the interior, reporting in reference to the dispatch of Her Majesty’s minister at Washington,, dated 22d April last, relating to ammunition stated to have been imported into Manitoba in large quantities, and in regard to which apprehension was expressed that a market might be found with the hostile Sioux Indians now in Canadian territory:

That the subject was also brought to his notice by the commissioner of customs, who forwarded to him a communication from the collector of customs at Winnipeg, reporting the arrival in that port of two several large consignments of ammunition, stating that he proposed to detain the same until further directed, and asking for instructions as to what disposal he should make of the goods.

That he, the minister, promptly requested that the ammunition should be detained until some inquiry could be made with a view to ascertain its destination, and whether the quantity imported, compared to that taken into the country in other years, was such as to afford ground for anxiety, seeing that it was possible it might be intended to supply the Sioux and other refugee United States Indians now within our borders.

That the results of the inquiries made have led him to the belief that the ammunition alluded to is not in quantity in excess of what may be fairly considered to be required for the legitimate trade in such goods of the vast territory of which, it may be mentioned, Winnipeg is at present the only port of entry.

That this view is entirely concurred in by Lieutenant-Colonel McLeod, commissioner of northwest mounted police, than whom no one is more conversant with the peculiar character of the trade in the territories.

That he, the minister, therefore, having received urgent appeals for the release of the goods from the merchants interested, has not felt himself justified in longer detaining them.

The committee concur in the foregoing report, and advise that a copy of this minute be transmitted to Her Majesty’s minister at Washington.

Certified:

W. A. HIMSWORTH,
Clerk Privy Council.

No. 228. Mr. Evarts to Sir Edward Thornton. [Document 250]

No. 228.
Mr. Evarts to Sir Edward Thornton.

Department of State,
Washington, July 30, 1879.

Sir: Information has been received from the consul of the United States at Winnipeg, Manitoba, to the effect that, in consequence of instructions addressed by the Canadian commissioner of customs to the collector at Winnipeg, the privileges heretofore accorded to American vessels navigating the Red River within the province of Manitoba have been withdrawn.

Pursuant to an order of the governor-general of Canada, issued on the 13th of June, 1871, American vessels destined for Winnipeg, upon the Red River, were permitted, after reporting at the frontier port of North Pembina, and paying the requisite duties upon merchandise destined for points between that port and Winnipeg, to land the same at the places of destination; but under the recent instructions of the 3d of April last this privilege is not allowed to American vessels, except to barges in tow of Canadian steamers. American steamers and sailing-vessels are, therefore, compelled, under the recent order, to discharge their cargoes at Pembina, and thus excluded from the free navigation of the Red River and the delivery of merchandise at points within the province of Manitoba.

I have the honor to call your attention to the fact that the Canadian authorities, in imposing upon American navigation the restrictions above adverted to, virtually deny to American vessels the privileges granted to Canadian vessels navigating that portion of the Red River lying within the United States, for, under section 3102 of the Revised Statutes of the United States, a Canadian vessel may avoid unlading at the American port of Pembina, and unlade her cargo at anyplace above that port if her cargo shall have been sealed or closed by a United States officer in Pembina.

In addition to denying reciprocal advantages to American navigation within the province of Manitoba, the recent order of the Canadian commissioner of customs is liable to come in direct conflict with the stipulations of the second clause of Article XXX of the Treaty of Washington concluded May 8, 1871, which permits citizens “to carry in United States vessels, without payment of duty, goods, wares, or merchandise from one port or place within the possessions of Her Britannic Majesty in North America to another port or place within the said possessions: Provided, That a portion of such transportation is made through the territory of the United States by land-carriage and in bond, under such rules and regulations as may be agreed upon between the Government of the United States and the Government of Her Britannic Majesty.”

The regulations here contemplated, as you are aware, have been fully agreed upon between the two governments.

It is desired that these views may be brought to the attention of the Canadian Government in the hope that, upon due consideration of the subject, that government will take the necessary official action to remove the restrictions which appear to have been imposed upon American navigation in the waters of Manitoba, by the recent order of the Canadian commissioner of customs.

I have, &c.,

WM. M. EVARTS.

No. 229. Mr. Evarts to Sir Edward Thornton. [Document 251]

No. 229.
Mr. Evarts to Sir Edward Thornton.

Department of State,
Washington, August 5, 1879.

Sir: I have the honor to acquaint you with the purpose of this government, in view of the importance of the pending questions respecting the fisheries of Newfoundland and the Gulf of Saint Lawrence, and for the better obtaining of the latest accessible information with respect to those fisheries, to send a naval vessel of the United States to the maritime provinces and ports of the Dominion and the adjacent fishing-grounds, for the purpose of making a careful examination of the conduct of those inshore fisheries by the American fishing fleet, which, under the Treaty of Washington, may visit those waters, and also of the treatment which our fishermen and their industry receive at the hands of the local authorities and population.

The United States steamer Kearsarge, under the charge of Commander Henry F. Picking, U. S. N., has been detailed for the assigned duty, and is now in the Gulf, with orders to await at Shediac, New Brunswick, the arrival of the agent, who has been directed to embark at that place. This agent is instructed to make inquiry and report as to the operation of the treaty stipulations and local laws, and the general condition of affairs in that locality, so far as the fishing interests of citizens of the United States are concerned, with a view to a better understanding of the questions involved, and the adjustment of points of difference between the two governments, if practicable.

I have, &c.,

WM. M. EVARTS.

No. 230. Mr. Seward to Sir Edward Thornton. [Document 252]

No. 230.
Mr. Seward to Sir Edward Thornton.

Department of State,
Washington, August 9, 1879.

Sir: I have the honor to state for your information that this Department has received a communication, dated the 6th instant, from the honorable Secretary of War of the United States, accompanied by a report made to him by Col. Nelson A. Miles, Fifth Infantry, dated July 3 ultimo, relative to depredations committed in the Yellowstone Valley by northern Indians.

It appears from the report in question that during the past few months a number of depredations have been committed in the Yellowstone Valley by small parties of Indians coming from the north. It was ascertained that those parties were not wholly composed of hostiles from Sitting Bull’s camp, but that some Missouri River Indians, particularly Yanktonais and Gros Ventres, were implicated in the outrages, and doubtless acted as guides for the hostiles.

Some of the particulars of the depredations in question, as given in the report of Colonel Miles, are, that about the 1st of March, 1879, several head of stock were stolen from McDonald and Dillon, ranchmen, near Powder River. On the night of the 4th of March ultimo 23 head of stock were run off from Countryman’s Ranch near the mouth of Stillwater. The trail of these depredators led toward Stanley’s crossing of the Musselshell.

On the afternoon of March 28 two ranchmen were murdered on the Yellowstone, above “Ferry’s Landing,” and one wounded. About this time horses were run off from “Rease’s Bottoms,” from ranches near the mouth of Buffalo Creek in the vicinity of Pompey’s Pillar, and 67 ponies were stolen from the Crows at their agency. The chiefs and headmen of the Crows at the time reported the raiders to be northern Indians, with perhaps a few Nez Percés. It is said that this party of Nez Perce Indians arrived at Wood Mountains on the 25th of April, having in their possession American horses, and boasted of the murder on the Yellowstone of two white men.

On the evening of the 6th of April, a small party of Indians attacked the ranch of Sebbezze and Peterson, near Powder River, killing the former-named ranchman and wounding the latter, and running off eight or ten head of stock. Mr. Sebbezze, in an ante-mortem statement, identified some of these depredators as Gros Ventres, recognizing them as such from their dress and language; and it was subsequently ascertained that the leader of the band was an Indian named Rushing Thunder, from the Northwest Territory, and that the raiding party crossed the Missouri on the 9th of April, and have since taken their property to north side of the Canadian boundary.

In view of the foregoing facts, this department deems it proper to express the wish of this government that the Canadian authorities may be instructed to return the Indians who have been guilty of murder to the United States, if possible, for trial and punishment, and also to restore the stolen property to the owners, if it can be found.

F. W. SEWARD,
Acting Secretary.

No. 231. Mr. Seward to Sir Edward Thornton. [Document 253]

No. 231.
Mr. Seward to Sir Edward Thornton.

Department of State,
Washington, August 11, 1879.

Sir: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your note of the 18th June last, in further relation to the subject of wrecks upon the great lakes.

Upon a perusal of the copy accompanying your note of a report of a committee of the Canadian privy council, approved by the governor-general on the 6th June, 1879, it is observed that the declaration is therein made that the government of the dominion is ready to enter into negotiations with this government with a view to the adoption of a more liberal policy than is now pursued in this matter, but that they cannot consent to any measure which would give United States shipowners privileges in Canadian waters not secured in equal proportion to Canadian ship-owners in United States waters, nor can any partial system of reciprocity be accepted which, in its practical operation, would favor the latter at the expense of the former.

While I am pleased to note this indication of a disposition and desire on the part of the Canadian authorities to come to some reciprocal agreement with the Government of the United States which shall do away with the present objectionable system of wrecking followed on the lakes lying between the respective countries, at the same time I am surprised that any such expression as is contained in the report referred to should have been made, in view of the act of the Congress of the United States, approved June 19, 1878, entitled “An act to aid vessels wrecked or disabled in the waters coterminous to the United States and the Dominion of Canada,” a copy of which was submitted to you upon the 15th July, 1878, for the consideration of the Canadian Government, and which is presumed to have received their serious attention. A second copy of that act is herewith inclosed for your information; and I would be pleased to have you recall the earnest consideration of the Dominion Government to the fact that the full, reciprocity this act engages, only awaits concurrent action on the part of that government to become instantly operative, and thus remove a cause of serious and dangerous embarrassment to the shipping interests of the United States.

I have, &c.

F. W. SEWARD.

[Inclosure in Mr. Seward’s note of August 11, 1879.]

Chap. 324.—An Act to aid vessels wrecked or disabled in the waters conterminous to the United States and the Dominion of Canada.

Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States of America in Congress assembled, That Canadian vessels of all descriptions may render aid or assistance to Canadian or other vessels wrecked or disabled in the waters of the United States contiguous to the Dominion of Canada: Provided, That this act shall not take effect until proclamation by the President declaring that the privilege of aiding American or other vessels wrecked or disabled in Canadian waters contiguous to the United States has been extended by the government of the Dominion of Canada and declaring this act to be in force: And provided further; That this act shall cease to be in force from and after the date of proclamation by the President to the effect that said reciprocal privilege has been withdrawn or revoked by the said government of the Dominion of Canada.

Approved June 19, 1878.

No. 232. Sir Edward Thornton to Mr. Seward. [Document 254]

No. 232.
Sir Edward Thornton to Mr. Seward.

Newburyport, August 12, 1879. (Received August 14.)

Sir: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of Mr. Evarts’s note of the 30th ultimo, relative to the navigation of the Red River by American vessels within the province of Manitoba, and to inform you that I have transmitted a copy of it to the governor-general of Canada, calling his excellency’s attention to the restrictions placed upon that navigation.

At the same time, I take the liberty of stating that, in compliance with the request of the administrator of the Government of Canada, I addressed a note, on the 3d of September, 1875, to Mr. Hunter, Acting Secretary of State, representing that, although the Canadian Government had theretofore permitted vessels of United States registry, carrying passengers and merchandise, to ply freely between the city of Moore-head, in the United States, and Winnipeg, in Manitoba, it was a constant matter of complaint on the part of owners of Canadian steamers that they were entirely prohibited from navigating beyond the boundary line, and the cases of the steamer Alpha, in 1873, and of the steamer Prince Rupert, on the 5th of August, 1875, were cited as instances of this prohibition. I then asked that this matter might be taken into consideration, and that the same privileges might be granted to Canadian vessels on Red River within United States territory as were enjoyed by United States vessels on the same river within British territory.

Mr. Hunter was good enough to acknowledge the receipt of my note, and to inform me that the matter was under consideration. I have not, however, received any notice of the decision which may have been come to upon the subject, but am glad now to learn from Mr. Evarts’s note above mentioned that Canadian vessels may navigate the United States portion of the Red River on complying with the condition of having the cargo sealed or closed by a United States officer at Pembina.

I have the honor, &c.,

EDW. THORNTON.

No. 233. Mr. Seward to Sir Edward Thornton. [Document 255]

No. 233.
Mr. Seward to Sir Edward Thornton.

Department of State,
Washington, August 16, 1879.

Sir: I have the honor to acknowledge the reception of your note of the 12th instant, in which, referring to the note of this department dated the 30th ultimo, relative to the navigation of the Red River by American vessels within the Province of Manitoba, you state that you have transmitted a copy of it to the governor-general of Canada.

You also advert to the note which you addressed to this Department on the 3d of September, 1875, representing that the owners of Canadian steamers had complained of being entirely prohibited from navigating the Red River beyond the boundary line, and asking then that this matter might be taken into the consideration of this government, and you say that you never received any notice of any decision by this government on the subject, but that you are now glad to learn that Canadian vessels may navigate the United States portion of Red River on complying with the condition of having their cargo sealed or closed by a United States officer at Pembina.

In reply I have to say that now that this subject-has been recalled to the attention of this government by the circumstance mentioned in the note of this Department of the 30th ultimo, it is hoped that an understanding may be speedily arrived at for the removal of all causes for complaint which may exist upon the part of the Government of the United States or that of Canada.

I have, &c.,

F. W. SEWARD.

No. 234. Sir Edward Thornton to Mr. Seward. [Document 256]

No. 234.
Sir Edward Thornton to Mr. Seward.

Newburyport, September 8, 1879. (Received September 9.)

Sir: With reference to your note of the 3d of July last, relating to the invasion of United States territory by British Indians, I have the honor to inclose copy of a report of a committee of the privy council for Canada, which has been forwarded to me by the governor-general of Canada, and which contains the views of the Canadian Government upon that subject.

I have the honor, &c.,

EDW’D THORNTON.

[Inclosure.]

Copy of a report of a committee of the honorable the privy council for Canada, approved by his excellency the governor-general on the 25th August, 1879.

The committee of council have had under consideration a memorandum dated 31st July, 1879, from the honorable Sir Alexander Campbell, acting in the absence of the minister of the interior, to whom has been referred a dispatch dated July 5 last, from Sir Edward Thornton, transmitting a note dated July 3, with inclosure from Mr. Seward, Acting Secretary of State, Washington, relating to the alleged invasion of the territory of the United States by British Indians and half-breeds.

Sir A. Campbell submits that he has been in constant receipt of advices from the officer in command of the Northwest mounted police, and from officials of the Indian branch of the Department of the Interior, in the vicinity of Forts Walsh and Macleod, but that it has not come to his knowledge, nor can he believe, that any British Indians or half-breeds have crossed into the United States with any intention of a hostile nature.

That he is aware that a number of our Indians and half-breeds last winter followed the buffalo, which had deserted British territory, south of the line.

That this course was, however, forced upon them, as the buffalo afford their only means of living, and they would otherwise have been reduced to a condition of starvation. That, moreover, the Indians in question, in common with all others in the buffalo country, are nomadic in their habits, and have always been accustomed to follow the buffalo in the migration of the latter north or south, as the case might be, irrespective of whether they were on British or United States soil.

Sir Alexander represents that the government is doing all in its power, by establishing farming agencies to instruct the Indians and half-breeds in farming and in raising cattle, in the meantime supplying those in need with food, to render these people self-sustaining and thus do away with any necessity for their leaving our own territory.

The committee recommend that a copy of the foregoing minute, when approved, be transmitted to Sir Edward Thornton for the information of the Government of the United States.

Certified:

W. A. HIMSWORTH,
Clerk Privy Council, Canada.

No. 235. Sir Edward Thornton to Mr. Hunter. [Document 257]

No. 235.
Sir Edward Thornton to Mr. Hunter.

Newburyport, September 9, 1879. (Received September 10.)

Sir: With reference to previous correspondence upon the same subject, I have the honor to inclose copy of a minute of the privy council for Canada, which has been forwarded to me by the governor-general of the Dominion, and which relates to the Sioux Indians who, escaping from the United States, took refuge in British territory.

As a continuance of the residence of those Indians in that territory may lead to the most serious difficulties and disturbances, I venture to hope that the Government of the United States will give its earnest consideration to the suggestions made by the Hon. Alexander Campbell, acting minister of the interior for Canada, by contributing in a friendly manner to relieve the Dominion of Canada from the burthen which has been imposed upon it for upwards of two years by the presence of the Sioux Indians who were driven into its territory, and will give to the Canadian Government its co-operation in its endeavors to effect their return to their native land.

I have the honor, &c.,

EDW’D THORNTON.

[Inclosure 1.]

Copy of a report of a committee of the honorable the privy council for Canada, approved by his excellency the governor-general on the 25th day of August, 1879.

The committee of council have had under consideration the report hereunto annexed from the honorable the acting minister of the interior in reference to events which have recently occurred in connection with the body of Sioux Indians who were driven into taking refuge in British territory by United States troops in 1876, and whose case has already been the subject of a correspondence between the two governments, and they respectfully report their concurrence therein, and advise that a copy thereof, and of the present minute, when approved, be transmitted by your excellency to the British minister at Washington for the information of the Government of the United States, in order that such steps may be taken by that government as they may think proper to induce the Indians to return to their allegiance.

Certified:

W. A. HIMSWORTH,
Clerk Privy Council, Canada.

[Inclosure 2.]

The acting minister of the interior to the governor-general.

Department of the Interior,
Ottawa, August 13, 1879.

The undersigned has the honor to report for the information of his excellency the governor-general in council, that recent events have taken place in connection with the Sioux Indians who were driven into British territory by United States troops in 1876, and whose case has already called forth considerable correspondence between the two governments of a character such as to cause increased anxiety to the Government of Canada, and the undersigned is of opinion that the present condition of these Indians and the possible consequences of their being forced to remain north of the line, under existing circumstances, should be brought to the notice of the Government of the United States with as little delay as possible.

The views of the Canadian Government, as to its responsibilities in connection with these refugee Sioux, are fully set forth in the order in council, dated the 17th of March last, which was duly communicated, and while the attitude of the government on this question remains the same, circumstances have occurred of a character which may result in possible hostilities on the part of the Sioux towards our settlements in the territories.

The events to which allusion is made may be adverted to as follows:

The Sioux appeared to be contented in our territory as long as it afforded them food, but as the buffalo disappeared during last spring, going southerly into the Missouri country, the Indians followed to obtain subsistence, and, it is said, while thus engaged were encountered by General Miles, who, according to the last advices, would appear to have succeeded in placing his force between them and the buffalo, driving the Indians across the boundary line.

Were it possible for the Sioux to obtain food of other kinds on British territory, the proceeding of General Miles might not call for remark; but in view of the facts, the buffalo, being the only Indian food-supply in that country, having deserted it, the consequences in relation to our scattered settlements are, to the undersigned, a cause of great and immediate anxiety.

The undersigned conceives it to be the duty of the government to remonstrate against a course of action the effect of which may be to force a powerful body of savages into Dominion territory, under circumstances where they may be driven by starvation to ravage peaceful and unprotected settlements.

The undersigned cannot but think that, on a representation of the facts, the United States Government will be induced to adopt some measure by which such possible disaster may be averted, and he respectfully recommends that a favorable view of the proposition contained in the concluding paragraph of the report accompanying the order in council of the 17th of March last, before mentioned, be urged upon the United States Government.

The time and circumstances would appear to be opportune, and there is reason to hope that an effort in such direction, judiciously managed, would result in the greater part, if not all, of the Sioux laying down their arms and returning to United States territory.

Much encouragement is afforded to this view by the Rev. Abbot Martin, O. B. S., superior of the Order of Benedictine Monks, having charge of the missions among the Dakota Nation. Abbot Martin, while in Ottawa recently, expressed to the minister of the interior his willingness, if authorized thereto by the United States Government, to visit the various bands of refugees in British territory with the object of inducing them to return, and appeared confident that, although he failed in a similar but self-imposed mission in 1877, he would succeed now, owing to the scarcity of food for the Indians in our territory, and further, in consequence of his having good reason to believe that it is now the desire of many of their leading men to return who were opposed to the proposition when formerly made.

The minister of the interior took occasion to assure the Rev. Abbot Martin that the Government of Canada would gladly give its aid to any scheme by which the return of the Sioux to their own country could be effected in a peaceable and proper manner

Respectfully submitted.

A. CAMPBELL,
Acting Minister of the Interior.

No. 236. Sir Edward Thornton to Mr. Evarts. [Document 258]

No. 236.
Sir Edward Thornton to Mr. Evarts.

Washington, September 30, 1879. (Received October 1.)

Sir:

I have the honor to transmit herewith copy of a report of the privy council of Canada, which I have to-day received from the governor-general of the Dominion, relative to the prohibition imposed upon Canadian Indians from following the buffalo into United States territory, and also respecting the belief entertained by Lieutenant-Colonel McLeod and his subordinates that if the Sioux Indians who took refuge in British territory were allowed to retain their ponies, they would be willing to surrender their arms, and would desire to return to the United States.

I venture to hope that the Government of the United States will give its earnest and friendly attention to the two points which are treated of in the inclosed report, and will take such measures as it may deem expedient to meet the views of the Canadian Government with regard to matters which are of such momentous importance to the interests of friendly neighbors.

I have the honor, &c.,

ED W’D THOENTON.

[Inclosure.]

Copy of a report of a committee of the honorable the privy council, approved by his excellency the governor-general 22d September, 1879.

The committee of the privy council have had under consideration a dispatch from Lieutenant-Colonel McLeod, commanding the northwest mounted police force, dated Fort Walsh, 9th of August, 1879, inclosing three dispatches from Superintendent Walsh, of the same force, dated from Hood Mountain on the 22d, 25th, and 31st days of July, respectively, with an inclosure in one of them giving a verbatim report of the views expressed by certain chief men (four) of the Sioux Nation of Indians as to the return of that tribe into the territories of the United States.

The committee of the privy council are deeply impressed with the urgent importance of preserving peace among the Indian tribes of the northwest territory. The policy pursued by “the company of adventurers trading to Hudson’s Bay” from the beginning of their intercourse with the Indians, and by the imperial government, has for generations secured not only peaceful intercourse with them, but their full faith and confidence, and, since the cession of the territory they inhabit to Canada, the Dominion has maintained the same friendly relations with them, and they on their part have continued to this government the loyal allegiance which they have always shown to the Crown of Great Britain and those in authority under it.

It has only been latterly and since large numbers of Indians from the territories of the United States have forced themselves across the boundary to take up their abode in Canada that any embarrassments have arisen in dealing with our Indians. The paramount difficulty which constantly presents itself arises from the scarcity of food. The buffalo, which forms the staple of consumption amongst the Indians of British North America, is diminishing rapidly in numbers, and their migration northward into Canadian territory has, your committee are informed, latterly been arrested (as far as it could be) by United States troops stationed along the border, and while our Indians and half-breeds are prohibited by the United States military authorities from going south of the boundary in pursuit of the animal necessary to feed themselves and their families, no restriction has ever been or is placed by the Canadian authorities, when the buffalo herds come northward, upon United States Indians coming into our territories in pursuit of the game in which all are so much interested.

It is true that the American Government undertake to feed their Indians if they remain upon the reservations provided for them within the United States; but in fact they come north and chase the buffalo in our country, diminishing the food supply of our Indians and half-breeds. The Canadian Government is making great exertions to settle their Indians, and to induce them to become herdsmen, and to cultivate land and raise supplies of food for themselves, but in the mean time, and until this is accomplishd, half-breeds and Indians alike depend upon the chase, particularly of the buffalo, for sustenance.

The committee of the privy council respectfully submit that it would only be reasonable that the same liberty which is extended by Canada to American Indians should be extended by the United. States to such of our Indians as may cross the border, without hostile intent or action, in search of food.

Another great difficulty which has been created for the Canadian Government in the northwest has arisen from the expatriation from the United States into Canada of a portion of the Sioux Nation of Indians, numbering about four thousand souls. This large additional population is forced upon Canada and (with more wandering tribes temporarily crossing the border) shares the rapidly-diminishing food supply of the Canadian Indians.

The United States authorities are willing, it is understood, to settle the Sioux upon their reservations within United States territory, if the latter will surrender their arms and their ponies. Lieutenant-Colonel McLeod and his subordinates believe that the Sioux are willing to give up their arms, but state that the Indians think it unreasonable that they should be asked to surrender their only means of transport of their women and children and sick, and such chattles as they possess.

The committee of the privy council respectfully submit that the United States Government may be moved to so far modify the terms held out to the Sioux as to allow them to settle on the reservations by the surrender of their arms only.

The committee trust that the Government of the United States may be willing to relax somewhat rules which, however beneficially intended, in practice increase so greatly the sufferings of the Indians, and add to the difficulties of preserving peace among them, and to the alarm and perhaps danger of the settlers now rapidly filling in the prairie country of the northwest; and the committee believe that, should the two objects contemplated in this report be attained, there would be no longer any difficulty in dealing with our own tribes of Indians, or in their obtaining a sufficient supply of food for themselves and their families until the measures taken by the Canadian Government, and above alluded to, shall have furnished them with more lasting and reliable resources.

Certified:

W. S. HIMSWORTH
Clerk Privy Council, Canada.

Hawaiian Islands.Hawaiian Islands.

[259] . Mr. Comly to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Honolulu, August 5, 1878. (Received August 23.)

Contents

Addenda. (Documents 260-266)

No. 237. Mr. Comly to Mr. Evarts. [Document 259]

No. 237.
Mr. Comly to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Honolulu, August 5, 1878. (Received August 23.) No. 47.]

Sir: I have the honor to transmit herewith copies of amended tariff act, restoring duties to former grade of 10 per cent. ad valorem; also copies of report of special committee of legislative assembly on foreign affairs, having reference to matters growing out of reciprocity treaty. These papers did not reach me until after the regular mail closed. I shall endeavor to get them into the agent’s mail for the steamer, which is not yet closed.

There is no time for comment further than to say that Great Britain will be satisfied, except as to remission of duties collected from British importers on goods received before the denunciation of 3d, 4th, and 5th articles was complete. The legislative body will be prorogued to-morrow.

Very respectfully, &c.,

JAMES M. COMLY.

[Inclosure 1 in No. 47.]

AN ACT to amend an act entitled “An act to increase the import duties upon certain goods,” approved the 27th day of September, A. D. 1876.

Be it enacted by the King and the Legislative Assembly of the Hawaiian Islands, in the Legislature of the Kingdom assembled: Section 1. That section 1 of an act to increase the import duties on certain goods, approved the 27th day of September, A. D. 1876, be and the same is hereby amended to read as follows: Section 1. There shall be levied, collected, and paid upon the following goods imported into this kingdom, duties ad valorem as follows, to wit: Silks, satins, and silk velvet, and all articles of which silk shall form the principal material, 10 per cent.

Clothing, ready made, and wearing apparel of every description, made up in whole or in part, 10 per cent.

Carriages of all descriptions, 10 per cent.

Hats and caps of all kinds, 10 per cent.

Linens, and all manufactures of which flax, grass-cloth, or a similar material shall form the principal part, 10 per cent.

Crockery and glass ware of every description, 10 per cent.

Drugs and medicines, patent and other, 10 per cent.

Furniture of all kinds, if upholstered or carved, manufactured in whole or in part, 10 per cent.

Millinery goods, beads, braids, bonnets, buttons, corsets, collars, sleeves and cuffs, edgings flowers (artificial), feathers (fancy), fringes for clothing and for upholstery, 10 per cent.

Gloves and mits, not otherwise provided for, 10 per cent.

Gimps for clothing, 10 per cent.

Hoop-skirts, 10 per cent.

Hooks and eyes, 10 per cent.

Insertions, laces, and lace goods of all descriptions, 10 per cent.

Ribbons, not otherwise provided for, 10 per cent.

Silver plate, plated ware, or gilt ware, 10 per cent.

Britannia ware and fancy metal ware, 10 per cent.

Tea, 10 per cent.

Matches of all kinds, 10 per cent.

Cigarettes, and all descriptions of paper cigars, 25 per cent.

Jewelry, and all descriptions of metal, glass, or stone beads, 10 per cent.

Paintings, pictures, engravings, statuary, bronzes, ornamental work of metal, stone, marble, plaster of Paris or alabaster, and all imitations thereof, 10 per cent.

Perfumery (other than that which pays a spirit duty), powders, hair, tooth, nail, and other toilet brushes, 10 per cent.

Soaps, 10 per cent.

Pipes (smoking), pipe-stems, bowls and fixtures, cigar-holders, 25 per cent.

Candles, 10 per cent.

Candies, 25 per cent.

Peanut oil, 25 per cent.

Toys, 10 per cent.

Fire-arms, 10 per cent.

Ammunition, 10 per cent.

Fire-works and fire-crackers, 25 per cent.

Watches and clocks, in whole or in part, 10 per cent.

Playing-cards, 10 per cent.

Sec. 2. That section 2 of the said act be, and the same is hereby, amended to read as follows: Sec. 2. There shall be levied, collected, and paid upon the following goods imported into this kingdom, specific duties as follows, to wit: On kid and all other leather and skin gloves, $3 per dozen pairs.

On cigars and cheroots, $10 per thousand.

On China tobacco, 50 cents per pound.

On camphor trunks, in nests of four, $2 per nest; and in nests of two, $1 per nest.

On China matting, $1 per roll.

On port, sherry, madeira, and other wines of like nature, above 18 per cent. of alcoholic strength; also, on all cordials, bitters, and other articles of any name or description containing alcohol or preserved in alcohol or spirits above that rate of Strength and below 30 per cent., unless otherwise provided for, $2 per gallon.

On champagne, sparkling Moselle, and sparkling Hock, $3 per dozen reputed quarts, and $1.50 per dozen reputed pints.

On claret, Rhine wine, and other light wines under 18 per cent. of alcoholic strength, not otherwise provided for, 40 cents per dozen reputed quarts, 20 cents per dozen for reputed pints, and 15 cents per gallon if in bulk.

On ale, porter, cider, and all fermented drinks, not otherwise provided for, 40 cents per dozen reputed quarts, 20 cents per dozen reputed pints, and 15 cents per gallon if in bulk.

Sec. 3. The provisions of this act shall extend and apply to all goods in bond at the time it shall come into operation.

Approved this 1st day of August, A. D. 1878.
KALAKAUA R.

[Inclosure 2 in No. 47.]

foreign affairs.

Report of special committee to the Hawaiian Assembly

Hon. Godfrey Rhodes,
President of the Legislative Assembly:

Mr. President: The undersigned special committee, to whom were referred a majority and a minority report of the committee on foreign relations, also a report of Hon. H. A. P. Carter, with two resolutions of Hon. Messrs. Rhodes and Gibson, beg to lay before the assembly their views and conclusions on the questions involved.

The reports relate to two subjects: our treaty relations with Great Britain and a scheme of East India immigration.

In respect to the former, we are chiefly at issue with the Government of Her Britannic Majesty in regard to the interpretation of the fourth article of the Anglo-Hawaiian treaty of 1851, and have to consider a question of claims growing out of an alleged infringement of the requirements of this article while in force.

The Views taken on this subject by British and Hawaiian officials engaged in the discussion are so decidedly in opposition the one to the other that your committee have anxiously sought for some solution or explanation of this wide divergence of opinion and interpretation. The article in question is the unconditional most favored nation stipulation of the treaty, and insists that the commercial intercourse of the two contracting parties shall be such that whatever advantage is conceded by the one to a third party shall be enjoyed by the other, without reference to any compensation therefor. But this stipulation is preceded by one that is conditional, the third article, which provides that when a concession is made by any party to a treaty for an equivalent, that a similar concession can only be claimed by the other party in return for a corresponding value. And there is apparent conflict between these two articles—the one conditional, and the other unconditional.

Now, from the Hawaiian standpoint in this discussion, which has the third article mainly in view, it has been contended that this government infringed no treaty obligations with Great Britain by conceding to the United States in a treaty of reciprocity a free entry of certain goods into Hawaii, in return for a free entry into America of Hawaiian produce; and that Great Britain could not insist upon the enjoyment of a concession for which she could not offer any adequate compensation. And this view of our government is sustained by a British interpretation of the above-mentioned conditional stipulation of the Anglo-Hawaiian treaty, as is fully and clearly expressed in the Clarendon instructions of 1856. (See Appendix, Exhibit A.) No opinion or interpretation to the contrary of this view of the case has been received by this government from the British Government until the Derby instructions of 1877. (See Appendix, Exhibit B.)

Hence it has been maintained by our government that not only was there no infringement of our treaty obligations with Great Britain growing out of a convention of reciprocity with America, but furthermore, there was no occasion for the denuncation of the fourth or unconditional article of the British treaty in consequence of the operation of the American convention.

On the other hand, the representatives of Her Britannic Majesty have claimed a consideration of the spirit as well as the letter of the Anglo-Hawaiian treaty of 1851, and have pointed to the seventeenth article as a general stipulation of comity, engaging each contracting party not to seek any modification of their compact, except with a view to “the improvement of their mutual intercourse and to the interest of their respective subjects” and not to be brought about in consequence of either party making some “special tariff bargain” with another country.

At this point, your committee beg to glance in review at some particulars in the history of our treaty relations, and at our traditional policy as inculcated by the early organizers of our government, and by the representatives of friendly powers.

Hawaii has had a remarkable and instructive treaty history. First, in her unrecognized state, she was subject to the arbitrary sponsio, dictated by a naval commander, at the cannon’s mouth. Afterwards, through earnest and faithful diplomacy, recognition is secured, and certain treaty relations are conceded, still with onerous restrictions, as though recognition was only partially granted to a nation in a state of pupilage—inasmuch as foreign representatives were allowed to exercise judicial authority on our soil, and to dictate to our government interferences in respect to legislative and ministerial action.

But Hawaii was guided by men who labored patiently, under various difficulties, to secure for her the untrammeled condition of a fully-recognized, enlightened State. The able, faithful, far-seeing Wyllie felt deeply the treaty restrictions which affected the honor of his sovereign, and impaired the independence of his adopted State. By a course of negotiation, which must entitle him to rank high as a statesman, he induced great powers to grant treaties to this young State, which recognized her perfect sovereignty and entire independence; and among the most important of these was the Anglo-Hawaiian treaty of 1851. This was a boon from Great Britain to little Hawaii. We are assured that this treaty was framed in the foreign office at Loudon, and sent for our government’s acceptance, as a voluntary offering of good will from England. (See Appendix, Exhibit C.) Therefore, there are abundant grounds for Hawaii to entertain a high traditional regard for this treaty. Yet it was not, and should not be, our policy to entertain any partialities in treaties with great powers. It especially behooves so weak a State as Hawaii to aim at uniformity and identity in the character of her international relations. She could not concede an especial favor to any one of several guaranteeing powers without affecting the independence of her situation. Therefore, all the early friends of Hawaii strongly recommended her to never grant any especial commercial favor to any nation. This was the instruction of King Leopold of Belgium, and the very especial injunction of the great statesman of America, Daniel Webster, who said to Hawaiian commissioners that no power in negotiation with this kingdom “ought to seek for any exclusive privileges or preferences in matters of commerce.” (See Appendix, Exhibit D.)

Now the American treaty of reciprocity may be regarded as a departure from this policy; in its negotiation the spirit of the Anglo-Hawaiian treaty of 1851 was overlooked, and its operation has led to the question at issue, as stated above, between the British and Hawaiian Governments.

It may be very properly urged that the spirit of the Anglo-Hawaiian treaty of 1851, in its 17th article, required that some preliminary proposition and mutual understanding between the two contracting parties should precede any stipulations with a third party calculated to disturb in any way the perfect harmony of their mutual intercourse, and that the unconditional obligations of the treaty should be observed.

On the other hand, the conditional stipulation can be pointed at, and very decided grounds taken, that the 3d article of the Anglo-Hawaiian treaty especially recognizes the principle of reciprocity and of granting especial favors for valuable equivalents—which favors, of course, are to be conceded to all other treaty parties who can offer a like consideration—the objection to this being that any one of two treaty parties should not negotiate with a third party a concession which it is known that its co-contractant is not in a condition to accept.

Hence your committee must recognize that the negotiation of the American reciprocity treaty by our government afforded some grounds for exceptions to be taken by treaty powers claiming the most favored nation privileges; and such exceptions were strongly taken by even legal minds in America. (See Appendix, Exhibit E.) And furthermore, an increase of the duty on imports in 1876, not called for by any deficiency of revenue, was an additional cause of irritation. But this treaty is not, after all, a ground of objections on the part of the British Government. We have assurances from the British foreign secretary, Lord Derby, in his instructions to the British commissioner in Hawaii (see Appendix, Exhibit B), that the British Government accepted fully the explanations of our envoy, Mr. Carter, in respect to the reciprocity treaty. Yet there is a reclamation on account of its operation—or rather, claims of importers of British merchandise are pointed out who paid, as alleged, an excess of duty during the operation of the unconditional 4th article, not withdrawn. At this point, your committee venture to remark that Great Britain, owing to the difference between her imperial and colonial tariffs, was not herself in a condition to fulfill the treaty obligations stipulated for in the 4th article of Anglo-Hawaiian treaty of 1851. (See Appendix, Exhibit F.) However, here is a case for the consideration of our courts of law, and for which the constitution of this government provides. And it is the opinion of your committee that any stranger residing here under the protection of our laws, who feels aggrieved, should seek the remedies which these laws provide, and would only in case of denial of justice be warranted in making any appeal to another power., Such a course of procedure would be in accordance with the spirit of an enlightened nation like Great Britain. We have a precedent in the treatment of a certain reclamation for excess of duties in the case of the “Asa Thor,” under our treaty with Denmark. This was a question of claim growing out of treaty interpretation, which was adjudicated in our courts, and our action was accepted by the Government of Denmark. (See Appendix, Exhibit G.)

The amount of claims on account of excess of duty paid over ten per cent. are so small—only $1, 177.14—(see Appendix, Exhibit H,) that it is evident to your committee that the whole question is mainly one of principle. Of course, the smallness of the amount claimed will not tend to diminish the importance of the principle involved in the estimation of a treaty-observing nation like Great Britain. And when such a power expects a like exactitude of observance from Hawaii, it is in the highest sense a recognition of our perfect independence.

A kingdom like Hawaii, whose only strength as a state is her weakness, should be especially scrupulous in respect to the exact observance of her treaties with great powers. She should be prompt to respond to any question of reclamation, and by her intelligence, open and impartial dealing, command a recognition of her moral worth that would raise her in the rank of nations far beyond the extent of her material resources and power.

Your committee, after a review of the several reports and resolutions, and of ail the correspondence bearing upon the subject, are of opinion that there is no question at issue in respect to treaty relations with Great Britain which cannot be adjudicated by our courts of law. The constitution of this kingdom, according to article 67, requires that all controversies growing out of the operation of our treaties shall be submitted to our supreme court of justice. And although in Great Britain courts of justice do not take cognizance of any questions of claims growing out of treaties, yet there is no expression emanating from Her Britannic Majesty’s Government which would lead us to suppose that they would object to the course of action prescribed by our laws. The British Government makes no demand, and British or other foreign residents having claims must present them to our courts.

Your committee will observe that the mission of our envoy, Mr. H. A. P. Carter, though failing in its objects, yet was productive of advantageous results in satisfactorily explaining the American reciprocity treaty to the British Government, and thereby removing any possible ground of misunderstanding.

Though it became a necessary consequence of the British interpretation of the fourth article of the Anglo-Hawaiian treaty to denounce and expunge this article from the treaty, yet no unfriendly feeling has followed; and by the consent of our government to withdraw the denunciation of the fifth and sixth articles of said treaty, an improvement in the harmony of our relations with the Government of Her Britannic Majesty has been the result.

Your committee feel that this is an occasion for the nobles of the Hawaiian Kingdom and the representatives of the Hawaiian people to declare their high appreciation of all treaties with great and friendly powers, to proclaim their purpose to avoid all occasion for the slightest infringement of them and to recognize the maintenance of such treaties as the surest guarantee of the independence of the Hawaiian Kingdom and people.

In respect to the scheme of East India immigration, your committee have no information except the statements of our envoy, Mr. Carter. They regret to observe his report of the difficulties that stand in the way of any realization of this scheme. Still, your committee are led to hope, from the friendly spirit in which our proposition was met by Her. Britannic Majesty’s Government under other circumstances and on another occasion, that Hawaii’s need of population, and especially her disproportion of the sexes, may be favorably considered and answered in the populous Eastern dominions, and among the cognate races, which acknowledge the sway of the Empress of India.

WALTER M. GIBSON,
Chairman.

J. W. MOANAULI.

J. NAKALEKA.

EDWARD PRESTON.

W. R. CASTLE.

Aliiolani Hale, July 26, 1878.

Appendix.

Honolulu, March 28, 1856.

Exhibit A.

[From appendix to report of minister of foreign relations to legislative assembly of 1856.]

Sir: Her Britannic Majesty’s Government having received a copy of a convention concluded on the 20th of July, 1855, between the Sandwich Islands and the United States, by which each party engages to admit into its territories, duty free, certain articles the produce of the territories of the other, I have been instructed by the Earl of Clarendon, Her Majesty’s secretary of state for foreign affairs, to address myself to the Hawaiian Government and to urge on them the following considerations, with a view to obtain for British commerce the same advantages which have been conceded to the United States by the beforementioned convention:

The fourth Article of the treaty between Great Britain and the Sandwich Islands of the 10th July, 1851, stipulates that no other or higher duties shall be charged on the importation into the Sandwich Islands of any article the growth, produce or manufacture of the British dominions than are or shall be payable on the like articles the growth, produce or manufacture of any other foreign country. If this were the only stipulation in the treaty bearing upon the subject, the claim of Great Britain to participate in the advantages conceded to the United States by the convention in question would be clear; but as the next preceding article of the treaty of 1851 contains a stipulation that any favor which either party may grant to a third country shall be extended to the other party on corresponding terms—that is, either gratuitously or for an equivalent compensation, as the case may be; and as the advantages conceded to the United States by the Sandwich Islands are expressly stated to be given in consideration of, and as an equivalent for, certain reciprocal concessions on the part of the United States, Great Britain cannot, as a matter of right, claim the same advantages for her trade under the strict letter of the treaty of 1851.

Unless, however, the convention between the Sandwich Islands and the United States was concluded with an unfriendly feeling towards Great Britain, which Her Majesty’s Government have no reason to suppose, it is probable that the Government of the Sandwich Islands will be willing to extend its benefits to Great Britain in consideration of the terms of Article IV of the treaty of 1851 and of the general liberality of the British commercial system. To such a participation Great Britain is in equity entitled, not only because it is not her practice to cut down the effect of an article such as Article IV of the treaty of 1851 by making special tariff bargains with foreign countries, but because she had already some years ago admitted duty free eleven out of the nineteen articles the produce of the Sandwich Islands enumerated in Article I of the convention with the United States, which the United States have now only consented to admit on the same terms, and the remaining eight the duties levied, except in the instance of sugar, are almost nominal.

The amount of trade between Great Britain and the Sandwich Islands at the present time is so small, that the question, so far as Great Britain is concerned, is one more of principle than practical value. Even, however, if that were the full extent of the question, exertion would be used to obtain the recognition of the principle for which Her Majesty’s Government contend.

But as regards Vancouver’s Island, the evils of such a partial arrangement as that contained in the convention will be very sensibly felt, inasmuch as the fish with which that island supplies the Sandwich Islands will hereafter be placed at a disadvantage of ten per cent. in comparison with American produce, and other articles will be similarly affected; and this notwithstanding Vancouver’s Island admits duty free the produce ordinarily imported from the Sandwich Islands. Trusting that the King and his cabinet will be pleased to take this important question into their early and favorable consideration,

I have the honor to be, sir, your most humble, obedient servant.

WILLIAM MILLER.

To R. C. Wyllie, Esq.,
Minister of Foreign Relations.

Exhibit B.

Foreign Office, January 25, 1878.

Major Wodehouse:

Sir: I have now to supply you on your return to your post with instructions in regard to the recent commercial negotiations with Mr. Carter, the Hawaiian envoy to this country, in connection with the discussion between Her Majesty’s Government and the Hawaiian Government relative to the infringement of the provisions of the treaty of July 10, 1851, between Great Britain and the Sandwich Islands, by the manner in which the reciprocity treaty of January 30, 1875, between the United States and the Sandwich Islands has been put into operation by the Hawaiian Government.

Mr. Carter had his first interview with me on the 27th of August. I expressed to him in general terms the friendly sentiments of Her Majesty’s Government towards the King and people of Hawaii; and as the question respecting which he had come to treat involved matters in detail, I then referred him for the discussion of these points to Mr. Lister and Mr. Kennedy. Previously to Mr. Carter’s arrival, Mr. Mauley Hopkins, the Hawaiian consul-general in London, had given notice of the desire of the Hawaiian Government to terminate, under the terms of article 17 of the treaty of July 10, 1851, articles 4, 5, and 6 of that treaty. He announced at the same time that a special envoy was coming to this country from Hawaii for the purpose of settling the differences which had arisen, or at best of explaining fully the position of the Hawaiian Government in the matter. This communication was made, in a friendly sense, and it thus coincided with the report on the subject contained in your dispatch No. 2, commercial, of the 23d of May, 1877; but in its terms this notice went beyond the actual requirements of the case; for while the points in discussion were limited to the first paragraph of article 4, Mr. Manley Hopkins gave notice to terminate the whole of that article, and also articles 5 and 6. Mr. Carter explained at length, in several conversations, the reasons which had induced the Hawaiian Government to enter into the reciprocity treaty of 1875 with the United States. The question in discussion was, however, further complicated by a tariff law passed by the Hawaiian legislature in 1876, by which the Hawaiian Government, besides exempting the goods specified in the schedule to article 2 of that reciprocity treaty from payment of custom duties, had augmented the rates of custom duties previously levied on mixed textiles and on certain other goods of British manufacture which are of much importance in the trade between this country and the Hawaiian Islands. The Hawaiian Government have thus not only infringed the stipulations of their treaty with this country by refusing to admit British goods on the same terms as United States goods, but they have increased the rate of the differential duty, which, contrary to treaty, they have thus established, by raising that duty in certain cases from 10 to 25 per cent., and they have apparently proceeded to levy these duties without waiting for the expiration of the twelve months’ notice given for the termination of article 4 of the British treaty of 1851. This state of things gave Her Majesty’s Government ground for serious complaint. But they were unwilling, if it could be avoided, to depart from the friendly policy which they have hitherto maintained towards the Hawaiian Islands. Mr. Carter then communicated, as an alternative plan for the settlement of this matter, the accompanying drafts of Additional Article and of Declaration. But these documents would merely give the sanction of the two governments to the course which has been taken by the Hawaiian Government. They are each alike opposed to the view of the whole question taken by Her Majesty’s Government, and to their interpretation of article 4 of the treaty of 1851. I therefore caused you to be instructed to supply a statement of the points under consideration with especial reference to their bearing on British commercial interests; and, after considering the subject, in order to act as far as possible in accordance with the friendly policy of Her Majesty’s Government towards the Hawaiian Islands, without insisting as a step preliminary to negotiation on the removal or modification of causes or complaint, I addressed Mr. Carter the inclosed note, proposing for his acceptance a draft of declaration, prepared with the object of making the difference between the two Governments simply a difference of interpretation, and by taking that basis to facilitate a settlement of the points at issue. It was understood that if Mr. Carter accepted this declaration, he would also accede to the suggestions made in my note of the 11th July, that the notice of termination of these articles should not take effect; and it was explained to him that the schedule annexed to the draft of declaration was open for modification; namely, that if he so wished, the designation of goods mentioned therein in general terms might be limited to certain classes of them, and that some of the goods mentioned, carriages, for example, might be altogether omitted from the list. Mr. Carter, however, did not proceed with the negotiation on this basis; and at an interview with me on the 9th of November, he communicated to me a memorandum, in which, by referring to correspondence in 1856, when a previous reciprocity treaty, which was not ratified and therefore never came into operation, was in discussion, and to correspondence in 1867 about consular privileges, he sought to controvert the interpretation given by Her Majesty’s Government to article 4 of the treaty of 1851. But these matters are, in the opinion of Her Majesty’s Government, beside the question now at issue. The correspondence in 1856 was incomplete, for it related to a state of things which, as that reciprocity treaty did not come into operation, in reality never arose. The consular question is obviously quite a different subject.

In the absence of Mr. Lister, and as a proof of the constant desire of Her Majesty’s Government to act in a friendly manner towards the Hawaiian Government, I then placed Mr. Carter in semi-official communication with Lord Tenterden. But this course likewise failed to discover the means of arriving at a satisfactory settlement.

It was suggested to Mr. Carter that the Hawaiian Government should engage that the schedule of the United States treaty of 1875, or even a modified form of that schedule, should be annexed to the British declaration proposed to be substituted for the first paragraph of article 4, with a proviso that the duty of the goods comprised in it, when of British origin, shall not, while the reciprocity treaty of 1875 is in force, exceed 10 per cent. ad valorem; that the unnecessary denunciation of the remaining part of article 4 and of articles 5 and 6 should be withdrawn, and that effect should be given to these engagements in such manner as would be most in accordance with the Hawaiian constitution. But Mr. Carter was not willing to agree to these suggestions; and as an alternative plan he proposed that the most-favored nation stipulation in the treaty of 1851 should be held not to apply to the reciprocity treaty of 1875 or to concessions made by treaties between the Hawaiian Islands and countries in or bordering upon the Pacific Ocean. This plan, however, was found on examination to be the same as that proposed in the drafts of additional article and of declaration communication by Mr. Carter on the 13th September, and which, in my note of the 25th October, he had been informed could not be adopted by Her Majesty’s Government. He was accordingly again informed so. He was further asked to say whether he was willing to withdraw the denunciation of the articles 5 and 6 of the treaty of 1851, for in conversation the precise meaning of a statement on this point in his memorandum of the 9th of November was not very clear. Before, however, this answer could be sent off, he announced that he was about to leave for the Continent, and up to this time no reply has been received to the semi-official letter in which this answer was conveyed to him. Having now stated the course of the recent negotiations, I will proceed to make known to you the views of Her Majesty’s Government in the present position of the question. I have to observe, in the first place, that in dealing with it Her Majesty’s Government have to consider it not merely as regards the relations between Great Britain and the Hawaiian Islands. The arrangement which may be arrived at for its settlement will also have a bearing upon the commercial relations and engagements of this country with foreign states generally. Her Majesty’s Government cannot, therefore, be parties to any arrangement which would be opposed to their general commercial policy. They are willing to accept fully the explanation given by you and by Mr. Carter in regard to the reciprocity treaty between Hawaii and the United States, and they have no wish that that treaty should impair their friendly sentiments towards Hawaii. But, at the same time, as a necessary condition to this friendly understanding, Her Majesty’s Government expect that the Hawaiian Government will remove just causes of complaint; and the draft of declaration proposed in my note to Mr. Carter of the 25th of October last not having been accepted, you must not give any pledge that the offer then made will be repeated. In consideration of the peculiar circumstances of the commercial relations of the Hawaiian Islands, as explained by Mr. Carter, and the statements made by you after communication with British merchants interested in the trade with those islands, Her Majesty’s Government proposed this method of settlement of the points in discussion between the two governments. But it was only as a temporary arrangement, the reciprocity treaty of 1875 being limited in duration, and only under the peculiar circumstances of the case, that Her Majesty’s Government could agree to any sort of differential treatment of British goods, and a formal agreement to the reduction of the 25 per cent. duties to 10 per cent. as a maximum was a necessary condition of any such arrangement. Without reverting to questions of the interpretation of article 4 of the treaty of 1851, for the termination of which notice has been formally given by the Hawaiian Government, I have to instruct you, on your return to Honolulu, to make the following statements to the King and to the Government of Hawaii: 1. Her Majesty’s Government cannot admit the right of the Hawaiian Government to terminate the operation of the provisions of that article until the expiration of the twelve months’ notice which they have given. While it remains in force Her Majesty’s Government must require that it shall he faithfully observed, and consequently duties improperly levied must be repaid.

2. Without further explanation to justify such a course, Her Majesty’s Government must regard the abrogation of articles 5 and 6 in the treaty of 1851, when the only point in discussion is the first paragraph of article 4, as an unnecessary and unfriendly act.

3. Her Majesty’s Government must regard as a specially unfriendly act the levying, when the treaty stipulation for most-favored nation treatment in matters of tariff shall terminate, of a iv such differential rate of duty as 25 per cent. on British goods imported into the Hawaiian Islands. You will give a memorandum embodying these three statements to the Hawaiian minister with whom you may be in communication on your return to Honolulu, and, if you think fit, you may read this dispatch to him and supply him with a copy of it.

I am, sir, your most obedient, humble servant,

DERBY.

Foreign Office, October 25, 1877.

Sir: I have now the honor to inform you that Her Majesty’s Government have carefully considered the drafts of an additional article of the treaty of 1851 between Great Britain and the Hawaiian Islands, and of a declaration which you have communicated as alternative means of obviating any difficulties with respect to the interpretation of the fourth article of the treaty of 1851. I have, however, to inform you that Her Majesty’s Government see objections to accepting either of these documents. They are at the same time, after considering your explanation of the subject, desirous of snowing in their manner of dealing with the question their friendship for the King and people of the Hawaiian Islands, and of assisting as far as in their power the object of your mission, to remove any difference between the two countries. I have accordingly the honor to communicate to you herewith the draft of a declaration which, on the part of Her Majesty’s Government, I have caused to be prepared with the view to settle this difference of interpretation. I think it right to state that it is only in consideration of the peculiar circumstances of the commercial position of the Hawaiian Islands which you have explained that Her Majesty’s Government are willing to propose this mode of settlement, and that they regard their action in waiving the strict application of article 4 of the treaty of 1851, as it now stands, as an especial mark of friendship and good-will. At the same time I think it right to state, in order to avoid any possible misunderstanding, that in consenting to the proposed declaration and the alterations in the terms of article 4, Her Majesty’s Government maintain their interpretation of it while it remains in force, and that consequently any claims preferred on account of excessive duties levied in contravention of that article of the treaty should be entertained by the Hawaiian Government.

I have the honor to be, with the highest consideration, sir, your most obedient, humble servant,

DERBY.

draft of declaration.

The Government of Her Majesty the Queen of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and His Majesty the King of the Hawaiian Islands, being desirous of obviating any difficulties which may arise in regard to the interpretation of article 4 of the treaty of friendship, commerce, and navigation between Great Britain and the Hawaiian Islands, of the 10th of July, 1851, the undersigned, duly authorized for the purpose, have agreed upon the following provisions:

His Hawaiian Majesty engages to recommend to the legislative assembly of the Hawaiian Islands that the duty on the goods specified in the schedule attached to this declaration, the produce or manufacture or coming from the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland, or of British Colonies or possessions, shall, upon their importation into the Hawaiian Islands, not exceed 10 per cent. ad valorem. As soon as an enactment to the above effect shall have been passed by the Hawaiian legislative assembly, the stipulations in regard to import and export duties contained in article 4 of the treaty of the 10th July, 1851, shall become and remain inoperative as long as the said law shall be in force.

schedule.

Tissues of all materials, pure or mixed.

Metals of all kinds, raw or manufactured, or in any stage of manufacture, pure or alloyed.

Cutlery, tools, and agricultural and other implements, with or without handles of wood or other material.

Machinery, complete or in pieces.

Saddlery and harness; floor oil-cloth.

Hats and caps of all kinds.

Boots and shoes.

Earthen, glass, and china ware.

Colors, paints and turpentine.

Cobra, linseed and cotton-seed oils.

Soap, scented or not.

Carriages, entire or the materials of.

Fire-bricks and fire-clay, Portland cement, lumber.

Exhibit C.

[Extract of letter of his excellency R. C. Wyllie, minister of foreign relations, to Gustavo A. Reiners, esq., consul of Prussia, Honolulu, 23d February, 1857.]

However brought about, the important fact is that Great Britain voluntarily sent out the draft of treaty concluded on the 10th July, 1851, between H. B. M.’s Consul-General William Miller and me, of which I inclose copy, marked No. 6.

Exhibit D.

[Extract of letter from Hon. Daniel Webster to Hawaiian commissioners Richards and Haalilio, at Washington, December 19, 1842.

The United States have regarded the existing authorities in the Sandwich Islands as a government suited to the condition of the people and resting on their choice; and the President is of opinion that the interests of all the commercial nations require that that government should not be interfered with by foreign powers.

Of the vessels which visit the Islands, it is known that a great majority belong to the United States. The United States, therefore, are more interested in the fate of the Islands and of their government than any other nation can be; and this consideration induces the President to be quite willing to declare, as the sense of the Government of the United States, that the Government of the Sandwich Islands ought to be respected; that no power ought either to take possession of the Islands as a conquest or for the purpose of colonization; and that no power ought to seek for any undue control over the existing government, or any exclusive privileges or preferences in matters of commerce.

[Extract of copy of the dispatch addressed by H. S. Fox, esq., the British minister at the court of Washington, to the Hon. H. P. Upshur, Secretary of State, June 25, 1843.]

All that has appeared requisite to Her Majesty’s Government has been that other powers shall not exercise there a greater influence than that possessed by Great Britain.

[Extract of copy of the Hon. A. P. Upshur’s dispatch in reply to that of H. S. Fox., esq., the British minister at the court of Washington, July 5, 1843.]

Seeking to establish no undue advantage in the Sandwich Islands for citizens of the United States at the expense of other powers, the President receives with much pleasure the assurance contained in Mr. Fox’s note, that none such are sought for Great Britain. He cannot doubt that the recognition of the independenee and the sovereignty of those Islands will be found altogether compatible with every just claim of Great Britain, while it, will best conduce to the interests of the Islands themselves and of all nations having intercourse with them.

Exhibit E.

[Extracts from Hon. E. H. Allen’s dispatch to Mr. Wyllie, 4th February, in relation to reciprocity treaty, 1857.]

The legal objection in the Senate arises from the most-favored nation clause in other treaties. * * *

I have seen a great many of the Senators when I came here; that most-favored nation clause met me everywhere. * * *

In relation to the treaty I can only say that the only serious obstacle seems to be the most-favored nation clause in other treaties.

* * * * * * *

Exhibit F.

[Extracts from tariff of Victoria, 1877.]

Twenty per cent. ad valorem.

articles of apparel.

Aprons, breeches, coats, capes, cloaks, furs, frocks, hoods, and hats, bobs, jackets, mantles, scarfs, night-dresses, petticoats, ruffles, robes, shirts of all kinds, stays, shawls, trowsers, vests, men’s, women’s, and children’s underclothing, silks of all kinds and in part.

Carriages and carts, furniture, agricultural implements, machinery, manufactures of metals of all kinds, manufactured stationery, musical instruments, wooden ware of all kinds.

Ten per cent. ad valorem.

Carpeting and druggeting, clocks, combs, gloves, watches, woolen piece goods.

Almonds, bacon, biscuits, 2d. per pound; ale, porter, and other beer, 9d. per gallon; bags and sacks, 1s. per dozen; boots and shoes (men’s), 25s. per dozen pairs; do. do., youths’, 15s. do. do.; do. do. (boys’), 11s. do. do.; do. do. (women’s), do. do.; playing cards, 3s. per dozen packs; china ware, 9d. per cubic foot; cigars, 5s. per pound; doors, 5s. each; aloes, 12s. per hundred weight; chlorodyne, 1s. 4d. per pound; morphia, 1s. 6d. per ounce; potassium, 10d. per pound; earthenware, 9d. per cubic foot; lead, 2s. 6d. per hundred weight; matches per gross (boxes containing 100), 6d.; nails (common), 3s. per hundred weight; horseshoes, 12s. per hundred weight; oils, 6d. per gallon; oat meal, 3s. per hundred pounds; onions, 20s. per ton; parasols and sun-shades (silk), 1s. 99. each; paints (ground in oil), 40s. per ton; powder, 3d. per pound; sugar and molasses, 3s. per hundred weight; spirits, liquors, and cordials, 10s. per gallon; perfumed spirits, 20s. per gallon; tobacco (manufactured), 2s. per pound; do. unmanufactured, 1s. per pound; wines 4s. and 6s. per gallon.

Exhibit G.

Department of Foreign Relations,
Copenhagen, July 28, 1856.

Sir: Under the date of the 13th February last you have addressed the department, on account of an order with which you have been charged by your government at Honolulu, respecting an interpretation given to the seventh (or the eighth) article of the treaty concluded between Denmark and the Sandwich Islands on the 19th of October, 1846, in a decision delivered by the supreme court of the said town in the month of May last year, in a case between the firm of Melchers & Co., as plaintiffs, and the custom office as defendant, concerning the amount of the import duty to be levied on a cargo imported from Hong-Kong into the said port by the said firm in the Danish vessel Asa Thor.

In the said case it was established by the court that no application could be made by the act passed by the Hawaiian legislature on the 24th May, 1853, by which the duty on Chinese goods was fixed at 15 per cent., as being in discordance with the said article of the treaty, whereas in the case in question there could only be claimed a duty of 5 per cent., being that payable on goods which are the produce of the most favored nations; and on this ground the court decided that the said firm should be entitled to recover the sum of $2, 141.08 overpaid by them on the said cargo. As, however, the Hawaiian Government could not admit the opinion expressed by the interpretation put on the above-mentioned article by the said decision, pretending that such an interpretation would, when definitely established, be productive of consequences most likely of great prejudice to the Hawaiian exchequer, you have, sir, through this department, requested the opinion of the Danish Government, as the other contracting party, concerning the interpretation to be given to the said article of the treaty.

The right honorable the Rear-Admiral Bille, who, as commander of the Danish ship-of-war Galathea, visited the Sandwich Islands in the year 1846, and then concluded the said treaty with the Royal Hawaiian Government, having now at my request, communicated his views as to the interpretation of the seventh and eight articles of this treaty, and this department having moreover obtained, through the respective consul-generals, copies of the several treaties, partly existing at the time and partly afterwards concluded between the said government and France, as well as England, His Danish Majesty’s department of foreign relations do hereby hand to you the following communication for the purpose in question:

When Denmark, as in the year 1846, concluded a treaty with a State, as the Hawaiian Kingdom, there could be no sufficient motive to induce the government of the former country to extend, by such a treaty, the acquisition of any greater advantage than that of procuring to Danish ships and merchandise on the Sandwich Islands a treatment equal to that granted in the said kingdom to the most favored nations. If, therefore, any doubt should happen to rise with regard to the interpretation of any of the articles contained in the said treaty, the Hawaiian Government might be convinced that the Danish Government would not consider what might be regarded as most profitable to the trade and navigation of this country, but only what must, in the sincere opinion of the same, be regarded as the real intention of the functionaries who, as representatives of their respective governments, had negotiated the said treaty. Such a doubt has now risen, it being, as above remarked, the question in what manner the seventh article of the treaty ought in the future to be interpreted, according to the mutual opinions of the two negotiators, without any regard to the interpretation put on it by others, either on the one or the other side. By the decision delivered by the supreme court at Honolulu, in the action brought on by the said firm against the Hawaiian exchequer, the expressions of the said article have been interpreted in a manner so as to imply that Danish productions or other goods, on board of or imported in Danish vessels, which are allowed to be imported by the ships of other countries, shall not be prohibited nor pay any higher duties than those levied on productions of the most favored nations; whereas the Hawaiian Government averred that the wording of the said article could not receive any other interpretation than this: That goods imported by Danish ships should be subject to the same duties as are paid by the most favored nations. The part of the wording of the said treaty on which the question chiefly depends is then those words of the seventh article, which say that the there mentioned Danish productions or other goods on board of Danish vessels “shall not be prohibited nor pay more than those duties levied on goods of the most favored nation.”

On a mere perusal of these words, without any regard to other matters which might else possibly be worth noticing, His Danish Majesty’s Government should indeed agree in the interpretation thus established by the said court as the only correct one; but, on the other hand, it could not be thought strange that the Hawaiian Government should be of opinion that it had been the intention of the respective representatives of the said contracting powers, in regard to the duty in question, to establish a rule contrary to the interpretation given by the said court, an opinion which might be supported as well by the construction of the said words of the treaty, as especially by the declaration of the minister of foreign relations at Honolulu, who represented the Hawaiian Government in negotiating and concluding the said treaty, that, for his part, he had never thought of such an interpretation as that established by the supreme court as the only correct one.

The second of the negotiators, the Rear-Admiral Bille, has, in his report to this department, declared that he had in every respect shared the same opinion as to the negotiations and the final conclusion of the said treaty as that professed by the Hawaiian minister of foreign relations, in addition to which he has further remarked that it had never been his thought by the said treaty to impose any restriction on the Hawaiian Government in regard to the prerogative of raising or lowering duties at its own discretion, but that, on the contrary, he would indirectly have the said prerogative acknowledged.

Such a declaration of His Danish Majesty’s representative must naturally have great influence on the interpretation of the said article to be followed in the future. But, besides this, there is another circumstance of great moment which still more corroborates the declaration of the two representatives, viz, that while the wording of the seventh article of the English original treaty is so dubious, as above shown, the corresponding words of the Danish translation of the treaty, which, like the Hawaiian translation, is annexed to the English original, are clear and evident, saying, that the oft-mentioned Danish productions or goods in Danish vessels “Ickeheller sküllie betale mere end saadanne Toldafgifter, som i saadant Tilfælde ere paalagte de meest begunstigede Nationer.”

In consideration hereof the Royal Danish Government does not object to the future admission of this interpretation by the Hawaiian Government, as soon as an official notification concerning the same has previously been issued.

But as the original of the above said article is interpreted in the above-mentioned manner by the supreme court of the Hawaiian Kingdom, this interpretation must, in the opinion of the Danish Government, be valid until such a declaration shall have been published by the Government at Honolulu; and, moreover, it must be considered as a matter of course that the firm of Melchers & Co., at Honolulu, either have received or will receive of the Hawaiian Government reimbursement of the said 10 per cent. overpaid by them on Chinese goods imported in the Danish ship Asa Thor into Honolulu.

Finally, I observe that, in consideration of the premises, there will, when a notification as that above-mentioned has taken place, according to the said act of the 24th May, 1853, hereafter be paid on Chinese goods, imported in Danish vessels into the ports of the Sandwich Islands, the higher duty of 15 per cent., instead of the earlier of 5 per cent., as long as this duty is paid in the Hawaiian Kingdom by the vessels of the most favored nations.

Having the honor to return to you the different inclosures which followed your said letter to this department, I avail myself of this opportunity to assure you, sir, of my high esteem,

SCHEELE.

Exhibit H.

Collector-General’s Office,
Honolulu, H. I., July 18, 1878.

To his excellency S. K. Kaai, H. H. M.’s Minister of Finance:

Sir: In reply to the communication of yesterday’s date from your excellency’s department, I herewith inclose the list of parties who have protested against paying the additional 15 per cent. duties under the tariff act of 1876, which was enforced with all treaty powers on and after the 12th October, 1877.

That you may see the grounds of protest, I send the several protests that were filed at this office.

The total amount of the 15 per cent. duty on protested entries is $1,177.14. This is all that I consider as direct protests against the tariff act.

I have a much larger list of protests against duties paid upon British, German, and French goods, which goods would have been admitted free if the growth, produce or manufacture of the United States, under the treaty of reciprocity.

I have the honor to be, sir, your excellency’s most obedient servant,

W. F. ALLEN, Collector-General.

List of parties protesting.

Ed. Hoffschlæger & Co.:

October 1, 1877, ex R. C. Wyllie, Germany and Great Britain, 15 per cent $1,336 29 $200 44

December 10, 1877, Germany and Great Britain, 15 per cent 776 04 116 40

December 13, 1877, ex City New York, Germany and Great Britain, 15 per cent 161 58 24 23

February 5, 1878, ex St. Paul, Germany and Great Britain, 15 per cent 179 02 26 85

February 26, 1878, ex Australia, Germany and Great Britain, 15 per cent 244 73 36 70

March 27, 1877, ex City New York, Germany and Great Britain, 15 per cent 139 89 20 97

April 10, 1878, ex Iolani, Germany and Great Britain, 15 per cent 391 84 58 77

April 23, 1878, ex Zealandia, Germany and Great Britain, 15 per cent 132 29 19 83

May 7, 1877, ex Wilmington, Germany and Great Britain, 15 per cent 66 97 9 90

$504 19

F. A. Schaefer & Co.:

October 18, 1877, ex City Sydney, Germany and Great Britain, 15 per cent 1,318 41 197 76

November 9, 1877, ex Courier, Germany and Great Britain, 15 per cent 782 78 118 41

December 13, 1877, ex City New York, Germany and Great Britain, 15 per cent 667 35 100 10

March 1, 1878, ex Glencoe, Great Britain, 15 per cent. 212 63 31 39

March 1, 1878, ex Glencoe, Great Britain, 15 per cent., champagne 64 65

522 21

Castle & Cooke, October 13, 1877, ex W. H. Meyer, Japan, 15 per cent 70 17 10 53

10 53

J. T. Waterhouse, January 2, 1878, ex Hertfordshire, Great Britain, 15 per cent 155 75 23 35

23 35

Dillingham & Co., April 3, 1878, ex St. Paul, Germany and Great Britain, 15 per cent 219 15 32 87

32 87

Theo. H. Davies, July 12, bonded goods, Germany and Great Britain, 15 per cent 559 93 83 99

83 99

1,177 14

Addenda.Addenda.

[260] Anglo-Hawaiian treaty.

July 10, 1851.

[261] . Mr. Comly to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Honolulu, June 9, 1879. (Received June 26.)

[262] . Mr. Comly to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Honolulu, June 9, 1879. (Received June 26.)

[263] . Mr. Comly to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Honolulu, June 9, 1879. (Received June 26.)

[264] . Mr. Morton to Mr. Seward.

United States Legation, Honolulu, H. I., September 1, 1879. (Received September 17.)

[265] . Mr. Evarts to Mr. Comly.

Department of State, Washington, September 23, 1879.

[266] Mr. Sherman to Mr. Evarts.

Treasury Department, September 17, 1879.

Anglo-Hawaiian treaty. [Document 260]

Anglo-Hawaiian treaty.

[Extracts.]

July 10, 1851.

article iii.

The two contracting parties hereby agree that any favor, privilege, or immunity whatever, in matters of commerce or navigation, which either contracting party has actually granted, or may hereafter grant, to the subjects or citizens of any other state, shall be extended to the subjects or citizens of the other contracting party; gratuitously, if the concession in favor of that other state shall have been gratuitous, or in return for a compensation as nearly as possible of proportionate value and effect, to be adjusted by mutual agreement, if the concession shall have been conditional.

article iv

No other or higher duties shall be imposed on the importation into the dominions of Her Britannic Majesty, of any article the growth, produce, or manufacture of the Hawaiian Islands, and no other or higher duties shall be imposed on the imporation into the Hawaiian Islands of any article, the growth, produce, or manufacture of Her Britannic Majesty’s dominions, than are or shall be payable on the like article, being the growth, produce, or manufacture of any other foreign country. Nor shall any other or higher duties or charges be imposed, in the territories of either of the contracting parties, on the exportation of any article to the territories of the other, than such as are or may be payable on the exportation of the like article to any foreign country. No prohibition shall be imposed upon the importation of any article the growth, produce, or manufacture of the territories of either of the two contracting parties, into the territories of the other, which shall not equally extend to the importation of the like articles, being the growth, produce, or manufacture of any other country. Nor shall any prohibition be imposed upon the exportation of any article from the territories of either of the two contracting parties to the territories of the other, which shall not equally extend to the exportation of the like article to the territories of all other nations.

article v.

No other or higher duties or charges on account of tonnage, light or harbor dues, pilotage, quarantine, salvage in case of damage or shipwreck, or any other local charges, shall be imposed in any of the ports of the Hawaiian Islands on British vessels than those payable in the same ports by Hawaiian vessels; nor in the ports of Her Britannic Majesty’s territories on Hawiian vessels than shall be payable in the same ports on British vessels.

article vi.

The same duties shall be paid on the importation of any article which is or may be legally importable into the Hawaiian Islands, whether such importation shall be in Hawaiian or British vessels; and the same duties shall be paid on the importation of any article which is or may be legally importable into the dominions of Her Britannic Majesty, whether such importation shall be in British or Hawaiian vessels.

The same duties shall be paid, and the same bounties and drawbacks allowed, on the exportation of any article which is or may be legally exportable from the Hawaiian Islands, whether such exportation shall be in Hawaiian or British vessels; and the same duties shall be paid, and the same bounties and drawbacks allowed, on the exportation of any article which is or may be legally exportable from her Britannic Majesty’s dominions, whether such shall be in British or in Hawaiian vessels.

article xvii.

In order that the two contracting parties may have the opportunity of hereafter treating and agreeing upon such other arrangements as may tend still further to the improvement of their mutual intercourse, and to the advancement of the interest of their respective subjects, it is agreed that at any time after the expiration of seven years from the date of the exchange of the ratifications of the present treaty, either of the contracting parties shall have the right of giving to the other party notice of its intention to terminate Articles IV, V, and VI of the present treaty; and that at the expiration of twelve months after such notice shall have been received by either party from the other, the said articles and all the stipulations contained therein shall cease to be binding on the two contracting parties.

Letter of Lord Tenterden to Mr. Carter.

Foreign Office, December 28, 1877.

Sir: The draft of declaraion inclosed in your letter of the 17th instant has been carefully considered. The stipulations in limitation of provisions for most-favored nation treatment proposed in that draft do not, however, correspond with the terms of the third paragraph of the declaration with Roumania of the 30th of November, 1876; that paragraph refers only to matters affecting border districts, which from time immemorial have been treated as exceptional in the relations of European powers with Turkey. It does not, as your proposal is understood to do, apply to such international arrangements as reciprocity treaties. Your present proposal, if rightly understood to apply to reciprocity treaties, is, in effect, the same as the method of dealing with the question which you previously suggested and which Her Majesty’s Government regret they cannot entertain. For in dealing with this question, Her Majesty’s Government have to consider the proposed declaration not only as regards the relation between Great Britain and the Hawaiian Islands, but likewise in its bearings upon the commercial relations and engagements of this country with foreign states generally.

On general grounds, therefore, Her Majesty’s Government are unable to accept a declaration in these terms. Lord Derby has stated to you verbally, and in a formal manuer in his lordship’s note of the 25th of October, the friendly sentiments of Her Majesty’s Government towards Hawaii. They are willing, as you have been informed, to accept fully any statements which you have made in regard to the reciprocity treaty with the United States, and they have no wish that those friendly sentiments should be affected by that treaty. But apart from the treaty there are two matters with regard to which Her Majesty’s Government may have ground for complaint—namely, first, the recent augmentation of duties, if it is maintained, upon goods the produce or manufacture of the United Kingdom; and, secondly, the unnecessary denunciation of Articles V and VI of the treaty of the 10th July, 1851, when the only point in discussion is the first paragraph of Article IV. Her Majesty’s Government are willing to accept your assurances that the Hawaiian Government will propose to the legislature the repeal of those augmentations.

As regards the second matter to which I have adverted, I would mention that Her Majesty’s Government have hitherto, in the hope of satisfactory arrangement being come to, refrained from making any public announcement of the denunciation by the Hawaiian Government of Articles IV, V, and VI of the treaty of 1851. In the present position of affairs this announcement cannot be longer delayed, and I would suggest for your consideration whether, in order to lessen its effect, you would withdraw the denunciation of Articles V and VI, which, if I rightly understood your verbal explanation, the Hawaiian Government do not really wish to terminate. As the purpose for which we entered into private communication does not seem likely to be accomplished, I would suggest that your further letters should be addressed to Lord Derby.

I have the honor to be, sir, your most obedient, humble servant,

TENTERDEN.

Carter’s declaration to the Anglo-Hawaiian treaty of July, 1851.

Certain relations of proximity having led to regulations for the importation into the ports of the United States of America of certain articles, the growth, produce, and manufacture of the Hawaiian Islands, and into the ports of the Hawaiian Islands, the growth, produce, or manufacture of the United States of America, by special stipulations of a treaty now in force, and which may be renewed, said stipulations being in no manner connected with the existing regulations of customs and duties in general, the two high contracting parties hereto being desirous of removing from their commercial relations all ambiguity on subjects of discussion, have agreed that the fourth Article of the anglo-Hawaiian treaty of 1851, of which this article shall form a part, shall not be held applicable to the exceptions in the general tariff of customs and duties resulting therefrom or from any conventions or treaty of reciprocity between the Hawaiian Islands and any other neighboring country in or bordering upon the Pacific Ocean. It is further agreed, that during the existence of any such convention or treaty of reciprocity the customs and duties levied in the ports of the Hawaiian Islands upon the following goods, being the growth, produce, or manufacture of Her Britannic Majesty’s dominions, shall not exceed ten per cent. ad valorem viz.: Plain cottons, printed cottons, hardware, iron and steel manufactures, saddlery, machinery, woolen goods (other than ready-made clothing); and further that all other articles being the growth, produce, or manufacture of Her Britannic Majesty’s dominions, and all articles the growth, produce, or manufacture of the Hawaiian Islands, which can be legally imported into the ports of the respective countries, shall be entitled in said ports to any exemptions, except as provided in such treaties, as accorded in any way to like articles the growth, produce, or manufacture of any other nation.

The present additional article shall take effect as soon as it shall have been ratified by Her Majesty and His Majesty the King of the Hawaiian Islands and said ratifications shall have been exchanged, and shall be considered as a part of said Anglo-Hawaiian treaty of July, 1851, having the same force and effect as if it had been inserted when that treaty was made.

Ratifications of this article shall be exchanged within six months of this date, or as soon as possible, in the city of London.

French treaty, 8th September, 1858.

[extract.]

article xxv.

It is formally agreed between the two contracting parties that, besides the preceding stipulations, the diplomatic and consular agents, the subjects of every class, the ships, the cargoes, and the merchandise of either of the two states shall enjoy in full right in the other the franchises, privileges, and immunities of every kind granted to or which may be hereafter granted in favor of the most favored nation; and this gratuitously if the concession be gratuitous, or with the same compensation if the concession be conditional.

It is specially stipulated that the postal arrangements concluded in Honolulu on the 24th of November, 1853, and which regulate the exchange of correspondence between the Society Islands and the Hawaiian Archipelago, and reciprocally, shall be maintained; and that the two contracting parties reserve to themselves only the right of modifying the details thereof, in the proportion and measure that hereafter necessity may point out.

Honolulu, April 18, 1867.

My Dear Sir: In conformity with your request, I transmit to you a résumé of the conversation we had at my office on the 15th instant. In answer to your inquiry as to the objects of the mission of the minister of finance in the United States, I stated to you that he was instructed to propose to negotiate a special reciprocity convention on the basis of that agreed upon in 1855 between the Hawaiian and American plenipotentiaries in Washington, but subsequently rejected by Congress.

I added that should any objection be made to treat on that basis, in view of our increased production of sugar, His Majesty’s plenipotentiary was instructed to negotiate on the basis of a reduced rate of duties, and to give up other Hawaiian produce if necessary, saving and excepting sugar.

In regard to the denunciation of our treaty with the United States for the purpose of striking out the 7th article, you remarked to me that that clause being inserted in our treaties with England Sweden, and Norway, our present action in Washington implied a similar one in London and Stockholm, to which I assented, stating that such were our intentions and that I would at no distant day so notify you officially.

In answer to your question how far the conclusion of a special reciprocity convention with the United States would affect the importation of articles of British manufacture, and how far in my opinion the parity clause applied to such a convention, I replied that an answer to the first part of the question could not be given until we knew exactly ourselves what the United States Government would claim in exchange for the admission of our produce, either free of duties or at a reduced rate, but that the convention, if agreed upon in Washington, had to receive the ratification of the King and would have to be discussed in the Legislative Assembly, since by the twenty-ninth article of our constitution treaties involving changes in the tariff have to be referred for approval to the said Legislative Assembly, as to the effect of the parity clause, I stated to you that I understood it to secure to Great Britain the right of claiming the same advantages given in such a case to the United States on her conceding the same compensation, but not otherwise. The rest of our conversation does not appear to me to come within the scope of this memorandum; should, however, my memory be at fault, and should any omission of importance occur to you, be pleased to point it out to me, and I will be happy to repair it.

Believe me, my dear sir, very sincerely, yours,

C. De VARIGNY.

To J. H. Wodehouse,
Her Britannic Majesty’s Commissioner, &c.

No. 238. Mr. Comly to Mr. Evarts. [Document 261]

No. 238.
Mr. Comly to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Honolulu, June 9, 1879. (Received June 26.) No. 74.]

Sir: I have the honor to transmit correspondence with the Hawaiian foreign office upon the question whether the Hawaiian tariff upon American cotton goods made up into clothing is not in contravention of Article II of the reciprocity treaty.

The Hawaiian Government having asked an opinion from the Treasury experts at Washington, I refer the whole correspondence, and respectfully ask instructions.

I beg to direct especial attention, however, to the fact that this is not exactly a parallel case to one resting wholly upon an expert interpretation of the meaning of the phrase, as submitted by the Hawaiian Government.

In deciding upon the meaning of the phrase relating to cotton goods in this treaty, it seems to me the phrases relating to textile manufactures made of a combination of cotton, wool, &c., must be considered, and whether the use of the phrase “other than when ready-made clothing,” as applied to these textile combinations, and the omission of this phrase in the paragraph relating to all-cotton goods, does not imply that cotton goods, when ready-made clothing, ought not to pay duty.

The collector-general seeks to enlarge the meaning by injecting the phrase “other than when ready-made clothing” into the paragraph as to cotton goods where it does not occur. This he does, not because of anything in the treaty authorizing such interpretation, but because of the opinion of one of the commissioners that the words were meant to have been in the clause as to cotton goods also.

I have, &c.,

JAMES M. COMLY.

[Inclosure 1 in dispatch No. 74.]

Mr. Comly to Mr. Kapena.

Legation of the United States,
May 2, 1879. No. 153.]

Sir: I am asked by importers of American goods, and by the United States consul, to submit to your excellency’s consideration the question whether the tariff collected by the Hawaiian custom-house upon all cotton manufactured into clothing, “the same being the growth, manufacture, or produce of the United States,” is not in contravention of Article II of the reciprocity treaty. For myself, I confess the question seems too plain for argument.” “Cotton and manufacturers of cotton, bleached and unbleached, and whether or not stained, painted, or printed,” must come in free. It is only when mixed with “wool, silk, or linen, or any two or more of them,” and not then unless when manufactured into “ready-made clothing,” that cotton can properly pay duty under the treaty. The mere statement of the point in the language of the treaty itself seems to me absolutely conclusive.

Renewing the assurances of my highest consideration and respect,

I am, &c.,

JAMES M. COMLY.

His Excellency John M. Kapena,
Minister of Foreign Affairs.

[Inclosure 2 in dispatch No. 74.]

Mr. Kapena to Mr. Comly.

Department of Foreign Affairs,
Honolulu, May 2, 1879.

Sir: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your communication of this date submitting to my consideration “the question whether the tariff collected by the Hawaiian custom-house upon all cotton manufactured into clothing, ‘the same being the growth, manufacture, or produce of the United States,’ is not in contravention of Article II of the reciprocity treaty.”

I have forwarded a copy of your dispatch to His Excellency S. K. Kaai, minister of finance, and await his answer, in order that I may fully reply to the question embraced in your letter now acknowledged.

With the highest respect, &c.,

JOHN M. KAPENA.

His Excellency James M. Comly,
United States Minister Resident.

[Inclosure 3 in dispatch No. 74.]

Mr. Wilder to Mr. Comly.

Department of Foreign Affairs,
Honolulu, June 9, 1879.

[With inclosure from collector-general.]

Sir: I have the honor to acknowledge your dispatch under date of May 2, in which you ask whether the tariff collected by the Hawaiian custom-house upon all cotton manufactured into clothing, the same being the growth, manufacture or produce of the United States, is not in contravention of Article II of the reciprocity treaty.

The custom-house officials of this port have always considered the term “manufacture of cotton” could only be held to cover such goods as are imported in the same form as when they come from a cotton manufacturer’s hands, say, as piece goods, not after having passed through another process; a shirt, for instance, even if made wholly of cotton cloth, is not a manufacture of cotton, i. e. raw cotton; it is, made of cotton cloth, and as such, has not been admitted under the clause “manufacture of cotton.”

His Majesty’s Government have and desire to continue to give the reciprocity treaty the most liberal interpretation, and are open to argument on this point, and would be pleased to receive the interpretation placed upon this clause “cotton and manufactures of cotton, bleached and unbleached, and whether or not stained, painted or printed,” by the experts of the Treasury Department, at Washington.

I beg to hand you copy of a dispatch from the collector-general of customs, which clearly gives his reasoning upon this point.

Renewing the assurances of the highest respect and most distinguished consideration,

I have, &c.,

JAMES G. WILDER,
Acting Minister for Foreign Affairs.

[Inclosure in Mr. Wilder’s note of June 9.]

Honolulu, May 3, 1879.

Sir: I am in receipt of your excellency’s communication, and would reply, that soon after the treaty went into effect some few of the importers took the ground that all articles of cotton, whether made up or in piece “if of the growth, manufacture, or produce of the United States” should be admitted free under the second article of the treaty. I then decided that nothing but piece goods could be admitted free. Any article made up must pay duty.

A few protests were filed and then the matter rested until November 15, 1877, when the minister of foreign affairs addressed me a letter, asking if any protests had been made, or if any ruling had been made on this point. I replied that the late minister of finance, Mr. Walker, had given me verbal instructions to the effect that the cabinet had decided that all cotton clothing, or cotton goods, made up, must pay duty. This seemed to be so well understood by the importers that none of them, to my knowledge, did anything more than file their protest.

The commissioners who negotiated the treaty said, that although the “words other than ready-made clothing” were not expressed here as in regard to wool and manufactures of wool, or textile manufactures, still such was the understanding and intention, that in neither case could anything other than piece goods he admitted free, or blankets, bed-spreads, and shawls, articles that are made at once, the same as apiece of calico or wool-pants stuff.

I can see no reason why cotton clothing should be admitted free and all other made dutiable. It seems as if the treaty showed plainly that made-up goods, in either cotton, wool, or textile fabrics, should not be free by its stipulations.

I have, &c.,

W. F. ALLEN,
Collector-General.

His Excellency Simon W. Kaai,
H. H. M. Minister of Finance, &c.

[Inclosure 4 in dispatch No. 74.]

Mr. Comly to Mr. Wilder.

Legation of the United States,
Honolulu, June 9, 1879.

Sir: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of yours of this date on the subject of the tariff on cotton goods.

As his majesty’s government express the wish to receive the interpretation of treasury experts at Washington, upon the disputed phrase, I have referred the question, and asked instructions.

Meantime I take the occasion to renew, &c.

JAMES M. COMLY.

His Excellency James G. Wilder,
Acting Minister for Foreign Affairs.

No. 239. Mr. Comly to Mr. Evarts. [Document 262]

No. 239.
Mr. Comly to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Honolulu, June 9, 1879. (Received June 26.) No. 75.]

Sir: Referring to your dispatches Nos. 40 and 43, I have the honor to report.

No. 40 directs me to communicate with “the Hawaiian Government upon the subject, certain alleged frauds and contemplated frauds upon the revenues of the United States.* * * *

No. 43, received May 27, informs me that the Secretary of the Treasury “is now desirous that a full report be obtained from Honolulu concerning the frauds alleged to be committed in the importation of sugars, and also of rice, from the Hawaiian Islands into this country”; and I am instructed and directed to comply, at my earliest convenience, with the wish of the Secretary of the Treasury.

My attention is also directed to the report of the late Consul Scott, before mentioned.

I have accordingly communicated with the Hawaiian foreign office and the United States consulate, and inclose full copies of the correspondence with each. (Inclosure No. 1 to No. 8, inclusive.)

At my request, Mr. Hastings also consulted with shipmasters long in the coasting trade, and prepared a descriptive list of the harbors, roadsteads, anchorages, landings, and ports of entry in the Hawaiian Islands, a copy of which is made inclosure No. 9. I requested him orally, also, to ascertain, if possible, the cost per pound of landing, repacking, and re-shipping rice and sugar, and include the same in his report. He states the result approximately in the conclusion that it would be cheaper to pay the duty than to evade it by these expensive means.

The Secretary of State will find valuable, and I think accurate information in the inclosures which make reply to my inquiries.

The vice-consul says: I do not know of any frauds, either actual or contemplated * * * Nor have I ever known or had any cause to suspect, during a residence of nearly two years at this post, that either rice, sugar, or any of the articles named in the schedule of Article II of the treaty were being brought to these islands for any such purpose.

As Consul Scott’s report is inclosed to me, and my attention is directed to it by the Secretary of State, I will ask the Secretary to observe that the facts as stated by Consul Scott do not differ from the facts as stated by Vice-Consul Hastings.

Consul Scott says: Knowing the strong temptation there would be to commit frauds on the revenue, * * * I have been watchful in that direction. So far, I have been unable to detect anything to lead one to believe, &c.

Again: From my observations and investigations, I have no reason to doubt that the rice so far imported has and is being (sic) consumed by the Chinese on the plantations and otherwise on these islands; nor have I any reason to say now that the lower grades of sugar being imported will be used otherwise than for consumption here, but their importation certainly creates great facilities for fraud on our revenues under the treaty, &c.

Referring to the Hawaiian customs officials, he says that “they understand that if fraud should be connived at by them it would be a good reason on the part of the United States to declare the treaty null and void, and this country has too good a thing in the legitimate operations of the treaty to run any risks. “Still,” says the late consul, “this has not made me less vigilant.”

The collector-general, in his letter to the Hawaiian minister of foreign affairs, states that “there has been no unrefined sugar imported since the treaty went into effect, except one small lot of 180 pounds from China.”

It seems safe and patriotic to hope that the vigilance of our late consul, combined with that of the interested Hawaiian customs officers, has prevented the exportation of this 180 pounds of Chinese sugar to the United States as the growth and product of the Hawaiian Islands, and it seems fair to suspect that it has not been “used otherwise than for consumption here,” whatever “facilities for fraud on our revenues under the treaty “may have been generated by “this importation.”

As to rice: The Hawaiian minister of foreign affairs states that nearly all that is imported here comes from Japan and “pays a duty in this country of one and a half cents per pound.” This rice could hardly be taken out of bond here and exported to the United States as Hawaiian rice. It would be necessary to first get it out of the hands of the government by paying the duty. I leave the question whether rice can be brought here, pay a duty of 1½ cents per pound, be landed, repacked, re-shipped, and carried to the United States at a saving over our own tariff on the direct article.

I agree with the late consul that “this country has too good a thing in the legitimate operation of the treaty to run any risks.” There is no question that the treaty is largely to the advantage of this country, and that the United States will not realize equal advantages pecuniarily. This was foreseen by the Secretary (then Senator) Sherman; yet the treaty was ratified and confirmed. But, as matter of good faith, I am bound to say that every citizen in this country is interested in preventing frauds, if for this reason alone. The planter has the additional inducement of preventing any such damaging competition with his own labor through the manipulation of an alien product.

I call your attention, also, in this connection, to the statement of Vice-Consul Hastings, as to the cost of landing, repacking, and reshipping. He states that, in his opinion, sugar from any producing country in the world can be landed in any port of the United States, duty paid, “much cheaper than such sugar could be brought to these islands, and landed, repacked, and shipped from any port or place on these islands” (except the three harbors and, perhaps, the roadstead of Lahaina), “and landed in San Francisco, or any port in the United States, duty free.” And he says: “From the harbors mentioned, such sugars cannot be shipped without the fact coming to the knowledge of this [consul’s] office.”

It is not sufficient, however, to quote from Mr. Hasting’s report; it should be read in full. I believe it states the facts fairly, without unjust suspicion or unsafe laxity.

Mr. H____ does not seem to suspect an army of thieves, against which eternal vigilance is the price of honesty; but he modestly takes the safe ground that, “should any refined sugars be landed on these islands, I should at once take it for granted that fraud was intended on our revenue.”

I do not know that I am called upon to comment on the communications of the Hawaiian minister of foreign affairs, as I have nothing to say in correction or contradiction.

My local experience may be of service to aid in one particular, i. e., the understanding of the difficulty (if not practical impossibility) of landing and reshipping cargoes of rice or sugar at any “remote harbor” of these islands—a difficulty which I was unable to comprehend before making the circuit of the islands, and observing the process of landing from the island steamers.

There are no “remote harbors”; there are only three harbors in the kingdom, and only one of these (Honolulu) has wharves. There is not another landing (in the strict sense) in the kingdom—meaning by that, a place where vessels may touch the shore without going to pieces. “Landing” usually means, however, any place where it is possible to communicate with the shore.

Having made the circuit of the islands in the “Likelike,” the subject of landing and shipping cargo may be of sufficient interest to justify a description of the mode of handling cargo at some points.

Leaving Honolulu for the circuit, there is no other landing on Oahu; it is dangerous to approach the shore. A fine English ship, the “Esk-bank,” was lost here recently in broad daylight, with a fair wind, by coming too near the shore.

The next island is Molokai, a very dangerous coast, where the regular coasters do not stop. It is possible at times to stop at the lesser settlement, and one or two other points, but there are no regular landings. The Harriet N. Carleton was wrecked on this island, and it was 23 miles to the nearest point where communication could be effected and her passengers and crew got off.

Lanai, only open roadsteads; landing difficult.

Maui, one of the richest islands of the group, has only one harbor—Kahulũi—and that for vessels of not over 300 tons. But there are several good roadsteads. Lahaina is almost equal to a harbor and is one of the ports of entry. Our whalers used to put in there, and it was the capital. At the leeward landings vessels anchor usually with safety from half a mile to one mile out, and communicate with the shore by means of boats. Hawaii, on the windward side, the landings are all bad and dangerous up to Kilo, described in the list as “Hilo Bay—good harbor.” Being a “good harbor,” I wish to describe it.

Its mouth is open to windward and the trades blow straight into its throat. Vessels have to anchor from half a mile to a mile from the shore, and the only way to land cargo is by lading boats which dance up and down the side of the vessel in the waves ceaselessly. The boats are then pulled to shore through heavy rolling waves, but” little better than the open sea. There is a small warehouse on piles, something like the floating “wharf-boat” of a western river in appearance. It has steps leading down to and under the water, where the landings are made. The boat is never still an instant; it constantly rises and falls with the waves, one moment six or eight steps deep, the next plunging forward, and only held by the boat-hooks as it rears up six or eight steps high. The only time either person or cargo can land safely is the instant the boat is at the highest point. Persons jumping out at any other point in the ascent or descent would be liable to be soused by the next wave before they could escape, as happened to a party under my observation. If the boat comes too near, it is liable to be drifted against the side of the steps, where the first retiring wave leaves it to gracefully capsize upon the incline of the steps, unless it is caught in time by the reflux wave. Every pound of freight taken on or off at Hilo, I was told, has to be handled in this way. This is put down as a “good harbor.”

Kawaiháe, although an open roadstead, has the advantage of being behind and to leeward of the north point of Hawaii, and when the wind is “right” is considered a good landing. The wind was right the day the “Likelike” anchored half a mile off shore to take on freight during the passage before mentioned. Some boat-loads of supplies were sent ashore covered with heavy tarpaulin or other water-proofs. The difficulties from the ceaseless motion of the ship and the boats are the same at all these landings, except that I am describing only the best of them. There were forty or fifty head of cattle, live freight, to be taken on here. The process was as follows:

The cattle were dragged, one at a time, to the boats in the water by lassoes. The head of the struggling beast was then hauled up till one horn lay over the gunwale, where it was fastened firmly. In this way each boat brought off six cattle at a trip, three on each side. Although the noses of the bullocks were hauled up to the gunwale in this way, they would be half drowned as the boat pulled off to the steamer.

The pull occupied a laborious fifteen or twenty minutes. The bullocks were hauled up the side of the steamer by having a girthing passed under the belly, which was then rigged to a pulley worked by steam.

The whole force of the “Likelike” was employed in getting these cattle aboard. In order to save hands and hasten the work, one boat was rigged to the windlass of the anchor by a mile or so of rope, worked by steam, and this supplementary boat made trips at the pace of hauling up anchor in this way, with only one man in the stern to steer and one in the bow as guard. Yet, with all these expedients, it took over three hours to take on those cattle by these expert men, with steam to help them, at one of the best roadsteads in the islands. I have described the process at the risk of being tedious, because I do not believe, from my own experience, that any stranger can understand the difficulties of shifting cargo, even at the best landings on these islands, without a minute description.

As to the second-rate landings, it is not uncommon for the regular packets to carry freight the round trip two or three times over before finding an opportunity to land it. Mr. Atherton, of Castle & Cooke, told me about two months ago that their house had then schooners which had been six weeks trying to take on cargoes at some of their plantations. Mr. Atherton had no knowledge of this present inquiry, and the remark was entirely disconnected from the subject. A fortnight ago Mr. Hutchinson, a planter, was very desirous to land at one of these second-rate landings. The officers of the vessel declined to land him, because “the wind was not right.” Being a determined man, he demanded a crew and attempted to land. The boat was “stove in,” two of the crew were killed, one injured, and Mr. Hutchinson was so seriously injured that he has since died. This was in fair average weather, except that “the wind was not right” for that landing. It may serve as a fair specimen of what might be accomplished in the way of landing and reshipping a cargo of sugar at any “remote” landing-place on these islands.

I surely do not wish to undervalue any danger to the United States revenue, nor to see any relaxation in the vigilance of our officers; but it seems to me that when the difficulty of landing cargoes Anywhere else, except at the entry ports of the kingdom, makes it easy to collect a tariff of $3 a pound on opium here, while other restrictions put up the price of “honest” opium to $16 and $30 per pound, it ought to be easy comparatively to prevent the evasion of a duty of 2½ cents per pound on rice or sugar, by an expensive process of concealment, repacking, and reshipping to the United States, with adverse eyes behind every cane-field in the kingdom, to spy out and detect such evasion of duty.

I have, &c.,

JAMES M. COMLY.

[Inclosure 1 in No. 75.]

Mr. Comly to Mr. Kapena.

Legation of the United States,
Honolulu, May 15, 1879. No. 154, H. F. O.]

Sir: It is brought to my notice that certain allegations are made as to frauds and contemplated frauds upon the revenue of the United States, by the importation of sugar and rice from the Sandwich Islands that were brought there from other countries and repacked and sent forward with certificates that they were the products of those islands. It is alleged that a large sum of money had been subscribed by proprietors and business men in the Sandwich Islands, to which it was believed was to be added a further large sum to be contributed by interested parties in San Francisco, all to be paid, provided a reciprocity treaty was made and ratified; that the treaty was procured by fraudulent misrepresentations; that one of the parties who had a prominent interest in securing this treaty has purchased a large tract of unoccupied lands in one of the distant islands that contains a fine harbor, a quiet place of refuge, where he can order cargoes of rice and sugar from various parts of the Pacific Ocean to be there landed and repacked and sent up by coasting vessels to Honolulu, and other ports of export, to be shipped thence to the United States as the growth and product of the Sandwich Islands; that through these fraudulent manipulations, duty-paying sugar and rice, evading and defrauding the customs, can be landed in the ports of our Atlantic coast from the Sandwich Islands at an expense of about half a cent per pound against a saving in duties of about two and a half cents; that brokers were offering in New York and Boston cargoes of sugars to be delivered from the Sandwich Islands by authority of parties in San Francisco.

Without doubt, your excellency will clearly see the necessity I am under of promptly communicating information so injurious in its bearing upon the treaty, and so threatening in its aspect towards the customs revenue of the United States and the home producer, already sufficiently weighted by competition with the Hawaiian rice and sugar.

I await your excellency’s prompt and earnest consideration of these matters, renewing the assurances of my high respect and esteem.

I am, &c.,

JAMES M. COMLY.

[Inclosure 2 in No. 75.]

Mr. Jarrett to Mr. Comly.

Honolulu, May 16, 1879.

Sir: I am directed by his excellency, the minister of foreign affairs, to acknowledge the receipt of your dispatch No. 154 of date 15th instant, stating, “It is brought to my [your] notice that certain allegations are made as to frauds and contemplated frauds upon the revenue of the United States, by the importation of sugar and rice from the Sandwich Islands, that were brought there from other countries and repacked, and sent forward with certificates that they were the products of those islands; with other grave matters as contained in your now acknowledged communication, tending, if substantiated by facts, to destroy the integrity of our reciprocity treaty with the United States.

I am further instructed to say, that after due inquiry into the allegations as made to your excellency, an early and full response will be given to your said pre-cited letter.

With the highest respect and most distinguished consideration,

I have, &c.,

WILLIAM JARRETT,
Secretary Department of Foreign Affairs.

[Inclosure 3 in No. 75.]

Mr. Kapena to Mr. Comly.

Department of Foreign Affairs,
Honolulu, May 21, 1879.

Sir: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your dispatch No. 154 under date of the 15th of the present month. In this dispatch you state “it has been brought to your notice that certain allegations are made as to frauds and contemplated frauds upon the revenue of the United States, by the importation of sugar and rice from this country that were brought here from other countries and repacked, and sent forward with certificates that they were the product of these islands.”

You will permit me, Mr. Minister, to say, that it is very difficult to meet allegations which are somewhat vague, and, for aught which I know, anonymous; it would, therefore, be possible for me to make my reply much more satisfactory to you if I could know who makes these allegations, “and what instances are given of such baseness.

I need not say to you, Mr. Minister, that it is for the interest of every business man in this country to watch narrowly and see that no such thing as that indicated by your dispatch should be done; nor need I remind you that the men engaged in the production of sugar and rice are of great ability and untiring energy, and that their influence is so extended here that they are present in every business and social circle. If three people are assembled by chance, two must be interested in the production of these articles, so that it is quite impossible that anything should be done, which may have any bearing on their interests, and go undetected.

Now, what can be more improbable than that our planters should stand by and see any frauds committed on the revenues of the United States which would endanger their present relations with that country, and likewise enable other people to bring their sugars or their rice into competition with the products of our own labor in the market of the United States? The mere statement of the thing carries its refutation on the face of it; but, however that may be, Mr. Minister, I assure you that at any time whensoever any suspicious circumstances shall be brought to the notice of any of the officials of the United States in this country, on the smallest hint from such officials, the utmost power of this country shall be used for the examination of such an offense, and it will be punished with the utmost rigor of the law. In the mean time, I beg to assure you that any allegation that there has been any sugar or rice exported from this country to any ports of the United States, being the product of any other country than this, is utterly without foundation.

In the second paragraph of the dispatch you say: “It is alleged that a large sum of money was subscribed by proprietors and business men in the Sandwich Islands, to which, it was believed, was to be added a further large sum to be contributed by interested parties in San Francisco, all to be paid provided a reciprocity treaty was made and ratified, and that the treaty was procured by fraudulent misrepresentations.”

Now, my dear Mr. Minister, I have to say that this is only an old story revamped. To say that it was believed that a further sum was to be added in San Francisco, suggests immediately the question, Who believed it, and on what ground was it so believed? There was never one dollar expended for the procurement of the present treaty with the United States otherwise than the payment of our legitimate expenses. Never one cent paid to influence a vote on the treaty; and so far from any assistance in San Francisco being rendered, we had from the first reason to complain that our business friends did not take a sufficient interest; and as for misrepresentations of any kind made to Senators or Representatives in Congress, or made by Senators or Representatives who favored the measure on the floor of Congress, it has been frequently challenged to produce such misrepresentations, and the challenge has as frequently come back unanswered.

To proceed, you say that “it is said that one of the parties who had a prominent interest in securing this treaty has purchased a large tract of unoccupied lands in one of the distant islands, that contains a fine harbor, a quiet place of refuge, where he can order cargoes of rice and sugar from various parts of the Pacific Ocean, to be there landed and repacked, and sent up by coasting vessels to Honolulu and other ports of export, to be snipped thence to the United States as the growth and product of the Sandwich Islands; that through these fraudulent manipulations, duty-paying sugar and rice, evading and defrauding the customs, can be landed in the ports of our Atlantic coast from the Sandwich Islands, at an expense of about half a cent per pound., against a saving in duties of about two and a half cents; that brokers were offering in New York and Boston cargoes of sugar to be delivered from the Sandwich Islands, by the authority of parties in San Francisco.”

I cannot but think that this refers to the purchase made by Mr. Claus Spreckels, and take occasion to say, in starting, that, as far as I know, Mr. Spreckels was not considered as favoring the treaty, at least until after its passage became pretty well assured. We may have been mistaken in our view, but we certainly looked upon him with uncertainty as to whether he was a lukewarm friend of the measure or deemed it hostile to his interest. But, regarding his purchase, I could wish your excellency would accompany me to Maui to look at it, and you would find that it is not on a remote island, but in the midst of a large population and involves large expenditures of money, so that Mr. Spreckels becomes interested in the preservation of the absolute integrity of the treaty, and whether he is or not, the harbor of Kahului, which is the harbor adjacent to his estate, is not within his property, but, on the contrary, is the most public of public places, from which on all sides the ground rises to the mighty dome of Haleakata, so that it is overlooked for many miles, and every action can be observed by every plantation in the district, and that it is quite impossible that any cargo could be landed from any vessel without being observed by those interested, and since this treaty went into operation no vessel has arrived there from any foreign port other than ports of the United States; and, further, the harbor is the one used by all the planters in that region of country for the deportation of their sugar and the reception of their supplies. A glance at the place, Mr. Minister, will convince you that the representations which you say have been made were either maliciously or basely false or the result of thorough ignorance.

To the remark that brokers were offering in New York and Boston cargoes of sugar to be delivered from the Sandwich Islands, by the authority of parties in San Francisco, I have to say, that if by that is meant Sandwich Island grown sugars, it is not impossible, although, inasmuch as the prices ruling in New York and Boston are so much lower than those ruling on the Pacific coast, it is so improbable that I shall have no hesitation in saying that it is quite untrue; but if it is meant to say that any one offers to deliver cargoes of sugar, or is contemplating to deliver any sugar other than that grown in this country, I have no hesitation in saying that it is an unqualified falsehood, and I would challenge any man to mention the name of any broker in either New York or Boston offering to contract for the delivery of any sugars from these islands.

You say, Mr. Minister, that without doubt I will clearly see the necessity you were under of promptly communicating information so injurious in its bearing upon the treaty, and so threatening in its aspect toward the customs revenue of the United States, and the home producer, already sufficiently weighted by competition with Hawaiian rice and sugar.

I thank you, Mr. Minister, for your communication, and hope that you will think it expedient to make the information more particular with regard to persons from whom it emanates, and facts and circumstances which they may give, to the end that we may subject it to the most rigid, and, if you shall think expedient, public examination; and this I do with full confidence that such an examination will show the Titter groundlessness of the allegations.

Renewing the assurances of my highes trespect and most distinguished consideration,

I have, &c.,

JOHN M. KAPENA.

[Inclosure 4 in No. 75.—Supplementary dispatch.]

Mr. Kapena to Mr. Comly.

Department of Foreign Affairs,
Honolulu, May 21, 1879.

Sir: Referring your excellency to my dispatch forwarded this day, to which I intend this as a supplement, I have the honor to inclose a letter and statement from the collector-general of customs. By them you will find that all the sugar imported into this country since October, 1876, amounts to 213,072 pounds, of which 22,000 pounds were imported from Germany, and the remainder, 191,072 pounds, from the United States, and is the product of their refineries. You know that the course of business with us at present is to make no refined sugar, as it is not worth while for any of us to make refined sugar for our own limited market, and, therefore, all our supplies of that kind come from abroad, and you see how small a supply it is; and yet I apprehend that it will not be a disagreeable fact to you to learn that so large a portion of it comes from the United States.

You will see that there has been only 180 pounds of unrefined sugar brought into the country in two years, and a half, and that was from China, surplus stores of ships bringing emigrants.

You will further see that no vessel has carried any cargo from Kahului, the port in Maui referred as being near to Mr. Spreckel’s estate. I do not refer to this as being a point of importance, except so far as it shows that any statements that sugars have been shipped from that port are not true. Inasmuch as the region of which Kahului is the port is one of our chief sugar-producing regions, it is as likely to go from there as from anywhere in the future.

I think it worth while to remind you that there are no what may be called private harbors in this country, by which I mean that there are no remote harbors which can serve as shelter for illegal transactions. The landings for the most part, outside of the ports of public entry, though affording sufficient facilities for the taking off of cargo, would make the landing of any cargo most risky and laborious. And there is a great difference between a place sufficiently convenient for the landing of supplies necessary for a planter and one commodious enough for the taking on and off of cargoes intended to defraud the revenues of the United States, which must be of considerable quantities to make it remunerative; and I would likewise submit to your consideration whether’ a shrewd man of business would be likely to submit himself to the risk of exposure and forfeiture of cargo, and whether any man of sound sense would imagine for a moment that he can rely upon the silence of the large number of men that would be cognizant of the transaction, in view of the immense rewards which exposure of it would bring to the informer.

I likewise inclose you an abstract of the rice imported into this country. This I do because I do not wish that there should be the slightest appearance of any concealment. The rice is imported for the consumption of our own laborers; and you will see how small a quantity it is, and it is steadily decreasing, whereas, if it be the means of fraud upon your country, it would be increasing. In the year 1877 the amount was 928,905 pounds. Our rice-planters were not in so extensive a form at that time, and orders had necessarily gone forward for rice wherewith to feed our own men. In 1879 the importation into this country of all foreign rice whatsoever fell off to 541,020 pounds, and so tar in the present year the amount imported is 378,994 pounds.

It is all inferior rice, of even a different species from ours, and cannot possibly be mistaken for Hawaiian rice. One million seventy-six thousand seven hundred and seventy-three pounds of it were brought from Japan, and pays a duty in this country of one and a half cents per pound, and not one pound of it has ever been re-exported from this country. I think your excellency will see that the amount is so small itself, and more especially when you consider the number of hands in which it is, and that they are all, with the single exception of Mr. Waterhouse, consumers of the article, being agents for sugar plantations, as to justify the assertion that it is impossible that it should be imported for fraudulent purposes—impossible, because so very unremunerative, more especially when, as I have said above, it is taken into consideration that the duty in this country would be added to the first cost, freight hither, landing, storage, and repacking, certainly the margin on so small a quantity of rice would not justify the risk of exposure. You see that Mr. Waterhouse’s purchase was only 10,000 pounds.

With my highest and most distinguished consideration,

I have, &c.,

JOHN M. KAPENA,
H. H. M. Minister for Foreign Affairs.

[Exhibit with inclosure No. 4.]

The Collector-General to Mr. Kapena.

Collector-General’s Office,
Honolulu, H. I., May 22, 1879.

Sir: I have the honor to acknowledge receipt of your excellency’s communication of the 19th ultimo, in regard to the importation of rice and sugar. There has been no unrefined sugar imported since the treaty went into effect, except one small lot of 180 pounds from China.

There has been no sugar or rice imported into any of the other ports, except a little refined at Hilo, from San Francisco. The only vessels sailing from any other ports carrying cargo were from Hilo, as follows, viz:

April 27, 1878, Mary Swan, San Francisco, with 180,540 pounds sugar.

November 18, 1878, Bonanza, for San Francisco, with 49,945 pounds sugar, molasses, and bananas.

January 11, 1879, Timandra, for San Francisco, with 231,226 pounds sugar, molasses, and bananas.

In April the schooner Dashing Wave sailed from Hilo with a cargo of sugar, the particulars not received.

No rice has been shipped from any port other than Honolulu.

Referring your excellency to the two accompanying statements, I have, &c.,

W. F. ALLEN,
Collector-General.

Statement of sugars imported at Honolulu from October, 1876, to May 19, 1879.

[Copy of exhibit to accompany letter of Collector-General Allen.]

Years. By whom. From— Quantity. Value.

1876 Hackfeld & Co Germany 10, 000 pounds. $655 78

H. May United States 15, 494 pounds. 1,308 78

H. McIntyre

G. C. McLean

1877 The Grocers Germany 47, 009 pounds. 4,706 56

1878 Hackfeld & Co do 12, 000 pounds. 967 55

The Grocers United States 98.114 pounds 10,853 18

26 barrels

40½ barrels

1879 The Grocers do 30, 455 pounds 2,597 85

Hackfeld & co

All of this sugar was refined; mostly white sugar; some coffee sugar.

W. F. ALLEN,
Collector-General.
Collector-General’s Office, May 22, 1879.

Statement of rice imported at Honolulu from October, 1876, to May 19, 1879.

[Copy of exhibit to accompany the letter of Collector-General Allen.]

Year. By whom. From— Quantity. Value.

Pounds.

1876 Chulan & Co China 34,500 $870 00

1877 J. T. Waterhouse do 40,000 1,060 00

Castle & Cooke do 10,000 300 00

do Japan 120,000 3,600 00

F. T. Lenehan & Co China 12,200 393 50

Th. H. Davies British Possessions 117,376 3,062 63

Afong & Achuck do 224,060 5,676 64

do Japan 189,968 4,524 45

H. Hackfeld & Co Dutch Possessions 108,362 2,889 18

W. G. Irwin & Co China 3,600 111 00

C. Brewer & Co Japan 103,240 3,257 20

1878 Surplus stores vessels bringing Chinese passengers. China 32,655 1,187 40

H. Hackfeld & Co Japan 200,965 5,734 65

T. H. Davies British Possessions 44,800 1,317 66

C. Afong Japan 100,000 2,400 00

J. T. Waterhouse do 10,000 410 00

Castle & Cooke do 42,600 1,746 60

W. G. Irwin & Co do 110,000 3,025 00

1879 Chulan & Co China 58,144 1,047 10

J. T. Waterhouse Japan 200,000 8,000 00

On Ching China 111,370 922 50

Surplus stores do 9,480 314 90

1,883,320 51,850 41

The total amount is 1,883,329 pounds, valued at $51,850.41, produced as follows, viz: Japan, 1,076,773 pounds; British Possessions, 386,236 pounds; China, 311,949 pounds; Dutch Possessions, 108, 362 pounds,=1,883,320 pounds.

None of this rice could possibly be mistaken for Hawaiian rice, and none of it has been shipped out of this kingdom.

W. F. ALLEN,
Collector-General.
Collector-General’s Office, May 22, 1879.

[Inclosure 5 in No. 75.]

Mr. Kapena to Mr. Comly.

[Private and unofficial.]

Department of Foreign Affairs,
Honolulu, May 21, 1879.

My Dear General: In your dispatch of the 15th instant you make a remark to the effect that your home producers were overweighted by competition with the Hawaiian producer.

In my public dispatch I have taken no notice of that remark, but trust at some future time, perhaps, I may be able to remove that impression from your own mind, if, indeed, upon reflection, you shall find that it has effected a lodgement there. I think I shall be able to show you that the production of rice in the Southeastern States has so fallen off as not to be able to supply the Eastern demand, and that the imports into the Pacific ports of the United States of Asiatic rice are so immense, that the product from the Atlantic States forms so inconsiderable an item that ours cannot be said to compete at all with the South Carolina and Georgia rice.

With regard to sugar this remark would apply very largely; but more especially I would call attention to the fact that supply of any particular article follows largely the course of business. I mean by that, that when there is no direct trade—as, for instance, there is none from New Orleans to San Francisco—it is impracticable to buy in the New Orleans market for the San Francisco market, and the oftener that an article passes through the hands of middle-men the more expensive it gets to the consumer; thus, if the New Orleans man ships to Boston or New York, his sugar is handled and stored there and then purchased by an agent of a San Francisco man, who pays transportation again by sea or land. Such a transaction does not follow the legitimate course of exchange of commodities. Hence, it is very difficult to change the customs general to traffic. The buyer buys of him who, in return, buys something from him, and it is difficult to establish new relations of business. I think I shall be able to show you that even though our sugar was not at all in the market on the Pacific coast, the Louisiana sugar would not be a competitor to that of Peru, Mauritius, or Manila.

I am conscious of not makiug myself very clear at present; but, as my main object is to make an impression upon your own mind personally, perhaps it will be sufficient if I should succeed in directing your thoughts and inquiries more especially to the subject.

I remain, my dear general, yours, very truly and respectfully,

JOHN M. KAPENA.

[Inclosure 6 in No. 75.]

Mr. Comly to Mr. Kapena.

Legation of the United States,
Honolulu, May 31, 1879.

Your Excellency: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of dispatch, and your supplementary dispatch with inclosures, and your note, “private and unofficial,” all under date of May 21.

I have delayed this note, hoping to include further information; but as it is already ten days since your dispatches were written, I will no longer delay.

I beg your excellency will accept my acknowledgments for the promptness and comprehensiveness of your reply, which I hold under further consideration. Your excellency’s private and unofficial note contains matter of a very suggestive character for reflection, and which seems to me of sufficient interest to be included in the official consideration of the subject. You will observe, however, that your excellency has somewhat enlarged the scope of my observations which speak of the native (American) producer as “already sufficiently weighted,” not overweighted, by Hawaiian competition.

Renewing, &c., I remain &c.,

JAMES M. COMLY.

[Inclosure 7 in No. 75.]

Mr. Comly to Mr. Vice-Consul Hastings.

Legation of the United States,
Honolulu, May 28, 1879. No. 260.]

Sir: The Secretary of the Treasury has information alleging frauds and contemplated frauds upon the revenue by the repacking of foreign rice and sugar at these islands, and their importation into the United States as the product of these islands, thus evading the duty.

This information (this letter as well) is confidential, and I will ask you to hold it strictly so. Meantime it enters largely into your province to be informed of such frauds and contemplated frauds, if there be any such, and to use your best skill in uncovering and preventing them. Relying upon your faithfulness and skill in the matter, I have the honor to ask your assistance in the discovery of the facts of the case, and reporting them to me at the earliest practicable time, in order that I may comply with certain instructions directed to me with reference to these alleged frauds.

1. Do you know of any frauds or contemplated frauds upon the revenue of the United States, through which sugars and rice produced in other countries are brought to the Hawaiian Islands, repacked, and subsequently shipped to the United States for free entry under the provisions of the treaty?

2. Please state what facilities you know of for the prosecution of such a scheme of fraud; whether there are not remote harbors on the islands affording facilities for transshipment and repacking of cargoes without risk of discovery, and whether there are not opportunities and temptations to provoke parties to the prosecution of such illegal traffic.

3. State what facilities are within your control for the discovery and prevention of such fraudulent shipments.

4. In your judgment what would be the attitude of the authorities and people of these islands toward any such breach of the treaty, and what opportunities for connivance and assistance would the case present?

5. State whether there are or are not peculiarities characteristic of Hawaiian rice and sugar, such as would enable an expert to detect attempts to import the product of other countries as Sandwich Island rice or sugar.

6. Such other information as you may have bearing on the question.

I would be glad to have an answer as early as practicable.

Very respectfully,

JAMES M. COMLY.

[Inclosure 8 in No. 75.]

Mr. Hastings to Mr. Comly.

Consulate of the United States,
Honolulu, H. I., May 30, 1879.

Sir: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your letter of the 28th instant, informing me confidentially that information had been received by the Secretary of the Treasury of alleged and contemplated frauds upon the revenue of the United States, by the repacking of foreign rice and sugars at these islands, and their importation into the United States as the product of these islands, thus evading the duty.” Requesting such assistance as I may be able to render in the discovery of the facts in the case, you submit the following questions, viz:

[Recites all of my questions in full. Vide inclosure No. 7, preceding this.]

In reply I have the honor to state:

1. That I do not know of any frauds, either actual or contemplated, upon our revenues by the repacking of rice and sugar not the product of these islands at this port or any of the ports of these islands, for export to the United States for free entry under the provisions of the treaty of reciprocity, nor have I ever known or had any cause to suspect, during a residence of nearly two years at this port, that either rice, sugar, or any of the articles named in the schedule of Article II of the treaty were being brought to these islands for any such purpose. Had any such transactions been discovered or suspected, it would have been the duty of this office to at once [have] brought the matter to the attention of the collector of the port to which such goods were destined, and to have sent full information in regard to such intended fraud to the Secretary of the Treasury at Washington.

2. In my judgement there are no facilities whatever for the carrying out of such a scheme of fraud. In the first place, Honolulu is the only harbor of the islands that affords any conveniences for reshipment. Kahulũi, the port for Wailuku, and Hilo are very good harbors, but with no wharves or conveniences for landing goods; besides, they are not at all remote, but are the harbors of two of the largest ports of the island outside of Honolulu.

At all the parts of the islands, except Honolulu, freight of all kinds is landed in boats from the schooners and steamers in the interisland carrying trade, and the loading of freight is done in a like manner, and at many of the landings at some risk. I do not think a vessel could be chartered to land a cargo at any port or place on the islands, except the three harbors hereinbefore mentioned, and possibly Lahaina, an open roadstead, on the leeward side of Maui.

If such a charter was made, it would be at a very high rate per ton. The cost of landing, repacking, and reloading sugar so landed would be at the lowest calculation one cent per pound, not including damage by sea-water, which is quite a risk. It is my opinion, therefore, sugar from China, Philippine Islands, Mauritius, or any sugar-producing country in the world, could be landed in San Francisco or any port of the United States, Atlantic or Pacific, duty paid, much cheaper than such foreign sugars could be brought to these islands and landed, and repacked, and shipped from any port or place on these islands, except at the harbors mentioned, and landed in San Francisco or any port of the United States duty free. From the harbors mentioned such sugar cannot be shipped without the fact coming to the knowledge of this office.

3. I am cognizant of all sugars and rice taken out of bond in the United States and landed here, through landing certificates which have to be presented at this office for verification, and by the publication in the papers here of the manifests of the cargoes coming from all countries to these islands.

All importations to these islands, excepting now and then a cargo of lumber, coal, or machinery landed at Hilo, Lahaina, Kahulũi, are entered at this port.

I do not think it possible that a cargo of any kind could be landed or transshipped from one vessel to another, at any port or place on these islands, without the fact coming to the knowledge of this office. News is weekly received from all parts of the group. Should any unrefined sugar be landed on these islands, I should at once take it for granted that fraud was intended on our revenue.

4. The merchant, the planter, and I may say the whole people of these islands, having a pecuniary interest in the continuance of a treaty so much in their favor, and the fact that any fraud committed under it would be sufficient cause for its abrogation, makes the customs officials and all interested in its continuance ever on the alert to see that no fraud is committed.

On one or two occasions the customs officials here hare informed me of the landing of Chinese and Japanese rice from Hong-Kong, and have acted in concert with me to see that no attempt was made to re-export it as Hawaiian produce. There are Hawaiian customs officials stationed at the ports of Lahaina and Kahulũi on the island of Maui, Koloa on the island of Kauai, and at Hilo, Kawaihæ, and Kealakekúa, on the island of Hawaii.

5. The bulk of the rice imported into this kingdom is from Japan, having been purchased in bond at San Francisco. This rice costs in bond at San Francisco from 3 to 3½ cents per pound, and can be laid down here, duty paid, for about 4 cents per pound. It sold here for 4½ cents per pound. It is used to feed Chinese servants and laborers on the plantations in the various parts of the islands and here in Honolulu. Hawaiian rice brings from 5½ to 7 cents per pound, according to quality, laid down in San Francisco. It is, therefore, very easy to be seen why foreign rice is imported into this, a rice-producing country.

In regard to the peculiar characteristics of Hawaiian rice, an unpracticed eye can at once detect the difference between Chinese, Japanese, and Hawaiian rice. The grain of the Chinese rice is long and slender, the Japanese short and quite full, while the grain of the Hawaiian is rather flat in appearance, a medium between the Chinese and Japanese in length, and takes a better polish than either of the other two. The dffierence in size and shape could easily be detected at any of the ports of entry of the United States.

The difference between Hawaiian and other sugars I am not able to describe, but I am satisfied that no unrefined sugars have been imported into these islands since the reciprocity treaty took effect. All the refined sugars used on these islands are imported, from San Francisco in bond, and the landing certificates for the same are verified at this office.

6. About one year ago the attention of this office was directed to this subject. It was then claimed that the increase in the exportation of sugar from these islands, from the time the treaty went into effect (September 9, 1876) up to that time (June, 1878), was from ten to twenty-five million pounds, an increase of fifteen million pounds in the two years, and it was assumed that this increase in the exportation could not have been from the increase in the production.

On looking over tables of domestic exports for the years mentioned I fail to find any such increase, as the following table will show:

Amount of sugar produced on these islands and exported to the United States for the year ending December 31.

Pounds.

1875 23,762,744

1876 25,001,397

1877 25,506,478

1878 38,399,862

From the enlargements of old plantations and the opening of new ones since the treaty took effect, it would not be a surprising fact if the increase in the production of sugar, does not bring the amount of export up to 50,000,000 pounds at the end of the next two years.

The consular agent at Hilo, Hawaii, was instructed, under date of July 27, 1878, to at once inform this office of any vessels touching at that port, or any of the ports within his jurisdiction, having on board unrefined sugar or rice not the product of these islands.

While I am of the opinion that it is impracticable to import foreign sugars and rice into this kingdom and re-export them as Hawaiian product, I shall preserve the same watchfulness as heretofore to observe that such a scheme is not carried into practice.

I have, &c.,

F. P. HASTINGS,
United States Vice-Consul.

[Inclosure 9 in No. 75.]

Descriptive list of all harbors, roadsteads, anchorages, landings, and ports of entry in the Hawaiian Islands.

island of kauai.

Nawilivili.—Bad landing; fair anchorage.

* Koloa.—Bad landing; good anchorage.

Waimea.—Bad landing; good anchorage.

Haualei.—Good landing; good anchorage.

island of molokai.

No landing, except for small schooners or steamers.

island of lauai.

Open roadstead, with anchorage for small vessels only.

island of maui.

* Lahaina.—Open roadstead; good landing; good anchorage.

Makena.—Open roadstead; good landing; good anchorage.

Haua.—Open roadstead; good landing; good anchorage.

Maliko.—Open roadstead; good landing; good anchorage.

* Kahulũi.—Small harbor for vessels not over 300 tons.

island of hawaii.

Kohala.—Open roadstead; bad ianding.

Hamakua Coast.—Open roadstead; bad landing.

* Hilo Bay.—Good harbor.

Punaliui.—Open roadstead; good anchorage.

Kona Coast.—Open roadstead; good anchorage.

* Kealakekua.—Open roadstead; but safe anchorage.

Kailúa.—Open roadstead; but safe anchorage.

* Kawaihae.—Open roadstead; but safe anchorage.

Mahukona.—Open roadstead; but safe anchorage.

island of oahu.

No harbor on Oahu except Honolulu, There are several landings where small steamers or schooners can go in and load—vessels drawing 5 or 6 feet.

* Ports of entry.

* Ports of entry.

* Ports of entry.

* Ports of entry.

* Ports of entry.

* Ports of entry.

No. 240. Mr. Comly to Mr. Evarts. [Document 263]

No. 240.
Mr. Comly to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Honolulu, June 9, 1879. (Received June 26.) No. 76.]

Sir: My dispatch No. 19, on some neglected opportunities for American trade with the Hawaiian Islands, has been controverted upon two points: 1. The allegation that British manufacturers of rice and sugar machinery were absorbing most of the trade in those articles. 2. That a large share of the rice crop was disposed of in San Francisco, while the Hawaiian planters bought an inferior quality of Japanese or other foreign rice, which was as satisfactory to their Chinese laborers, for home consumption. The latter proposition has been often referred to and vigorously assailed in the local press here.

Only a few weeks ago the Pacific Commercial Advertiser repeated, “The Hawaiians import no rice,” &c. Now, I simply desire to call the attention of the department to the statistics furnished by the collector-general (inclosure 4 in dispatch No. 75), showing an importation of over one million pounds from Japan alone.

On the first point I desire to call your attention to the inclosure herewith, showing that there are eight complete sugar “plants”—a “plant” is all the machinery for a plantation—now on the way here, by different vessels, from the one house referred to, as represented by one of its partners here at the time dispatch No. 19 was written. I am told incidentally of five other plants furnished or to be furnished by this same house. This energetic British manufacturer, therefore, is demonstrated to have taken orders amounting to about $500,000 from these islands, every dollar of which ought to have passed into the pockets of American manufacturers.

Another fact: The government is constructing additional waterworks, with new reservoir, for Honolulu. The large order for iron piping was given to a British house.

I have, &c.,

JAMES M. COMLY.

[Inclosure.]

[Hawaiian Gazette.—Extract.]

Quick passage.

The fine British hark Lalla Rookh, Hender, master, and consigned to the house of Messrs. G. W. Macfarlane & Co., of this city, made the passage from Glasgow, Scotland, Tia Cape Horn, to Honolulu, in 122 days, which is considered a quick passage.

The Lalla Rookh brings a full cargo of assorted merchandise for these islands, a large portion of which is sugar mills and machinery, from the celebrated manufacturers, Messrs. Mirrless, Tait & Watson.

We learn that there are two large complete sugar plants on board, one for the Adams and Ross estate on Kauai, and the other for the Waimanalo Sugar Company on this Island. The first is capable of making 15 tons sugar per diem, and the latter 10 tons per diem.

We congratulate the owners of these estates on the safe and speedy delivery of their machinery. The fine ship Dovenby, 1,100 tons, now about 80 days out, has two complete plants, ordered by Colonel Spreckels, for Hakalan plantation at Hilo, and Paohfau estate at Hamakua, Hawaii, also one complete plant for Hon. H. A. Widemann’s estate at Waianae, Oahu. The Governor Goodwin, 1,500 tons, which left Glasgow April 24, has three plants, one for Mr. Watson’s estate at Huelo, Maui, one for Akan-aliilii & Co.’s estate at Makawoa, Maui, and one for Messrs. Schaefer & Parker’s estate at Hamakua, Hawaii. Considerable interest is manifested by our sugar men in the arrival of their machinery, which is said to be the best made in the world.

No. 241. Mr. Morton to Mr. Seward. [Document 264]

No. 241.
Mr. Morton to Mr. Seward.

United States Legation,
Honolulu, H. I., September 1, 1879. (Received September 17.) No. 3.]

Sir: I have the honor to transmit herewith a copy of a communication addressed to me by his excellency J. M. Kapena, minister foreign affairs, dated the 21st instant, which incloses a copy of a letter from the honorable minister of finance, in reply to certain interrogatories from the Department of State, at Washington, touching the amount of gold and silver coin and bullion and paper currency in the Hawaiian Islands.

I have, &c.,

J. M. MORTON,
United States Consul, Acting Chargé d’Affaires.

[Inclosure 1 in No. 3.]

Mr. Kapena to Mr. Morton.

Department of Foreign Affairs,
Honolulu, August 21, 1879.

Sir: I have the honor to acknowledge and reply to a dispatch No. 157 of 25th June last past, received from his excellency James M. Comly, United States minister resident, inclosing “interrogatories respecting the amount of gold and silver coin and bullion and paper currency in the Hawaiian Islands.”

I have now the honor and the pleasure to inclose herewith copy of a letter received this day from his excellency Simon K. Kaai, minister of finance, in which he answers the several queries embraced in the Hon. Mr. Evarts’s note to General Comly.

* * * * * * *

With highest respects and distinguished consideration, I have, &c.,

JNO. M. KAPENA.

[Inclosure 2 in No. 3.]

Mr. Kaai to Mr. Kapena.

Department of Finance,
Honolulu, August 21, 1879.

Sir: I am in receipt of your note accompanying letter from the Department of State at Washington, asking information touching coin and bullion, and currency generally.

In answer to query No. 1, I would say that $800,000 is the probable amount.

Query 2. Five hundred thousand dollars.

Query 3. No paper currency. Certificates of deposit are issued by the treasury for coin deposited.

Queries 4 and 5. No mines.

Query 6. The amount used in manufactures is very small; importations are light.

Query 7. For manufacturing purposes, but little is used. Importations the past year from San Francisco, probably come up to $150,000. Exports small.

I have, &c.,

SIMON K. KAAI,
Minister of Finance.

No. 242. Mr. Evarts to Mr. Comly. [Document 265]

No. 242.
Mr. Evarts to Mr. Comly.

Department of State,
Washington, September 23, 1879. No. 52.]

Sir: Referring to department’s No. 47 of July 3 last, I have now to inclose for your information a copy of the letter of the Secretary of the Treasury upon the question involved in the discussion between yourself and the Hawaiian authorities, and presented in your No. 74, of the 9th of June, 1879, as to whether the tariff collected by the Hawaiian customs officials upon cotton goods manufactured into clothing, the same being the growth, manufacture, or produce of the United States, is not in contravention of Article II of the reciprocity treaty between the United States and the Hawaiian Government.

From the correspondence herewith transmitted it will readily be seen that the reasoning, which seems to be full and explicit, of the Secretary of the Treasury in regard to the construction of Article II of the treaty in question, providing for the free admission of “cotton and manufactures of cotton, bleached and unbleached, and whether or not colored, stained, painted, or printed,” &c., is clearly opposed to that of the collector-general of Hawaii, who seeks to enlarge the meaning by injecting the phrase “other than when ready-made clothing “into the paragraph as to cotton goods where it does not occur.

The concluding paragraph of the letter of the Secretary of the Treasury is in the following language, viz: In the opinion of this department, therefore, ready-made clothing of cotton is entitled to admission free of duty into the Hawaiian Islands under the treaty mentioned, and it may he stated that this view is concurred in by the collector of customs, the United States appraiser, and United States naval officer at New York, and by the United States appraiser at Boston, all of whom have considered the question.

The Hawaiian Government having expressed the wish to receive the interpretation of the Treasury experts at this capital upon the disputed phrase, you are instructed to communicate for its information a copy of the inclosed correspondence, and the sense of this instruction founded thereon, adding the hope that the views therein contained may be considered satisfactory for determining the question at issue.

I am, &c.,

WM. M. EVARTS.

Mr. Sherman to Mr. Evarts. [Document 266]

Mr. Sherman to Mr. Evarts.

Treasury Department, September 17, 1879.

Sir: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of a letter from the Acting Secretary of State, dated the 30th of June last, requesting the views of this Department upon the question presented in dispatch No. 74, dated the 9th of that month, from Mr. Comly, minister of the United States at Honolulu, and the correspondence which accompanied it. Mr. Comly inquires whether the tariff levied by the Hawaiian customhouse on all cotton manufactured into clothing, being the growth, manufacture or produce of the United States, is not in contravention of Article II of the reciprocity treaty between the United States and the Hawaiian Government.

Article 2 of the treaty cited provides for the admission into the Hawaiian Islands free of duty of “cotton and manufactures of cotton, bleached and unbleached, and whether or not colored, stained, painted or printed, &c.”

The minister holds that this provision includes in its terms ready-made clothing, &c., as well as textile fabrics of cotton in the piece, while, as stated by the minister, the collector-general of Hawaii seeks to enlarge the meaning of the provision by injecting the phrase “other than when ready-made clothing” into the paragraph, where it does not occur.

The argument supporting this view is, that if the term “manufactures of cotton” had been intended to cover ready-made clothing, the words “bleached and unbleached, and whether or not colored, stained, painted or printed,” would have been omitted, inasmuch as those terms are applied to textile fabrics in the piece.

This reasoning does not appear to be well founded, inasmuch, as will be seen from the inclosed copy of a report upon the subject, dated the 11th instant, from the United States appraiser at Boston, the terms referred to are applicable to the various kinds of clothing made of manufactured cotton, as well as to goods in the piece. The appraiser states that the terms are not merely commercial, but are necessarily descriptive of the goods according to the facts. He mentions skirts, which may be made of bleached and unbleached, or of colored cottons, and which must be designated, as a natural description of the articles, by the terms mentioned, and states that the same fact is true of an infinite number of articles of clothing made of cotton. There can be no question that if the terms mentioned had been omitted all manufactures of cotton, whether in the piece or made up into clothing, would have been treated as embraced in the provisions of the article, and the fact that a description is afterward given which is equally applicable to goods in the piece and to clothing, should not be held to affect the matter.

After the paragraph quoted, and also of an enumeration of sundry other goods, the article cited provides for the free entry of “wool and manufacturers of wool other than ready-made clothing, and in a separate clause for textile manufactures made of a combination of wool, cotton, silk, or linen, or of any two or more of them other than when ready-made clothing.”

The portion of the article relating to manufactures of cotton is widely separated and wholly disconnected in the treaty from that relating to manufactures of wool, or of a combination of wool, cotton, &c.; and the fact that the provision for manufactures of cotton does not except ready-made clothing while the other two provisions mentioned do make such an exception, seems to render it conclusive that it was intended to include all manufactures of cotton, whether consisting of ready-made clothing or otherwise, in the terms of the first provision.

It is not to be supposed that in two clauses of the same article, ready-made articles of wool, or of wool and cotton, &c., would have been specially excepted, without the special exception, also, of ready-made clothing of cotton, had it been the intention to except the latter.

In the opinion of this Department, therefore, ready-made clothing of cotton is entitled to admission free of duty into the Hawaiian Islands under the treaty mentioned, and it may be stated that this view is concurred in by the collector of customs, the United States appraiser, and United States naval officer at New York, and by the United States appraiser at Boston, all of whom have considered the question.

Very respectfully,

JOHN SHERMAN, Secretary.

[Inclosure in Mr. Sherman’s letter of September 17.]

Mr. Darrah to Mr. Beard.

Custom-House, Boston,
Appraiser’s Office, September 11, 1879.

Sir: Respectfully referring to Department’s letter of 15th ultimo, which requests the views of experts at this port upon the construction of parts of the reciprocity treaty between Hawaii and the United States, which relate to the free introduction at Hawaii of cotton and manufactures of cotton, whether bleached, unbleached, colored, stained, painted, or printed, which are of the manufacture of the United States; also textile manufactures made of combination of wool, cotton, silk, and linen; or of any two of more of them other than when ready-made clothing; the question being whether ready-made clothing wholly of cotton is to be accorded the right of free entry, I have the honor to report: That the argument against their admission is, I think, an unsound one. Certainly the terms bleached or unbleached, stained, painted, or printed, are as commonly applied to the various kinds of clothing made of manufactured cotton as they are applied to goods in the piece. These terms are not merely commercial terms, but are necessarily descriptive of the goods, according to the fact. Skirts may be made of bleached, unbleached, or of colored cottons and would be so designated as a natural description of the articles—so of an infinite number of articles of clothing made of cotton. This certainly is a novel question, but the distinction between the names applying to manufactures of cotton in the piece and ready-made clothing made of the same, is made without any warrant of usage in trade.

I can affirm of my own knowledge that in trade the various articles of ready-made clothing of cotton are always named bleached or unbleached, or colored, as much so and as frequently as the goods in the piece from which they are made.

Very truly, &c.,

R. K. DARRAH, Appraiser.

Hayti.Hayti.

[267] . Mr. Langston to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Port au Prince, Hayti, January 24, 1879. (Received February 10.)

[268] . Mr. Langston to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Port au Prince, Hayti, January 24, 1879. (Received February 10.)

[269] . Mr. Langston to Mr. Seward.

Legation of the United States, Port au Prince, Hayti, January 24, 1879. (Received February 10.)

[270] . Mr. Langston to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Port au Prime, Hayti, March 12, 1879. (Received March 31.)

[271] . Mr. Langston to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Port au Prince, Hayti, June 7, 1879. (Received June 20).

[272] . Mr. Langston to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Port au Prince, Hayti, June 21, 1879. (Received July 7.)

[273] . Mr. Langston to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Port au Prince, Hayti, June 30, 1879.

[274] . Mr. Langston to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Port au Prince, Hayti, June 30, 1879. (Received July 23.)

[275] . Mr. Langston to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Port au Prince, Hayti, June 30, 1879. (Received July 23.)

[276] . Mr. Langston to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Port au Prince, Hayti, July 7, 1879. (Received July 23.)

[277] . Mr. Langston to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Port au Prince, Hayti, July 17, 1879. (Received August 2.)

[278] . Mr. Langston to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Port au Prince, Hayti, July 17, 1879. (Received August 2.)

[279] . Mr. Langston to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Port au Prince, Hayti, July 18, 1879. (Received August 2.)

[280] . Mr. Langston to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Port au Prince, Hayti, July 25, 1879. (Received August 7.)

[281] . Mr. Langston to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Port au Prince, Hayti, July 25, 1879. (Received August 7.)

[282] . Mr. Langston to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Port au Prince, Hayti, July 26, 1879. (Received August 7.)

[283] . Mr. Langston to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Port au Prince, Hayti, July 28, 1879. (Received August 7.)

[284] . Mr. Langston to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Port au Prince, Hayti, August 1, 1879. (Received August 15.)

[285] . Mr. Evarts to Mr. Langston.

Department of State, Washington, August 6, 1879.

[286] . Mr. Langston to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Port au Prince, Hayti, October 24, 1879. (Received November 8.)

[287] . Mr. Preston to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of Hayti in the United States, Washington, January 16, 1879.

[288] . Mr. Evarts to Mr. Preston.

Department of State, Washington, January 22, 1879.

[289] . Mr. Preston to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of Hayti, Washington, February 4, 1879.

[290] . Mr. Preston to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of Hayti, Washington, April 4, 1879.

[291] . Mr. Evarts to Mr. Preston.

Department of State, Washington, April 19, 1879.

[292] . Mr. Preston to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of Hayti, Washington, May 28, 1879.

[293] . Mr. Evarts to Mr. Preston.

Department of State, Washington, June 13, 1879.

No. 243. Mr. Langston to Mr. Evarts. [Document 267]

No. 243.
Mr. Langston to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Port au Prince, Hayti, January 24, 1879. (Received February 10.) No. 106.]

Sir: I have the honor to transmit, herewith inclosed, copies of the dispatches which, up to this time, compose the correspondence not already forwarded to the Department, as passed between this legation and the Haytian Government, having reference to the consular charges levied and collected under the law of August 23, 1877.

I am now fully advised with regard to the position as well of the French and German as the British Government, on this subject, and I am able to state that the representatives of the governments named have now under consideration the project of a paper which will probably be adopted by them, and be presented as an identic protest against the collection of the charges referred to. The considerations submitted in this paper are substantially those dwelt upon by me in my several dispatches on the subject, and, if the paper is presented, will serve to convince the honorable secretary that I am not the only representative of a foreign state, residing near his government, who is opposed to the levy and collection of the charges in question, and from whom a wise and positive protest emanates in moderate but firm terms.

As bearing upon this general subject, and to advise you as fully as may be with regard thereto, I beg to inform you that the present secretary of state for foreign affairs, Mr. L. Ethéart, is the author of the act enjoining the consular charges under consideration, and feels not only quite confident of his ability to defend his work in this behalf, but would experience special satisfaction did he find himself really able to do so. I await your instructions with regard to the closing portion of his last dispatch, in which, I am informed, that the honorable minister of Hayti residing near our government will be directed to bring this matter to the attention of the cabinet at Washington, in order to a speedy, definitive solution.

I have, &c.,

JOHN MERCER LANGSTON.

[Inclosure 1 in Mr. Langston’s No. 106.—Translation.]

Mr. Ethéart to Mr. Langston.

Office of the Secretary of State,
Port au Prince, December 7, 1878.

Mr. Minister: Among the different questions actually pending between the legation of the United States of America and my department, with regard to which I shall have the honor to write you in succession, in order to arrive as soon as possible at a definite solution, I shall approach with you to-day that which concerns the law upon the new consular taxes.

It appears from the dispatches that you have written to this department the 6th and 26th of December, 1877, and the 3d of May of the present year, that considering the new imposition created by this law as a distinct duty of importation upon the commerce of the United States; as an indirect contravention of the spirit and letter of the treaty in force between the United States and Hayti; as a non-observance of the reciprocity which, in view of this convention, the two countries ought to maintain in their commercial relations; as a measure which, in its application, is prejudicial to American commerce, you protest, in the name of your government, against the law above mentioned, and ask my government to suspend its execution and make reimbursement to American citizens who have unjustly paid these taxes since the law was put in force.

To these considerations which you have presented, one of my predecessors, Mr. F. Carrié, replied on the 13th December, 1877, and on the 10th of January last, giving you to understand the opinion of the government on this question, and did not fail to expose at length, on his side, arguments with regard to the purpose of the law.

“The new consular tax,” he said, “does not only affect American merchandise, but also that of all foreign countries, and in a general and equal manner. It establishes no privileges, and therefore cannot constitute a contravention to the spirit and the letter of the treaty between the two countries, which provides that the United States must always be treated on the basis of the most favored nation.”

While giving you the assurance of the profound respect of the government for the treaty concluded between the two countries to their reciprocal advantage, the chief of this department shows/by incontestable facts, that there does not exist in the law of the 23d of August any absence of the sentiment of reciprocity, of which the two governments ought to give proof, one toward the other, with regard to the commercial relations of the two republics; and, that American interests are in no wise injured by this legislative provision.

The principle of the consular tax has existed twenty years; has never provoked any protest, not even on the part of the United States in 1872, when, under the empire of our treaty, a law increased our duties on importations 25 per cent.; the law of August 23 has merely established duties which are truly proportional, more equitable than any created since 1858; at the same time that new taxes are levied by reason of the financial necessities of the country; the duty of 1 per cent. upon invoices of merchandise does not affect American commerce any more than that of other countries which are in communication with us, since the Haytien markets, far from regulating foreign markets are regulated by them; so far as it concerns the United States this assertion is justified by the fact that since the enforcement of this law, American merchandise sent here has not been reduced in price in the markets of the United States; the American producer is not affected by the tax; the internal consumption of Hayti alone hears all the charges ordinarily imposed upon invoices of merchandise, and it is that exclusively which bears also the burden of the new consular tax; it is acknowledged that there exists in all countries consular charges (des frais de chancelleries de consulat) which are collected according to the usages and wants of each nation; an excessive duty only can cause the diminution of consumption in a country, but the new tax with us of 1 per cent. on invoices is in no wise excessive, only affecting our importation to the extent of about $100,000 upon a total value of $2,000,000 received; it is, then, an annual impost of 10 cents more that our population, if estimated at 1,000,000 souls, will have to pay, which cannot limit its consumption.

Mr. Carrié adds to this last consideration that if against the conviction of the government, the internal consumption of Hayti would diminish from the effect of this law, the maintenance of the resources of the state being a matter of the highest importance to it, it will be for the government in its own interest, as it may be advised, to propose to the chambers the abrogation of a legislative provision contrary to the Interest of the public treasury. But to that point, the executive has not the power to suspend the execution of a law of his own initiative, a law that the chambers have voted, and he has promulgated.

I have nothing to add, Mr. Minister, to the arguments above mentioned, with which my predecessor has combated the objections contained in your dispatches of the 6th and 28th of December past. They elucidate perfectly the question in debate, and establish the right and the duty of the government to create, as it has done, the new consular imposition, which, it has been demonstrated above, is not in any wise prejudicial to commerce, foreign and American. Then, again, you did not enter further upon these considerations in your last dispatch, which proves that they meet your entire approbation.

There is only left to me to discuss with you the argument according to which, “if it be granted,” you remark, “that Hayti in the exercise of her sovereignty has the right to impose taxes upon importations as she may judge convenient; friendly nations, having intercourse with her, have a right to expect that such acts of sovereignty will be exercised on her own territory, and that she will not seek to avoid the condition or obvious character of the tax, by making her consuls in foreign countries collectors of imposts in those countries.”

It appears to me that the argument is not entirely free from reproach.

The receipts accruing under the law of August 23 on consular visas are collected in the United States by our various consulates, and paid over to the Haytian legation, whose residence (l’hôtel), if it may be permitted to invoke, in aid in this case, the privilege of exterritoriality, forms part of the territory of our republic. They are then levied upon our territory as taxes levied in Hayti by foreign legations are upon foreign territories. Then, again, if the figures, which have been forwarded by our legation at Washington, are correct, the Federal government, by its consular taxes, receives in the neighborhood of $1,700,000 annually, from which sum there is to be deducted the expenses incurred by the diplomatic and consular corps, estimated at $1,000,000, about, which leaves a surplus of $700,000.

Why, then, should the Haytian Government be hindered from using the same procedure, and draw an income which is much smaller, barely covering the expenses and the salaries of our several legations? Have we not, also, treaties with other powers, and why do they not continue, as the United States, after the reasons which we have given, to persist in their manner of viewing this question?

So far as it concerns the duties collected by the Haytian Government on the territory of the United States, one might adduce the other consideration, which you will recognize as of great value in the question. Do governments, which have recourse to their credit and to the loans, which are the consequence thereof, not tax their bonds (litres de rente) or their personal effects (valeurs mobiliéres), and has any one ever thought of contesting their right of being benefited by a tax levied upon foreign capital, when the loan is not national, and upon a territory which is not theirs?

The question which occupies us, already dates far back, Mr. Minister; it will soon be one year that it has been under discussion, without ability to bring about a solution, and, I believe, that it is necessary, in its present condition, that it be placed directly before the cabinet at Washington. My government has decided, therefore, to instruct our minister in the United States, in order that on his part he may take such action as will result in a definite solution; this does not hinder us from continuing to discuss the question, if you believe that it has not reached the point which necessitates the action we propose.

It is in these sentiments that I have the honor, Mr. Minister, to present you the renewed assurances of my highest consideration.

The secretary of state for foreign affairs:

L. ETHÉART.

Mr. Langston,
Minister Resident, &c., &c., &c.,

[Inclosure 2 in Mr. Langston’s No. 106.]

Mr. Langston to Mr. Ethéart.

Legation of the United States,
Port au Prince, Hayti, January 18, 1879. No. 39.]

Sir: I have heretofore, on the 26th of December last, acknowledged the receipt of your dispatch dated December 7, 1878, having reference to consular impositions made under the law of the 23d of August, 1877. I desire now to offer in answer to your dispatch, several considerations. If I repeat and insist upon the correctness of the objections already submitted, it is because I am still of the opinion that the arguments made by you and your excellent predecessor, in defense of the legislation referred to, and the consular charges enjoined, are inconclusive and unsatisfactory. And, besides, I beg you, if in the sequel it appears that I have not made direct and special allusion to each consideration Offered by you in your dispatch, not to conclude that I admit as true the consideration not thus specially mentioned. As heretofore, the general scope and purview of any one, certainly the whole of the reasons which I shall now offer, will reach, and, as I believe, discover, the fallacious character of all that is contained in the correspondence on the part of your government as matter of defense of the consular charges in debate.

In considering the matter in difference between us, the course which justice, duty, and interest enjoin upon your government with regard thereto, it is well that you remember that the Republic of Hayti has made with no other nation such treaty as the one made by it with the United States of America. The words of such treaty, especially those of its preamble, which were intended to illuminate and illustrate the phraseology of its several provisions, cannot be held in this discussion as without special meaning, but the rather, as significant in the broadest and best sense. I refer to such words as these:

“And to place their [the United States of America and the Republic of Hayti] commercial relations upon the most liberal basis, have resolved to fix, in a manner clear, distinct, and positive, the rules which shall, in future, be religiously observed between the one and the other, by means of a treaty of amity, commerce, and navigation.”

What is the promise, and what the pledge of these words? Certainly that in dealing with the commercial interests of the one and other government, the rule to be adopted is that founded upon “the most liberal basis.” Is such the rule adopted and enforced under your law of the 23d of August, 1877? Let this question be answered in the light of what is attempted to be done by the law.

First of all, according to the very terms of the law, the charges are levied for a double purpose: first, to meet the consular exactions; and, secondly, to raise funds for the public treasury.

For the first purpose 15 per cent. of the amount collected is used; and for the second, 85 per cent. And this duty is levied upon articles, except perhaps the money mentioned in the second clause of the first article of the law, which, when they reach the ports of your country, are subject to other heavy custom-house duties, of which you have such abundant and exact knowledge, how can you reasonably maintain that the consular exactions referred to are not, under the circumstances, excessive? Nor do you meet this objection of exorbitance by saying, in reply, that they are eventually paid by the Haytian consumer. And more than this, being excessive in and of themselves, and especially so, in view of the circumstances mentioned, they tend to, and do, obstruct and retard the commercial interests of the two governments.

But in so far forth as the charges under consideration are levied, and collected for any other than consular purposes proper; in so far forth as they are levied and collected to meet the general wants of the government, as declared in the very terms of the law, and admitted in your dispatch, they are contrary to the well-defined usages, with relation to the consular service, as recognized by the great powers of the earth. I cannot conceive how it is possible for you to deny the correctness of this position. If so, you must destroy all those peculiar characteristics which distinguish the diplomatic and consular service, and make the charges connected therewith special and unique. You must show that one government has a right to levy of its own volition, without reference to international obligations, expressed or implied, and to collect by its consular agents within the jurisdiction of another, such taxes, without reference to the purpose for which they are to be used, as may suit its convenience and wants. Is it necessary that I suggest that such proceeding would be very justly regarded as altogether unusual and objectionable? But you reply that the charge levied by your law has to do simply with merchandise intended to be shipped from a foreign country to Hayti. I admit it. But the principle remains the same; and your charge is nothing, other than an old ad valorem duty levied upon merchandise in the country from which it is to be exported by the government of your country into which it is proposed to import it, such duty being levied upon the fallacious and indefensible doctrine, that through the indirect instrumentality of the consular service the foreign government may collect, after levying, by a law passed by its own legislature, such duty, within the territory and jurisdiction from which the merchandise is to be shipped.

And thus the objection which I now urge becomes double in character, not only violative of all well-defined and wise usages as regards the consular service, but violative of a fundamental rule of national sovereignty as regards the matter of taxation. And this last position you admit when in your dispatch you invoke, in defense of this tax, the doctrine so well illustrated in the designation “exterritoriality.” But here you can find no help, for this doctrine in this case can have no application, especially when these charges, according to the language of the law, are made general as to their purpose and are collected for the benefit of the public exchequer. The words of the law in its preamble being: “Qus l’impôt prélevé par les consulate ne profite ancunement à la caisse publique,” these words sufficiently reveal the object of your law, the purpose of your consular exactions.

For these good and all sufficient reasons, I beg to enter, with renewed earnestness and emphasis, the solemn protest of my government against the collection of the consular impositions and charges referred to, and to demand the reimbursement of all sums heretofore paid by American citizens.

Seizing this opportunity, Mr. Secretary, to tender you the assurance of my most distinguished consideration,

I am, &c.,

JOHN MERCER LANGSTON.

No. 244. Mr. Langston to Mr. Evarts. [Document 268]

No. 244.
Mr. Langston to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Port au Prince, Hayti, January 24, 1879. (Received February 10.) No. 111.]

Sir: I have the honor to transmit, herewith inclosed, for your information and consideration, copies of dispatches not heretofore forwarded to you, passing between this legation and the Government of Hayti, with regard to the discriminating tax upon patents or licenses.

I invite your special attention to the contents of the dispatch from the Haytian Government, as showing the interpretation of the treaty of 1864 insisted upon by it, and the practice which is adopted in matters pertaining to trade with relation to American citizens residing here and doing business.

I am quite certain that the view which I take in replying on this subject must receive your approval.

I am, &c.,

JOHN MERCER LANGSTON.

[Inclosure in No. 111.—Translation.]

Office of the Secretary of State of Foreign Affairs,
Port au Prince, December—, 1878.

Mr. Minister: The law establishing the quota of the duty on licenses, against which you protest in your dispatch dated May 3, is of the 14th of August, last year.

As you are aware, the second paragraph of article 174 of our constitution provides that laws relating to duties can only be enforced for one year, unless renewed, and the law of the 30th of October, 1876, had been continued for the budget of 1877–’78 by that of the 14th of August. Your protest, then, came nine months after the law went into effect, and at a period of only three months prior to its expiration.

This is, then, a first point of the question, to which I refer simply to attract your attention, without expatiating thereupon and making of it a peremptory argument against that which you plead in your dispatch of the 3d of May, the analysis of which, with your permission, I am about to undertake.

While placing yourself upon the text of article 5 of our treaty with the great republic which you represent, which reads as follows, “The citizens of each of the high contracting parties residing or established in the territory of the other shall be exempt from all compulsory military duty by sea or by land, and from all forced loans or military exactions or requisitions, nor shall they be compelled to pay any contributions whatever higher or other than those that are or may be paid by native citizens,” you maintain that the law of 1877 is in formal contradiction of this treaty, since it establishes a quota (quotité) of licenses which is dearer for foreigners, and especially for American citizens, than for the Haytians.

Consequently, you make protest energetically against the sanction of this law in its provisions which may concern American citizens, and against the payment of the obligatory tax imposed upon them on account of their business, taking all precautions that sums exacted from your citizens contrary to the stipulations of our treaty shall be reimbursed.,

Our treaty with the United States is fourteen years old, and, in presence of your protest, I have naturally inquired whether, during this long period, American citizens, have been allowed to pay the same commercial licenses as Haytians, and my researches upon the subject enable me to present you the following table, subjoined, drawn out according to our laws of finance from 1864 to 1878:

From 1864 to 1869 (the law of December 12, 1860, extended each year up to 1869).

foreign deposit [license]. haytian deposit [license].

First class 3,000 First class 1,500

Second class 2,500 Second class 800

Third class 2,000 Third class 600

Fourth class 1,500 Fourth class 500

1870 and 1871.—From the provisional government, February 9, 1870.

foreign deposit [license]. haytian deposit [license].

First class 40,000 First class 20,000

Second class 33,333 Second class 13,333

Third class 26,666 Third class 10,000

Fourth class 20,000 Fourth class 8,333

1872–’73.—The law of August 19, 1871, was extended for 1873 by the law of the 23d of August, 1872.

foreign deposit [license]. haytian deposit [license].

First class 60,000 First class 30,000

Second class 50,000 Second class 20,000

Third class 40,000 Third class 15,000

Fourth class 30,000 Fourth class 12,500

N. B.—All the different laws provide that the license of foreigners whose vocations are other than that of merchant consignees shall be double that of the Haytians.

1876.—Decree of the Domingue Government, December 23, 1875.

foreign deposit [license]. haytian deposit [license].

First class P. 1,200 First class P. 150

Second class 800 Second class 100

Third class 600 Third class 75

Foreigners under the authority of this decree paid five times more for patents than Haytians for exercising any other calling.

1877–’78.—Law of October 30, 1878, extended by that of August 14, 1877.

foreign deposit [license] haytian deposit [license]

First class P. 300 First class P. 150

Second class 250 Second class 125

Third class 200 Third class 100

Fourth class 150 Fourth class 75

Always the same licenses were doubled for other occupations exercised by foreigners.

Thus in the matter relating to the law on licenses there has existed a marked difference in our country between the condition of American citizens and that of our own people. How is it, then, that from 1864 to 1877, no protest, excepting that made under the fallen government, upon which I shall take occasion to dwell, has been produced on the part of the Government of the United States against the execution of our laws of finance?

Without detracting from the advantage of a prescription of thirteen years, I believe there is only one way of answering this question; it is, that the Government of the United States has never viewed article 5 of our treaty in the light in which through your intervention it is considered to-day, and that it has never compared the impost on licenses with the contributions mentioned in article 5. The following article, which reads thus, proves if:

“The citizens of each of the contracting parties shall be permitted to enter, sojourn, settle, and reside in all parts of the territories of the other, engage in business, hire and occupy warehouses, provided they submit to the laws, as well general as special, relative to the rights of traveling, residing, or trading.”

This provision declares sufficiently that in both countries there exist certain shades of distinction between the condition of foreigners and that of native citizens, and that each is bound to conform to the laws, general and special, regulating the matter.

In support of this argument, I will take the liberty to remind you that there existed among us up to the end of 1876 a duty of consignment of 2 per cent. for Haytians and 6 per cent. for foreigners, and that this difference, no more than the law of patents, had ever called forth, under the authority of our treaty, any protests from your government.

It is appropriate to mention the protest which your predecessor, Hon. Mr. Bassett, noted in the time of the government of General Domingue. At that time it was a question not of a law which had received the sanction of the Chambres des Communes and of the Senate, the only way in which impositions maybe voted legally in our country, but of a decree dictated by the sole will of the executive, in violation of all the principles of right, and of one so exaggerated in its figures that it could not reasonably be defended. Foreigners were, in fact, taxed by the law on licenses eight times more than the Haytians!

Thus, when the government of that period was called upon to discuss the question which now occupies us it was perplexed, and could do no better than to call to its aid article 42 of our treaty, thus seeking to terminate a convention concluded in the reciprocal interest of the two republics. Such certainly are not the views of the administration in the present condition of the question.

I had the honor of making this declaration to your predecessor on the 16th of September, 1876.

My government will continue to defend its right to interpret, in the sense which has always been given, our treaty with the United States. If there should come to pass, which may God forbid, differences of opinion between the chief of the legation of the United States and the department of foreign affairs, the last named will always make it a duty to send instructions to the minister plenipotentiary of Hayti in the United States, in order that the point litigious be directly laid before the cabinet at Washington, that a prompt solution may be arrived at in the reciprocal interest of the two republics.

With these sentiments, I have the honor to beg you to accept the assurance of my very high consideration.

Secretary of state of foreign affairs:

L. ETHÉART.

Mr. J. M. Langston,
Minister Resident of the United States of America, Port-au-Prince.

[Inclosure 2 in No. 111.]

Mr. Langston to Mr. Ethéart.

Legation of the United States,
Port au Prince, Hayti, January 21, 1879. No. 40.]

Sir: In reply to your dispatch of December —, 1878, the receipt of which I have heretofore had the honor to acknowledge, I have the pleasure to assure you that, in the discussion which occupies our attention concerning the matter of discriminating duties upon licenses, I come to this discussion bringing no new interpretation of the fifth article of the treaty of 1864 as the same has been established by our government; for my path has been made plain, even luminous, by the able and concise argument of my predecessor, and the action of your government when you were its honored representative and announced its conclusions with regard to this same subject, in response to the protest of my government.

I am not forgetful of the discrimination which you undertake to make in your late dispatch between the discriminating tax, as established by a decree under Domingue, and your present legislative enactment. But if the tax was wrong, contrary to the treaty, under the decree, even if quite excessive, what makes it exactly right under the present enactment when the discrimination is equally made, if the charge is, in the latter case, a little less? The principle is the same. Perhaps you have forgotten that when this subject occupied the attention of our governments in 1876 my own government held and advanced the opinion that the fifth article of the treaty between the United States and Hayti of the 3d of November, 1864, was intended to protect and should protect our citizens from any discriminations in matters of trade to the advantage of Haytian citizens.

Consequently no acquiescence could be given to a license law or decree creating such discriminations by my government; and it was upon such ground that the decree to which you refer was held contrary to the treaty and discontinued, and upon which objection is made to the law now enforced by your government to the disadvantage of American citizens doing business in your country. And, with your permission, I beg to state that one would find it difficult, indeed, in the light of any accepted principles of interpretation, to reach any other conclusion with regard to the meaning and application of the fifth article of the treaty. I am, therefore, Mr. Secretary, of the opinion heretofore presented, and must insist upon the protest already made in the name of my government and the restitution therein demanded.

With sentiments of distinguished consideration,

I am, &c.,

JOHN MERCER LANGSTON.

Hon. L. Ethéart,
Secretary of State of Foreign Affairs, Fort au Prince, Hayti.

No. 245. Mr. Langston to Mr. Seward. [Document 269]

No. 245.
Mr. Langston to Mr. Seward.

Legation of the United States,
Port au Prince, Hayti, January 24, 1879. (Received February 10.) No. 112.]

Sir: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your No. 51, and to transmit, herewith inclosed, a copy of the identic note of protest presented this day to the Haytian Government by the representatives of the French, the British, and German Governments against the consular impositions made under the law of the 23d of August, 1877. You will perceive on reading the protest that, while it covers the matter repealing the law, it says nothing as to reimbursement.

This branch of the subject may not be specially interesting to the governments making the protests; but to our government, whose citizens have already paid, under protest, if not more, certainly $50,000, and the estimate of the Haytian Government as income from this source for the the year 1878 is some $85,000, this branch of the subject is of special importance and must not be neglected.

Because this branch of the subject has already been presented by our government, and its importance is of such significance to our citizens, and it is wholly omitted in the note of protest herein inclosed, it may be well that I have not been instructed to join in making the same; and yet, of course, I shall await any instructions which you may hereafter see fit to give me, with the deepest interest.

I am, &c.,

JOHN MERCER LANGSTON.

[Inclosure in No. 112.—Translation.]

Port au Prince, January 23, 1879.

Mr. Minister: An exchange of communications has taken place between the cabinets of London, Berlin, and Paris, upon the subject of the law voted by the Haytian Chambers 23d of August, 1877, consequent upon which I have received instructions to have understanding with the agents of Germany and France, and to protest in the same terms against the provisions of this law, which, in spirit and letter, are contrary to existing tariffs.

The law of the 23d of August, 1877, has for its object, according to the purpose of the law-maker, to create new resources to the Haytian treasury by levying upon foreign commerce a veritable tax. The preambles of the said law declare in fact:

Whereas it is necessary to take new measures to secure our customs duties, since the visas of our consuls abroad, borne upon invoices of merchandise and other documents such as they handle, render imperfect and incomplete the control exercised by our financial agents;

And whereas the imposts levied by the consulates in nowise profit the public treasury;

Upon the proposition of the secretary of state of finance and commerce, and upon the advice of the council of the secretaries of state, the Corps Legislatif has passed the following law:

Article I. After the 1st day of October next there shall be levied abroad, by the consuls or the commercial agents of the republic, charges of visas rated and fixed as follows: 1. One per cent. upon the amount of invoices of money.

2. One per cent. upon the amount of invoices of merchandise, &c.

Again, there exists a fact of which you seem to have forgotten to take account; it is that without modifying an international contract, that that consent is necessary which the government of Her Britannic Majesty cannot give; because, apart from the reasons which make it desirable not to aggravate the charges, already heavy, which weigh upon commerce, it could not in any case authorize Haytian consuls to collect in English ports a tax in favor of the Haytian treasury.

I am persuaded, Mr. Minister, that you will admit the justice of these observations, and that you will be willing to take measures necessary to place things in the condition in which they were before the promulgation of this law.

I seize, hastily, this occasion to renew to you the assurance of my high consideration.

____ _____.
____ _____.

No. 246. Mr. Langston to Mr. Evarts. [Document 270]

No. 246.
Mr. Langston to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Port au Prime, Hayti, March 12, 1879. (Received March 31.) No. 133.]

Sir: Referring to my dispatch No. 112, I have the honor to advise you that the “identic protest” of the English, French, and German Governments, made to the Haytian Government, against the consular exactions of the law of the 23d of August, 1877, was, on the 7th instant, answered by the government addressed.

A copy of the reply made to the representative of the French being, as I am informed, identical with that made to the representative of the German government, together with a copy of the paragraphs of the reply made to the representative of the English Government, which are omitted in the other replies, I herewith transmit to you, with translations.

I am advised that the representatives named propose to transmit, at once, such replies to their several governments for further instructions.

Of course, in view of the position heretofore taken by the Haytian Government on this subject, such replies were to be expected.

I am, &c.,

JOHN MERCER LANGSTON.

[Inclosure 1 in No. 133.—Translation.]

Office of the Secretary of State of Foreign Affairs,
Port au Prince, March 7, 1879.

Mr. Minister: I have the honor to acknowledge the reception of your dispatch of the 23d of January last, as the result of an exchange of communications between the cabinets of Paris, Berlin, and London, you addressed me to protest against the provisions of the law of the 23d of August, 1877, relative to consular taxes.

Permit me, in the first place, to recall the following principles, which seem to me to be a truth incontestable. The modification of the tariff of customs of a people is a legal measure against which one cannot be opposed. It exercises there its right of sovereignty, whether it applies after its conviction and acquired experience the principle of the protective system with all its exclusions, or the commercial liberty in all its extension. In the case under consideration Hayti has not made engagements with any nation that its tariff of customs should never be modified, and, in doing it, it has not, I believe, injured any international contract.

I am about to have the honor to submit to your appreciation some arguments which already I have had occasion to formulate upon the subject of the legitimacy of our consular taxes.

It is not correct to say that the law of the 23d of August, 1877, has had for object to create new resources for the Haytian treasury, “in levying upon foreign commerce a veritable tax.” The charges of visa of invoices of merchandise sent to Hayti constitute an impost which weighs only upon the Haytian consumer. Foreign commerce pays them at our consulates and is reimbursed thereof with a commission in advance by the importer of Hayti, who in his turn adds them to the current price of the merchandise offered to the consumption of the country. It is therefore in reality this last one only who has to his charge the sums paid for consular visas.

The consular tax received from 1858 to 1877 never gave place to any contestation; the modifying law against which you protest to-day has had nevertheless for effect to regulate, after a manner more conformable to justice and equity, the receipt of charges of consular visa, in substituting charges proportional to charges fixed. I cannot believe that a proposition of this kind can be of a nature to cause disapprobation.

All governments receive consular charges, collected according to the mode which they believed it right to establish in conforming themselves to the usages, to the political customs of their country, and to the necessity of the moment; no one can contest in these governments the right to modify their consular tariffs, to lessen them or to increase them.

Another argument works in our favor. Does not one often see a state subject to taxation, negotiable paper, stocks, bonds, &c., and even the annuities upon the national, state, and public funds abroad? The foreign holders residing upon the territory of another state, are they not really governed by the legislation of a country which is, not theirs? Do they not pay that impost received to the profit of another state? A fact of this kind does not raise, notwithstanding any reclamation on the part of governments, and does not provoke, even, discussion by publicists.

The law of the 23d of August, 1877, in its consequence and its results, does it offer anything which can be compared to the fact which I have just had the honor to cite to you?

I have only submitted here, in response to your dispatch, the general points of a debate which may be extended, and the details of which, when they shall be made clear, will show the question in its true light. Nevertheless, I hope, Mr. Minister, that the considerations which I have just presented will suffice to convince you of the legitimacy of the imposition, the maintenance of which I here defend, and for which the government has asked the vote of the Corps Legislatif as much in point of duty as in point of right.

Be pleased to accept, Mr. Minister, the assurances of the distinguished sentiments with which I have the honor to be, your obedient servant,

The secretary of state of foreign affairs,

L. ETHÉART.

[Inclosure 2 in No. 133.—Translation.]

Difference of the text of the Response of the Secretary of State of Foreign Affairs relative to the consular taxes of Hayti, addressed to the representative of H. B. M.

2d paragraph.—On the 12th day of January, 1878, this department received from the minister resident of H. B. M. a protest upon this subject, to which it replied on the 16th of the same month. Up to the day of your dispatch the British legation having made no objection to the arguments presented by my government to justify the law in question, it was reasonable to suppose that this affair was settled between my department and the legation, whose silence could imply an acceptation of the exposé which had been made to it.

10th paragraph.—In this dispatch I have resumed the discussion undertaken upon this question by this department on the 16th of January, 1878, by adding a new argument to these already presented to the legation. I hope, sir, that the general considerations above mentioned will suffice to convince you of the legitimacy of the impositions whose maintenance I defend, &c.

No. 247. Mr. Langston to Mr. Evarts. [Document 271]

No. 247.
Mr. Langston to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Port au Prince, Hayti, June 7, 1879. (Received June 20). No. 159.]

Sir: Referring to my dispatch, No. 157, of the 19th ultimo, I had the honor to advise you of the opening of the National Assembly of this republic, and in that dispatch promised to transmit to you copies in French, with the translations, of the addresses delivered on this occasion by the president of the Senate and the President of the republic. Copies of such addresses I herewith inclose and transmit for your consideration.

Both addresses are brief, and both are well calculated, as presented in the French, to be of service to the people of this country. The address of the president of the Senate, in so far as it attempts a description of the real situation of Hayti, seems to me to be altogether truthful. And that portion of the address of the President in which allusion is made to the want of capital here is very correct. Industry does languish for some reason here, and capital seems to grow steadily less and less.

It is a fact that the fifteenth legislature has done its work and passed into history; and the sixteenth legislature, with its unusual responsibility of making a selection of the successor of President Canal, enters upon the duties of its first session with anything other than a bright and flattering future. Indeed, whether the Chamber of Deputies and the Senate will be able to act harmoniously in the interest of the general good seems even now to be problematical. For, so soon after the formal opening of the National Assembly, the Senate has refused to recognize the election of General Prophéte, sr., to the Senate, alleging as ground for such refusal that the Chamber of Deputies has not been constituted upon a legal majority, and the two bodies are at conflict to-day upon this subject.

I am, &c.,

JOHN MERCER LANGSTON.

[Inclosure No. 1 in No. 159.—Translation.]

Address of the President of the National Assembly.

Mr. President, Gentlemen, Senators, and Deputies: In all States governed by parliamentary rules, the period of meeting of the legislature, and especially a new house, is replete with active and legitimate preoccupations; the great powers of state are soon to face each other; the acts of the administration are to be submitted to the control of the chambers; serious political, administrative, international, and financial questions are to be introduced and debated; the people, desiring to be enlightened on the progress of their affairs, pause and observe. If to this ordinary status you add the exceptional condition in which our country finds itself, the important action of the nomination of a chief of state, which the legislature about to be opened will have to accomplish, you will recognize that these causes united are quite of a nature to communicate a greater intensity to these anxieties appertaining to the ordinary course of parliamentary institutions, and to give a new animation to the stirring spirit of our young nation.

The condition of the people, we say, renders them anxious. Admittedly commerce is in a most deplorable state; agriculture is in open decadence; industry perfectly paralyzed; work, in one word, the moral and essential base of all prosperity, is wanting; thousands of hands are idle.

Guardians of the nation, it is in you the country confides her hope. Let us then gauge our patriotism and devotion to the demands of our duty. For this it is necessary to make a perpetual sacrifice of all that is personal, particularly when one remembers that to former sufferings are added the disasters of a cyclone which has befallen the south; that a flood has carried off the greater part of our products in the north; that a fire has obliterated Miragoâne, one of our most important and prosperous towns; the sinking of one of our steamers, together with great loss of life; and, finally, the insurrection in the arrondissement of Marmelade.

To-day we inaugurate a new house, and from this moment each one of us assumes a share of the duties and responsibilities in the work of repair and restoration which imposes itself upon the present administration.

The fifteenth legislature which has just expired had its share of duties and responsibilities. Its mission was confined to the purpose of reorganization of all branches of the administration, conformably to the principles of re-establishment of which was the cause of the revolution of 1876; to settle the control of the management of public affairs; to guard, to the extent of its power, and conciliate the interests of order with those of liberty; to enforce the practice of the constitution of 1867 and the principles which it enunciates; and to occupy itself above all in the determination of the burdens that the nation ought legitimately to assume, and to provide the means of meeting gradually, to the extent of our resources, without paralyzing, the progress of the ordinary public service.

It has done its work; it is for us to take up and continue this work of pacification and civilization.

“When, by the general exposé of the situation of the republic, the chambers will be inspired by the results obtained in a legitimate manner, as in the case of all those to be hereafter sought, they will have resolutions to assume which must be in conformity to the general weal. May such resolutions, assumed with the candid and loyal aid of the executive, tend only to the amelioration and restoration of the material and moral situation of our beloved country.

President, in the name of the National Assembly and of the country, we thank and congratulate you and your council of secretaries of state for having kindly honored this important ceremony by your presence.

In the name of the constitution, I declare open the first session of the sixteenth legislature.

Vive l’Union!

Vive la paix!

Vive la liberté!

Vive l’indepéndence!

Vive le Président d’Haiti!

Vive la constitution de 1867!

[Inclosure 2 in No. 159.—Translation.]

Gentlemen, Senators, and Deputies: In viewing with you the anxiety caused by the convening of a new legislature called upon to decide the most momentous questions in all countries subject to parliamentary rule, I cherish the hope that the great powers of state will find, even in the spirit of present difficulties, in the desire to place the duty of the citizen above personal competition, the calm and reason suited to appease public disquietude.

The sufferings of the country are evident. Are they but the consequence of early or late disasters; or is it necessary to trace past history to discover their origin? Here is the study which demands our attention. The share of duties and responsibilities that you assume in the work of national regeneration is to me a sure guarantee that you will second the efforts of the executive, in the complicated task which devolves upon us.

This task, in fact, embraces questions of every nature. From an economical and financial point of view, one cannot be astonished that in a new country, in which practice has not yet demonstrated the truth of different theories, there are diversities of opinion and tendencies to opposition. Nevertheless, while accepting the principles which a happy reform proves to be each day just and advantageous among the most civilized people, the executive has always hesitated when confronted by measures calculated to destroy the fruit of work which exists, however defective it may he, to the profit of enforced labor. It believes that it is not work that is wanting for hands, but hands that lack for work; it believes that as capital, the primary element of prosperity, is lacking in our youthful growth, it should be encouraged by all possible means, in offering it entire security which will guarantee it against the inroads of past restrictions and the impositions of arbitrary provisions.

Such, gentlemen, is the rule which has governed the acts which the executive will shortly have the honor of submitting to you.

The fifteenth legislature has terminated its career. It is within your province, gentlemen, to profit from the experience that it may offer, and to use such acquired experience to the accomplishment of the work of progress of which our country stands in so much need. In considering the demands of general interest, you will appreciate the results already obtained; you will recognize the causes which have hindered the flight of a higher progress; you will give to the country the means of promptly obtaining its legitimate development. Best assured that all resolutions taken with a patriotic purpose and in a candid and frank understanding with the executive will meet on its part the most complete and sincere support.

Vive l’Union.

Vive la Paix.

Vive la Constitution de 1867.

Vive l’Assemblie Rationale.

No. 248. Mr. Langston to Mr. Evarts. [Document 272]

No. 248.
Mr. Langston to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Port au Prince, Hayti, June 21, 1879. (Received July 7.) No. 165.]

Sir: With regard to the political situation in this republic, I have the honor to advise you that the dispute between the Senate and Chamber of Deputies has not been adjusted; an adjustment seems now to be wholly impracticable. In refusing to recognize General Prophète as duly elected to the Senate, this body has been forced to take the broad ground that, in its judgment and according to its decision, the chamber is not legally constituted; and within a few days the senate has passed a resolution to the effect that it will not recognize any acts of the chamber as legal or constitutional.

The Chamber of Deputies maintains its position firmly, and justifies its constitution as legal, in view of numerous precedents furnished in the parliamentary history of the country; even going so far as to maintain that heretofore in the history of the government this body, with a smaller number of members than it now contains, was recognized as legally constituted, and was permitted to cast its vote for the election of President of the republic; no one at that time questioned the legality of its constitution.

On last Saturday, the 14th instant, the Chamber of Deputies passed a resolution affirming clearly and positively the correctness of its position, and prepared and ordered published an address to the people of the country in justification of its course. The address has not, as yet, been published.

The executive department of the government, the President and the cabinet, have taken steps, within two or three days, looking to a reconciliation between these co-ordinate branches of the Corps Législatif. The president and secretaries of the Chamber of Deputies, and the president and secretaries of the Senate, were invited to a conference with the President and his ministers at the national palace on last Tuesday, the 17th instant; but the officers of the chamber, staunch and unyielding Nationals in their party affiliations, and the officers of the Senate, staunch, and unyielding Liberals in their party affiliations, could only be brought, so far as adjustment of differences was concerned, to agree to bring the suggestions of the conference to the consideration of their different bodies; the officers of each body intimating that they knew of no reason why there should be any change with respect to the views severally maintained. So far no steps toward reconciliation seem to have been taken with earnest and intelligent purpose by the Chamber or Senate.

* * * * * * *

I have, &c.,

JOHN MERCER LANGSTON.

No. 249. Mr. Langston to Mr. Evarts. [Document 273]

No. 249.
Mr. Langston to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Port au Prince, Hayti, June 30, 1879. No. 170.]

Sir: During the night of the 20th of last month, Cape Haytian was the theater of another of those oft-occurring insurrectionary movements which disturb and injure the government and country of Hayti.

In the Moniteur, the organ of the government, issued on the 26th ultimo, the President of the republic makes proclamation to the people and army, with regard to this occurrence, declaring that the government reports a new triumph over the enemies of order.

The object of this movement has not yet been made public, nor has its political complexion been defined. Nationals as well as Liberals were found among the insurgents; although, it is reported, that a considerable number of the latter party, including, several prominent men, have been imprisoned by reason of their real or supposed connection with this affair.

The leader of this movement was General Théophile Parisien, assisted by General Badeau and Mr. Tassy. The three are men of prominence, holding official positions, civil or military, of importance and honor.

Advantage it is said was taken of the absence of the commandant of the place, General Dumesle Garçon, as well as that of General Béléard, who commanded the volunteers, to make this movement, and attack was made upon the Hotel de l’Arrondissement, which it was believed, without doubt, under the circumstances could be taken with little effort. The resistance, however, seems to have been earnest and determined, and the insurgents were repulsed with loss in killed and wounded.

General Montpoint, supported by Generals Duvivier and Osgar, commanded and led the forces of the government. His conduct seems to have been gallant and successful, though it is said that in single-handed combat with General Parisien he received a wound, perhaps only slight.

It was near the Hotel de l’Arrondissement and upon the Place de la Cathédrale that the principal fighting was done.

At daylight the insurgents were put to flight, and as they went they left their dead and wounded upon the scene of action in the hands of the vanquishers.

In closing his proclamation the President expresses the liveliest felicitations to the generals, the soldiers, and citizens whose energy saved the Capital; and he promises the government will take all the steps necessary to punish the authors of such attempts. But he seems to forget, when he promises so much, that it was only on the 23d of last April that, after a military commission had condemned to death certain persons engaged with General Louis Tanis in his famous insurrectionary movement in this city on the 14th day of March, 1878, the criminal tribunal of the capital, with its jury of twelve good and true men, all Haytians, of course, found that there was no taking of arms, as charged, and released all the men on trial. In other words still, the courts of this country are not always certain to sustain the findings of the military commissions nor to sustain the promises of the President with regard to bringing insurgents to condign punishment.

I am, &c.,

JOHN MERGER LANGSTON.

No. 250. Mr. Langston to Mr. Evarts. [Document 274]

No. 250.
Mr. Langston to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Port au Prince, Hayti, June 30, 1879. (Received July 23.) No. 172.]

Sir: At this time, when the Corps Legislatif is in session, and the people are anxiously awaiting their determinations and acts having reference to the public welfare, opinions are being expressed by persons in different parts of the republic with regard to the industrial and material condition of the country, as well as the measures to be adopted calculated to ameliorate it.

These opinions, as they appear in the public journals, entirely agree as to the general unfortunate condition which exists, and agree in ascribing its existence to the lack of interest on the part of the people in agriculture and the neglect of ordinary industry.

These opinions so far are correct; for here there is no suitable attention given to agriculture, and common labor is not cultivated with vigor and efficiency.

On the 21st instant there appeared in Le Peuple, one of the ablest newspapers published in this city, a communication, written evidently by a Haytian gentlemen of intelligence, with special information and thought upon the subject on which he writes, entitled “La misère publique.”

In this article occur several interesting statements and suggestions, which, as translated, show with clearness and force the feelings of the writer with regard to the topics upon which he dwells.

He states, first, what is probably true: Hayti, a country essentially agricultural, has always encountered, in the development of this branch of labor, grave difficulties, which had their birth with the war of our independence. The beautiful plantations which, at the time of the colonists, covered our island with richness and made it the Queen of the Antilles, all disappeared in the flames. Becoming masters of the country, where of old superb habitations had been established, producing in abundance sugar, coffee, cotton, &c., we saw only a heap of ashes, sad but noble and disinterested witnesses of the fury which had guided the conduct of our fathers, and of the valor which they had to display to bequeath to us this free soil. Were these ruins necessary? It belongs to posterity—that is, to us, born after these terrible convulsions—to say that the misery which besieges us, the absence of labor which has caused it, are so many proofs exceptional against these means.

Certainly we do not regret the expulsion of the colonists, but we do regret that all the traces of labor, of prosperity, have disappeared with them.

Really, the labors of the fields, abandoned by the fact of war, were difficult of re-establishment. The slaves of yesterday, to-day free, regarded with aversion those same fields which they had for so long a time watered with their sweat, and where they always seemed to see the whip of the commander, alas, still marked by their blood, and which reminded them of things too painful. Besides, so many ruins, where formerly one saw so much wealth, reacted upon the spirit of those old slaves, and they preferred to serve as soldiers than to use again the hoe and the manchette.

He continues: We have gone from fall to fall, and we have reached to-day the edge of the precipice, the complete annihilation of our agriculture.

These last words present a dark picture, but there is, alas, too much truth in them, and, so far as statements are made on this subject, they are sustained by the general utterance.

The words of this entire quotation contain matter worthy of serious thought. It is well to recollect, however, in this connection, that the fact that so little is absolutely needed to supply the ordinary wants of the common man, the laborer of this country, and that little is so abundantly supplied by nature, in many respects, without the least effort from him other than that of appropriation, that the tendency in purpose and action is idleness) there is no pressure of necessity to drive one to work.

In the second place, with regard to general industry, the writer says: The cultivation of the earth is that which, among all, is the most fruitful of wealth; but it has never sufficed, alone, in any country, to assume really the general welfare. It is necessary that by the side of agriculture walks her dearly beloved sister industry. It is time that it be established among us! It is time that our youth, idle now, learn to put on the blouse of the artificer and cease to multiply in the public bureaus! It is time that Hayti leave the state of lethargy in which she is plunged, and regain her ancient title of Queen of the Antilles.

But some one will object that, to regain that place which she occupied anciently, to restore her influence of labor, it is necessary for us to have means, which we have not—we need capital! Capital is needed, we admit truly! It is an easy matter to bring capital to you. For that you have only to be at least egotistical, to pronounce definitively against the exclusion which all of our constitutions have consecrated against foreigners.

Thereafter the writer becomes bold in his advocacy of immigration, and advises recurrence thereto; not to the immigration of the blacks, for unsatisfactory results, in this regard, have been experienced already, but to the immigration of the whites. For this purpose he demands that the constitution be amended. Whether it has been wise in the people of Hayti to continue to deny to white men the privilege of becoming citizens and property-holders in this country, is a matter about which honest and patriotic persons may differ.

The Haytian, inexperienced in all the solid and more important elements of wise and progressive industry; without habits of forecast and endurance; wanting in those lessons of wisdom which efforts in providing for the future impart and impress; and, like the residents of the tropics generally, possessing little energy and a small amount of earnest and positive industrial purpose, to say nothing of his admitted want of means and general intelligence, might find it a difficult task to maintain his own in free competition with a class which, in addition to its intelligence and wealth, commands all those qualities which assure success.

But the opinion that this exclusion of white men should be removed is not general. I know of but one or two influential Haytians who defend it. The great body of the people, even did they believe its removal would bring capital and industrial improvement, would, I think, oppose it. For, besides the fear of competition, there exists here considerable feeling among the more illiterate against foreigners; and the feeling against color, even as between mixed persons and blacks, natives and residents of the country, is too general; and at times shows itself in positive and active manner.

In the present session of the Corps Legislatif, in which party spirit runs high, there have been offensive exhibitions of this color-feeling as between the members of the two political parties. Where there exists such feeling of one colored man against another, what must be their feeling toward white men? In exhorting the members of the Corps Legislatif to an intelligent and earnest performance of their duties to the country in its present condition, the writer of the article named uses the following words: To occupy themselves to establish our finances; to elevate agriculture; to implant industry; to explore our abundant resources; to continue to encourage public instruction; to give, with the regular transmission of the executive in 1880, an active and intelligent administration; and, finally, to have introduced among us foreign capital by the repeal of Article 7 of the constitution.

This definition of the duty of the Haytian lawmaker seems well enough so far as it goes, but is there not underlying all that is said therein a subject more fundamental and pressing, which, first of all, should command his attention when reconstruction and amelioration are demanded? It is, what is the capability of the people and the country; and how can political and industrial adjustments be made so as to secure, in the highest and best sense, the development and growth of this capability?

To these questions the lawmaker should address himself at once in the spirit of the largest patriotism, and the other subjects, which are comparatively superficial, though important, will find an easy solution.

The extracts which I have given must prove interesting as showing the general sentiment with regard to the industrial conditions of the country, and the judgment and feeling with respect to change and amelioration in that behalf.

I am, &c.,

JOHN MERGER LANGSTON.

No. 251. Mr. Langston to Mr. Evarts. [Document 275]

No. 251.
Mr. Langston to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Port au Prince, Hayti, June 30, 1879. (Received July 23.) No. 173.]

Sir: Reference is had to the subject of this dispatch again, for the purpose of presenting certain pecularities concerning the constitution of the Haytian Corps Législatif which make such conditions of disagreement between the two chambers as at present exist, possible, and, in exciting political times, when power is being shifted from one party to another, well-nigh certain.

In the first place the corps is composed of the Senate and Chamber of Representatives of communes, and when these branches meet jointly they constitute the National Assembly.

The popular branch of this body is the Chamber of Representatives. It comes directly from the people, and to it is committed the duty of electing the senators, as is seen in the case of M. Prophète, so lately elected to the Senate, and in connection with whose admission thereto the present difference between the House and Senate had its origin.

The House is composed of 75 members, and ordinarily at least 50 are required to be present to organize the chamber and to transact business. But a smaller number sometimes, when for political and other reasons it has been difficult to secure the attendance of so many as 50, has proceeded with the organization and transaction of business. This was the case in 1867, 1870, and 1873. Then there were only 44 members present; but both the House and the Senate were of the same political complexion, and the legality of the constitution of the former was not questioned.

The Senate is composed of 30 members, and it is understood generally and admitted that 20 senators must be present to organize and transact ordinary business. But it is claimed by certain of the leaders of the National party to-day that there have been times in the past, as in 1867, 1870, and 1873, when 20 were not present. And yet the constitution and transaction of the Senate then were not called into question. But this was owing probably to the fact already mentioned, that at that time both the House and Senate were, in their majorities, of the same politics, and it is apparent that difference will not originate under such circumstances.

It is only when one party holds the House and the other the Senate that such difficulties are possible.

Such is the case to-day. The Nationals hold the House and the liberals the Senate. The Senate holds the House to the strict observance of the rule that 50 representatives must be present to organize and do business, while the House contends in justification and support of its claim that a less number may answer, that the necessities of the case warrant deviation from this requirement, ordinarily recognized as just, and that certain precedents furnished, as already indicated in the history of both the Senate and House, justify this position.

It is impossible for the House to secure the attendance of 50 members at this time. This number is said to have been present at the organization, which was recognized by the Senate as legal, and hence it joined with the House in declaring the opening of the National Assembly.

Since the organization of the House two of its members have died, one has been imprisoned by its order, as being in some way involved in an insurrection, and the law on “abstention” has been enforced against others, as Mr. Bazelais, and thus its numbers have been so reduced that they are now less than 50. Indeed, the House proposes to work with only 38.

The results of the elections which have just been held have not yet been made known. The Nationals in the House are hoping for large accessions from this source; while the Liberals of the Senate feel that their power may be increased by the election of a large number of adherents of their political faith.

How the dead-lock of the Senate and House is to be removed is a matter of vital and pressing importance.

The executive, enjoying the real sympathy of neither branch of the Corps Législatif, even if he be earnest (and some question his motives) in his efforts to secure reconciliation, seems unable to accomplish anything in this regard.

And now it is reported that, in the chamber, elections which have just taken place, in so far as they are not agreeable to it, will be contested and invalidated. This state of things must result, sooner or later, if continued, in revolution; it may be bloody; it certainly will be widespread and decisive.

I have referred to the vote of the chamber declaring the seat of Boyer Bazelais vacant. Against this action Mr. Bazelais has made an earnest, though neither an able nor a patriotic, protest; and on the 25th ultimo the chamber voted to adhere to its action, and gave notice accordingly to the secretary of state of the interior, and asked that an order be taken to fill this vacancy by a new election.

This action tends to increase and intensify popular feeling, already sufficiently excited.

But another peculiarity of the Chamber and Senate, worthy of mention, is found in the fact that they each elect their officers, presidents and secretaries, every month, from their number. M. Délorme, the chief of the National party, was chosen president of the chamber at the organization of the present session, and holds the same position as reelected on the 1st instant. M. Dénis, a prominent and influential Liberal, was chosen president of the Senate at its opening, and still presides as re-elected on the first of this month. The secretaries of either body are of like party character with the different presiding officers.

Why this rule of frequent change in the officers of these bodies was originally adopted it is now difficult to say. Intimations are sometimes made that aspirants are numerous, and such arrangement meets better the conveniences of all concerned, and sustains peace and harmony. It is probable, however, that this arrangement was adopted to compel each member of the bodies to do his full share of duty, both as member and officer, except as excused by his colleagues. And this reason will appear to have force when it is understood that neither the presiding officer of either body, nor the secretaries, receive additional compensation for services performed in each capacity.

Each member of the chamber is entitled to $200 per month during each session; and each senator to $125 per month for the two years during which he holds his position.

The re-election of M. Délorme gave special dissatisfaction to the Liberals, as it was understood that Mr. Bazelais would not, for certain personal reasons, enter the chamber taking the oath of office from him; while the re-election of M. Dénis, and the election of two members, as secretaries of the senate, who had distinguished themselves by their efforts and votes against the admission of General Prophète, were regarded by the Nationals as an expression of positive and determined opposition to them by the Liberals. And so matters stood when Mr. Bazelais made his protest.

I am, &c.,

JOHN MERCER LANGSTON.

No. 252. Mr. Langston to Mr. Evarts. [Document 276]

No. 252.
Mr. Langston to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Port au Prince, Hayti, July 7, 1879. (Received July 23.) No. 174.]

Sir: On the 30th ultimo, at 3 o’clock p.m., pistol-shots were fired in the Chamber of Deputies; when, the “assemblée” was sounded in the streets of this city. At once soldiers, policemen, and ordinary citizens, armed, were seen moving in haste, greatly excited, to and fro, apparently in search of some object of attack.

But a few moments thereafter, on every hand, there were heard these words: “There is a movement against the government.” These words proved indeed to be too true. For the insurrectionary and revolutionary movement which had been expected and predicted for several weeks had been precipitated; and its forces, marshaling themselves under their leaders, prepared for attack and defense.

Now, the lines of difference between the friends and supporters of the government, and its enemies and opposers, were drawn quickly and with great plainness. It proved to be true that the Liberals composed the latter class; and the Nationals the former. Boyer Bazelais and Edmond Paul, in learning, political influence, and general esteem, stand among the foremost men of the republic; both prominent members of the Chamber of Deputies, in which body, for many years past, they have exerted a large and overshadowing influence upon the legislation of the country; and being the acknowledged leaders of the Liberal party of the republic, assumed and maintained, to the end, the command and control of the insurgents. Besides being a member of the Chamber of Deputies, Paul has been for some time the magistrat communal of Port au Prince.

Such men as these, entering upon such enterprise as this, would very naturally be expected to adjust their plans with wisdom and forecast and secure a large and formidable following. The number of those taking part with them, in actual contest against the government, is variously estimated at from two to five hundred men, while it is claimed by many that the entire Liberal party gives them its silent, if not its active, sympathy.

Among those who actually took part in the fight against the government, using their guns, as the common soldiers, and accepting a fare even poorer than his, were several of the first men of the republic—professional men, and others of good standing. In fact, so far as the composition of the followers of Bazelais and Paul is concerned, a large number of the best families of Haytian society were represented therein.

The scene of the conflict was in the central parts of the city, in the Rue Pavée, midway between the sea and the limits of the city eastward, in near vicinity of the building in which are located our legation and consulate-general. Here the insurgents occupied from three to four buildings, commanding several streets, from which buildings they fired, using small arms entirely, upon all who attacked them; and, too frequently, upon the unoffending and innocent, passing about the streets. On the morning of the 3d instant, it was discovered that they had moved into and taken possession of a large and commanding building in close proximity to our legation and consulate-general, and from thence were using their arms with vigor.

It was now that the President, after moving quite moderately in his general maneuverings and attack for the first two days and more, during which many persons had been killed; and after offering to the insurgents unsought proposals of amnesty, upon condition of their surrender, determined that their dislodgment should be effected, and for this purpose ordered the use of vigorous and destructive means.

In the early part of the day the government forces, with heavy guns planted from different directions, commanding the buildings in which the insurgents were located, commanded by General Canal, the brother of the President, advanced to earnest and determined attack.

It became my duty, at this point, as I did, to remind the President that in firing upon the building next to our legation and consulate-general, care must be taken not to injure in any way the property and interests of our government. And I am glad to be able to advise you that entire respect was had by the government to this warning.

The attack is made. The insurgents are so situated that it is difficult to dislodge them. The struggle promises to be a long and desperate one; when about two o’clock in the afternoon, one of the main buildings occupied by them is found to be on fire; it burns rapidly, and the flames spread. Another of their buildings, the residence of Mr. Bazelais, and then a third, the house of Mrs. Adams, next to our legation and consulate-general, are aflame. In a moment acres of the city are in flames; and in less than two hours a half million of dollars worth of property is in ruins, with much of the finest part of the city utterly destroyed.

The building in which our legation and consulate-general are located stands solitary and alone in the midst of the acres of desolation and ruin. The only thing burned upon it was our flag-staff; and that fell charred by the heat of the surrounding fires.

It was in the midst of the fire and confusion, occasioned thereby, that Bazelais and Paul with the few men that were left, escaped in various directions; the leaders and many of the men finding asylum finally in several of the legations and consulates. I am most happy to advise you that no one of them is under my protection.

The loss of life in connection with this movement is very great; at least a hundred and fifty persons have been killed, including several of the more prominent men of the republic, several senators and members of the Chamber of Deputies. Among the dead are numbered General Jh. Chrysostôme François, the secretary of state of war and marine, and Col. Auguste Bazelais, the brother of Boyer Bazelais, and commandant of the National Guard. The first was, perhaps, the most honorable and faithful man of this country; he was also the chief military character of the government, and when he fell, on the evening of the 30th ultimo, early in the struggle, while leading his troops in a charge upon the insurgents, the government lost its best and ablest officer. The second, Colonel Bazelais, was the military chief of the insurgents, and, doubtless, the largest expectations were placed in him by those whom he had engaged to serve. Hence his early fall, also on the evening of the 30th ultimo, must have been deeply felt. Indeed, the fall of these men must have confused, as it surprised, both the government and the insurgents.

It is said that a large number of the wounded among the insurgents were burned in buildings, from which they could not be removed. The number of the wounded at the hospital, cared for by the government, is reported at something over one hundred, while there are many wounded in private houses in different parts of the city. Deaths are occurring among them, according to report, constantly.

In the general destruction of property, the government lost heavily and seriously. The building occupied by the department of state, of finance, commerce, and foreign relations, with books, papers, and records of such department, the building occupied by “la commission législative d’amortisseinent,” of which Boyer Bazelais was president, with books, papers, and records belonging to that commission, and four other buildings used by the government, the bureau of stamps, the national printing office, the hotel communal, and the bureau of the arrondissement, together with the books, papers, records, and property belonging to such establishments, were entirely destroyed by fire.

Thus, once more, this country already made too miserable by its frequent and wasteful insurrectionary movements, becomes the theatre of another whose destructive effects, in view of its duration, its extent, and the numbers engaged in it, surpasses anything which has preceded it. If such movements are continued but a little longer, the ruin of this country, its utter desolation, cannot be prevented.

Of course, from the evening of the 30th ultimo up to the 4th instant all business was suspended, every store and shop was closed, and no attention was given to commercial affairs; several steam-vessels coming into the harbor within that time, and finding it impossible to discharge or receive freight, soon took their departure.

Criticism is made of the President’s conduct by some, who hold that he ought to have moved at once with vigor against Mr. Bazelais and his followers, and, if possible, overpowered and routed them without delay. Such persons claim that delay on the part of the authorities, especially as connected with such propositions of amnesty as that contained in the order of the government herewith inclosed, presented to Mr. Bazelais before and after it was printed, and by him persistently refused, emboldened and encouraged the insurgents.

There is force in this view, for delay and hesitation on the part of the government were certainly construed, under the circumstances, into weakness on its part, and the insurgents were hence emboldened, and held their position with greater pertinacity and determination; and, finally, greater force and destruction of life and property were indispensable to their dislodgement and route. But the President, it must be remembered, had lost his chief general, his secretary of war and marine, and another had to be found to fill his place in the cabinet and the field. This was done, but it required some delay. Mr. A. Thoby was appointed ad interim secretary of state of war and marine, and General Canal, as already stated, was given immediate command of the troops. Besides it is believed that the President had to consider and assure himself with regard to the feeling and purposes of the nationals with respect to sustaining him and his administration, and this necessitated some delay. Above all, however, the President is not a bloodthirsty man; he is more inclined to deal with insurgents by methods of clemency and mercy, his friends say, and hence his delay may have been prompted mainly by such consideration as this last. But in Bazelais, Paul, Price, and their associates in insurrection, he found determined, bitter, and unyielding opposers, who could only be made to surrender by the use of the most destructive means.

The government has not, as yet, announced its purpose with relation to the course it will pursue as to these insurgents. Here, however, the same course is always pursued—the leaders are permitted to escape through the legations and consulates into exile, and the followers are amnestied. The same course will doubtless be followed in this case.

In concluding, I beg to invite your attention to the dispatch herewith inclosed, addressed by me to Mr. Ethéart on the 3d instant, as I supposed, when I had received reliable information with respect to the matters therein stated. It proved fortunately, however, to be the case that I had been misinformed.

You will appreciate my anxiety with regard to this matter when I advise you that, for at least twenty-four hours, the firing of guns in the immediate neighborhood of our legation and consulate-general, in the streets and from the buildings occupied by the insurgents, was so constant and indiscriminate that it was hazardous, even foolhardy, to attempt to go there. Besides, the building and premises, could they have been secured by Mr. Bazelais, would have proved convenient, spacious, and extremely difficult of bombardment, even by the heaviest guns of the government, for the house is built of the very best and finest material, stone, brick, and iron, with very little wood in the interior, so as to be perfectly fire-proof; and the premises, yard, and garden back are surrounded by a high and solid wall, which would prove an excellent defence against attack. As stated, however, my fears were not well grounded.

To-day there is perfect quiet in the city, and business is beginning again generally to be resumed. A solemn silence, however, a fearful anxiety, a painful expectancy of something dreadful yet to come, and quickly, pervade the community. It is true that the people stand in the presence of an awful waste of property and a frightful loss of life. The smoke is still ascending from the smouldering ruins; the dead are not yet accurately known, numbered, and buried, nor the wounded all cared for and relieved. Nor is safety and protection assured, as yet, so that the community is again at its usual ease.

It is reported that there is fighting in Gonaïves. This may be true. Otherwise the country seems to be quiet.

This movement has so deranged the Senate and Chambers, arraying the Liberals against the Nationals, and the former against the government, that it is doubtful whether the Corps Législatif will find itself intact, and be able to proceed with its business.

If the officers of the Senate are living, and that body holds its quorum, it is very doubtful as to whether such officers will be permitted, for some time to come, to resume their seats. For there exists, on the part of many citizens and the soldiers generally, a great deal of hatred and deadly feeling against all Liberals, especially such as occupy places of prominence and influence. What will be the effect of this condition of things, the future must demonstrate.

I am, &c.,

JOHN MERCER LANGSTON.

[Inclosure No. 1 in No. 174.—Translation.]

Republic of Hayti.

Liberty! Equality! Fraternity!

Order.

Boisrond Canal, President of Hayti, in view of Article 117 of the constitution, on the advice of the council of secretaries of state, orders: Article 1. Amnesty, full and entire, shall be accorded to every citizen who has complicated himself in the events of taking arms, which occurred on the 30th of June, upon condition that he immediately ground his arms and retires peaceably.

Art. 2. There shall be excepted from this amnesty the chiefs of the insurrection, Messrs. Boyer Bazelais and Edmond Paul, who shall deliver themselves up to justice, or they shall be permitted to leave the country, if they so desire.

Art. 3. The secretaries of state are charged, each in that which concerns him, in the execution of the present order, which shall be printed and published.

Done at the national palace, at Port au Prince, July 3, 1879, in the year 76th of the independence.
BOISROND CANAL.

By the President.

The secretary of state of the interior and agriculture, provisionally charged with the portfolio of war and marine:
A. Thoby.

The secretary of state of justice, public instructions, and worship:
C. Archin.

The secretary of state of finance, commerce, and foreign affairs:
L. Ethéart.

[Inclosure 2 in No. 174.]

Mr. Langston to Mr. Ethéart.

Legation of the United States,
Port au Prince, Hayti, July 3, 1879. No. 56.]

Sir: It has come to my knowledge to-day that, on the afternoon of the 2d instant. (yesterday), there was hoisted upon the flag-staff of the legation and consulate-general of the United States, situated in this city, without authority, by some party or persons unknown tome, a United States flag. And it has also come to my knowledge to-day that it is probable that some party or persons wholly unknown to me, and without authority, have forcibly entered upon the premises connected with said legation and consulate-general, and are taking unauthorized and illegal possession thereof. I have, therefore, the honor to present to you, in the name of my government, my solemn, earnest, and formal protest against such proceedings, reminding you at the same time that it is the duty of your government to accede to my legation and consulate-general, together with all the property, books, papers, and archives thereof, entire and full protection against all and every such party or persons whatsoever.

I am, &c.,

JOHN MERCER LANGSTON.

No. 253. Mr. Langston to Mr. Evarts. [Document 277]

No. 253.
Mr. Langston to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Port au Prince, Hayti, July 17, 1879. (Received August 2.) No. 178.]

Sir: I have the honor to advise you that this country is to-day in the midst of an extended and formidable revolution.

While the southern part seems to be peaceful and loyal to the Canal administration, the north is in arms and persists in changing the government at all hazards. Already Cape Haytien, Gonaïves, and St. Marc have passed from the government to what seems now to be the fixed revolutionary condition.

It is also said that the forces of the revolutionary party are being organized and will be at an early day led against the capital, which many claim will be able to offer but a feeble defense on behalf of the government. It is a fact that since the defeat of Bazelais and Paul with their followers in this city, the administration has shown the smallest purpose, and but a modicum of energy. Meanwhile it seems that the revolutionary party has worked, fought, won victories, and, as stated, is now advancing on Port au Prince.

It has been reported for the past twenty-four hours that the President will present to the secretaries of state, as the constitution permits, within a very few days—perhaps the next forty-eight hours—his resignation, and leave the country. This he will be compelled to do, or fight, and, it may be, lose his life. And now, with the general feeling which seems to exist with regard to him and his administration, it would appear that, unless he is sure of large and reliable support, unless he is in possession of intelligence with regard to support which is not generally known, the wisest course for him to pursue is to resign. This course will certainly save general bloodshed and destruction of property, and it may, and probably will, save the life of the President himself.

So far, however, I have heard no word from the President or his advisers with respect to any purpose on his part to resign; and he may yet in earnest and vigorous combat demonstrate his purpose and power to hold his official position to the close of the presidential term, ten months hence.

On the 9th instant the English man-of-war Boxer anchored in this harbor, and, in addition to giving a very significant guaranty of protection to English interests here, has played an important part in the matter of embarking refugees from the different legations and consalates. The leaders, Bazelais and Paul, and some eighteen of their men have already gone; and it is reported that there are some thirty or forty more upon the Boxer awaiting passage by the regular steamers to Jamaica.

So far there has been no difficulty experienced in connection with the embarkation of these men. They have all been embarked, however, in the night season, and without government military escort.

The leaders of the movement in this city being sent away, quiet and order would be even now measurably restored, were it not for the reports which came yesterday, from the places already named, as having fallen into the hands of the insurgents, that they are proposing an early attack upon the capital.

No one can as yet speak with certainty as to the final result; but it looks now very much as if a change of administration was inevitable, and near at hand.

I am, &c.,

JOHN MERCER LANGSTON.

P. S.—I have just learned that the President has just presented his resignation, and will leave immediately.

No. 254. Mr. Langston to Mr. Evarts. [Document 278]

No. 254.
Mr. Langston to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Port au Prince, Hayti, July 17, 1879. (Received August 2.) No. 179.]

Sir: I have the honor to transmit, herewith inclosed, for your consideration, copies of two dispatches, with translations, received at this legation from the Haytian Government, together with my replies thereto.

I beg to invite special attention to the subject-matter of the dispatch of the 10th instant; and to ask most respectfully the instructions of the Department with regard to it.

I beg also to ask the Department to instruct me as to whether our consular officers shall be permitted to take refugees. This is a matter of grave importance at this time in this country, and the attitude of our government with regard to it should be well defined.

I am &c.,

JOHN MERCER LANGSTON.

[Inclosure 1 in No. 179.—Translation.]

Mr. Ethéart to Mr. Langston.

Port au Prince, July 7, 1879.

Mr. Minister: Divers Haytians who took part in the insurrection at Port au Prince, on last Thursday, have found, it is said, refuge in several legations in this city.

While asking the names of those to whom you have accorded protection under your flag, I believe it my duty to inform you that the government desires, at the same time, to be advised with regard to the dispositions upon which you have determined in their behalf.

Awaiting your acquiescence in my demand, I have the honor to salute you with the high consideration which is due you.

The secretary of state of foreign affairs.

L. ETHÉART.

[Inclosure 2 in No. 179.]

Mr. Langston to Mr. Ethéart.

Legation of the United States.
Port au Prince, Hayti, July 8, 1879. No. 56.]

Mr. Minister: Your dispatch of the 7th instant has been received, and in reply thereto I have the honor to state that no refugee connected with the insurrection of which you speak has been accorded protection under my flag.

I have, &c.,

JOHN MERCER LANGSTON.

[Inclosure 3 in No. 179.—Translation.]

Mr. Ethéart to Mr. Langston.

Port au Prince, July 10, 1879.

Mr. Minister: I believe it to be my duty to invite your serious attention to a fact of the greatest importance, persuaded that conformably to the spirit of the government that you represent, and to the usages everywhere established, that you will agree with me as to the measures the most proper to stop the revolutionary propaganda which seems more and more to emphasize itself.

My government is informed that vessels (embarcations) expedited from the two insurgent cities (St. Marc and Gonaives) bring every instant packages to the refugees in the legations. If we admit the right of asylum, it is upon the condition that the foreign legations would be a barrier to all communication between those who are sheltered under their flags and the rebels from without. To tolerate such communications, is to establish the negation of every principle of public order and security, and you cannot but know, Mr. Minister, I am convinced, to give support to these communications of a nature to impart life to the culpable menaces of the refugees and to give them a certain authority. This would be, then, you will admit, a strange extension of the right of asylum, to which every government has a right to object, because, in those conditions, the inviolable asylum would become centers of organized conspiracies against the legal power.

In consequence my government has taken the resolution not to permit vessels (embarcations) sent from St. Marc and Gonaives to cast anchor in our harbor. They shall be immediately re-expedited with all the packages which they bear.

We ought not to have any communication with the rebel towns; that is a right which nobody can contest; and it may be said that this resolution, which will restore certainly the establishment of order, is exacted for the guaranty even of the great commercial interests which you are called upon to protect in Hayti.

This decision having been brought to your knowledge, I hope, Mr. Minister, that you will notify your agents of the rebel cities in order that they abstain from sending vessels (embarcations) to the capital.

Please to accept, Mr. Minister, the assurance of my very high consideration.

The secretary of state of foreign affairs.

L. ETHÉART.

[Inclosure 4, in No. 179.]

Mr. Langston to Mr. Ethéart.

Legation of the United Stattes,
Port au Prince, Hayti, July 11, 1879. No. 57.]

Mr. Minister: Your dispatch dated on the 10th instant, in which you notify me of the resolution which your government has taken with regard to vessels (les embarcations) sent from the two cities of St. Marc and Gonaives to this port bearing packages, has been received.

Reserving all rights that appertain to my government and its consular officers residing in this republic, and especially for the time being, with sentiments of highest consideration, I have, &c.,

JOHN MERCER LANGSTON.

No. 255. Mr. Langston to Mr. Evarts. [Document 279]

No. 255.
Mr. Langston to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Port au Prince, Hayti, July 18, 1879. (Received August 2.) No. 181.]

Sir: After finishing and mailing my dispatch numbered 178, dated yesterday, the President, Boisrond Canal, having presented his resignation to the National Assembly at 6 o’clock p.m., embarked, with his family, upon a French steamer, La Désirade, which sailed this morning for St. Thomas.

He was escorted from the national palace by his aides-de-camp, followed by a large and orderly concourse of citizens, to the “Bord de la Mer,” where he took a small boat for the steamer.

As he entered this boat, applause, earnest and long, was given him by the dense crowd which gathered upon the shore. He signified, by polite and respectful bows and waving of the hat, his grateful acknowledgement for this demonstration of kindly regard. It is safe to state that it will be a long time before this unfortunate country will see his equal in patriotism and intelligent devotion in its Presidential chair.

At present, the Canal administration having passed out of power, the government of the country has fallen into the hands of the revolutionists. The two political parties of this city stand face to face, neither demonstrating its preference for any particular man for the Presidency, both awaiting the revolutionary army from the north, which is said to be marching toward the capital.

It is hoped that no further fighting will take place; but that some reasonable arrangement may be made without further bloodshed for a provisional or permanent administration of the government.

The tranquillity and order of this city so far, since the resignation of the President, has been remarkable and praiseworthy. The city and arrondissement are now under the management of the commandant of of the place, General Dupréval, assisted by a committee of twenty-two citizens, eleven Liberals and eleven Nationals, prominent members of the two parties.

The considerations which led the President to resign were briefly stated in a proclamation published yesterday evening by General Dupréval. No copy of this proclamation can at this time be secured; but the chief considerations given therefor is the general movement of the north, connected with that of this city.

I am, &c.,

JOHN MERCER LANGSTON.

No. 256. Mr. Langston to Mr. Evarts. [Document 280]

No. 256.
Mr. Langston to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Port au Prince, Hayti, July 25, 1879. (Received August 7.) No. 183.]

Sir: On the 1st instant at, an early hour of the morning, I received from the Hon. H. Byron, Her Majesty’s vice-consul in Hayti, in charge of the legation and consulate-general in the absence of Major Stuart, Her Majesty’s minister resident and consul-general, a note, the copy of which, with translation, constitutes the first inclosure of this dispatch.

Accordingly I came at once to the city, and made haste to advise him of my whereabouts, and that I, with my colleagues named, awaited his presence, as stated in the note, a copy of which constitutes the second inclosure hereto.

In a short time, Mr. Byron, accompanied by the secretary of state of the interior, and others, made his appearance; when, according to arrangements which I had caused to be made, I invited them into a private apartment to learn what was to be communicated, and whether the matter was one which required the assembling and action of the diplomatic corps., Besides, I informed Mr. Byron that if he had a written communication from the government or the insurgents it was proper to present it. He stated only as matter of communication and reply, that he had received a note from the government, that there was no time to be lost, and that he was going, whatever others might do, at once to the palace.

To this, I replied, “I cannot attempt, under the circumstances, to represent or act for the corps until I have taken their decision in regard to the subject about which the government is said to have made communication, nor will I go to the palace on my own responsibility, until I know what I am called there for.”

It was finally stated, however, that the government would make full statement and explanation of its desire when we reached the palace, and that it would be wise for us to go there without delay. I consented, then, and went.

There we met the President and his secretaries, when the former proceeded to state and explain what he desired. The service which he would have us undertake was to carry to the insurgents the proposition of amnesty which the government would offer, as contained in the order of the government, already transmitted to the Department as inclosure No. 1 of my dispatch No. 174; and in view thereof, if possible, to induce the insurgents to ground their arms and return to their allegiance. Bazelais and Paul only to be embarked.

When the President had finished his statement, I told him that the diplomatic corps had not considered this matter; that it had not been brought to their attention; that we had received no communication from him, directly or indirectly; that, therefore, I could not speak by any authority for my colleagues.

That the situation might be fully understood, through his kind permission I asked the President the three following questions:

Have you had communication with the insurgents?

Are they willing to hear and consider terms of amnesty from the government?

Does the government desire our counsel as to the course which it ought to pursue in this case?

To the first question the President answered affirmatively; to the second, he signified that he did not find the insurgents ready to listen to terms of amnesty; and to the third, he replied with clearness and decision, the government had decided upon its course, and will pursue it.

In this connection, I beg to state that, in order to render it proper and feasible for the diplomatic corps to enter upon the service suggested by the government, three conditions should exist.

In the first place, it ought to have received from the government and the insurgents communications by despatch or otherwise, certainly in proper form, that each desires it to undertake the service of reconciliation and adjustment as between them; in the second place, the assurance ought to have been given by them that each would abide by and observe the adjustment which was finally advised; and, thirdly, that all fighting should cease pending negotiations, and the flag of the corps, or that borne by its agents, as it or they might have occasion to go or pass under the guns of the one or the other party, should be entirely respected as one of truce.

In the light of such principles and the answers of the President to the questions propounded, it seemed to me the only thing left to be done under the circumstances was, as I said to the President, for the government to advance to the suppression of the rebellion.

And yet, leaving the palace and repairing to our legation, accompanied by the gentlemen present at the interview, Messrs. Byron, Huttinot, Lubin, and Denis, the president of the senate, I made an ineffectual attempt to secure a meeting of the diplomatic corps. One or two of the members of the corps were in the country; and such was the condition of affairs in the city, the firing of guns from the houses occupied by the insurgents, so incessant and dangerous, that another of them refused to leave his residence. Indeed, I came to and left our own office under the fire of the guns of the insurgents. Thereafter it became entirely impracticable, up to the 4th day of this month, to hold a meetiny of the corps. And hence no action was taken by it upon the matter submitted informally by the President, as stated.

But Messrs. Byron and Huttinot, the latter since the death of Gomte Rochechouart, in charge of the French legation, did, in their individual capacity, what they deemed proper to induce the insurgents to accept the proposal of amnesty tendered by the government. Their endeavors were, however, totally unavailing 5 and such result was apparent from the first, for the leaders of the rebellion had staked all they possessed on the results of this movement, and their followers were pledged to support them to the last 5 while any proposition of adjustment originating with and coming from the government was considered and treated by them as evidence of weakness on its part. And when Bazelais and his adherents, in the presence of Messrs. Byron and Huttinot, who had brought it to them, tore up and threw away with disdain the order of amnesty offered by the government upon condition of surrender, their action furnished the amplest proof of all that is here stated.

As showing the zeal with which Mr. Byron, assisted somewhat by Mr. Huttinot, labored, I have the honor to transmit, herewith inclosed, as published in the Moniteur of the 5th instant, with translations, three notes addressed by him to the President, together with the reply thereto, with translation, by his excellency. These notes need no comment.

It may be stated, however, that Mr. Byron has resided in this country for over twenty years, has contracted marriage with a Haytian woman; and it is reported that by such marriage he has been brought into close social relations with the leading liberal families of this city.

In presenting, with particularity, these facts and details, I do but simple justice to the diplomatic corps, of which I have the very distinguished honor of being, at this time, the dean.

I am, &c.,

JOHN M. LANGSTON.

[Inclosure 1 in No. 183.—Translation.]

July 1, 1879.

My Dear Colleagues: I pray you to come into the city immediately in order that we may go to the palace to endeavor, in the name of humanity, to bring to an end the terrible outpouring of blood which deluges the city at this moment.

Make haste to come; it is already almost too late.

Your friend and colleague,

H. BYRON.

Messrs. Langston, Dr. Graser, Fierro y Cruz, and Huttinot.

[Inclosure 2 in No. 183.—Translation.]

Western Mission House,
Port au Prince, Hayti, July 1, 1879.

Sir: In presenting you his most respectful compliments, Hon. John Mercer Lang-ton, United States minister resident and consul-general, dean of the corps diplomatic, begs to inform you that he, together with Messrs. Huttinot and General Vil Lubin, are at present here in this parsonage, and would be very happy to see you at your earliest convenience; and will remain here until we hear from you.

Very respectfully,

JOHN MERCER LANGSTON.

VICTOR HUTTINOT,

AMITIÉ VIL LUBIN.

Hon. H. Byron,
Her Britannic Majesty’s Vice-Consul in Hayti,
charged with the Legation and Consulate-General.

[Inclosure 3 in No. 183.—Translation.]

Legation of Her Britannic Majesty,
Port au Prince, July 2, 1879.

President: I extremely regret to announce to you that, in spite of the order made to cease fire, it is impossible to go out of my house on account of the firing of cannon, &c., perpetual on the part of the La Place and all this district. I desire exceedingly to fulfill the philanthrophic mission which I have imposed upon myself, but in vain. No one respects the order which has been given by your excellency, and which does you so much honor.

I return the carriage with this note, and I pray you to arrange the thing in manner to permit me to go to the palace in the carriage which you have been kind enough to place at my disposal.

While awaiting your response, I remain the very devoted servant of your excellency,

H. BYRON.

Legation of Her Britannic Majesty,
Port au Prince, July 2, 1879.

President: I regret to say to you that those gentlemen refuse formally to accept your proposition, and that they have torn up, in a thousand pieces, the copies of your act of amnesty. Our mission is, then, complete. I regret that it has not reached a more happy result.

Now I have to announce to your excellency that before our arrival from the Bazelais mansion to join our carriage, balls were showered upon us, without doubt on account of the presence of the ladies Bazelais, who came out with, us, the consequence being that, although we were able to put widow Bazelais in security, we are unable to say what became of one of the two Misses Bazelais, who in the confusion, was lost sight of.

Again, on arriving before our legations, in spite of our mounted flags, and in spite of those who accompanied us, La Place did not give us time to alight from the carriage and to enter our house without firing upon us, at such point that the projectile grazed the head of Mr. Huttinot, the son, secretary of the legation of France.

We pray you, President, to accept the assurance of our respectful salutation.

V. HUTTINOT.

H. BYRON.

Legation of Her Britannic Majesty,
Port au Prince, July 3, 1879.

President: I come again to beg you to cause to cease the fire which has already lasted three days and nights, in order to see if some arrangement with Mr. Bazelais and company—a thing that I dare to hope possible—cannot be made.

I pray your excellency to communicate to me by the bearer that you will have the fire suspended up to to-morrow morning; for the guards find themselves under the order of persons animated too much by passion.

Only yesterday, La Place fired upon me and my colleague of France in face of our legation. Yesterday, also, on return from our philanthropic mission, the post near the bureau of the interior fired a rain of balls upon us and our flags, and it was only a quarter of an hour ago that the boy of the bureau of France, in going from the legation to buy some bread for his chief, was struck by a ball, also from La Place, and he died, for he was mortally wounded. Give the orders, then, President, to the commandant of La Place to cease these acts of assassination upon the persons of foreigners—upon the persons of the representatives of foreign powers—and be pleased to accord the cessation of fire that I have demanded of you in the interest of humanity.

I salute your excellency with high consideration.

H. BYRON.

Boisrond Canal, President of the Republic of Hayti, to Mr. Henry Byron, vice-consul of Her Britannic Majesty.

Mr. Vice-Consul: I have not been permitted to respond as I had desired to your two dispatches of the 2d and 3d instant, wanting time until this moment to do so.

I regret to say to you that it is not possible to accord what you ask. Already twice there has been suspension of hostilities, and the insurgents have profited thereby to revictual. If they are willing to submit themselves to my decree of amnesty, let them send to you a flag of truce to announce it to you, and in these conditions I am always ready for the sake of humanity to have executed my decree dated yesterday.

BOISROND CANAL.

No. 257. Mr. Langston to Mr. Evarts. [Document 281]

No. 257.
Mr. Langston to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Port au Prince, Hayti, July 25, 1879. (Received August 7.) No. 186.]

Sir: I have the honor to transmit herewith inclosed copies of two dispatches, with translations, and the replies made thereto, addressed to me by the Haytian Government.

These dispatches, according to the request made, were brought by me at once to the attention of the diplomatic corps, and upon its approval the replies returned were made.

The subjects treated in these dispatches are so grave, the attitude assumed by the government so remarkable, and the style and manner adopted by the writer, especially in the closing portions to the dispatch of the 10th instant, so unusual, that it has been deemed prudent to bring them with the replies to the attention of the department.

I am, &c.,

JOHN MERCER LANGSTON.

[Inclosure 1 in No. 186.—Translation.]

Mr. Ethéart to Mr. Langston.

Port au Prince, July 3, 1879.

Mr. Minister: As you know, I addressed yesterday a circular to the members of the diplomatic corps to ask them the names of the refugees which they had received at their residences, and what disposition they were going to take in that behalf. Not having received any response to my circular I have the honor to ask you to convoke them, and to inform them that the government has decided to embark said refugees upon the English steamer which will leave this port to-day. It is necessary, then, to have an understanding in order that all necessary measures may be taken in the premises.

Be pleased to accept, Mr. Minister, the assurance of my very high consideration.

The secretary of state of foreign relations.

L. ETHÉART.

[Inclosure 2 in No. 186.]

Mr. Langston to Mr. Ethéart.

Legation of the United States,
Port au Prince, Hayti, July 8, 1879.

Sir: I have the honor to state that your dispatch of this date, in which you ask me to convoke the corps diplomatique and inform them that the government has decided to embark the refugees referred to by you in a circular addressed yesterday to them, has been received.

The diplomatic and consular corps have been convoked and the contents of your dispatch made known to them according to your request.

The members of this body have either answered your circular already, as I am assured, or will do so as soon as practicable.

By the way, it appears that several gentlemen who wese present have not received your circular.

I have, &c.,

JOHN MERCER LANGSTON.

[Inclosure 3 in No. 186.—Translation.]

Mr. Ethéart to Mr. Langston.

Port au Prince, July 10, 1879.

Mr. Minister: I desire to ask you, in the name of my government, to have the goodness to convoke, in the shortest possible time, the diplomatic and consular corps. The English man-of-war Boxer being in the harbor, the government desires that the refugees in the different consulates may be embarked as soon as possible. They may await on board of her the arrival of the royal mail, which comes here to-morrow or the day after to-morrow.

You will be kind enough, Mr. Minister, to consult with the corps over which you preside, as to the proper means of securing this result agreeably to the promise made when the embarkation of these persons on board of the Ailsa was refused. The legations of France and Spain, as is known, alleged as the ground of their refusal to permit said embarkation the fact that they had themselves taken measures to have the refugees placed on board of some vessel, and that they were awaiting, with this view, the arrival of a man-of-war.

This condition being to-day fulfilled by the presence of the Boxer in our waters, and the near arrival of the royal mail, no obstacle can hereafter be opposed to the execution of the promise which has been made us.

I believe it my duty to advise you, Mr. Minister, that if the members of the diplomatic and consular corps neglect this favorable opportunity for the embarkation of the individuals whom they have received at their residences, the government can no longer guarantee the security of the persons who have sought refuge under the protection of the different flags; and it would leave, with reason, the responsibility of the possible consequences of so dangerous a situation with those who have provoked it by their obstinacy.

I avail myself of this occasion, Mr. Minister, to offer you the assurance of my most distinguished consideration.

The secretary of state of foreign affairs.

L. ETHÉART.

[Inclosure 4 in No. 186.]

Mr. Langston to Mr. Ethéart.

Legation of the United States,
Port au Prince, Hayti, July 10, 1879.

Sir: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your dispatch, dated this day, and having reference to the embarkation of refugees said to be in the different legations and consulates.

The contents of this dispatch have been brought, according to your request, to the attention of the members of the corps diplomatique et consulaire.

So far as the use of the English man-of-war Boxer is concerned, for any purpose for which your government might need it, you will permit me to suggest that you should correspond with the representative of Her Britannic Majesty.

I may be permitted to suggest, also, that I apprehend, from information which I have received both directly and indirectly, that any promise made by the representatives of the English and Spanish Governments to yours will be duly observed.

As to your suggestion with regard to not guaranteeing protection in case the refugees referred to by you are not embarked according to your request, I have only to say that responsibility in such case will attach to such party as may be eventually shown to be at fault; it is generally believed, however, that a refugee seeks shelter beneath the flag of a legation or consulate to which he flees because there he finds protection.

I beg to suggest, Mr. Minister, in the most respectful manner, that so far as my colleagues of the corps diplomatique and consulaire are concerned, your use of the French expression “obstination” is, in our judgment, not quite in accordance with diplomatic usage.

I am, &c.,

JOHN MERCER LANGSTON.

No. 258. Mr. Langston to Mr. Evarts. [Document 282]

No. 258.
Mr. Langston to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Port au Prince, Hayti, July 26, 1879. (Received August 7.) No. 187.]

Sir: As you have been already advised, here as in Cape Haytien, Gonaives, and St. Marc, as the revolution seemed to succeed and the President resigned, a committee was formed, called “Le Comité d’Ordre Public.” The committee here, as those in the other places named, has done good service in the maintenance of order and general quiet. Composed of the representative men of the republic, it has conducted its affairs, in the main, with special wisdom and efficiency, and deserves popular gratitude.

According to a dispatch addressed to the diplomatic and consular agents of the several governments represented in this city, it has attempted, perhaps without due thought, to organize at least a sort of provisional government. What the source of its power is, for this action, it is impossible to say. A copy of the dispatch sent to this legation, with translation, and a copy of the reply returned, are herewith inclosed.

To-day, however, the army of the north the revolutionary army, with the commander-in-chief of the revolutionary forces, General H. Hérrissé, at its head, made formal entry into the city and assumed entire control; the Comité d’Ordre Public, as well as the citizens generally, yielding a ready submission.

For this army, the people have been waiting patiently, since the 17th instant, when President Canal embarked; and the citizens and residents of no city could have behaved themselves in a more orderly and becoming manner, for such period, than those of Port au Prince. Some one has remarked that they do better without than with a chief executive.

But the army being present, it accords with past usage that the leaders of the revolution provide, at once, a provisional government, with a chief. It is said that this will be done with reasonable dispatch. This is probable; for there appears to be considerable harmony and purpose existing among the chief men of the country with reference to the responsibility and duty which rests upon them.

It is reported that General Hérrissé said yesterday, in his address to the committee of reception, that he was neither a National nor a Liberal; that he came to drive Canal from power; that he found him gone; and it was his duty to give the people protection and good government.

When attempt was made yesterday to disembark Bazelais from the English man-of-war, the Boxer, lying in this harbor, on which he has remained since his departure from the Spanish consulate, in which he took refuge, the sentiment of the revolutionary army, as well as that of the major portion of the people, was found to be against it, and he was not permitted to come ashore. The popular sentiment seems to be positively set against the toleration of any disturbing cause or influence at this time.

I am, &c.,

JOHN MERCER LANGSTON.

[Inclosure No. 1 in No. 187.—Translation]

republic of hayti, section of foreign affairs.

Le Comité d’Ordre Public,
Port au Prince, July 19, 1879—76th of the Independence.

Liberty! Equality! Fraternity!

Mr. Minister: In consequence of the retirement from the executive power of the President of Hayti, a committee of public order has been found to fill a vacancy of the executive power until the government may be reconstituted.

The committee makes haste to inform you of this state of things and to give you the assurance of its profound desire to maintain the good relations which exist so happily between the government you represent and the Government of Hayti.

The committee has been divided into bureaus for the expedition of the public service; the bureau of foreign affairs is authorized to establish with you those relations for which you are accredited near the Haytian Government.

The bureau of foreign relations is superintended by Mr. Senator Denis. The committee prays you, Mr. Minister, to accept, with its cordial salutations, the assurance of its distinguished sentiments.

President:
DENIS.
Vice-President: DÉLORME.

[Inclosure No. 2 in No. 187.]

Legation of the United States,
Port au Prince, Hayti, July 24, 1879.

Sirs: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your dispatch dated the 19th, and received on the 24th instant, and to tender you therefor my thanks.

It is certainly gratifying to learn of the progress which “Le Comité d’Ordre Public” is making in maintaining peace and good order in the communtity, and in advancing and preserving the general interest.

Hoping that all relations which I am called to sustain with your country may be in future, as in the past, altogether pleasant,

I am, &c.,

JOHN MERCER LANGSTON.

Messrs. Denis, President, and Délorme, Vice-President,
Le Comité d’Ordre Public.

No. 259. Mr. Langston to Mr. Evarts. [Document 283]

No. 259.
Mr. Langston to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Port au Prince, Hayti, July 28, 1879. (Received August 7.) No. 188.]

Sir: I have the honor to advise you that so far quiet and order prevail in this city, and throughout the country.

Provision has already been made for the organization of a temporary government by the appointment of five persons who are to wield certainly all the power of the national executive. In the appointment of this commission the five departments of the country are supposed to be represented, the North, the Northwest, the Artibonite, the West, and the South. Its composition is said to be non-partisan, and its members are said to be judicious and reliable men; and while there is not entire satisfaction shown in connection with its composition, the probability is that the country will accept the arrangement thus established, and the defeated parties, those upon whom the responsibility of the inauguration of the late rebellion rests, will be compelled to yield a silent submission.

The persons who compose the “Gouvernement Provisoire” are: General Hériston Hérrissé, commander-in-chief of the revolutionary forces; General T. S. Sam, of Cape Haytien; Démoléus Serre, of Port de Paix; Joseph Lamothe, of Port au Prince) M. Douylon, of Aux Cayes.

It is also reported that Messrs. Audain, Margron, Alexis, and Fouchard, have been selected as sécrétaires de conseil. If this be true—and it is altogether probable—the new order of things moves off with no little promise of general success.

The gentlemen of the conseil are men well known in the country, and sustain good reputations for wisdom and moderation.

I am, &c.,

JOHN MERCER LANGSTON.

No. 260. Mr. Langston to Mr. Evarts. [Document 284]

No. 260.
Mr. Langston to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Port au Prince, Hayti, August 1, 1879. (Received August 15.) No. 190.]

Sir: I have the honor to transmit herewith inclosed, with translation, a copy of a dispatch received yesterday from the provisional government of Hayti. My reply thereto is also herewith inclosed for your consideration, together with the decree of the central revolutionary committee, providing for the government.

The persons signing the dispatch, as you will perceive, are General H. Hérissé, the chief man of the central revolutionary committee, and Mr. Jh. L. Lamothe, also a member of the committee, who is said to be, for the time being, charged with the conduct of foreign affairs. And these are the two first men of the provisional government.

I am, &c.,

JOHN MERCER LANGSTON.

[Inclosure 1 in No. 190.—Translation.]

republic of hayti, section of foreign affairs the provisional government.

Port au Prince,
July 24, 1879, 76th year of the Independence.

Liberty! Equality! Fraternity!

Mr. Minister: We have the honor to advise you that, in consequence of the revolution which has driven General Boisrond Canal from the executive power, a provisional government has been instituted by decree of the 26th instant, of the central revolutionary committee sitting at the capital, two copies of whose decree we make haste to transmit to you under cover hereof.

The provisional government, in informing you at the same time of its institution, is happy to give you the entire assurance which has inspired the views of the revolution for the advancement of the country, and every care on its part will be taken constantly to maintain and strengthen more and more the bonds of friendship which exist between the Republic of Hayti and the government of the country of which you are the worthy representative.

Be pleased to accept, Mr. Minister, the assurance of our high consideration.

H. HÉRISSE.

JH. LAMOTHE.

[Inclosure 2 in No. 190.]

Legation of the United States,
Port au Prince, Hayti, July 31, 1879.

Sir: Your dispatch, dated Le Government Provisoire, Port au Prince, July 29, 1879 and marked “Section of foreign relations,” in which you advise me of the institution of a provisional government by decree, of the 26th instant, of the central revolutionary committee sitting at the capital, and containing two copies of such decree, has just now been received. You will be pleased to accept my very sincere thanks therefor.

I need not assure you, sirs, that the government which I have the honor to represent at this capital is profoundly interested in everything which concerns the welfare of this republic, and I may, therefore, express with confidence the hope that good understanding may ever subsist between yours and my country.

With sentiments of exalted consideration. I am, &c.,

JOHN MERCER LANGSTON

Messrs. H. Hérissé and Jh. Lamothe.

[Inclosure 3 in No. 190.—Translation.]

republic of hayti.

The central committee of the revolution sitting at the capital, after having deliberated with the generals of the revolutionary army:

Whereas the safety of the state and the operation of the public services require the immediate constitution of the executive, power.

Whereas the revolution having made its peaceful entry into the capital, the mission of the revolutionary committees is terminated.

It is decreed: Article 1. That citizens Heriston Hérissé, Tiresias Augustin Simon Sam, Adelson Bony on, Joseph Lamothe, and Diogène Serres, are named members of the provisional government.

Art. 2. From the publication of the present decree all the committees generally whatsoever are, and shall remain, dissolved.

Art. 3. The present shall be published and executed by diligence of the general-in-chief of the revolution.

Done at the hôtel of the central committee of the revolution, the 26th day of July, 1879, the 76th year of the Independence.
L. LAURENT.

J. B. MICHEL, JEUNE.

T. REMEAU.

S. C. BOTTEX.

T. A. SIMON SAM.

G. St. GERMAIN.

E. SUPPLICE.

ARBOUET.

J. B. LEVIEUX.

W. DÉBROSSE.

AMBROISE.

S. TÉLÉMAQUE.

R. DALEUCOUR.

M. ALEXIS.

H. HÉRISSE.

POMIE.

No. 261. Mr. Evarts to Mr. Langston. [Document 285]

No. 261.
Mr. Evarts to Mr. Langston.

Department of State,
Washington, August 6, 1879. No. 73.]

Sir: Your No. 179, of the 17th ultimo, has been received. You therein report the correspondence which had recently taken place between yourself and Mr. Ethéart, the minister for foreign affairs under the government of President Canal, concerning asylum and the communication of refugee insurgents with those still in arms. The same mail which brings your No. 179 brings the later intelligence that the insurrectionary movement had compelled the resignation and departure of President Canal and his cabinet. This renders it unnecessary to give you special instructions concerning the case reported by you, further than to observe that if the socalled “right of asylum” (which this government has never been tenacious in claiming for its officers abroad) is to continue to exist as a quasi rule of public law, in communities where the conspirators of to-day may be the government of to-morrow, it should at least be so exercised as to afford no ground of complaint on the score of aiding and comforting rebellion by conniving at communication between the refugees in asylum and their associates who are, it may be, engaged in hostilities against the existing government. It is evident that asylum would be as intolerable as reprehensible, were not the refugees supposed to be kept out of mischief as well as out of danger.

I am, &c.,

WM. M. EVARTS.

No. 262. Mr. Langston to Mr. Evarts. [Document 286]

No. 262.
Mr. Langston to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Port au Prince, Hayti, October 24, 1879. (Received November 8.) No. 196.]

Sir: Referring to my No. 195, transmitted to the Department by the same mail that bears this dispatch, I have the honor to advise you that the National Assembly of this republic, convening in the palais national, at six o’clock yesterday evening completed its work of electing a President by choosing, according to popular expectation, General Lusius Salomon, to fill such position.

It is probable that his inauguration will take place either upon Sunday or Monday next.

General Salomon is a person of large official experience. It will be recollected that he is a lawyer by profession, a member of the bar of Aux Cayes, and that he was called after serving in the senate, by Soulouque, to a place in his cabinet, and before he had quitted such service he had filled the four several positions recognized therein.

Upon the fall of Soulouque’s administration he became an exile from his country, and remained in exile, it seems, for some eighteen years.

However, during the administration of Salnave he represented the Haytian Government as ambassador at Paris, in which capacity it is said that he discovered ability and efficiency.

Coming as he does from Aux Cayes, General Salomon is regarded in his election as the representative of the southern section of the republic; but it is true that out of the 87 members of the senate and chamber present last night and balloting he received 74 votes, the senators and deputies from the north, according to report, casting their votes for him. Indeed, to secure so large a vote his support must have come, as you will perceive, from the country generally.

When the result of the vote was announced, at nine o’clock, the popular enthusiasm was profound and widespread, and it discovered itself in such demonstrations as cheering, “Vive Salomon”; the firing of guns; the display of fireworks; such demonstrations continuing through the night, culminating at dawn in a general salute from the forts surrounding the capital.

From the beginning to the end of such demonstrations the best of feeling seemed to pervade the populace, and there were, I believe neither manifestations of opposing feeling shown, nor disturbance of, the general peace made. In fact, the election of General Salomon is received and accepted, so far, with popular applause; and it is to be hoped that he will, as a true patriot and statesman, devote his great powers to the promotion and maintenance of the best and most enduring interests of the country.

To-day, and for some time to come, the newly-elected President will doubtless be the recipient of unnumbered and generally cordial congratulations.

I am, &c.,

JOHN MERCER LANGSTON.

No. 263. Mr. Preston to Mr. Evarts. [Document 287]

No. 263.
Mr. Preston to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of Hayti in the United States,
Washington, January 16, 1879.

The undersigned, envoy extraordinary and minister plenipotentiary of Hayti, has the honor to inform the honorable Secretary of State of the United States that, after a long correspondence between the American legation at Port au Prince and the department of state of foreign relations of Hayti, in relation to a law entitled, “A law permitting the collection of fees for visés in foreign countries by the consuls or agents of the republic,” which has resulted in no definite settlement of the matter, the Government of Hayti has decided to transfer the question to Washington, and to communicate this decision to the minister resident of the United States.

The undersigned having received a copy of all the documents having reference to this question, has examined it with all the attention that it deserves, and is convinced of the legality of the action of his government. He hereby submits the question to the examination of the Department of State, hoping that the Federal Government will reach the same conclusion.

It is difficult, in fact, to understand how the minister resident of the United States in Hayti could protest against the law of August 23, 1877, on the ground that it is in violation of the spirit and letter of the treaty of 1864, between the Governments of the United States and Hayti. In order to elucidate the matter which forms the subject of this communication, the undersigned thinks it will be sufficient for him to lay before the Hon. Mr. Evarts the text of the aforesaid law, which was published in the official journal of the Republic of Hayti, August 25, 1877 (Inclosure A), and the three following articles of the treaty which have reference thereto:

Art. X. The high contracting parties hereby agree that whatever kind of produce, manufactures, or merchandise of any foreign country can be, from time to time, lawfully imported into the United States in their own vessels, may also be imported in the vessels of the Republic of Hayti, and no higher or other duties upon the tonnage or cargo of the vessels shall be levied or collected than shall be levied or collected of the vessels of the most favored nation.

And, reciprocally, whatever kind of produce, manufactures, or merchandise of any foreign country can be, from time to time, lawfully imported into Hayti in her own vessels, may be also imported in the vessels of the United States, and no higher or other duties upon the tonnage or cargo of the vessels shall be levied or collected than shall be levied or collected of the vessels of the most favored nation.

Art. XI. It is hereby agreed that whatever may be lawfully exported or re-exported from the one country, in its own vessels, to any foreign country, may in like manner be exported (or re-exported) in vessels of the other; and the same duties, bounties, and drawbacks shall be collected and allowed as are collected of and allowed to the most favored nation.

It is also understood that the foregoing principles shall apply, whether the vessels shall have cleared directly from the ports of the nation to which they appertain or from the ports of any other nation.

* * * * * *

Art. XIII. No higher or other duties shall be imposed on the importation into the United States of any article the growth, produce, or manufacture of Hayti or her fisheries, and no higher or other duties shall be imposed on the importation into Hayti of any article the growth, produce, or manufacture of the United States or their fisheries, than are of shall be payable on the like articles the growth, produce, or manufacture of any other foreign country or its fisheries.

No other or higher duties or charges shall be imposed in the United States on the exportation of any article to Hayti, nor in Hayti on the exportation of any article to the United States, than such as are or shall be payable on the exportation of the like article to any foreign county.

No prohibition shall be imposed on the importation of any article the growth, produce, or manufacture of the United States or their fisheries (or of Hayti and her fisheries), from or to the ports of the United States or Hayti, which shall not equally extend to any other foreign country.

The undersigned thinks that, on comparing the text which is so precise of the above-quoted articles of the treaty and that of the law, the Secretary of State of the United States will find no contradiction. The undersigned declares, moreover, that the Haytian law which permits the collection of charges for visés in the United States by the consular officers of Hayti is executed in all other countries which maintain relations with the Republic, and cannot be considered a violation of our engagements, as asserted by Mr. Langston.

The undersigned deems it his duty to insist that the situation of American citizens affected by the law is in all points similar to that of the citizens of the most favored nation.

He is of opinion that the obligations contracted by the treaty of 1864 have been fulfilled.

The undersigned will await the reply of the honorable Secretary of State, feeling perfect confidence in the spirit of equity which has always distinguished the international relations of this government with those of the independent States of the New World, “doing unto others as it would be done by.” He is authorized to assure the Washington Cabinet of the great respect professed by his government for the international convention which binds the two countries, and the importance of which he moreover fully appreciates; and finally to state that, far from ignoring any of its stipulations in its own internal regulations, its efforts will be conformed therewith, in order to extend the relations of commerce and friendship which exist between the two nations.

The undersigned avails himself of this occasion to renew to the honorable Secretary of State the assurances of his very high consideration.

STEPHEN PRESTON.

A law authorizing the collection of fees for vises in foreign countries by the consuls or commercial agents of the republic.

[The Monitor: Official journal of the Republic of Hayti, Saturday, August 25, 1877.]

I, Boisrond Canal, President of Hayti:

Whereas it is important that new measures he adopted to secure a thorough collection of our customs duties;

Whereas the visés of our consuls abroad attached to invoices of merchandise and other documents, as they are now prepared, render the control which is exercised by our financial agents imperfect and incomplete;

And whereas the charges collected by the consulates is of no benefit to the public treasury:

In accordance with the suggestion of the secretary of state of finance and commerce, and by the advice of the council of the secretaries of state, have proposed, and the legislative body has passed, the following law:

Article 1. On and after the 1st of October next, the following fees for viséing shall be collected in foreign countries by the consuls or commercial agents of the republic:

One per thousand on the amount of invoices of coin. One per centum on the amount of invoices of merchandise.

Five dollars ($5) for the bill of health of each vessel.

Five dollars ($5) for the manifest of each port to which a vessel is dispatched.

Two dollars ($2) for a pastport:

Two dollars ($2) for authentication of signatures and all other documents not provided for.

Twenty dollars ($20) for a provisional certificate of naturalization, delivered to a vessel purchased by a Haytian in a foreign country.

Art. 2. Consuls are authorized to retain 15 per cent. of the above fees.

Art. 3. Shippers or captains must present their invoices or manifests in triplicate for the obtainment of the consular vise, and one copy shall be delivered to them to be sent to the consignee in Hayti, who shall deliver it to the custom-house with his 4 declaration; the second copy shall be dispatched by the Haytian consul, by the vessel on board of which the merchandise shall have been shipped, to the principal administrator of finance of the port of its destination; the third copy shall be sent at the end of each month, through the legation or the consul-general, to the secretary of state of finance and commerce, whose duty it shall be to forward it to the chamber of accounts.

Art. 4. The consular invoice must agree in all points with the manifest of the vessel and the declaration made by the consignee to the national custom-house.

Art. 5. If the shipments are made by steamers which are authorized to discharge their cargo in different ports, the three copies of manifests shall be requireable for each port of destination.

Art. 6. In foreign ports, where there are no Haytian consular agents, the captain of the vessel and the shippers shall make a declaration to that effect by an authentic instrument, signed before a notary of the place, and the consular fees provided for in this law shall, on this authentic declaration, be collected by the custom-house of the port of destination.

Art. 7. The lack of the vise’s above required for ports in which there are consular officers, or of the authentic declaration of the absence of such officers in ports where there are none, shall render the person thus failing to comply with the provisions of this law liable to a fine equal to fifteen times the amount of the charge for the visé.

Art. 8. On the 1st of January of each month (year?) consuls or commercial agents shall send their accounts to the Haytian legation within whose jurisdiction they are, and the head of that legation shall deposit the moneys received in a bank designated by the secretary of state of finance and commerce, who shall use them for the requirements of the public service.

Art. 9. These amounts, with all their vouchers, shall be ordered paid (ordonnancées) in receipts, at the end of each quarter, to chapter 3, section 1, of the tableau of ways and means.

Art. 10. This law abrogates all laws and all provisions which are at variance with it, and shall be printed, published, and executed under the supervision of the secretary of state of finance and commerce.

Done at the House of Representatives, at Port au Prince, on the 22d day of August, 1877, the 74th year of independence.
The speaker of the house:
EUG. MARGROU.
The secretaries:
H. PRICE.
P. E. LATORTUE.

Done at the national house, at Port au Prince, on the 23d of August, 1877, the 74th year of independence.
The president of the Senate:
A. FLAMBERT.
The secretaries:
T. DUPUY.
M. ALEXIS.

In the name of the republic:

The President of the republic orders that this law of the legislative body have the seal of the republic attached to it, and that it be printed, published, and executed.

Done at the national palace, at Port au Prince, this 24th day of August, 1877, the 74th of independence. BOISROND CANAL.

By the President:

The secretary of state of finance and commerce:
T. Carrié.

A correct copy.

The minister:

STEPHEN PRESTON.

No. 264. Mr. Evarts to Mr. Preston. [Document 288]

No. 264.
Mr. Evarts to Mr. Preston.

Department of State,
Washington, January 22, 1879.

The undersigned, Secretary of State of the United States, has the honor to acknowledge the receipt of the note of Mr. Preston, envoy extraordinary and minister plenipotentiary of Hayti, of the 16th instant.

It states that his government has thought proper to transfer to its legation in this country the discussion which has heretofore been carried on with the legation of the United States at Port au Prince, relative to the act of the Haytian Congress of the 23d of August, 1877, authorizing certain charges by the consuls of that republic abroad on exportations from foreign countries to Hayti. With a view to show that those charges are not incompatible with the treaty between the United States and that republic, Mr. Preston quotes several articles of that instrument. These, however, are general in their terms and appear to have no special reference to the question at issue.

According to the preamble, one of the main objects of the treaty was to place the commercial relations between the two countries upon the most liberal basis.

The act of the Haytian legislature referred to cannot be regarded as in conformity with that stipulation. It authorizes the consuls of that republic to charge exorbitant fees on exportations from the United States; among others, one per cent. on the value of cargo of the vessel. This, besides being illiberal in its character, is tantamount to an export duty, acquiescence in which by this government would be a concession to that of Hayti of an authority in ports of the United States which has not been conferred on this government by the Constitution.

There is, however, a clause in the thirteenth article of the treaty, one of those cited by Mr. Preston, which seems to have a direct application to the point in dispute.

If the Haytian consular charges in the United States are so considerable as virtually to be an export tax, this would in effect contravene the stipulation which declares that no higher duties or charges shall be imposed in the United States on the exportation of any article to Hayti than such as shall be payable on the exportation of the like article to any foreign country. This clause is unconditional, and not only forbids this government from levying any such tax, but also a consul of Hayti at a port of the United States.

The preamble to the Haytian law in question expressly acknowledges that one of its objects was to benefit the treasury of that republic. Several of the other charges which it authorizes appear to be excessive. Such charges may not be uniform as prescribed by the laws of different countries. It is believed, however, that no other than Hayti has authorized them to such an extravagant amount as that provided for by the law referred to, or has required an export tax on merchandise. This Department had hoped that the remonstrances on the subject which had been addressed to that government through the United States legation in Hayti would ere this have led to a repeal or modification of that statute. This hope has, however, been disappointed, but as the charges complained of are believed to work a serious discouragement to trade, it is hoped that, as the Haytian Government is understood to be adverse to a policy leading to such a result, it will no longer delay removing the cause of the grievance.

It is believed that Mr. Preston is mistaken in saying that the United States is the only government which has complained of the effect of the statute referred to. According to reports from the legation of this country in Hayti, representatives of other governments have also pointedly complained to the same effect.

The undersigned avails himself of this occasion to renew to Mr. Preston the assurance of his high consideration.

WM. M. EVARTS.

No. 265. Mr. Preston to Mr. Evarts. [Document 289]

No. 265.
Mr. Preston to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of Hayti,
Washington, February 4, 1879.

The undersigned, envoy extraordinary and minister plenipotentiary of Hayti, has the honor to acknowledge the receipt of the note which was addressed to him on the 22d ultimo, by the honorable Secretary of State, in reply to his communication of the 16th of the same month, relative to certain consular fees established by the Haytian law of August 23, 1877.

The undersigned therein cited, in support of his opinion, several articles of the treaty invoked by the minister resident of the United States at Port au Prince, the spirit and letter of which, he maintained, were violated by the law above mentioned.

In his note, the honorable Secretary of State does not consider these articles applicable to the matter under discussion; he stops at the preamble of the convention, calling the attention of the undersigned to the principal object of that instrument, which was to place commercial relations between the two countries on a more liberal basis.

In his view, the law is not in harmony with the preamble above referred to. He adds that the charge of one per cent. on the amount of invoices for a consular visa, as authorized by the act in question, is not only illiberal in its character, but that it may be considered as a duty on exportation; a duty which the Constitution of the United States does not permit the Federal Government to levy, and to the collection of which by Hayti in American ports that government cannot consent.

Yet the honorable Secretary of State thinks that one clause of one of the treaty articles quoted by the undersigned is applicable to the point under discusion. It is that of Article XIII, which stipulates as follows: “No other or higher duties or charges shall be imposed in the United States on the exportation of any article to Hayti.” This clause, continues Mr. Evarts, is absolute; it permits neither this government nor a Haytian consul to make charges of this kind in a port of the United States.

The preamble of the Haytian law admits, says the Secretary of State, that its object is to benefit the treasury of Hayti. Other charges established by it likewise appear to him excessive.

These same charges, established by other powers, may not be uniform; but, in the opinion of the Hon. Mr. Evarts, none reach as extravagant figures as those permitted by the tariff under discussion or impose an export duty on merchandise.

The Department of State, adds Mr. Evarts, thought that the remonstrances addressed on this subject, through Mr. Langston, to the cabinet of Port au Prince, would by this time have induced the Haytian Government to abolish or modify this law. Having been disappointed, however, in this expectation, he hopes that the policy of Hayti, which is represented as being adverse to any measure that is prejudicial to commerce as this measure is charged with being, will not delay the abrogation of this restriction.

The note of the 22d of January, contains the following passage: “According to advices received from the legation of the United States, Mr. Preston is in error in stating that this government is the only one that has complained of the effects of the law; on the contrary, these advices declare that the representatives of other powers have made formal complaint.”

The undersigned regrets to perceive the difference of opinion which exists between his government and the Secretary of State on the question which forms the subject of this correspondence.

It seems to him that the settlement of the question in favor of his government will depend upon the demonstration which he will hereafter furnish, tending to prove that the law of August 23, 1877, “is not in contravention of the preamble to the treaty of 1864,” and that “the fees charged by Haytian consuls cannot be considered as a tax on exportation established by Hayti in foreign ports.”

If the preamble of the aforementioned treaty says “The Republic of Hayti and the United States of America, desiring to make lasting and firm the friendship and good understanding which happily prevail between both nations, and to place their commercial relations upon the most liberal basis,” the same preamble adds, “have resolved [Hayti and the United States] to fix, in a manner clear, distinct and positive the rules which shall, in the future, be religiously observed between the one and the other, by means of a treaty of amity, commerce, and navigation.” (The words underscored are not so in the original.)

As above provided, the two countries, with a view of placing their commercial relations on the most liberal basis, have fixed, in a manner clear, distinct and positive by a solemn treaty, the rules which are in future to be religiously observed by them. These rules are found in the thirty-three articles of the said treaty, the sense of which is too precise to allow a misunderstanding between the two governments to exist on any point referred to in that instrument.

The stipulations of the treaty is a reflex of the liberal sentiments which dictated it; each country nevertheless reserves its liberty in the exercise of its sovereignty as regards the regulation of its internal interests.

The undersigned does not deem it necessary to expatiate further on the foregoing subject in order to demonstrate that the preamble of a treaty can in no case take precedence of its clear and precise stipulations.

The government of the undersigned does not regard as admissible the theory of the Department of State, which assimilates the fees for a consular visa collected by Haytian consuls in foreign countries, however high they may appear to be, to a tax on the exportation of American products to Hayti; a tax which the Constitution, says Mr. Evarts, does not allow the Government of the United States to levy. A tax on exportation does not, therefore, exist in the United States; but the clause of Article XIII, which is invoked by the honorable Secretary of State, leaves it to be supposed that one may be established. It says, “No other or higher duties or charges shall be imposed in the United States on the exportation of any article to Hayti, nor in Hayti on the exportation of any article to the United States, than such as are or shall be payable on the exportation of the like article to any foreign country.”

According to the most generally accepted authorities, this duty is a tax levied by a state on its own productions, on their leaving its ports, for its own benefit, and paid by the producer.

This tax exists in Hayti, and existed before the date of its treaty with the United States. It is also imposed in other countries.

It is not the mission of the undersigned to discuss the economy of this fiscal measure. He thinks that, if the charges fixed by the law of August 23 can be considered as a tax levied on merchandise, it might rather be likened to a duty on importation, not on exportation, especially as it is paid by consumers in Hayti.

His government has never complained of the charges for consular visas collected by American consular officers on invoices of Haytian productions sent from the ports of Hayti to those of the United States, and on other papers relating to the cargoes of vessels, although the charge on the latter is often prejudicially exorbitant. Nevertheless, the undersigned takes the liberty, in this connection, to call the attention of the Secretary of State to a fact which has been recently brought to his notice.

In October last a cask of rum was shipped from Port au Prince to New York; it contained 48 gallons, and was valued at about $1 per gallon. The shipper was obliged to pay the consul-general of the United States, at Port au Prince, $2.50 for the visa of his invoice, which represents more than 5 per cent. As this Haytian production is subject in the United States to a prohibitory duty of about 200 per cent., and as the operation was certain to be attended with loss, the shipper instructed his correspondent to return it to him. On its return to Port au Prince, the producer will again have to pay $5 to the consul-general of the United States, for certifying that the merchandise was discharged in Hayti. Thus a consular officer of the United States will collect a tax exceeding 15 per cent., in a Haytian port, on the exportation and reimportation of an article of Haytian production, which is consumed in Hayti.

The undersigned thinks that he has proved, by this example, which is taken from a hundred others of like character, that, in many cases, Haytian charges in the United States are not more exorbitant than those of this country in Hayti.

As to the liberality of Hayti in its commercial relations with the great republic of the north, it will be sufficient to compare the tariff of Hayti with those of the European possessions and of the independent states of this hemisphere lying south of the United States, excepting free ports, such as St. Thomas, Colon (Aspinwall), and Panama, to see that the principal articles exported from the United States are admitted there at lower rates.

The undersigned will not pursue this subject further; he thinks he has clearly shown that the Haytian law is not a violation of any stipulation of the treaty of 1864. He also thinks that he has shown, with equal clearness, that the visas of consular invoices cannot be regarded as a tax on exportation in contravention of one of the clauses of Article XIII of the said treaty.

He agrees with the honorable Secretary of State that, in the preamble to the law in question, it is provided that a portion of the consular receipts is to benefit the public treasury; in this, however, he can discover nothing at variance with the convention between the two countries or with the law of nations. Is not the same method successfully practiced by the Treasury Department at Washington? In proof that it is, the undersigned would refer to the following extract from the Revised Statutes of the United States, p. 308 [Pg. 308 includes portions of Doc. 167 and Doc. 168], § 1734 (really, § 1733): All moneys received for fees at any vice-consulates or consular agencies of the United States, beyond the sum of one thousand dollars in any one year, and all moneys received by any consul of consul-general from consular agencies or vice-consulates in excess of one thousand dollars in the aggregate from all such agencies or vice-consulates, shall be accounted for to the Secretary of the Treasury, and held subject to his draft or other directions.

The Government of Hayti, moreover, cannot admit that the enforcement of the law in question is prejudicial to the commerce of the two republics. Although the statistics of one year are not usually sufficient to demonstrate the effects of a fiscal measure, the undersigned has consular reports in his possession which show that during the period that has elapsed since the date when the law under discussion took effect, the amount of the imports and exports has suffered no diminution either in respect of the volume of the productions imported or exported, or of the tonnage employed.

If the total value on both sides is inferior to that of former periods, the great depreciation must be considered, which, during this latter period, has existed in the values of American and Haytian productions. It is, moreover, the first duty of the government of Hayti, having respected its international engagements, to protect its own interests on fiscal questions, whether it views them in relation to the balance of its trade, according to the teachings of the school now in favor in the United States, or according to those of the school that has made so great progress in Europe daring the last forty years.

The Secretary of State is certainly not unaware that both the Government of Hayti and that of the United States have each, in the exercise of its sovereignty, modified their tariffs without any protest on the part of foreign powers, so long as their international engagements were maintained.

In making these modifications, whether they were designed to increase or diminish the duty on foreign goods, each government had in view only the protection of its own interests or of its fiscal resources.

As to the verbal statement made to the Hon. Mr. Seward on the occasion of a visit of the undersigned to the Department of State, on the 2d of January last, to the effect that the Government of the United States was the only foreign government that continued the discussion the undersigned has, in confirmation thereof, both the advices which he had received at that time and the following extract from a note addressed by the secretary of state of foreign relations of Hayti, on the 7th of December, 1878, to the minister resident of the United States.

“Have we not,” wrote Mr. Ethéart to Mr. Langston, “also treaties with other foreign powers, and why do they not continue, as do the United States, after the reasons which we have stated, to persist in their manner of viewing this question?”

Immediately after the law went into operation, the minister resident of Her Britannic Majesty made representations against its enforcement, but the explanations furnished by the Haytian cabinet having been satisfactory and accepted, no further action had been taken in relation to the matter at the date of the last advices received from Port au Prince.

The undersigned avails himself of this occasion to renew to the honorable Secretary of State the assurances of his very high consideration.

STEPHEN PRESTON.

No. 266. Mr. Preston to Mr. Evarts. [Document 290]

No. 266.
Mr. Preston to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of Hayti,
Washington, April 4, 1879.

The Government of Hayti having decided to lay directly before the Federal Department of State, with a view to reaching a more speedy settlement, the question raised last year at Port au Prince by the minister resident of the United States on the occasion of the repassage of the license law of October 30, 1876, on August 14, 1877, the undersigned, envoy extraordinary and minister plenipotentiary of Hayti, has the honor to submit the following statements to the consideration of the honorable Secretary of State of the United States:

Article 174 of the constitution of Hayti provides that “taxes for the benefit of the state shall be voted annually.”

It was in pursuance of this provision that the license law passed in 1876 was again passed in August, 1877, for the next fiscal year, as the different license laws had been, both before and since the conclusion of the treaty of 1864, between the United States and Hayti. The last, only with the exception of the decree of Ex-President Domingue (which bore date of December 23, 1875), regulating the same matter, called forth a protest from the American legation, although this law is more liberal than those which preceded it.

The Hon. Mr. Langston protested on the 3d day of May, 1878, against the sanction of the law promulgated in 1876, invoking Article V of the treaty between the two republics, and demanding that the sums paid by American citizens, contrarily to the treaty, should be refunded to them.

In a note bearing date of December 7, 1878, the secretary of state of foreign relations of Hayti presented to Mr. Langston a statement of the licenses which have been established by the fiscal laws of the republic since 1860. It appears therefrom that a difference has always existed between the rates required of natives and foreigners, licenses never having been assimilated to the contributions referred to in Article Y, but rather to the provisions of Article VI: “The citizens of each of the contracting parties shall be permitted to engage in business, provided they submit to the laws, as well general as special, relative to the rights of trading.” Likewise, to the provisions of Article XXXV.

The fact that no protest was made against this fiscal measure during the first thirteen years of the existence of the treaty is a sufficient proof that the American Government did not interpret Article V as it now does, but that it agreed with the different branches of the Government of Hayti.

The undersigned deems it necessary to cite the following articles of the Haytian constitution (1867), in order to establish the interpretation of Articles V and VI of the treaty by his government.

Article 44 says: “The law-making power shall be exercised by two representative branches; a House of Commons and a Senate, which (together) shall form the legislative body.”

Article 73, paragraph 3 (of the powers of the National Assembly, house and senate united), says: “To ratify or reject treaties of peace, alliance, neutrality, commerce, and other international conventions concluded by the executive branch of the government.”

According to the constitution of 1846, which was in force in the republic in 1864, this power of the National Assembly was vested in the senate alone (by Article 106). The law-making power was exercised, according to Article 46, “collectively, by the executive and by two representative branches, the House of Representatives and the Senate.”

As the undersigned has stated above, the various license laws never called forth any objection from the representatives of the United States at Port au Prince, except in 1876, on the occasion of a decree bearing date of December 23, 1875, issued by the executive, and establishing this tax in violation of Article 83 of the constitution (1874), which contains the following provision: “The legislative branch shall make laws concerning all matters of public interest. Nevertheless, all laws relative to the public receipts and expenditures, to imposts or contributions, shall be passed first by the House of Representatives.”

The Hon. E. D. Bassett, who was then minister of the United States, protested against the proposed rates, which established a difference of eight times the value between native citizens and foreigners. He invoked, as does his successor, the fifth article of the treaty. The Haytian Government, with a view to putting an end to the question Under discussion, decide to give notice of its desire for the termination of the treaty according to Article 42, and to communicate this notice to the Washington cabinet, through Mr. Bassett.

The undersigned had several interviews on this subject with the Hon. Hamilton Fish, then Secretary of State of the United States. Meanwhile, the events of the month of April, 1876, occurred, which put an end to the Government of President Domingue. The new administration at once suspended the execution of the decree which had given rise to the protest of the American legation, and re-established the state of things that had existed in 1871.

In consequence of various steps, both official and unofficial, which had been taken by the minister resident of the United States near the department of foreign relations of Hayti, as is shown by the two notes that were addressed to him by that department on the 10th of June and 16th of September, 1876, and which were communicated by him to his government, with his dispatches of June 21 and September 16 of the same year, it was agreed that the Government of Hayti should withdraw the note of Mr. Excellent of the 4th of April preceding, whereby he had expressed the desire of the government to terminate the treaty of 1864, according to its provisions.

It was officially agreed (the undersigned thinks that the Hon. Mr. Evarts will find proof of this in the Department of State at Washington) that the protest of Mr. Bassett should be withdrawn, the legislative body of Hayti having re-established the previously existing license fees by the law of October 30, 1876, which is the same that was passed again in August, 1877, and that occasioned the action of Mr. Langston.

The undersigned thinks he can assert that it was thus decided because this tax on licenses, which is the only direct tax paid by foreigners in Hayti, whether to cities, communes, or to the central government, was considered very moderate.

The undersigned will also call the attention of the honorable Secretary of State to the fact that there are scarcely two tax-payers in the entire republic who can legitimately call themselves citizens of the United States.

In view of the interpretation given to Articles V and VI of the treaty, of the fact that; both before and since its ratification, the difference between the rates for licenses was accepted, of the smallness of the amount, of the very small number of tax-payers who are entitled to claim the protection of the Federal Government, and of the understanding which was reached on this subject in 1876 the undersigned hopes that the honorable Secretary of State will consent to the continuance of the established state of things, as did his honorable predecessor, and that he will instruct Mr. Langston’to withdraw his protest.

The undersigned avails himself of this occasion to renew to the honorable Secretary of State the assurances of his very high consideration.

STEPHEN PRESTON.

No. 267. Mr. Evarts to Mr. Preston. [Document 291]

No. 267.
Mr. Evarts to Mr. Preston.

Department of State,
Washington, April 19, 1879.

The undersigned, Secretary of State of the United States, has the honor to acknowledge the receipt of the note of the 4th instant of Mr. Preston, envoy extraordinary and minister plenipotentiary of Hayti, stating that he had been instructed to discuss directly with this Department the question raised by a protest of Mr. Langston, the minister of the United States at Port au Prince, against an act of the legislature of Hayti which levies a discriminating tax against citizens of the United States engaged in trade in that country.

It appears that Mr. Langston deemed it his duty to protest against the proposed discrimination, on the ground that the fifth article of the treaty of 1864, between the United States and Hayti, stipulates that the citizens of the contracting parties shall not be compelled to pay any contributions whatever higher or other than those that are or may be paid by native citizens.

Mr. Preston contends that this stipulation is not applicable to the case. The reasons which he assigns for this view are that such discriminations were not only made anterior to the treaty, but also even subsequently to the date of that instrument, without complaint on the part of citizens of the United States or their representatives.

The undersigned is not disposed to deny the correctness of this statement. Whether true or otherwise, however, this cannot be regarded as impairing the right to equality in respect to license taxes, which is clearly and positively conferred by the article of the treaty referred to. Citizens of Hayti are entitled to and would receive the same privilege in this country for the same reason.

Mr. Preston alleges that the question should be governed by the provision of the sixth or thirty-fifth article of the treaty, rather than by the fifth. Those articles, however, are obviously general in their stipulations, while the fifth is specific, and applicable to the very case in controversy.

The minister resident of the United States at Port au Prince had occasion during the Presidency of General Domingue to protest against a similar act of the legislature of Hayti. In consequence of that protest, the Haytian Government for the time being gave notice of its wish to terminate the treaty of 1864. That notice was, however, withdrawn by the subsequent government. Mr. Preston supposes that that withdrawal was conditional upon a similar withdrawal by the minister resident of the United States of his protest against the objectionable license law.

There is no proof in this Department, however, that any such condition was authorized or even entertained.

The treaty was concluded under very interesting circumstances, at a critical period in the history of this country. Its provisions are believed to have been well weighed by the parties. They are also believed to have been mutually advantageous in practice. It would be a subject of regret that such an instrument should be annulled when one of its stipulations should be found to interfere with an act of the Haytian legislature which imposes a discriminating tax upon citizens of the United States in that country.

It may be as Mr. Preston says, that the number of persons affected by that tax is not large; still, however small the number of citizens of the United States who may be required to pay the discriminating tax, this government has no discretion to waive their rights to equality, if, as is believed, they are protected by treaty.

It may also be said that if those numbers are few, it may be a matter for the consideration of the Haytian Government whether the pecuniary advantage which it would derive from exacting the discriminating tax would outweigh the inconvenience of hazarding its good faith in violating the treaty.

The undersigned avails himself of this occasion to renew to Mr. Preston the assurances of his high consideration.

WM. M. EVARTS.

No. 268. Mr. Preston to Mr. Evarts. [Document 292]

No. 268.
Mr. Preston to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of Hayti,
Washington, May 28, 1879.

The undersigned, envoy extraordinary and minister plenipotentiary of Hayti, has the honor to acknowledge the receipt of the note which was addressed to him by the honorable Secretary of State of the United States, under date of the 19th of April last, in reply to his of the 4th of the same month, relative to the license law. As soon as he shall have received from Hayti certain advices which he expects from the department of foreign affairs, he will hasten to reply to the honorable Secretary of State.

The undersigned had the honor, to write to the honorable Secretary of State of the United States on the 4th of February last in relation to consular visas. As his government desires to settle this question definitely with the federal cabinet and with other foreign governments to whose representatives have recently joined in the action of the minister resident of the United States concerning the Haytian law of August 23, 1877, the undersigned desires hereby to request the honorable Secretary of State to inform him whether the Federal Government, after re-examining the subject, has accepted the considerations set forth in his aforesaid note in behalf of the fiscal law of Hayti, which, as is shown in that note, is in contravention with no provision of the law of nations, nor with any stipulation of the international convention existing between the United States and the Republic of Hayti.

The undersigned avails himself of this occasion to renew to the honorable Secretary of State of the United States the assurances of his highest consideration.

STEPHEN PRESTON.

No. 269. Mr. Evarts to Mr. Preston. [Document 293]

No. 269.
Mr. Evarts to Mr. Preston.

Department of State,
Washington, June 13, 1879.

The undersigned, Secretary of State of the United States, has the honor to acknowledge the receipt of the note of Mr. Preston, envoy extraordinary and minister plenipotentiary of Hayti, of the 28th ultimo.

In answer to that part of it which relates to the authentication by consular officers of Hayti in this country of the invoices of the cargoes of vessels bound to the ports of that republic, the undersigned has the honor to state that the charge of one per cent. on values for that proceeding is, after the most deliberate consideration, believed to be unduly exorbitant and tantamount to an export tax, which it does not comport with the dignity of this government to allow to be exacted by any foreign authority in the United States.

It seems plain that even if the exaction, in the form in which it is imposed, however moderate its amount may be, were once to be acquiesced in, this would be a bar to any objection which this government might make if the consular fee were to be much augmented. The inexpediency of subjecting exports from this Country to Hayti to a tax of the kind may be further illustrated by the fact that, owing to the dangers of the sea and other causes, many cargoes do not reach their destination.

The Government of the United States is, by its Constitution, expressly prohibited from levying an export tax. This right of sovereignty having, therefore, been denied, that government cannot allow it to be exercised here, in substance or in form, by any foreign power.

The right of the Haytian Government, at its discretion, so far as this? may not have been limited by treaty, to impose duties on the cargoes of vessels from this country arriving in Haytian ports, is not denied.

It is true that it is an axiom in political economy that all duties are ultimately paid by the consumer. This truism, however, does not counteract or mitigate the grievance of winch we complain in this case, that the consular fee exacted in our ports is in its form derogatory to the sovereignty of the United States. It is hoped, therefore, that the Haytian Government will see the expediency of changing its regulation upon that subject without any unnecessary delay.

The undersigned avails himself of this occasion to offer to Mr. Preston a renewed assurance of his very high consideration.

WM. M. EVARTS.

Italy.Italy.

[294] . Mr. Marsh to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United Stated, Rome, October 27, 1878. (Received November 18.)

[295] . Mr. Marsh to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Rome, November 19, 1878. (Received December 7.)

[296] . Mr. Marsh to Mr. Évarts.

Legation of the United States, Rome, November 30, 1878.

[297] . Mr. Marsh to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Rome, December 10, 1878. (Received December 30.)

[298] . Mr. Marsh to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Rome, March 31, 1879. (Received April 17.)

[299] . Mr. Marsh to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Rome, July 16, 1879. (Received August 4.)

[300] . Mr. Wurts to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Rome, September 14, 1879. (Received October 4.)

No. 270. Mr. Marsh to Mr. Evarts. [Document 294]

No. 270.
Mr. Marsh to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United Stated,
Rome, October 27, 1878. (Received November 18.) No. 796.]

Sir: The retirement of Count Corti from the ministry of foreign affairs, and the assumption of that department by Mr. Cairoli, president of the council, which you have no doubt learned from the telegraphic dispatches of the journals, have been officially announced to the legation, and the vacancies created by resignations of other ministers have been filled, so that the cabinet is now completely reorganized.

The resignations of Count Corti and other retiring ministers have been occasioned by the promulgation of a ministerial policy, in which they are not prepared to concur, in a recent speech of the president of the council at Pavia, but they have not, individually or collectively, made public the objections to the policy proposed by Mr. Cairoli. The speech has not yet appeared in a pamphlet, or other convenient form for perusal, but I will send you copies as soon as they are issued in such form.

The speech, though satisfactory to very many, is more or less freely criticised by influential journals of both parties, but it seems to be understood that the ministry, though certain to be opposed by some of its former conspicuous partisans, will have a parliamentary majority at the next session of the national legistature, or at least at its commencement.

The points which will be most warmly contested are the proposed extension of the elective franchise, and the reduction and final abolition of the macinato or grist-tax; but there are other questions which may prove embarrassing, such as the liberty of association, or of forming clubs and holding public meetings for the discussion of political questions; the measures to be taken for increased security of life and property; the financial condition of the municipalities, many of which are greatly embarrassed; the increase or reduction of the army and navy; and the relief of the industries of the country from a paralyzing taxation, are all exciting and difficult topics. It is, of course, impossible to predict how parties will divide upon all these questions, and the ministry is less sure of a strong support in the Senate than in the Chamber of Deputies, but the more liberal features of Mr. Cairoli’s proposed policy will, I think, be carried out.

I have, &c.,

GEORGE P. MARSH.

No. 271. Mr. Marsh to Mr. Evarts. [Document 295]

No. 271.
Mr. Marsh to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Rome, November 19, 1878. (Received December 7.) No. 798.]

Sir: In anticipation of your telegram of congratulation received yesterday, I had, at an earlier hour, repaired to the foreign office and expressed, to Count Maffei, acting minister of foreign affairs, what I was sure must be the sentiments of the Government and people of the United States on the escape of His Majesty King Humbert from the nefarious attempt upon his life, which has so deeply touched not only his people, but the entire civilized world, so far as the knowledge of it has yet reached. Upon receipt of the intelligence of the event at Rome, M. de Kendell, ambassador of Germany and head of the diplomatic corps at this capital, telegraphed to Mr. Cairoli the congratulations of his colleagues, both on the escape of the King and upon the part which Mr. Cairoli himself had so happily played in defending his majesty against the attack of the assassin.

Upon the first announcement of this event, the feeling of satisfaction at the King’s escape overpowered for the moment the sentiment of horror which the crime now so well calculates to excite, but the deliberate character of the act and its close resemblance to other recent attempts of the same sort are now producing a sense of insecurity and alarm, which cannot fail to be augmented by the atrocious violence perpetrated at Florence on occasion of the demonstration of popular loyalty and gratification at the failure of the detestable act of which the King-was the intended victim.

That the assassin was the instrument of an international or other treasonable conspiracy does not yet appear, and so far as is now known, his crime is an isolated manifestation of the tendencies of certain social influences which seem to be everywhere in action. These influences, though productive of the same effects in Italy as elsewhere, are by no means to be ascribed altogether to the same causes. The Italian people, of the class most easily tempted to crimes of violence, are little influenced by theories as to the rights of man and the abuses of the existing order of society, and are generally moved by personal resentment or cupidity to acts of vengeance or plunder. Something, however, of what is vaguely called internationalism, has found its way among the inferior ranks in Italy, and the apostles of the disorganizing doctrines embraced in that designation are aided by influences, one of which may be said to be peculiar to the kingdom, and to others which are operating at this moment with greater intensity in Italy than in any other country known to me. The first of these causes is the impression produced by the incessant attacks of the partisans of the lately deposed rulers of the country, both lay and ecclesiastical, upon the family of Savoy and their government, as spoilers and usurpers, which, in a large number of citizens of every rank, have prevented the development of a feeling of loyalty to the dynasty, as a rightful depository of the supreme authority, and deprived it of the reverence with which public opinion in many monarchical countries invests loyalty, as in some sort a sacred institution.

* * * * * * *

I have, &c.,

GEORGE P. MARSH.

No. 272. Mr. Marsh to Mr. Évarts. [Document 296]

No. 272.
Mr. Marsh to Mr. Évarts.

Legation of the United States,
Rome, November 30, 1878. No. 800.]

Sir: Their Majesties the King and the Queen of Italy made their solemn entry into Rome after their royal progress through the principal provinces of the kingdom, on Sunday, the 24th instant, and were received with great demonstrations of enthusiasm by a vast concourse lining all the streets through which they passed. On Monday evening there was a torch light procession of the citizens and a great open-air concert in front of the Palace of the Quirinal, both of which drew together a multitude of very man thousand people. Of course, every precaution was taken for the safety of their majesties and attendants, as well as the general public security, and there was no disturbance of the public peace. There had been for several days great apprehension of some new attempt against the life of the King, and there were numerous rumors of the detection of conspiracies for that purpose, most of which were, no doubt wholly unfounded, though some of them were based on circumstances, such as seditious placards posted on walls, and the like, which led to many arrests by the police. The assassin who attempted the King’s life at Naples has been subject to repeated interrogatories, according to the custom of the country, but his answers do not appear to have disclosed any fact tending to show that he was the instrument of a conspiracy, but it is abundantly proved that he was an habitual reader of international and socialistic publications. The explosion of bombs with fatal effect at Florence and at Pisa, without serious injury, and the attempt at breaking into the arsenal at Pesaro, seem to be of a more systematic character, and they tend to prove that anarchical associations and their teachings have produced greater effects on the populace than had been supposed, though thus far the facts made known to the public are too indefinite and uncertain to furnish the means of tracing the responsibility of these acts to their sources, unless it is to be found in the causes to which I referred in my dispatch No. 798.

There are, however, local influences in operation in many of the municipalities which tend to aggravate the social and political evils of the present crisis. I refer especially to the financial embarrassment of several important towns, among which the virtual bankruptcy of Florence is the most serious. That city has been burdened with a considerable debt for several years, and the expense of the material improvements, designed mainly to render the town more eligible as a permanent capital of the kingdom, and other public works, has augmented the liability of that city enormously. The debt of Florence is now thirty-five or forty millions of dollars. The city is almost without industry, commerce, or great private wealth, and it has scarcely any resources but the octroi tax which falls far short of what is required to cover the ordinary expenses of the municipality and interest of the debt. It is generally admitted that the the nation ought to remunerate the city for the expenses properly and judiciously incurred in improvements made with reference to its new character as the national seat of government, but it is not probable that the government will assume the half of the city’s debt, and there are no visible means of meeting the remainder. Under these circumstances the employment of a large number of laborers in the service of the city has been discontinued. The savings-bank has suspended payments, and the distress among the poorer classes is extreme. Mere repressive measures are ineffectual to calm the public discontent, but for the present no other steps appear to be in serious contemplation.

The wound received by Mr. Cairoli in the defense of the King against the assassin has been attended with unfavorable symptoms, and the minister is not able to attend to the duties of his office. It is rumored that Mr. Depretis will relieve him of the burden of the portfolio of foreign affairs, and a strong opposition to the ministry seems to be forming, which may lead to a modification if not a general change of the cabinet.

* * * * * * *

I have, &c.,

GEORGE P. MARSH.

No. 273. Mr. Marsh to Mr. Evarts. [Document 297]

No. 273.
Mr. Marsh to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Rome, December 10, 1878. (Received December 30.) No. 802.]

Sir: The liberal Italian ministry, which came into power with so large a majority in 1876, and, after modifications, had still retained the control of the Chamber of Deputies, was defeated last evening in the lower house by a majority of about 70 votes on a resolution of confidence and approval. It is announced that the cabinet advised a dissolution of the Parliament and a new election, and, in the alternative, offered the resignation of the ministers. The decision of the King is not yet known and probably may be delayed for some days.

The question most prominent in the discussions which have terminated in this result was whether the ministry may and ought to dissolve political meetings and prohibit political associations for purposes apparently seditious, or merely to punish the members of such assemblies by ordinary criminal procedure for disturbance of the public peace or other infractions of law. The views of the ministry as to lightening the burdens of the poorer classes by the gradual abolition of the grist-tax, and as to the extension of the right of suffrage, had also weight with very many deputies, and personal considerations and private jealousies were not without influence on the result. The abolition of the grist-tax would reduce the revenue by at least eighty millions of francs, and the extension of the suffrage is opposed by many liberals, in the belief that the new class of voters to whom it would be given would be controlled by the clericals and the socialists.

The opponents of the ministry also took advantage of the present state of anxiety and alarm in regard to seditious and treasonale combinations by representing the unusually numerous illegal violences, including the attempt on the life of the King by which the public peace has been lately disturbed, as prompted by an internationalist conspiracy, which the laxity of the ministry has permitted to be organized and for whose crimes it is consequently responsible. The public has thus far little evidence of the existence of such a conspiracy as is alleged, and no proof of its connection with the crimes in question, and it is difficult to believe that this ministry has shown greater apathy in regard to the prevention and punishment of crime than has been manifested by its, predecessors or indeed by the Italian people at large.

I have, &c.,

GEORGE P. MARSH.

No. 274. Mr. Marsh to Mr. Evarts. [Document 298]

No. 274.
Mr. Marsh to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Rome, March 31, 1879. (Received April 17.) No. 822.]

Sir: I have the honor to inclose herewith a copy of my recent note to the ministry of foreign affairs on the; case of Largomarsino, and a copy and translation of the minister’s reply. If Mr. Guiseppe Onesti had had the frankness to state in his letter to the Department of State the fact, which was doubtless known to him, that Largomarsino had still but a few months to serve, he would have saved all parties unnecessary annoyance, as in such case I should not, without positive instructions to that effect, have again addressed the Italian Government on the subject.

I have, &c.,

GEORGE P. MARSH.

[Inclosure 1 in No. 822.]

Mr. Marsh to Mr. Depretis.

Your Excellency: My attention has been again called by the Secretary of State of the United States to the case of Largomarsino, now serving as a conscript in the Italian army, which was laid before the Italian Government by my note of 1877, and I am instructed to make a further effort for his release. I have no new facts and no new legal considerations to urge, but I venture to express the hope that the peculiar hardship of the case, in the ruin of business into which Largomarsino had entered, and of interests acquired in the full belief of legal right, the length of time he has already served, and the circumstances referred to in the accompanying communication from a relative of his in America, may have some weight with the Italian Government in inducing it to take a favorable reconsideration of the facts, and to grant to Largomarsino the indulgence he desires.

I avail myself of this occasion to renew to your excellency the assurance of my distinguished consideration.

GEORGE P. MARSH.

[Inclosure in dispatch No. 882.]

Mr. Peiroleri to Mr. Marsh.

Rome, March 26, 1879.

Mr. Minister: I have received your note of the 15th instant, by which you call upon me again to use my good offices for the release from military service of Giovanni Felice Largomarsino, at present in the Italian army, on account of the serious injury to his private affairs resulting from his continuing there.

I regret very much being unable to second your request, but in the face of the laws of Italy it is not possible to make an exception in favor of Largomarsino. Article 12 of the civil code of the kingdom explicitly enacts that the loss of citizenship does not carry with it exemption from the obligation of military service.

Matters of private interest, which, in fact, are common to all Italian citizens on whom military service is incumbent, are not taken into consideration by the laws on conscription. The royal government cannot, therefore, hold them of any weight. Nevertheless, as I learn that Lagomassina was enrolled on the 8th of January, 1877, I think it will not be very long before he will be granted unlimited leave of absence, as the term of service for the infantry in time of peace is only three years.

Trusting that you will recognize the justness of these reasons which prevent me from replying in a more favorable sense to your note, I avail myself of this occasion to renew to you, Mr. Minister, the assurance of my high consideration.

For the minister:

A. PEIROLERI.

No. 275. Mr. Marsh to Mr. Evarts. [Document 299]

No. 275.
Mr. Marsh to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Rome, July 16, 1879. (Received August 4.) No. 840.]

Sir: It is announced on the 14th instant that Mr. Cairoli, who was charged by the King with the formation of a new cabinet, had succeeded in this task, and so many of the new ministers as were present at Rome were sworn into office on that day. It appears, however, that some of the portfolios are still vacant and there is no certainty when the ministry will be complete.

The grave question of principle in regard to the power of the Senate on bills for revenue still remains, and there does not appear to be much prospect of harmonious action as to the proposal to reduce or abolish the grist-tax, and it may be necessary to dissolve Parliament and resort to a new election.

I have, &c.,

GEORGE P. MARSH.

No. 276. Mr. Wurts to Mr. Evarts. [Document 300]

No. 276.
Mr. Wurts to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Rome, September 14, 1879. (Received October 4.) No. 850.]

Sir: Upon the receipt of your circular instruction No. 686, of August 9, 1879, relating to the Mormon emigration into the United States, I communicated the substance of it in a note to the ministry of foreign affairs. I have since had conversations on the subject with Mr. Cairoli, prime minister, minister of foreign affairs, and Count Maffei, secretary-general of the ministry of foreign affairs.

While expressing interest in a question which has aroused the serious attention of a friendly power, and sympathy with the efforts of our government to check the evil, the minister congratulated himself that the circular had no apparent application to this country. At the same time he did not hesitate to say that all civilized Christian powers should cooperate to terminate the existence of a sect whose tenets are contrary to the recognized laws of morality and decency.

It can readily be said that Mormonism is unknown in Italy. From all the information gathered, it results that no movement of the kind has ever been undertaken in this country. The only instance we have known here of the presence of any Mormon, either as preacher or proselyte, even as a visitor, was last year, when three compatriots calling themselves Mormon elders passed through Rome on their way to Jerusalem.

The Mormon creed is not one likely to prove attractive to the people of Italy, who, ill-disposed to permanently quit their native land, only do so when driven out by misery and the hopelessness of bettering their condition in it, and they rarely leave with the determination of never returning.

Few Italian emigrants go to the United States. During the fifty years from 1820 to 1870 less than 48,000 left Italy for North America, and many afterwards returned.*

The dream of the Italian emigrant is to come back to his birth-place with sufficient fortune to insure the rest of his days in ease and plenty. With this cherished hope constantly in mind, he would feel little inclination to embrace a faith and adhere to dogmas which would close the door to his return; and while he would not be deterred from joining the Mormons, or any other denomination, if sufficient inducement was offered, the most tempting promises of material advantage held out by their emmissaries would have slight influence upon him at the price of perpetual exile.

The Italian of to day is not easily worked upon from the religious point of view; religious enthusiasm is at a low ebb in Italy, and as a people the modern Italian is singularly indifferent to appeals of this kind.

To this general rule, however, an exception should be made in a case which last year attracted much attention by reason of the tragic end of the so-called prophet, Davide Lazzaretti, a sort of John of Leyden of the nineteenth century, who had been able to found a sect over whom he exercised unbounded sway; and the fact that he was clever enough to gather about him several thousand followers is a proof that the absurdity and immorality of Mormon teachings would not alone prevent their acceptance by the same class who became ardent believers in the divine mission of the carter of Arcidosso.

At the present moment, in view of our Mormon difficulty, an account of this extraordinary mania, which took possession of a large part of a rural population, may not be wanting in interest, as an indication of the moral and political condition of this people. I beg, therefore, to submit a brief statement of the facts as found in the relation of Signor Caranaggio, inspector at the ministry of the interior, who was sent by government to investigate the circumstances attending the death of the prophet of Monte Labbro.

Davide Lazzaretti was born of most humble parents in Arcidosso, Central Italy, between Siena and Grossetto, in 1834; his father was a carter, and he pursued the same calling. Tall and powerfully made, quick-tempered, violent, and incorrigibly blasphemous, he made for himself a bad name at an early age. It was after having finished his service in the army that he came across the literature which turned his head, and was the cause of his hallucination: “He attempted to imitate the classics, wrote poetry, dramas, and essays, in which poetry, grammar, orthography, and common-sense were equally wanting;” he pretended to have visions—revelations of the most marvelous character were made to him. At the request of an eminent prelate of the Church of Rome, he put these into writing, and, it is asserted, they obtained for him admission to the presence of the Pope. After this he retired into a hermitage (1868–’69), when the visions and apparitions of angels, madonnas, and saints continued, revealing to him the greatness of his future and the gift of prophecy. Meanwhile his fame spread about Arcidosso; many peasants, even of the better class, declared their belief in this impostor as a prophet, so that on his return home he was met by crowds of persons, upon whom his solemn bearing, his long unkempt beard, but, above all, the mark on his forehead,* stamped there, he averred, by Saint Peter, made a profound impression., He built by voluntary aid a church, tower, and hermitage at Arcidosso, and this church was opened for divine service with the full authorization of the bishop of Montalcino. In 1870 he announced his departure for unknown regions, to there expiate the wickedness of others, and render himself worthy of listening to the voice of God. In fact, he withdrew to the island of Monte Cristo, where, with his visions and conversations with the Almighty, he fanaticized the few fishermen of the place. A few weeks after he returned to the mainland, and on his arrival at Santo Stefano so great was the commotion and excitement among the people that the local authorities were obliged to request him to leave. This state of things continued for some years. The central government was fully informed of its phases, and so long as order was maintained Lazzaretti was little interfered with. He was once arrested for treasonable expressions in his speeches and writings, but the suit was dismissed. Later another accusation was brought against him, that of obtaining money under false pretenses, large sums having been raised for his use among his followers, many of them having in their devotion sacrificed their all. On this occasion he was defended by a person of most respectable condition, formerly attorney-general under the grand duke of Tuscany, who publicly manifested to Lazzaretti the honor and affection in which he held him. This suit was also dismissed.

In 1874 he was again brought to trial on the same charges, and was condemned as a vagabond and cheat; but the court of appeals afterwards acquitted him. He then emigrated to France, where he remained until the year 1878; and, although during his absence the propaganda of his doctrines was kept alive by his adherents, he would probably have been forgotten had he not suddenly reappeared in the month of March, prepared for new struggles and energetic action. At this period unusual agitation was observed among his proselytes; the principles of communism, secretly spread during the past years under evangelical aspect and carried out by force of their social statute, were openly proclaimed by the sect.

It is really strange [writes Signer Caranaggio] to note how Lazzaretti, until this time in entire accord with clerical reaction and the ecclesiastical authorities, notwithstanding his schemes of reform in the rights of the Catholic religion here and there specified in his hooks, it is strange to note how Lazzaretti now changed his tactics, loudly combating certain dogmas of Catholicism, and manifesting the utmost hatred towards the Catholic Church, which he called the abominable sect of papal idolatry.

On the morning of August 18, 1878, with the ringing of bells and the singing of hymns by a population excited to fanaticism, a red banner, with the motto “La Republica è il Regno di Dio,” was raised on the tower of Monte Labbro. A mob, variously estimated at from 1,500 to 3,000 men, women, and children, thereupon descended the hill, in triple file, waving flags; to those without flags, Lazzaretti had given red crosses with the two C’s reversed, symbolical, according to the interpretation of the prophet, of the ruin of the people and of the deluge of blood. As the crowd increased, the general alarm, already great, became greater; shops, public houses, even the doors and windows of private dwellings, were hastily closed. Fathers of families armed to defend their hearths; women and childen, overcome by fright, recommended themselves to all the saints in heaven. The delegato di sucurezza publica (chief of police) and the mayor, followed by a body of carabineers, then met the crowd, and, at great personal risk, exhorted them to disperse; but no persuasion had any effect. Upon this, the mayor having retired, the delegato formally summoned Lazzaretti and his mob to disband; and not only even the three summons required by law, but four. To this Lazzaretti replied, as is well known, calling upon the delegato and the carabineers to surrender their arms; and exciting the mob with the cry, “I am the King! People, forward; defend me; disarm them!” he attacked the delegato, striking him on the head with a stick, while his companions saluted this officer and the carbineers with a shower of stones.

At this point the order was given to fire. Davide Lazzaretti fell instantly killed, and many of his rabble were wounded.

The doctrines of Lazzaretti can be thus summarized. In the early part of his career he professed the utmost devotion to the Church of Rome; his writings were all of an ascetic form. Only in the year 1870, after recognition of his prophetic powers, did his political and social action commence.

His religious code consisted of ten chapters, the most important of which were: Article. 1. The Holy Pontiff of Rome, the legitimate vicar of Christ, shall be recognized as king and monarch above all other kings and monarchs on earth. He shall be the only judge in the strifes and secular troubles among us, peoples and nations. Every temporal, legislative, as well as spiritual body shall be under him.

Art. 3. All church and state property shall be at the disposition of his Pontifical Holiness.

Art. 7. The arms and emblems of the nation shall be those of the Pontiff.

His political code was in thirteen chapters. The tributary system very expeditious; all citizens, except priests, monks, and nuns, and those under twenty or over seventy-five years of age, to pay a tax of from 50 centimes to 6 francs, according to their class, women paying a half tax. The education of children confided to the religious orders; the liberty of the press restricted; public and private concubinage severely prohibited; adultery punished according to the will of one or the other of the couple, even to confinement for life.

His civil code was in twelve articles, relating to taxation, fishing rights, &c.

Neither the spirit of liberty nor of progress was conspicuous in those laws, of which the carter Lazzaretti was certainly not the author.

And, as will be seen by this extract, nothing in common existed between the creed of the prophet of Monte Labbro and that of our Mormon brethren.

Since the death of their leader the sect has not been heard of, and though many of his disciples about Arcidosso remain faithful, it is said, to his memory and teachings, it is believed that his ideas will not long survive him.

In my conversation, with Mr. Cairoli, I took occasion to allude to the aforerelated episode, and remarked that, though there is no cause to apprehended a Mormon crusade in Italy, where as yet Mormonism is unknown, it indicated the possibility of the Italian people being led astray by the enticements of emissaries who might instil into them the spirit of religious exaltation which would blind them to every sense of reason and of right.

I have the honor to be, &c.,

GEORGE W. WURTS,
Chargé d’Affaires.

* Young: Labor in Europe and America, page 626.

* C, two C’s reversed, with a cross between. Besides this mark on the forehead, there were two others on his shoulders and two on his legs.

Japan.Japan.

[301] . Mr. Bingham to the Secretary of State.

United States Legation, Tokei, Japan, October 21, 1878. (Received November 21, 1878.)

[302] . Mr. Bingham to Mr. Evarts.

United States Legation, Tokei, Japan, October 21, 1878. (Received November 21, 1878.)

[303] . Mr. D. W. Stevens to Mr. Evarts.

United States Legation, Tokei, Japan, November 9, 1878. (Recived December 6, 1878.)

[304] . Mr. D. W. Stevens to Mr. Evarts.

United States Legation, Tokio, Japan, September 9, 1878. (Received December 6, 1878.)

[305] . Mr. D. W. Stevens to Mr. Evarts.

United States Legation, Tokei, Japan, November 21, 1878. (Received Dec. 19, 1878.)

[306] . Mr. D. W. Stevens to Mr. Evarts.

United States Legation, Tokei, Japan, November 23, 1878. (Received Dec. 19, 1878.)

[307] . Mr. D. W. Stevens to Mr. Evarts.

United States Legation, Tokei, Japan, December 7, 1878. (Received January 11, 1879.)

[308] . Mr. D. W. Stevens to Mr. Evarts.

United States Legation, Tokei, Japan, December 19, 1878. (Received July 6, 1879.)

[309] . Mr. Stevens to Mr. Evarts.

United States Legation, Tokei, Japan, January 15, 1879. (Received February 24.)

[310] . Mr. Stevens to Mr. Evarts.

United States Legation, Tokei, Japan, January 24, 1879. (Received February 24.)

[311] . Mr. Stevens to Mr. Evarts.

United States Legation, Tokei, Japan, February 5, 1879. (Received March 13.)

[312] . Mr. Evarts to Mr. Stevens.

Department of State, Washington, March 1, 1879.

[313] . Mr. Stevens to Mr. Evarts.

United States Legation, Tokei, Japan, March 25, 1879. (Received May 5.)

[314] . Mr. Stevens to Mr. Evarts.

United States Legation, Tokei, Japan, April 9, 1879. (Received May 5.)

[315] . Mr. Stevens to Mr. Evarts.

United States Legation, Tokei, Japan, May 13, 1879. (Received June 10.)

[316] . Mr. Bingham to Mr. Evarts.

United States Legation, Tokei, Japan, June 16, 1879. (Received July 26.)

[317] . Mr. Bingham to Mr. Evarts.

United States Legation, Tokei, Japan, June 17, 1879. (Received July 26.)

[318] . Mr. Bingham to Mr. Evarts.

United States Legation, Tokei, Japan, July 15, 1879. (Received August 11.)

[319] . Mr. Bingham to Mr. Evarts.

United States Legation, Tokei, Japan, July 16, 1879. (Received August 11.)

[320] . Mr. Bingham to Mr. Evarts.

United States Legation, Tokei, Japan, July 23, 1879. (Received September 1.)

[321] . Mr. Bingham to Mr. Evarts.

United States Legation, Tokei, Japan, July 24, 1879. (Received September 1.)

[322] . Mr. Bingham to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Tokio, Japan, July 26, 1879. (Received September 1.)

[323] . Mr. Bingham to Mr. Evarts.

United States Legation, Tokei, Japan, August 8, 1879. (Received September 4.)

[324] . Mr. Bingham to Mr. Evarts.

United States Legation, Tokei, Japan, August 11, 1879. (Received September 4.)

[325] . Mr. Bingham to Mr. Evarts.

United States Legation, Tokei, Japan, August 11, 1879. (Received September 4.)

[326] . Mr. Bingham to Mr. Evarts.

United States Legation, Tokei, Japan, August 18, 1879. (Received September 29.)

[327] . Mr. Bingham to Mr. Evarts.

United States Legation, Tokei, Japan, August 18, 1879. (Received September 29.)

[328] . Mr. Bingham to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Tokei, Japan, August 18, 1879. (Received September 29.)

[329] .

Tokei, 12th July, 1879.

[330] .

Tokei, the 12th July, 1879.

[331] .

Tokei, the 13th July, 1879.

[332] .

Tokei, the 14th July, 1879.

[333] . Mr. Bingham to Mr. Evarts.

United States Legation, Tokei, Japan, August 18, 1879. (Received September 39.)

[334] . Mr. Bingham to Mr. Evarts.

United States Legation, Tokei, Japan, August 29, 1879. (Received September 29.)

[335] . Mr. Bïngham to Mr. Evarts.

United States Legation, Tokei, Japan, September 2, 1879. (Received September 29.)

[336] . Mr. Bingham to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Tokei, Japan, September 2, 1879. (Received September 29.)

[337] . Mr. Bingham to Mr. Evarts.

United States Legation, Tokei, Japan, September 15, 1879. (Received October 16.)

[338] . Mr. Bingham to Mr. Evarts.

United States Legation, Tokei, Japan, September 15, 1879. (Received October 16.)

Contents

Imperial government telegraphs. (Documents 339-346)

No. 277. Mr. Bingham to the Secretary of State. [Document 301]

No. 277.
Mr. Bingham to the Secretary of State.

United States Legation,
Tokei, Japan, October 21, 1878. (Received November 21, 1878.) No. 885.]

Sir: On the 19th instant I received from Mr. Yan Buren a dispatch of that date, a copy of which is herewith (inclosure 1), in relation to the request of this government, made through the Ken Rei (governor) of Kanagawa, to the effect that all merchant-vessels arriving at that port from Nagasaki should be subject to inspection by a medical officer appointed by His Imperial Japanese Majesty’s Government, and upon ascertaining that the vessel so inspected was infected, or that any persons had died or suffered on board thereof from cholera, that such vessel should go into quarantine, and that neither the crew, passengers, nor cargo thereof should, during such quarantine, be landed, and assigning as the necessity for this action that cholera had been prevalent in Nagasaki since the 2d instant.

You will observe that to this reasonable request the consuls at Yokohama, as Mr. Yan Buren reports to me in his dispatch herewith, were unanimous in consenting that the medical officer might inspect such foreign vessels as might arrive in Yokahama from Nagasaki, but that no further steps should be taken until the consul of the nationality of the foreign vessel so inspected should be satisfied from the certificate of a medical officer, appointed by himself, that the vessel is infected; nor should the same be ordered into quarantine save upon the order of such consul.

I have replied to Consul-General Van Buren that this action of the consuls does not accord with the policy of the United States in Japan, nor with our obligations to respect and observe the laws of Japan, and that the action of the consuls is a substantial denial of the undoubted right of this government to prevent the importation of pestilence by foreign vessels into the territorial waters of Japan, a copy of which reply to the consul-general I have the honor to inclose (inclosure 2).

It will occur to you that this consular action puts it in the power of a single consul to import pestilence into this capital against the law of this empire and the protest of every other nationality save that represented by such dissenting consul!

It cannot be doubted, in my opinion, that the right of the Japanese Government to prohibit and prevent from coming into its ports all ships infected with pestilence, is as clear as its manifest right to prohibit and prevent from coming into its ports the armed vessels of a declared public enemy.

I respectfully submit this matter to your consideration, and request instructions thereon.

I have, &c.,

JNO. A. BINGHAM.

[Inclosure No. 1 in No. 885.]

Mr. Van Buren to Mr. Bingham.

United States Consulate-General,
Kanagawa (Yokohama), October 19, 1878. No. 3549.]

Sir: Being prevented by the storm, which seriously affects my health, from waiting upon you in person to-day, I beg to inclose you a copy of a communication addressed to the senior of the foreign consuls here by the ken rei of Kanagawa, upon the subject of the medical inspection, &c., of vessels arriving from Nagasaki, and about which I wished to converse when I had the pleasure of meeting you. The ken rei’s letter reads as follows: “Sir: I have the honor to inform you that, as cholera has been prevalent in Nagasaki since the 2d instant, I am desirous to have a medical officer visit all vessels, excepting men of war that come here via Nagasaki, immediately on their arrival, in order to question the captain and doctor, and ascertain whether any deaths or cases have occurred on board; and, if so, that neither crew, passengers, nor cargo be permitted to land.

“Trusting that you and your colleagues will concur in this, and oblige me with an early reply,

“I have the honor to be, sir, your obedient servant,

“NOMURA YASUSHI.”

I find that the consuls are unanimously agreeable to complying with the request of the ken rei, so far as a medical inspection of vessels is concerned, but insist that before any other steps can be taken the consul of the nationality to which the particular vessel sought to be quarantined belongs, must be satisfied by the certificate of a medical officer appointed by him that the vessel is infected, and such placing on quarantine or other action must be directed by said consul.

I have, &c.,

THOS. B. VAN BUREN.

[Inclosure No. 2 in No. 885.]

Mr. Bingham to Mr. Van Buren.

United States Legation,
Tokei, October 19, 1878. No. 672.]

Sir: I have your note of this date, in relation to the written request of the ken rei of Kanagawa of date the 8th instant, a copy of which you inclose. This letter of the ken rei is to the effect that the Japanese Government gives notice to the consuls at Yokohama that, because of the prevalence of cholera in Nagasaki, all vessels (except men of war) arriving in the former port from Nagasaki are to be inspected by a medical officer appointed by this government, and if, upon inquiry, such officer shall ascertain that persons have suffered or that deaths have occurred on board from cholera, such vessel shall be put into quarantine, and neither the crew, passengers, nor cargo thereof be permitted to be landed.

I see no reason why this government may not make an order to that effect, nor why such order should not be respected by you and every other consul at Yokohama; I understand from your note that all the consuls at the port concur in assenting to the raedical inspection of such vessels, but insist that no further steps beyond the inspection can be taken save by the action of the consul of the nationality of the vessel inspected, who, upon the certificate of a medical officer, to be appointed by him, that the vessel is infected, will then decide whether the vessel shall be subject to quarantine.

This qualification seems to imply that each consul will decide for himself whether a vessel of his nationality has been infected with cholera or should be required to go into quarantine, thereby substantially declaring that a quarantine proclaimed by this government in its own ports is not to be respected by any foreign vessels, and that quarantine of foreign vessels, under all circumstances, within the territorial waters of Japan can only be declared by the consul of each nationality.

This claim of the consuls severally to prevent a quarantine of foreign vessels in the port of Yokohama does not accord with the declared policy of our government toward Japan, nor with its obligations thereto, and is, in my opinion, a needless denial of the undoubted right of this government to protect its people against the importation of pestilence into its own waters by foreign vessels.

I have to request that you furnish me a copy of any correspondence on this subject which you may have had with the Ken Rei, and also a copy of any quarantine regulations which you may have received from him.

I am, &c.

JNO. A. BINGHAM.

No. 278. Mr. Bingham to Mr. Evarts. [Document 302]

No. 278.
Mr. Bingham to Mr. Evarts.

United States Legation,
Tokei, Japan, October 21, 1878. (Received November 21, 1878.) No. 886.]

Sir: I have the honor to inclose for your consideration, and for such instruction in relation thereto as you may deem advisable, a communication from their excellencies the envoy extraordinary and minister plenipotentiary of the Imperial Government of China to this court, in which the good offices of our government are invoked under the first article of 1858, at Tientsin, to bring about an amicable arrangement between Japan and China in the matter of the kingdom of Lew Chew.

In connection herewith, I respectfully refer you to my No. 844, dated the 2d ultimo, inclosing the memorandum of the Lew Chew officials.

I beg leave to inclose a copy of my reply to the Chinese ministers.

I have, &c.,

JNO. A. BINGHAM.

[Inclosure No. 1 in No. 886.—Translation.]

To His Excellency Mr. Bingham,
Minister of the United States of America:

Sir: The relations between our respective countries have always been those of peace and concord, and since the interchange of treaties, have gone on increasing in intimacy. The first article of the treaty (of Tientsin) contains the following words:

“There shall be, as there always has been, peace and friendship between the two countries, * * * and if any other nation should act unjustly or oppressively, the United States will exert their good offices on being informed of the case.”

Hence, from the rulers above to the people under them, the intercourse has been invariably characterized by sincerity, and there has never been a single word of discord. Ever since our first arrival in Japan your excellency has bestowed upon us, the (Chinese) ministers, the greatest regard, and has treated us with unbounded cordiality, by which we have been most deeply impressed; and have repeatedly represented to our government our sense of the sincerity of the friendship (existing) between our two countries and of the great courtesy shown (to us) by your excellency; and our government has evinced great gratification thereat.

Now that your excellency is about to return home on leave of absence, we have still a subject of importance which we desire to lay before your excellency, namely, the memorial of the Lew Chewan commissioners, Mao Fung-tai and Ma Kien-tsai, in which they state that—

“Japan has within a few years (enforced its) oppressive rule upon our little state, and has taken upon itself to change our old established regulations. The treaty which Lew Chew, in the 5th year of Mien Fung, entered into with Commodore Perry, of the United States Navy, Japan forcibly constrains us to deliver up to the department of foreign affairs (of Japan), and the tribute hitherto paid (by us) to the Chinese Empire Japan has perversely prohibited and stopped. We (the Lew Chewan commissioners) have already represented the state of the case to your excellency and begged you to exhort Japan to allow Lew Chew to remain in every respect as heretofore, and having been favored by your excellency with a personal interview, we (the Lew Chewan commissioners) beg to memorialize the supreme authority of your honorable country in reference to the case as we have stated it, that suitable action may be taken,” &c.,

Your excellency, seeing the equity of the case, will, we are confident, act with magnanimous public spiritedness, which will be looked up to by Lew Chew with the deepest (gratitude) for the condescension, and will be regarded by us, the (Chinese) ministers, as a most distinguised evidence of neighborly kindness.

We earnestly request that your excellency, upon arriving at home, will personally memorialize the supreme government of your honorable country with reference to the present state of the affairs of Lew Chew, and will explain them minutely to their excellencies the members of Congress, to the end that the nationality and the (internal) government thereof may remain in every respect as heretofore, and we the (Chinese) ministers shall deem ourselves inexpressibly favored and happy. In sending this special (communication) we respectfully wish you present happiness.

Kwangsei, 4 year, 9th moon, 26th day (21st October, 1878).
HO JÜ CHANG.

CHANG SZ-KWEI.

A true translation.

Attest:

D. BETHUNE McCARTEE,
Foreign Secretary of Sis Imperial Chinese Majesty’s Legation.

[Inclosure No. 2 in No 886.]

Mr. Bingham to the Ministers of China in Japan.

United States Legation,
Tokei, October 21, 1878. No. 673.]

Your Excellencies: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your excellencies’ note of this day, which you were pleased to address to me, invoking the good offices of my government in accordance with Article I of the Tientsin treaty of 1858 in the matter of Lew Chew, now the subject of controversy between the Imperial Government of China and that of Japan, and also requesting me to represent this matter to my government upon my return presently to the United States.

I beg leave to assure your excellencies that I will, upon my arrival in the capital of my country, take great pleasure in calling the special attention of my government to your excellencies’ request, and representing to the same your wishes, as expressed in your communication, a copy of which, translated, I will also immediately forward to my government.

Accept, I pray your excellencies, the renewed assurances of my high consideration,

JNO. A. BINGHAM.

Their Excellencies Ho Jü. Chang, and Chang Sz-Kwei,
His Imperial Chinese Majesty’s Envoys Extraordinary and Ministers Plenipotentiary in Japan, &c.

No. 279. Mr. D. W. Stevens to Mr. Evarts. [Document 303]

No. 279.
Mr. D. W. Stevens to Mr. Evarts.

United States Legation,
Tokei, Japan, November 9, 1878. (Recived December 6, 1878.) No. 4.]

Sir: An outbreak of Asiatic cholera in Nagasaki, now happily reported to have abated, induced the Japanese Government to issue temporary regulations for the medical inspection of vessels coming from that port to Yokohama and Kobe. These regulations were transmitted to Mr. Bingham by his excellency the minister for foreign affairs on the 24th ultimo, and were approved by him.

On the 29th ultimo, I notified Mr. Terashima of Mr. Bingham’s approval of the regulations, and also sent a copy thereof to Consul-General van Buren, directing him at the same time to forward copies to our consuls at Nagasaki and Kobe.

I have the honor to inclose a copy of the regulations, and also a copy of my dispatch to his excellency the minister for foreign affairs, (inclosures 1 and 2).

I have, &c.,

D. W. STEVENS.

[Inclosure No. 1 in No 4.]

Now, as Asiatic cholera is prevailing at the port of Nagasaki, all vessels coming from that port must submit to medical inspection at Kobe and Yokahama, according to the following temporary regulations.

Article I. Outside of Wadano-Misaki for Kobe, and outside of Yokosnka Bay for Yokohama, guard-ships, displaying signal flags, are posted, and medical officers will board and inspect all vessels coming from Nagasaki, and the said vessels are required to stop and submit to medical inspection. In case any vessel is prevented from stopping for inspection by stormy weather, such vessel will be required to submit to medical inspection after entering the port.

Art. II. The captain, or person who has control of any vessel coming from Nagasaki, will be required to answer all questions by the medical officers and afford every facility to such officers in discharging their duties. Unless permission is first obtained from the medical officers after due inspection, no person on board said vessel will be allowed to communicate directly with the shore or other vessels.

Art. III. When any cholera patient or dead body is found on board, the vessel will be required to anchor at some anchorage designated by the medical officers, and the patient will be removed to the quarantine hospital, and the dead will be buried at some place designated by the medical officers after disinfection.

Art. IV. All persons on board said vessels will be landed at a place prepared for the purpose (Wadano-Misaki for Kobe, andNagawoora for Yokohama), where the disinfecting process will be properly carried out, and all clothing, bedding, luggage, &c., will be delivered to the owners after disinfection. The mode of disinfection for merchandise on board vessels will be subject to the discretion of medical officers.

Art. V. If, after medical inspection, no case of cholera is found, and there are no dead bodies on board, and the sanitary condition of the vessel is deemed by the medical officers to be satisfactory, the vessel will be allowed to enter the port directly. Although no case of cholera or dead body is found on board, if the vessel is in a filthy condition, so that infection is feared, suitable disinfection shall be performed.

Art. VI. After inspection has been finished, the medical officers will give a certificate to that effect.

[Inclosure No. 2 in No. 4.]

Mr. Stevens to His Excellency Terashima Munenori.

United States Legation,
Tokei, Japan, October 29, 1879.

His Excellency Terashima Munenori,
His Imperial Japanese Majesty’s Minister for Foreign Affairs:

Sir: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your excellency’s communication of the 24th instant, addressed to Mr. Bingham and covering regulations for the medical inspection of vessels entering the ports of Yokohama and Kobe from Nagasaki, where Asiatic cholera now prevails. Your excellency’s dispatch was received at the moment of Mr. Bingham’s departure for the United States, hut before leaving he instructed me to inform you that the regulations forwarded to him by your excellency should be notified to the United States consular officers at Yokohama, Kobe, and Nagasaki, as obligatory upon American shipping coming from Nagasaki to Yokohama and Kobe.

I shall accordingly, at an early day, forward a copy of the regulations to the United States consul-general at Yokohama, and direct him to transmit copies thereof to the United States consuls at Nagasaki and Kobe.

I have, &c.,

D. W. STEVENS.

No. 280. Mr. D. W. Stevens to Mr. Evarts. [Document 304]

No. 280.
Mr. D. W. Stevens to Mr. Evarts.

United States Legation,
Tokio, Japan, September 9, 1878. (Received December 6, 1878.) No. 5.]

Sir: On the 23d ultimo his excellency the minister for foreign affairs forwarded to Mr. Bingham a copy of regulations whereby the Japanese Government seeks to control the importation of opium and its sale by foreign apothecaries in this empire.

The several articles of the regulations provide for the vending of medicinal opium by the imperial Japanese laboratories to licensed apothecaries in quantities not to exceed five ounces upon each application; for the resale of such opium by apothecaries only upon physicians’ certificates or prescriptions; for the examination of such certificates and prescriptions by Japanese officials: and for the refusal to sell opium to any apothecary who shall fail to observe the conditions of the regulations.”

The Japanese Government, on the 24th ultimo, and for several days thereafter, caused these regulations to be published in the foreign newspapers at Yokohama. I have the honor to inclose herewith duplicate-copies of such publication as it appeared in the Japanese Daily Herald.

The regulations have given rise to considerable comment in the foreign press here, generally of an unfavorable nature. It is said the regulations, especially article 6, are a violation of the ex-territorial rights of foreigners. I understand that this is the view taken by the British and French ministers, who are directly interested, as of the four apothecaries in this city and Yokohama three are English and one French.

I have, &c.,

D. W. STEVENS.

[Inclosure in No. 5.—Extract from the Japanese Daily Herald, October 24, 1878.]

regulations for the sale of opium.

Permission to foreigners for obtaining opium, for medicinal purposes only, will hereafter be granted by the Japanese Government in accordance with the following regulations: Article 1. Supplies of opium can be obtained only at the open ports and cities in Japan, on application to the imperial Japanese laboratories (Siyakujio) under control of the home department; or where no such laboratories exist, to the local government offices.

Art. 2. Opium will be supplied only to those who are licensed by their respective governments as apothecaries.

Art. 3. The opium to be supplied as above shall, in the dried and powdered state, contain from 8 to 12 per cent. of morphine, and each package will be labeled with the stamp of the imperial Japanese laboratory. The quantity of opium to be supplied at one time shall not exceed 40 momme (about 5 ounces).

Art. 4. Any apothecary who wishes to obtain a supply of opium must apply in writing, setting forth his name, residence, nationality, and date in full, on application, together with the quantity of opium which he requires.

Art. 5. Apothecaries who have been supplied with opium as above provided, shall sell the same only to such persons as are provided with the prescription of a physician, or to any physician upon his written certificate that the same is required for his professional use. The sale of opium to any other person is strictly forbidden.

Art. 6. Any apothecary requiring a further supply of opium shall, on every application to the imperial laboratory, produce a statement showing the quantity of opium previously supplied by the laboratory to him, and the quantity sold by him, and also the total quantity used by him in preparing and compounding medicines out of the amount so received, together with a statement of the quantity remaining on hand.

Certificates and prescriptions of physicians referred to in the preceding article, and also the statement describing the medicines compounded, together with the quantity of opium used in their preparation, as stated in the present article, shall be kept for examination by the officials of the Japanese Government whenever required.

Art. 7. Any apothecary failing to produce the statement alluded to in the 6th article, or who shall sell or transfer opium to persons not provided with the prescription of a physician, or to a physician without his written certificate indicating that the same is required for his professional use, shall be denied any further supply of such opium; and apothecaries suspected of having disposed of opium for smoking purposes, shall also be denied a further supply of opium.

Central sanitary board, imperial Japanese home department, the 24th day of the 10th month of the 11th year of Meiji.

P. S.—The foregoing regulations will be in force in Tokio and Yokohama from the 28th day of the 10th month at this office; and due notice of the time when they will come into force at the other ports and cities will be given at the government laboratory, or at the local government offices in each open port and city.

No. 281. Mr. D. W. Stevens to Mr. Evarts. [Document 305]

No. 281.
Mr. D. W. Stevens to Mr. Evarts.

United States Legation,
Tokei, Japan, November 21, 1878. (Received Dec. 19, 1878.) No. 10.]

Sir: The return of His Majesty the Emperor on the 9th instant, after a progress the longest he has yet undertaken, was made the occasion of a reception of the diplomatic corps to-day at the imperial palace. The representatives of the treaty powers, through the doyen of the corps, Sir Harry S. Parkes, Her Britannic Majesty’s minister, felicitated His Majesty upon his return to the capital, and upon the happy auspices attending the progress just completed. The Emperor thanked the foreign representatives for this manifestation of good will, and expressed a wish for the continued health and welfare of the heads of their respective governments.

The recent progress of the Emperor occupied nearly two and a half months, and during that time he visited some of the most distant parts of the Empire. His journey was first directed through the rich provinces of Joshin and Shinshin to the port of Nügata on the west coast. Thence he proceeded south partly by the west coast and partly by the Nakasendo or central mountain road to Kioto, whence lie returned to Tokei by the Tokaido, the road near the eastern coast.

His Majesty was received throughout his progress with manifestations of loyalty and cordial good will. Extensive preparations were everywhere made for his reception; new roads were constructed, old ones repaired, and fine bridges built; the towns and villages through which he passed wore a holiday dress, and the people collected by thousands, most of them to see their sovereign for the first time.

The progress of the Emperor undoubtedly has a political significance.

The past few years have seen Japan torn by internal strife, and even now the spirit of discontent does not seem to have been allayed. The recent radical changes in the Empire have of necessity borne hardly upon some of the people, and upon none more heavily than upon the ancient military caste, the Samurai. Four rebellions within as many years; the revolt and tragic death of men who were foremost in restoring the Emperor to the full power of his throne, bear witness to deep-seated disaffection.

During all these troubles it has been the first effort of the discontented to impress upon the minds of the people the belief that rebellion was directed not against the Emperor, whom they held sacred and whose authority they did not dispute, but against the counsellors who surrounded him. Yeto made this plea in 1873; Mayebara repeated it two years later, while Saigo boldly declared that the Emperor was a prisoner in the hands of evil-minded men, who did in his name what he really never sanctioned.

To counteract influences such as these, it has been the evident desire of the present ministry to appeal to the body of the nation, and to show them that their sovereign has a strong personal interest in the welfare of the whole people. One by one privileges, formerly the badges of the samurai, have become accessible to the heimin, or lower orders. The army and navy, once peculiarly the domain of samurai alone, are now open to the common people, and the highest offices of state can be attained to by the humblest.

The task undertaken has been one of unification and education; the unification of what were until recently semi-independent, feudal clans, loosely connected by a vague sentiment of loyalty toward a soverieign too far withdrawn to elicit strong personal interests; the education of the great body of the people to a sense of the rights and the consequent duties which are theirs as subjects of the Empire. By visiting their homes, worshipping at their temples, displaying interest in their schools, their manufactures, arts, and agriculture, the Emperor has no doubt created a bond of personal esteem between himself and many of his people to whom otherwise he would have been little more than a name.

While it would be idle to represent Japan as having attained the goal at which she aims, or even as having more than begun the difficult labor of revolutionizing not only many of the customs, but the habits of thought of a whole nation, it will be acknowledged that many commendable measures have been taken, none, I am convinced, wiser or more likely to lead to good results than the recent progress of the Emperor.

I have, &c.

D. W. STEVENS.

No. 282. Mr. D. W. Stevens to Mr. Evarts. [Document 306]

No. 282.
Mr. D. W. Stevens to Mr. Evarts.

United States Legation,
Tokei, Japan, November 23, 1878. (Received Dec. 19, 1878.) No. 11.]

Sir: On the 20th instant the Japanese iron-clad, Hi Yei Kwan, left the port of Yokahama, having on board Mr. Hanabusa, one of the principal secretaries of the foreign office and chargé d’affaires to Corea. The destination of the Hi Yei Kwan is the port of Fusan, in Corea, and it is said that Mr. Hanabusa’s mission is to demand an explanation of the recent action of the Corean authorities with reference to the trade of that country with Japan.

Fusan is the place designated by the treaty between Japan and Corea as one of the open ports. A number of Japanese merchants have taken up their residence there, and a trade, small at first but steadily growing, has, through their medium, been carried on between the two countries. The exports consist principally of seaweed, ginseng, ox hides, and bones, while the imports are mainly of cotton goods and a few cheap articles of foreign merchandise.

The Corean Government has lately, in open violation of treaty stipulations, imposed a duty of 20 per cent, upon both imports and exports. This duty amounts virtually to a prohibition of trade. Continued, as it has been, notwithstanding the protest of the Japanese authorities and merchants, it displays a desire to end intercourse which the Coreans have never pretended to conceal was distasteful to them. The Japanese Government, on the other hand, deeply resents this obstructive policy, and is apparently determined to insist upon its treaty rights, even at the cost of war. It is reported, and generally believed, that Mr. Hanabusa was the bearer of an ultimatum, the rejection of which, it is understood, he is instructed to say will lead to hostilities on the part of Japan.

In pleasing contrast with the short-sighted policy of the Corean Government, as above noted, is the humane disposition shown by some of their nationalty toward the crew of the Barbara Taylor, a British merchant vessel recently wrecked at the island of Quelpart on the coast of Corea. The Coreans have not hitherto had an enviable reputation for their treatment of those who have been unfortunate enough to be shipwrecked upon their coast. But in the case of the Barbara Taylor they acted in a most friendly manner, saving the crew, salving the cargo, providing transportation for both to Nagasaki, and, finally, refusing to accept any compensation for their kind conduct.

I have, &c.,

D. W. STEVENS.

No. 283. Mr. D. W. Stevens to Mr. Evarts. [Document 307]

No. 283.
Mr. D. W. Stevens to Mr. Evarts.

United States Legation,
Tokei, Japan, December 7, 1878. (Received January 11, 1879.) No. 13.]

Sir: Referring to my No. 11, in relation to the departure of Mr. Hanabusa, on the Japanese man-of-war Hi Yei Kwan, for Corea, and the rumored probability of difficulty between that country and Japan on account of the imposition by the Corean authorities of a tax upon imports and exports, I have the honor to inform you that on the 19th instant Mr. E. M. Satow, Japanese secretary of the British legation, left Nagasaki, in Her Majesty’s ship Egeria, for the island of Quelpart, on the Corean coast. The ostensible object of Mr. Satow’s mission was to thank the Coreans for their kind conduct toward the crew of the British merchant vessel Barbara Taylor, to which I alluded in my No. 11. I have learned from a trustworthy source that Mr. Hanabusa’s departure was hastened on receipt of the news of Mr. Satow’s intended journey, and that the Japanese Government ascribe to the dispatch of the Egeria another, or, at least, an additional object to that made public. It does not seem probable, however, that Mr. Satow can, at the most, do more than report to his government the condition of the Japanese colony at Fusan, and, perhaps, the attitude which the Coreans would presumably assume should advances be made for the object of concluding a treaty with them.

There has been a decided change in the tone of the Japanese press with reference to the Corean question since last I wrote upon this subject. I inclose an extract from the Nichi Nichi Shinbun, the semiofficial organ of the government, in which the writer argues that the independence of Corea is necessary to the well-being of Japan; that friendly relations should be maintained with the Coreans, and that, while they must not be allowed to continue their obstructive policy, every effort should be made to induce them to enter into a just tariff convention, by which the interests of both countries will be promoted. The demand for immediate redress for the alleged violation by Corea of the treaty rights of Japan, which lately seemed to be the general sentiment of the press and people of the capital, has given place to milder counsels, and there now appears to be a disposition to avoid anything more violent than diplomatic remonstrance.

A curious feature of the discussion which has arisen upon this question in the foreign and native press, is the allusion made by certain of the English editors to Russia and her relations with Japan. The Russian bugbear, if I may be allowed the expression, has on this occasion been paraded before the Japanese with a solemnity which would be impressive were it not ludicrous.

Japan is warned of the imminent danger in which she stands from her proximity to Russia, and it is intimated, by no means ambiguously, that in these perilous times Great Britain is her natural friend. The manner in which Russia is thus made to do duty on all occasions and under any pretext was amusingly illustrated by a recent article in the Japan Weekly Mail, a journal generally considered the exponent of the cultured English class in Japan. Speaking of the rumor that the Russian Government is about to dispatch several men-of-war of improved armament, &c., to these waters, the editor of the Mail gravely remarks: These news are more threatening to Japan than to England. We can increase our squadron in the Pacific and China seas with ease and give our commerce the requisite protection. But if Russia choose to seize Yezo or the Tsushima group as “a base of operations,” how do the Mikado’s advisers imagine they could stop her?

The fact that the relations of Russia and Japan are most friendly, and that there is not even the shadow of a probability that Russia will perpetrate such an act of gross treachery and injustice as that intimated, seems to have no weight with writers like the editors of the Mail. While, of course, the manifest bias and inconsequence of such assertions are their best answer, it is to be regretted that their constant repetition has led certain writers of the native press to indulge in reflections upon a friendly power which are as discreditable to their good sense as they are to their fairness.

I have, &c.,

D. W. STEVENS.

[Inclosure in No. 13.—Translation from the Nichi Nichi Shinbun (from the Japan Gazette), November 27, 1878.]

Mr. Hanabusa, chief secretary of the foreign office, the envoy to Korea, left by the corvette Hi Yei Kwan. Previous to his departure the Korean Government imposed heavy internal taxes on imports and exports with the intention of causing the cessation of trade with Japan. The merchants in Fusan were much distressed by this new system of levying taxes, and the general notice of Japan has been given to the discussion of measures how best to deal with the Koreans. One opinion is that, as the Korean authorities attempt unreasonably to compel Japanese to retire from their country and to stop all communication by the imposition of taxes, we are justified in threatening them by a display of force, or to compel them to agree to our proposals in regard to the tariff in order to protect our interest and advantages. Others take quite different views, urging that, as Korea is a young country, she does not know what trade means—whether it is advantageous or injurious—and the Japanese may endeavor to lead the obstinate Koreans to follow the example of more civilized nations. Thus, owing to differences of opinion as to what should be done, there is also a wide difference in opinion as to the mission of the envoy, now on his way to Fusan.

We consider that, although the purpose of the envoy is not known, as diplomatic affairs of this sort are kept secret, it may be the object of the government to compel Korea to conform to proposals from us that are supported by a threatening parade of force. This may be, but tariff and trade regulations to promote and preserve mutual benefit and convenience are expected to be arranged by a conference to take place between the envoy and the Korean authorities. We understand this from the reason that, as far we are concerned in Korea, Japan and that peninsula have most important influences on eastern countries, and we must endeavor to avoid any jealous misunderstanding between Japan, China, and Korea, in order to preserve the most friendly relations. The new system of levying taxes adopted by the Korean authorities is not for the purpose of protection, but merely to stop trade. As it is an extraordinarily heavy tax, it must be reduced more or less, but we do not desire to compel the Koreans to adopt a tariff of the lowest rate merely for our own advantage. The general condition of trade in Fusan for the past year shows it to be very dull, although a few kinds of imports and exports are increasing on a small scale. It is therefore hopeless that Korea will become a treasury for Japan in the future. Notwithstanding we cannot abandon this poverty-stricken country if only for the reason that it lies in a position of the utmost importance for Japan, it must not be annexed or occupied by any other power. With this necessity before us, it is most prudent for us to conduct our negotiations in a manner calculated not to inspire the Koreans with hostile feelings towards us. Since the years of Bunroku (1591–’95), in which Hideyoshi made an expedition to Korea, the Japanese and Koreans have been unfriendly; and the latter nation was compelled to sign the treaty of frendship with us against their wish. Let us consider the general feeling and condition of Japan twenty years ago. What aversion had we shown to foreigners? What opposition did we show to trade? On these considerations, we can, without difficulty, found an opinion upon the action of Korea with regard to foreign intercourse. Therefore we have a right to expect that a tariff should be framed for the convenience of both parties, as was done here by the late Mr. Town-send Harris, minister for the United States. This should be explained to the Koreans, for it is an important matter for us at present to let the Koreans know thoroughly our views on the subject.

As we have pointed out in the Nichi Nichi Shinbun of previous dates, the Eastern question has gradually advanced further east, reaching the center of Asia, and it will appear in Korea in the future. For several years Russia intended to add Turkish empire to her dominions and to possess Constantinople. The reason why Russia is so greedy for possession of the Ottoman capital is that the city is so situated as to command the Mediterranean Sea, and it would give Russia opportunities to attack Southern Europe. Korea is the Turkey of the east of Asia, and Fusan is Constantinople. If it falls into the hands of Russia, and her land forces can join the naval transports and navy at Fusan, Russia will then have no difficulty in advancing toward Japan on one side while she can also threaten China on the other. Since 1856 she has extended her dominions in the north of China, and added various provinces in Central Asia, but as she has possessed no good harbor in the east, she cannot satisfy her voracious and savage greed in that direction. In winter Russian harbors in Europe are frozen up, and her men-of-war are locked up for more than half the year. Napoleon Bonaparte said that if he permitted Russia to possess Constantinople, he should secure another ally; but that ally would soon become the sole ruler of the world. From that time no change in the possession of Constantinople has taken place, the integrity of this important position being secured by the treaty of Berlin. If Russia takes possession of Korea in the east of Asia she will be a robber. This matter is a most important question to eastern countries, all of which will suffer by Russian aggression.

Korea occupies an important position in the East. When we have to discuss the question of the East, we must consider by whom the peninsula may be governed in order to preserve peace and the balance of power. If it be found advantageous to leave Korea to govern her own subjects as an independent state, we must then consider under what conditions she will exist. Since Russia first began to cast avaricious eyes upon Korea, several years have elapsed. Glancing back to 1861, the Russian man-of-war Ashirotte arrived off the coast of the island of Tsushima, where the Russians landed and formed camps under pretext of repairing their vessel. This occurred in February. At this time the allied troops of England and France were engaged in war with China. Russia declared her resolve to be neutral, but she was ready to enter into alliance with either of the contending powers whenever she saw it would be advantageous. In order to prevent Russia from aiding China, it was most important for England to station her troops at Tsushima or Korea. Admiral Kazakavitch, commander of the Pacific fleet of Russia, having heard of this movement, ordered the captain of the Ashirotte to occupy the island of Tsushima, where the British vessels followed by command of the minister of England in Yedo. Both the British and Russian vessels stopped several months in spite of the protests and requests made by our government to leave the island.*

This occupation was not ordered by the Russian Government. By this digression we desire to show our readers that seventeen years ago the island of Tsushima attracted notice, as important as Cyprus has lately clone in regard to Turkey. In 1862, the Tokugawa Government sent ambassadors to the treaty powers to require the opening of Hiogo, Niigata, Osaka, and Yedo to trade, to be deferred owing to civil disturbances in Japan. When the ambassadors arrived in England, the late Earl Russell, secretary of state for foreign affairs, persuaded them to open the island of Tsushima to foreign trade; and we read in the London Protocol:

“(The envoys of the Tycoon accredited to Her Britannic Majesty announce their intention) ‘on their return to Japan to submit’ (to the Tycoon and his ministers) ‘the policy and expediency of opening to foreign commerce the port of Tsushima in Japan, as a measure by which the interests of Japan will be materially promoted.’”

On their arrival at Paris, the envoys were advised by M. Thouvenel, minister for foreign affairs, to do the same, and we do not read in the treaty of Paris: “On their return, the Japanese ambassadors will endeavor to induce their government to open Korea to trade”—though these words correctly represent the verbal advice given to our envoys. When the envoys went to Russia, they found there quite different opinions, and Gortschakoff, minister of foreign affairs, said that any such courses must be followed by severe injury to Japan.

From these we can clearly judge the purpose of these countries. They differ in opinion, because they desire to promote their own advantage, not that of Japan. Let us examine what is advantageous and what disadvantageous to Japan with regard to Korea! As the island of Tsushima is in a most important position, being close to Korea, there should be an army and navy stationed there. After that we should teach the Koreans to understand the benefit likely to arise from opening their country to trade. The Korean peninsula must not be occupied by Russia or China. According to the present condition of things the latter country has no power to do anything in the east. Will, then, the Japanese take possession of Korea? This we do not think. Not only is the Korea of no value to Japan, but as it now is it is a perpetual barrier against other nations.

From this it is clear that the independence of Korea tends to maintain the balance of power in the East, and is consequently advantageous to Japan. The most necessary thing to be done by us now is to preserve friendly relations with the Koreans, whom we can gradually lead on to civilization and instruct them to enter into treaties with England, France, and other countries, in order to preserve their independence. As the peninsula forms an important factor in the great Eastern problem, it is necessary for the government to make preparations in anticipation of possible, and indeed probable, events.

* This is quite incorrect, as Sir James Hope, the commander of the British naval force at the time in China, actually forced the Russians to leave Tsushima. It is said he used threats of opening tire upon earthworks which would soon have been turned into permanent batteries. Sir James Hope’s services to Japan on this occasion should have protected him from the erroneous and injurious comment.—Ed. J. G.

No. 284. Mr. D. W. Stevens to Mr. Evarts. [Document 308]

No. 284.
Mr. D. W. Stevens to Mr. Evarts.

United States Legation,
Tokei, Japan, December 19, 1878. (Received July 6, 1879.) No. 16.]

Sir: I have the honor to inclose for your information duplicate copies of the report of the commissioner of the imperial mint at Osaka, Japan, for the year ending June 30, 1878. The total value of the coinage at the mint from its establishment to the above date is, yen 82,785,397.63.

During the present year the principal coinage has been of silver and copper, the amounts being, silver, yen 4,031,345.75, and copper, yen 959,406.43; while gold was coined only to the amount of yen 357,578.

These figures indicate progress in the substitution of coins of modern design and neat finish for the subsidiary copper coinage which was in former times almost the only metallic currency in active use.

The large foreign staff under whom the mint was inaugurated, all of whom were Englishmen, has been reduced to two persons only, an assayer and an engineer.

On page 24 of the report you will observe a notification by His Excellency Sanjo Saneyashi, prime minister, dated the 25th of last May, to the effect that the trade-dollar is made a legal tender within this empire for all public and private transactions. The coin referred to is of the same standard as our own trade dollar (420 grains and 900 fineness), and upon its introduction to the Eastern market met with a similar reception. It has been forced out of circulation by the inferior Mexican dollar, and instead of becoming a general medium of exchange for the trade of the East, has found its way to the melting pot almost before it began to serve the purposes of money.

Apparently not discouraged by this failure to introduce into circulation a reliable coin for the use of commerce, the Japanese Government, as shown by Mr. Sanjo’s notification of the 25th of May, endeavored to insure the domestic circulation of their trade-dollar. But here, also, and in a very short time, they have met with disappointment.

On the 30th of last month Mr. Sanjo issued a second proclamation, wherein it is announced that the trade-dollar is withdrawn from circulation and the silver one yen piece substituted. The one yen piece was first coined in 1874, and was of the same standard as the best Mexican dollar, viz, 416 grains (minimum), 900 fineness. Although this coin was rapidly coming into general circulation, the government, for some unexplained reason, ceased its coinage in 1875 and issued the trade dollar of 420 grains.

As intimated, this latter coin has been under the disadvantage of competition with an inferior dollar, and has, in consequence, been of little use as a medium of exchange. By coining in its stead a dollar of fine appearance and approved standard, but not so much more valuable than the Mexican dollar as to make its conversion into bullion profitable, the Japanese Government has rendered a great service to commerce in the East.

The Mexican dollar of clumsy pattern and varying design, counterfeited both at home and in the East, fluctuating in value as a favorite object of speculation, has become a hinderance rather than an aid to trade. If the Japanese Government succeeds in substituting for it a reliable coin, which shall not vary in value at different hours of the day, as suits the interest or whim of Chinese “shroffs” and “compradores,” it will have conferred a substantial benefit upon all nations trading in the East, and will have ended, as well, one of the most vexatious of the petty annoyances of life in China and Japan.

I have, &c.,

D. W. STEVENS.

No. 285. Mr. Stevens to Mr. Evarts. [Document 309]

No. 285.
Mr. Stevens to Mr. Evarts.

United States Legation,
Tokei, Japan, January 15, 1879. (Received February 24.) No. 32.]

Sir: The regulations for licensing pilots of foreign-built vessels, issued by His Imperial Japanese Majesty’s Government in December, 1876, duplicate copies of which Mr. Bingham transmitted to the Department in his No. 510, dated February 25, 1877, have been revised, as you will observe, by the inclosed translation of a proclamation issued on the 9th ultimo, by His Excellency, Iwakura Tomomi, junior prime minister, which proclamation is accompanied by a copy of the revised regulations.

I have caused copies of these regulations to be forwarded to our several consuls in Japan, and have informed them that the same should be observed by American citizens.

The issuance of these regulations and their proper enforcement will supply a want long felt in this country. The need of uniform rules for the regulation of pilotage in Japanese waters has been the subject of much discussion, and as those which I have the honor to inclose seem well adapted to the purposes for which they were issued, it is to be hoped that they will have the concurrence and support of all foreign authorities in Japan.

I have, &c.,

D. W. STEVENS.

[Inclosure in No. 32.]

Proclamation is hereby made that the rules for licensing pilots for foreign-built vessels, published in No. 154, of date the 12th month of the 9th year of Meiji (December, 1876), have been revised as follows: Iwakura Tomomi Udaijin
9th of 12th month of 11th year Meiji (December 9, 1878).

rules for licensing pilots of foreign-built vessels.

Article I. From and after the 1st of January, 1879, licenses issued according to these rules shall be furnished to persons who follow the business of pilots to foreign-built vessels, and also to all boats used as pilot boats for foreign-built vessels in the ports or pilot-districts mentioned herein below.

Art. II. The control of all matters affecting the business of pilots belongs to the department of the interior, in which department a well qualified person or persons shall be chosen to examine all applicants for examination under these rules.

Art. III. Licences shall be furnished to pilots in the ports or pilot-districts mentioned below in this article, and also to pilots in other places when deemed requisite. 1. The Bay of Tokio. This is bounded by a line passing from Iromisaki, in the province of Idzu, through Kamikomotogima, in the same province, and Hafuno, Minato, Oshima, to Noshima Misaki, in the province of Awa.

2. Idzumi Nada, This district is bounded on the south by a line passing from Mi-yamisaki, in Kishu, to Nihiro Ushiwosaki, in the province of Awaji, and on the north by a line drawn in the 135th degree east longitude, in the extreme north of the province (island) of Awaji.

3. From Idzumi Nada, through the Inland Sea, to Nagasaki.

4. The port of Nagasaki. This district is bounded by a line passing from Fukuda Mura, in the province of Hizen, through the extreme north of Iwoshima, in the same province, by Okinoshima and Koyakishima to Fukabori, all in Hizen.

5. The Strait of Sugaru. This district is bounded on the east by a line drawn from Shiriyasaki, in the province of Mutsu, to Hezansaki, in the province of Oshima; on the south by a line drawn from Otna Mura, to Tabisaki, both in the province of Mutsu, and on the west by a line drawn from Tabisaki, in Mutsu, to Shirakamisaki, in Oshima.

Art. IV. The number of licensed pilots to be provided for each port or pilot-district will be regulated to meet the wants of the particular port or district.

Art. V. An applicant for license to act as a pilot must prepare and send into the department of the interior, through the government office of his native place, Or place of residence, a reliable account of his attainments, character, and especially of his previous course of life, or else hand it directly to the examining official at the place of examination.

Art. VI. Pilots must be full twenty-two years of age, and must have acted at least one year as the captain of a foreign-built vessel of 100 tons and upwards, or as the first officer of such vessel, or they must have followed the sea six years, one of which must have been spent in learning practically to act as a pilot in the pilot-district in which license is requested. They must be thoroughly acquainted with all the harbors, bays, straits, anchorages, and dangerous places in the pilot-district, and also with the principal signals for avoiding dangerous places, directions or points of the compass, the ebb and flow of the tide, tide-currents, light-houses, and the locality of buoys and signals. They must also satisfy the examiner or examiners of their perfect ability to command and maneuver large vessels.

Art. VII. When the examiners are satisfied that an applicant who has been examined is quite competent, they shall signify the fact to the department of the interior, and a license shall be furnished at once. This license shall expire on the 1st of the 1st month of the following year.

Art. VIII. Applicants for the renewal of license shall send in their applications to the department of the interior before the 1st day of the 11th month of each year. The granting or withholding such renewal rests, however, entirely with said department.

Art. IX. Persons who have lost or mutilated their licenses shall make application to the department of the interior, stating the facts in the case, and have their licenses made out anew.

Art. X. Pilots shall pay a fee of ten yen for a license at first and one yen for each renewal.

Art. XI. When pilots are to be examined proclamation shall be made in both Japanese and foreign newspapers at least fourteen days before the day fixed. Said proclamation shall specify the number of persons to be licensed and the place and time of examination.

Art. XII. When the statements or accounts (see Article V) of the applicants for examination are regarded as satisfactory, the names of such applicants shall be recorded in the order of their application, which shall also be the order of their examination.

Art. XIII. Foreigners who shall obtain license to act as pilots under these rules shall have special permission, while engaged in this business, to land on any part of the coast of the empire of Japan and to return to the place from which they departed by land.

Art. XIV. In the pilot-districts mentioned in article III unlicensed pilots, when engaged in piloting vessels, shall always surrender the work to licensed pilots when asked or signaled by such licensed pilots to do so. Those who refuse to do so, or who feign to be licensed pilots or use a forged license, shall be liable to a fine of not more than fifty yen.

Art. XV. The pilot fees fixed in the annexed table are not to be exceeded. For places not therein mentioned the fees are to be fixed according to the distance by fair contract between the captain and the pilot.

Art. XVI When two or more licensed pilots ask to pilot a vessel or signal to do so at the same time, the one first on board shall pilot the vessel and obtain the fee.

Art. XVII. Pilot-boats used only for this purpose by licensed pilots shall be made as directed in sections 1 and 2 of Article XIX, and shall be licensed by the department of the interior upon request, and after inspection. This license, like that of a pilot, is good for one year; renewal is to be requested every year.

Art. XVIII. Licensed pilot-boats, when used for the sole purpose of conducting vessels in the pilot-districts where license was obtained, shall be exempted from all port, bay, tonnage, or light-house dues.

Art. XIX. All pilot-boats shall be distinguished in the following manner: 1. The outside shall be all painted black.

2. The words “Licensed pilot-boat” and the number shall be clearly written in Japanese and Roman letters on the stem of the boat and on the upper part of the large sail.

3. When licensed pilots are on hoard a licensed pilot-boat, a pilot flag shall be displayed from sunrise to sunset on the mast, at the prow of the boat on a flag-staff, or some other places where it may be easily seen. Such flag must conform to the description given in notification No. 1 of the navy department of date the 1st month of the 10th year of Meiji.

4. A licensed pilot-boat containing licensed pilots, both when at anchor at its station or when moving about, shall display a white bright light at the top of its mast where it may be easily seen from all points on the horizon during the night, from sundown to sunrise, and shall discharge flashing lights every fifteen minutes, and at all other times shall display the ordinary side lights in the same manner as sailing-vessels.

Art. XX. When in the day time the following signals are displayed, they shall be regarded as indicating that a pilot is wanted: 1. The ship’s jack or the national flag hoisted on the fore mast.

2. Hoisting and showing the international pilot signal letters P. T.

When the following signals are made at night, either simultaneously or at different times, they shall be regarded as indicating that a pilot is needed: 1. The display of a green light every fifteen minutes.

2. The display of a clear white light after short intervals of about a minute each at the side of the upper deck.

Art. XXI. A copy of these rules shall be furnished to each licensed pilot along with his license; hence, when the proper officials or employer requests permission to examine his documents he shall exhibit them at once; if he refuses to do so, he shall be restrained from acting as a pilot by the department of the interior or have his license taken away.

Art. XXII. This license shall not be lent or given to another. If so lent or given the holder shall be deprived of it by the department of the interior.

Art. XXIII. When in the opinion of the department of the interior a licensed pilot is unable to perform his work or is a drunkard or negligent, or with cause fails to discharge his duties, said department shall instruct an officer to investigate the case, and according to the finding shall restrain him from the exercise of his duties or take away his license.

No. 286. Mr. Stevens to Mr. Evarts. [Document 310]

No. 286.
Mr. Stevens to Mr. Evarts.

United States Legation,
Tokei, Japan, January 24, 1879. (Received February 24.) No. 35.]

Sir: Referring to my No. 13, of date of the 7th ultimo, on the subject of the recent complications between Japan and Corea, and the mission of Mr. Hanabusa to the latter country, I have the honor to inform you that Mr. Hanabusa has returned, and that, in an interview yesterday, Mr. Mori, vice-minister for foreign affairs, informed me that the difficulty between the two countries had been amicably and satisfactorily settled. But while the Corean Government has removed the duties upon exports and imports of which the Japanese Government complained, Mr. Mori said that the question of damages on account of the alleged illegal restriction upon trade resultant from the imposition of those duties still remained open. It is not probable, however, now that the main point in dispute has been conceded by the Corean authorities, that any serious complications will arise from the consideration of the losses which have been sustained by Japanese on account of the action of the Government of Corea.

* * * * * * *

I have, &c.,

D. W. STEVENS.

No. 287. Mr. Stevens to Mr. Evarts. [Document 311]

No. 287.
Mr. Stevens to Mr. Evarts.

United States Legation,
Tokei, Japan, February 5, 1879. (Received March 13.) No. 41.]

Sir: I beg to transmit herewith, for your information, the report of Japanese exports and imports from 1868 to 1878, inclusive. The imports for the ten years amounted in value to yen 246,001,729.02, the exports to yen 190,412,539.24, a difference in favor of imports of yen 55,589, 189.77.

The amount of coin and bullion exported during the ten years was yen 54,505,691.37; the amount imported was yen 19,368,311.32—an excess in the export of yen 35,137,380.05.

The average rate of duties collected by the Japanese Government on imports is shown by this report to have been a little over 4 per cent, only.

In but two years, viz, 1868 and 1876–’77, were the exports in excess of the imports; during the remainder the balance of trade has been largely against Japan. The year 1877–’78 shows the largest aggregate foreign trade, the total of exports and imports being yen 58,841,960.55, and the excess of exports yen 5,024,744.71.

I have, &c.,

D. W. STEVENS.

No. 288. Mr. Evarts to Mr. Stevens. [Document 312]

No. 288.
Mr. Evarts to Mr. Stevens.

Department of State,
Washington, March 1, 1879. No. 414.]

Sir: It has afforded me pleasure to receive your dispatch No. 35, of January 24, reporting the peaceable adjustment of the main question, in dispute between Japan and Corea. It is hoped that the recession of Corea from the position assumed may be indicative of a better disposition to cultivate relations of friendship and commerce with the rest of the world. That it should take a step in that direction with a neighboring people of the same race is a hopeful sign, and it may be that the influence of Japan may make itself felt in the interest of furthering the enlightened policy which should seek to open the hitherto inaccessible regions of the rich Pacific coast to the beneficial tendencies of trade and material development.

I am, &c.,

WM. M. EVARTS.

No. 289. Mr. Stevens to Mr. Evarts. [Document 313]

No. 289.
Mr. Stevens to Mr. Evarts.

United States Legation,
Tokei, Japan, March 25, 1879. (Received May 5.) No. 55.]

Sir: Some time since, Dr. David Murray handed me several documents, in Japanese, relating to the visit of Mr. Townsend Harris, formerly United States minister in Japan, to Yedo in 1857. These documents Dr. Murray obtained from a Japanese gentleman, and he kindly gave me permission to have them translated and to transmit copies to the Department, containing a detailed account of the reception accorded by the Japanese authorities to the first foreign minister who had ever visited the capital or was granted an audience by the Shiogun (Taikun), as well as the memoranda of several important conversations between Mr. Harris and the Japanese officials on the subject of the treaty which he soon after concluded with Japan. The translations which I have the honor to inclose herewith will doubtless possess great interest in your eyes.

The careful and minute instructions given as to every detail of Mr. Harris’s reception in Yedo on this occasion are a curious illustration of Japanese methods even at that comparatively recent time, and also of the importance evidently attached to this, the first visit of an accredited representative of a foreign government to the capital.

It is true that in former times the superintendents of the Dutch Trading Company at Nagasaki had periodically been brought to Yedo, but their journeys were undertaken rather to pay homage to the Taikun than to receive audience from him as the representatives of a foreign state on an equality with Japan. Their visits to Yedo were supposed to be made secretly; they and their attendants were lodged outside of the official quarter of the city, sometimes beyond the city limits, were closely guarded during the whole of their stay, and otherwise received but scanty courtesy from a people by whom official etiquette and its attendant formalities were deemed most weighty and important matters. Mr. Harris, on the contrary, enjoyed every consideration and attention, his visit being marked by all the care as to ceremonies and details which the most exacting critic could have required.

It is gratifying to reflect that this unusual courtesy was first extended to a representative of the United States; still more gratifying to know that the recipient was worthy of the honors shown him; that his con duct was marked by sagacity and firmness becoming his position, and at the same time by such evidences of sincere friendship and generous consideration toward this government and people as have justly made his name memorable in Japanese annals.

The translations herewith inclosed are by Mr. Thompson, interpreter of this legation. The original documents, as I have before stated, were obtained by Dr. Murray from a Japanese gentleman, the successor of the Prince of Bitchu, who was in 1857 the chief of the Taikun’s council. The accompanying copy of a letter from Dr. Murray furnished proof of the trustworthy character of the record.

It is understood that the literary executors of Mr. Harris are engaged in collecting material for his biography. I have no doubt that they would find facts worthy of notice in this account of his first visit to Yedo.

I have, &c.,

D. W. STEVENS.

[Inclosure 1 in No. 55.—Translation.]

visit of the american ambassador (mr. harris) to the castle of yedo in the 10th month of the 4th year of ansei (1857).

30th of the 6th month of the 4th year of Ansei.

Copy of a notice to Inouye, Prince of Shinano.

As there is to be a communication made respecting the visit of the American ambassador to the capital, you are to go at once to Shimoda and have a consultation with Nakaroura, Prince of Dewa, and, if anything of importance transpires respecting the important matter on hand, you are to return and report particularly.

The Prince of Dewa is to remain in office till the second month of next year, after which time you are to take his place.

(Not signed.—Tr.)

14th of the 8th month.

Notification to Honda, Prince of Mino.

The American ambassador, now residing at Shimoda, in Idzu, has desired to come to Yedo with a letter from the President of the United States. A precedent for such a visit and interview is found in the case of certain Englishmen before the cycle of Kan-ei (Before 1620.—Tr.) Besides, it is a universal rule of all countries which have made treaties to receive the ambassadors of treaty powers in their capitals.

You will therefore notify the Tei-sho-shu (officers of the Mikado), for His Majesty’s information, that an audience will be granted here at an early day to the American ambassador.

(Not signed.—Tr.)

Notification to Toki, Prince of Tamba, Haiashi Daigalcu no Kami, Udono, Mimbushoyou, Nagai, Prince of Gemba, aud Tsuha Koetosulce, all executive officers of the Taikun.

As the American ambassador has been granted permission to visit Yedo, you are directed to make all needful preparation to facilitate his visit and for his accommodation while here, as also for his visit to the palace, and for the audience there to be granted with the Taikun and council.

(Not signed.—Tr.)

21st of 8th month.

Copy of notification to officials charged with the preparation for the ambassador’s visit to Yedo.

The present audience of the American ambassador will be a precedent for all foreign countries, and must be managed therefore with the greatest care. As intercourse with foreign nations necessitates the repeal of old regulations and restrictions, the matter is attended with difficulty, and the possible evils cannot be foreseen, you must therefore neglect nothing, but attend to all things with the greatest care as the Taikun’s order requires.

The above was also notified to the members of the council, the coast-guards, and “Ometskes” (superintendents of Nagasaki and Hakodate), to the governor of Shimoda, and to the officials who attended the ambassador on his visit.

10th of the 9th month.

Route to be followed by the ambassador on arriving at Yedo: From the hotel at Shinagawa, along Takanawa street, Hon Shiba street, Hamasugi street, Shibakuchi Bridge, Nihon Bridge, Main street to Second street, thence to the left to Tokiwa Bashi Gate, thence to the right, outside the castle wall, along the moat by Kanda Bridge Gate, Hitotsu Bashi Gate, and Kiji Bashi Gate to the Bansho Shirabejo. (Present imperial college or Kaiseyo.—Tr.)

Route when entering the castle: From the Bansho Shirabejo, by Kiji Bashi Gate, on the outside: along the moat, through Kanda Bashi Gate, to the front of the palace of Saka Saiemonnojo, and from thence, by the side and front of the palace of Sakai, Prince of Uta, to Otei Gate.

Route when going to the house of Hotta, Prince of Bitchu: From Bansho Shirabejo, by Kiji Bashi Gate, on the outside; along the moat before the palace of Sakai Saiemonnojo, in the rear of the palace of Endo, Prince of Tashima, to Tatsunokuchi; through Wadagura Gate, in front of the palace of Matsudaira, Prince of Higo, to the gate of the house of the Prince of Bitchu.

Ninth month.

To the Ometskeis, or managing officers:

When, in a short time, the American ambassador visits Yedo, it will not be necessary to repair the yashikis (palaces or residences of princes) along the road; the temporary board fences may be left as they are. Each householder is to keep his portion of the road swept clean. It will likewise not be necessary to set out the ornamented firemen’s buckets before the houses, nor to place guards there. Travelers may be allowed to pass along as usual. Guards should be placed at the small stations or guard-houses to suppress any disorder, if required to do so by the officers in attendance on the ambassador. Beggars must be removed out of the way.

As to sight-seers, they may stand at designated spots along the road, but are not to be allowed to crowd together at the upper-story windows of tenement houses and like places. As much as possible, all encounters of persons on horsesback are to be avoided.

Great care must be taken by the officials to avoid all noise and confusion on the way. Hence, to avoid mistakes, careful directions must be given even to the lowest official. The foregoing is to be notified to all officers in charge by the Prince of Bitchu.

Ninth month.

To the Inspector of Roads and Accountant:

When the American ambassador visits Yedo he will be attended by the governor of Shimoda and officials of his staff, and will pass through Amakiyama and Mishiina to the Tokaido. Of course, men (coolies) and horses must be provided, and care taken to have the lodging-places and bridges on the way in good order. The local officials on the way shall send one or two under officers to do duty at the estates of the Hata-motos. The retainers of princes, however, shall be called out to perform duty, preserve order, and to direct the village officials and hotel-keepers how to act. They must take care that travelers create no disturbance. Notice is to be given to the local officers on the Tokaido (main road) by the road inspectors, and to the local officers on the branch roads by the accountant.

Ninth month.

(Not signed—Tr.)

To the same:

A relay of coolies for special service shall be provided at all the stopping-places on the way when the American ambassador visits Yedo, and places of refuge must be provided in the vicinity to be resorted to in case of lire, &c. Houses and fences may be left as they are, without decoration, but each householder must keep the space in front of his house swept clean.

Travelers must be allowed to pass on their way freely. On the way the town officials shall disperse crowds of on-lookers when directed to do so by the attending officials.

The people must not be allowed to gather in front of shops or at second-story windows on the way to look on as if some unusual thing was taking place.

The substance of the above shall be notified to the local officials along the main road by the road inspector, and to those along the branch roads by the accountant.

The foregoing is issued by the Prince of Bitchu.

9th month.

Letter (with inclosure) from Hotta, Prince of Bitchu, to Honda, Prince of Mino, dated 7th of 10th month.

Give notice, without fail, to the officers of the Mikado’s household that the American ambassador and one interpreter, attended by the officials of the governor of Shimoda, are about to leave Shimoda, and, if not delayed on the way, will reach this place (in a few days).

10th month.

(Not signed.—Tr.)

Memorandum dated 12th of 10th month

On the 11th of the 10th month was informed by the governor of Shimoda that the American ambassador will reach Yedo the 14th instant.

Notice to the overseer of the Buddhist and Shinto Temples, and to the officers charged with making preparation for the ambassador’s visit.

Should anything happen to the quarters of the American ambassador while stopping in Yedo, he is to be removed to the temple of Tenryoji, in Yotsuya, or to the temple of Shoshinji, in Fukagawa.

To the officers charged with making preparations for the ambassador’s visit:

The notice immediately preceding has been given to the overseer of temples.

All the foregoing delivered by the Prince of Bitchu.

10th month.

(Not signed.)

Notice to the “Ometske,” Toki, Prince of Tamba, dated 15th of 10th month.

The cedar chest or box to be delivered as directed when the ambassador reaches the city.

The foregoing delivered by the Prince of Bitchu,

10th month.

To the American ambassador, dated the 16th of the 10th month.

To Townsend Harris,
United States Minister Plenipotentiary and Consul-General:

I have received your letter of the 14th instant, and am happy to learn that you have reached this place without delay on the way, and understand that you come as the bearer of a letter from the President of the United States. Arrangements are making for your audience in the castle on the 21st instant at 9 a.m.

Very respectfully,

HOTTA,
Prince of Bitchu.

16th of 10th month of 4th yr. Ansei.

Memorandum dated the 17th of 10th month.

The American ambassador goes to the house of the Prince of Bitchu on the 18th, and on the 21st will have his audience with the Taikun in the castle.

Notice to the “Ometskes” (superintending officials) issued by the Prince of Bitchu.

As the American ambassador is to have his audience in the castle on the 21st, notice is to be given to all who are to attend him to be in readiness by 9 a.m. of the day appointed.

17th of the 10th month.

Letter to Mr. Townsend Harris, United States Minister Plenipotentiary and Consul-General.

I have received translations in Japanese and Dutch of your address and of the President’s letter to the Taikun. I will be happy to see you at my house to-morrow, the 18th, and will send a guide to conduct you.

(Signed)

Hotta, Prince of Bitchu.

17th of 10th month of 4th year of Ansei.

The American ambassador’s entry into the castle on the 21st of the 10th month.

The officials in attendance all to wear flowing court-dresses. The governor of Shimoda is to precede the ambassador. The interpreter will get out of his kago at the dismounting place, in front of the main entrance. The ambassador will get out of his kago at the bridge called Gegobashi. Thence he shall be conducted by the governor of Shimoda to the top of the front steps. Here two ometskes, or superintending officials, will come out to meet him, and after a salutation will conduct him to his seat in the first room, after entering at the side of the Chinese screen facing the north. The interpreter shall be seated in the same room on the west side. For both, chairs shall be provided. The governor of Shimoda shall be along with them, and a table shall be placed at the side of the ambassador on which to place the President’s letter.

Here all the officers charged with making preparations shall pay their respects to the ambassador.

Before the Taikun comes out the two superintending officials shall conduct the ambassador from the first room to the room adjoining the obiroma, or wide room, and the kurumayose (Taikun’s place for entering his carriage), called the kari hikaijo.

The interpreter shall follow with the letter of the President. Here also chairs shall be provided. The governor of Shimoda shall be with them. The superintending officials shall have seats assigned them in the passage by the ninoma (or second room). The Taikun will now enter the obiroma (or wide room), wearing a takai eboshi (high hat) and a koshidare (loose robe). Thence he will pass to his seat in the gojodan (upper room) preceded by Naito, Prince of Kishu, bearing his long sword, and Iura, Prince of Harima, bearing his short sword.

The upper, middle, and lower rooms, and also the passage shall be provided with sudare (curtains or hangings). The curtains at the two sides of the upper room shall be down, those of the middle room shall be lifted, and all the other curtains shall be rolled up. The personal servants of the Taikun, his familiar retainers, and sword-bearers shall be seated behind him.

On the west side of the lower room to within one yard of the middle room the tamarizume dokaku (guardians of the Taikun’s person) shall be seated, while on the east side of the same room the princes shall be seated in order, beginning with the Prince of Bitchu one yard from the middle room.

In the passage to the west of the middle room the Wakadoshiyori (councilors) and the familiar servants of the second class shall be seated. The members of the high families shall be seated in order in the passage west of the lower room.

In the passage south of the second and third rooms the various household retainers and officials of the Taikun, with their first-born sons and heirs, shall be seated on mats. In the second room the hereditary princes of the first rank shall be seated on the north side, and those of the second rank on the east side or end, together with their oldest sons. In the third room those officials who are admitted into the Taikun’s presence, and also his physicians, shall be seated.

When the Taikun has taken his seat the Ometske, or superintending officer, shall give a signal to the governor of Shimoda, who shall conduct the ambassador along the passage and stop alongside the second room. The interpreter shall follow, bearing the President’s letter.

The Prince of Bitchu shall then, having ascertained that the Taikun is ready, advance to the entrance of the lower room, the sliding doors of which shall be removed, and shall signal the superintending officer and the kimoiri, or introducing officer, to introduce the ambassador, and shall then return to his place.

The introducer shall now advance two yards, or mats, into the lower room, and the superintending officer shall make a sign to the governor of Shimoda, who shall bring forward the ambassador and then take his place in the passage near the entrance of the lower room.

The ambassador shall then advance two mats, or yards, from the entrance of the lower room and bow, when the introducer shall announce as follows: “The ambassador of the President of the United States of America.” The interpreter, bearing the letter, shall stand in the passage. After the preceding announcement the ambassador shall advance to the fourth mat and bow again. He shall then advance to within three mats of the upper end of the room, bow respectfully, and deliver his address and bow. The Taikun shall then reply.

The interpreter shall then come forward with the letter, deliver it to the ambassador, and return to his place in the passage. Then the Prince of Bitchu shall rise, receive the letter from the ambassador, and resume his seat, near which a table shall be placed to lay the letter on. The ambassador shall then bow and retire as he came, bowing at the fourth and second mats, after which he shall be attended by the governor of Shimoda, the interpreter, and two attending officers back to the waiting-room. At the same time one of the Wakadoshiyori (councilors) shall enter the lower room from the west passage and receive the President’s letter from the Prince of Bitchu, return with it to his seat, and there deliver it to the first secretary.

The sliding doors of the upper room shall now be removed, and the Taikun shall stand at the partition of the middle and lower rooms and receive the salutations of the hereditary princes and then retire.

The ambassador shall next be conducted back to the front room by the governor of Shimoda and two superintending officials.

After this the ambassador and interpreter shall be brought back to the waiting-room by the two superintending officers. The Prince of Bitchu and other princes of the council shall take their places at the west end of the second room, the private officers of the Taikun shall stand on the north side of the third room, and the managers of the audience shall be on the south side of the same room. The superintending officers and governor shall bring forward the ambassador and interpreter. The ambassador and governor of Shimoda shall enter the second room. The interpreter shall stand in the third room

A present of fifteen suits of seasonable clothing is now made to the ambassador from, the Taikun.

A porter dressed in the Taikun’s livery shall bring in the Taikun’s present and place it in the center of the second room. The Prince of Bitchu shall tell the ambassador that this is a present from the Taikun. The ambassador shall signify his acceptance and express his thanks. The Prince of Bitchu shall next inform the ambassador that a present is also to be given to the interpreter, for which also he will express his thanks. The Prince of Bitchu shall then announce that a dinner is to be provided by the Taikun. The ambassador shall again thank the prince and withdraw to the fourth room, conducted by the two superintending officers. The dinner shall be served in the lodging-place, and the gift to the interpreter will be delivered by the governor of Shimoda.

The Taikun’s address will be given to the interpreters, and by them be rendered for the ambassador, whose address shall be translated and given to, the governor of Shimoda, to be by him made known to the Taikun.

The managers and the Taikun’s private officers shall next take their stand on the west side of the fourth room, and the princes of the council shall stand at the south end facing the north to take leave. When the ambassador departs they shall follow him to the passage, when both parties shall stand and salute each other once more. The governor of Shimoda and superintending officials shall next conduct the ambassador and interpreter back to the front room. The managers shall pay their respects in the front room, as was the case in the morning.

When the ambassador leaves the superintending officers shall conduct him to the front steps, and the ambassador shall depart preceded by the governor of Shimoda, as in the morning. The “Goshokumi “guards shall be on duty in the “Goshoin” guardroom, and the “Ogoban” guards in the “Obiroma” (wide room) and the fourth room, and shall withdraw after the ambassador has departed.

Bill of fare of the dinner given to the American ambassador on the 21st of the 10th month.

First course on an unvarnished table, the plates or dishes of painted porcelain, the cups lacquered on the outside and painted red in the inside.

1st. A Tai fish (the Serramis Margmalis), dressed in Java style. Oysters and Tai. Sliced Bilone gigantea. Chesnuts and garlic. Citrus japonica. Bean sauce. The above served in vinegar.

soups.

Oysters and Tai. Rice soup. Small turnips. Small mushrooms. Asparagus.

pickles.

Egg-plant in bean-sauce. Smooth cucumbers. Small radishes.

baked things.

Biche-de-mer. Duck cooked in oil. Small sugar potatoes. White rice.

Second course.—Dishes and cups as above.

Boiled lobsters. Sliced fish. Mushrooms. Mustard and vinegar. Boiled plums sprinkled with dried “katsuwo “(fish grated).

Soup of Tai sliced and served with bean-sauce and lemon-juice. Pickled salmon served on a Corean dish.

Third course.—Table and dishes as before.

Gold fish with its roe. Sliced eels. Sliced fish and sauce. Omelet. Mushrooms. Lotus bulbs. Tai. Small lobsters. Horseradish and bean-sauce. Oyster soup.

Fourth course.—Table and dishes as before.

Fish sausage. Sweet Tai in bean sauce. Mountain potatoes in the skin. Sliced Tai raw. Boiled clams. Stuffed goose. Mashed eggs. Mushrooms. Celery.

Fifth course.—Table and dishes as before.

A Tai on a large colored dish. A lacquered wine cup on a new tray. A silver pot for warming “sake” (wine”) on a tray as above. Cold “sake” and hot “sake” Fish and doughnuts on a medium sized dish. Cuttle-fish and sauce. Large oysters (Awabi) boiled.

Certain symbols of prosperity: The pine tree and bamboo on a Nara table. One porcelain cup. A pot, for warming liquor, of silver. Three year old liquor “sake” cold. Tea and candies. Oboro marya (a kind of tart or pie). Preserved chestnuts. Preserved bamboo sprouts. Chopsticks and tooth-picks on a smooth unpainted tray.

Second course of candies, &c.: Gold-colored sugar, purple-colored sugar, crystallized sugar. Tea powder candy. White thin crackers. Chopsticks and tooth-picks.

All the above to be served on tables, dishes, and trays, as before described.

The dinner provided for the interpreter shall he served on a high table of unpainted wood, and shall be the same as that provided for the ambassador except in his case the symbols of prosperity placed on the Nara table shall be omitted.

Memorandum of places to be visited and streets to be traversed by the American ambassador during his visit to the captial.

From his lodging in the Bansho Shirabejo (present Tokio University.—Tr.) outside of Kiji Bashi gate, along the moat, outside of Kanda Bashigate, along Mikawa street, Kainakura street, Old Shirokane street, Honkoku street, Kashidori street, to the left, through the first square of Main street, thence along Otenma street, Hatago street, Abura street, Shi wo street, Yokoyama street, Yoshikawa street, Ryokoku Hirokoji, across Yanagi Bridge, along Yemon street, before the gate of the temple of Tairoku Tenjin, thence along Kay a street, Tenwo street, Okuramai street, Kurofune street.

Dinner in the Temple of Shokakuji.

Thence from the gate of the temple at Asakusa into the grounds of the temple of Kwanon. Thence, returning from the Raishin gate along Higashinaka street, beside the temple of Houganji, through new Tera street, to the left, before the gate of the temple of Tokakuji, and the residence of Toda Masunoske, and Satake Ukiyo no Taifu, and also before the medical school. Thence along the street before the gate of Toto, Prince of Idzushi, and Idzumi Hashi street, Sakuma street, thence to Sujikai gate, along Ogawa street, across Manaita Bridge, along Motoita street to Bansho Shirabejo again.

second day.

From Bansho Shirabejo to Kudan, thence to the left along the moat, before the residence of Maida, Prince of Tamba, outside of Haso gate to First street in Kojimachi. Then from Third street, Kojimachi, to the left along Hira Kawa street, before the shrine of Tenjin, through Sankenya street and behind the residence of Iyi, Prince of Kamo, thence to the right through Kasumiga Seki and along the street before the residence of Matsudaira, Prince of Mino. Then from the corner at the residence of Nishiwo, Prince of Okij to the left beside the residence of Sanada, Prince of Mino, over the new bridge, to the left along Kubo street, then from the side of the bridge at the entrance of Shiba to the right along First, Second, Third, Shiba, and Genske street, Rogetsu street, Shibai street, Udakawa street, Shimei street, thence into the house of the Shinto priest of Shinmei Temple, to dinner.

In returning, set out from Shinmei street to Shibakuchi Bridge, then to the left across To Bridge, along Hachikan street, through Tsukiya Bridge Gate, Daimio Koji, then from the residence of Matsudaira, Prince of Sagami, to the left, through Yayodzu Kashi, Tatsuno Kuchi, out at Kandahashi Gate, along the moat to the Bansho Shirabo, or place of starting.

Account of an interview with the American ambassador in the 10th month of the 4th year of Ansei (December, 1857.)

I. Statement made by the American ambassador in the house of Hotta, Prince of Bitchu, on the 26th of the 10th month of the 4th year of Ansei (December, 1857).

The ambassador said:

“The matters concerning which I am now about to speak are of the utmost importance, and are so regarded by the President; and as everything springs from good-will and is done with kind consideration for His Majesty, the Taikun, I beg you to hear with attention.

“As I will only repeat what is said in the letter to the Taikun, please regard what I say as corning directly from the President.

“All that I say to-day shall be very plain and simple. There shall be no concealment of the least particular. By following this course I shall carry out the wishes of the President, who desires the negotiations to be carried out with the utmost frankness.

“As the treaty made with the United States is the first treaty entered into by your country with other countries, therefore the President regards Japan with peculiar friendliness.

“The United States have no possessions in the east and do not desire to have any, as other countries do. To acquire such possessions is prohibited by the Government of the United States. Heretofore many countries have asked to be admitted into the Union, but their requests have not been granted. Three years ago the Sandwich Islands asked to be admitted into the Union, but admission was refused.

“It is the uniform custom of the United States, while frequently making treaties with other countries, not to annex any country merely by force of arms. Many changes have taken place in the West within the last fifty years. Since the invention of steam-ships distant countries have become like those that are near at hand, Since the invention of the electric telegraph especially, rapid communication may be had between the most distant parts. By means of this instrument a reply may be had in an hour to a message sent from Yedo to Washington. By means of steam one can go from California to Japan in eighteen days. Commerce has become very extensive since the invention of steam, and the countries of the West have in consequence become rich. The nations of the West hope that by means of steam communication all the world will become as one family. Any nation that refuses to hold intercourse with other nations must expect to be excluded from this family, donation has the right to refuse to hold intercourse with others.

“Two things are desired in order that intercourse may be had: First, that a minister or agent be allowed to reside at the capital. Second, that commerce between different countries be freely allowed. Not only America but also all other countries desire the above-mentioned two things; and to grant them would be for the benefit of all, and not for the benefit of the United States only. Misfortunes are now threatening Japan in consequence of the state of things in England and other European states. England is not satisfied with the treaty made with Japan by Admiral James Sterling. The English Government hopes to hold the same kind of intercourse with Japan as she holds with other nations, and is ready to make war with Japan, as I will now show. England greatly fears that Russia will disturb her East India possessions. Quite lately England and France united to fight against Russia because the latter was disposed to annex other countries. England does not want Russia to hold Saghalien and the Amoor. England fears that Russia will take possession of Manchuria and China, Should Russia take possession of Manchuria and China, she may then attack the possessions of England in the East Indies, and thus the war between England and Russia break out again. Should Russia do as above indicated, it will become very difficult for England to defend herself, and in order to be in a position to defend herself successfully, she desires to take possession of Saghalien, Yezo, and Hakodate. Should England take possession of these places, she will send a large fleet to each place and cut off communication between Petropauloski, the port of Kamtchatka, and Saghalien. England would rather have possession of Yezo than of Manchuria.

“Japan and China are isolated and without intercourse with other countries; hence the President directed me to attend to or watch the state of affairs in China also.

“Eighteen years ago a war broke out between England and China, which might have been avoided by an agent residing in the capital of China, The above unfortunate war broke out because the Government of China committed the management of affairs to the governor of Canton instead of managing them directly. The governor of Canton acted deceitfully and made false reports to the government, and, besides, treated the English haughtily, thereby provoking the war.

“By that war China lost a million people. By the same war China lost many ports. The city of Nankin, too, fell into the hands of the English.

“China paid to England £5,000,000 for peace as an indemnity. The loss of millions of men and millions of money, as mentioned above, is only a tenth part of the whole loss incurred by China. By this war China was greatly weakened, and her cities and fortifications were destroyed. Thus China, though formerly very strong, has become weak as she was when conquered by the Tartars. Everything there is in disorder, and another war will break out there before long.

“The two nations England and France are now engaged in war with China, and what will be the result as respects China no one can conjecture. The indications are at present that China will yield to the demands of England and France, or, if not, the whole nation will be subjected to said two countries. In any case, the action of China can only result inrendering England stronger. France wants to have possession of Corea, and England wants Formosa. If the present war ceases, China must pay all the costs of the war.

“The above facts are mentioned that you may be on your guard and take proper care. I am quite certain that the war would not have broken out had an agent been admitted to reside in Pekin. The Governments of England and France asked the United States to unite in the war against China, but the President refused. The United States was also provoked by the Chinese; but, not being anxious for war, the government refused to unite with England and France. Some time ago the Chinese fired on the American man-of-war Portsmouth, and when an explanation was asked of the Chinese Government no answer was given, whereupon Commodore Armstrong opened fire on and destroyed four ports; but when, in consequence of the attack, the vice-governor of Canton made explanations, the hostilities were stopped. In this America did not act in concert with England. All nations unite in denouncing the unjust conduct of China. Opium has been the cause of the troubles in China. Thirty years ago opium was used only at one place, near Canton, in China, but now it is used in many parts by millions of people, who spend vast sums to obtain it. I have heard that two years ago China imported opium to the amount of $25,000,000. Opium is the one great enemy of China. If it is used it weakens the body and injures it like the most deadly poison; it makes the rich poor and the wise foolish; it unmans all that use it, and by reason of the misery it brings robbers and acts of violence increase. About one thousand criminals are executed annually for crimes committed while under the influence of opium; but notwithstanding this punishment crimes are on the increase. The uncle of the reigning Emperor of China died from the effects of opium. The opium used in China comes from India, which is subject to England.

“Though opium is, as I have already said, a very bad thing for China, England will not prohibit it, because the trade is profitable. Hence the word ‘opium’ is not used in the treaty between the two countries.

“China has prohibited the importation of opium; but the English bring it in armed vessels and smuggle it in. The Chinese officials are aware of this practice, but they have no power to put a stop to it, and hence let it be carried on in the ports without opposition. It appears that the English think the Japanese, too, are fond of opium, and they want to bring it here also. If a man use opium once he cannot stop it, and it becomes a life-long habit to use opium; hence the English want to introduce it into Japan.

“The President of the United States thinks that for the Japanese opium is more dangerous than war. The expense of a war could be paid in time; but the expense of opium, when once the habit is formed, will only increase with time.

“The President wishes the Japanese to be very prudent about the introduction of opium, and if a treaty is made, he wishes that opium may be strictly prohibited. If American merchants should bring opium to Japan, the Japanese authorities may burn it or do what they please with it. Besides, a line may be required if landed and introduced among the people of Japan.

“The President assures you that if you have intercourse with other countries, and allow agents to reside in the capital, the country will be quite safe. I must congratulate your country that no war has taken place for hundreds of years; but peace, when continued too long, may be injurious, as thereby the military power may become weak and inefficient.

“The President regards the Japanese as a brave people; but courage, though useful in time of war, is subordinate to knowledge of arts; hence, courage without such knowledge is not to be highly esteemed. In time of war steamships and improved arms are the most important things. If war should break out between England and Japan, the latter would suffer much more than the former. The damage that might be done to Japan on the coast alone is very great.

“The Japanese are very fortunate, because they have had no experience of war and only know about it from history. The President hopes that hereafter also you will only know about it from history, and have no actual experience of its evils.

“If Japan had been near to either England or France, war would have broken out long ago. The great distance between the countries is the reason why peace has been preserved thus long. In case of war, a treaty would have to be made at the end of the war. The President wants to make a treaty without any war, and with mutual goodwill and respect.

“A famous foreign general has said that an ordinary peace is better than an extraordinary victory.

“The President is of opinion that if Japan makes a treaty with the United States, all other foreign countries will make the same kind of a treaty, and Japan will be safe thereafter.

“The President wants to make a treaty that will be honorable to Japan, without war, in a peaceable manner, after deliberate consultation. If Japan should make a treaty with the ambassador of the United States, who has come unattended by military force, her honor will not be impaired. There will be a great difference between a treaty made with a single individual, unattended, and one made with a person who should bring fifty men-of-war to these shores. We were sent to this country by the President, who desires to promote the welfare of Japan, and are quite different from the ambassadors of other countries. We do not wish you to open your ports to foreign trade all at once. It will be quite satisfactory if you open them gradually, as the circumstances may require; but the President assures you that this will not be the case if you make a treaty with England first.

“If you make a treaty first with the United States and settle the matter of the opium trade, England cannot change this, though she should desire to do so.

“When the ambassadors of other foreign countries come to Japan to make treaties, they can be told that such and such a treaty has been made with the ambassador of the United States, and they will rest satisfied with this.

“The President does not expect or wish to obtain from Japan anything extraordinary, but only such privileges as the people of the United States require.

“Everything is quite different now from what it was two hundred years ago, when the Portuguese and Spaniards were driven out of Japan. Then they desired to propagate religion.

“In the United States religion is neither supported nor prohibited by the state, but is left to the choice of each one. In the West military force is not now used in propagating religion, though changes may freely he made. We have at last found that the best way is to let each one have his choice in religious matters. Hence we neither support nor prohibit religion. There are many different religions in the world, but the aim of all is to make the people good; hence, to revile other religions and praise one’s own religion to make proselytes is the mark of a bad man.

“In America Christian churches and Buddhist temples are built near each other, but they do not quarrel among themselves.

“When the Portuguese and Spaniards came to Japan they came as private persons, and not on government business. They came to trade and to propagate religion and to subdue Japan ultimately by military force. They were all adventurers and rough characters, of a kind now rarely to be met with. At present times are greatly changed from what they were then, and now people universally cultivate friendly intercourse.

“It is the usual custom of these days to transport the superabundant productions of one country to where they are wanted, so that there may be an equalization. If, for instance, there should be a scarcity of food in England, those countries where food is abundant will send the needed supplies, even if they have to interrupt the usual trade. I do not mean by the word ‘trade’ only the exchange of marketable articles, but also the exchange of profitable new inventions. By trade the people of any one nation will become well acquainted with the productions and customs of all other countries.

“Although agriculture is of the first importance to a country, all cannot be farmers; there must also be workmen and merchants, and all these are mutually helpful. In some countries manufactured articles are much better and cheaper than those of other countries; hence it is usual to export such articles when not needed at home, and bring back what may be needed. If trade is carried on with other countries, manufactured articles will become abundant and be improved, and the productions of other countries may easily be obtained. Articles not manufactured in the home country may be, obtained by trade; and as trade can only be carried on in time of peace, extension of trade tends to prevent war.

“When things are imported customs must be paid on them. In America the expenses of the government are paid by this means, and the remainder laid up yearly in the Treasury.

“There are many ways of collecting taxes, but no one is so satisfactory as by custom or duty on imported articles.

“I will now tell you again what are the advantages of trade. Thereby the friendship between countries is perpetuated and increased. On my way to Japan I stopped in the Kingdom of Si am and made a treaty with that government. Shortly afterwards Siam made a like treaty with France. The reason why Siam made a treaty with America and France is because she fears that England has an intention of taking the country. Hence for her own safety she made the above treaties.

“India is now subject to England, but formerly it consisted of many independent states; but as none of them had treaties with western powers they were easily conquered by England when she attacked them. Hence we learn that it is very injurious for a nation to stand alone without any friendly treaty powers. Japan should therefore take care not to meet a like fate as the countries of India. If you open your country to commence, your flag will become known in the ports of all nations.

“If a person who has good eye-sight should ascend a high mountain in Japan he might see hundreds of American whale-ships along the coast. Is it not a ridiculous thing to let foreigners have the profit of a trade that might be carried on by the people of Japan?

“The President ordered me to tell you anything about America that you might wish to hear. America will furnish to Japan men-of-war, steamers, and needed arms, also officers of the army and navy, as many as may be required.

“The President wishes it to be understood that should difficulty arise between Japan and any foreign country, he will gladly become a mediator, and use his good offices in the interest of peace.

“On my way to Japan I met the English governor, of Hong-Kong, John Bowering, who told me that he was about to be appointed an ambassador to go to Japan, and I have received four letters from him since my arrival in Japan. Our conversation was of course private, but in his letters he discusses Japanese Government matters. He says he intends to bring with him a larger fleet than the Japanese have ever seen, and anchor at Yedo, where the discussions will be carried on. He says also that Yedo is the only place to hold consultation with the Japanese; that his object is, first, to get permission for a minister or agent of England to reside in Yedo, and, secondly, to get permission to carry on free trade at several places in Japan. If these two things are not granted war will be declared at once. The sending this ambassador he says is delayed by the war in China. He said he would be in Yedo in the third month, but he has been detained by the war. France will also send an ambassador at the same time with England. I understood from the first that he would come with many ships. From his last letter I learn that he will come with more than fifty steamers. I think he will come to Japan as soon as the Chinese war, which detains him, ends.

“The best-informed people think the Chinese war cannot last long; hence the English ambassador may be expected before long. I hope therefore that you will arrange all matters before he comes. In my opinion it will be necessary in any case to make a commercial treaty.

“If I write in my name to the agents of England and France residing in Asia and inform them that Japan is ready to make a commercial treaty with their countries, the number of steamers will be reduced from fifty to two or three.

“I have to-day told you what is the opinion of the President and the intention of the English Government. To-day will be the happiest day of my life if what I have said is attended to so as to secure the welfare of Japan. I hope you will consider what I have advanced and communicated to your associates in office. What I have told you are unadorned facts acknowledged in all the world.”

Account of a conversation had with the American ambassador in the Banshe Shirabejo (a kind of foreign office.—Tr.) on the 6th of the 11th month.

Present, Toki, Prince of Tamba, Kawaji Saiemonnojo, WadonOmimbushone, Inouye, Prince of Shinano, and Nagai, Prince of Genba.

Question first, by the Japanese officials, who begin by saying: The Prince of Bitchu has instructed us to inquire more particularly about some matters mentioned at the time of the interview recently held in his house. May we hear you on those matters again?

American Ambassador. Certainly.

Question. Do all countries which have treaty relations admit a minister to reside at the capital?

Answer. All except China. However, some small countries do not send a minister, to avoid expense, which must be borne by the country sending the minister.

Question. What is the duty of a minister?

Answer. His principal duty is to attend to the intercourse between the two countries, keeping both governments informed as to what each government is doing. Also when, at the ports open to trade, any difficulty occurs between a native and foreigner the consul or vice-consul will give a minute account thereof in writing to the minister, who will then discuss the matter with the minister for foreign affairs. A consul or vice-consul cannot correspond directly with the government of a country.

Question. What is the rank of a minister?

Answer. This question is rather hard to answer. There are two kinds of officers, civil and military. Civil officers manage all government affairs and are higher than those who manage military affairs. In the matter of salutes even a minister receives a salute of seventeen guns, while an admiral, who is the highest officer of the Navy, receives a salute of thirteen guns. A minister sent to a foreign country has to attend to the affairs of his own country and the country to which he is accredited; hence he is the highest in rank of any officer sent abroad.

Question. Is there not a difference in rank according to the rank of different countries?

Answer. Formerly the minister of a powerful country was treated with more respect than the minister of a small country; but about forty years ago a rule was established between various countries that ministers should rank according to their time of service, the first arrival ranking first and the others ranking in the order of their arrival. For example, the minister of a small country like Holland who has served ten years will outrank the minister of a great country like Russia who has only served a short time.

Question. What kind of treatment is a minister entitled to from the country to which he is sent?

Answer. He must be treated according to the law of nations.

Question. What kind of thing is the law of nations?

Answer. To give a full answer to this question would require the space of a large book; so I can only briefly mention some fundamental principles, one of the first of which is that the laws of the country to which a minister is sent are not binding on him. Another is that a legation must not be entered by an outsider without the minister’s permission. Also, none of the inmates of his household must be interfered with. His residence, though small when compared with a whole country, is to be regarded, the same as his country.

Question. We understand that a minister is the highest in rank of all officials sent, to foreign countries, but what is his rank in his own land when compared with the officials there?

Answer. In America a minister to a foreign country, in official correspondence and titles of respect, ranks with the Secretary of State. When he meets the minister for foreign affairs of the country to which he is sent the salutations are the same and equal on both sides.

Question. Is the time of service fixed?

Answer. Some serve one year, others ten; so the time is not fixed. If the minister’s government is pleased, it may keep the same man in office many years. Some are recalled at their own request. Usually ministers wish to return home every four or five years. When the conduct of a minister displeases the ruler of the country to which he is sent, the matter should be communicated to the minister of said country and be by him made known to the government of the offending minister in order to his recall. In an emergency a resident minister may be ordered to leave at once.

Question. When there is a change of ministers is there any special ceremony or respects paid to the ruler of the country?

Answer. There is the ceremony of leave-taking. To take an example near at hand, a minister residing in Shinagawa or in this house, near the castle, would go to the castle to take leave of the Taikun before going home to his country. A minister having to transact business with the minister of foreign affairs should reside not far from the castle.

Question. Though inside the legation of a minister all are independent of our laws, how is it as respects the outside?

Answer. That is different; the will of the minister is not law there.

Question. Is a minister subject to our laws when outside the legation?

Answer. He has liberty to walk in the streets, but of course not to enter the castle nor even the residence of a private person without the consent of the owner. If the members of his household get into quarrels while in the street, the minister will punish them himself.

Question. Are ministers and consuls sent by the United States to all countries?

Answer. The United States sends ministers and consuls to England, France, Holland, Austria, Prussia, Denmark, Sweden, Spain, Mexico, Turkey, Persia, and like civilized countries.

Question. Are consuls sent to all other countries?

Answer. Consuls only are sent to some countries in Africa and South America, and also to every country to which a minister is sent.

Question. Is not a minister sent to China?

Answer. Yes, but he circulates among the five open ports and is not admitted to reside at the capital; hence the present difficulty in China.

Question. Have the ministers sent to the above-named countries all the same rank?

Answer. Their authority is the same, but their salaries are not the same, for the following reason: Salaries must be adjusted to correspond to the expense of living in different countries. They vary from $6,000 to $16,000.

Question. Do all the above-mentioned countries send ministers to the United States?

Answer. Yes, as a general thing, but there is no compulsion if they do not. This is left to each government. The United States never objects to receiving a minister or consul, because she has sent such officers. For example, should Japan make treaties with twelve countries and receive a minister from each, she might send abroad three or ten ministers, or none at all, at her own option.

Question. Do the ministers who come to the United States all reside in different parts of the country, or do they all live in Washington?

Answer. They all reside in Washington; but in summer when it is very hot they may go to New York and other places.

Question. Is a minister located in the capital rather than in an open port in order that he may have facilities for speedily informing himself about important matters in the country?

Answer. That is one reason. Another is that important matters communicated to him by his government cannot be intrusted to another, but must be made known by him directly to the minister for foreign affairs, and by him be discussed and settled.

Question. Are there are any other reasons?

Answer. None in particular, only the legation is a branch of the government of the minister’s country, charged with the management of the affairs of both countries, which should be conducted quietly, speedily, and so as to prevent misunderstandings.

Question. Perhaps not with the affairs of two countries only. In case Japan should get into difficulty with Russia or some other country; in that case would the minister interfere to settle the difficulty?

Answer. He will interfere if it be a matter affecting the treaty, I am directed by the President to have an article inserted in the treaty to the effect that the United States will be a mediator in case of difficulty with other nations. In case such a treaty is made, the United States will use her influence to settle difficulties between Japan and any other country whatever.

Question. We would like to hear anything else that might be to our advantage to know about the matter, of a minister.

Answer. There is hardly anything else that need be repeated or dwelt on; still, as you ask, I will mention one or two things that should he kept in mind, namely, you have asked whether a minister resided in China. I reply there is no minister at Peking, hut one circulates between the five ports. The present war of England and France with China arose because no minister resided in Peking. If ministers of both countries had resided in Peking, matters might have been so arranged in ten days that the war would not have broken out. If Japan inserts a clause in the present treaty to the effect that in case of necessity the United States minister will act as a mediator to settle difficulties, the other foreign countries will follow this example. Then if ten countries should make a like treaty, and one of them, as Russia, should become unfriendly, and difficulties thereby arise, the remaining nine would all befriend Japan. Have you understood thoroughly all I have said on these points? I have been directed by the President to make everything plain and easy of comprehension, and to conceal nothing.

Question. Would the opium war that broke out at Canton eighteen years ago have been prevented by a minister residing in Peking?

Answer. The burning of the opium was one cause, but not the only cause of the war. The Chinese way of dealing with opium was very wrong and this greatly provoked the English Government. It was not the fact of confiscating opium, but the Chinese way of confiscating it, that caused the war. There were no doubt mistakes on both sides, but had a minister resided at Peking, these or even greater mistakes would not have been allowed to result in war.

Question. What is meant by unrestricted trade between the people of various countries?

Answer. Japan, like other countries, has the right to forbid the importation of certain articles according to their nature, and on the other hand foreign countries have the right to import all unforbidden articles, subject, however, to the payment of duties, and after the payment of fixed duties, may freely sell such articles to your countrymen.

Question. Are duties paid according to the nature of the article?

Answer. Should one man import one pound of anything he would pay duty on one pound; should another man import a hundred pounds of anything he would pay duty on a hundred pounds. To trade unrestrictedly is for the people of both countries, duties being paid, to trade directly without the intervention of government officials. Again, Japan has the right to forbid the exportation of rice, gold and silver. After this has been done, the unrestricted exportation of all other articles is free trade. In foreign countries trade is all in the hands of merchants; it is beneath the dignity of governments to engage in it. When any one imports baggage it is to be inspected and the duties collected. Afterwards it passes out of the hands of the government. Do you now understand the idea of unrestricted trade?

Answer and Question. Yes, perfectly; but we would like to know fully what the President means by a privilege not extravagant but moderate and suited to the needs of the people of the United States.

Answer. Only the privilege of locating a minister in the capital and of unrestricted trade; nothing else.

Question. We would like to know more fully what the President means by all the world becoming one family through trade?

Answer. He means only that all live at peace with one another without individual usurpation or selfishness. Since heaven regards all with impartiality and as equals, men should act as brothers of one family. It is not intended that they should become blood relations or intermarry.

Question. We are very much obliged for the assurance of the President that should a treaty be entered into with the United States other nations would follow the example set them, so that no anxiety need be felt by us. Let us now hear what is meant by opening ports like other nations.

Answer. When a treaty is entered into, the method of collecting duties, location of ports, and time of opening them must all be fixed; but these are secondary matters; the necessary things are the following: First, the location of an officer in the capital to attend to the business of both countries. Second, the opening of additional ports at a fixed time, especially of some other port instead of Simoda, which, being inconvenient, is to be closed. Third, the payment of duty on imported articles to the Japanese Government. Fourth, the prohibition of opium. Fifth, that trade be between the people of both countries without official interference. Finally, that the treaty once entered into be subject to revision at the expiration of fifteen years at the request of either party to it. The treaty should now be entered into and its working during fifteen years observed, after which you can revise it as may be desired.

Question. Have you any particular port in mind?

Answer. No particular one. I think two or three ports should be opened.

Question. Already Nagasaki, Simoda, and Hakodate have been agreed upon, but Simoda is to be closed. Is another port to be opened instead?

Answer. I think that one or two should be opened instead.

Question. Have you any choice as to ports?

Answer. I prefer to leave that to he considered with the officer who shall, when the time comes, he appointed to attend to this business. Nagasaki is at one end of Japan and Hakodate at the other; hence they are not well situated for commerce. I have no choice. I only wish you to open a place convenient for the people of both our countries. If a treaty is made, hundreds of American whalers will resort to Hakodate. These vessels will need anchors and chains such as are not made in your country. These things must be imported and kept in store in Hakodate. Though not imported for your countrymen nor sold to them, duty will be paid on them all the same to the advantage of Japan.

Question. What do you think of opening ports gradually?

Answer. I think that one port should be opened at once to meet the demands of trade, then another, at the expiration of a year; and another in two years, and thus gradually. If, as I have said, you make a treaty first with me, this can be done, but not if you make a treaty first with England.

Question. What is the English idea of unrestricted trade?

Answer. When the English ask for trade, they say they will come with men-of-war and demand that ports be opened at once. If opened, well; if not, war will at once be declared. There will be a great difference between granting their demands and making a, treaty with me, who am consulting the advantage of both countries. It will be greatly to the honor of Japan to do as I now say.

Question. Is it the idea of a “modified commercial treaty that the present defective treaty be changed into a commercial treaty”?

Answer. The treaty made by Perry at Kanagawa is a treaty of amity. Foreign nations all advance from friendship to commerce. Hence the idea is to found a treaty of commerce on the former treaty. Nothing will be said about cultivating friendship in the new treaty; but of course it will provide for the opening of new ports, as the present are inadequate.

Question. Will not England desire additional concessions even if a treaty is made with America?

Answer. If a satisfactory treaty is made with the United States no other nation will ask more. England will not, as I have learned by letter from John Bowering. (Here Mr. Harris read from a letter as follows:) “I have received an appointment to take charge of the management of affairs in Japan. If I understand beforehand that Japan will make a satisfactory treaty, I will not alarm them by taking a large fleet; but England will not endure the present management of affairs on the part of Japan. There must be a change. If Japan grants the above request it will be to her advantage.” The above is from the last letter received. He should have come some months ago, but has been detained by the war in China. From the above letter it is evident that he comes to open trade. If you make such a satisfactory treaty as I have described on the above principles, you may feel secure. John Bowering has the same end in view.

Question. Do all foreign countries say that the conduct of China is bad; and in what respects is it bad?

Answer. All other countries dislike the pride and haughtiness of the Chinese. As I have already said, a minister is not allowed to reside in Peking, and the manner of treating the foreigners who reside in Canton and Amoy was not well known to the Peking government, and the governors of those places were not observed by that government, and hence they did as they pleased. The governors of Canton and of other places did not control the inferior officers well, hence they also in turn did badly. The treatment foreigners received being too bad, the foreign officers appealed to the government at Peking, but the Chinese governors opened the letters as soon as they came to hand and burned them, because they exposed their evil conduct; thus by degrees the war was brewed.

Question. You have said that opium was not the only evil with which China is afflicted. What other source of trouble is there?

Answer. I referred to the breaking out of the rebellion.

Question. Of course war would not have broken Out had a minister resided in Peking as you say, and the outbreak was caused by the bad management of the governor of Canton; but had not the distance between Peking and the open ports much to do with it?

Answer. As you say.

Question. Is there any reason for the co-operation of France and England?

Answer. They co-operate against China now because they were united with Turkey in the late war against Russia.

Question. Are there any countries, that do not have intercourse with the United States?

Answer. None.

Question. This is all we have to ask. Is there anything more that we ought to know?

Answer. There is nothing more. I have said all I wanted to say.

The above is a true record.

(Not signed.—Tr.)

Conversation with the American ambassador, in the house of the Prince of Bitchu, on the 2d of the 12th month (February, 1858).

Prince of Bitchu. All that you said in our recent conversation has been reported to my associates and to the Taikun, who expresses himself as pleased with the President’s kind intentions; and I, myself, am pleased. A speedy answer should have been given, but, as there were difficulties in the way, the subject had to be discussed, and hence there has been delay.

The Taikun has been made acquainted with the contents of the President’s letter. As to opening trade, we must draw up regulations, but the officers charged with this work will consult with you.

What has kindly been said about sending a minister has been made known and assented to by the Taikun. Its importance required that the subject be duly considered, so that nothing should be done to provoke the people or endanger good understanding. Regulations, as to the time of sending, place of residence, &c., will be taken into consideration by you and the officers charged with this work.

As to closing Simoda and opening other ports, Japan being a small country, it will be inconvenient to open many ports; still one port instead of Simoda will be opened. The location of said port; additional to Nagasaki and Hakodate, will be fixed on discussion. The above is our reply to what you recently stated. Particulars will be decided by you and the officers charged to settle this matter.

American Ambassador. I understand. Have you nothing more to add?

Answer. The officers charged with this business will settle the particulars with you, so as to be convenient for both parties without reserve.

Ambassador. This reply is very full and satisfactory, but one thing has been left undecided. I refer to the ports.

Prince of Bitchu. Do you refer to the place?

Ambassador. As I said before, the object of the President is to secure unrestricted trade between foreigners and Japanese. The Taikun has just decided that there shall be trade between foreigners and Japanese, but there must be ports in order to carry on trade. The island of Niphon is a large island, eight hundred “ri “(2½ miles) in circumference. I cannot understand why only one port should be opened in all this distance. In order to reap the benefit of trade, ports should be opened at various places. (Niphon is the name given by foreigners to the main island, excluding Kinshu, Shikoku, and Yeso.) I stated that the President wished to form such a treaty as other nations would accept. Unless there should be trade with the whole of Japan other foreign nations would not accept the treaty. Though the prices of imported articles at Nagasaki and Simoda be the same, yet, when the price of transportation overland is added, the prices will vary greatly, as the Taikun will readily understand. I have more to say on this matter, but will reserve what I have to say till I meet the officers commissioned to make the commercial treaty, and from them you will hear what I have to say, and which you will find to be of importance. Trade will be profitable to Japan in proportion as it is free. This is what I have to say respecting the ports.

There is one thing more of which I want to speak. Nothing can be done unless the officers whom you shall appoint to attend to this business shall have full authority. Hence, it will be necessary for the government to give them written evidence of their having full authority. The seal of the President and of the United States is attached to the commission which I hold, and it is stated therein that I am to consult with officers having a like commission and authority from the Taikun. It must then be stated, in the commission given your officers, that they are empowered to consult with the plenipotentiary of the United States of America. I respectfully request that you will consider what I have said about ports, for if this one point is not settled satisfactorily all the rest will be in vain. I suppose a slight mistake must have been made, from your not haying fully understood me. I have told the Prince of Shinano that I wished you, as I still wish you, to inquire if there are any points not clearly stated.

Japanese. We will send officers to consult with you about particulars to-morrow or next day.

Ambassdor. It is my wish that the Government of Japan may be fully informed. The President has no object but good will to Japan. He has no wish but that the matter be fully understood, and the interests of Japan promoted. I, myself, am urgent only that you may avoid danger. Understand fully that there is no danger of the United States and Japan becoming enemies. Whether you grant what I desire, or do not grant it all, the President will bear you no ill will. Be assured of this. There will be no alienation if you reject the treaty, if you only do it understandingly. This is the amount of what I have to communicate.

(By Inouye, Prince of Shinano.) Of the points mentioned by the Prince of Bitchu, how do you understand the two points which do not relate to the opening of ports?

Ambassador. I understand that, according to the representations made by the President, trade will be opened, and that the particulars will be arranged with commissioners. This is one point, or article. The second is, that a minister will be received, but that the place and time will be taken into consideration by the commissioners, care being taken not to provoke popular opposition.

Prince of Bitchu. You understand that the matter of the ports will be taken into consideration, and settled so as to suit the convenience of both parties.

Ambassador. As you say, the convenience of both, not of one party. After you have appointed commissioners, at our first meeting we must show each other our commissions authorizing us to act, after which the protocol of a commercial treaty will be issued; after seeing which you can choose or reject what pleases or displeases you, and a mutual understanding be reached. I will not be displeased if you reject what you dislike after seeing all the clauses and each clause of the protocol or draught of the treaty. I will answer all inquiries. If matters are managed as I propose, there will be no misunderstanding on either side. I will not insist on any one article of the treaty that the Government of Japan does not thoroughly understand. Nothing is to be decided on that is not well understood. Day after to-morrow is Monday. I would like to compare our commissions then.

Answer. We cannot positively decide on that day, but will fix on a convenient one.

Ambassador. Can the commissions be seen at our first meeting, whenever it may take place?

Answer. Certainly.

Ambassador. I ask because nothing can be done till the commissions have been compared. I expect to show a draught of a treaty the first day after comparing commissions. If you consider it, and discuss at once after seeing it, the work will be expedited, and you will, after seeing this draught, clearly understand the President’s object. When the commissions are compared, there should be a formality observed in honor of the Taikun’s commission, like that observed at the recent audience at the palace. On this occasion a special dress should be worn. This paper (showing one) is a copy of the President’s commission, which I show to the commissioners. Please let me see a copy of your commissions before they are to be compared.

Prince of Bitchu. I suppose the commission is to be given only to the commissioners.

Ambassador. The Japanese Government, at its option, can give a special commission. A commission like the one recently given to the Governor of Simoda will suffice, if only the clause “Authorized to deliberate with the plenipotentiary of the United States” be added. I hope you will add this clause. I have, myself, another special commission in my possession.

Prince of Bitchu. Do you speak of yourself?

Ambassador. Yes. I have a special commission which I keep, but do not show. Any new or different business can be settled, if there is an order from the Taikun to undertake it. According to circumstances, matters may be settled, after conference with the minister for foreign affairs. This is all I have to say.

Note.—Accompanying diagrams of reception rooms not copied.

No. 290. Mr. Stevens to Mr. Evarts. [Document 314]

No. 290.
Mr. Stevens to Mr. Evarts.

United States Legation,
Tokei, Japan, April 9, 1879. (Received May 5.) No. 58.]

Sir: I take pleasure in informing you that the Japanese Government have expressed the desire to make General Grant their guest during his anticipated visit to Japan. At the request of Mr. Terashima I telegraphed this to General Grant at Calcutta, and I understand that instructions have been given to the Japanese consul at Hong-Kong to formally tender to the general on his arrival at that place the invitation of the Japanese Government to accept their hospitality during his sojourn in Japan. Extensive preparations are being made for his reception. The line buildings of the Enriokwan, used as the residence of the Duke of Edinburgh and of Prince Alexis when they visited Japan, will be set apart for himself and party.

A commission has been appointed to attend to the details of the reception, consisting of three ex-daimios, and to which Mr. Yoshida also is attached.

General Grant is expected at Hong-Kong about the 30th instant. We have not yet ascertained whether he will proceed thence to the Northern Chinese ports and Peking, or come directly to Japan.

I have, &c.,

D. W. STEVENS.

No. 291. Mr. Stevens to Mr. Evarts. [Document 315]

No. 291.
Mr. Stevens to Mr. Evarts.

United States Legation,
Tokei, Japan, May 13, 1879. (Received June 10.) No. 68.]

Sir: On the 2d instant, Shoken, the young prince of Loo Choo, accompanied by his suite, arrived at Yokohama in the steamer dispatched by the Japanese Government to bring his father, the ex-king, to this country. The latter alleged illness as a reason for not coming to Japan at the present time, and it was accordingly decided to bring his son in his stead.

On the 8th instant his excellency Sanjo Saneyoshi His Imperial Japanese Majesty’s prime minister, addressed an order to Prince Shoken in the following words: “For public reasons you are hereby ordered to remain in Tokei.”

It would seem from this that the Japanese Government is resolved to leave nothing undone toward completing the changes recently begun in the local government of the Loo Choo Islands. The inclosed extract from the Nichi Nichi Shimbun (translated for the Japan Daily Herald of the 5th instant) gives some account of the manner in which those changes have been effected. The islands have now been made, in due form, a ken of the empire; Japanese are installed in the chief offices; the King has only the rank of a Japanese noble (Kwazoku), while the principal gentry of the kingdom have become pensioned, samurai (shiz-oku). The subordinate local officials have been retained, and it is reported that there are no signs of discontent either among them or among the common people. The King and his advisers, who are more nearly affected by the new order of things, are, of course, dissatisfied with the change, but is is hardly probable that their discontent will assume any practical shape. Nor is it probable that China will actively interfere in behalf of the people whom she has hitherto, tacitly at least, recognized as dependents. His excellency H-ü-Chang, Chinese minister at this court, seems to have contented himself with remonstrating against the action taken by Japan, and still remains here, notwithstanding the determination he expressed some time ago to return to China if the Japanese Government persisted in the course it had adopted toward Loo Choo.

I have, &c.,

D. W. STEVENS.

[Inclosure in No. 68.]
[From the Japan Daily Herald, May 5, 1879.]

[Translated from the Nichi Nichi Shimbun.]

A person who returned to Yokohama by the same steamer as brought the Prince of Loo Choo, has furnished us with the following particulars:

When Mr. Matsuda came the second time to Loo Choo he found the King ill, and the order by which the han was abolished and replaced by a ken, was communicated to Prince Shohitsu, who also received the Imperial message brought by the chamberlain, Mr. Tomikoji. But the Sansikwan, the Oyakata, and the Haiunjo (Loo Chooan mandarins) were all very much perplexed. The records of the Hancho were examined by the newly appointed officers, who sealed them up, and guards of police were stationed at the castle gates; the Loo Chooan officers were summoned to the Tenkaiji, where they were officially informed of the change that had taken place, and warned not to be led astray by idle rumors. But the whole han was in a state of excitement, and on the following day, the 20th March, a deputation of more than forty persons, representing the Prince, the Anzu, the Sansikw an, the Oyakata, the Haiunjo, and the Chikushi, proceeded to the Kencho, where they handed in a written memorial. This was however rejected, and returned to them with a kind reproof. Under these circumstances it was thought advisable to remove the ex-King from the castle, and this was consequently done on the 29th March at midnight; on the 31st March the Imperial troops occupied the castle, and then the people saw that there was no help for it, but that they must submit. It being thought proper that the ex-King himself should advise the people of the abolition of the han, the people were summoned on the 2d April, and the ex-King made a speech to them. The gentry are now to be ranked among our shizoku and will receive pension bonds. In the mean time Mr. Kinashi issued the following notification:

“To the officers of Shuri, Toinari, Kume, Naffa and other districts:

“As the Loocho han has now been abolished, and replaced by the Okinawa ken, the han officers have all been dismissed, but you, the local officers of Shuri, Tomari, Kume, Naff a and other districts, and all the village and street officers, are hereby ordered to continue your duties as before.”

No. 292. Mr. Bingham to Mr. Evarts. [Document 316]

No. 292.
Mr. Bingham to Mr. Evarts.

United States Legation,
Tokei, Japan, June 16, 1879. (Received July 26.) No. 903.]

Sir: I have the honor to inclose herewith an official notification by his excellency Mr. Sanjo, the prime minister of this government, to the effect that the following articles, from and after July 1 next, may be exported duty free, to wit, silk and cotton manufactures, silk and cotton mixtures, made dresses, porcelain ware, precious stones, lacquer ware, bronzes, manufactured bamboo, manufactured copper, paper, fans, and umbrellas.

You will observe that the notification concludes with the words “whenever export duties shall again be imposed notice will be given two months beforehand,” which seems to imply that this government has at last concluded, so far as the revenues from export duties are concerned, to determine for itself whether the non-imposition of duties upon the domestic exports of this empire in the future will not be productive of good to the producers of Japan.

I inclose the translation of the notification as published in the Japan Daily Herald of the 14th instant, together with the remarks of the editor thereon.

The editor declares this to be “a rather important notification”; that it seems to import that “the export duties on articles of Japanese manufacture or produce would appear to be doomed to extinction; that is to say, if the foreign ministers can be brought to sanction such an addition to the import tariff” as will compensate for the loss of the export duties.

* * * * * * *

I have, &c.,

JNG. A. BINGHAM.

[Inclosure in No. 903.—Extract from the Japan Daily Herald, June 14, 1879.]

A translation of a rather important notification, signed by the prime minister, Sanjo Daijin, appears below. If “coming events cast their shadows before,” the export duties on articles of Japanese manufacture or produce would appear to be doomed to extinction; that is to say, if the foreign ministers can be brought to sanction such an addition to the import tariff as will not merely considerably add to the total sum now collected at the custom-house, but be enough also to compensate for the loss of the whole of the export duties.

“Notification No. 21.

“It is hereby notified that the following articles are, from the 1st July next, to be exported duty free. Cotton manufactures, silk manufactures, silk and cotton mixtures, made dresses, porcelain ware, precious stones, lacquer ware, bronzes, manufactured bamboo, manufactured copper, paper, fans, and umbrellas. Whenever export duties should again be imposed notice will be given two months beforehand.

“SANJO SANETOMI,
“Daijo Daijin.
“The 13th June, 1879.”

No. 293. Mr. Bingham to Mr. Evarts. [Document 317]

No. 293.
Mr. Bingham to Mr. Evarts.

United States Legation,
Tokei, Japan, June 17, 1879. (Received July 26.) No. 909.]

Sir: His excellency Mr. Hennessy, Her Britannic Majesty’s governor of Hong-Kong, is at present visiting Tokei, and is the guest of His Japanese Majesty’s ministers. The governor did me the honor a few days since to call upon me, and in conversation took occasion to say that my own official action toward this government, as published in the foreign relations, and the action of our government toward Japan in the matter of treaty revision, met with the hearty approval of the majority of the people of Great Britain as well as his own approval.

The governor made an address before the Tokei Chamber of Commerce on yesterday, a copy of which, as published in the Japan Herald of the 16th instant, I have the honor to inclose, together with the reply thereto of Mr. Fukuchi, the vice-president of the chamber. I note that the governor in his address spoke of the trade of Japan with Great Britain and with the United States and China, and had the courage and justice to say that Japan’s trade with China, as well as that with the United States, “was especially favorable to producers in Japan and to exporters.” His excellency might have said with equal justice that the United States buys more of the domestic productions of Japan than any one of the Western States, while Great Britain sells more largely to Japan, and draws from her almost exclusively the large annual balances against Japan in coin.

It is also worthy of remark that Mr. Hennessy, speaking of the public debt of Japan, took care to say, as the fact is, the debt of this empire is almost exclusively a domestic loan, and that her foreign debt “is quite insignificant”, and that he also warned the Chamber of Commerce of the danger of a foreign debt, wisely citing for the instruction of his auditors, the present deplorable condition of Egypt.

I beg leave to say that the reply of Mr. Fukuchi is significant in this, that it suggests the need of Japan to encourage her own industries, and the obstacles which prevent their encouragement, and that this government is so hampered that it cannot command such revenues from imports “as are essential for the country,” and that “the revenue derived therefrom does not materially benefit our (Japan’s) finances to the extent that revenue of the same kind does in other countries.”

The presence of Governor Hennessy here and his policy in Hong-Kong, have excited unfavorable comment in some of the English journals in this quarter, which do not favor fair play toward either China or Japan.

I have, &c.,

JNO. A. BINGHAM.

[Inclosure in No. 909.—Extract from the Japan Daily Herald, June 16, 1879.]

Mr. Hennessy’s address to the Tokei Chamber of Commerce.

At the invitation of the chamber, his excellency John Pope Hennessy, C. M. G., governor of Hong-Kong, delivered an address to the Tokei Chamber of Commerce yesterday afternoon on the trade between Japan and China. About one hundred and fifty persons were present, including their excellencies Inouye, Okuma, and Matsugata, and Messrs. Iwasaki, Yataro, Shibusawa, Masuda, Fukuchi (editor of the Nichi Nichi Shimbun), and some foreigners.

Mr. Shibusawa, the chairman of the Chamber of Commerce, in a few words, introduced Mr. Hennessy to the audience, who rose and bowed their acknowledgment.

Mr. Hennessy said:

“Gentlemen, though I speak in a foreign language, yet I believe a good many present understand it. I could not refuse your invitation to address you to-day for several reasons. I am officially connected with the largest depot of commerce in the British Empire abroad. Last year there passed through the colony under my government shipping to the extent of 1,700,090 tons, and the value of that tonnage could not have been far short of $500,000,000. Now the commerce of Hong-Kong is great because it is close to the two Empires of China and Japan; and when I speak of the prosperous condition of commerce between Japan and Hong-Kong, it means, to a great extent, the prosperous state of commerce between Japan and China, and it also means the prosperous state of commerce between my own country—the united countries of Great Britain and Ireland—and Japan. It is well worth your while, as practical men of business, to ascertain what is the amount of Japan’s trade with China; in what way that trade can be developed, and how you can assist in its development. The trade of Japan with Great Britain in one year amounted to $25,650,000; with the United States $7,882,000, and the total trade between France and Japan to $8,412,000; between Japan and Germany, $1,087,000; that is, from June, 1877, to June, 1878. Now, what is your annual trade with China? It amounts to $10,452,000, and is therefore greater than the aggregate trade of France and Germany with Japan. There is another interesting feature in connection with your trade with China. Taking from June, 1878, to December of that year, your trade amounted to $5,151,329. It must be a matter of interest to you all to know how that trade is made up. You exported to China, during the six months I refer to, goods to the value of $3,307,582, while your imports were less than that sum by $1,843,747.

“Your China trade, as well as that of the United States, is therefore not only large but especially favorable to producers in Japan and to exporters. It is also a trade favorable to the Government of Japan, for by means of that trade you get specie imported into the country. And having mentioned these facts, I am reminded of what occurred when I introduced my friend Mr. Matsugata to the viceroy of Canton. The viceroy of Canton, who rules 40,000,000 of people, said that the friendship of China and Japan is more natural and will be of greater benefit to the two empires than the friendship of China and Japan with any other power. And when I reminded the viceroy that the trade of Great Britain with Japan was about double the trade between Japan and China, the viceroy said that in the future China would be the largest market for the produce of Japan. I have estimated the trade of Hong-Kong last year at $500,000,000. It is of interest to look at the authentic records published by your government for the same period. Now what have you exported to China? You have exported large quantities of rice, camphor ($177,000), large quantities of copper ($560,000), ginseng ($161,000), coal, and dried fish. Nearly half a million of dollars’ worth of cuttlefish alone has been exported from Japan; about $410,000 worth of seaweed, and $130,000 worth of beche-de-mer. Now let me tell you that the quantities of those articles consumed in China is enormous, and the demand is so great that it is almost impossible for you to supply it. By far the largest quantity of those articles come through Singapore under the name of straits produce. The dried fins sharks, fish, different kinds of seaweed, and various other articles come from Borneo, and the straits produce travels 2,400 miles before it reaches Hong-Kong. Now you are 1,000 miles nearer to the market than they; you produce the same articles, and why should you not send more, having 1,000 miles in your favor, every practical gentleman present ought to be able to answer. You send in one year 23,700,000 catties of wheat to China, and you send 735,000 catties of dour; so it will be seen that the quantity of wheat greatly exceeded that quantity of flour.

“I may now tell you, for your consideration as men of business, that the Chinamen in Hong-Kong, for some years past, have imported great quantities of flour instead of wheat from California. The great American houses in Hong-Kong no longer import flour; it is imported by native merchants who have the whole of that trade. Some of these merchants are Chinese, born in Hong-Kong; in other words, Chinese British subjects. But the advantage of Chinese importing is this, that they do business so much cheaper, are so frugal and temperate, that they can sell the flour at a cheaper rate than when it was in the hands of the American houses. Now should not the traders in Japan, who send such large quantities of wheat to China, send it in the form of flour? I need not point out to you, there would be a saving of some 4,000 miles in in distance. The British consul for Hakodate told me that Yezo will be able to supply the whole of China—by the way of Hong-Kong or by any other way you please—the whole of that populous empire with as much fruit as they may require. And, he added, the government have done so much to develop the fisheries in that island that the fish supplied to China from other parts of the world will in futue be supplied from Yezo. And I may take this opportunity of mentioning, for the benefit of some present, that when Mr. Eusclen saw the report which was placed in my hands, he said ‘Those papers are perfectly true; there is no exaggeration in the reports of the Japanese Government with regard to Yezo.’

“So much for what you are able to send to China and Hong-Kong for the China market. I estimate that last year there were 50,000 tons of goods transhipped from Hong-Kong to Japan. Now whoever promotes the prosperity of Japan will add to those 50,000 tons of transhipped goods. Therefore, I have, in what I am saying at this moment, a selfish interest. As the governor of that important colony, I am bound to extend the commerce of Great Britain with Japan and China. Therefore I maintain that every subject of Queen Victoria is interested in the prosperity of this empire. The English flag, as you know, flies in every sea, and British ships carry by far the most produce from one country to another. Therefore what I look to is the future prosperity of Japan through the future development of British commerce and British manufactures; and therefore, perhaps, I may be excused if I say one or two words upon what I have seen in the few days I have been here as to the prosperity of this empire. As a British subject I feel proud of the prosperity of Japan, because I remember that at a great crisis in the history of your country the British minister, Sir Harry Parkes, took an active part in the restoration of that government which you now enjoy. Now one remembers the state of this empire at the time when Sir Harry Parkes labored so successfully in the restoration of the government; it is impossible not to admit or see that Japan has made greater progress than any other country in the world in the same space of time. There is much to see, no doubt, and very much to learn of Japan. But I have seen what has impressed me very much. I have seen an empire in which the court and minister forming the government present a great contrast to Oriental countries nearer Europe.

In Egypt, which is a small country when compared with the Empire of Japan, I have noticed three differences between it and your empire. I have seen the Khedive of Egypt and his ministers living in oriental splendor and extravagance. I have seen the ministers of the Khedive living in magnificent palaces, and with enormous and expensive retinues. When I had the honor a few days ago of an interview with His Majesty the Mikado, I saw a court in which true dignity was maintained, but about which there was no extravagance. And you all know how the members of your government, instead of squandering the finances, live the lives of gentlemen, no doubt in proper style, without any extravagant outlay. And another, and in an empire much smaller than yours, they raised a large debt, but it was a foreign debt, a debt raised in foreign countries, whereas I find that your public debt has been raised by your finance minister, nearly all, by an internal loan, in which the people get the interest; and the foreign debt is quite insignificant. I also noticed what, of course, you are all more familiar with than I am, that there is a remarkable difference in the way in which those debts were applied in the two countries. In Egypt the debt was laid out in wild projects of the Khedive, and in defraying the cost of his extravagances and the extravagances of his ministers. Whereas I observe that your debt has been expended in reproductive works, good for you and good for your country.

“And as I have touched upon the foreign debt, I may as well tell you what my observation as a governor has been relative to the difference between the public debts, when compared with their populations, of different countries. Your public debt, I calculate, is about 10 yen per head of the population. Well, I will just mention that an important British colony, that of the Cape of Good Hope, has a debt of £4,068,000, or 30 yen for each head of the population. Another important British colony, the Dominion of Canada, has a public debt of 45 yen for each head of population. And I could tell you of other flourishing British colonies, such as Australia, in which the debt is far larger per head than the public debt of Japan. But in all those British colonies the public debts are perfectly safe, because, like Japan, they have been laid out in the promotion of commerce and in the development of the resources of the colonies.

“And now for a final contrast between Egypt and this empire. At this moment the great powers of England and France tell the Khedive that they must appoint a minister of finance, because the debt is a foreign debt due to Englishmen and Frenchmen; hence the danger of a foreign debt.

“In conclusion, I may tell you this, which makes a still more remarkable contrast between your country and Egypt. It is not long since an Englishman in charge of an eastern bank said, ‘I have entire confidence in the finance minister of Japan and in the future-prospects of the empire.’ But, gentlemen, whatever may be the undoubted financial ability of Mr. O’Kuma, whatever may be the ability of the cabinet, it is really your own enterprise and commercial skill that the ministers will have to rely upon for the financial prosperity of the empire. Therefore, gentlemen, in wishing success to the Tokei chamber of commerce, and in wishing an increasing and profitable business to every merchant present, I am wishing prosperity to the empire at large.”

Mr. Hennessy resumed his seat amid considerable applause, his discourse having lasted about an hour.

Mr. Fukuchi, the vice-president, replied as follows:

“On behalf of the Tokei chamber of commerce, I have the honor to thank your excellency for complying with our invitation. And we beg to express our obligations for the valuable remarks and suggestions your excellency has made with the object of promoting still more the commercial relations between Japan, Hong-Kong, and Southern China. With your excellency’s permission, I beg to say a few words in reply. Our country is the immediate neighbor of China, separated only by a narrow channel of sea, and its commerce is, as your excellency remarked, of special interest and value to Japan. Hong-Kong occupies an important position geographically and commercially, with respect to the two empires, and, moreover, is, so to speak, a gateway of commerce also between Japan and Great Britain, which latter country is the greatest nation engaged in Oriental commerce. We, therefore, would ask your excellency to closely observe the real position of commerce in Japan. Japan has two neighbors, on the east the United States of America, on the west China; in the commerce with both these neighbors, the balance of trade, as your excellency pointed out, is in our favor, but I regret to say the balance of trade between Japan and other foreign countries, in the aggregate, is seriously against Japan, and, notwithstanding the gradual progress and development of our industries, at present I cannot say our foreign commerce is as advantageous or profitable to the nation as it should be, and the revenue derived therefrom does not materially benefit our finances to the extent that revenue of the same kind does in other countries. This state of things continually causes the mercantile community of Japan the greatest concern.

“Your excellency has rightly impressed upon us that we are ruled by a good, patriotic emperor and most thoughtful and able ministers. Our government supervise our finances, encourage our industries, and promote, so far as it is in their power to do so, the commercial development of the country; in short, they endeavor to leave nothing undone to increase our welfare, and I believe the time is not far distant when we shall occupy a commercial position second to none in the East, if the efforts of the government are not thwarted. If, however, the balance of trade continues against us in the future, then this time will be almost indefinitely prolonged, not only to the detriment of Japan, but to the detriment of the true commercial interests of foreign nations. Still more, if our government is hampered in securing that just and rational incidence of taxation, and that full measure of revenue that we feel to be essential for the country and for facilitating internal transit, by which the consumer and foreign producer may be brought into closer commercial contact.

“There is no nation in the world which is sufficiently wealthy to supply its wants entirely from foreign markets, and also no nation that can entirely supply its own wants independently of foreign markets. So commerce is nothing more than a barter of the products of each nation; so it is in Japan; and, undoubtedly, your excellency is wise enough to comprehend this far better than we can. Your excellency acknowledged to be selfish in your desire to do the best you could for British commerce, and if your excellency sincerely wishes to promote the real interests of the great manufacturing and shipping industries of England, then they must recognize the necessity of encouraging the industries and promoting the exports of Japan’s products; in a word, must hope that the Japanese may be prosperous enough to purchase in quantities the industries of England. If Japanese industries are allowed to prosper, it follows the import trade will increase in proportion; on the contrary, if the industries of Japan are repressed, the English manufacturers cannot expect to find a satisfactory market for their goods in Japan. So it is that, either in the immediate present or in the future, encouragement of our industries and increase in the export of our products is not only the individual interests of the people of Japan, hut the real advantage also of the British manufacturers and ship-owners—more so, perhaps, than any other foreign power, your excellency’s country having the greatest mercantile marine in the world. There is an old Japanese maxim, that ‘if men wish to profit themselves, they must allow others to profit;’ and I believe the selfish object your excellency claims is no other than what is contained in the moral of this maxim and is in reality unselfish.

“In conclusion, as regards the present commercial position of Japan, I believe we are now approaching a point of development. I regret much there are certain obstacles in the way—obstacles the removal of which I maintain to be of vital national importance—they obstruct the development of our finances, our commerce, and our industries, and it is only natural for your excellency, interested as you are as the governor of one of England’s most important commercial colonies, to distinguish and to discern the nature of these obstacles and the course to adopt to remove them. If these impediments are removed it is palpable that all foreign commerce, but especially’s British commerce and shipping, in the future will be promoted, and I think that no time should now be lost in allowing full, fair play to the commercial development of this empire. We have not failed to observe a depression in British shipping interests of late—a depression due, we believe, not to any defect inherent in the trade of England, but to the condition of the markets throughout the world. That condition, as far as this empire is concerned, would be reversed by our own legitimate development—a development which would soon be traced in the increase of trade with your excellency’s government and with Great Britain herself. I have only to add that we gratefully appreciate the interest you have shown in the commercial concerns of Japan with regard to the important British colony whose government you administer so impartially and successfully.”—[Daily Advertiser.]

No. 294. Mr. Bingham to Mr. Evarts. [Document 318]

No. 294.
Mr. Bingham to Mr. Evarts.

United States Legation,
Tokei, Japan, July 15, 1879. (Received August 11.) No. 913.]

Sir: I have the honor to inform you that General U. S. Grant and suite arrived at Nagasaki, Japan, on the 20th ultimo, and that on the 21st ultimo I met him at that port, upon the request of Prince Date and his excellency Mr. Yoshida, who had been appointed by His Majesty the Emperor, to receive General Grant and family as the guests of the empire. The General was most cordially welcomed to Japan by the Japanese officials, and also by the people of Nagasaki, and was entertained as the nation’s guest during his stay in that city. He left Nagasaki oh the 26th of June for Tokeiy on board the United States steamer Richmond, escorted by His Majesty’s man-of-war Kongo-Kuan, and also by the United States steamer Ashuelot.

The General arrived in Yokohama on the 3d of July, and was saluted by the war vessels of Russia, Japan, France, and the United States, the German man-of-war displaying the Imperial ensign in honor of the General. The English men-of-war in port made no recognition of the General, owing to the order issued by Her Britannic Majesty’s colonial secretary, Sir Michael Hicks Beach, to the effect that Her Majesty’s war vessels should not salute General Grant as he was but a private gentleman. After the salute, the General was received at the Japanese admiralty landing by His Majesty’s ministers of state, and conducted at once to Tokei, where he was met by the governor and received an address of welcome from the citizens of Tokei; after which he was conducted by Japanese officials, under a guard of honor, to the palace of Euriokwan, which had been assigned to him by the Emperor. The palace assigned to the Ex-President, with all its surroundings, is the finest in the empire.

On the 4th of July, their Majesties the Emperor and Empress, gave audience to General and Mrs. Grant, and received the distinguished visitors with marked consideration in the presence of the princes of the empire, the prime ministers, Admiral Patterson, and several naval officers and the officers of this legation. I inclose a copy of the Emperor’s address and of General Grant’s reply on the occasion of his reception, as published in the Tokio Times of the 12th instant:

On the same evening the citizens of the United States resident in Tokei gave the General and family a reception, and welcomed him to Japan in appropriate addresses. The Emperor, on the 7th instant, gave a dinner to the General and his family, at which the Emperor, with several of the chief ministers of state, was present, and at which I was also present with Mrs. Bingham. On the same day His Majesty also held a review of the troops of this and neighboring garrisons in honor of General Grant. The citizens of Tokei gave an entertainment to General Grant on the evening of the 8th instant in the College of Engineers, the most spacious and elegant structure of the kind in Japan, on which occasion the attendance was about twelve hundred people. The extensive grounds of the college were most beautifully illuminated with lanterns decorated with the flags of the two countries. I inclose an account of this generous and very significant reception of General Grant by the people, as published in the Tokio Times of the 12th instant, and also a copy of General Grant’s speech at Nagasaki as published in the same paper, and an account of his entertainment at that city from the Japan Herald of the 10th instant, and which account contains, among other things, the remarks made by me at Nagasaki.

There is no room to doubt that this government and people, by the unprecedented attentions shown to General Grant, manifest not only their great admiration of and respect for their distinguished guest, but also their respect for the government and people of the United States, and their appreciation of the fact that our government was the first to bring them into the comity of civilized states, and has been the first to accede to their request that the right to regulate their own commercial affairs, domestic and foreign, may no longer be restricted or denied.

As my visit to Nagasaki was not an absence from my post under instructions, and did not cut me off from communication by telegraph with the legation nor from a speedy return thereto, and as the legation was kept open during all the period of my journey, I trust that my action in the premises may meet your approval.

I have, &c.,

JNO. A. BINGHAM.

[Inclosure 1 in No. 913.—Tokio Times, July 12, 1879.]

Since his landing in Yokohama, General Grant has been chiefly occupied in visiting and receiving visitors, sight-seeing, and partaking of the most genial hospitality on the part of his warm-hearted entertainers. On Friday, the 4th instant, the distinguished traveler, accompanied by Mrs. Grant, were [was] admitted to an audience with the Emperor and Empress. After offering not merely a graceful but a cordial welcome to the General, the Mikado addressed him in words of which the following is the translation:

“Your name has been known to us for a long time, and we are highly gratified to see you. While holding the high office of President of the United States, you extended to our countrymen special kindness and courtesy; and when our ambassador, Iwakura, visited the United States, he received the kindest civilities from you. The kindness thus shown by you has always been remembered by us. In your travels around the world you have reached this country, and people of all classes feel gratified and happy to receive you. I trust that during your sojourn in our country you may find much to enjoy. It gives us sincere pleasure to receive you; and we are especially gratified that we have been able to do so on the anniversary of American Independence. We congratulate you, therefore, on this occasion.”

The General replied as follows:

“Your Majesty: I am very much gratified for the welcome you accord me here today, and for the great kindness with which I have been received, ever since I came to Japan, by your government and your people. I recognize in this, friendliness toward my country. I can assure you that this feeling is reciprocated by the United States; that our people, without regard to party, take the deepest interest in all that concerns Japan, and have the warmest wishes for her welfare. I am happy to be able to express that sentiment. America is your next neighbor, and will always give Japan sympathy and support in her efforts to advance. I again thank your Majesty for your hospitality, and wish you a long and happy reign, and for Japan prosperity and independence.

[Inclosure 2 in No. 913.—Tokio Times, July 12, 1879.]

Her Majesty the Empress received the lady guest with charming grace and sympathy, and a few pleasant words were exchanged. In the evening the double event of the anniversary of the Declaration of Independence, and the presence in their midst of the second savior of their country, was taken advantage of by the American residents of the capital to entertain the Ex-President and his party at a banquet at the Uyeno Seiyoken, a fete which will be forever memorable to those who participated in it. Since then no effort has been spared to make the sojourn of the tourists agreeable and varied in its phases. The princes of the blood, ministers, and all the prominent members of the society of the capital have visited at the Euripkwan. On the 7th, there was a brilliant review in honor of the general. On the 8th, a gorgeous festival was arranged for him by the citizens of Tokei in the great hall of the Kobu Dai Gaku, This was really a superb display, and quite a new departure on account of the large throng of Japanese ladies. The same feature was noticeable at the similar entertainment provided by the merchants of Yokohama for Grant in the town hall. On this occasion Mr. Hirayama Ginta, the famed pyrotechnist, seems to have outdone all his previous efforts both in the quality and the number of his brilliant but evanescent beauties.

On the 10th instant, the General remained at home and received numerous visitors, including the committee of Yokohama residents appointed to superintend the arrangments of the entertainment to be given by the stranger community of the port. At the choice of the guests the time has been fixed for some day in the first week in August. On the 15th or 16th of this month, the General and his party will sail for Xezo, where they will remain for a few days, then return to Tokei, whence a trip to Nikko will be undertaken. According to present plans the sojourn in this empire of the ex-President of the United States will terminate on the 25th of August.

[Inclosure 3 in No. 913.—Tokio Times, July 12, 1879.]

One of the most important and significant statements of conviction respecting the rights of eastern nations, and especially the independent privileges of Japan, that has proceeded from any high and, commanding authority, was announced by General Grant at Nagasaki, in a speech responsive to the address of the governor of that place. It has not hitherto been printed fully, and we are gratified to place it upon record here:

“Your Excellency, Ladies and Gentlemen: You have here this evening several Americans who have the talent of speech, and who could make an eloquent response to your address. I have no such gift, and I never lamented its absence more than now, when there is so much that I want to say about your country, your people, and your progress. I have not been an inattentive observer of that progress, and in America we have been favored with accounts of it from my distinguished friend whom you all know as the friend of Japan, and whom it was my privilege to send as minister; I mean Judge Bingham. The spirit which has actuated the mission of Judge Bingham—the spirit of sympathy, support, and conciliation—not only expressed my own sentiments, but those of America. America has much to gain in the East; no nation has greater interests at stake. But America has nothing to gain except what comes from the cheerful acquiescence of the Eastern people, and insures them as much benefit as it does us. I should be ashamed of my country if its relations with other nations, and especially with these ancient and most interesting empires in the East, were based upon any other idea. We have rejoiced in your progress; we have watched you step by step; we have followed the unfolding of your old civilization and its absorbing the new. You have had our profound sympathy in that work, our sympathy in the troubles which came with it, and our friendship.

“I hope that our friendship may continue; that it may long continue. As I have said, America has great interests in the East. She is your next neighbor. She is more affected by the Eastern populations than any other power. She can never be insensible to what is doing here. Whatever her influence may be, I am proud to believe that it has always been exerted in behalf of justice and kindness. No nation needs from the outside powers justice and kindness more than Japan, for the work that has made such marvelous progress in the past few years is a work in which we are deeply concerned, and in the success of which we see a new era in civilization. This we should encourage.

“I do not know that I can say anything more than this in response to the kind toast of the governor. Judge Bingham can speak with more eloquence and, as a minister, with authority. But I could not allow the occasion to pass without saying how deeply I sympathize with Japan in her efforts to advance, and how much these efforts are appreciated in America. In that spirit I ask you to unite with me in a sentiment: ‘The prosperity and the independence of Japan.’”

[Inclosure 4 in No. 913.—Extract from the Japan Daily Herald, July 10, 1879.]

General Grant at Nagasaki.

General Grant has come and gone. As our readers are aware, the Richmond, with the general and family on board, arrived early Saturday morning last, and received the customary salutes. The day was made one of great rejoicing, and there could have been very few indeed who did not join some way or other in welcoming the great warrior and statesman. During the morning salutes were being fired on all sides, and as the day wore on it became evident that by sundown Nagasaki would come out in all the brilliancy which chochin could produce.

In the afternoon, as agreed upon, a deputation of the residents waited upon General Grant, and the following address of welcome was read by Commodore Furber, to which the General feelingly replied.

General U. S. Grant:

You have been so fêted in other lands during your two years’ tour, that now, as you cross the threshold of this ancient empire, which in twenty-five years has attempted to revolutionize the traditions of twenty-five centuries, we, representing the foreign community of Nagasaki, are sensible that any welcome we can offer you will appear but a poor one, compared with the receptions you have met with from the larger and more wealthy ports in China.

Be assured, however, that no more genuine feelings of respect and admiration exist in any community than those’ which are felt toward you by the foreign residents in Nagasaki, and which prompt us to offer you our sincere and hearty welcome to Japan.

We feel much gratified by your visit. We wish you a pleasant journey through this Empire, and a safe return to the country of your birth, to enjoy the well-merited reward of your brave deeds and successful government.

We have the honor to be, with much respect, your most obedient servants, E. G. Furber,

Ching Sing Leong,

V. Florent,

H. de Figueiredo,

T. B. Glover,

H. J. Hunt,

H. Iwersen,

H. K. Koning,

J. V. Petersen,

F. Ringer,

E. Rogers,

G. H. C. Salter,

Taikee.

The committee of thirteen, representing the United States of America, British, French, German, Danish, Dutch, Portuguese, and Chinese residents of Nagasaki, Japan.

June 21, 1879.

After dark Nagasaki began to look very pretty, scarcely a house being conspicuous through want of some attempt at illumination. Many of the buildings on the settlement were exceedingly beautiful and exhibited a great deal of taste in their decorations, while the hill lots sparkled out from the surrounding darkness like fairy palaces of surprising forms. Altogether the scene was a very pretty one, and only our oldest residents can recall a similar occasion which took place some years ago. It was the intention to have repeated the illumination during the general’s stay, hut the weather was unpropitious and the idea was in consequence abandoned.

On Tuesday a grand dinner in native style was given by the Japanese in honor of their distinguished guest, and the opportunity was taken for the presentation of the following address: General U. S. Grant:

In the name of the citizens of Nagasaki, we offer you a sincere welcome at this small town. We feel greatly honored by your visit to Nagasaki, and still more so by your becoming our guest this evening.

Any outward signs of respect and hospitality we offer you are but a fraction of our kindly feelings toward you, and are quite inadequate to express the great admiration we have for you.

On your return to your own great country, after having visited this eastern empire, we trust you will carry away with you pleasant reminiscences and friendly feeling toward our country and people. We wish you a successful career and a long life and health to enjoy the illustrious name and position you have made for yourself.

The dinner at which you have honored us with your company is given in this country to convey from the hosts the well wishes and friendship they feel towards their honorable guest; and in the hope that a long and sincere intimacy may be promoted between our guest and those we have the honor to represent to-night, we have offered you this poor entertainment.

We have the honor to be, with much respect, your most obedient servants,

awoki kiuhichiro,

matsuda gengoro.

June 24, 1879.

We are not in a position, nor indeed would our space allow, to reproduce the many speeches made during the General’s visit, but the following from the Hon. Mr. Bingham, United States minister, in reply to Mr. Yoshida, who proposed his health, is worth recording:

Mr. Bingham, in response to the sentiments of personal regard offered by Mr. Yoshida, acknowledged the courtesy to himself, and said that he came hither to join the official representatives of His Majesty the Emperor, and also the people of Nagasaki, in fitting testimonials of respect to General Grant, the friend of the United States of America, and the friend as well of Japan.

He also said that he came to join in the quality of United States minister, bearing a commission issued by the distinguished guest of the evening, under whose administration as, President of the United States the minister received his appointment. Mr. Bingham stated that it had been his endeavor to faithfully discharge his duties in such manner as would strengthen the friendship between the two countries and promote the commercial interests of both, and that he did not doubt that by so acting he reflected the wishes of the illustrious man who is the guest of the empire, and the wishes also of the President and people of the United States.

“The government of my country,” said he, “has, by the recent treaty with Japan, manifested its desire that justice may be done, by according to Japan her right to regulate her own commercial affairs. To do justice is the highest duty, as it is the highest interest of civil government.” It is much to be regretted that the almost constant downpour of rain with which we have been favored for nearly the last three months had not ceased during the General’s short stay, as the few lions we possess lose more than, a great deal of their interest in the wet weather. However, we believe most was made of what Nagasaki had to show, and we feel sure, that in spite of the rain and other circumstances, which render a visit to Arita unadvisable, the General’s first insight into the character of the Japanese, with their readiness to entertain and their liberal notions of hospitality, will not be forgotten as he passes through the empire, and his visit to this country will do much to strengthen the ties that bind America and Japan together.—[Rising Sun and Nagasaki Express.]

No. 295. Mr. Bingham to Mr. Evarts. [Document 319]

No. 295.
Mr. Bingham to Mr. Evarts.

United States Legation,
Tokei, Japan, July 16, 1879. (Received August 11.) No. 918.]

Sir: On the 4th instant I received from his excellency Mr. Terashima, minister for foreign affairs, a communication, dated the 3d instant, to the effect that owing to the prevalence of cholera in the districts of Kobe and Osaka provisional regulations had been established (a copy of which was inclosed), by which all vessels coming hither from either of said districts should be detained in quarantine at Nagawia for ten days, and adding that “said regulations will be carried out as soon as all necessary arrangements shall have been completed.”

On the 5th instant I addressed a note to the foreign minister in reply, acquainting him of my desire to be informed when the regulations would be carried out, to the end that I might instruct our consuls in Japan, and cause due notification to be made thereof. I have the honor to inclose herewith copies of this correspondence, together with a copy of Mr. Terashima’s letter of the 3d instant.

On the 9th instant Mr. Terashima replied to my note as follows: “The quarantine regulations will be in force until further ordered by my (his) government. I (he) trust that you (I) were good enough to notify the contents of my (his) note of the 3d instant to the consuls of your (my) country; if, however, you have not done so, I (he) respectfully request that your excellency (I) will kindly notify the contents of this communication in addition to those of mine of the 3d instant,” a copy of which communication is herewith, together with a copy of my dispatch to the consul-general of date the 10th instant, directing him to make public the quarantine regulations, to the end that the same might be observed by all American vessels, with the qualification set forth by the minister in his dispatch of the 9th, “that vessels ascertained upon examination by the quarantine commission to have had no case of cholera on board during their voyage will be allowed to enter the harbor (of Yokohama), after they have passed seven days from the day on which they left a port where cholera or any other infectious disease prevails.”

I also inclose a copy of the consul-generals notification, as published in the Japan Herald, of date the 11th instant. Not antil after the publication of this notice upon my order, did any foreign representative accredited to this court make publication of any notice of the quarantine regulations. His excellency the British minister did, on the 14th instant, make publication that it should be lawful for Her Britannic Majesty’s consul at Kanagawa, so long as the ports of Hiogo and Osaka, or either of them, shall be declared by the Imperial Japanese Government to be infested with cholera, or other infectious disease highly dangerous to health, to detain by his warrant any British vessel entering the Bay of Yedo from the ports of Hiogo or Osaka, for a period not exceeding seven days, unless upon further order of the British consul. A copy of the order of the British minister, as published in the Japan Herald of the 15th instant, is herewith.

It is to be observed of this order that the British minister limits the action of the British consul to such British vessels as may come from the ports of Hiogo or Osaka, and also gives him full liberty at his discretion to permit all such vessels to come into the port of Kanagawa.

Thus it is seen that the British minister ignores altogether the provisions of the quarantine regulations of this government that infected vessels from either of said ports shall be detained ten days, and substantially, and by necessary implication, declares the right of Great Britain at the election of its consul, in defiance of the law of this empire, to import cholera or other infectious disease dangerous to human life into the port of Kanagawa.

It is with deep regret that I also note the fact, as published in yesterday’s Japan Herald, that a German merchant-vessel, the Hesperia, was taken out of quarantine by the German consul, who was attended by a German man-of-war, and brought into the port of Kanagawa.

* * * * * * *

The position assumed by the British minister, and, as I understand, by the German minister also, is that no quarantine is to be enforced save by their direction, and that any quarantine regulations made by this government shall be entirely disregarded by their respective consuls.

* * * * * * *

No such instructions, it gives me pleasure to say, have at any time been given to me. In my opinion, our own people residing in Japan have the right, under all existing treaties, to the protection of this government against the importation of pestilence into their habitations by the vessels of any foreign power whatever, and it is also my opinion that the denial by Great Britain of the power of this government in the premises, is the denial of a power the assertion of which by the Japanese Government our government may, with great propriety, insist upon in the interest and for the protection of the lives of our own citizens.

As you were pleased to approve my action in the matter of quarantine last year, as communicated in my No. 885, I trust that my action under like circumstances now, as herein communicated, may also meet your approval.

I beg leave to say that General Stahel, who was rightfully detained in quarantine for a few days, was permitted by the government to return to his post, and that the circumstances attending his detention and release will be made the subject of another dispatch at a future day. In my opinion there was nothing in the action of this government in the matter of General Stahel’s detention of which he or our government can justly complain.

I have, &c.,

JOHN A. BINGHAM.

[Inclosure 1 in No. 918.—Translation.]

Foreign Office, Tokei,
The 3d, the 7th month, the 12th year, Meiji.

His Excellency John A. Bingham,
Envoy Extraordinary and Minister Plenipotentiary of the United States of America:

Sir: I have the honor to inform your excellency that, owing to the prevalence of cholera at present in the districts of Kobe and Osaka, the provisional regulations have been established as per inclosure, by which all vessels coming from either of the above districts are to be detained at the quarantine harbor of Nagaura, in the province of Soushin, for a period of ten days, and further that the said regulations will be carried out as soon as all necessary arrangements shall have been completed. I avail myself of this occasion to renew to your excellency the assurances of my highest consideration.

TERASHIMA MUNENORI,
His Imperial Japanese Majesty’s Minister for Foreign Affairs.

[Inclosure 2 in No. 918.]

United States Legation,
Tokei, Japan, July 5, 1879. No. 1000.]

His Excellency Terashima Munenori,
His Imperial Japanese Majesty’s Minister for Foreign Affairs:

Sir: I am in receipt of your excellency’s communication of the 3d instant, inclosing provisional quarantine regulations as to vessels coming from the districts of Kobe and Osaka, and informing me that the same “will be carried out as soon as all necessary arrangements shall have been completed.” I beg leave to acquaint your excellency that I am advised by the United States consul-general that these regulations have been put into execution as to the Genkai Maru without notice, and that General Julius Stahel, the United States consul at Kobe, being a passenger on said vessel, is now detained thereon in quarantine, and that the quarantine director, Dr. Simmons, reports “that there is no cholera, or the appearance of any infectious or contagious disease on board the vessel.”

I am further informed by the consul-general that Consul Stahel is under instructions from my government to proceed at the earliest moment to Hong Kong, Canton, and Macao “on important public business.”

I trust that it will be the pleasure of your excellency’s government, as it is clearly, its privilege so to do, to issue a permit to General Stahel, United States consul, allowing him to quit the quarantine at once and proceed without delay to Hong-Kong, Canton, and Macao, as he is directed by his government so to do.

I pray your excellency to give me as early a reply to this communication as may be convenient, and especially inform me if the regulations are to be observed until further ordered by your excellency’s government, to the end that I may notify our consuls.

I beg leave to renew to your excellency the assurance of my highest consideration.

JNO. A. BINGHAM.

[Inclosure 3 in No. 918.—Translation.]

Foreign Office Tokei,
The 9th, the 7th month, the 12th year Meiji. No. 14.]

His Excellency John A. Bingham,
Envoy Extraordinary and Minister Plenipotentiary of the United States of America:

Sir: With reference to my communication No. 12, which I had the honor to address your excellency on the 3d instant, forwarding a copy of the provisional quarantine regulations and giving notice that vessels coming from the districts of Kobe and Osaka would be detained for a period of ten days at Nagaura, in the province of Soushin, on account of the prevalence of cholera in the above districts, I beg now to acquaint you that I have received information from the proper department to the effect that they have decided that vessels ascertained upon examination by the quarantine commission to have had no cholera on board during their voyage, will be permitted to enter the port after they have passed seven days from the day on which they left a port where cholera prevails.

I avail myself of this occasion to renew to your excellency the assurance of my highest consideration.

TERASHIMA MUNENORI,
His Imperial Japanese Majesty’s Minister for Foreign Affairs.

[Inclosure 4 in No. 918.]

Mr. Bingham to Mr. Van Buren.

United States Legation,
Tokei, Japan, July 10, 1879. No. 745.]

Sir: I am in receipt of advices from his excellency Mr. Terashima, to the effect that a quarantine is declared as to all vessels bound for Yokohama which may have left or which may leave any port where cholera or any other infectious disease prevails. The inclosed quarantine regulations are to be observed until further ordered, with this qualification, that vessels which shall be ascertained upon examination by the quarantine commission to have had no case of cholera on board during their voyage, will be allowed to enter the harbor of Yokohama after seven days’ detention.

You are requested to give public notice of these quarantine regulations, to the end that the same may be observed by all American vessels, and furnish a copy of such notification to our several consuls.

In my opinion it is the duty of our several consuls to see that the regulations are observed by all American vessels.

I am, &c.

JOHN A. BINGHAM.

[Inclosure 5 in No. 918.—Extract from the Japan Daily Herald, July 11, 1879.

United States Consulate-General,
Kanagawa, July 11, 1879.

quarantine regulations.

By instructions from the United States minister in Japan, I hereby make public the quarantine regulations enacted by the Japanese Government, which are to be observed by all American vessels.

THOS. B. VAN BUREN,
United States Consul-General.

Provisional regulations applicable to the ports of Kanagawa and Shinagawa for the inspection and detention of vessels arriving from Kobe or Osaca.

1. All vessels arriving in the Bay of Yedo from one of such ports as are above mentioned, or which during their Voyage have touched at such ports, shall be detained at the quarantine harbor of Nagaura for a period of ten days before being allowed to enter either of the above ports.

2. A man of war will be stationed inside the entrance of the Bay of Yedo, and its officers will inquire, by signal, of all vessels entering the bay as to the port from which they come. Vessels coming from infected ports will proceed, as directed by the officers of the man of war, to Nagaura. Other vessels will be permitted to enter the harbor to which they are bound.

3. Vessels ordered to Nagaura, and there detained, will not be permitted to hold communication with other vessel or to discharge their passengers or cargo, or to hold any communication with the shore, whether for the purpose of shipping or discharging daily provisions or otherwise, except with the permission, and subject to the supervision, of the medical inspector in charge of the station.

4. The passengers or crew of a vessel so detained will be permitted by the medical inspector, if he shall consider it safe, to land, and, if they shall so desire, to remain on shore during the period of the ship’s detention at a place situated near the disinfecting station, to be indicated by the medical inspector.

5. In case cholera be found on board any vessel so stopped, patients suffering from the same will be removed to-the special hospital situated at Nagaura, apart from the other buildings, and there be treated.

N. B.—The cost of medicine and food, and other expenses necessarily incurred by or on behalf of the patients, shall be borne by themselves or their representatives.

6. During detention all vessels, their furniture, &c., all passengers and their baggage, and such articles among the cargo as, in the opinion of the medical inspector, shall require it, shall undergo disinfecting processes in the manner and at the times and places appointed by the medical inspector.

N. B.—In the case of passengers such processes will consist principally of baths; clothing, baggage, bedding, &c., will be subjected to the action of heat or to that of the vapor of carbolic acid.

Travelers overland to Tokio or Yokohama will be detained for five days at some suitable places in Yamanashi Ken and Gemma Ken, and at the post town Mishima.

N. B.—If, upon examination of any vessel after arriving at quarantine, it shall be found that no cholera or other infectious disease exists on board, she shall be released from quarantine at the expiration of seven days from the day of her departure from an infected port.

[Inclosure 6 in No. 918.—Extract from the Japan Daily Herald July 14, 1879.]

Whereas the Imperial Japanese Government have declared the ports of Kobe (Hiogo) and Osaka to be infected with cholera, and have issued and promulgated certain provisional quarantine regulations for “all vessels arriving in the Bay of Yedo, from one of such ports, or which, during their voyage, have touched at such ports,” and have in and by such provisional regulations made provision, among other matters, for the detention and medical examination and disinfection of such vessels and the crews, passengers, and cargoes thereof.

And, whereas, it is urgently necessary for the peace, order, and good government of British subjects resident in or resorting to Japan for the maintenance of friendly relations between British subjects and Japanese subjects, that the British consul at Kanagawa should be vested with legal powers to enable him to co-operate effectually with the Japanese authorities with the object of preventing the introduction into the port of Kanagawa of cholera or other infectious disease highly dangerous to the health of man, and in that behalf to detain, or cause to be detained and medically examined, any British vessel, her crew, passengers, and cargo coming into the Bay of Yedo from or having touched at either of the above-mentioned ports of Hiogo or Osaka, and such vessels, crews, passengers, or cargoes thereafter when necessary to further detain or cause to be further detained and properly disinfected.

The undersigned, Her Britannic Majesty’s envoy extraordinary and minister plenipotentiary in Japan, under and by virtue of the powers conferred upon him by “The China and Japan Order in Council, 1865,” and of all powers vested in him or in anywise enabling him in that behalf, has made and hereby publishes for the general information of Her Britannic Majesty’s subjects in Japan, the following regulation which, being urgent, will have effect unless and until it be disapproved by Her Majesty, and such disapproval be signified through one of Her Majesty’s principal secretaries of state, and notification of such disapproval be received and published by Her Majesty’s minister in Japan:

regulation.

It shall be lawful for Her Majesty’s consul at Kanagawa, so long as the ports of Hiogo and Osaka, or either of them, shall be declared by the Imperial Japanese Government to be infected with cholera or other infectious disease highly dangerous to the health of man, by warrant under his hand and the seal of his consulate, to detain or cause to be detained and medically examined by officers to be appointed in that behalf by him, any British vessel entering the Bay of Yedo from the ports of Hiogo and Osaka or either of them, together with her crew, cargo, and passengers (if any), and, after such primary detention and medical examination, to further detain in quarantine and cause to be properly disinfected—if and when necessary in the opinion of the medical officer so to be appointed as aforesaid—the said vessel, crew, cargo, and passengers, in such place or places and in such manner as may from time to time appear to the said consul to be expedient and necessary, provided always, that no such vessel, crew, cargo, or passengers shall be detained under any such warrant more than seven days at any one time unless and until the warrant for the detention of such vessel or crew, cargo or passengers (if any) shall have been renewed or extended for a longer period than seven days, or a fresh warrant for any such purpose shall have been issued by the said consul.

And any British subject disregarding or disobeying any such warrant of detention, or omitting and refraining to carry out any order for medical examination or for disinfection made by or under authority of the said consul, shall be deemed guilty of an offense against this regulation, and on conviction thereof before any of Her Majesty’s courts in Japan, shall for each such offense be liable to imprisonment for any term not exceeding three months, with or without hard labor, and with or without a fine not, exceeding five hundred dollars, or a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars without imprisonment.

Given at Her Britannic Majesty’s legation at Yedo this 14th day of July, A. D. 1879.
HARRY S. PARKES.

No. 296. Mr. Bingham to Mr. Evarts. [Document 320]

No. 296.
Mr. Bingham to Mr. Evarts.

United States Legation,
Tokei, Japan, July 23, 1879. (Received September 1.) No. 923.]

Sir: I have the honor to inclose herewith a copy of an interesting letter from the pen of Mr. E. J. Reed, M. P., published by him in the London Times under date the 31st of May last, and reproduced in the Japan Daily Herald of the 21st instant.

The writer very significantly remarks that— It is Great Britain and America that have wrought the deepest effects upon this ancient nation, now taking a high and worthy place among the civilized communities of the earth. * * * It is plain, however, although America has for the most part been singularly fortunate in her representatives of all kinds in Japan, the mind of the country, with its own ancient traditions, turns chiefly to this “land of old and just renown.”

* * * * * * *

I have, &c.,

JOHH A. BIHGHAM.

[Inclosure in No. 923.—Japan Daily Herald, July 21, 1879.]

Mr. Reed, M. P., on Japan.

To the Editor of the Times:

Sir: On leaving home in October last for Japan it was my intention (in accordance with a habit I have contracted in traveling) to offer you occasionally for insertion in the Times a letter setting forth some of the matters of interest which presented themselves abroad. On reaching Japan, however, I found everything so exceedingly novel and so entirely outside the range of one’s usual experiences in other countries, that I deferred for a time the attempt to offer you any remarks upon what I saw. Having now, however, completed a stay of several months in the couutry, during which I had unusual opportunities of studying it, I venture to offer a few general observations upon it. I should not do so even now were it not that the Whitsun holiday relieves your space of Parliamentary debates, while the treaty with Yakoob Khan and Sir Garnet Wolseley’s mission of peace have tranquilizer the public mind and afforded it leisure, to a portion of which Japan may well lay claim.

In my opinion, Japan is a country which the British people will take more and more into their regard just in proportion as they learn more and more of it. By the British people I do not mean those alone whose eyes are so intensely set on mere trade that they can see nothing else; I mean those also who regard and care for the imperial relations of Britain with other states, and those, too, whose interest is quickened by matters of art, science, religion, and social progress. Many foreigners besides our countrymen have taken a lively interest in Japan and favored her with their advice and assistance; but if we except the French impress which her army bears and the German characteristics of her medical schools and systems, it is Great Britain and America that have wrought the deepest effects upon this ancient nation, now rapidly taking a high and worthy place among the civilized communities of the earth. As Great Britain and America have a common language (with some odd, but minor differences), it is difficult to measure their respective influences upon Japanese life and institutions as they now exist. It is plain, however, that, although America has for the most part been singularly fortunate in her representatives of all kinds in Japan, the mind of the country, with its own ancient history and traditions, turns chiefly to this “land of old and just renown.” At both of the interviews which His Majesty the Emperor did me the honor of according me, I gathered from his words that the country and the people from which I came were present to his mind as he framed his kindly and gracious sentences, and daily intercourse with his ministers continually demonstrated that His Majesty’s sentiments were warmly shared by them. It must not be inferred from this that the political relations between the two countries are such as they ought to be. I may have opportunity hereafter to show that we are holding the Emperor of Japan and his ministers in a position which must occasion, and does occasion, ceaseless and unspeakable pain to them, without the smallest advantage to ourselves, and I am quite certain that when once the existing state of things becomes known to Parliament and understood by the country, its amendment will be sure to follow. Still, whatever causes of discontent the Japanese Government may have, and however pained they may be, their disposition is to respect and work with us, and if estrangement comes they will deeply regret it. It is characteristic of the refined manners of the Japanese that throughout my stay among them no mention of the painful part of their relations with us was ever made until my departure was at hand, and then only in reply to searching inquiries of my own.

The present condition of Japan and its future prospects cannot be in the least degree understood unless careful regard is had to its history, and more particularly to its history during the last few years. For the first thousand years of our era the Mikados of Japan were the real governors of the country; but from that time forward, down to our own time, a series of military chieftains successively held the Mikados in isolation and impotence, themselves conducting the actual government as they pleased. The last of these military usurpers, the Tokugawa family, held the governing power from 1603 down to 1868, and Keiki, its latest representative, although he resigned his high office of shogoon in November, 1867, made a desperate struggle for renewed power early in the following year, and only retired from the contest after the three-days’ battle of Fushimi had destroyed the hopes of his principal partisans. The Tokugawas had governed the country on a highly-organized feudal system, under which their vassals and retainers were the masters of the people. In the extremely brief space of the eleven years which have elapsed since the overthrow of this system, and in face of considerable uprisings in 1868 of the remaining partisans of the Tokugawas, and the formidable revolt of Saigo in 1877, the restored government of the Mikado or Emperor has covered the country with schools, in many of which English is taught; has established postal and telegraphic systems which would be creditable to any European country; has given perfect freedom to the person, and full security to property in every part; has organized a police system which not only performs its own duties efficiently, but greatly aided the troops during the revolt of Saigo in Satsuma; has provided and trained an army which is considered to be sufficient for all the purposes of the State, and bought and built a navy which would effectually debar any foreign minister from inflicting wanton injury upon its people, or from impulsively menacing the government with naval violence—things, both of them, far from unknown in Eastern waters. While accomplishing the foregoing objects the Government of Japan has had to incur and discharge great expenses incidental to the change of system from feudalism to freedom; because it wisely preferred to pension, as far as possible, the daimios and samurai whom it displaced, rather than be engaged with them in internal hostilities, which must have cruelly injured the innocent people. Yet, in spite of all, it has contrived to maintain its foreign credit unimpaired, having promptly met every pecuniary obligation outside of the country; and although, under the heavy exceptional pressures which I have named (to which several others might be added), its paper money is at present at a varying discount, the evil is being remedied by measures which must heartily commend themselves to us, viz, the reduction of expenditures in every department of the state and the simultaneous revision of its sources of revenue.

The great political and social change which has passed and is passing over Japan is very visible and full of interest to the visitor. In keeping the accounts of the state, for example, there is a curious mixture of Japanese and European systems, native characters being employed in the written parts in conjunction with Roman figures. After examining the books of the finance department, the naval accounts, &c., I feel sure that under the existing ministers the country will be allowed to benefit as rapidly as possible by the extended adoption of our methods. As regards outward appearances in the naval and military services there is but little beyond the faces of the officers and men to distinguish them from European forces. In the civil departments of the government there is a great mixture of European and native costumes, the native largely predominating. On one occasion I had the honor of dining with the cabinet and with two princes and princesses of the imperial house who occupy stations near to the throne. The dinner was a European one, and all the gentlemen dressed in European style; but the ladies wore the native costume. This was usually the case in the houses of the ministers; but the wives of those ministers who have traveled abroad wear European dress. Some of the ministers reside in European and some in native houses. In the great cities of the interior, such as Kioto and Osaka, there are extremely few Europeans to be seen, and almost the only European houses belong to them or to the government. In the barracks for troops and in some schools the old system of living has been changed for the new. In the ancient capital, Nara, I saw no European whatever, and but one European building, the government school; and the same is true of scores, I may say hundreds, of large cities and towns through which we passed.

I felt deeply interested in the education of the country, and visited the principal schools of most of the cities in which we staid. On one occasion, in the western capital of Kioto, I was asked by the American teacher of a girls’ school if I desired to hear the pupils read English, and was surprised to find that several of the native children read it with fair fluency. In a boys’ school of the same city a youth of fifteen stood up and declaimed Grattan’s “Eulogium upon William Pitt” in well-modulated tones, and with no imperfection of accent that his teacher was not responsible for. The great drawbacks to native education in Japan are its language and its caligraphy. The language is a complex hieroglyphic system, and the caligraphy a system of drawing or painting. Every schoolboy has to learn at least 1,000 different characters; in the elementary schools of the government 3,000 have to be taught. A man with pretensions to scholarship must be acquainted with about 10,000, and a very learned man with that number multiplied many times. My friend Captain Brinckley, R. A., of Tokei, a master of the Japanese language and the author of the first work written in Japanese by a foreigner, informed me: “It may be roughly said that a Japanese must devote at least ten years’ persistent and earnest study to the acquisition of his own language if he desires to possess a knowledge of it sufficient for the purposes of an educated man.” The mechanical art of handling the brush so as to paint the characters with skill and rapidity occupies no small part of a learner’s time. If our country could be induced to take a friendly interest in this beautiful far-off land of Japan, there is no good reason why the Anglo-Saxon tongue should not become the language of the country, which would be a better defense for it against Asiatic aggression than many ships and fortresses, and at the same time a great furtherance to that adoption of a common language which the colonial empire of England and the United States of America promise to the world. Unhappily, the learned men of Japan, having acquired their eminence by such laborious study, are averse to the adoption of an easier language, and so are many other Japanese conservatives. But their conservatism, like that of others, will be brushed aside by the omnipotence of natural forces. I feel satisfied that the general adoption in Japan of our language—which already appears upon its coinage and otherwise officially—would very greatly promote and quicken the development of the country; and, on the other hand, the retention of the present language will work incalculable mischief. Language is but an instrument, of course, and no student who has to devote ten years to its preparation can be expected to compete in literature or science with those who possess a language that can be acquired in a year or two.

The art of Japan, by which I here mean its drawing and painting, is undergoing marked changes. Derived originally from Corea and China, it has in the course of centuries undergone many changes of style, at first being merely employed for the decoration of palace, developing later into a means of depicting ceremonial dresses, and separating into various schools of what we understand by pictorial art. None are more ready than the Japanese to acknowledge, however, that all which the art of Japan can boast of in grace of outline, freedom of stroke, and delicacy of coloring is borrowed from the foreign sources before named. In the matter of perspective the influence of European art is now becoming strongly manifested. Until late years Japanese painting was so thoroughly and constantly defective in this respect that it was a safe principle to lay down that wherever the laws of perspective were correctly observed in a picture it could not be a true example of Japanese art. These laws are now, however, becoming studied and understood by Japanese artists, and I have seen many examples of considerable merit in this respect. In fact, one cannot but view with surprise the skill with which some of the younger artists of Japan are adopting European methods. I have possessed myself of several proofs and illustrations of this, of which I may mention a set of photographs of battle scenes taken from a series of pictures illustrative of the recent contests in Satsuma. They might be taken for the work of one of the most vigorous battle-painters of France, but are all from the hand of a Japanese artist, who has manifestly studied in Europe. I must confess, however, that I fear the influence of Europe upon Japanese art will not be wholly for its benefit, some of the most charming effects of Japanese painters being produced by arrangements and dispositions which are unknown to, and probably irreconcilable with, our European system.

In the matter of religion Japan presents a most interesting field of study. The ancient Shinto religion, which is probably purely indigenous, has been revived as the religion of the Emperor, and the marvel is how it ever became replaced by Buddhism at the imperial court. If we may credit the ancient records, or even if we subject them to all reasonable correction, we find that Shintoism was the only religion of the country for nearly a thousand years before Buddhism found its way across the sea from Corea, and it was in the traditions of the ancient religion that the empire itself was rooted. The first historical Mikado was supposed to be the direct descendant of the Sun Goddess, from whom were derived the proofs of his divine descent, the insignia of his authority, and the pledge of permanence for his dynasty. Yet some of the Mikados were among the earliest converts to Buddhism, although the people for a time resisted the introduction of the strange gods. My visit to the country has convinced me that the Christian religion is not making the progress there which other European systems are making, and that there are reasons why its progress will continue to be very slow indeed for some time to come. These reasons grow out of historic events. There was a time, in the sixteenth century, when the Roman Catholic missionaries of Spain and Portugal had gained no less than two million converts in Japan to their form of Christianity. This prosperity encouraged them to seek still further extension of their system by arts which were not uncommon in the days of the Spanish Inquisition, but which alarmed and irritated the men in power. The consequence was that the persecutions which in certain provinces had been practiced upon the Japanese who refused to become Christians were now put in play against those who had become converts, and hostility to the new religion, or rather to the new religionists, aggravated by the fear of the national independence being betrayed, resulted in a vast and pitiless attempt to exterminate Christianity altogether from the country. It is the memory of these days that forms the obstacle to the present spread of Christianity in Japan. If Christianity were now presented for the first time to the Japanese, it would probably have “a free course, run, and be glorified.” There is nothing in the Shinto faith to present any great or lasting obstacles to the simple religion of the Gospels; and even Buddhism, as it exists in Japan, in one of its principal sects, seems to offer a singular, and to me wholly unexpected, approximation toward Christian doctrine. I refer to the Shinshu sect, who believe and teach the doctrine of salvation by faith, although the object of their faith is, of course, other than the object of the Christian’s faith. I had considerable intercourse with the chief ecclesiastics of the Eastern and Western Shinshu churches, and learnt from them that the close resemblance of our religion to theirs supplies them with a lively hope of converting England to their faith. The existence of such a feeling, which will no doubt be largely reciprocated in this country, shows at least that the antagonism between the Buddhism of Japan and the religious doctrines of Europe is not nearly so pronounced as many might suppose. An indication of great impending religious changes in Japan is to be found in the fact that the temples are already the scenes of extremely free discussions between the priests and the people. A discussion which took place in August last at the temple of Shin-kai-zhi, at Shinagawa, Tokei, during a discourse by a priest on “Infinite Vision,” furnished an illustration of this. Numerous members of the audience interrupted and cross-examined the preacher, one of them saying, “All that the priesthood affirms on the subject of heaven and hell is a mere fabrication.” Even this rudeness was meekly endured by the priest, who answered with patience and temper the various disputants. Reserving further remarks for another letter, I have the honor to be, sir, your obedient servant,

E. J. REED.
Broadway Chambers, Westminster, May 31.

No. 297. Mr. Bingham to Mr. Evarts. [Document 321]

No. 297.
Mr. Bingham to Mr. Evarts.

United States Legation,
Tokei, Japan, July 24, 1879. (Received September 1.) No. 924.]

Sir: I have the honor to transmit herewith for your information the report of his excellency Mr. Okuma, his Imperial Japanese Majesty’s minister of finance, of the estimated receipts and expenditures of this government for the current fiscal year, ending the 30th of June, 1880.

The minister in his letter transmitting his elaborate and most creditable report to his excellency Mr. Sanjo, the prime minister, remarks that as “the country is now in a condition of peace and tranquility” he esteems this to be an “opportune time” to gradually establish the system of national finance upon a satisfactory basis.

The report estimates the expenditures of the current fiscal at yen 55,651,379.03, and the estimated revenues for the year at precisely the same amount. The minister is manifestly unwilling to estimate for yearly expenditure beyond the estimated yearly income of the state.

As before reported in these dispatches of the revenues of the last fiscal year, the chief source of revenue in Japan for the current fiscal year is the land tax, which, it is estimated, will furnish yen 41,000,950 of the entire sum of yen 55,651,379.03; that is to say, more than two-thirds of the entire amount of the national revenue for the year.

In the items estimated for miscellaneous expenditure is the sum of yen 1,200,000, in which is included the subsidy to the “famine relief fund.” This provision for a relief fund against famine is as novel as it is wise and humane. You will notice that the finance minister in his report, speaking of this new provision, says that— The reasons why the people fall into distress are that there exists no scheme to enable them to provide a reserve for bad years, but only one which makes them pay double after calamities have passed, * * * and they have had no opportunity yet of judging of the high importance and advantage of a public or union reserve fund. Such a system has therefore been matured this year for the purpose of stimulating the establishment of public funds to meet possible calamities. By this means only the successful relief of distressed peasants can be provided for. In order to encourage the public to respect the measure, the government has come to the resolution to economize as much as possible their own expenditure, so as to give their aid to this fund by providing three per cent, of the annual land tax, or 1,200,000 yen yearly.

Such administration as is herein indicated by the finance minister accords with our American theory that civil governments are instituted to secure to the governed their rights and to promote their interests.

It is further to be noted that the report shows a decrease of the paper circulation from last year of yen 7,499,217, and of the national debt, domestic and foreign, there has been a reduction in gross of yen 21,200,280.68.

The total domestic and foreign debt of the nation is yen 363,227,974; the foreign debt amounting in yen to but 11,829, 120.

I have, &c.,

JNO. A. BINGHAM.

No. 298. Mr. Bingham to Mr. Evarts. [Document 322]

No. 298.
Mr. Bingham to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Tokio, Japan, July 26, 1879. (Received September 1.) No. 925.]

Sir: Since writing my No. 918, in relation to the presence of Asiatic cholera in Hiogo and Osaka, and the quarantine established by this government in the Bay of Yedo to prevent the incoming, for the time being, of infected vessels or vessels arriving from said infected ports, I am in receipt of the revised quarantine regulations adopted on the 21st instant for all the open ports of Japan, a copy of which, together with copies of Mr. Terashima’s letter of transmittal, of my reply thereto, and also copies in duplicate of my notification to our citizens and the officers of our vessels, and a copy of my letter to our consul-general, I have the honor to inclose herewith.

Being advised of the rapid spread of this malignant disease in the interior of Japan, and of the very great mortality occasioned by it in the ports of Hiogo and Osaka within the last thirty days, it was to my mind the duty of His Imperial Japanese Majesty’s Government to establish a quarantine as it has done, and thereby prevent, if possible, the transmission of the contagion into other ports of the empire. To observe and enforce these needful and just measures of quarantine also seemed to me to be the duty of our government, as indicated by my general instructions, our treaty obligations, and especially by your instruction to me No. 404, dated the 6th of December, 1878.

I also inclose for your information a copy of the published notification of the minister of Great Britain for the enforcement of the revised quarantine regulations as qualified by him. It is difficult to see in this notification of the British minister any recognition of the right of the Japanese Government to establish and maintain a quarantine other than that which the British minister and consuls may from time to time deem “necessary or expedient.”

I have issued an instruction to each of our several consuls corresponding with that which I addressed to the consul-general, a copy of which is herewith as above stated.

None of the other European powers represented at this court have, so far as I can learn, given public notice of any purpose to observe, in whole or in part, the quarantine regulations of this government. It remains to be seen how long the governments of the western powers will countenance the monstrous pretension that they may each and all lawfully deny to this government the inalienable right of self-preservation.

I have, &c.,

JNO. A. BINGHAM.

[Inclosure 1 in No. 925.]

Mr. Terashina Munenori to Mr. Bingham.

Foreign Office, Tokei,
The 21st the 7th month, the 12th year Meiji.

Sir: I have the honor to inform your excellency that the quarantine regulations, which I had the honor to forward on the 15th instant, having since undergone revision, an amended edition of the same has been this day promulgated by the imperial government, an English translation of which I beg herewith to inclose, and I have respectfully to request that, in accordance with the method of proceeding in such matters hitherto found convenient, your excellency will take the necessary steps to secure the observance of these regulations by your nationals in all open ports.

I avail myself, &c.,

TERASHIMA MUNENORI,
His Imperial Japanese Majesty’s Minister for Foreign Affairs.

His Excellency John A. Bingham,
&c., &c., &c.,

[Inclosure 2 in No. 925.]

Mr. Bingham to Mr. Terashima Munenori.

United States Legation,
Tokei, July 22, 1879. No. 1021.]

Sir: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your excellency’s two communications numbered 18 and 19, respectively, and dated the 21st instant, in the former of which you inclosed copies of the quarantine regulations, and in the latter of which you acknowledge and answer satisfactorily my letter of the 17th instant.

I beg leave further to acquaint your excellency that, in compliance with the request made in your No. 18, I have this day issued a notification to citizens of the United States of America to conform to and observe the provisions of the revised regulations, a copy of which notification, together with a copy of the revised quarantine regulations, will appear in the Japan Daily Mail of to-morrow.

I avail myself, &c.,

JNO. A. BINGHAM.

His Excellency Terashima Munenori,
&c., &c., &c.

[Inclosure 3 in No. 925.—Japan Daily Mail, July 23, 1879.]

United States Legation,
Tokei, July 22, 1879.

The undersigned, envoy extraordinary and minister plenipotentiary of the United States of America in Japan, gives notice that the annexed revised quarantine regulations, adopted and promulgated as applicable to the several open ports of Japan until further ordered by His Imperial Japanese Majesty’s Government, are to be observed and conformed to by the commanders and officers of all naval and merchant vessels of the United States of America which are now or may hereafter be in Japanese waters.

And the undersigned gives further notice that all citizens of the United States of America who shall violate the provisions of said regulations may be held to answer therefor in the appropriate United States consular court in Japan.

JNO. A. BINGHAM.

Quarantine regulations established by His Imperial Japanese Majesty’s Government, 14th July, 1879.

(Revised 21st July, 1879.)

Article. I. The Government of Japan having declared a quarantine for the purpose of preventing the spread of cholera the following regulations are hereby declared applicable to the open ports, and the same shall be observed and enforced until further notification.

Article. II. A local board of health will be organized at such of the open ports as the central board of health shall determine upon, consisting of government officers, properly educated and qualified Japanese or foreign medical men, a chemist, and a suitable staff of assistants. The number of members will be regulated in each instance by the amount of shipping at the port, but in all cases will be sufficient to insure the speedy disposal of all matters of quarantine.

All such local boards will be under the control of the central board of health.

Art. III. The government will appoint a quarantine anchorage at each of the open ports under quarantine regulations, and will provide a hospital for cholera patients, a separate hospital for the reception of doubtful cases, a place for the disposal of the dead, properly fitted buildings far disinfection, and quarters comprising all necessary accommodation for persons under surveillance.

Art. IV. A guard-ship, displaying a quarantine signal, will be stationed near the entrance to each port under quarantine regulations, where every vessel, before entering the harbor, will be detained for inspection by at least two members of the local board, one of whom must be a medical officer. The commanding officer, surgeon, if any, and any person on board shall answer all inquiries of the quarantine officers; and a written declaration shall be filled up and signed in the prescribed manner and form.

The commanding officer shall also, if required, open every portion of his vessel to inspection; the cargo-holds shall, however, only be subject to inspection when they have been occupied by passengers or crew during the voyage, or otherwise directly exposed to infection.

The quarantine officers shall be allowed to examine the ship’s log, and to compare the crew and passenger lists with the persons on board.

Art. V. If the commanding officer of any vessel arriving from an uninfected and unsuspected port shall have satisfied the quarantine officers, by his written declaration and otherwise, that his vessel has had no direct communication with any infected or suspected port or vessel, and that no cases of undoubted or suspected cholera have occurred on board during the voyage, the vessel shall be allowed to enter the port at once. In the case of a vessel of war, a written declaration to the above effect, signed by the commanding officer and surgeon, shall always be held sufficient, and the vessel shall be allowed to enter the port without inspection; but in the absence of such declaration, the vessel shall be subject to the rules of the quarantine.

Art. VI. On the arrival of any vessel which, either at the commencement or during the course of its voyage, had had any direct communication with an infected or suspected port or vessel, but on board which no case of suspected or confirmed cholera has occurred during the voyage, the vessel and persons on board shall be detained until the completion of a period of seven days, counting from the date of such exposure to infection, except in special cases in which the local board may consider it safe to shorten the term. Should the above period have expired on or before the arrival of the vessel, the passengers shall be at liberty to land immediately upon the completion of the necessary disinfection.

The cargo, unless consisting of rags, old clothes, bedding, or other articles considered specially dangerous by the quarantine officers, shall not be subject to disinfection; but disinfection of other articles shall be performed or omitted at the discretion of the quarantine officers, and disinfected articles may be landed as soon as the process is completed. Cargo and other articles, unless disinfected, shall not be landed until the expiration of the period of detention.

Should any case of confirmed or suspected cholera appear in a vessel during detention, such vessel and all persons and things on board the same shall be subject to the provisions of Articles VIII and IX.

Art. VII. Any vessel of war arriving from an infected or suspected port shall be allowed to enter at once, provided the commanding officer and surgeon shall furnish a written declaration that no person on board has landed at such port or has been otherwise exposed to infection within the period of seven days preceding the arrival of the vessel, and that no case of confirmed or suspected cholera has appeared on board during the voyage.

In the absence of such declaration, the vessel will be required to submit to the quarantine regulations.

Art. VIII. Any vessel on board of which suspected or confirmed cholera has appeared shall on arrival remove to an anchorage indicated by the quarantine officers, and shall be liable to detention for a period of seven days, counting from the date at which the necessary disinfection is completed.

If before the arrival of the vessel the disease shall have disappeared, and disinfection have been subsequently performed in a manner satisfactory to the quarantine officers, the period of detention may be shortened so far as the local board may deem advisable.

On the other hand, in the event of the apearance of cholera upon a vessel in quarantine after the disinfection has been performed, the disinfection shall be repeated so far as may be considered necessary by the officers of the local board, and the vessel shall be detained for three days from the time of completion of such disinfection for until the end of the period of detention at first prescribed, should the time unexpired exceed three days. Any patients or dead bodies shall be dealt with according to the provisions of Article IX.

Art. IX. On the arrival of any such vessel as in the last preceding clause mentioned, any patient still suffering from the disease shall, if his condition admits, be removed to the quarantine hospital; and, should death have resulted in any case, the body, if not already disposed of, shall either be burned at a place prepared for that purpose, or, at the request of the persons interested, buried after thorough disinfection.

After the removal from the vessel of such patients or dead bodies, the bedding, clothes, and other articles and any part of the vessel which has been exposed to the infection shall be thoroughly disinfected in the manner prescribed by the local board; and all persons on board, except those required for completing the disinfection and taking care of the vessel, shall be removed to and disinfected at the quarantine buildings set apart for their accommodation. Those remaining on the vessel may undergo disinfection either on board or, when replaced by others, in the proper buildings ashore.

Art. X. Vessels which have been at an infected or suspected port, and which have subsequently touched at a port without undergoing a quarantine, shall be treated as coming directly from the infected port.

Art. XI. All vessels regularly carrying mails shall be allowed to land mail-matter immediately on their arrival, and suitable means for transport and delivery of such mail-matter will be provided by the government.

Art. XII. Patients in the quarantine hospital shall receive medical attendance and all necessaries.

Any person desiring to visit a patient in the hospital, or on board any vessel in quarantine, will be permitted to do so under certain conditions prescribed by the local board.

Qualified medical men, not connected with the quarantine hospital, may be admitted to consultation, at the request of patients or their representatives.

No patient shall leave the hospital until discharged by the medical officers.

Art. XIII. In cases where no confirmed or doubtful cholera has occurred on board, persons under surveillance may be detained in the vessel, or, at the discretion of the local board, be removed to the quarantine quarters provided on shore, according to the hygienic condition of the vessel.

Art. XIV. In the event of the appearance on board a vessel coming to a port under quarantine regulations of any case of illness with obscure symptoms which the quarantine officers may consider probably of choleraic origin, the patient shall be removed to a special quarter of the quarantine hospital, and the vessel shall be detained until the expiration of a sufficient time, which shall not exceed forty-eight hours, to enable the medical officer to form a decision as to the nature of the disease; and the local board, on the report of the medical officer, shall put in force such of these regulations as shall be applicable to the case.

Art. XV. All vessels in transit from infected or suspected ports, touching at a port under quarantine regulations for the purpose of receiving supplies or cargo, shall be allowed to receive such supplies or cargo by such means and under such restrictions and conditions as may in each case be imposed by the local board. But all such vessels shall previously be subject to medical inspection and to any disinfection considered necessary by the quarantine officers. Should any case of doubtful or confirmed cholera have occurred on board, the vessel and all persons and things on board shall be subject to the provisions of Articles VIII and IX. All persons landed from such vessels shall be subject to the regulations applicable to persons arriving in other vessels.

Art. XVI. The inspection of all vessels shall be completed as soon as possible after arrival. If, upon the expiration of twelve hours from the time of arrival, no inspection shall have been made, the vessel shall be allowed to enter the port, unless such delay has been occasioned by bad weather or other unavoidable circumstances, or by any act or default of the commanding officer or other person connected with the ship, in which case the inspection shall be made when the causes of delay have terminated.

Art. XVII. The disinfection ordered by the local board shall in all eases be carried out by the quarantine officers, assisted by the officers and crew of the vessel, at the expense of the owners of the vessel or other persons concerned, and shall be completed, if possible, within twenty-four hours after the order for disinfection has been given.

Art. XVIII. Should a case of confirmed or doubtful cholera occur on board any vessel lying in any port under quarantine regulations, such vessel and all persons and things on board the same at the time of such occurrence, shall immediately become subject to the provisions of Articles VIII and IX. Should the vessel, however, have been already in quarantine at the port in which she is lying, the quarantine officers shall repeat the measures of disinfection and surveillance only to such an extent and in such manner as shall be considered necessary by the local board.

Art. XIX. Vessels arriving at an open port where cholera already prevails shall he subject to those of the foregoing regulations which refer to inspection, disinfection, and the disposal of cholera patients and of the bodies of those who have died of the disease; for the carrying out of which due provision will be made by the government; but the rules for the detention of vessels and persons on board shall be suspended.

Art. XX. In the case of the arrival of vessels coming within the terms of Article VI or of Articles VIII and IX, the condition of which is considered especially dangerous to the public health, such vessels may be subjected to precautionary and restrictive measures beyond such as are authorized in ordinary cases by these regulations, if in the opinion of the local board such extraordinary measures are necessary. In such cases the local board shall at once forward a special report of the circumstances to the central board, and a copy of such report shall upon application be afforded by the local board to the master, owners, or agents of any vessel so treated.

Art. XXI. No person shall be permitted to visit any vessel under inspection or in quarantine, or to enter the surveillance quarters, without permission of the local board.

Art. XXII. All personal expenses for food, medical treatment, and other necessaries incurred under or by reason of any of the foregoing regulations shall be borne by the persons on whose behalf such expenses have been incurred or their representatives.

Art. XXIII. Any person violating or refusing to comply with any of the foregoing regulations shall be liable to a fine not exceeding 200 yen for each offense; unless such person be the commanding officer, owner, or agent of any vessel in connection with which such violation or refusal occurs, or be acting under the orders or on behalf of such last-mentioned persons or any of them, in which case the fine may be increased to 500 yen for each such offense: Provided, That the non-payment of any expenses payable under these regulations shall not subject any person to a fine, but that such expenses shall be recoverable by civil process only.

Persons or vessels leaving the quarantine station in breach of these regulations shall, in addition to any fines incurred, be liable to be immediately reconveyed thither.

SANJO SANETOMI,
His Imperial Japanese Majesty’s Prime Minister.

I hereby certify that the foregoing is a true copy of the original revised quarantine regulations on file in this legation.

D. W. STEVENS,
Secretary of the United States Legation.

[Inclosure 4 in No. 925.]

Mr. Bingham to Mr. Van Buren.

United States Legation,
Tokei, July 22, 1879. No. 752.]

Thos. B. Van Buren, Esq.,
United States Consul-General, Kanagawa:

Sir: I herewith inclose for your information an official copy (translated) of the revised quarantine regulations of the Japanese Government, which, until further ordered by said government, are to be enforced in the several open ports of Japan. I have issued an official notice on the subject, which will appear in the Japan Daily Mail of to-morrow, to which will be annexed a certified copy from the records of this legation of the revised regulations.

When you shall receive the published copy in the Mail, I will thank you to post it up in a conspicuous place in your office for the information of all parties concerned. Of course all judicial proceedings that may be instituted against American citizens for any violation of these regulations, as you will observe by my notice, are to be instituted in our consular courts, and conducted therein according to American law.

I am, &c.,

JNO. A. BINGHAM.

[Inclosure 5 in No. 925.—Japan Daily Herald, July 25, 1879.]

notification.

Whereas the Imperial Japanese Government did, in the commencement of this present month, declare the ports of Kobe (Hiogo) and Osaka to be infected with cholera, and did thereupon issue and promulgate certain provisional quarantine regulations, hearing date the 3d day of this month, for “all vessels arriving in the Bay of Yedo from one of such ports, or which during their voyage have touched at such ports,” and did in and by such provisional regulations, make provision, amongst other matters, for the detention and medical examination and disinfection of such vessels and the crews, passengers, and cargoes thereof, and did subsequently officially communicate the same to the undersigned, Her Britannic Majesty’s envoy extraordinary and minister plenipotentiary in Japan;

And whereas the undersigned, believing the same to be urgently necessary, did, under and by virtue of the powers vested in him in that behalf, thereupon make and publish a regulation, bearing date Yedo, the 14th day of this present month, for the purpose of enabling the British consul at Kanagawa to co-operate effectually with the Japanese authorities, with the object of preventing the introduction into the port of Kanagawa of cholera or other infectious disease highly dangerous to the health of man, and by such regulation did temporarily confer upon the said consul certain special powers over any British vessel entering the Bay of Yedo from the port& of Hiogo and Osaka, or either of them, and the crew, cargo, and passengers (if any) on board such vessel;

And whereas the said Imperial Japanese Government did, on the 14th day of this present month, issue and proclaim, and did subsequently officially communicate to the undersigned, certain other regulations in place of the said provisional quarantine regulations;

And whereas, after the issue and proclamation of the said regulations of the 14th of this present month, the said Imperial Japanese Government did revise the same, and did 6n the 21st day of this present month promulgate the same so revised, under the style or heading of the “Quarantine regulations established by His Imperial Japanese Majesty’s government, 14th July, 1879 (revised 21st July, 1879),” and did officially commuicate the same to the undersigned;

And whereas in the first article of the said revised regulations it is set forth that “The Government of Japan having declared a quarantine for the purpose of preventing the spread of cholera in Japan,” the regulations thereafter following shall be applicable to the open (treaty) ports, and that the same shall be observed and enforced until further notification;

And whereas by such revised regulations provision is made, amongst other matters, for the establishment of local boards of health, under the control of a central board of health, quarantine grounds, hospitals, and guard-ships, as well as for the detention, medical inspection, and, when necessary, the retention in quarantine and proper disinfection of all vessels entering any of the open (treaty) ports, together with their crews, cargoes, and passengers;

And whereas it is urgently necessary that all and each of Her Britannic Majesty’s consuls at the open (treaty) ports in Japan should be vested with special legal powers and authority to enable them to co-operate more effectually than they can now do with the Japanese authorities in the matter of such quarantine regulations, with the object of preventing the spread of cholera in Japan, and in that behalf to detain or cause to be detained and medically inspected any British vessel, her crew, cargo, and passengers, entering any treaty port in Japan, and any such vessel, crew, cargo, and passengers thereafter, when necessary, to further detain or cause to be further detained in quarantine and properly disinfected;

And whereas it is just and expedient that the owners and master of any vessel which may be detained and medically inspected by or under the authority of any of Her Majesty’s consuls shall pay the expenses of such medical inspection, and, if such vessel should be subsequently disinfected, the expenses of and attendant upon such disinfection, and that all British subjects who shall, for the time being, be subject to quarantine at any treaty port in Japan, and who shall be landed in pursuance of any quarantine rules or regulations to which they may from time to time be subjected by or under the authority of Her Majesty’s consul, should pay the costs of medical attendance upon them find of their maintenance on shore:

The undersigned, Her British Majesty’s envoy extraordinary and minister plenipotentiary in Japan, under and by virtue of the powers conferred upon him by the China and Japan order in council, 1865, and of all powers vested in him, or in any wise enabling him in that behalf, has made and hereby publishes for the general information of Her Majesty’s subjects in Japan the following regulation, which, being urgent, will have effect unless and until it be disapproved by Her Majesty, and such disapproval be signified through one of Her Majesty’s principal secretaries of state, and notification of such disapproval be received and published by Her Majesty’s minister in Japan:

Regulation.

I. The regulation made and published by Her Majesty’s minister in Japan, dated the 14th day of July, 1879, is hereby revoked.

II. It shall be lawful for Her Majesty’s consul at each treaty port in Japan, whilst and so long as the quarantine for the prevention of the spread of cholera, declared by the Government of Japan as set forth in the first article of the “Quarantine regulations established by His Imperial Japanese Majesty’s Government, 14th July, 1879 (revised 21st July 1879),” shall be maintained and continue, by warrant under his hand and the seal of his consulate, to detain or cause to be detained and medically inspected by officers to be duly appointed by him in that behalf, any British vessel entering or about to enter the treaty port at which he is consul, together with her crew, cargo, and passengers, and, after such primary detention and medical inspection, if and when there shall be good reason for believing that there is danger of choleraic infection in and from such vessel, her crew, cargo, or passengers, the same or any or either of them to further detain in quarantine and cause to be properly disinfected, in such place or places and in such manner and subject to such quarantine rules and regulations as may from time to time be necessary or expedient.

Provided always, that no such vessel, crew, cargo, or passengers shall be detained under the provisions of this regulation more than seven days at any one time, unless the warrant under which such vessel, crew, cargo, and passengers shall have been originally detained shall have been renewed or extended, or a fresh warrant for such detention issued by the said consul.

And any British subject disregarding or disobeying any warrant of detention issued by any such consul under the provisions of this regulation, or omitting or refusing to obey any order for medical inspection or for disinfection, or any quarantine rule or regulation to which he may from time to time be subjected under or by virtue of this regulation, shall be deemed guilty of an offense against this regulation, and on conviction thereof before any of Her Majesty’s courts in Japan, shall for each such offense be liable to a tine not exceeding $500.

III. The owners and master of any British vessel which may be detained and medically inspected under section II of this regulation shall pay the costs attendant upon and incidental to such medical inspection, and, if such vessel be subsequently disinfected, the costs of or attendant upon or incidental to such disinfection; and any British subject who shall for the time being be subjected to quarantine at any treaty port in Japan under or by virtue of this regulation, and who shall be landed in pursuance of any rule or regulation of such quarantine, shall pay all costs of medical attendance upon him, and of his maintenance in any hospital or quarantine ground at which he may be landed.

The costs of such medical inspection, disinfection, medical charges, and maintenance, respectively, shall be recoverable summarily in any of Her Majesty’s courts in Japan from the person or persons respectively liable to pay the same.

Given at Her Britannic Majesty’s legation at Yedo this 24th day of July, A. D. 1879.
HARRY S. PARKES.

No. 299. Mr. Bingham to Mr. Evarts. [Document 323]

No. 299.
Mr. Bingham to Mr. Evarts.

United States Legation,
Tokei, Japan, August 8, 1879. (Received September 4.) No. 929.]

Sir: Referring to my No. 925, of the 26 ultimo, in which I reported the revised quarantine regulations issued by this government to prevent the importation by vessels of cholera, I now have the honor to inclose for your information the report of the sanitary bureau of the home department, as published in the Japan Daily Mail of the 5th instant, of the number of cholera cases, together with the rate of mortality therefrom up to the 25th ultimo. Referring to this report, it appears that there is no publication of cases in the report, as the table shows, later than the 11th of July, and that up to that date the whole number of persons attacked was 31,759, 18,017 of whom died within that period, showing the rate of mortality to have been 56.73 per cent.

Of the whole number of deaths, as above stated, but 60 are reported to have occured in Tokei and Kanagawa (Yokohama). Omitting these two places, and including the other places named in the table, where nearly the entire mortality occurred, I estimate their population at not more than 2,000,000 people.

In concluding this note I beg leave to observe that an examination of this official report shows that the entire mortality caused by Asiatic cholera occurred between the 22d of April and the 11th of July last; and that from the 22d of May to the 11th of July 5,031 persons died in the city of Osaka of this scourge, the whole population of the city being estimated at about 600,000. The rate of mortality was 77 per cent, of the persons attacked.

I have &c.,

JNO. A. BINGHAM.

[Inclosure in No. 929.—Extract from Japan Daily Mail, August 5, 1879.]

Table of cholera cases reported up to July 25 from different localities.

Name of fu and ken. Date commenced. Patients. Died. Cured. Under treatment Percentage of mortality.

Osaka From May 22 6,478 5,031 935 512 77.66

Kiyoto From June 6 700 482 118 100 68.86

Sakai From May 30 5,205 2,874 598 1,803 55.22

Hiroshima From April 23 3,157 1,867 283 1,007 59.14

Yamaguchi From May 15 1,956 1,015 42 899 51.89

Okayama From May 22 3,768 1,883 399 1,486 49.97

Wakayama From June 2 915 423 6 486 46.23

Yéhime From April 22 2,962 1,495 171 1,296 50.47

Kochi From June 7 159 80 9 70 50.31

Oitah From April 23 2,512 1,224 950 338 48.73

Nagasaki From June 11 52 7 45 13.46

Kumamoto From May 24 36 11 25 30.56

Kajoshima From April 30 308 157 58 93 50.97

Fakuoko From May 21 691 276 64 351 39.94

Shiga From May 25 133 88 16 29 66.17

Miyi From June 15 47 29 7 11 61.70

Kanagawa From June 19 9 6 1 2 66.67

Aichi From July 2 24 16 8 66.67

Gifu From June 30 3 1 2 33.33

Ishikawa From June 23 181 75 3 103 41.44

Shimane From June 19 3 1 2 33.33

Shidzuoka From June 26 6 3 3 50.00

Tokei From June 19 82 54 4 24 65.85

Yamanashi From June 26 9 3 5 1 33.33

Gunba From July 2 4 1 3 25.00

Chibah From June 27 1 1

Ibaraki From June 29 1 1

Niigata From July 8 13 3 10 23.08

Soldiers under army:

Osaka garrison From June 17 80 22 19 39 27.50

Himeji garrison From June 27 10 4 6 40.00

Hiroshima garrison From June 2 6 3 2 1 50.00

Matsuyama garrison From June 28 23 6 13 4 26.09

Marugame garrison From July 2 5 2 3 40.00

Kokura garrison From June 29 16 7 2 7 43.75

Fuknoka garrison From July 11 6 2 4 33.33

Kanazawa garrison From July 23 1 1

Kumamoto garrison From July 11 13 3 10 23.08

Otsu garrison From June 29 1 1

Fushimi garrison From July 6 2 1 1 50.00

Total 31,759 18,017 3,731 10,011 56.73

Infected localities:

Osaka, under the jurisdiction of Osaka fu.

Kobe, under the jurisdiction of Hiogo ken.

Shimonoseki, under the jurisdiction of Yamaguchi ken.

Collected by sanitary bureau, home department, on 26th July, 12th year of Meiji.

No. 300. Mr. Bingham to Mr. Evarts. [Document 324]

No. 300.
Mr. Bingham to Mr. Evarts.

United States Legation,
Tokei, Japan, August 11, 1879. (Received September 4.) No. 934.]

Sir: Referring to my No. 929, of date the 8th instant, in which I had the honor to inclose cholera statistics up to the 25th ultimo, I now beg leave to inclose herewith further statistics of the pestilence up to the 4th instant, as published in the Tokei Times of the 9th instant, by authority of the interior department of this government.

This table shows that up to the 4th instant the number of cholera cases in the empire as reported was 41,647; that the number of deaths therefrom to that date were 23,350, and that the death-rate was 56.07 per centum. All this mortality was confined to the places named in the inclosure with my No. 929.

It is painful to note that in the doomed city of Osaka, the number of cases of cholera up to the 4th of August was 6,941, and of deaths from that disease to that day the number was 5,407. It is to be observed that, aided doubtless by the refusal of certain foreign powers to observe and enforce the quarantine regulations of this government, the importation of the disease into Kanagawa and Tokei has gone on until since the quarantine of the 1st of July (when there were no cholera cases officially reported in either city) it is now reported officially that both cities are infected with the pestilence, and that up to the 4th instant in Tokei there were 248 cholera cases, of which 135 were fatal, and in Kanagawa (Yokohama) 192 cases, of which 98 were fatal, showing a mortality in the former of 54.44 per cent, and in the latter of 51:04 per

I have, &c.,

JNO. A. BINGHAM.

[Inclosure in No. 934.—Extract from the Tokio Times, August 9, 1879.]

A table of cholera statistics carefully prepared by the home departments inform us that up to the 4th of August the number of cases reported in the entire, country was 41,647. Of these 23,350 were fatal, 5,054 having been cured. Under, treatment there were 13,243, and the percentage of mortality was 56.07. The ken most seriously affected was that of Osaca, where the number of seizures was 6,941, and of deaths 5,407. Other kens were visited in the following order of severity: Hiogo, Okayama, Yéhime, Sakai, Oita, Yamaguchi, Hiroshima, Wakayama, and Fuknoka, the last named having 1,204 cases and 474 deaths.

In the remaining parts of the empire the epidemic had not obtained so strong a foothold, but its growth in this particular vicinity was undoubtedly becoming rapid. Until the 26th of July there had been only 82 patients in Tokei, and 9 in Kanagawa ken. By the 4th of August there had been 248 attacks and 135 deaths in Tokio; and in Kanagawa 192 attacks and 98 deaths. The percentage of fatalities in Tokio was 54 44; in Kanagawa 51.04. It is in consequence of these serious increases that the two places have been declared “infected,” as is more particularly explained in an article on another page of this paper.

No. 301. Mr. Bingham to Mr. Evarts. [Document 325]

No. 301.
Mr. Bingham to Mr. Evarts.

United States Legation,
Tokei, Japan, August 11, 1879. (Received September 4.) No. 935.]

Sir:Herewith I have the honor to inclose the final correspondence, as published in the Japan Herald of the 7th instant, between his excellency Mr. Terashima Munenori, His Imperial Japanese Majesty’s minister for foreign affairs, and his excellency Mr. von Eisendecher, the German minister resident in Japan, in relation to the quarantine regulations recently promulgated by the government of this empire to prevent, if possible, the importation of malignant Asiatic cholera into the ports of Yokohama and Tokei by the merchant or war vessels of Japan or of other nations.

It appears by the inclosed dispatch of Mr. Terashima to Mr. von Eisendecher that the German minister, in a communication to Mr. Terashima, had attempted to justify his order that the Hesperia should break the quarantine of the Japanese Government and enter the harbor of Yokokama, because, in the opinion of Mr. Von Eisendecher, “the quarantine regulations promulgated by the Japanese Government are not obligatory for German subjects and vessels unless they are sanctioned by the German consular authority,” To this pretension of the German minister, Mr. Terashima replies as follows: “I beg to state that the position taken by your excellency, as above stated, has never been and cannot be admitted by this government, as it is, in my opinion, in opposition to the existing treaty stipulations and to international law,” and therefore, his excellency further says, “I (he) regret to find that your excellency has been led to a proceeding which appears to me to have been executed with unnecessary haste, and without any just reason, and against which I consider it my duty to formally protest.”

To this communication of Mr. Terashima, dated the 31st ultimo, Mr. von Eisendecher in his note, dated the 1st instant, you will observe, makes answer that he will not fail to lay before’ his government a translation of Mr. Terashima’s dispatch. It remains to be seen whether the German Government, after its own recent and rightful quarantine against the introduction of pestilence into its own empire, will deny a like right of quarantine to Japan, save as its consuls may at their discretion determine.

It is in vain for Germany or any other power to say that Japan, by what is termed the exterritorial provision of existing treaties, has surrendered her right of self-protection against the importation of pestilence by the vessels of all nations into the habitations of her people. She surrendered no right of sovereignty by that provision, as our own government has uniformly declared, save the right to try and punish offenders against her laws in her own tribunals, and in accordance with her own methods of procedure, because the several treaty powers covenanted by treaty to try their subjects or citizens for all offenses committed by them in Japan against Japanese laws in their respective consular courts, and upon conviction to punish such offenders in accordance with the laws of their respective countries.

I have, &c.,

JNO. A. BINGHAM.

[Inclosure 1 in No. 935.—Extract from the Japan Daily Herald, August 7, 1879.—Translation.]

Mr. Munenori to Mr. Von Eisendecher.

Foreign Office, Tokei,
The 31st, the 7th month, the 12th year Meiji. No. 312.]

Sir: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your excellency’s letter, dated 21st instant, relative to the detention of steamship Hesperia, in which you give the motives for your manner of proceeding with that vessel, by contending that the quarantine regulations promulgated by the Japanese Government are not obligatory for German subjects and vessels, unless they are sanctioned by the German consular authority.

In reply, I beg to state that the position taken by your excellency, as above stated, bas never been and cannot be admitted by this government, as it is, in my opinion, directly in opposition to international law and the existing treaty stipulations.

Your excellency is, no doubt, aware that according to well-known principles of international law even the persons who are entitled to the privilege of exterritoriality are bound to observe the police regulations of the country where they reside, and that by the existing treaty, if a certain portion of jurisdiction is conceded to the German consular authorities, it does not follow that they are entitled to claim participation in the proper administration of the government.

Notwithstanding the explanation you furnished in the note of 21st, I regret to find that your excellency has been led to a proceeding which appears to me to have been executed with unnecessary haste and without any just reason, and against which I consider it my duty to formally protest.

I avail myself of this occasion to renew to your excellency the assurance of my highest consideration.

TERASHIMA MUNENORI,
His Imperial Japanese Majesty’s Minister for Foreign Affairs.

[Inclosure 2 in No. 935.]

Mr. Von Eisendecher to Mr. Munenori.

Tokei, August 1, 1879.

Sir: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your excellency’s note of the 31st ultimo, in which you make known to me your position in the quarantine question, and in which you further formally protest against my action in the case of the Hesperia. I shall not fail to lay before my government a translation of the dispatch.

I have the honor to renew to your excellency the assurance of my highest consideration.

VON EISENDECHER.

No. 302. Mr. Bingham to Mr. Evarts. [Document 326]

No. 302.
Mr. Bingham to Mr. Evarts.

United States Legation,
Tokei, Japan, August 18, 1879. (Received September 29.) No. 939.]

Sir: I have the honor to make further report of the progress of the Asiatic cholera in Japan, and to acquaint you that a table of all the eases of the disease in the empire since its appearance in April last up to the 9th instant, has been compiled by the sanitary bureau, a summary of which, as published in the Tokei Times of the 16th instant, is herewith inclosed.

From this summary it appears that the whole number of cases of cholera in Japan this season, up to the 9th instant, was 53,779; that the deaths therefrom to that date numbered 29,722; and that of the persons attacked, 6,752 recovered, and 17,305 remained under treatment; that in Osaka (where the mortality has been greatest) the number of persons seized up to the 9th instant was 7,295, of whom 5,670 died, and that the average death-rate throughout the Empire is about 55 per cent.

I beg leave to say that, as I am advised, the disease has been thus far restricted to the places specified in the table inclosed with my No. 929.

I have, &c.,

JOHN A. BINGHAM.

[Inclosure 1 in No. 939.—Extract from the Tokei Times, August 16, 1879.]

A table of all cases of cholera throughout the empire since the outbreak until the 9th instant, has been compiled by the sanitary bureau. The grand total shows 53,779 patients, 29,722 deaths, 6,752 cures, and 17,305 still under treatment. The death-rate is about 55 per cent. The greatest number of attacks has taken place in Osaka, where the mortality also seems to have been greater than in any other district. The figures are 7,295 and 5,670 respectively. Hiogo and Okayama follow, each with upward of 6,000 cases, more than half of which were fatal. In Tokei 410 and in Kanagawa 348 instances of the epidemic have been registered, the majority terminating in the decease of the victims.

No. 303. Mr. Bingham to Mr. Evarts. [Document 327]

No. 303.
Mr. Bingham to Mr. Evarts.

United States Legation,
Tokei, Japan, August 18, 1879. (Received September 29.) No. 940.]

Sir: Herewith is inclosed, for your information, a history of cholera in Japan, translated from the Osaka Nippo and published in Japan Daily Herald of the 12th instant, which informs us that this pestilence first appeared in Japan in the summer of the 6th year of Shotoku (the year 2376 from the founding of the empire by Jimmu Tenno, and in the reign of Nakamikado Tenno), that is to say, in the year 1716 of our era, and that the mortality exceeded 8,000 per month (translated and published, manifestly by mistake, 80,000 per month).

It also appears from the article that the disease again appeared in the 5th year of Ansei (A. D. 1850), during the reign of Komio Tenno, when it began in the 7th month and raged most furiously during the 8th month, “the men who worked at the cremation furnaces in the evening being themselves changed into smoke the next morning,” and “the name of the tombstone cutter of one day was found carved on a stone on the morrow.” It was believed, the writer states, that all water and all fish were poisoned. The article further states that in the same year (5th of Ansei, A. D. 1850) the record published the 9th month of that year showed that in the city of Yedo, from the 1st to the 30th of the 8th month, the number of deaths were 12,492, as appeared from “the statistics of deaths reported to the government daily,” and that in addition 18,737 persons, whose names had not been properly registered at the ward offices, died.

It also appears that in the 5th year of Ansei the name of the disease was not known, and in the notification issued at that time by the bakufu, a copy of which is appended to the article, it is called the “prevailing disease of sudden purging.” It would seem from this history of the disease that before the eighteenth century this dreaded and destructive pestilence was unknown in Japan, and it is therefore to be inferred that it was imported, as afterwards, in the nineteenth century, it was imported into Europe and America, from India, where, according to the general belief, it has prevailed from time immemorial.

I have, &c.,

JNO. A. BINGHAM.

[Inclosure 1, in No. 940.—Extract from the Japan Daily Herald, August 12, 1879.]

A brief history of cholera in Japan.

[From the Osaka Nippo.]

Our object in taking up the pen to write a short article on cholera in Japan, which appeared before the restoration, is that, by so doing, the public may learn the past history of this dreadful disease, observe its effects in the present, and take heed for the future.

In the summer of the sixth year of Shotoku (2376, era of Jimmu), in the reign of Nakamikado Tenno, and during the rule of the Shogun Yoshimune, fever prevailed, and the mortality in the city of Great Yedo exceeded 80,000 per month. Owing to the rapid spread of the disease, and the number of deaths, the carpenters were unable to keep pace-with the demand for coffins, and empty sake casks had therefore to be employed for the purpose. The grave-yards were at length all filled up, no space remained for more burials, and the priests of the various sects refused to permit the interment of the remains, insisting that the bodies should be burned and only the ashes be buried.

At the various cremation grounds, therefore, coffins in countless numbers were seen piled on top of each other, the burning of bodies being done in regular succession, according to the order of their arrival. Numbers of corpses, mostly of poor persons, had to be left unburnt for upwards of half a month, and the head man of the ward was at his wit’s end what to do in the matter. The government was therefore asked for instructions, and an order was issued that the bodies should be wrapped in coarse mats, and that (after the performance over them of a brief religious ceremony) they should be conveyed in boats to the Bay of Yedo and sunk in the sea.

This we read in the Shokio Kanki, and we may judge from the virulence of the disease that it was quite different from ordinary fever. We are inclined to think that it was what we now caU cholera, and that this was the first appearance of the pest in our Toyoashihara [“fertile, sweet flag-plain,” Japan]. We, however, invite an expression of opinion from antiquarians.

Again, in the fifth year of Ansei, (2518, era of Jimmu), during the reign of Komio Tenno, and at the time when Iyeshige was Shogun [A. D. 1850], an epidemic prevailed in Yedo, as many persons will recollect. This disease first manifested itself in the neighborhood of Akasaka, in the beginning of the 7th month of that year; according to some, it was brought from the Tokai-do. Reiganjima became infected, and soon it-spread in all directions.

During the first half of the 8th month the epidemic raged most furiously. At the gates of every temple there were hills of coffins; the men who worked at the cremation furnaces in the evening were themselves changed into smoke the next morning, and the tombstone cutter of one day found his own name carved on a stone on the morrow. The panic among the populace beggared description. The epidemic was regarded with even far greater dread, by both high and low than is the prevailing one in this 12th year of Meiji, for medical knowledge was in such a crude state that no one was able to ascertain the cause of the disease, and the people could do nothing but sit down in dread suspense and await the approach of death.

The disease was generally attributed to diabolical agency; hence the people gave it the name of “Ko-ro-ri,” that is, “fox, wolf, and badger.” It was also believed that all water and all fish were poisoned, so that people dared not draw water, even from the pure stream of the Upper Tamagawa, nor eat any fresh fish, even when it was brought to their doors alive. Each one adorned his gate with branches of pine and bamboo, and straw ropes, and prayed that so dreadful a year might pass away as quickly as possible; some praying to the Kami and some to Buddha. The whole city was filled with horror and dismay, and a state of things existed to which that in Osaka at the present time bears but a faint resemblance.

If we may believe the “Ri-riu-koki” or “Record of the Ravages of Dysentery,” which was published in the 9th month of the 5th year of Ansei, there were then in Yedo, 1,775,215 houses, and a population of 7, 101,318. The disease was most virulent between the 1st and the 30th of the 8th month, during which space of time the number of deaths was 12,492, as appears from the” “statistics of death reported to the government daily.” Besides these, 18,737 persons, whose names had not been properly registered at the ward offices, died. For the first three or four days in the beginning of the 9th month there were 50 or 60 deaths daily; after that the number gradually decreased, and at length the disease entirely disappeared, and tranquillity was once more restored.

Amongst those who fell victims to the scourge were the following celebrated men: Odake Shoto and Ichikawa Beian, the famous penmen; Riokutei Seurin, Riukatei Tanekadzu, and Rakutei Seiba, the novelists; Seian Seiba, the poet; Rissai Hiroshige, the painter; Ichiriusai Teizan, the story-teller; Kiyomobo Enju and Kirieya Rokuzayemon, the music-masters; Takaragawa Ishogqro, the wrestler; and Onoye Hoshinosuke, the actor; besides many other men famous at the time.

Even in the present age, the era of civilization, there is no infallible remedy for the dreadful disease, its origin being not yet well understood, owing to its violent nature and the danger attendant on an analysis and microscopical examination of the matter thrown out by the patient. There are, however, medicines sufficiently good for disinfecting purposes; and even when a person is attacked by the true cholera, his life may be saved it the services of a skilled physician be secured at once. Besides, there are shoshangin (?) and morphine, which are reported to have the virtue of curing the disease.

But in the period of Ansei even the name of the disease was not known; naturally, the proper remedy was unknown, and the people had no alternative hut to lie down and patiently await the approach of death.

At the present time, however, there are not a few persons who make light of the disease and pay no attention to the kind advice and good treatment of the government, thereby often making themselves a medium for the spread of the disease, and thus causing calamity and misfortune among society, Such persons are in no better condition than those who lived in the period of Ansei.

Thus whole families often depart together for the dark world, to our great lament. Sanitary measures and other necessary precautions are now undertaken by the government, and the people have nothing to do but obey its orders and take care of their health. Even in the period of Ansei certain precautions were observed, so that those who ignore the sanitary regulations made by the present government of Meiji are not only offenders against it, but also against the late Bakufu. We give below a copy of a notification issued by the Bakufu in the fifth year of Ansei, that our readers may learn what measures were taken to combat the disease at that time:

“For the prevailing disease of sudden purging there are various methods of treatment, among which the undermentioned is notified for the benefit of the people. In the way of precaution, avoid exposing your body to cold air, always wear a cotton belt around your abdomen, be careful to avoid gluttony and excessive drinking, and the eating of indigestible food. If symptoms of the disease appear go to bed, be extremely careful of what you eat and drink, keep the whole body warm, and take the medicine called hoko-san, as prescribed below. Many valuable lives have been saved by it alone. If you vomit and purge much, and your body becomes cold, put 2 monme of refined camphor into 2 go of spirit (sho-chic), warm the mixture over the fire, dip a cotton cloth in it, and rub the body and limbs briskly; then put a mustard plaster over the stomach every half hour. To make hoko-san, mix together powdered cinnamon, yekichi, and dried ginger, in equal quantities, and boil; drink at intervals one or two cupfuls at a time.

“To prepare the mustard plaster, mix together powdered mustard seeds and wheat en flour, pour in vinegar, and mix well; spread the mass over a cotton cloth and apply to the stomach. In urgent cases, when time is precious, use mustard only, mixing it with hot water.

“Another medicine: Into a certain measure of hot tea pour about one-third the quantity of spirit, add a little sugar and drink. The patient must shut himself up in a close room and rub his body with a cotton cloth that has been soaked in spirit. If his extremities are cold warm them with hot stones until he perspires.

“The above is a course of treatment which may be applied with benefit in the case of any one attacked by the prevailing disease. This is notified to all.

“Eighth month of the year of the Horse.”—[Hiogo news, translation.]

No. 304. Mr. Bingham to Mr. Evarts. [Document 328]

No. 304.
Mr. Bingham to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Tokei, Japan, August 18, 1879. (Received September 29.) No. 941.]

Sir: Referring to my No. 935, in which I inclosed copies of certain correspondence between his excellency Mr. Terashima and his excellency Mr. von Eisendecher, the German minister, in relation to the violation by the latter of the quarantine regulations, I now have the honor to inclose for your information the entire correspondence on the subject of quarantine regulations between his excellency the minister for foreign affairs and their excellencies the British and German ministers.

From this correspondence it is clear that the representatives of Great Britain and Germany in Japan deny the power of His Imperial Japanese Majesty’s Government to declare and enforce a quarantine in Japanese waters over the vessels of their respective countries without their consent and approval. That each of these diplomatic representatives declined to approve, and refused to respect or enforce the Japanese quarantine regulations as heretofore proclaimed (of which I advised you in my Nos. 918 and 925), is apparent in the inclosed correspondence, as published in the Japan Herald of the 22d July last and the 12th instant.

I have, &c.,

JNO. A. BINGHAM.

[Inclosure 1 in No. 941.—Extract from the Japan Daily Herald, July 22, 1879.]

Correspondence relating to quarantine.

The official correspondence relating to the institution of quarantine by the Japanese Government, which we publish below, will serve to inform the public of what has passed on that subject between the British representative and the Japanese minister for foreign affairs, and tend to remove the false impressions created by an article in the Japan Mail and also one in the Tokei Times, both of them being written by persons whose lack of knowledge of what they were writing about is conspicuous. The intention of the writers is to put forward statements and advance arguments which they hope may be pleasing to the government, with the addition, in the case of the Tokei Times, of being, as usual, virulent against Sir Harry Parkes, who seems to be the bête noir of the editor of that journal. The German Minister, in this instance, however, divides the animadversions with him, and he is accused of ordering the “Hesperia” to break quarantine, and of being guilty of “countenancing a most flagrant rupture of the Japanese regulations,” and he is threatened with “strenuous representations being made to his government.” It seems to us that the servile officiousness of these journals is calculated to be rather a source of embarrassment, than otherwise, to the government they are so solicitous to serve. We expect to be in a position also to print the correspondence relating to the “Hesperia.”

[Translation.]

July 3, 1879.

Sir: I beg to inform you that, in consequence of the prevalence of cholera at Kobe and Ozaka, the inclosed provisional regulations have been framed for the purpose of detaining vessels arriving from those places at Nagaura, in Sagami, during a period of ten days, and that they will be put in force as soon as our arrangements are completed.

With respect,

[l. s.] TERASHIMA MUNENORI,
Minister for Foreign Affairs.

His Excellency Sir Harry S. Parkes, &c., &c., &c.

[The above note was only received by Sir H. Parkes, in consequence of his absence from Yedo, on the morning of the 9th July.]

[Translation.]

July 9, 1879.

Sir: In my note of the 3d instant I informed you that in connection with the prevalence of cholera in the localities of Kobe and Ozaka, vessels arriving from those localities would be detained during ten days at Nagauri, in Sagami, and inclosed some provisional regulations; but I have now been informed by the authorities that it has been decided that vessels which, upon being examined by the health officer, are found to have had no cases of cholera during the voyage, will be allowed to enter port after the lapse of seven days, calculated from the day on which they left the diseased port.

I take, &c.,

TERASHIMA MUNENORI, [l. s.]
Minister for Foreign Affairs.

His Excellency Sir Harry S. Parkes, &c., &c., &c.

[Translation.]

July 9, 1879.

Sir: I beg to state that I have been informed by the authorities that in consequence of the spread of cholera now prevalent in various localities from Kioto and Ozaka to the Shiga, Gifu, and Miye prefectures, orders have been sent that travelers coming to Tokei by land will be detained at points on the main lines of communication in the Yamanashi and Gumba prefectures, and at Mishima, in the Shidzuoka prefecture, during five days from the day of their arrival before being allowed to pass on.

I take, &c.,

TERASHIMA MUNENORI, [l. s.]
Minister for Foreign Affairs.

His Excellency Sir Harry S. Parkes, &c., &c., &c.

Yedo, July 12, 1879.

Sir: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of Your Excellency’s note of the 3rd instant, informing me that in consequence of the prevalence of cholera at Kobe and Ozaka vessels arriving from those places bound for Kanagawa or Shihagawa will be subject to a detention of ten days at Nagaura, and you inclose a set of provisional regulations providing for the inspection and detention of such vessels, which you observe will be put in force as soon as the arrangements of your government are completed.

In a subsequent note of the 9th instant Your Excellency informs me that the above-mentioned period of detention has been changed, and that those vessels which are found to have had no cases of cholera on board during the voyage from Kobe or Ozaka will be allowed to enter port after the lapse of seven days, calculated from the day of departure from the infected port.

In these notes Your Excellency makes no reference to foreign vessels, but I learn from Her Majesty’s Consul at Kanagawa that the course which your government proposes to adopt in their case has been stated in the following terms in a letter addressed by the prefect of that port on the 7th instant to Mr. Bavier as Doyen of the Consular body.

The prefect observes, “I have received instructions from His Excellency the minister for foreign affairs to inform you that when I receive from Ozaka or Kobe a telegram announcing the departure of a foreign vessel bound for this port, I am to report it to the consul under whose jurisdiction she is, and he will be requested to accompany the health officers on board, examine her, and, after consultation as to the sanitary measures to be taken with her, she will be put in quarantine in Nagaura Bay. In the event even of no telegram arriving in time from Ozaka or Kobe, the Japanese man-of-war stationed on guard off Yokosuka will, on perceiving a vessel coming in, proceed to stop her, and report at once to me. I will then let the consul know and proceed as above stated.”

At the interview which I had the honor to hold with Your Excellency on the 9th instant you informed me that you had authorized the prefect to make this communication to the senior Consul.

It affords me pleasure to assure Your Excellency of my readiness to authorize Her Majesty’s Consul at Kanagawa to co-operate with the prefect in applying to British vessels coming from Ozaka and Kobe, so long as those ports remain in an infected state, a system of quarantine in the sense of the general terms above stated, and I am now engaged in making the arrangements necessary for this purpose, which I shall speedily communicate to Your Excellency. I may mention, at once, however, that it is not the Consul, but the medical officer whom he may depute, who should visit British ships on their arrival off Kanagawa, and that it will be requisite that the same medical officer should have free access to any British vessel, her passengers or crew, during the performance of quarantine.

In respect to the regulations inclosed in Your Excellency’s note of the 3d instant, I feel that, if these are to be regarded as the rules which the Japanese Government intend to apply to their own ships, it would be out of place for me to offer an opinion as to the suitableness of their provisions. But presuming that Your Excellency’s government would naturally desire to observe towards foreign vessels, as closely as circumstances will permit, the quarantine system which they adopt in the case of Japanese vessels, I feel that I should draw Your Excellency’s attention to the incompleteness of these regulations as they at present stand.

The deficiencies to which I allude will at once be observable on comparing these regulations with those which Your Excellency communicated to the foreign representatives at the close of last August.

In those regulations Your Excellency’s government defined with much care and minuteness the rules of quarantine which they then desired to institute, and made provision for various important points and contingencies which are left unnoticed in these new regulations.

Thus the regulations of last August provided that “upon the establishment of a quarantine, a local board of quarantine shall be organized” (under the direction of the central board of health at the capital) “at each of the open ports, and shall consist of properly educated and qualified Japanese or foreign medical men, government officers, and a suitable staff of assistants. The number of members shall be regulated in each instance by the amount of shipping at the port, but in all cases shall be sufficient to insure the speedy disposal of all matters of the quarantine.”

But by the new regulations all authority in regard to the enforcement of quarantine is given to a single individual called “the medical inspector,” and nothing is stated as to his nationality or qualifications, as to the superior medical authority under which he should act and by which he should be directed, or as to the organization of the staff of health officers which is indispensable to the institution of efficient quarantine.

Again, no distinction is made in the new regulations between the treatment of a ship in which cholera has not appeared and one on board of which the disease has already broken out. By the regulations of last August the quarantine board were given power to reduce the detention to less than seven days in the case of non-infected vessels, if the board considered it safe to do so, but this judicious provision is not mentioned in the new regulations. The latter contain no special provision for limiting or regulating the visitation of a ship in quarantine by persons from the shore. No provision is made for cases of doubtful disease, and to remove non-choleraic patients to the cholera hospital would not only be a very grave error, but also a flagrant wrong, as their lives would thereby be placed in peril. No special clause is introduced for the convenience of vessels in transit; no mention is made of any modification of the term of detention of a ship in the event of cholera breaking out during quarantine; and no arrangement is made for the separation of suspected from infected ships at the quarantine station.

All these points, however, are provided for in the regulations of last August, and Your Excellency will therefore excuse me for observing that I fail to understand the object of your government in substituting these new and incomplete regulations for the much fuller and clearer rules which were drawn up by the able medical officers composing the quarantine commission which sat last summer.

Your Excellency I trust will perceive that it would be impossible to establish an efficient system of quarantine without giving due attention to the above-mentioned points and other details, with which I will not burden this note, and also that I should be unable to authorize Her Majesty’s Consuls to enforce the observation by British subjects of quarantine rules which were manifestly inefficacious or impracticable. In this case, however, I feel that it will not be difficult for me to furnish such instructions to Her Majesty’s Consul at Kanagawa as will enable him to co-operate effectively and cordially with the Japanese health officers and to meet, as far as British subjects are concerned, every prorjer requirement which quarancine entails.

For my own part I may observe that, though I do not share the opinion of Your Excellency’s government, that a system of quarantine is preferable to that of medical inspection, because quarantine, as Your Excellency is aware, was-condemned by a large majority of the most eminent medical men of all nations who formed the International Sanitary Congress at Vienna in 1874, I am nevertheless entirely willing, in deference to the wishes of your government, to co-operate with you earnestly in giving such a system a trial in the present instance. The experience which will be thus obtained will furnish evidence as to the degree of benefit that may be derived from it. But I beg leave to mention that if the quarantine which Your Excellency seeks to establish is to be carried out in the manner which appears to have been followed in the case of the Japanese passenger steamer “Genkai Maru,” it must prove entirely useless,

In that case, it appears that, some of the Japanese passengers were allowed to leave the ship, while many Japanese, and also several foreign visitors, some from Yokohama, were allowed to come off to her from the shore, to mix freely with the passengers, to take meals on board, and then to return to their houses. No doctor was appointed to remain on board the ship in order to attend to the passengers, although they were treated as infected persons, and as such should have been placed under constant medical care, while the cattle on board were allowed to die for want of food, and to create a degree of foulness in the ship, which alone might have caused sickness to break out onboard. For some particulars of the allegations made in this case I beg to refer Your Excellency to the inclosed copies of letters addressed to Her Majesty’s Consul by two passengers, Mr. Singleton and Mr. Mitchell, British subjects, who were detained on board the “Genkai Maru,” and of a letter addressed by the United States Consul-General at Kanagawa to his colleagues. Your Excellency will perceive that these letters contain grave complaints of the manner in which quarantine was conducted on board that vessel.

I refrain from offering any obervations on the great difficulty which your government will encounter in their efforts to institute the land quarantine of which you informed me in another note of the 9th instant, but it is obvious that unless that be efficient, maritime quarantine must prove ineffective also. Allow me, however, to again assure Your Excellency that I shall do all that lies in my power to promote the objects of your government in this matter, as the spread of disease concerns in equal degree the health and welfare of the Japanese people and the foreign residents of this country.

I take advantage of this opportunity to renew to Your Excellency the assurance of my high consideration.

HARRY S. PARKES.

To His Excellency Terashima Munenori.

British Legation, Yedo, July 14, 1879.

Sir: With reference to my note of the 12th instant, on the subject of the quarantine regulations issued by your government on the 3d instant, I have now the honor to communicate to Your Excellency a regulation which I have this day made and promulgated for the purpose of vesting Her Majesty’s Consul at Kanagawa with such legal powers as will enable him to co-operate effectually with the Japanese authorities for preventing the introduction of cholera into Kanagawa, by detaining British ships entering the Bay of Yedo from Hiogo or Ozaka, and by causing them to submit to medical examination and other precautions.

I take, &c.,

HARRY S. PARKES.

To His Excellency Terashima Munenori, &c., &c., &c.

[Inclosure 2 in No. 941.—Extract from the Japan Daily Herald, August 12, 1879.]

Correspondence relating to quarantine and the “Hesperia.”

Yokohama, the 4th July, 1879.

Nomura Yasushi, Esq.,
Kanagawa Ken Rei:

Sir: The Doyen of the Consular body has communicated to me the letter which you again this year have written to him concerning quarantine measures against foreign vessels arriving in Yokohama from infected ports.

I must again this year express my regret that you, in such an important matter, which affects the rights of German vessels, did not confer with me beforehand. I should willingly, jointly with you, have arranged such measures as would not only have secured the desired object—the prevention of cholera being imported—but would also have obviated your communicating to me a measure taken by your government, the application of which to German vessels I, under the existing circumstances, cannot permit.

The standpoint which I again this year am obliged to occupy in the quarantine question, is exactly the same as in the previous year.

I perfectly agree with you that precautionary measures ought to be taken, without delay, in order to prevent cholera from being imported, and I intend to meet your wishers in this respect by means of the circular to German shipmasters arriving in Yokohama, which I inclose for your perusal.

This circular enjoins on German shipmasters, as in the previous year, to comply with such quarantine as the Kencho authorities may consider necessary, until the provisional medical inspection to be ordered by the imperial Consulate has been made.

I should again this year point out that it is of the greatest importance that communications from the Japanese health-officers to me are made with the least possible delay, and I therefore recommend that incoming ships should be boarded and examined by them outside the harbor.

E. ZAPPE.

circular.

As cholera has appeared in Southern Japan, the Japanese Government, with a view to prevent importation of the disease, has ordered that vessels arriving from infected ports shall be inspected, and it has asked the foreign Consuls to assist it in the carrying” out of such measures as may prevent the spread of the disease; measures the necessity of which is admitted by the undersigned, who therefore willingly has accorded the Japanese Government his co-operation in their enforcement as far as German ships are concerned. You are, therefore, hereby requested to answer the inclosed questions with regard to the state of health on board your ship, to write, your answers on the space left open, and hand the same to the Japanese health officer who presents this circular. If the latter, in consequence of your statements, or of examination of patients on hoard, should inform you that it is necessary that you go into quarantine then you shall anchor in an isolated place, and there await the medical inspection which I shall immediately cause to be made, and, in the mean time, with quarantine flag hoisted, abstain from all communication with the land.

To all masters of German merchant-vessels arriving from Southern Japan.

The Imperial German consul,

ZAPPE
Yokohama, the 4th July, 1879.

Yokohama, the 8th July, 1879.

Nomura Yasushi, Esq.,
Kanagawa Ken Rei:

Sir: On the 4th instant I had the honor to inform you in how far I would be able to assist you in enforcing the proposed quarantine measures with regard to German ships.

At the same time I sent you a circular that authorizes the Japanese health officers to board German vessels and take provisional measures, which remain in force until this Consulate has been able to give definitive orders.

This morning I received, through His Danish Majesty’s consul-general, another letter from you, in which you so far modify the contents of your letter, dated the 1st July, to the Doyen of the consular body, that incoming vessels are not to be put under quarantine until the consul and the Japanese health officers have agreed thereupon.

But I cannot consider my letter of the 4th instant answered by that communication, and I therefore request you kindly to inform me, as soon as convenient, whether you feel inclined to accept the way in which I proposed to carry out quarantine measures against German vessels.

I consider it necessary that we should arrive at an understanding in this respect before German ships arrive in this port from Hiogo.

ZAPPE.

July 10, 1879.

To E. Zappe, Esq.,
His Imperial German Majesty’s Consul:

Sir: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your dispatch dated the 8th instant. The various points with regard to the examination of German vessels, as mentioned in your dispatch of the 4th instant, have not by any means been cast aside.

I have received information by telegram that the German steamer “Hesperia” weighed anchor from the port of Kobe at 10 p.m. yesterday; and I shall accordingly cause the inspecting officers to carry with them the document sent by you, and measures shall be taken in the sea off Yokoska, according to the regulations mentioned in your letter. I beg you, therefore, to take note of the above.

I have, &c.,

NOMURA YASUSHI, [l. s.]
Ken Rei of Kanagawa.

Yokohama, the 12th July, 1879

Nomura Yasushi, Esq.,
Kanagawa Ken Rei:

Sir: Referring to the communication which you caused to be made to me last night through Mr. Kono Michitomo, namely that the German steamer “Hesperia,” coming from Kobe, had been sent to the quarantine ground, and, in the opinion of the Japanese health officers, would have to undergo a quarantine of seven days from her departure from Hiogo, I have to inform you that chief staff-surgeon, Dr. Gutschow, will this morning, under instructions from the Consul, proceed on board the “Hesperia” and make an inspection, the results of which he will afterwards report to me.

I have the honor to request you to inform the superior officer on the quarantine station of this, in order that Dr. Gutschow may have such facilities as are requisite for him to attain his object in view.

ZAPPE.

Yokohama, the 12th July, 1879.

To the same:

Sir: In continuation of my letter of this morning, I hereby inform you that I, accompanied by chief staff-surgeon, Dr. Gutschow, went to-day in His Majesty’s gunboat, “Wolf,” to the quarantine ground at Nagaura, from whence I have just returned.

The result of the inspection of the “Hesperia,” which I, from want of time, am unable to forward this evening in extenso, is briefly this, that the state of health and other conditions on board are so favorable that the immediate release of the ship from quarantine cannot apparently, or even probably, expose Yokohama to any danger of cholera being imported.

This caused me to ask Mr. Kojima, the superior officer on the quarantine station, to release the Hesperia at once, and as he declared that he had no authority to do so, then I requested him to telegraph for orders to that effect.

No answer having arrived in Nagaura by 7 o’clock p.m., I returned to Yokohama, and I now have the honor directly to address to you the request that you will, without further delay, order the quarantine of the Hesperia to cease, as the same, in view of the state of health on board, no longer appears necessary.

Finally. I urgently ask you to let me kindly know your decision by letter this very night, or, at the very latest, before 10 a.m. to-morrow.

ZAPPE.

Tokei, the 11th July, 1879, evening.

His Excellency Terashima Munenori,
Minister of Foreign Affairs:

Sir: I have the honor respectfully to inform Your Excellency that I have requested chief staff-surgeon, Dr. Gutschow, of Yokohama, to proceed to-morrow on board the German steamer Hesperia, which is now provisionally detained at the quarantine grounds, there to make a medical inspection, and report the result to me.

Your Excellency will have the goodness to make this known to the quarantine authorities, in order that no difficulties shall arise at the place.

I request your excellency to accept, &c.,

VON EISENDECHER.

Tokei, the 12th July, 1879.

His Excellency von Eisendecher,
Imperial German Minister Resident:

Sir: I have had the honor to receive Your Excellency’s favor of yesterday, in which you inform me that you have instructed the German chief staff-surgeon, Dr. Gutschow, to proceed on board the German steamer Hesperia, which is now, according to the quarantine regulations, detained at Soshu Nagaura, there to make a medical inspection, and in which Your Excellency requests me to take the necessary measures, in order that no difficulties shall arise at the place. I have immediately notified the authorities concerned, but, at the same time, I must respectfully inform Your Excellency that the inspection by the said medical officer can have no influence on the duration of the prescribed term of quarantine.

With the highest consideration,

TERASHIMA MUNENORI,
Minister of Foreign Affairs.

No. 65. [Document 329]

No. 65.

Tokei, 12th July, 1879.

His Excellency Terashima Munenori,
Minister of Foreign Affairs:

Sir: Yesterday I had the honor to make a communication to Your Excellency concerning the German steamer “Hesperia.”

I have since with regard to the said steamer received further reports from Yokohama, which make it appear that its detention is absolutely unnecessary and purposeless, and I feel justified in assuming that the Imperial Japanese quarantine authorities, in view of the circumstances, have arrived at the same conclusion, and that the steamer may now, as soon as an eventual disinfection has taken place, continue, without hinderance, its voyage to Kokohama.

If, nevertheless, the steamer “Hesperia” should continue, without sufficient cause, to be detained on the quarantine ground, then Your Excellency’s exalted government would have to bear the full responsibility, and I could not answer for the consequences of such a proceeding.

I shall, as soon as I shall have received the report from the German physician delegated by me, have the honor to make a further communication to Your Excellency in this matter. With regard to the state of the “Hesperia,” I may now observe that there are only foreigners on board, and that, with the exception of the captain, none of the crew has been ashore in Kobe.

I request Your Excellency to accept, &c.,

VON EISENDECHER.

No. 67. [Document 330]

No. 67.

Tokei, the 12th July, 1879.

His Excellency Terashima Munenori,
Minister of Foreign Affairs:

Sir: I have had the honor to receive Your Excellency’s esteemed dispatch of this day’s date, in which you inform me that the inspection of the German steamer “Hesperia” by the medical officer delegated by me can have no influence on the duration of the prescribed term of quarantine.

I suppose from this that I am to understand that Your Excellency, without paying any regard to the opinion of a German expert, intends indiscriminately to detain on the quarantine grounds air German vessels arriving in the bay of Yedo from Kobe or Osaka. I am unable under the existing treaties between Germany and Japan to admit such a right of exclusive disposition of German vessels.

In case Your Excellency really pretends to such a right on behalf of your government, then I feel compelled most formally to protest against it on behalf of the government of the German Empire until I have received the instructions for which I have asked by telegraph.

I am, as I repeatedly have had the honor to assure Your Excellency, perfectly prepared with all my powers to co-operate in the prevention of importation of cholera through German vessels, but it is impossible for me to permit that a German steamer, which in the infected port of departure has had almost no communication with land, and which has a perfectly clean bill of health, be unnecessarily detained.

Nor could I assume the responsibility Of renouncing in matters of quarantine upon the co-operation of a German expert, because, as I have already had the honor to inform your excellency, all the reports which I have hitherto received concerning the enforcement of quarantine at Nagaura., go to show that the quarantine is not effective.

With the assurance of my most distinguished respect,

VON EISENDECHER.

No. 68. [Document 331]

No. 68.

Tokei, the 13th July, 1879.

To the same:

Sir: In continuation of my previous letters concerning the German steamer Hesperia, I have the honor to forward as inclosures copies of the master’s protest against the detention and of the report of the inspection of the steamer ordered by me.

In view of these documents I must maintain the request made in my letter of yesterday, that the ship be liberated, and also hold the Imperial Japanese Government responsible to the full extent for all the losses arising from the detention of the ship.

I must emphatically repeat what I have said before, namely, that it is impossible for me to subject German vessels to quarantine regulations, which are manifestly insufficient, and the maintenance of which apparently by no means realizes the object in view.

I have especially the honor to call Your Excellency’s attention to the appearance of policemen On board. I must expressly guard against the legality of such visits on board a German vessel, quite apart from the circumstance that these policemen at the same time circulated freely on other, perhaps infected, vessels.

I ask your excellency to accept, &c.,

VON EISENDECHER.

Yokohama, 12th July, 1879.

This day the German steamer “Hesperia,” an iron ship, with accommodations for eight cabin passengers (two to each cabin), and launched in 1875, 1, 136 tons register, and on which, according to the captain’s statement, cholera has never appeared yet, has been inspected by the undersigned, after having been detained by the Japanese quarantine authorities in the quarantine ground near Nagaura for the space of about twenty-four hours.

The ship, which in her state-rooms, cabins, crew’s quarters, between-decks, and lower ship’s hold is kept perfectly clean, well aired and dry, and whose bilge-water is small in quantity, and, except a certain greasy smell, quite without smell about it, has taken her last provisions in Hong-Kong from the steamer “Eleetra” from Hamburg, her cargo—piece goods—in Hiogo, and her ballast, consisting of stones and sand which are perfectly dry, partly in Hong-Kong and partly in Hiogo.

The drinking water of the ship comes from the usual place of supply in Hiogo, Messrs. Domoney & Co.; the same, which is being kept in an iron tank, is clear, colorless, and has no smell, and has, further, a refreshing taste.

The closets, &c., are in a perfectly clean state.

There are on board one captain, 7 officers, among whom 3 engineers and one assistant; 6 sailors, 10 stokers, 1 ship’s boy, 8 cabin passengers, among whom two women, further, three children.

The ship’s crew has been hired in Hamburg on the 7th December, 1878, only one sailor having been hired in addition on the 8th January, 1879, in Port Said.

The passengers, with the exception of one who took his passage in Hong-Kong, have come on board, inclusive of the three children, in Hiogo.

Their effects are kept partly in the cabins and partly in the between-decks.

Nothing is known here of the prevalence of cholera in the ports where the vessel called, except that according to the statement of the Japanese authorities Asiatic cholera is said to prevail in Hiogo and its neighborhood.

The ship arrived in Hiogo on the 13th June, and left that port on the 10th July, between 1 and 2 o’clock in the morning.

The ship’s crew, with the exception of four officers, who last were on shore on the 15th June, and the captain, have not been on shore at all.

Japanese or residents of Hiogo have only been on board for loading purposes, at an average of 25 daily.

Nothing is known of illness having existed among the people.

In the shape of provisions, fresh meat, fowls, and vegetables were taken on board at Hiogo, furnished by Domoney & Co.

During her voyage to this port, the ship has had comparatively pleasant, cool, and dry weather.

The general state of health on board has, during the whole voyage, been most excellent. There have especially been no cases of diarrhoea.

In Kobe the captain had no occasion to call in medical attendance.

The foregoing facts rest on depositions made by the captain, the crew, and the passengers, whose attention has been drawn to the importance of their statements, on the inspection of the persons on board, made with the aid of the ship’s certificate and the captain’s statements, and on the minutest inspection of the whole ship.

The captain has declared his readiness to take, on oath, all the statements made by him.

The captain has lodged a complaint at the consulate in Yokohama about the most rude behavior on the part of the police officers sent on board, and about their communication with Japanese ships in the quarantine grounds and the shore, by which he is exposed to the danger of cholera being carried on board, and has verbally repeated his complaint.

If on one hand the total absence of cholera or diarrhea on board cannot be taken as an absolute proof that cholera may not yet make its appearance, on the other hand the certainty of cholera not appearing will not be enhanced by a further detention of the vessel during four days, according to the belief of the undersigned medical officer.

He is further of opinion that, judging from the present state of the ship, there is neither an imminent danger nor the likelihood of danger that cholera may be carried to Yokohama if the ship in question should go there at once.

The undersigned—the Consul and the medical officer—have not been able, after inspection of the quarantine arrangements, and after the information they were able to receive on the spot, concerning the manner in which the quarantine regulations are beng carried out, to arrive at the conviction that either the arrangements made, or the measures taken, have the least likelihood of attaining the desired object.

DR. GUTSCHOW,
Surgeon in Chief of the German Naval Hospital,
at Yokohama, and Oberstabsarzt.

Zappe,
Imperial German Consul.

No. 69. [Document 332]

No. 69.

Tokei, the 14th July, 1879.

To the same:

Sir: In continuation of my letters Nos. 65, 67, and 68, with regard to the German steamer Hesperia, to which I have as yet received no reply, I have the honor to inform your excellency that I shall now order the said steamer, which has been kept in quarantine for three days and a half without consent from the German authorities, to proceed forthwith to Yokohama, its place of destination.

With the assurance of my most distinguished consideration,

VON EISENDECHER.

Tokei, the 23d July, 1879.

His Excellency Von Eisendecher,
Imperial German Minister Resident:

Sir: I have the honor to acknowledge receipt of Your Excellency’s esteemed letters Nos. 65, 66, 67, 68, and 69, concerning the quarantine affair. As, however, the matter in question has already, as Your Excellency knows, been brought to an end, I do not intend particularly to revert to the same; but there remains one point which I cannot here avoid laying stress upon. The German steamer “Hesperia” was detained at Nagaura in conformity with the quarantine regulations, of which Your Excellency received communication on the 3d instant; afterwards, when the said regulations had been revised and altered, the quarantine authorities were instructed that there was nothing to prevent the prescribed term of quarantine from being shortened, whereupon they informed both the German Consul and the master of the ship that the steamer would not be permitted to quit the quarantine ground until the prescribed disinfection had taken place. Although the above-mentioned two gentlemen had declared that they agreed to this, the said steamer, according to the report received from the authorities concerned, left the quarantine station without paying any regard to the protest of the medical officer, on the pretext that Your Excellency’s orders to that effect had suddenly arrived.

Notwithstanding that we on our part, as Your Excellency is well aware, have done everything in our power to meet as far as possible Your Excellency’s demands, Your Excellency has issued orders, which have set at naught the lawful regulations promulgated by my exalted government. Such a proceeding appears to me pregnant with grave consequences, and I therefore most respectfully request that Your Excellency will have the goodness to vouchsafe me some explanation of the same.

With the highest consideration,

TERASHIMA MUNERORI,
Minister of Foreign Affairs.

Tokei, the 24th July, 1879.

His Excellency Terashima Munerori,
Minister of Foreign Affairs:

Sir: I had the honor to receive Your Excellency’s esteemed letter of yesterday concerning the quarantine of the steamer “Hesperia,” at the end of which letter you ask me for a further explanation with regard to the said vessel’s departure for Yokohama, by my orders.

In the first place I have, from the contents of Your Excellency’s letters, dated respectively the 3d, 9th, and 12th instants, reason to presume that Your Excellency views the quarantine question from a standpoint totally different from the one I occupy. I hold the opinion, that in order that the sanitary measures, which are considered necessary with regard to ships—be they detention, inspection, or disinfection—shall be binding on German vessels, they must have been sanctioned by the German Consular authorities.

Under the existing treaties, which invest the German authorities with jurisdiction over German ships, it was my duty to maintain that right, and I could not consider the seven days’ detention, ordered by Your Excellency’s exalted government, as binding on German ships, as long as I had not, on my part, sanctioned such detention.

As I had the honor to state to Your Excellency in my note of the 12th instant, No. 66, nothing was further from my intentions than to oppose the precautionary measures in contemplation; on the contrary, I authorized at once the Consul to issue a circular to German shipmasters, by which a detention of German vessels by the Japanese authorities was legalized.

Your Excellency, on the other hand, considers the regulations issued by the high Japanese Government as dejure equally binding on all foreign ships; nor have you in your letters, dated the 3d and 9th instant, asked for my sanction, but in your letter of the 12th instant you informed me that the inspection ordered by me could have no influence on the duration of the quarantine.

Guided by the treaty stipulations and the instructions received from my high government, I could, as long as no final arrangement had been arrived at, only sanction such quarantine measures against the steamer Hesperia as appeared to be really required in the public interest. But the medical report and the state of health on board the steamer made me consider a detention as without purpose, especially as I was aware that a real strict quarantine was not carried out by the Japanese.

I took, under these circumstances, in order to avoid a conflict, the course of explaining my views in my letters No. 67 and 68 to Your Excellency, of protesting, and of asking that the steamer be liberated. I then waited from the 11th until the 14th for the purpose of affording Your Excellency’s exalted government an opportunity of its own accord to set the “Hesperia” free.

As this was hot done, I determined on the evening of the 14th, fully convinced as I was that no danger could arise from the liberation, to let the steamer come up, a step, in which I, formaliter, was perfectly justified, as long as I had not given my sanction to the regulations as far as German ships were concerned. Even then I should have waited, if I had not on the evening of the 14th been informed in Yokohama, that an inspection had only just been ordered, that the quarantine doctor had to make a report, and that according to its tenor, and eventually after a disinfection had taken place, the liberation would ensue. According to this information the liberation might yet be delayed for days, while I, a few hours previously, had, from private utterances of the Minister of the Interior and of the Vice-Minister of Foreign Affairs, assumed that the ship would immediately be set free, in consequence of a report already made.

I should have had no objection whatsoever to the disinfection mentioned by Your Excellency, and I should also have instructed the captain to that effect, if I had had any knowledge of it.

Finally I express to Your Excellency my regret at the occurrence, which, without doubt, could have been avoided if Your Excellency had been good enough to reply in time to my letters No. 67 and 68, or to personally intimate a desire in this respect.

If Your Excellency had intimated to me, officially or privately, verbally or in writing, that the German authorities were doubtless entitled to be heard in the affair, and that the detention perhaps was not absolutely necessary, but that the Japanese Government were especially desirous that the quarantine in this case should last seven days, then I have no doubt that I should have complied with a desire thus intimated to me.

I regret especially, with regard to Vice-Minister Mr. Mori and to the Minister of the Interior, to whom my thanks are due for their conciliatory efforts, that the affair at last took a turn that was unpleasant to all the parties.

I request Your Excellency, &c.,

VON EISENDECHER.

No. 305. Mr. Bingham to Mr. Evarts. [Document 333]

No. 305.
Mr. Bingham to Mr. Evarts.

United States Legation,
Tokei, Japan, August 18, 1879. (Received September 39.) No. 942.]

Sir: In accounting for the reappearance of Asiatic cholera this summer in Japan, Dr. Doenitz, a learned physician, for six years a resident of this city, at a recent meeting of the board of health for this, city, said that the present epidemic can be traced to that of 1877; that some months since the graves of soldiers who died of the cholera in 1877, in the province of Kiusiu, and whose bodies were buried in Oitaken, were opened by the government, it is supposed, for religious purposes, and also to bury the bodies more decently, and that instantly from the graves thus opened the disease developed and spread slowly into Kiusiu, and some time after reached Kobe, whence it was brought by the Hiroshima Maru (a Japanese vessel) to Yokohama and Tokei.

I inclose the report of Dr. Doenitz’s statement as published in the Tokei Times of the 2d instant. Dr. Doenitz made substantially the same statement to me.

If this statement be true as to the origin of this disease this year, it seems to me to be worth while to publish it, that other people as well as the Japanese may profit by their experience in this matter.

I have, &c.,

JNO. A. BINGHAM.

[Inclosure 1 in No. 942.—Extract from the Tokio Times, August 2, 1879.]

At the last meeting of the Tsukiji board of health that Professor Donitz attended previous to his departure for the south, he took occasion to submit some interesting and remarkable suggestions respecting the present ravages of cholera. He once more forcibly maintained that the epidemic is infectious, and that it is absolutely and positively “Asiatic cholera,” and no other disease. Certain probable causes of sickness in and about Tokei, and the remedies therefor, were propounded, and a novel theory of the origin of this immediate visitation was put forward, as follows:

“The epidemic can be traced back to and shown clearly to be connected with that of 1877. The history of it is this: Some months ago the graves of soldiers who died of cholera in 1877, and were buried in Oita Ken, were opened by the government partly, it is said, for certain religious purposes, and partly to bury more decently those who had been hastily interred during the war. The present disease began instantly from that point, spread slowly in Kiu Siu, and after some time reachead Kobe, whence it was brought to Yokohama and Tokei by the Hiroshima Maru.

With regard to the views of certain physicians who are opposed to the belief in Asiatic cholera, Professor Donitz adduced numerous facts and arguments in confutation, and declared his readiness to produce irrefutable proof at any time, if such were needed, after the obvious manifestations of the past week or two.

No. 306. Mr. Bingham to Mr. Evarts. [Document 334]

No. 306.
Mr. Bingham to Mr. Evarts.

United States Legation,
Tokei, Japan, August 29, 1879. (Received September 29.) No. 944.]

Sir: Herewith I have the honor to inclose for your: information the official statement of the statistics of Asiatic cholera within this empire, up to the 26th instant, from which it appears that the total number of cases to that date was 102,217, and that of this number 54,615 died; showing a mortality of over 50 per cent.

I inclose herewith a copy of the statement kindly furnished me by his excellency Mr. Ito. His Imperial Japanese Majesty’s Minister of the Interior. You will note that all this mortality from cholera has happened within the last four months.

I have, &c.,

JNO. A. BINGHAM.

[Inclosure in No. 944.—Cholera statics, 1879.]

29th June to 27th August:

Number of patients in Tokei 1,113

Deaths 736

22d May to 26th August:

Number of patients in Osaca 8,098

Deaths 6,266

6th June to 26th August:

Number of patients in Kiyoto 1,064

Deaths 814

30th May to 26th August:

Number of patients in Hiogo 7,932

Deaths 4,805

19th June to 26th August:

Number of patients in Kanagawa 928

Deaths 581

11th June to 26th August:

Number of patients in Nagasaki 5,560

Deaths 1,418

Total number of patients throughout the land 102,217

Total number of deaths throughout the land 54,615

The localities that have been the most seriously affected by this disease are as follows: The Ishikawa, Okayama, Yéhime, Sakai, Kumamoto, Yamaguchi, and Oita Kens. The number of patients in each of these kens has varied from 3,000 to 14,000, and the percentage of mortality has reached 53 per cent. In Osaca the percentage was 77 per cent. The Miyagi and the Iwata Kens have happily escaped visitation by the cholera, and they are the only ones that have.

No. 307. Mr. Bïngham to Mr. Evarts. [Document 335]

No. 307.
Mr. Bïngham to Mr. Evarts.

United States Legation,
Tokei, Japan, September 2, 1879. (Received September 29.) No. 954.]

Sir: On Monday, the 24th ultimo, a large body of the people of Japan, for the first time, gave a fete to the Mikado which His Imperial Majesty, accompanied by all the ministers of his court, by the Imperial Princes of the Empire, and by, the representative men of the capital, attended in person.

This fête was held in the Oyeno Park within the city, and was witnessed by thousands of His Majesty’s faithful and loyal subjects. The Oyeno Park is a large inclosure, embracing an area of several square miles, beautifully adorned with fine forests and traversed by superior carriage-ways, and is also a historic ground, being the burial place of several of the Shoguns, whose memorial temples are of elaborate finish, and is also the burial place of many of the soldiers who tell there, A. D. 1868, in the last battle for the restoration of the present Mikado, the lineal representative of the dynasty which was founded by Jimmu Tenno seven hundred years galore our era.

It seems to me worthy of record that on this occasion, when so many hundreds of thousands of people covered for miles the way over which the Emperor pissed to the park, where also many thousands were assembled, there was among the immense throng the most perfect orde and respectful silence, thus manifesting their profound regard for thei Emperor and their respect for law and decorum.

The action of the people in tendering this magnificent entertainment to the Emperor and His Majesty’s acceptance of it, constitute an event without precedent in this empire, and bear witness that both the Emperor and the people of Japan recognize, as I have before had occasio to report in these dispatches, that they consider it to be the duty of th government to promote the welfare and to protect the rights of the governed, and the duty as well of the people to maintain the supremacy of the government.

His Majesty the Emperor received, as reported in the public journals, on this occasion, in person, 2,400 of the aged people of the empire, who came to pay their respects to him.

I herewith inclose a full account of the festivities on the occasion and of the decorations of the grounds; also copies of the addresses the Emperor of the chiji (governor) of Tokei, and of the reception committee and also of the Emperor’s reply thereto, as translated in the Weekly Mail of the 30th ultimo.

I note in this published report that on that day General and Mrs. Grant each planted a tree in the grounds near the temple Toshogu, where a stone will be erected bearing the inscriptions “Grant’s Hinoki,” and “Mrs. Grant’s Gryokuran,” these words, “Hinoki” and “Gryokuran,” being the Japanese names of the respective trees so planted.

I have, &c.,

JNO. A. BINGHAM.

[Inclosure in No. 95–1—Japan Weekly Mail, August 30, 1879.]

The People’s Fête to the Mikado.

Old Yedo never saw such a display as was witnessed on Monday last, when Tokei, the capital of the restoration, rather famous of late for its public entertainments, eclipsed itself by the magnificence of its fete to the Mikado. In no other country could such a characteristic assemblage have been witnessed; such a quiet popular gathering, such a multitude without tumult or rowdyism, such taste in its accessories, and such cordial hospitality in its reception of guests.

This popular fête to the Mikado had been for some time projected by the citizens of Tokei, who were anxious that their Emperor should receive from the people of his capital the same display of loyalty which, so far, had principally been confined to the provinces through which, from time to time, he had made a royal progress. For a short time a doubt existed as to whether the proposed entertainment would be accepted or not, and the native-papers have been full of paragraphs upon the anticipated disappointment of their hopes. But the invitation was finally accepted, the fete has passed, and the impression left on the mind of everyone who witnessed it must have been one of unalloyed, satisfaction.

The crême de la crême of a public festival consists in the crowd who witness it; in the sea of men, women, and children surging to the barriers to get a glimpse of the passing show, and in the grand sight of the millions who expect nothing but a momentary view of a pageant in which they are but spectators. And this was more than realized on Monday. For upwards of three miles a dense population crowded the streets of the capital to witness the passing guests, while in the park of Uyeno a great ocean of people flooded the grounds and gave the finishing touch to the picture—that deep background without which the picture itself would have been but a miniature.

From the railway station at Tokei to the entrance of the Uyeno park crowds of quiet citizens lined the streets; one continuous line of red and white lanterns, suspended on battens marked the roadway, and three compact, well-built triumphal arches gave a special mark of interest to those portions of the old Tokaido. These arches deserve special, notice; they were well-shaped, closely covered with evergreens, and the middle one (near the Nihon Bashi), with a red bridge forming its arch and two figures looking down on the passing crowd, was particularly elegant. At Uyeno long pavilions had been erected forming three sides of a square, in which accommodation was found for all the guests, who must have numbered several thousands. In the centre of the principal pavilion was the place set apart for the Mikado, who arrived on the ground shortly after half-past three in the afternoon, escorted by a troop of lancers and accompanied by the representatives of Tokei, who had met him at the park entrance. The presentation to his Majesty of old people of Tokei, over eighty years of age, was then made, some addresses were read and replied to, and at about half-past four the games commenced, which were to form the Principal attraction of the fête, General Grant and suite and the diplomatic body having arrived in the mean time.

The first performance consisted of lance and sword exercise, in which some hundred men took part; fighting in couples either with lances or broadswords. The performers were incased with the usual padding on their left side, while their heads were protected with masks, and right lustily did they belabor one another. To onlookers the broadsword exercise afforded the most amusement, especially when, in the excitement of the tussle, the two men would drop their weapons and fight out the battle by wrestling, often rolling over and over each other in their momentary wrath or vexation.

After this came the Yabu same, or archery, by mounted horsemen, and of all the games this certainly was the most entertaining. A straight road across the inclosure was kept by hurdles (forming a riding-course of probably 300 yards), and three white paper targets stood in front of black boards at equal distances, each target being about 10 feet from the road down which the archers had to ride at full speed. The first target was at the commencement of the course, the second in the middle, and the third at the finish.

The archers (who we understand were all of the Hatamoto class) appeared in their picturesque costumes, which are now only to be seen in the prints of a past civilization, with their many colored dresses, their aprons of deer or bear skin, their heavy stirrups, their long bow, and their quiver of arrows at saddle seat. Starting at a gallop, the archer places his arrow in position with the bow held well up; as he nears the target the bow stretches, the arrow comes in a line with his eye, and, when passing the object, an imperceptible motion discharges the shaft into “the target, cutting it in two, and creating a shower of tinsel paper to attract attention to his prowess, while the attendant marker raises a white “mop” to show the hit.

The practice was wonderful, and out often competitors but one failed to hit the targets, and he, poor fellow, missed all three. Most struck all in succession, and the last rider won well earned applause by brandishing his arrow in his hand until the target seemed to have been passed, when suddenly its very center was found to have been pierced! This able archer was Mr. Kasiyo, a prince of Chikugo and a former governor of Kanagawa.

The Horo and Kinu Biki was an interesting display of Japanese horsemanship, in which four riders showed off the paces of their ponies and the peculiar action which was such a favorite performance before western ideas came into the country. One black pony, belonging to Mr. Matsugata, was especially effective and a very showy animal.

The last performance was the Inu-o-mono, in which twenty-four horsemen took part. The usual programme of this game is to start a dog from a circle (round which the archers are clustered), and for it to be shot at by blunted arrows and then chased round the ground. On Monday drags were used, and much fun arose from the attempts of the crowd of horsemen to overtake and shoot the drag, which was drawn by one of their number at full gallop across the field. One black dog was, however, let loose, and he seemed to have been an old stager at the game, for in spite of several palpable hits from the blunted arrows, he gave good sport in doubling through the crowd of pursuers until, tired out, he was allowed to rejoin his keeper and go to kennel.

The Mikado left immediately after the games, when all the guests repaired to the supper pavilion, where ample meat and most ample drink were provided for an innumerable crowd of hungry and thirsty souls.

From dark until ten o’clock an unusually fine display of fire-works was let off from the lake, and the whole park became aglow with lanterns hanging in festoons from tree to tree. The road back to the station, with its myriads of lights, its crowds of people, its block of carriages and jinrikishas, is a sight which will not be forgotten by those who witnessed it, and who will remember with pleasure the Mikado’s fete of the 25th August.

The number of aged people presented to the Mikado amounted to 2,400, according to the native papers; from which source we also learn that during the afternoon, upon the suggestion of Mr. Tsuda, a member of the committee and the well known agriculturist, a tree was planted by General Grant in toe neighborhood of the Temple of Tôshôgû, in front of which a stone with the inscription “Grant’s Hinoki,” is to be erected. Mrs. Grant also planted a tree which is named “Mrs. Grant’s Giyokuran,” both being highly pleased at the remembrance of their visit to Japan being thus perpetuated.

The following translations of the addresses presented to the Mikado are taken from the Japan Herald: From the Chiji of the Tokio Fu:

“Your Majesty the Emperor has accepted the invitation of our citizens and paid a visit to the public gardens at Onyeno, on this 25th day of August, in the 12th year of Meiji, and shown Your Majesty’s favor by complying with the desire of the public. Since the accession of Your Majesty to the imperial throne until the present time, Your Majesty’s glorious administration has daily improved for twelve years; under Your Majesty’s reign the population is daily increasing in number, and Your Majesty takes the initiative in promulgating new laws and making the administration more perfect.

“Your Majesty has created the Gun and Ku divisions for the greater convenience of the districts, and local assemblies to bring the government and the people into fuller harmony. By placing local officers in the Gun and Ku the administration has been brought into a more working order, so that whenever a new law is issued it is cheerfully obeyed, and with the same ease as the running water seeks its level. Such things could never have taken place if it were not that Your Majesty’s virtue had cast its charm over the people.

“And now Your Majesty has honored us with your imperial visit; what are we to do to show how highly we appreciate Your Majesty’s favor? I, Masataka, Your Majesty’s servant, have been entrusted with the charge of this Fu, and day and night I strive to comply with Your Majesty’s gracious will, on the one side, and with patriotic, promptings of the people, on the other side, and I avail myself of this auspicious opportunity, in the name of the Tokei citizens, to offer my homage to Your Majesty. I beg to present this new map of the Gun and Ku in our Fu.

“Your Majesty’s servant,

“KUSUMOTO MASATAKA.

Tokei Fu Chiji,
“The 25th August, 12th year Meiji.”

From the reception committee:

“We, the representatives of the citizens of Tokei, respectfully return thanks for Your Majesty’s favor, and ask permission to express our feelings of gratitude.

“Your Majesty’s reign is bountiful like the falling rain, and Your Majesty’s virtue is exalted like the rising sun. Law and order are firmly secured, and for thousands of years there never was so bright a time as the present. Your Majesty has accepted the invitation of the citizens and honored them with a visit; how could we, Your Majesty’s servants and citizens of Tokei, forbear from expressing our gratitude? We humbly hope that Your Majesty may live forever, and that Your Majesty’s servants may be every day more and more of one mind, and enjoy themselves for thousands of thousands of years to come.

“Your Majesty’s servants.”

To which the following was His Majesty’s reply:

“By invitation of the people of this Fu we have to-day appeared here; we have received their welcome, at which we have been highly gratified. We wish that our people may prosper in their various callings and enjoy themselves forever.”

No. 308. Mr. Bingham to Mr. Evarts. [Document 336]

No. 308.
Mr. Bingham to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Tokei, Japan, September 2, 1879. (Received September 29.) No. 956.]

Sir: General Grant being about to quit Japan for the United States, it pleased His Majesty the Emperor to give a farewell audience to the General and Mrs. Grant and their suite on Saturday, the 30th ultimo, at the imperial palace. I, too, had the honor to be present. Herewith I inclose copies of the report of the audience and of the addresses made on the occasion by General Grant, His Majesty the Emperor, Her Majesty the Empress, Mrs. Grant, and by myself, as published in the Japan Daily Herald of the 1st instant.

A final reception will be given this evening in honor of General Grant at the palace Enryoquan, in which the Emperor has entertained his distinguished guest during his sojourn in this city. On to-morrow General Grant and family sail for the United States per the American mail steamer Tokio. I inclose herewith a statement of the arrangements made for the transfer of the General from, the palace to the ship, as published in the Japan Herald of the 1st instant. I do not hesitate to say that no such imperial and popular reception as that given to General Grant by His Majesty and His Majesty’s ministers and people was ever before given in this empire, to any foreign visitor.

It is a pleasure to note that our naval officers in these waters, our consuls, and our citizens resident in Japan have also shown due courtesy and consideration to General Grant.

It is not to be doubted that the extraordinary attentions shown to our illustrious citizen were shown alike in honor of the ex-President and of the government and people of the United States of America.

You will observe that the Emperor in his address to General Grant expresses the hope that “America and Japan, being near neighbors, * * * will become more and more closely connected with each other as time goes on,” and that His Majesty “cordially wishes” that his illustrious guest “may on his return home” find our “nation in peace and prosperity.”

The Emperor and people of Japan look with a confiding trust to our government and people.

I have, &c.,

JNO. A. BINGHAM.

[Inclosure 1, in No. 956.—Extract from the Japan Daily Herald of September 1, 1879.]

General Grant’s final interview with His Majesty the Mikado.

Monday, September 1, 1879.

On Saturday afternoon, General Grant and party took their leave of the Emperor. General Grant, Mrs. Grant, Colonel Grant, and Mr. Young left the palace of Euryoquan at half past two, in state carriages, escorted by a company of cavalry. The party was accompanied by Mr. Bingham, United States minister; also, by Prince Date and Mr. Yoshida. The cortege reached the palace shortly after three, and was received with, military honors. General Grant, on descending, was met by the prime minister and foreign minister and the minister of the household, and was escorted to the audience chamber, where the Emperor, the Empress, and the Imperial Princes were waiting. On entering, the Emperor advanced and shook hands cordially with General and Mrs. Grant. General Grant then said:

“Your Majesty: I come to take my leave and to thank you, the officers of your government and the people of Japan, for the great hospitality and kindness I have received at the hands of all during my most pleasant visit to this country. I have now been two months in Tokei and the surrounding neighborhood, and two previous weeks in the more southerly part of the country. It affords me great satisfaction to say that during all this stay and all my visiting I have not witnessed one discourtesy towards myself, nor a single unpleasant sight. Everywhere there seems to be the greatest contentment among the people; and while no signs of great individual wealth exist, no absolute poverty is visible. This is in striking and pleasing contrast with almost every other country I have visited. I leave Japan greatly impressed with the possibilities and probabilities of her future. She has a fertile soil, one half of it not yet cultivated to man’s use, great undeveloped mineral resources, numerous and fine harbors, an extensive seacoast, abounding in fish of an almost endless variety, and, above all, an industrious, ingenious, contented, and frugal population. With all these, nothing is wanted to insure great progress, except wise discretion by the government, peace at home and abroad, and non-interference in the internal and domestic affairs of the country by the outside nations.

“It is the sincere desire of your guest to see Japan realize all possible strength and greatness, to see her as independent of foreign rule or dictation as any western nation now is, and to see affairs so directed by her as to command the respect of the civilized world. In saying this, I believe I reflect the sentiments of the great majority of my countrymen.

“I now take my leave, without expectation of ever again having the opportunity of visiting Japan, but with the assurance that pleasant recollections of my present visit will not vanish while my life lasts. That Your Majesty may long reign over a prosperous and contented people and enjoy every blessing is my sincere prayer.”

To this address His Majesty the Emperor responded. His Majesty’s reply, which was translated by Mr. Ishibashi, was as follows: “Your visit has given us so much satisfaction and pleasure that we can only lament that the time for your departure has come. We regret also that the heat of the season, and the presence of the epidemic, have prevented several of your proposed visits to different places. In the meantime, however, we have greatly enjoyed the pleasure of frequent interviews with you, and the cordial expressions which you have just addressed to us, in taking your leave, have given us great additional satisfaction. America and Japan, being near neighbors, separated by an ocean only, will become more and more closely connected with each other as time goes on. It is gratifying to feel assured that your visit to our empire, which enabled us to form very pleasant personal acquaintance with each other, will facilitate and strengthen the friendly relations that have heretofore happily existed between the two countries. And now we cordially wish you a safe and pleasant voyage home, and that you will, on your return home, find your nation in peace and prosperity, and that you and your family may enjoy long life and happiness.”

The Emperor read his address in a clear tone. When he had finished the Empress, addressing herself to Mrs. Grant, said she had rejoiced in Mrs. Grant’s presence in Japan, but feared that the unusually warm weather and the pestilence may have interfered with her pleasure. Mrs. Grant answered that her visit had more than realized her anticipations; that she had enjoyed every hour of the trip, and hoped she might have in her own country an opportunity of acknowledging and reciprocating the hospitality she had received in Japan.

His Majesty, addressing himself to Mr. Bingham, hoped the minister was well. Mr. Bingham said: “I thank Your Majesty for your kind inquiry. I desire, on behalf of the President of the United States and of the government and people I represent, to express our profound appreciation of the kindness and the honor shown by Your Majesty and your people to our illustrious citizen.”

His Majesty bowed his thanks, and shaking hands with General Grant and Mrs. Grant, the ceremony came to an end.

[Inclosure 2 in No. 956.—Extract from Japan Daily Herald of September 1.]

General Grant will receive on Tuesday evening, at 8.30, at the palace of Euryoquan. There will be fireworks and a fête, and at the close a special train will return to Yokohama.

On Wednesday morning he will leave Tokei in a special train, accompanied by high officials of the Japanese Government and the American minister, and go to the Admiralty pier, where he will be received by Admiral Patterson, and embark on the City of Tokio, which will sail as soon as the general goes on board. The American men-of-war in the harbor will man yards and fire twenty-one guns, according to the regulations prescribed in the American statutes for honoring an Ex-President of the United States. The Japanese fort and ships will fire salutes. The general will go to San Francisco, and spend some weeks on the Pacific coast, possibly returning as far as the Sandwich Islands. We believe the visit to Australia was at one time contemplated, but has been abandoned.

No. 309. Mr. Bingham to Mr. Evarts. [Document 337]

No. 309.
Mr. Bingham to Mr. Evarts.

United States Legation,
Tokei, Japan, September 15, 1879. (Received October 16.) No. 961.]

Sir: Referring to my No. 766, of date the 2d of April, 1878, wherein I brought to your notice an article of the Japan Times, of that year, wherein, among other things, it was declared by the editor that the treaty powers were entitled to demand of Japan new guarantees and safeguards, “when restoring by treaty revision her imperial right of coinage.” I now take pleasure in noting the fact that on the 12th instant, without waiting for any such demand of the treaty powers, this government, in the exercise of its clear right to coin money and fix its value, has by due notification declared that the Japanese silver yen of 416 grains weight and 900 fineness, shall be received at par with the Mexican dollar by every department of the government when tendered in payment of custom duties, or on any account opened or to be opened in Mexican dollars, and shall, when tendered in payment of any sum payable in Mexican dollars now due, or which may hereafter become due, be received by all Japanese subjects in full payment thereof.

It is gratifying to know that this government has had the courage to coin money, fix its value, and declare it a legal tender within its own dominion, without yielding to any demand of the treaty powers for safeguards and guarantees for the exercise of its rightful powers.

I note that the foreign bank corporations of Yokohama expressly recognize the legality of the action thus taken, and from no quarter do I hear it now suggested that the treaty powers can rightfully demand of Japan “new guarantees and safeguards.”

For your information I beg leave to inclose a copy of the notification as published in the Japan Daily Herald of the 13th instant.

I have, &c.,

JNO. A. BINGHAM.

[Inclosure in Mr. Bingham’s No. 961.—Extract from Japan Daily Herald, September 13, 1879.]

Notification No. 35.

It is hereby notified as follows:

The Japanese silver yen of 416 grains weight and 900 fineness will henceforth be received at par with the Mexican dollar by every department of the government when tendered in payment of custom duties or any other account opened or to be opened in Mexican dollars.

On and after the 19th instant the aforesaid yen shall, when tendered in payment of any sum payable in Mexican dollars, now due or hereafter to become due, be received by all Japanese subjects in full payment thereof.

SANJO SANEYOSHI.

DAIJO DAIJIN,
Prime Minister.

12th day of the 9th month, 12th year of Meiji.

No. 310. Mr. Bingham to Mr. Evarts. [Document 338]

No. 310.
Mr. Bingham to Mr. Evarts.

United States Legation,
Tokei, Japan, September 15, 1879. (Received October 16.) No. 962.]

Sir: Herewith I have the honor to transmit for your information the “Fourth report of the director general of the Imperial Government telegraphs of Japan” for the fiscal year ended June 30, 1878.

The report shows that from the earliest date (1873) to the 30th of June, 1878, the aggregate receipts were yen 990,343.50, and that the total number of messages transmitted was 3, 187,727, and that the total expenditure to that date was yen 3,551,200, and that during the year ended June 30, 1878, the receipts amounted to yen 344,017.44, and that the expenditure for the same year was yen 645,553.94.

The report also shows that in January, 1878, a “telegraph engineering school” was established (p. 24 [Pg. 24 includes portions of Doc. 21 and Doc. 22]), in which natives are thoroughly instructed for the service, and that in this school during the year much material and some apparatus were manufactured, among which instruments were magnets, telephones, &c.

The several appendixes set out the tariff for European and Japanese messages.

It appears that during the year 1877 miles of line were constructed or rebuilt.

The whole number of persons employed in the service, 1,410.

I have, &c.

JOHN A. BINGHAM.

Imperial government telegraphs.Imperial government telegraphs.

[339] Fourth report of the director general, being for the year ending on the 30th day of the 6th month of the 11th year of Meiji (30th June, 1878.)

Kobusho, Tokei, 30th June, 1878.

[340] . Mr. Bingham to Mr. Evarts.

United States Legation, Tokei, Japan, September 18, 1879. (Received October 16.)

[341] . Mr. Bingham to Mr. Evarts.

United States Legation, Tokei, Japan, October 6, 1879. (Received November 4.)

[342] . Mr. Bingham to Mr. Evarts.

United States Legation, Tokei, Japan, October 6, 1879. (Received November 4.)

[343] . Mr. Bingham to Mr. Evarts.

United States Legation, Tokei, Japan, October 9, 1879. (Received November 4.)

[344] . Mr. Bingham to Mr. Evarts.

United States Legation, Tokei, Japan, October 10, 1879. (Received November 4.)

[345] . Mr. Bingham to Mr. Evarts.

United States Legation, Tokei, Japan, October 22, 1879. (Received November 28.)

[346] . Mr. Payson to Mr. Van Buren.

Department of State, Washington, November 23, 1878.

Fourth report of the director general, being for the year ending on the 30th day of the 6th month of the 11th year of Meiji (30th June, 1878.) [Document 339]

Fourth report of the director general, being for the year ending on the 30th day of the 6th month of the 11th year of Meiji (30th June, 1878.)

In July, 1877, the Satsuma rebels still held the road between Hinga and Osumi but were demoralized, and not long after the struggle was terminated in favor of the imperial troops, the leaders of the insurrection being killed and their bands dispersed; the army telegraphs continued to render good service in the field, and the lines to Kagoshima and Oita were being expedited as far as possible.

It being probable that His Majesty the Emperor would visit the northwestern provnces, every exertion was made to complete the lines of telegraph in that direction, and, though not actually finished at the date of this report, everything was in so forward a condition that a few days only would suffice to open up communication.

Since my last report there have been many extensions of our system to places not previously served, and a large proportion of the lines included in the entire scheme of national telegraphs has been substantially erected and brought into actual operation; the remainder is gradually being proceeded with, and the benefit to the public, foreign and native, of possessing means of rapid communication has been thoroughly exemplified.

The telegraphic congress in London being fixed in June, 1878, I was ordered to proceed thither as the delegate from Japan, and I had set out on the journey accordingly, when the news was received of a postponement until 1879 having been decided upon. Although, therefore, the conference has not yet taken place, the fact of our government having decided to send a representative is illustrative of the sure and rapid growth of western civilization in this country.

As mentioned in my previous report, the extension of the permanent line from Kumamoto southwards to Kagoshima was urged onward as fast as circumstances would permit, keeping in the wake of the army, and communication was opened up with Yatsushiro, in Higo, and thence with Sashiki (3d July), Kajiki (8th August), and Kagoshima (10th August), for government messages only.

In the same way the temporary field telegraphs were carried forward with the army, and offices were established for brief periods.

On the 1st September the rebels attacked the town of Kagoshima so suddenly that our staff at the office there had not time to retreat, and clerk Fujino was killed at his post. The others fortunately made good their escape, and subsequently reunited at the Kajiki office a few miles off, where they resumed their duties during the final struggle which took place at Kagoshima, and terminated in the complete route of the rebels at “Shiroyama” on the 24th September.

The temporary station for field telegraphs at Tanoura was transferred to this department on the 16th October and opened for public traffic, but was closed since on 15th December, when the new Kagoshima office was opened.

Offices for public traffic were also opeued at Yatsushire, Sashiki, and Kajiki (October 20).

The chain of communication around Kinshiu was meanwhile gradually advancing, and, to expedite matters, double squads of men, under native engineers, were set to work from Kagoshima and Oita, north and south. Offices were opened for government messages at Miyakonojo and Miyazaki (6th October), respectively, 41 and 75 miles north of Kagoshima, and a junction between the two lines was finally effected, and the work completed on the 20th October.

The office at Sashiki was closed on the 10th November; that at Kajiki on the 31st January, 1878, and that at Miyakonojo on the 12th of the same month.

Altogether the length of line provided for military telegraphs, counting from the outbreak of the Satsuma rebellion, amounted to 511 English miles (206 last year and 305 in this year); 53 offices were established (28 last year and 25 in this year), and 156 officers (112 last year and 44 in 1877–’78), of all ranks, engineers, operators, &c., formed the staff.

The line between Kokura and Oita, in Bungo, passing through Nakatsu, in Buzeu (vide last report), was rapidly extended southward, with temporary stations at the latter places merely for government purposes; the work was completed to Nakatsu on the 5th July, and as far as Oita on the 28th. The same staff was then directed (18th August) to carry on the work in the direction of Kagoshima (as referred to in a previous paragraph), and accordingly did so as far as TakanaM, about 84 miles, taking in Nobeoka on the way. This work was finished on the 13th November, the route between Nobeoka and Takanabe having presented unusual difficulties in the shape of rocky ground, in which hole-dicing became all but impossible.

The offices were opened for public traffic as under: Nakatsu, 20th October.

Oita, 20th October.

Nobeoka, 15th December.

Miyazaki, 15th December.

Kagoshima, 15th December.

The erection of lines in the island of Shikoku was completed as far as Marugame and Takamatsu, in Sanuki, during the last fiscal year, with temporary stations at those places for the transmission of government messages only. As it became very desirable to extend the communication in this island on account of the Kagoshima insurrection, the survey and construction of the line from Takamatsu to Tokushima, in Awa (about 43 miles from Takamatsu), and from Marugame to Kochi, in Tosa, via Matsuyama, in Iyo, was prosecuted with great rapidity, officers of the engineering staff being dispatched to each of those sections. The Tokushima portion having been commenced on the 3d July and completed on the 5th December last, the office thereat was opened on the 15th of the latter month: and, as the rebellion had meanwhile been entirely suppressed, the stations at Takamatsu and Marugame were opened for the public service from the 5th October. The section between Marugame and Matsu-yama was commenced on the 6th March, and another section between Matsuyama and Kochi on the 25th February of this year.

The road to Kochi passing through a very mountainous region, the work was rendered difficult of execution, and the line in this direction was not quite finished, but so nearly that only a very small proportion remained to be built at the date of this report.

In the mean time the government had decided to provide offices at Imaharu, in Iyo, and Muya in Awa, and consequently two wires were run up from Odera village, on the Tokushima route, to Muya, 8¾ miles (19th December, 23d March), and an office opened on the 1st June. Imaharu had not been completed at the end of the fiscal year.

In the previous year the line directed towards Niigati had been completed to a point beyond Urawa and Mayebashi. Takasaki was subsequently reached in the present year, and Uyeda in Shinano. The government having, however, issued notice of His Majesty’s contemplated progress through the northwestern provinces (as before alluded to), it became necessary to put forth special exertions to complete the chain of communications in that part of the empire in good time. Various companies of engineers and workmen were therefore sent out, and the entire length split up into short sections proportionate to the strength of the staff and the time of disposal. Thus, Uyeda having been reached on the 10th April, the portion beyond, to Nagano, was well advanced on the 30th June. Stations were opened from time to time as the works progressed, Urawa and Kumagai on the 1st October, 1877, Takasaki and Mayabashi on the 15th October, Uyeda on the 1st May.

In the same way in connection with His Majesty’s visit, a line was undertaken between Otsu and Uwotsu, Etchiu (215 miles), with stations at Tsuruga in Echizen, Fu-kui, and Kanazawa in Kaga; this was commenced on the 3d June in the Otsu section, on the 11th between Tsuruga and Fukui, Fukui and Kanazawa on the 14th, and towards Uwotsu on the 27th.

Work was rapidly proceeding in all these sections on the date of this report and the line would probably be completed in two months. It was subsequently determined to connect Uwotsu with Imamachi on the Nügate road, so as to make the circuit of those provinces completely.

Wires used for electric-bell communication were provided in the exhibition grounds at Uyeno (14th-19th September); also a lightning-rod on the roof of the fine arts museum.

The line to Hagi, in Nagato, was executed, starting from Yamaguchi, about 20 miles (14th August-20th December), and an office was opened on the 1st January. The line is being carried on towards Hamada, in Iwami, and Matsuye, in Idsumo, 167 miles, at which places it is proposed to establish stations.

A fourth wire was provided throughout on the poles between Tokei and Nagasaki, having become necessary in consequence of increased traffic.

The ordinary maintenance staff being engaged, the cable in connection with this wire required at Shimonoseki straits had not been laid, and thus it remained terminated at the stations in either side.

In Osaka, a line temporarly, provided between Koraibashi office and the branch war office in connection with the Satsuma troubles, was taken down in October; on the other hand, a wire was connected to the castle instead, about one mile from Koraibashi office (14th-22d December), and fitted with the apparatus previously used at the war office.

Bell’s telephones were imported from America in November, and they were tried between the public works department, Tokei, and the Yokohama town office, a distance of about 20 miles. The experiment being quite successful, it was determined to bring these newly invented instruments into use between the public works department offices and the imperial palace at Akasaka, and wires were provided for the purpose (18th to 21st December) between these points, the distance being 1 mile 2½ furlongs, and conversation was carried on satisfactorily.

In my third report reference was made to the projected reconstruction of the local lines in Tokei for which a new route had been surveyed; the actual building of this trunk line was commenced on the 24th October, 1877, and was completed on the 22d March, of this year.

Having in view the substantial character of the work done, and the comparative freedom from risk of fire, &c., which the new line possesses, it may safely be assumed that there will be a considerable saving in the cost of maintenance and repair, as compared with the route previously adopted.

The erection of a brick building in a convenient position in Kobikicho, to be used as a central telegraph station, was commenced in April, 1877, and on the 5th December it was so far advanced that the internal fittings alone remained to be supplied in order to render it complete and ready for the conduct of the traffic which had so far been carried on in a somewhat confined and ill-situated office in Tsukiji.

All preparations having been made, the transfer was easily effected on the morning of the 25th March, and at noon of that day the minister of public works officially opened the building, being accompanied in his visit by the vice-minister and various officials.

Although telegrams had actually been forwarded by the government lines for some years previously, this had been done unofficially and by the intermediation of the Great Northern Telegraph Company, for the convenience of the public; in the mean time, however, by far the greater part of the lines originally planned having been erected and brought into working condition, and the constructor and operators having attained to a considerable degree of proficiency, it was determined that from the same date the government should declare its adhesion to the terms of the St. Petersburg telegraph convention, and its intention to accept messages from the public, as far as international telegrams are concerned, at any of its offices for transmission in accordance with the provisions and regulations therein contained. This announcement was telegraphed to the Great Northern Company’s representatives in Shanghai, and to all the existing stations of the empire. The telegraphic arrangements of this country were thus placed on a footing similar to those of other countries and administrations, and in order to celebrate the occasion, the minister of public works invited the members of the imperial family, the ministers and counselors of state, the ministers and secretaries representing the treaty powers, officials ranking as appointed by the soverign, those of the public works department appointed by the council; the governor of Tokeifu, &c., to a banquet at the Imperial College of Engineering, on the evening of the same day. The bands of various corps, naval and military, performed selections of music, and the many types of telegraphic apparatus, Hughes, Gray, Breguet, Siemens, Duplex, &c., were exhibited to the guests in actual operation, a wire having been provided specially for the occasion, connecting the college with the new central telegraph office.

Kuwana station was established on the 1st April, intermediate on the already existing line joining Nagoya and Tsu.

An extra wire with Morse apparatus was provided between the central office and Nihonbashi branch, Tokei (April 4–8).

In Osaka, a line of wires was provided (by means of poles already existing or newly erected for the purpose) from the central police station at Yedobori to eight branch offices in Nishinagabori, Nagaboribashi, Sonezaki, Sugawara, Ohtedori, Koraibashi, Kiubojimachi, and Andojimuchi; Morse apparatus being employed. Electric bell communication was also provided between two of the offices (Sonezake and Sugawara) and the house of correction, and between Ohtedori and the prison. The central station further connected with Kawaguchi telegraph office; the object being to facilitate maintenance of the police system in that city. (May 11–June 13, distance about 9 miles.)

In Tokei, the home department and the central police station were joined by a wire on new poles fitted with telephones. (May 16, 17—three-quarters of a mile.)

Mitajire, in Suwo province, was opened on the 15th June, an office having been erected, and a wire provided on new poles for 11 miles and on existing poles for 10 miles, connecting it with Yamaguchi. (24th April-5th June.)

On the 25th June, Ishinomachi, in Rikuzen, was opened as a public message station. A new line of poles and one wire connects this place with Sendai, 33 miles distant. The construction occupied from the 25th April until the 11th June.

The country was surveyed during April and May for a one wire new line between Yamagata and Sakato in Ugo, via Yokote and kita, about 185 miles, with a station at each town; operations having previously been retarded by a deep snow. The actual construction was begun on the 15th June, and was still proceeding on the date of this report.

In Tokei, the new building of the first division of police, fourth section, having been completed at Nakabashi, it was connected by a new-pole line with the central police station. The line to the office in Sakamotocho (temporarily made use of after the destruction by fire of the original station in Irifunecho Tsukiji) was abandoned. (May 20–23.)

The 5th division police, 5th section, having established a new station at Shitaya Ka-nasugimachi, it was connected with the main system in lieu of the office which had previously existed on the Senjiu-Yeki premises. (15th-22d January.)

In order to diminish the risk of damage by fire, the line of wires between Asakusa-bashi and Asakusa office was transferred to the Bakurocho, on the opposite river bank (Mukoriyogoku) and cairied forward by way of Hanakawadomachi, distance 2 miles 830 yards.

The original office at Awomori, burnt in April 1877, was replaced by a new building on the proper site, completed 11th June, 1878.

During the fiscal year now under review about 1,3671/6 miles of line, carrying in all 1,533¾ miles of wire, were newly constructed or rebuilt; 32 stations were opened (exclusive of two on the battle-field for government messages only). In addition to these 511 miles of line and 53 offices were provided for the army telegraphs.

The expeditions for 1875 and 1876 having proved unsuccessful in the attempted repairs of the defective Tsugaru Straits (Hakodate) cables, for want of proper appliances, it was resolved to make a final effort, and the Great Northern Telegraph Company’s repairing steamer H. C. Orsted was chartered for the work. On this occasion the operations were brought to a satisfactory termination, and the communication through both cables was restored on the 13th July, 1877. A test of the insulation taken immediately after gave fair results.

In June the Shikoku cable was interrupted, but communication was restored on the 26th of that month; the damage had apparently been occasioned by a boat’s anchor.

A considerable, amount of repair-work was carried on throughout the year on the trunk lines north and south, being necessitated by the decay of timber, fire, storm, &c., but, save in a few cases detailed hereafter, special mention is not necessary.

About 45 miles of the entire section lying between Toyohasha and Kobe were repaired, in continuation of the work commenced in 1875.

The renewal of the trunk line between Kobe and Shimonoseki, also commenced in 1875, was completed. Some important river-crossings were executed in connection therewith, notably those of the Kawabe, Shojo, Yoshi, Teno, and the line Rivers.

Between Idzuchi village and Koyeti the main line was reconstructed by a new and better road.

The remaining portions of the Nagasaki and Kokura main line, lying between Saga and Fukuoka, were repaired, thus completing the works on that locality.

Direct communication between Nagasaki, Kumamoto, and Kagoshima having been found to be desirable, it was effected by connecting two of the wires together at the Saga office.

In continuation of the works begun in 1876–’77, a further portion of about 62 miles was thoroughly repaired between Tokei and Sendai.

In the Sendai and Awomori district, about 35 miles were completely repaired, about 70 resurveyed, and about 100 miles temporarily restored, pending the final renewal.

education of native operators.

At the commencement of the last fiscal year, 107 of the candidates were selected and entered upon a course of training at the Shiodome school.

In consequence, however, of the opening of lines in Shikoku, Niigata, Oita, &c., as well as to supply the existing offices, and also the military system, 60 others were admitted in September, and 80 more in March, 1878; they were sent out from time to time to act as operators at stations, or as “first-class” students, to gain practical experience. The total number receiving tuition at the date of this report was 149.

In my first report I referred to the fact of 114 operators having been engaged for a term of four years from 1873.

The term having expired in July, 1877, six of them resigned the service, but 108 were re-engaged.

The regulations under this head have since been revised.

In January, 1878, a telegraph engineering school, was established at the Shiodome depôt, and native officers of the engineering staff, as well as operators and students, were thoroughly instructed in their duties in this branch. The engineering staff officers intended ultimately to act as inspectors, &c., were taught the surveying, construction, and outdoor work generally, as well as the requirements of indoor supervision in the various offices, whilst the operators received training in the indoor branch merely.

expenditure.

In accordance with revised regulations issued in September, 1876, the new system of keeping, accounts was brought into operation in the fiscal year now under notice, the expenditure being classed under three heads, viz: I. Control (general expenses of the Kobusho head office). [The expenditure under Class I is not shown in the present report, but under it were included such items as salaries, traveling expenses, and house allowances of native and foreign staff engaged at the head office; clothing and boarding allowances to native operators (paid by the chief accountants’ departments). These sums were included in the general account of Kobusho.]

II. Maintenance (ordinary working expenses at stations, repairs of lines, &c).

III. Construction (building new lines, new offices, &c).

The charges under Class II to be defrayed by the receipts for message traffic, or should there be a deficiency, by a capital fund, specially reserved.

The estimated expenditure was as under—

Class II, maintenance, yens, 298,540.00.

Class III, construction, yens, 194,983.63.

The amount of receipts for message traffic was only estimated at yens, 200,500, and thus there was a prospective deficiency of yens, 98,040, as compared with the expenditure under Class II. To cover this the reserve-fund was fixed at yens, 120,000.

The actual expenditure for the year was as follows:

Class II, maintenance, yens, 444,224.86.

Class III, construction, yens, 193,770.40.

And the receipts, yens, 395,410.36.

[In the receipts are included 334,944.24 for messages, the remainder being derived from sundry other sources.]

Thus the actual deficiency was 48,814.51, and this was met by the reserve-fund.

A farther charge on the reserved fund of 7,558.67 was made in respect of the special expenses attendant upon the official opening ceremonies and the probable traveling expenses of the delegate to the International Telegraph Congress in London, whose journey was, however, delayed, the meeting having been postponed.

The total expenditure thus amounted to be 645,553.94, an increase upon the previous year’s total of 11,765.13.

Up to the end of the year under review, the total expenditure from the earliest date of commencing the work, had been yens, 3,551,209.90.

traffic and receipts.

During the year there were transmitted 998,559 Japanese messages (63,057 “on service”); 28,431 foreign messages (7,682 “on service”); 18,452 international messages (609 “on service”).

The receipts amounted to yens, 344,017.4.4.

[The above figures include 48,448 Japanese and 594 foreign messages passing over the colonization department’s lines in Yeso, for which that department held a sum of 9,072.19.]

Compared with the previous year there was an increase in the number of messages of 364,503, and in the receipts of yens, 112,661.90.

From the earliest date of opening up to the 30th June, 1878, the aggregate receipts had been yens, 990,343.50, and the total number of messages transmitted, 3,187,727.

staff.

The total number of officers, engineers, and employés in the telegraph service, including the students and the foreign staff, at the date of this report is 1,410, which, on comparison with the number for last fiscal year, shows an increase of 263, owing to the considerable additions to our system in the shape of new lines and stations. The rank and classes of the various officers are shown in the accompanying table.

mechanician’s branch.

During the year much material and apparatus was manufactured in the mechanic shop at the Shiodome depot, and the work proved to have been executed efficiently. The principal instruments were: 20 Brittan’s galvanometers, 24 magnets, 50 double terminals, 29 bell buttons, 13 switches, 2 telephones, 2 sounders, 1 lightning discharger, and 1 electric bell.

A. YOSHIKAWA,
Director-General of Telegraphs.
Kobusho, Tokei, 30th June, 1878.

Table showing the actual number of officers and employés on the 30th June, 1878.

administration.

Japanese officers (Sonin rank) 4

Japanese officers (Hannin rank) 57

Japanese officers (Togai rank) 58

European officers 4

Other employés 23

146

commercial staff.

Japanese officers (Hannin) 161

Japanese officers (Togai) 259

European officers 8

Students 192

Messengers 234

854

engineering staff.

Japanese officers (Hannin) 87

Japanese officers (Togai) 25

European officers 14

Students 18

Lineman and workmen 266

410

Total 1,410

No. 311. Mr. Bingham to Mr. Evarts. [Document 340]

No. 311.
Mr. Bingham to Mr. Evarts.

United States Legation,
Tokei, Japan, September 18, 1879. (Received October 16.) No. 968.]

Sir: On the 3d instant General Grant quitted Japan for the United States per the American steamer Tokio. He was attended from the Palace “Enryokwan,” in this city, to the railway station, by His Imperial Majesty’s guard and several of His Majesty’s ministers. Arriving at the railway station he was met by the representatives of every branch of His Majesty’s service and a large number of the quiet people of the capital who had come to see the departure of the great American, who had been received with so much consideration by the Emperor as the unofficial representative of the United States of America, the power which they believe to be most friendly to Japan.

In the harbor of Yokohama the vessels in the port were dressed, and the General was saluted with twenty-one guns by our own naval vessels, and also by those of Japan, there being no other saluting vessels in port.

The General, accompanied by Rear-Admiral Patterson, Japanese ministers, and myself, was conveyed in the Emperors’ barge from the admiralty office to the Tokio.

It may be said that every attention possible was shown to General Grant from the day of his arrival upon these shores to the day of his departure, and that His Imperial Majesty and his people left no room to doubt that they esteemed it to be a pleasure and a duty to thus receive and entertain their distinguished guest.

I have, &c.

JNO. A. BINGHAM.

No. 312. Mr. Bingham to Mr. Evarts. [Document 341]

No. 312.
Mr. Bingham to Mr. Evarts.

United States Legation,
Tokei, Japan, October 6, 1879. (Received November 4.) No. 978.]

Sir: Referring to my No. 967, in which I enclosed the report of the British legation in Japan upon the general foreign trade of this country, I now have the honor to inclose a table of the yearly imports and exports of this empire from the first to the eleventh year of Meiji (1868–’78), as published in the Nichi Nichi Shimbun and translated in the Japan Daily Herald of the 6th instant, which shows the balance of trade against Japan during the eleven years to have been in round numbers yen 67,000,000, or more than five times the present foreign debt of Japan and its interest.

I have, &c.,

JNO. A. BINGHAM.

[Inclosure in Mr. Bingham’s No. 978.—Extract from the Japan Daily Herald, October 6, 1879.]

The following is a table of the yearly difference between exports and imports from the 1st to the 11th year of Meiji (1868–78).

Year. Exports. Imports.

Yen. Yen.

1st 15,553,472 87 10,693,071 84

2d 12,908,978 02 20,783,633 17

3d 14,543,012 59 33,741,637 56

4th 17,968,608 71 21,916,727 74

5th 17,026,647 21 26,174,814 94

6th 21,142,014 77 27,617,264 05

7th 18,780,078 79 22,924,587 08

8th 18,077,660 58 25,094,742 08

9th 27,503,457 73 25,121,897 88

10th 26,908,607 92 31,933,352,63

11th 24,614,760 24 29,815,353 49

No. 313. Mr. Bingham to Mr. Evarts. [Document 342]

No. 313.
Mr. Bingham to Mr. Evarts.

United States Legation,
Tokei, Japan, October 6, 1879. (Received November 4.) No. 980.]

Sir: Referring to my No. 959, in which I reported the cholera returns in Japan up to the 6th ultimo, I now beg leave to acquaint you that the report of returns of cholera cases throughout the empire up to the 30th ultimo, as published in the Japan Daily Mail, of the 4th instant, are as follows: Whole number of cases from the commencement of the epidemic in April last, 148,038; of which 83,012 proved fatal; showing that the death-rate of those attacked was 56.07 per cent.

It is a pleasure to be able to say that the plague is staid, and that but few cases are reported in any quarter.

I have, &c.,

JNO. A. BINGHAM.

No. 314. Mr. Bingham to Mr. Evarts. [Document 343]

No. 314.
Mr. Bingham to Mr. Evarts.

United States Legation,
Tokei, Japan, October 9, 1879. (Received November 4.) No. 987.]

Sir: Referring to my No. 961, wherein I reported the order of this government making the silver yen a legal tender, I now have the honor to further acquaint you that the same is being produced at the imperial mint of Japan at the rate of 30,000 per day, and that it is rapidly expelling from trade the Mexican dollar, so long the currency of this empire.

As the gold yen is also legal tender, this government has established the bimetallic standard in Japan.

I have, &c.,

JNO. A. BINGHAM.

No. 315. Mr. Bingham to Mr. Evarts. [Document 344]

No. 315.
Mr. Bingham to Mr. Evarts.

United States Legation,
Tokei, Japan, October 10, 1879. (Received November 4.) No. 988.]

Sir: Referring to my No. 125, dated September 26, 1874, it gives me pleasure to say that by the amended code of this government trial by torture is altogether abrogated in the Japanese Empire.

I have the honor to inclose herewith the notification on this subject of his excellency Sanjo Saneyoshi, the prime minister of His Majesty, as published in the Japan Daily Mail of this date.

I have, &c.,

JNO. A. BINGHAM.

[Inclosure in Mr. Bingham’s No. 788.—Extract from the Japan Daily Mail, October 10, 1879.]

Notification No. 42.

It is hereby notified that as ever since the revision of article 318 of the Keitei Ritswiei (amended code) notified by notification No. 86, in June, 1876, torture to extract confession is not to be used; all laws and regulations relating thereto (torture) have all been abrogated.

SANJO SANEYOSHI,
Prime Minister.

No. 316. Mr. Bingham to Mr. Evarts. [Document 345]

No. 316.
Mr. Bingham to Mr. Evarts.

United States Legation,
Tokei, Japan, October 22, 1879. (Received November 28.) No. 994.]

Sir: I have the honor to inclose herewith a copy of a treaty recently negotiated by the Japanese Government with that of Corea for the opening of an additional port in the latter country. You will observe that by the terms of this treaty “from the month of March next the Corean Government will open the port of Gensan, situated in Kan kion-do, to trade with the Japanese, who shall be entitled to establish a settlement at Chotoku-san.

This new port is distant from the Corean capital only about forty miles.

With the exception of China and Japan, Corea seems indisposed to hold treaty relations with foreign powers.

I have, &c.,

JOHN A. BINGHAM.

[Inclosure with dispatch No. 994.]

Treaty.

Article I. From the month of March, in the year of Koshin, according to Corean chronology, which corresponds with the month of May in the 13th year of Meiji, Japanese chronology (1880), the Corean Government will open the port of Gensan, situated in Kankion-do, to trade with the Japanese, who shall he entitled to establish a settlement in Chotoku-san, the limits of which shall he fixed after a survey has been made by the Sorio-Kwan.

Art. II. The ground-rent in the settlement shall in the commencement be the same as the ordinary tax paid in that place; it may afterwards be increased or decreased by mutual consent between the two governments, according to the requirements of the expenditure mentioned in Article III.

Art. III. The Corean Government shall prepare the site of the settlement, clear it from bush and rock, level it, and make the necessary roads or bridges; but the Japanese Government shall build the houses and lay out the streets.

Art. IV. A cemetery for Japanese shall be laid out at a convenient distance, for which the same ground-rent shall be paid as at the settlement.

Art. V. The Corean Government shall build a pier from the western coast of Chotoku-san to Chotoku-jima, and keep the same in suitable order and repair, so that cargo may there be landed and ships lie safely at anchor. Corean vessel shall also be permitted to anchor there on condition of paying harbor duties to the customhouse, and they shall have the right to call there when navigating the coast. When a Corean wishes to take passage in a Japanese ship to any open ports, then he shall send in a petition stating his name and residence and his luggage, and the customhouse shall then grant him permission, and no unnecessary obstacles shall be thrown in the way of his intended voyage. Consul Miyamoto wrote on the 29th August, of the ninth year of Meiji (1876), as follows:

“With regard to extending the pier to Chotoku-jima, that question may be settled when a proper survey of the locality has been made, and according to the exigencies of the time.”

Art. VI. The Corean Government will establish a custom-house near the pier, and build a shed for protection of the goods against wind and rain while they are being examined.

Art. VIII. The treaty limits for Japanese shall be ten ri in all directions, the same as at Fusau. Tokugen Fu may be visited as freely as Torai Fu.

P. S.—The road from the port of Gensan to the port of Katsuma is within treaty limits; but as there is a place which is not open to visit, another road shall be made.

If there be any points in the above seven articles that require further arrangement, it shall be done according to the requirements of the settlement.

No. 317. Mr. Payson to Mr. Van Buren. [Document 346]

No. 317.
Mr. Payson to Mr. Van Buren.

Department of State,
Washington, November 23, 1878. No. 158.]

Sir: Your dispatch No. 324, of the 9th of September last, has been received. It relates to the powers of consular courts in-Japan, under the treaty of 1858 between the United States and that country, to deport from Japanese territory citizens of the United States convicted of felony or twice convicted of misdemeanors; and in consequence of a supposed ambiguity in the views which the department has previously expressed upon the subject, it requests definite instructions for your future guidance.

Your dispatch also refers to the sentence passed by you in the consular court at Kanagawa upon Thomas Glass, convicted of assault and battery, to be imprisoned for ten days and then turned over to the Japanese authorities to be removed from the country. It further appears that at the expiration of the ten days’ imprisonment you addressed a communication to the kenrei of Kanagawa, advising him that you had concluded to withdraw your official protection from Glass, and left the kenrei to deal with him in accordance with the treaties between the United States and Japan.

The Revised Statutes of the United States (Sections 4083–4089) as well as the treaty of 1858 between this country and Japan (Article VI) provide that American citizens residing in Japan shall be tried and punished for offenses committed by them in that country by consular courts of the United States, in accordance with American law. The department has consequently, disapproved sentences of deportation whenever they have been pronounced by consuls of this government, as being a mode of punishment not recognized in this country. The sentence of Consul Shepard in the case of John Rogers, in regard to which you appear to consider the instructions of the department at variance with its previous position against deportation by consular sentence, was that Rogers should “be imprisoned at hard labor for the term of one year and that he forfeit his right of residence in Japan.” It is difficult to perceive how the opinion of the department that the consul did not transcend his powers” in this case can be construed as an approval of forcible deportation.

According to the usual and most reasonable construction of Article VII of the treaty of 1858, if the Japanese authorities desire that an American citizen shall leave Japan under the stipulations of the said article, they should communicate such desire to the proper representative of the United States, whose duty it shall be to give due notice thereof to the offender, giving him sufficient time, not to exceed one year, to make the necessary preparations for his departure. So far as the department is informed, all requirements on the part of the Japanese authorities under the seventh article of the treaty of 1858 have heretofore been voluntarily obeyed, and there seems to be no immediate necessity of determining what course should be pursued in the hypothetical case of a refusal to comply with such demand.

Under no circumstances, however, has the department authorized a consul to withdraw official protection from an American citizen who has been tried and convicted in a consular court, and to remit him to the jurisdiction of the Japanese authorities before the expiration of the time allowed him to leave the country pursuant to the requisition of the said authorities.

In the case under consideration it appears that you advised the kenrei of Kanagawa that you withdrew official protection from Glass and turned him over to the Japanese authorities, even before they had made any requisition in regard to him. The chief object of the feature of exterritoriality in the treaty with Japan and treaties with other unchristian powers is to secure citizens of the United States under any and all circumstances from being subjected to the modes of trial and personal punishment considered alike repugnant to Christian civilization and the Constitution and laws of the United States which have heretofore prevailed, and, although now much modified, still prevail to a dangerous degree in those countries. Your course, being in violation alike of treaty stipulations with Japan and the Constitution and laws of the United States, cannot be approved. It is, therefore, to be regretted that you disregarded, in this case, the opinion communicated to you by Mr. Bingham, at your request, on the 7th of June, 1875, in the case of Rappeport.

I am, sir, your obedient servant,

CHAS. PAYSON
Third Assistant Secretary.

Liberia.Liberia.

[347] . Mr. Turner to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Monrovia, April 3, 1878. (Received June 3.)

[348] . Mr. Smyth to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Monrovia, Liberia, January 9, 1879. (Received February 15.)

[349] . Mr. Smyth to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Monrovia, Liberia, March 24, 1879. (Received May 8.)

[350] . Mr. Smyth to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Monrovia, April 20, 1879. (Received June 9.)

[351] . Mr. J. H. Smyth to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Monrovia, Liberia, May 12, 1879. (Received June 16.)

[352] . Mr. Smyth to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Monrovia, Liberia, May 30, 1879. (Received June 30.)

[353] . Mr. J. H. Smyth to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Monrovia, Liberia, June 17, 1879. (Received August 6.)

[354] . Mr. Smyth to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Monrovia, Liberia, July 17, 1879. (Received August 19.)

[355] . Mr. Smyth to Mr. Seward.

Legation of the United States, Monrovia, Liberia, August 7, 1879. (Received September 10.)

[356] . Mr. Smyth to Mr. Seward.

Legation of the United States, Monrovia, Liberia, August 28, 1879. (Received October 13.)

[357] . Mr. Hunter to Mr. Smyth.

Department of State, Washington, September 8, 1879.

No. 318. Mr. Turner to Mr. Evarts. [Document 347]

No. 318.
Mr. Turner to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Monrovia, April 3, 1878. (Received June 3.) No. 301.]

Sir: The gradual but perceptible increase in the coffee crop of Liberia, and the wide and satisfactory attention it is now attracting, together with the superiority of the quality of Coffea Liberiea, has determined me to submit for the information of the Department the following facts relative thereto.

It has been ascertained that this plant is more vigorous, and nourishes best when planted upon the territories of this republic, that is to say, in the country comprehended between the Sherbro River, on the north, and the San Pedro River on the south. For example, I have been fortunate to glean, from sources somewhat authentic, information to the effect that this coffee is less healthful and prosperous in other West African settlements than in Liberia.

This knowledge appears to have been reached through the efforts which were made to propagate it in the territories of the Gold Coast, of Sierra Leone, and other settlements. Indeed, I have not met any one willing to brave or to attempt to controvert the opinion prevailing here that this coffee fails in other sections of the coast to attain to that high perfection which it reaches in Liberia. However, from all I have been able to gather, other localities on this coast appear each to produce and possess their own variety and quality of coffee. It may not be amiss to remark here that Liberians may well pride themselves upon the fact that their coffee possesses an aroma far superior to all other African coffee, and is, I believe, admitted to equal the best variety of any country.

It is a satisfaction that this coffee is attracting very wide attention and preference in all coffee-growing countries, and very large quantities of scions and seed-coffee are being continually sought for and sent out of the country. Experiments have shown that it will attain a perfection in Ceylon, little, if any, inferior to, and in many respects more healthful (and superior) than the coffee of that island. It is known, when in Liberia, not to be affected by the fungus (Hemileia vastatrix); and it is conceded by those experimenting that, when transplanted in Ceylon (New Commercial Plants. By Thomas Christy, F. L. S.), it is equally free from the attacks of that destructive plague.

I have had the happiness recently to entertain at this legation Mr. de Santos, an experienced Brazilian coffee-planter, from Rio Janeiro, owning in Ins country more than one million of coffee trees, among which are ten thousand of that species peculiar to Liberia, with which that gentleman had been experimenting successfully.

Such was Mr. de Santos’s satisfaction with the manner in which Coffea Liberica throve on his plantations in Brazil, that he came in person to Liberia to purchase many thousand coffee scions, with which to succor his extensive coffee farms in that country. The American bark Elverton, of Baltimore, arrived here in ballast under charter from Rio Janeiro, during the month of March, and has returned to that point with a cargo composed entirely of Liberian coffee seed and scions.

A considerable shipment was also recently made, via England, to Java. For this wide celebrity and knowledge of her coffee, Liberia is indebted in a considerable sense to the high standing it reached in the awards at the Centennial Exhibition. Under proper cultivation, such as attentive pruning and other necessary care, these trees, when planted at a distance apart of 8 or 9 feet, interlace with each other, hence Liberian planters have determined in future to plant them at a distance, at least, of 12 or 14 feet, thus preventing that falling off in production caused by closer planting. The average production of a coffee tree in Liberia is from 3 to 5 and sometimes 6 pounds.

Experience has developed the rare and singular fact that it grows equally well upon the tops or sides of the hills, in the clayey banks of the streams, along the borders of the swamps, or when situate upon the seashore, unprotected from the blasts of the Atlantic winds; indeed, it flourishes similarly in either of these localities and never exacts the benevolent shade of other trees as does the coffee tree of most, if not all, other countries. The Liberian plantation is usually formed in this manner:

The planter first husbands the berry carefully in a nursery. After one year the scions are thought to be sufficiently grown for transplantation, but are sometimes allowed to remain in the nursery as long as two years. The months of June and July are usually preferred for setting out these scions, at which time we usually enjoy an intermission of five or six weeks in the rain or wet season, known in Liberian parlance as the “middle dries.”

One would suppose that setting forth so young a scion in the very midst of such torrents of rain as we sometimes have, would be fatal to the life of the plant, but it appears that this tree being indigenous is sufficiently hardy as to thrive, notwithstanding the excessive rainfall.

It is proper to be mentioned just here that this tree is sometimes attacked by a species of worm termed by Liberian planters “the borer.” This worm, very singularly too, is said to ascend the outside of the coffee tree and, selecting a favorable spot near the top thereof, to bore downward through the center; it subsists upon the sap, and, if not extirpated, will destroy the plant. Its presence may in general be detected with tolerable accuracy and ease, as, whenever it attacks a tree, the upper limbs lose their usual green and healthy appearance. I have been unable, however, to glean an instance in which it is has measurably injured a plantation, or destroyed or even blighted the prospects of a crop.

The plan usually employed to rid the tree of this worm is to saw off the trunk at the point where the unhealthy appearance ceases. This is almost a certain cure, for observation has developed the fact that the tree withers and dies pari passu with the “borer’s” descent. But I am assured by careful planters that if full attention is bestowed upon the tree the “borer” declines to attack it, as, like all other vermin, it prefers only the neglected and filthy.

It is but recently that Liberians have devoted any considerable attention to this important and promising branch of their agriculture. That inattention was owing not so much to indifference or indolence, as to those unfortunate circumstances which have conspired so unhappily to leave Liberians without individual competence or wealth or that very exact knowledge of fruit-culture in a sense so essential to the successful cultivation of coffee. At its session held in the years 1874–’75, the Liberian legislature passed an act (which became a law) to encourage its culture. The executive department of the government expended a few thousand dollars in premiums to all those who planted a certain number of trees. It must be conceded that that law gave fresh impetus to the planting of coffee and increased the area of land devoted to that industry. Since that time the government has regretted its monetary inability to so give continued and direct encouragement to coffee-growers; albeit, it is worthy of observation that much of the tendency to construe the more restrictive and somewhat exclusive laws unfavorably to foreign capitalists, has been relaxed by the executive officers of this government, with regard to this particular industry. So marked has been this increased liberality in the construction of the law of real property, that a company of English capitalists founded in London are now engaged in opening plantations under leases of from fifty to ninety-nine years, on the St. Paul’s River, the constitution of Liberia forbidding title to real estate to rest in foreigners. It has been remarked above that coffee trees in a state of high cultivation yield from three to five or six pounds (extreme average capacity of the tree); but several things should, however, be borne in mind, as, for example, in all Liberia there are not more than 2,000 acres planted in coffee. Upon each acre may be found perhaps an average of 400 trees, making about 800,000, or less than 1,000,000 trees in the country; and these trees are owned perhaps by about 500 persons, styled here planters, but who are without sufficient realized capital to tide them over the first three or five years, during which it is essential to make outlays upon, without receiving income of any sort from, coffee farms. One result of this is that the large number of persons own the comparatively small number of trees planted. I have learned from the authorities that in other coffee-growing countries 100,000 trees are regarded as a small farm, but in Liberia these 400 or 500 so-called planters own all the way from 100 to 30,000 trees each. I have met with only one planter who claims to have the maximum quantity. A man is thought in this country to be a considerable planter when he owns 10,000 trees, one-half of which have reached maturity and are bearing.

It is an unfortunate circumstance that Liberians have not attained to that business experience and confidence which would enable them to form monetary combinations for the co-operative development of their rich coffee and other resources. In view of all the circumstances and bearings of this subject so pregnant with interesting practical thought, I would be inclined to venture the intimation to American capitalists desiring to invest in foreign countries, that coffee-growing in Liberia, with comparatively small investments of co-operative capital, native labor being so cheap, tractable, and available, can easily, with proper discretion, be made a source of certain remuneration, possessing elasticity sufficient to preserve itself uninfluenced by those fluctuations to which capital is so liable in other countries.

Be pleased to accept renewed assurances of the high esteem with which I have, &c.,

J. MILTON TURNER.

No. 319. Mr. Smyth to Mr. Evarts. [Document 348]

No. 319.
Mr. Smyth to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Monrovia, Liberia, January 9, 1879. (Received February 15.) No. 9.]

Sir: I have the honor, after unavoidable delay, to inform you that the Liberian Legislature convened on the first Monday in December, 1878, and thereupon the Senate proceeded to resolve itself into a high court of impeachment for the trial of ex-President Payne, the immediate predecessor of Mr. Gardner, the present incumbent. The trial had proceeded but a day when, on the following day, the House of Representatives, by resolution, caused a continuance from the present to the next Legislature. This course was pursued, it is generally believed, that Mr. Payne may be deprived of the privilege of aspiring to presidential preferment this year.

On the 12th of December, the day upon which the message was delivered, two copies of which are herewith inclosed, the President, his cabinet and the Senate accompanying him, repaired to the legislative hall, and the President in person, at twelve o’clock, read his message to the legislature and others present.

He first referred to the recent emigrations by the Liberia and the Azore, and the expense of the maintenance of the emigrants of the Azore by the government, on account of their extreme poverty.

Recommendation was made to the Legislature to pass some law regulating the distribution of emigrants, that the responsibility of doing” so should not be left to the “caprice” of the executive.

Reference was made to the decrease of the volume of currency by burning, and the course pursued by the secretary of the treasury approved, and the hope indulged that a better financial time was coming for the republic.

A railway scheme of Messrs. Criswick and Burnell, of London, to extend from Monrovia to Musardu (interiorward), was discussed, its advantages set forth, and a recommendation made to the Legislature to accept the proposals made and make the concessions asked by the passage of the law. It was asked by the President that some plan be adopted to augment the revenue. No other request could be made of the importance of this as affecting the present and future well-being of Liberia.

The foreign relations of the government were referred to as being in a most satisfactory condition. The recent differences with the Netherlands, it was said, had been amicably adjusted through His Netherland Majesty’s consul-general. In this connection a decided disapproval was expressed as to the dual relation of merchant and consul, and legislation tasked with reference to the matter.

If this suggestion should be heeded by legislation, the German and Dutch Governments would not be likely to have consular representation here at all, as the fees paid consular officials are merely nominal.

The message contained almost an entire history of the “northwest boundary question”—to what end no indication was given. The expectancy of Commodore Shufeldt is foreshadowed as the arbitrator, and mention of my arrival as the representative of the United States and an expression of regret that England has not a like officer accredited to the government.

The request made by me for the settlement of the claim held by the United States against the Liberian Government for arms and munitions of war was referred to, and immediate action asked to be taken in the matter. I inclose copy of letter recently addressed me as to the claim from the Liberian state department.

Other liabilities of the government were referred to and action asked to be taken as to their adjustment.

The matter of opening of new ports of entry was called to the attention of the body, the opening of them urged, and the commercial advantages of such course both to the government and native population pointed out.

The “navigation, commerce, and revenue laws,” it is said, should be amended so that whether a vessel comes in the ports of the republic with cargo or in ballast, in either event tonnage duties may be exacted. This was evidently suggested by the recent case of R. R. Barcley, master of the bark Elverton, of Baltimore, who arrived here recently from Rio de Janeiro in ballast, but with $15,000 or $20,000 for the purchase of coffee scions and seed, and when he applied for clearance after the expenditure of some $12,000, in gold and silver, it was refused, on the frivolous pretext that money was as any article of cargo, and tonnage dues should be paid upon it as it came in the bark. After having shown the absurdity of the demand under Liberian law, clearance was reluctantly given. Now the President asks legislation to reach such cases, and to his country’s prejudice.

The necessity of making some change in the public-school system is earnestly insisted upon, whereas there exists nothing that rises to the dignity of a system at all.

Mention is made of the deaths of O. B. Dunbar, Maryland, late senator; Dr. Fletcher, late secretary of Maryland County.

On Tuesday, December 17, 1878, the secretary of the treasury transmitted the annual statement of the finances of the republic to the representatives. The receipts from all sources during the fiscal year ending 30th of September, 1878, were $119,889.60; disbursements, $124, 166.63; excess of the latter over the former, $4,277.03.

The aggregate of receipts are thus divided between the counties of— Montserrado $35,618 07

Grand Bass 60,674 36

Sineo 8,079 98

Maryland 15,517 19

Total 119,889 60

Debentures registered as unpaid during the fiscal year, $10,377.09; amount spent in the interest of Azor emigrants, $4,262.60.

The summary of the financial condition of the government at the close of the fiscal year shows the insolvency of the government within; but look without, and to this add our claim of $48,000, with four years’ accrued interest, an English loan of a half million, with interest, and comment beyond the figures seems unnecessary.

I am, &c.,

JOHN H. SMYTH.

Department of State,
Monrovia, Liberia, January 7, 1879.

Your Excellency: I have the honor to acknowledge your dispatch of October 19, calling the attention of this government to the liability of the same in favor of the United States.

I have to express very sincere regret that the claim has not been met before this, and beg to assure you that it is not the result of any want of inclination to do so, but from pressure of a most distressing pecuniary embarrassment, received due consideration, and his excellency the President will urge upon the Legislature now in session to provide a way for meeting the interest due on said claim.

With sentiments of very high consideration, I have the honor to be your excellency’s humble, obedient servant,

G. W. GIBSON.

His Excellency John H. Smyth,
United States Minister Resident and Consul-General, Monrovia.

Message of His Excellency President A. W. Gardner to the Legislature, December 12, 1878.

Fellow-citizens of the Senate and House of Representatives:

Gentlemen: I have the honor as well as the pleasure of congratulating you on the present occasion. We have abundant reasons to be thankful to the great Arbiter of all human events for His preserving care. He has crowned our efforts in giving us a bountiful harvest and has mercifully preserved us from famine and pestilence.

Since your last meeting there has been an accession of immigrants by the Azor of 242 persons, and by the Liberia, if I am correctly informed, of 70 persons. The immigrants per Azor were poorly prepared for self-support, as had been announced by the “Liberian Exodus Association,” and in view of this fact, and the very destitute condition of said immigrants, the government had not only to rent houses to shelter them, but also to furnish provisions and medical attention during their acclimation. And here I must give the Azor immigrants much credit for their industry and enterprise since their arrival in the country. They have labored hard and done much to help themselves. Many of them have drawn their lands, located, and gone to work on their farms; a more industrious people have, perhaps, never immigrated to these shores, and they should be encouraged by all possible means. I would, however, recommend, as there is a spirit of immigration pervading every State in the American Union, that some law should be made regulating immigrants to Liberia and their location in the several counties of this republic. The privilege of locating immigrants should not be left to executive caprice or discretion, but something definite in the form of law to enable the executive to act without suspicion of partiality or local prejudice should be enacted.

I have also to inform your honorable body that, in keeping with the recommendation as contained in your report on immigration at the last session, I authorized the commissioners to rent suitable houses for said immigrants until they could provide for themselves; and I beg most respectfully to request your approval of the amount expended. The honorable secretary of the treasury will, at an early day, lay the account before you for your consideration and approval. Before leaving the subject of immigration, allow me to urge upon you the importance and necessity of a law regulating the same. Every encouragement should be given to promote immigration to Liberia, not only from America, but from all parts of the civilized world where our brethren are scattered and earnestly longing to return to their fatherland.

I regret to inform you that the government schooner “Emmy,” sent to Grand Bassa County by my predecessor some fourteen months ago for repairs, is still at that place, said “to be undergoing repairs.” The government needs the service of that vessel as a coasta guarda, and especially at this time, to place her at the disposal of our commissioners to Sierra Leone on the northwest boundary question. But most unfortunate for the government, the contractors, Messrs. Clinton & Son, have failed to repair the “Emmy,” in time for the purpose above named. I do not think the failure to repair said vessel can in any way be attributed to the government. I have not only issued three warrants of $1,200 each, but I have in every communication urged upon the honorable superintendent of Grand Bassa County to push forward the repairs to completion and to get the Emmy to sea at as early a day as possible, as foreigners, and especially those trading below Cape Palmas, are disposed to contravene the revenue laws of the republic with impunity. But from some cause or other the “Emmy” still remains not repaired; and I am inclined to the opinion that Messrs. Clinton & Son, having to build their own vessel, have not had the time to devote to the repairs of the “Emmy,” as I am sure it was not for the want of money to meet the current expenses. The Bassa treasury has not been wanting in money in this respect. It is due to Grand Bassa County that I should here remark that it has, to a very great extent, met the current expense of the general government as well as the expense of some of the other counties of the republic.

It is proper that I should here state that the act of the Lesgislature regulating the burning of a certain portion of the currency received at the treasury department has had a very beneficial effect, not only in promoting labor thoughout the country, but it is nearly at par value with gold coin. Currency is in great demand. Let well enough alone. The problem is self-evident and will work itself out in pure gold; touch it, and a reverse action—say depreciation—will immediately follow, and the energies of government will become paralyzed, and leave no hope whatever of paying one dollar of our foreign debt, much less to carry on a healthy government. Every species of internal improvement will collapse, as it has done for the last sixteen years, and every public building go to wreck, leaving not a jail, the most common of all buildings, sufficient to secure a common thief, much less a murderer. My advice is, let us endure like good soldiers the present hardships, as better and more glorious days are ahead. We have only to take the signs of the times and give latitude to the admission of capital and the promotion of internal improvement. The time has come that the government and people of Liberia should lay aside all timidity and embrace some of the proffers calculated to give labor and improve the condition of the country. It is evident that we need money in the country for every purpose, and we can only obtain money by developing the resources of our commercial and agricultural interests. The world of mankind is moving with gigantic strides, evident by steam-power, turning every thing to account in a very short time. Inventive genius and steam-power are renovating the world, and it is high time that Liberia should feel some of this renovating power, and it is to be hoped that our country will awake on this important matter, and no longer defer the accepting of proffers or concessions calculated to benefit the country and relieve humanity.

And here I would inform your honorable body that I will, in due time, lay before the honorable Senate a project of concession for a railway from Monrovia to Musardu. I need not here enlarge on the propriety or utility of a railway in any country; it stands at the head of every facility for commercial business, travel, and intercourse. Messrs. Criswick and Burnell, of London, are desirous, at their own cost and responsibility, of projecting a railway from Monrovia to Musardu; and all they ask of the government is a concession of sufficient quantity of land to plant said railway, and I can see no good reason why the government may not make the concession. Our interior abounds in a vast variety of natural resources that can be made subservient to the commerce of the world, as well as a great benefit to Liberia, to say nothing of the civilizing effect upon the aboriginal inhabitants of the Republic of Liberia. Commerce is said “to be a powerful civilizer to any people,” but I am inclined to the opinion that the iron horse, emitting his fiery flames through our densely populated interior, will prove a greater civilizer than mere commerce; it will wake up thousands and tens of thousands that are barred from all intercourse with our civilized and Christianized communities. The kings and headmen of Bopora and Musardu will not only be able to visit our seaboard towns at any and all times, but they will compete with each other in bringing down their gold, iron, cattle, hides, cotton, cloths, ground-nuts, bennet-seed, and rice, and their intercourse will bring about such an alliance and friendship such as can never be severed. They are our brethren, and it is only necessary for us to understand them and they understand us, and all things will conspire not only to make the republic numerically strong, but a happy and wealthy people.

Now, fellow-citizens of the Senate and House of Representatives, allow me to impress upon you the propriety, as well as the necessity, of adopting some plan that will augment the revenue; this you can do without any risk of uprooting any privilege guaranteed in the constitution to your children to the latest generation. I shall rely upon the patriotism of the Senate to ratify the concession for a railway in Liberia in the manner set forth in the agreement which I shall submit for consideration.

Our foreign relations are friendly and of a reciprocal character. All matters of difference between this government and the Government of His Majesty the King of the Netherlands, growing out of the complaint of Consul Marschalk, have been amicably adjusted and settled, and I trust satisfactorily to His Majesty. Consul-General Hamel, a most polite and able gentleman, was intrusted by his government to settle these matters.

The Liberian Government can, as well as the Netherland Government, appreciate the disinterested and courteous manners in which Consul-General Hamel discussed the subject submitted to his mission to Liberia. There can be no doubt but that Consul-General Hamel has fully observed that, in order to avoid everything like a misunderstanding or complication in matters of trade and commerce, especially in our position, just struggling into existence as a nation, no individual who is a merchant should be accredited to this government as a consul.

This dual character of merchant and consul at the same time is calculated, from a blended interest and honor, not only to engender strife, but complications of a bellicose character, which we as a weak people cannot ward off, but must yield obedience to everything which a merchant consul who chooses to regard his interest and honor infringed may impose.

And I would here be understood that the government has nothing special against Captain Marschalk either as a consul, a merchant, or as a gentlemen, but simply state that the dual position appears to be incompatible and should be discountenanced.

Since the last meeting of your honorable body Her Britannic Majesty’s Government has thought proper that the northwest boundary question should be settled, and in keeping with this opinion Lord Salisbury, secretary for foreign affairs, has been pleased to direct his excellency the governor of Sierra Leone to inform this government that commissioners on the part of Her Majesty’s Government have been appointed, and that the Liberian Government is requested to appoint commissioners on her part, to settle said question, and also the claims of certain Sierra Leone traders for alleged spoliation of property by the Liberian troops in 1871 at Salijah and other points in the immediate vicinity of the Gallinas and Manna countries.

It is to be regretted that this question of our claims from the river Jong to Solima has been so long held in abeyance. To my mind, if I have the right views and conceptions of the claim of the Liberian Government to these territories, it is not to be questioned. Our claims to the territory from the Jong, including all that portion of country known as Gumbo, Muttro, Gallinas, and Shebar (now in dispute), is of more than twenty-seven years’ standing, and it is a maxim of national law, says Mr. Wool-sey, that “the territory of a nation, or that portion of the earth over which it exercises the right of sovereignty, may have begun to pertain to it in a variety of ways. It may have derived its title, first, from immemorial occupation of land before vacant; second, from occupation by colonies or other incorporation of land before occupied; third, from conquest, accepted as a fact and at length ending in prescriptive right; fourth, from purchase or gift.” The Liberian Government, following the principles laid down by the American Government in the precedent of settling America, took the just and honorable course of paying for the soil on which it had established itself, and I must state, from forty-seven years’ residence in the country, and to my certain knowledge, the Liberian Government has acted steadily on the principle of extinguishing the native title by treaty and payment of a price. Commander Stockton, of the United States Navy, set an example in this particular when he removed our fathers from the Sherbro and landed them on these shores. He then laid down the golden rule, if we would be happy and prosperous, we must do unto the heathen man as we would have him do unto us, and English philanthropists, from our early settlement here, have constantly encouraged us to persevere honestly in acquiring the territory from the natives by purchase; which the American Colonization Society has done, or, in other words, steadily followed during its administration of government, and which every President (of the republic) has scrupulously pursued since our independence as a republic. And it would be almost impossible for an executive of Liberia to depart from these praiseworthy examples of an honorable purchase of the soil by Commodore Stockton and Mr. Ayers, Governors Ashmun, Mecklin, Skinner, Buchanan, Hall, of Cape Palmas to the river San Pedro; President Roberts, of the Gallinas and adjacent territories in the years 1849 and 1851, from a donation by Mr. Gurney, a British philanthropist. To now question our rights to these, territories would seem to undermine the very foundation of the Republic of Liberia, and set at naught the fundamental principle of law that says, “deeds and other writings shall be evidence against all parties to them, and shall also be evidence of the transfer of all titles or rights transferable by them, against all mankind.” These executive officers of Liberia were men of undoubted Christian character and veracity, and did all in their day not only to assimilate but to incorporate the heathen element with us, and their labors are seen and felt throughout the length and breadth of Liberia. The Liberian Government has not only paid a full and just consideration in money for the territory from the river Jong on the northwest to the river San Pedro on the southeast, but the government, from the instigation of unprincipled traders along our coast, has paid an invaluable price in blood. Harris, of all Englishmen that ever traded on the Liberian coast, has done us more injury in promoting rebellion, sedition, and insubordination than all the world put together. He is the principal agent in causing the natives in our northwest boundary to deny our title to the territory, and I am sure our deeds carry on their faces what every true and honest lawyer would term presumptio juris et de jure, and Harris’s conduct, if in any other country except Liberia, would have caused him long since to have been brought to justice and suffered the consequences of the law.

As I see noted in the “report of the committee of the House of Commons, and ordered to be printed June 26, 1865,” there is, to my view and opinion, no difference between the substance and language of our deeds for the northwest territories and the deed of cession by the king and headmen of Lagos and parts adjacent, to Her Majesty, the Queen of Great Britain. And why our deeds should be disputed for the natives is a matter to me unaccountable and most unreasonable, unless it is for the purpose of allowing foreigners to have a better opportunity of taking an advantage of our commerce in that portion of our territory without paying the import and export dues, as Harris has done for the last sixteen years, thereby causing a loss of revenue to this republic of at least $150,000. Until Harris trespassed upon our territory and instigated the natives to insubordination and a denial of our title to the northwest territory, the aboriginal inhabitants were perfectly at peace, friendly and loyal to government. Harris’s persistent and defiant attitude has caused this government to pay an immense sum of money, to say nothing of the loss of life, wounded and decrepit soldiers, now pensioners upon this government for life.

If we contrast the conduct of Harris, now residing on the disputed territory and carrying on an extensive mercantile business without paying duties, with Englishmen generally who have traded along our coast for twenty-eight years prior to the government confining and restricting all foreign vessels to ports of entry, we shall observe a great difference in characters. Take, for instance, old Captain Spence, who first introduced the palm-oil trade, and Captain Dring Murray, Cortland, and a number of others who followed; while in some instances there were a few who did not come up to the mark of national courtesy and respect, yet they were generous and noble-hearted Englishmen, and would never give the least encouragement to our aboriginal inhabitants to resist the authority of the (Liberian) government. And in every case of emergency or war they were among the first to come to our assistance by supplying provisions and, in some instances, munitions of war. These honest English traders, unlike some now in our midst from undue forestalling, regretting, and competition, never misrepresented the government and people of Liberia, and as a consequence we had no trouble with them. And I am sure trade was better and more profitable than it is now.

But to recur to our right and title to every part of the territory between the river Jong and Grand Cape Mount, I would remark that the question, according to mutual understanding, will be finally settled by commissioners; and from the tenor of our deeds of cession and confirmation, the Government of Liberia has good reason to believe that Her Majesty’s commissioners will do Liberia the justice to acknowledge the validity of our title-deeds from the fact, patented by nations and reiterated by Mr. Vattel, that “when a nation takes possession of a country to which no prior owner can lay claim [and there are none prior to Liberia], it is considered as acquiring the umpire or sovereignty of it at the same time with the domain. For, since the nation is independent, it can have no intention in settling in a country to leave to others the right of command or any of those rights that constitute sovereignty. The whole space over which a nation extends its government becomes the seat of jurisdiction and is called its territory.” And it cannot be denied, but is a fact generally known and accepted, that the Liberian Government exercised unmolestedly the seat of jurisdiction over Gumbo, Muttro, Gallinas; and the Shebar from 1849 to 1863, when our title was first disputed and called in question by Lord John Russell, from some complaint that had been made at the foreign office of the seizure of the Phebe and Emily, two Sierra Leone schooners, for violation of the revenue laws of this republic, which vessels were taken and towed out of the port of Monrovia by Her Majesty’s ship of war the Torch. And I can but think that when our claim to the above-mentioned territory is properly and fairly laid before the commissioners and adjudged according to common law, that a party to the deed is estopped from invalidating his own deliberate act, that Her Britannic Majesty’s commissioners will accord to the Government of Liberia that courtesy and comity that is due to the most potent nation on earth. The English Government is too just and magnanimous to deprive us of a just and equitable claim to our northwestern territory. And, again, there is another maxim of international law which is generally acknowledged and conceded by nations, and that is, the domain of the nation extends to everything she possesses by a just title; it comprehends her ancient and original possession, and all her acquisitions made by means which are just in themselves, or admitted as such among nations, concessions, purchase, conquest made in regular war, &c. And by her possessions we ought not only to understand her territories, but all the rights she enjoys. The native chiefs and headmen of the territories above named being sovereigns, and absolute owners of the soil at the time of ceding the same, and owing allegiance to no power on earth, have of their own free will and accord ceded the above-mentioned territory to the Republic of Liberia, and at the time of alienation incorporated themselves with the republic as citizens of the same, and our title cannot be regarded otherwise than just, the same having been acquired by means just in themselves. This principle of international law I feel confidence that Her Majesty’s Government cannot fail to recognize, especially as all her acquisitions of territory on the west coast of Africa stand precisely upon the same fundamental basis, and to reject or repudiate this principle of international law is simply to support it vi et armis, which Her Majesty’s Government can maintain, but Liberia cannot.

The Government of Liberia is content to rest her claim upon these fundamental principles underlying the well-being and perpetuity of nations. We simply ask at the hand of Her Majesty’s Government that justice in respect to our northwest territory that she would require and demand in any interest that she could or would claim for any of her colonies, whether on the west coast of Africa or in the East Indies. And inclosing my remarks on this subject, I cannot well conclude without referring to another principle of international law which Mr. Woolsey lays down as a rule accepted by nations and as a settled point. He says: “The territory of a state includes all that portion of terra firma which lies within boundaries of the state, as well as the waters; that is, the interior seas, lakes, and rivers wholly contained within the same lines. Thus the sea of Azof, the Volga, Lake Michigan, the Ohio, and the Sea of Marmora, are exclusively in the territory, respectively, of Russia, the United States, and Turkey.” And as the Jong branch of the Shebar was definitely understood by Earl Russell, Her Majesty’s secretary for foreign affairs, and President Benson, in 1862, to be the northwest boundary of the Republic of Liberia, it was so noted on the chart by Admiral Washington, and in view of this fact, as well known to Her Majesty’s Government, the territory of Gumbo, Muttro, and the Gallinas, lying between the Shebar and Solima, must have been regarded, according to the doctrine of Mr. Woolsey, the bona-fide property of the Republic of Liberia, made doubly sure by purchase.

The form of a conveyance by the chiefs and headmen to the Republic of Liberia is very simple, as many words would darken counsel by the formality of its manner, the prolixity of its provisions, and the usual redundancy of its language. It is usually by bargain and sale according to the second section of an act relating to treaties and the negotiation with the surrounding chiefs and headmen of native tribes for land, &c., that the possession passes ex vi fact without the necessity of livery of seisin, reference to the statute of uses. And I trust the Liberian commissioners will draw the attention of Her Majesty’s commissioners to the apparent good understanding between Earl Russell and President Benson in 1862 in regard to our northwest boundary, as well as subsequently to the evidence of Consul-General Ralston before the committee of the House of Commons, reported June 26, 1865, in which Mr. Ralston very clearly sets forth the claim of the Liberian Government to the territory above named, especially, as I have intimated before; the question of the right and title to the Jong appears to have been settled by President Benson and Earl Russell, except the course, which was to have been determined for sixty miles interiorward.

There seems to have been some difference of opinion as to the true course of the river Jong, and it was agreed by Earl Russell and President Benson that a “commission of survey” should be appointed to ascertain the true course, and if it was ascertained that the said river did not run to the north, then in that case a line from the cafe or bend of said river was to run due north 60 miles interiorward, forming the northwestern boundary of the Republic of Liberia. See the Jong notes on the chart in red ink by Admiral Washington. And it was not until President Benson returned from England that this boundary question assumed quite a different phase and has subsequently been the subject of a diplomatic correspondence until now, and in the mean time English traders especially have taken advantage and entered the disputed territory, traded, and in a word done as they have pleased without the slightest deference or courtesy to the Government of Liberia; and in consequence of this discourtesy we have lost thousands of dollars by the question being held in abeyance. And the Government of Liberia cannot but feel grateful to Lord Salisbury in desiring to bring the question to a speedy termination. According to a newspaper notice, the Philadelphia Daily Evening Telegraph, Commodore Schufeldt will not only visit the African coast as the American arbitrator on the Liberian boundary commission, but he has had several conferences with Secretary Thompson in regard to his proposition to examine into the resources and demands of the African trade, and the Secretary has concluded to give him the command of the Ticonderoga, with directions to visit the west coast of Africa.

Hon. John H. Smyth, the newly-appointed minister resident and consul-general from the United States to Liberia, arrived on or about the 31st of July, and was formally received by me on the 19th of August last.

It would be a pleasure if Her Britannic Majesty’s Government had a similar officer accredited to this government. It does seem to me that our commercial relations with England warrant the accreditation of such a minister, as well as an accommodation to British traders in our midst, on matters of difference that may arise from trade, or the infringement of the lex loci of the country.

With respect to our internal affairs, as above alluded to, I would remark that it is important that some act should be passed at this session to increase the revenue. While there is a gradual increase of our commerce and revenue in some parts of the republic, there is a fearful falling off in other parts; for instance, in Montserrado County the commerce and revenue has greatly fallen off to what it was a few years ago, and I can only account for it in one or two ways; the first is, the principal trade is carried on for greenbacks, drafts, and coffee, on which there is no duty or revenne accruing to government. There are thousands of dollars in greenbacks, drafts, coffee, and specie that go out of the country on which the country do not derive one cent of benefit, and yet the republic is called upon and expected to meet the current expenses of government without receiving an adequate revenue from her commerce, or even a tax upon the country. And I would here inform your honorable body that we have foreign debts to pay, and our present system of paper money cannot meet the demand now upon the country, and it will become the duty of the present session of the Legislature to devise ways and means to meet the demands upon this government for money due foreigners. Hon. John H. Smyth, minister resident and consul-general on the part of the United States Government, has, since his arrival, demanded the amount due for arms and ammunition furnished this government in 1868. And, gentlemen of the Legislature, you will have to arrange in some way to enable the secretary of the treasury to meet the demand, which must be done at an early day as possible, and I need not remind your honorable body of other foreign demands, as you are aware that not even, the interest has been paid on the English loan. These are matters that must claim your undivided attention during the present session.

Secondly, the produce trade is not extensively prosecuted in Montserrado County owing, as I suppose, to native disturbances in the interior which have tended no little to retard the trade almost from one end of the county to the other. It has occurred to me that the government is derelict in not putting down and removing these obstructions to trade, and causing the highway to the interior to be open to the ingress and egress of the far interior tribes desiring to trade with us. Much depends upon the prosperity and protection of our trade to insure a revenue to government. And here I would most respectfully recommend not only the protection of our trade from the interior, but the opening of a few more ports of entry and delivery along our coast. Our aboriginal inhabitants, a most industrious class, for the want of a few more intermediate ports are greatly inconvenienced and circumscribed. I believe our trade might be increased tenfold by a few additional ports. And for the greater accommodation of our citizens would it not be well to amend and supplement the present port of entry law in such a manner as that foreigners desiring to open business in any of our Americo-Liberian settlements, may have the privilege of doing so I make the recommendation upon the principle of international law that “it is the duty of nations to encourage their foreign trade.” And especially as the freedom of trade tends to, the prosperity and happiness of a nation. And in this, connection I would further remark that I notice a very interesting paragraph in the African Repository under date of October last, headed, “Liberia, its resources and prospects,” which reads thus: “People in remote regions of the world who had never heard of Liberia are now hearing of it through its coffee. The London Times of August 28 contained a whole column advertising Liberia coffee-plants. Orders are sent for seed and young plants from all the coffee producing countries in the world. Thus it would seem that Providence has provided a means not only for the comfortable support, but for the wealth of the thousands of hard-working and enterprising Africans in this country who are looking toward the land of their fathers; and it is to be hoped that the Liberian Government will know how to raise the revenue from this large demand for one of the most valuable products of the country.”

I would here note that hitherto the government was not disposed to put a duty upon coffee for fear it might have a tendency to discourage the enterprising citizen planting it in large quantities, but in order to give a stimulus to the growing of coffee, the government gave a large premium to every person who would engage in this laudable and industrious enterprise. And here I would remark that, as small and insignificant as our revenue has been and is now, thousands of dollars have been paid to the citizens under the act of the Legislature regulating “agriculture throughout the Republic of Liberia;” and, strange to say, these very coffee trees and plants for which government have expended so much money in premiums are now being sold and sent out of the country by hundreds of thousands; said plants are actually sold for less than the premium paid by government. It is a burning shame that any such advantage should be taken of the government in this manner! While I do not recommend a prohibition to the sale and exportation of coffee plants and seed, I do recommend a very high protective duty to be levied and assessed upon this article, especially as every nation has the right of judging for itself in respect to the policy and extent of its commercial arrangements. The general freedom of trade, however reasonably and strangely it may be inculcated in the modern school of political economy, is but an imperfect right and necessarily subject to such regulations and restrictions as each nation may think proper to prescribe for itself.

To revert again to Internal affairs, I beg most respectfully to inform your honorable body that for want of funds, and the falling off of the revenue, I thought it best to defer for the present the repair of the executive mansion, and repair the court-house and Senate chamber, as we have no public building for the court or the use of the Senate, I trust, however, to have this building ready for the use of the Senate in the course of the next two or three weeks, as well as the lower story of said building for the use of the court.

I am pleased, however, to inform you that I am gradually collecting the material for the repair of the executive mansion; an iron roof has been ordered out from England for it, which is daily expected to arrive. And in this connection I would further inform you that I have in contemplation the erection of a custom-house, 40 by 60 feet, 20 feet high, for the port of Monrovia, and I have to request an appropriation for the same; for it is certainly high time that the port of Monrovia had a custom-house, as there have been none to my knowledge since our independence. The office of the customs has been draged all over town, from one side of Ashman street to the other—and now it is in the old mansion. We can do beter and better shall be done. I beg also to inform your honorable body that the superintendent of Grand Bassa County has made an arrangement to get an iron court-house for that place, and we wish for him every success in the undertaking.

I regret to acquaint you, on inquiring, that, notwithstanding the amount of three or more thousand dollars that have been drawn in the shape of debentures, nothing has been done towards rebuilding the court-house in Sinoe County. It is said “there is not a block or piece of timber on the ground or the first piece cut for said building;” the fault is somewhere, I cannot say where. I have, however, urged upon the superintendent of Sinoe County to cause said building to be erected under the law regulating public work, but the plea is “the Legislature has stopped the payment of the debentures and the government has violated her contract^ and the contractors absolved from all responsibility or liability to government to erect said court-house.” How the contractors obtained the full amount in debentures in advance is a matter that I do not understand. To parties engaging to perform public work under bond, it is usual to advance one-third to commence the work, and when the work is half completed to give another one-third, and when completed to satisfaction the last one-third is then paid, and the work handed over to government. I regret much that I am not in a position to report even progress on the court-house in Sinoe County. I am sure, it is no fault of mine to be unable to do so, but I hope to commence that building, if I cannot complete it, during the present fiscal year. If the amount appropriated had not been drawn in debentures in advance, that building might have been very far advanced, if not entirely completed.

Light-houses. I can only offer or assign the same reasons as above mentioned (the want of funds) for not commencing the light-houses in Bassa and Since Counties. I am aware of the great need of these buildings, but the revenue has been so small and uncertain that I dare not direct the superintendent of Bassa and Sinoe Counties to commence said buildings, and I know not that I shall ever have the privilege of doing so. The executive term of office is so very short and uncertain that it is impossible to do much to profit. The executive is inaugurated on the first Monday in January in a presidential term of two years, and in sixteenth months after another presidential election comes on, and very little, if anything, of importance can be done in sixteen months. Such a régime and administration of affairs, doing and undoing as our political predilection may direct, can never benefit the country. I do not give utterance to the above sentiment because I am desirous of a re-election, but for the general good, peace, harmony, and prosperity of our government. Doubtless, the more thinking portion of our citizens have seen the evil of the frequent elections; political rancor, antipathy, and non-association is the order of the day, and these unhallowed feelings extend to and affect the church of God.

Let us review the days of Roberts and Benson, when they were continued in office for eight years—pristine days. What prosperity and sociality compared with these days of aspiration and unfriendliness!

But to return to our subject of internal improvement. Much depends upon the government in promoting a division of labor in the country. Every species of labor should be encouraged by holding out inducements as a reward of labor, genius, and enterprise. National fairs and reward are the order of the day among highly cultured and refined nations, and Liberia should not be behind in exhibiting her products, however rude they may be. Life and activity must be infused into the people by some national movement, and I recommend some national effort in this direction. Let the government be willing to make the first effort, and the people will follow, as in days past. The people seem to be indifferent in some respects as to what is going on, and it is time they should awake and consider, not only how they shall improve their own individual condition, but the condition of the country. This we can do by a spirit of liberality that pervades, more or less, every nation; not by restricting commerce, nor by isolation from the world now advancing with gigantic strides in the arts and sciences and turning everything in nature to account.

The honorable secretary of the treasury will, at an early day, lay before your honorable body his report on the finance of the country, and, doubtless, you will there see the necessity of improving, as far as practicable, the financial condition of the country, not by an additional tariff duty, but rather a modification or reduction of the tariff, so as to bring about more of a uniform system in our revenue laws. Many of the amendatory and supplementary acts are so ambiguous, vague, and loose that it is not very difficult for the keen-eyed merchant to drive a coach and six through, and thus escape paying the government her just dues, either for tonnage or the duty arising on merchandise. The system of bonding goods, wares, and merchandise is very defective, and the laws should be amended or repealed in toto. The idea of a private bonded warehouse is chimerical and wholly unsafe so far as it relates to the securing of the duty accruing to government, and I would recommend some amendment, or the repealing of that portion of the law. I am decidedly of the opinion that the committee on navigation, commerce, and revenue should, by all possible means, consolidate the several acts on these subjects, and thus make plain in the most ample manner the revenue laws of the republic. The law passed and approved February 8, 1878, regulating the payment of tonnage dues by vessels which may casually visit a single port of entry within the Republic of Liberia should be reviewed and enlarged; the words “goods, wares, and merchandise” preclude the right to demand the tonnage dues on a vessel bringing gold and buying up a cargo of produce or other commodity of the country. If the collector demand tonnage, the captain will say at once that he has landed no goods, wares, or merchandise, and he will not pay the tonnage dues. I trust that your honorable body will see the propriety of changing the phraseology of the law.

There is one more subject that I take the liberty of calling your serious attention to, and that is the large quantity of unoccupied land in our several settlements once drawn by persons who have died, leaving no relatives or heirs to claim said land; in my opinion, a statute of escheat or reversion should be passed regulating this matter. Our cities and towns, as well as the farming districts, are overgrown with noxious weeds and trees on lands which no person can legally claim, and I would, therefore, invite your attention to this subject.

The education of the youth of Liberia is a subject of vital importance and should deeply interest the nation; the manner in which our public schools are conducted, the want of competent teachers and substantial school-houses, situated in some central position in the respective counties so as to be convenient to the outlying settlements, is a matter I hope will claim your most serious consideration. And I would further invite your attention to the law regulating public schools. It maybe that the several acts need to be amended in order to give a greater efficiency to our educational system; if so, I can but recommend the necessary amendment. I regret very much that owing to my recent induction into office I can say little or nothing in regard to the Liberia College, as I have no knowledge of its operation or the officers, nor have I been informed as to who is the president, or whether the trustees have elected a president or not. If not, it is their duty to do so according to the fourth section of an act to amend and consolidate the several acts concerning Liberia College, passed and approved December, 1864.

It is simply the duty of the “president of the Republic of Liberia to inspect the state and condition of the college; and the proper officers of the college shall, upon his request, furnish him with an account of the government, a list of its officers and teachers, with their names and professions, the branches of education taught, the studies pursued, the number of students in the different departments, and a statement of its pecuniary resources,” &c. For the want of the above information I must respectfully decline saying anything with respect to this most Interesting institution of learning, trusting, however, that whatever may be remiss will soon be rectified and the college prove a great blessing to Liberia.

It is with much sorrow and grief that I have to inform your honorable body that since your last meeting Senator C. B. Dunbar departed this life, much lamented by his friends and the country. As a medical man, the loss of Dr. Dunbar will be felt in this community, if not throughout the republic, for a long time to come; and as an industrious and enterprising farmer and as a loyal citizen, Dr. Dunbar’s loss is keenly felt.

I have also to inform you of the death of Dr. Fletcher, late superintendent of Maryland County. The loss of Dr. Fletcher’s eminent services to the country, both as physician and superintendent, is severely felt and lamented. Hon. J. T. Gibson has been appointed to fill the vacancy in the office of superintendent.

In conclusion, gentlemen of the Senate and House of Representatives, I beg to assure you that you shall have my cordial co-operation in any measure tending to benefit the country.

In the language or instruction given to Joshua by Jehovah to go in and possess the land, “let us be strong and courageous.” “Whatever our hands find to do, let us do it with all our might,” for millions of our brethren in the United States and other quarters of the world are preparing to join us in the work of civilizing and evangelizing this part of our great continent. None but the strong and courageous nation can succeed; and our success depends upon our boldly and courageously launching out and laying hold of every proffer calculated in its tendency to enhance our welfare in this benighted land; light and knowledge must be diffused and pervade this continent, and we will be derelict to our high trust if we have no part in it. The day is ours, and let us work while we have the opportunity and privilege of doing so, and leave the event to our children, as all nations have-done and must do to the end of time. Let no imaginary evil to us or our children prevent your honorable body from faithfully discharging the high trust imposed upon you.

Now is the day for accepting the reward due to the sable sons of Ham, and the sons of Japheth of their great abundance will give it. Let us not turn aside the providences of God, for He is stirring up our brethren to return to their fatherland, as the eagle stirreth up her nest, and we must make ample preparation in this goodly land for their reception.

ANTHONY W. GARDNER.
December 12, 1878.

No. 320. Mr. Smyth to Mr. Evarts. [Document 349]

No. 320.
Mr. Smyth to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Monrovia, Liberia, March 24, 1879. (Received May 8.) No. 21.]

Sir: I have the honor to call to your attention the interest manifested by the farmer class, in this the largest county of Liberia, Montserrado, in the United States.

On the 22d day of March I was officially requested to be present at the Planters’ Hall, Clay Ashland, on the St. Paul River, at the annual gathering of the planters or farmers. I availed myself of the opportunity to attend. The secretary of state was present and presided, a circumstance very unusual. He delivered an eloquent address, in which, with much earnestness, seconded by hearty responses from his auditors, the appreciation of their government of the interest and solicitude shown by the United States in the prosperity of their republic, and testified to a renewed confidence in the United States Government in consequence of the presence of so eminent a gentleman as Commodore Shufeldt as the arbitrator in the northwest-boundary matter; also as “to the survey of the St. Paul River from its bar-mouth 20 miles interiorward, and of the adjacent land to within a short distance of the rich and healthy locality of Borphora, the Mondiugo Country. He urged them to interest themselves in their aboriginal brethren, to whom they owed the duty of closer relationship.

Should the survey, the report of it made by Lieutenant Drake, together with the general report upon Liberia, commend itself to our government by inducing Congressional action looking to a development of the country lying back of Monrovia and the St. Paul settlement, to which this river could be made, by the removal of the obstructions to navigation, a direct means of communication, there would be opened a mart for many of the manufactured commodities of the United States, which would be a source of material advantage to our industrial classes, to the government, and would greatly aid in the stability of this republic, which has existed thus long amid most untoward circumstances.

Then, when it is remembered how potent an agent of civilization commerce is and how much the United States, in common with the remainder of the civilized and Christian world, owe to Africa and the negro race, it does seem that our Government might take, with propriety, some part in aiding this struggling government in the accomplishment of some results for Africa. The Hon. E. W. Blyden, minister to Great Britain, spoke as only he can speak of the relation that the negro race had sustained to the Aryan races, and expressed the hope that our great republic would aid the reform sentiment which was going on in his county.

In my contact with the people of Liberia I have invariably discovered that although the greater portion of their products are sent to England and Germany, and they purchase largely from those countries, they generally express a preference for American products and manufactured articles; but in the absence of a regular line of vessels between their and our country their desire cannot be realized.

I am credibly informed that the countries of Borphora, Pessy, Barline, and Musardo are rich in minerals, particularly gold; dyewoods, mahogany, ebony, &c.; that the people are tractable and friendly, and although Mohammedans, are remarkable for their various industries and for their advancement in letters.

The opening up of these countries promises rich results for the labor, not only to Liberia but to our country, should it be the policy of our government to avail itself of them.

With highest considerations of esteem, I am, &c.,

JNO. H. SMYTH.

No. 321. Mr. Smyth to Mr. Evarts. [Document 350]

No. 321.
Mr. Smyth to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Monrovia, April 20, 1879. (Received June 9.) No. 24.]

Sir: As I have not up to the present written a dispatch with exclusive reference to the practical policy which has steadfastly been adhered to by the colonial and republican forms of governments of Liberia toward the native or aboriginal people within their geographical jurisdiction, and of the social relations of the Liberians, and believing that a retrospect and present view of the same may not be uninteresting, and may throw some light upon the subject of emigration, I have concluded to state some general facts which can be fully and clearly established, and deduce as justly as I may the conclusions that seem inevitable.

Without further preliminaries, it is a fact that the first emigration to Liberia, in the year 1820, or thereabouts, consisted almost entirely of negroes, “pure and simple,” from the United States; but from 1824, when the next one came, to the last emigration by the bark Monrovia, of New York, January 6, 1879, there has not been, of the estimated 25,000 or 30,000 emigrants who have come from the United States and elsewhere here, so full and complete a negro emigration.

From the beginning of the philanthropic effort, first suggested by a negro, which subsequently took form as the Colonization Society, through the media of which organization a negro government was sought to be established here for the colonization and Christianization of the African negro, and as an asylum for the oppressed people of African or negro descent, a false consciousness seems to have possessed and controlled the American philanthropists, the Colonization Society, and the “colored” people of the United States and the West Indies—that all persons who were “held to labor,” who were emancipated, who were born free negroes, or “colored” persons possessing a conscious drop of the blood which courses the veins of the negro race, were negroes or persons of African descent.

The fallacy of this impression, this opinion, this unfortunate belief, had, prior to the years 1820 and 1824, been known to science, and was clearly inferable from writings of scientific men, then extant in the English and other languages; and is it not astonishing that gentlemen and scholars, con trolling so important a matter as emigration, in the presumed interest of the negro and his descendants here and in America, the American negro and colored man being the agents in so sublime a duty, should have overlooked in their honest effort to contribute to the present and future well-being of a race, so primarily an important fact?

As to the negro out of Africa, in the United States, South America, the isles of the Caribbean Sea and the Gulf, in the immediate presence of a Christianity not his, that taught and teaches him his natural inferiority, falsely, of course, and a civilization that daily impressed the sanctions of that Christianity; the fact that the “colored” man was, under the laws of the several States and the Constitution of the United States, accepted and regarded the same as a negro, went far to form and continue the existence in him of this false consciousness, that colored people and negroes together were one people, that they combined were a race, when they were the same alone in condition.

The newspapers of the United States, managed and edited by negroes and “colored” persons, were recently urging a conference of “colored men,” and in the light of past error the inference may be properly drawn that neither Mongolians nor Indians were included.

With the fact clearly before us that the negro may be colored, as in the example of the Eboes, but that colored people are not necessarily negroes, I call attention to the composition of the colonial and republican governments of Liberia.

There is here but one race and a subdivision of two races, the Caucasian and negro, which subdivision may be properly termed a class of people known as mixed persons.

This mixed hybrid class the unwritten history of Liberia declared to be superior in intellectual development and pecuniary condition to the native or emigrant negro, many of the class possessing moderate competencies through their former masters, parents, though not superior numerically to the negroes, nor otherwise than relatively.

These persons by reason of this difference, and the possession of the element, cunning, so peculiar to physically inferior animals as a means of protection and destruction, tacitly became the ruling class here as to the aboriginal and emigrant negro, and next in authority to the original supreme power of the colony, the white governors, and on their retirement took their vacant chair.

Acting upon the assumption, as a class, of their superiority to a race, by reason of descent, color, imperfect culture, and an unfortunate comprehension of the principles of Christianity, they treated the formerly free man in his habitat as a servile inferior; legislated him an existence with rights he was unable to enforce or avail himself of against the general sentiment which was against him, though justice might be outraged by such tyranny and absolutism on the part of rulers.

This was the practical policy which succeeded, by the delusion and snare set by the class for the emigrant negro who became a party to the wrong, by convincing him that the class and he were one people, the native negro another, and so far inferior to them that their relations to him must be that of a master class. Their inability to succeed alone in this wrong was equaled alone by their cunning.

Fifty years have so riveted this error in the brain of the emigrant negro and his issue that no citizen of the United States could realize the sentiment and practices of the Liberian toward the aboriginal man and woman without an involuntary expression of surprise and astonishment, and this feeling would be at once succeeded by seeking the cause of the existence of so unnatural a feeling between a civilized and an uncivilized or semi-civilized people of the same race.

The government was formed with the aboriginal freeman the base, the general structure the emigrant negro, the superstructure the hybrid.

This design formed, this edifice existent was intended to develop into a negro nationality on the west coast of Africa; but now being happily changed and purified by the naturalization of the destructive element or class, and the giving play to the natural instincts of emigrant negro which seemed lost, but which are now being gradually restored.

When the negro presidents—so by sufferance—Benson, Warner, and Koye were the executives of the republic, the class was restless in consequence of their successes, and the fate of the first and last seems to indicate plainly that the class and the race were not one; and when such minds as those of the negroes Crommell, Blyden, Freeman, and others became fully alive to the condition of affairs and asked justice, persecution followed.

The power to crush the class, the enemy of the state, existed with the negro, but the unimpaired instinct of forgiveness of injuries so peculiar to him controlled, and he suffered, bided the time of his deliverance from the class who had little in common with his race; and he has seen the hand of death sever the foremost of his enemies from a power that threatened the life of Liberia.

Within the schools established in various parts of Liberia, with few exceptions, no friendly relations existed between the few native children admitted and the liberian pupils. Kings’ and chiefs’ sons were sent to prominent Liberians to be taught “book,” as they call it, to be educated; they were received, and the promise to perform the trust given and disregarded, and these sons were made to do the menial offices their fathers would impose upon their domestic slaves. Their scholastic training was entirely neglected. An example of this treatment of natives is deserving of notice in view of the distinction of the actors, Hon. James J. Roberts, late president of Liberia and an African negro king.

King James West, a man of distinction among his and other tribes, requested President Boberts to take his son and have him schooled. The President consented, and, after having the boy more than a year at Monrovia, he was constantly and systematically made a servant in his household until, in despair and disgust, the boy returned to his father’s kingdom, profitless.

The only evidence of the benefits derived by aboriginal children who have from time to time been placed in the families of Liberians, many of whom are now grown up, is that they can understand and speak English imperfectly.

Among the Vey or Veii people, many of whom I have conversed with, men and women who have long lived in Liberian families, I have found the same results, and that they uniformly testify to the dislike of the Americans, as they call the Liberians, to them, to their people, and their absence of any love for the Liberians.

Marriages, bona-fide, to the number of fifty between native men and women and Liberians have never been consummated. All like relations have been contrary to the sanctions of moral law and the laws of the republic. The absence of marriage relations has not been due to the paganism of the aboriginal people of Liberia, as in the conspicuous absence of paganism this portion of Western Africa is the most favored, Sierra Leone being of course excepted. Nor has this been due to the immeasurable distance between heathenism lettered, as among the Veii and Greaboes, both of whom have written languages, and civilization and Christianity (here) too generally unlettered, bigoted, and intolerant.

Nor can this opposition and resistance to assimilation be urged on account of the immoral influence of polygamy, because the native woman of the tribes within Liberian jurisdiction, though sold in her infancy, in some instances, to her future husband, is not a subject of marriage, or the consummation of the relation, until she attains the age of fifteen or sixteen years, and from an early age to this period of her life she is kept under the strictest surveillance of matrons in the “gree gree bush,” the object being with reference to her morality and domestic industry; and marriage cannot be consummated until this tutelage terminates.

Among some of the native tribes of Liberia, the chastity of the male is as carefully guarded as that of the female, and as a consequence he entertains and practices a rigid respect for the female of his tribe.

The Liberians among themselves ignored the negro boys as a rule, in admission of applicants to the Liberian college; the appointing power being confined to the strong men of the class. Seldom could a vacancy be found for a negro boy, notwithstanding the fact that no man of the class, no mixed man in the Republic, was held competent to perform the office of professor in the institution. The professors were all pure negroes, and were divested of any and all authority as to the admission of candidates, further than examination. Designation preceded examination.

Disregard of the native population tended to estrange them from the government of the colony and the republic, as is shown in this, that whenever the Liberian makes a settlement near them, they move their settlement to some place other than the one just occupied by them.

In the portion of territory now in dispute between the Liberian Government and Great Britain, the interests of the natives have been neglected, and the government’s own material interests have suffered in the non-opening of a port of entry in so rich a palm district.

Below Cape Palmas, in and beyond the Taboo district, for at least 100 miles of that south coast, no port of entry has been opened, no attention paid to the welfare of the aborigines by the government.

At the last session of the legislature, according to a wise custom or enactment some time since adhered to, by which native kings and chiefs were permitted to sit as members of that body, and deliberate but not vote, a senator refused to sit in the body with the native chief, alleging as a reason that his people were hostile to the republic. This native negro chief was an intelligent, well dressed Kroo.

The sequence was, the senator’s prejudice was pandered to, and the chief was deprived of this partially just and important privilege, ay, right.

That discrimination should be made in the matter of colonization must suggest itself to the thoughtful mind, in view of the fact that science has placed a barrier in temperate zones as to propagation, with regard to mixed or hybrid classes. The mortality which from 1824 to 1879 has been among this class in Liberia, and the general health of the class from the Govee to the Congo River, should tend to advise this class against emigration here, in their own interests.

The apparent harmony between this class and the negro in the colony and as citizens of the republic, but the actual incongruity between them, is a fact that cannot be disergarded in the interest of a negro government that is to have an influence for good upon the negro race.

The wisdom of God in placing the negro here will not be questioned, where he has attained to the highest physical excellence, and under truly friendly and competent secular and Christian instructors, who shall regard him alone as a relative, but not an absolute, natural inferior, will attain to a high civilization, not European, not American, but negro, African civilization, which will be as important in its influence on mankind as the other civilizations, is a fact to be noticed in the interest of Liberia specially and Africa generally.

The significant fact that the Caucasian race has never, as a race, in this habitat or elsewhere, consented to amalgamate with any other race, has preserved the Caucasian race, and made its civilization possible. It is a fact that this class has no claim on the negro race, as such, nor the negro race any on it such as the race has upon other races.

These facts must suggest to the “colored people,” to the negro void of self-respect, wanting which must make his race less to him than any other, and to the Caucasian philanthropist who would really serve the cause of Africa through the Republic of Liberia, that the means to that end is not to be found in assisting, by emigration, in making any community of Africa a mixed or hybrid one, by encouraging a class to aid in the civilization of a race.

Such, briefly, has been the practical policy of Liberia toward her aboriginal denizens, such the conduct of the class toward the emigrant negro, whose American teaching had led him into gross error. At no period of the existence of colony or republic has Liberia acted wisely, justly toward those whose claim upon her for her light has commended her to the special philanthropic sentiment of America and generally of the world. It is only recently that prominent negro citizens have been tolerated in advancing views hostile to this practical policy of the government.

When at a luncheon recently given in honor of the distinguished gentleman, Commodore Shufeldt, the able jurist, Ex-Attorney General Davis, in response to a toast, “The Aborigines,” advised the young men in the interest of the republic’s present and future prosperity to marry native damsels, the patriotic and loyal racial sentiment was laughed at and applauded; and serious doubts possessed some as to the gentleman’s sincerity, although a negro.

Fortunately for the republic, in the now severe school of adversity through which she is passing, she is learning that the success of the effort of self-government is to be solved through the loyalty of the negro to himself, to his race.

I am, &c.,

JNO. H. SMYTH.

No. 322. Mr. J. H. Smyth to Mr. Evarts. [Document 351]

No. 322.
Mr. J. H. Smyth to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Monrovia, Liberia, May 12, 1879. (Received June 16.) No. 26.]

Sir: I have the honor to inform you that the adjournment of the northwest boundary commission without definitely determining to which government the disputed territory belongs, together with the refusal of the British commissioners to be bound by the decision of the arbitrator, have caused much uneasiness among the Liberians and the aborigines from Cape Palmas to the river San Pedro, a distance of 150 miles of Liberian territory.

The unrest of the Greaboes and Kroos, who are very numerous, has culminated in a union, and the severance of their connection with the republic. The tribes, after conferences between themselves, have prepared and forwarded to the government a circular announcing their secession.

The government is powerless to coerce these people who have seen fit to throw off their allegiance. The defenders of the past and present policy of the government place the responsibility of this act of the natives upon the English traders, whom they accuse of hostility to Liberia. Prominent members of the present administration find the cause in the general neglect of the interests of the natives.

I am, &c.,

JNO. H. SMYTH.

No. 323. Mr. Smyth to Mr. Evarts. [Document 352]

No. 323.
Mr. Smyth to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Monrovia, Liberia, May 30, 1879. (Received June 30.) No. 30.]

Sir: I have the honor to call your attention to a recent interview between the secretary of state of Liberia and myself at the department of State.

I was by that gentleman informed that the French Government desired that Liberia should become a dependency of France. As an evidence of this, a dispatch was shown me from the Liberian consul-general, addressed to the secretary, in which a protectorate was proposed and urged by that officer, who indicates the advantages to accrue to Liberia from such relation with France, which are of a commercial character and a postal one, due to the nearness of Liberia to Senegal, and desires immediate action to be taken by Liberia in the matter.

Prior to the receipt of this dispatch nothing had been said by the Liberian Government to their French consul-general as to becoming a dependency of France.

The secretary reminded me of a fact, known to me for some time since, of the existence, at least at Monrovia, of a faction, the leader of which is in disgrace, which is anxious for foreign intervention, and has indicated its preference for alliance of the government with the United States.

This officer distinctly and unequivocally stated the policy of his government to be averse to anything savoring of a protectorate.

That the sentiment of the people and of the administration upon foreign intervention, may be regarded as equally opposed to France and all other foreign states having control of their affairs, notwithstanding the general depression directly consequent upon the unsettled question of their right to the northwest boundary, and the secession of the aborigines from Cape Palmas to San Pedro, is shown by the result of their recent election in support of the present incumbents of the presidency and vice-presidency. These officers were elected without opposition.

I am, &c.,

JNO. H. SMYTH.

No. 324. Mr. J. H. Smyth to Mr. Evarts. [Document 353]

No. 324.
Mr. J. H. Smyth to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Monrovia, Liberia, June 17, 1879. (Received August 6.) No. 31.]

Sir: You will observe by reference to my No. 26, dated May 12, 1879, that the aborigines from Cape Palmas to and including San Pedro had formed an alliance, and had seceded from Liberia.

I inclose herewith as additional evidence of the fact, an extract from The Observer, Monrovia, June 12, 1879, the manifesto forwarded by the chiefs to the Liberian Government.

I am, &c.,

JNO. H. SMYTH.

[Inclosure 1 in No. 31.—Extract from the Monrovia Observer, Thursday, June 12, 1879.]

Manifesto of the chiefs of the G’ Debo tribes east of Cape Palmas.

We, the undersigned kings and chiefs of the tribes between the river Cavalla and river San Pedro, considering that our mutual security and the prosperity of our country require that we should he united in friendship did, on the 2d and 3d days of April, 1879, meet together at Grand Taboo, and having referred to the matter of our country which is fraudulently claimed by the Republic of Liberia, on the pretense that it was purchased by or for them, and of which we have been kept in perfect ignorance all these past years, until it was first brought to our knowledge by an official order dated November 8, 1877, from Jos. T. Gibson, superintendent of Cape Palmas, to Messrs. Julio and Lehmann to leave river Taboo in five days, and to stop nowhere in any part of our country which they claim. But we would not allow them to comply to that order; and five days after, viz, 13th November, Mr. J. T. Gibson came down with the United States ship Essex to river Taboo, and when our chiefs were on board they were menaced if they refused to comply with the demands of Liberia; and lately by the arrival of the United States flagship Ticonderoga March 8, 1879, do hereby bind ourselves to the following resolutions, which have been mutually agreed to by the kings and chiefs undersigned:

Resolved, We shall never acknowledge the authority of the Republic of Liberia on the pretense that our country was purchased by Dr. Hall or any other person.

Our chiefs when on board of the United States flagship Ticonderoga, off river Taboo, were offered $100 per year to take the Liberian flag.

Resolved, We shall never accept it.

Resolved, We consider our people under the protection of England, whose flag was sent to us many years ago by that government, and which we will fly and also call upon in our present difficulty.

Resolved, We from this date stop all trade and communication with the Republic of Liberia until this question about the rights of our country is settled to our entire satisfaction.

The following are the names of the kings and chiefs:

(Eighteen signatures.)

Grand Taboo, April 5, 1879.

No. 325. Mr. Smyth to Mr. Evarts. [Document 354]

No. 325.
Mr. Smyth to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Monrovia, Liberia, July 17, 1879. (Received August 19.) No. 38.]

Sir: I have the honor to again call your attention to the difficulty alluded to in my No. 31, dated June 17, 1879, between the Liberian Government and its aboriginal inhabitants occupying that portion of territory between Taboo and San Pedro.

I forward by this mail two copies of a letter sent from the state department of Liberia to the chiefs of the disturbed section.

I have concluded to make no further comment than to call attention to that portion of the letter which refers to the use and exercise by the government of “all pacific and gentle means” to induce these rebellious subjects to return to their allegiance, and on failing to do so the intention of the government to resort to “ulterior measures.”

It is to be hoped that this proposed conduct of the government will be acted upon In good faith.; for experience has demonstrated that to a failure to so act in the past many present complications may be traced.

It is also to be regretted that the government is not in condition to put such force in the field, should it become necessary to coerce these recalcitrant chiefs and their followers.

I am, &c.,

JNO. H. SMYTH.

A letter from the state department to the Taboo, Berreby, Pedro, and other chiefs.

Department of State, Monrovia, Liberia, July 12, 1879.

Messrs. Pisser Blahble, Kuhkkle Nimle, Tableh Nimle, and others:

Sirs: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of a document issued by you under the date of April 5, 1879, headed a “Circular,” said to be the proceedings of a meeting held by a number of chiefs occupying districts of Liberian territory between the Taboo and San Pedro Rivers.

Permit me, gentlemen, to assure you of the most anxious concern felt on the part of this government in behalf of all portions of our national domain, as well as in the welfare of the inhabitants thereof. Especially is this so with regard to that portion of our citizens who, owing to the fact that they are not as far advanced in the knowledge of international and municipal law as is desirable, may be too readily led into errors and wild extravagances by wicked and evil-designing men.

It is because of this unfeigned interest, and the earnest sympathy of the government for you, in view of your lack of extensive information on the great matters of the rights and laws of nations, that I take this method of addressing you, and of giving careful attention to the several resolutions embodied in your circular.

I have the honor to remark, however, that had such a paper as that which forms the subject of this dispatch emanated from a section of the more civilized and enlightened portion of our citizens, and of whose acquaintance with the constitution and laws of the country no doubt could be entertained, the government would ere this have proceeded to adopt severe and decisive measures for crushing out the spirit of insubordination therein manifested. For it is a well-established and universally-admitted principle that no government duly watchful over its national existence and the highest welfare of the body politic, can be too prompt in checking the first uprising of that hydra-headed spirit of rebellion which too often intrudes itself in even the most advanced and best governed communities and states.

But, aware of the fact that the chiefs who signed the document under consideration have but a limited stock of information on the grave questions involved therein, and firmly convinced that the dissatisfaction it betrays was instigated through the evil device of others, we feel it due to you that this communication pointing out your errors be forwarded before further steps be taken should any be found necessary.

The few reckless foreign adventurers contravening our laws in that section who will be dealt with in due time, and to whom we trace the whole, of this movement, care nothing for you, your country, nor your future welfare. All they seek is to enrich themselves at your expense and then go home, leaving you poor, defrauded, and as ignorant as they found you. The idea of elevating you and of advancing the welfare of your country never enters their plans.

But the Government of Liberia, whose citizens you are, and to whom your fathers, with remarkable foresight, of their own free will and accord, ceded these districts, are striving to build up an African nationality here, one that will command the respect of the world, which will confer upon you, your children, and future generations, the inestimable boon of civil and religious institutions.

Africa is capable of becoming as great a country as Europe or America, by stirring industry and the introduction of the arts and sciences; and to effect something toward this desirable end is the great object of this government.

You, a portion of the aboriginal inhabitants, joint owners with us of the land of our fathers, have an important part to perform in this noble enterprise.

Liberia is a country owned and controlled by Africans—your brethren, your kinsmen; not foreigners, such as Englishmen, Americans, Spaniards, Frenchmen, Germans, or Portuguese. We are Veys, Mandingoes, Golahs, Congoes, Bassas, Eboes, Pessas, Kroos, Greboes, Barboes, Taboos, &c., &c. These are the people, with their descendants returned from exile and oppression, who make up the population of this commonwealth. Our interests then are one, and united should be our objects and aims in seeking to advance the general welfare of the whole body politic.

The Liberian Government will intentionally take no advantage of any portion of her citizens. The laws apply equally to all. And if in the administration of them the inhabitants of any part of our territory feel that they are oppressed, grieved, or even slighted, they have a right according to the fifth article of the constitution to petition the government or any public functionary for the redress of such grievances. If the tribes between Taboo and the River San Pedro feel that they have any cause for complaint, or are laboring under any disadvantages whatever, let them meet as they have done in this case, draw up a statement of their grievances and either forward them to the President or send them by a delegation chosen to present their cause, and the government is bound to hear and redress their wrongs. Having made these remarks, I proceed now to notice the several articles of your circular.

1. In the first you resolve never to “acknowledge the authority of the Republic of Liberia on the pretense that our country was purchased by Dr. Hall or any other persons.”

You are quite right in resolving not to acknowledge any mere pretense or unfounded; claims to authority over your country. But the claim of the Republic of Liberia is not of this character. There are now filed in the archives of the government accessible to any of you who may be inclined to visit Monrovia, original deeds of cession executed by the kings and chiefs of all the territory claimed by this state in that section, conveying the same to Liberia for the joint use of the original owners and other Liberian settlers who may be inclined to occupy them, subject to the constitution and laws of this republic.

If there be doubts entertained by you on this point, correct and true copies of the deeds with the names of the chiefs and witnesses who signed the same, will be forwarded to you at your request, or the original instruments can be inspected by any of you who may be delegated for that purpose.

2. You allege, secondly, that when on board of the United States flagship Ticonderoga, off river Taboo, certain chiefs were offered $100 per year to take the Liberian flag.

I beg permission to correct an error in your statement with reference to the circumstance here alluded to. Learning that our revenue laws were being violated by certain foreign traders on that part of the coast, and, there being no customs’ officers there to protect the interest of the government, it was deemed advisable by the executive to appoint a few reliable persons or chiefs as head police officers, with instructions to note any infringements of said laws, to give information of the same to the officials at Cape Palmas, as well as to enforce order among the tribes in their respective neighborhoods. And, as the government imposes no service without a compensation, the annual remuneration of $100 was ordered to be paid to such persons as the superintendent of the county should see fit to appoint. He was also directed to furnish every such appointee with the Liberian flag, representing the authority and jurisdiction of the government.

3. You resolve, thirdly, that you will “never accept it,” meaning, I suppose, the offer made,

In reply to this, I have only to remark that it is the privilege of any citizen of Liberia to accept or refuse an appointment to office by the government, which right is continually exercised in all parts of the republic. Nor is any one liable to pains or penalties for such refusal. The chiefs, in refusing to accept the commission tendered them, had a perfect right to do so, however unwise or unpatriotic it may appear. We have no law compelling a citizen to hold any given office contrary to his wish.

4. You resolve, fourthly, that you consider your people under the protection of England, whose flag was sent to you many years ago by that government you allege, and which you will fly, and also call upon in your present difficulty.

Here, gentlemen, I have the honor to call your attention, most respectfully, to another error into which you have fallen. From the date of the deeds of cession above referred to, now thirty-three years ago, up to the present, Her Majesty’s Government have never, to our knowledge, set up any claim to possession of, or protectorate over, any portion of the territory under consideration. So far from it, Great Britain has long since acknowledged our right to the coast as far below Cape Palmas as the San Pedro River, which she would scarcely have done had that government possessed a prior claim to any portion thereof.

5. In your fifth and last resolution you propose to stop all trade and communication with the Republic of Liberia until this question about the rights of your country is settled to your entire satisfaction

Being within and forming a part of the republic, I do not see how you will be able to carry out this resolution. If, however, you mean that your intention is to cease all trade and commercial intercourse with other parts of Liberia, I have only to remark that it is optional with every Liberian citizen to choose his market. As desirable as it is that you continue friendly trade and commercial transactions with other Liberian importers and dealers, yet there is no law in our compilation making it binding upon you to do so. You are under no legal obligation to patronize the home market. You have equal privileges under the law with other Liberian producers to ship the result of your labor to Europe, America, or to dispose of it to foreign traders on the coast, who are transacting business in compliance with the revenue laws of this republic. So far from discouraging it the government will be glad to see you availing yourselves of the advantages of a foreign market in common with other good citizens. And to facilitate this object a special law was enacted two years ago permitting foreign vessels to trade directly with the inhabitants of the whole line of coast from the Gavalla River to the San Pedro; thus more than compensating you for the disadvantages of having no ports of entry in that district.

Another idea was conceived last year which will likely culminate in the passage of a law at the ensuing session of the legislature, opening two or three ports of entry and delivery between the rivers aforementioned, which will afford you the advantages of shipping your produce by steamers or other vessels direct to the European and other markets. These privileges and benefits are yours under the laws of the land, be it understood, but not in repudiation of them.

Having thus noticed the resolutions set forth in your circular, and having pointed out some errors under which you are evidently laboring, I have the honor to assure you, gentlemen, that, while the government are willing to remonstrate with, advise, point out errors, instruct, and in fact exhaust all pacific and gentle means to settle difficulties of this character, yet, upon the failure of these, ulterior measures must be adopted. A spirit of disloyalty and insubordination cannot be tolerated within the limits of the state.

Trusting, gentlemen, that you will not fail to see the propriety of reconsidering your resolutions, and of returning to your wonted allegiance,

I have the honor to be, sirs, your obedient, humble servant,

GARRETSON W. GIBSON,
Secretary of State.

No. 326. Mr. Smyth to Mr. Seward. [Document 355]

No. 326.
Mr. Smyth to Mr. Seward.

Legation of the United States,
Monrovia, Liberia, August 7, 1879. (Received September 10.) Consular series
No. 27.

Sir: I have the honor to again remind the Department of the importance to the government of securing some direct influence in Africa, for the commercial advantages to be thereby obtained.

It would be idle to indulge the thought that the English and French Governments are influenced by humanitarian, civilizing motives, solely, in the acquisition of territory on this continent. Beyond all such thought is the opening up and development of Africa for the prospective commercial wealth that will accrue to these governments and peoples from such effort.

While now we may not need additional area, with our great West rolling in mineral richness from the Mississippi to the Pacific, yet we need more markets for our manufactured articles, and the need increases with every new invention made, every article for which we have not an immediate customer which we produce.

While we may be justly proud of the ground gone over in the last hundred years, yet, with corresponding increase of population and industries in the present century, the markets for our commodities must be increased.

I send you a clipping, under the caption “France,” dated at Paris, Monday, July 14, 9.30 p.m., in which the fact is stated of a commission that has been appointed by M. de Freycinet to report as to a projected railway from and between Algeria, Soudan, and Senegal to Niger; a region with a population estimated at one hundred millions, and a soil probably the most fertile.

The budget and senatorial committees have pronounced in favor of this scheme, which will cost much less than the Panama Canal, and will be of immeasurably greater importance to France.

Now, if a golden harvest were not promised France in the successful accomplishment of this work, it would not be so seriously entertained.

Now, contrast this French project with the American Polar expedition, an article upon which is to be found in the Washington Star, dated June 28, 1879, which I also inclose. Here is an expedition gotten up, no doubt at great expense, and which if successful can do for science no more than correct and settle conflicting theories as to the region of earth around the north pole. But when accurate knowledge is obtained can our commerce claim any advantages from the victory of science? The consummation of the purpose of the expedition will be but the settlement of a merely speculative matter, which can satisfy the scientist, and enlarge, without material benefit to humanity, the world’s geographical knowledge.

But here is Central Africa, a fact, partially explored, for which the world must be ever the debtor of those great benefactors of their kind who have so far successfully labored in this field, and of whose achievements the United States of right claim so large a share. Now, were the same attention directed hereto the known and unknown womb of wealth imbedded in this land, the benefit to our revenues and 40 millions of our nation cannot readily from a commercial view be estimated.

When France, England, and Belgium shall have occupied this great field bristling in commercial importance, should we have any relation to it, that relation must of necessity be secondary.

With earnest hope that Africa may not be wholly neglected by us commercially, and your indulgence for the length to which your attention has been taxed by the perusal of this,

I am, &c.,

JNO. H. SMYTH.

[Inclosure 1 in No. 27.—Extract from the London Times, July 15, 1879.]

France.

Paris, Monday, July 14—9.30 p.m.

A commission has been appointed by M. de Freycinet to report on the feasibility of a railway between Algeria the Soudan and Senegal. The population of the Soudan is estimated, remarks Mr. de Freycinet, at 100,000,000. The Niger traverses half of it. The inhabitants are industrious. The moving sands formerly considered universal are only a local incident, and the soil is everywhere similar to that of European soils.

A railway from Algeria to the Niger would not exceed 2,000 kilometers, and would be much less costly than the projected Panama Canal.

A preliminary commission has already recommended the scheme, one ground being that it would suppress the internal slave-trade; but it enjoins circumspection on account of the imperfect knowledge of certain parts of the Sahara.

It therefore suggests a survey for a line of 300 kilometers between Biskra and Ouargla to be connected with the Algiers and Constantine line, and that explorations should be made beyond Ouargla towards the Niger. The budget committee and a senatorial committee on Algerian railways have also pronounced in favor of France taking an active part in the opening up of Central Africa. The commission now appointed is headed by Generals d’Andigné and Meudes, and includes M. de Lesseps, various senators and deputies, and a number of engineers.

No. 327. Mr. Smyth to Mr. Seward. [Document 356]

No. 327.
Mr. Smyth to Mr. Seward.

Legation of the United States,
Monrovia, Liberia, August 28, 1879. (Received October 13.) Consular Series
No. 32.

Sir: I have the honor again to call your attention to Central Africa in the interest of our increasing commerce.

By reference to my No. 27, dated August 7, 1879, consular series, you will observe that I expressed views favorable to this section of Africa, and forwarded an extract from a Paris letter to the London Times.

I now send you in extenso the extract from the West African Reporter of Sierra Leone, August 20, 1879; also, an editorial in which the English Home Government’s attention is invited to the subject, “European enterprise in Soudan.”

I am, &c.,

JNO. H. SMYTH.

[Inclosure 1 in No. 32.—Extract.]

A Railway from Algeria to Senegal.

We are enabled to publish the following translation of a letter addressed by the minister of public works to the President of the French Republic, who has issued a decree for the appointment of the commission recommended:

Mr. President: During late years the discoveries of various travelers have shown that Central Africa is very different from what people imagined. Formerly we believed that there were only huge deserts and barren land, while now, on the contrary, it has been proved that large tribes of human beings exist there, who are more or less in a state of semi-civilization. Important towns, with many inhabitants, are built upon the shores of the lakes and the banks of the rivers. The Sahara itself is not all that has been described in unfinished and superficial observations. The movable sands, too, which were considered an impassable barrier, extending far and wide, are, in reality, only local, and, generally, the soil has a consistency and firmness which does not differ much from the soil of Europe.

Soudan appears to be the most important part of this huge continent. Some travelers reckon the population at over one hundred millions. There is a large river, the Niger, which spreads over half its extent. The inhabitants are industrious, and the elements of an international commerce seem to be in existence there to a very high degree.

Again, in surmounting difficulties, more or less considerable, this country can be approached from two sides, by Algeria and by Senegal. This problem has for the last twenty years filled the minds of many, and the time seems come to solve it practically. Two years since M. Dapouchel, one of our principal civil engineers, obtained permission from the government to go to Algeria to collect all possible information about the nature of Soudan as well as of Sahara. He was assisted by the wonderful narratives which had been published by several travelers, especially those of M. Daveyrier, by the accounts of chiefs of caravans, and by information he received from distinguished officers, who had frequently made expeditions in the south of Algeria; also, by undertaking himself an exploration on the borders of the Great Desert. M. Dapouchel has been able to publish a very interesting memoir which shows the possibility of uniting ourselves to the Niger by an unbroken line of railroad of 1,250 miles.

However bold such an idea appears, we must not treat it as an absurdity when we come to think of the wonderful results of man’s genius; above all of that grand railroad which joins San Francisco to New York, across obstacles of all kinds, over a space of nearly 3,750 miles. A railroad from Algeria to the Niger, if it be possible, will certainly cost less than cutting the Isthmus of Panama, in the way it was decided at the International Congress held lately at Paris. Struck by M. Dapouchel’s report, I felt we ought no longer to remain inactive. I have formed a provisional committee, consisting of several distinguished members of my department, and I have consulted with them on the value of these ideas of M. Dapouchel’s. After a long deliberation this committee drew up the following statement on the 12th of June: 1st. The committee consider that there exists in Soudan a large population, a fertile soil, and natural riches which are uncultivated. It is very important to open outlets for commerce through the French possessions, which are the most favorably situated for this purpose. France ought to follow the example of England, and do her best to induce the caravans to cross French territory instead of only coming to its borders.

2d. The opening of a railroad joining our possessions in Algeria with Soudan is necessary in order to obtain this double result.

3d. It is also necessary to join Senegal with the Niger.

4th. The explorations or surveys of the undertaking ought to be directed simultaneously from Senegal and from Algeria, and the plans ought to include both directions.

5th. South of Algeria, the uncertainty which exists regarding the topography, the climate, the resources, and the inhabitants of certain parts of the Sahara, makes it necessary to proceed with care in order to avoid mistakes and military complications.

6th. It will be advantageous to start immediately with a preliminary line between Biskra and Ouargla of about 200 miles. This line can be joined by the Hodua to the line from Algiers to Constantine. As far as Ouargla ordinary escorts appear sufficient to protect all operations.

8th. A credit of 800 I will be demanded to meet the expense of the surveys and the needs of the explorers.

After this full statement, if I had felt any hesitation it would all have vanished before the general opinion which was simultaneously manifested in the two chambers in favor of this same question. In the Chambre des Députés, the budget committee having to decide on the amendment of Mr. Paul Bert expressed themselves in these terms through their secretary, M. Rouvier:

“Your commission, gentlemen, is very sympathetic with the object of the amendment. Africa is attracting the attention of the civilized world more and more. France, situated nearer this continent than most other nations, more directly interested in its future by her possessions in Algeria, in Senegal, in Gaboon, and by her numerous factories established on the west coast, France cannot but take her part in this movement, which is drawing Europe towards those regions in Africa, the wealth of which we are just beginning to see. Do not the greatness and the interests of our country command us to place ourselves at the head of this movement?”

In the Senate, the commission on the railroads of Algeria has not been less explicit. Their report concluded thus on the subject of an amendment of M. Caillaux:

“The majority of the committee, for these motives, has not thought it necessary to adopt the amendment of M. Caillaux. The committee, however, unanimously agree to the surveys which are necessary for the execution of the railroad across the Sahara; they are certainly convinced that it is greatly to the interests and to the advantage of our country for us to solve this problem of the basin of the Niger, and to be in advance regarding the civilization of those countries which our colony of Algeria opens to us.”

The committee had even fancied that they ought to settle in general terms a line from Algeria to Soudan. If they have given up this, it is in consequence of the engagement made in the tribune” on July 5, by the minister of public works, that we should commence with more reliable surveys. “Under these conditions the government ought to enter resolutely, but still with prudence, on the path which is marked out.

Consequently, I have the honor of proposing to you, Mr. President, to name a general commission, in which different and special interests should be represented, and to which should be appointed members of Parliament. This commission would have in its power the definite plan of the surveys to be undertaken. They would extend the programme indicated by the preparatory commission. They would draw up instructions for exploring expeditions. They would decide how these expeditions are to be undertaken in order to be sufficiently extensive without compromising France or endangering life. They would gather together all the results obtained, and they would draw up such reports as will enable us to come to a conclusion upon the possibility of uniting Algeria and Senegal to Soudan by railroad.

Whatever be the issue of such an enterprise, it will always be an honor to France to have tried it, and she will have something beneficial to bequeath to the future. If you accept this view, Mr. President, I beg you to give your approbation to the present report as well as the decree which accompanies it.

I have the honor to be, &c., &c., &c.,

C. DE FREYCINET.

[Inclosure 2 in No 32.—Extract from the West African Reporter, August 20, 1879]

European enterprise in Soudan.

The leading nations of Europe have their eyes upon Africa, and a very few years will doubtless bring about the most important changes at least in the physical aspects of certain portions of interior Negroland. We take the following from the Times of July 15, 1879, as to efforts making by the French:

“A commisssion has been appointed by M. de Freycinet to report on the feasibility of a railway between Algeria, the Soudan, and Senegal. The population is estimated, remarks M. de Freycinet, at one hundred millions. The Niger traverses half of it. The inhabitants are industrious. The moving sands, formerly considered universal, are only a local accident, and the soil is everywhere similar to that of European soils. A railway from Algeria to the Niger would not exceed 2,000 kilometers, and would be much less costly than the projected Panama Canal.

“A preliminary commission has already recommended the scheme, one ground being that it would repress the internal slave trade; but it enjoins circumspection, on account of the imperfect knowledge of certain parts of Sahara. It, therefore, suggests a survey for a line of 300 kilometers between Biskra and Ouargla, to be connected with the Algiers and Constantine line, and that explorations should he made beyond Ouargla towards the Niger. The budget committee and a senatorial committee on Algerian railways have also pronounced in favor of France taking an active part in the opening up of Central Africa.

“The commission now appointed is headed by General d’Andigné and Mendes, and includes M. de Lesseps, various senators and deputies and a number of engineers.”

According to the speech of M. Victor Hugo, to which we have before referred in these columns, Africa is the common property of the European nations, to be appropriated for European purposes with or without the consent of its inhabitants, who, according to another authority, are only “lazy, palavering savages.” In making their allotments of this big farm, of course not the slightest regard will be paid to such insignificant obstacles as Ashantees and Zulus, notwithstanding the reminder which a recent magnificent funeral should furnish to the French nation.

Fifty years ago there was prevalent with reference to Africa and her people a spirit of conventional depreciation. This is now giving way to a spirit of conventional admiration for the country, if not for its inhabitants. The former spirit was the off-spring of ignorance; more accurate information is causing it to yield to the latter spirit.

England has always taken the lead in legislative and philanthropic measures in behalf of Africa and her people; and therefore Africans so readily condone what may be at times objectionable to them in the conduct of isolated Englishmen abroad.

The portion of the continent to which French enterprise is about to be directed was opened to the world by English sagacity and energy. It has been extensively explored and reported upon only by Barth and Richardson, who made their celebrated journeys under the auspices of the British Government a quarter of a century ago.

In 1855 Dr. Barth reached Tripoli, having twice crossed the Sahara, and traversed and retraversed twenty degrees of longitude in that portion of the continent. One of his native assistants, who accompanied him from Tripoli to Timbuctoo, is now a resident of this settlement.

When thirty years ago it was felt that the labors of Mungo Park, of Denham and Clapperton, needed completion in the thorough exploration of the countries south of the Great Desert, England, as the first of commercial nations, could not rest without more accurate knowledge of the natural capacities of a region known to be populous, and without endeavoring to open new and easier routes of communication with it. Richardson and Barth were in trusted with the task of carrying out the explorations.

Richardson lost his life amid his arduous and hazardous labors. Barth barely lived to publish the results of his observations, giving a full account of the geography, ethnology, history, industry, and commerce of Negroland; and the world was for the first time apprised of its industrial activity and wealth. We learned of the existence of towns whose history dated as far back as 1200 A. D., which was considered a respectable antiquity for negro towns; large cities like Kano, of 30,000 inhabitants, were described to us, and the surprising information was imparted of centers of activity in the heart of Soudan, of a complex and widely ramified commerce, busy hives of manufacturing industry, and extensive specimens of skillful agricluture. And all these places are within a few weeks’ journey of Sierra Leone. Visitors come to the settlement from Kankan, Sego, Katsena, Sokoto, Kano. Barth says:

“The principal commerce of Kano consists in native produce, namely, the cotton cloth woven and dyed here or in the neighboring towns, in the form of tobes, or the oblong piece of dress of dark blue color worn by women, the plaid of various colors, &c. In taking a general view of the subject, I think myself justified in estimating the whole produce of this manufacture, as far as it is sold abroad, at the very least, at about three hundred millions (cowries), and how great this national wealth is will be understood by my readers when they know that with from fifty to sixty thousand cowries or from four to five pounds sterling a year a whole family may live in that country with ease, including every expense, even that of their clothing; and we must remember that the province is one of the most fertile spots on the earth, and is able to produce not only the supply of corn necessary for its population but can also export, and that it possesses besides the finest pasture-grounds.”—(Vol. ii, pp. 125–127.)

These products are purchased by Arab traders and taken to Egypt and the Mediterranean. Such is the constant intercourse between that region of country and Europe, through Tripoli and Tunis, that it is said bills of exchange on Europe have been negotiated at Sokoto. Bishop Crowther informed us that a letter from Europe reached him at Lagos, through Tunis, via Sokoto and Ashantee.

Notwithstanding the efforts being put forth by the French to monopolize the valuable products of that country, England may yet so utilize Gambia and Sierra Leone as to control a much greater portion of Nigritia and Soudan than France can ever influence.

During the last trading season, a few months ago, we had caravans from Timbuctoo, from Sego, and from the gold diggings at Bouré These “strangers” who had not been among ns in such large numbers for several years expressed themselves as highly gratified at the results of their visit, and especially at the kind treatment they received from the authorities.

The governor-in-chief, we believe, sent a messenger to accompany them on their return as far as Sego. This was a very important move on the part of Governor Rowe, and if such generous treatment of our interior tribes by the officials is followed up by-energetic efforts on the part of English capitalists, the English would easily secure that commercial ascendency in Soudan which, in view of the large expenditure and sacrifices they have made to open up that country, they richly deserve. Sir Michael Hicks-Beach has already declared it to be the policy of the British Government to push forward civilization in Africa; and they will certainly support any intelligent and well directed commercial effort in the interior of Sierra Leone and the Gambia.

Considering the present demand by European manufacturers for commercial openings in Africa, the governor-in-chief of these settlements occupies one of the most important positions in the civil service of the empire. He has before him a field for high achievements not only for his own reputation, but in the interest of commerce, civilization, and humanity.

No. 328. Mr. Hunter to Mr. Smyth. [Document 357]

No. 328.
Mr. Hunter to Mr. Smyth.

Department of State,
Washington, September 8, 1879. No. 35.]

Sir: Referring to your dispatch No. 30, of 30th May last, relative to overtures reported to have been made through the “Liberian consul-general” to the Liberian Government looking to the extension of French protection to that government, I have to inform you that inquiries having been made in high official quarters in regard to the matter, it has been ascertained that the French Government has never proposed or expressed a desire that Liberia should be placed under its protectorate, but has on the contrary declined to entertain any scheme looking to such a result.

W. HUNTER,
Acting Secretary.

Mexico.Mexico.

[358] . Mr. Foster to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Mexico, November 2, 1878. (Received November 19.)

[359] . Mr. Foster to Mr. Evarts.

Legation Of The United States, Mexico, November 4, 1878.

[360] . Mr. Foster to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Mexico, November 22, 1878. (Received December 17.)

[361] . Mr. Foster to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Mexico, November 29, 1878. (Received December 17.)

[362] . Mr. Foster to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Mexico, December 4, 1878. (Received December 17.)

[363] . Mr. Foster to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Mexico, December 9, 1878. (Received January 2, 1879.)

[364] . Mr. Foster to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Mexico, December 10, 1878. (Received January 2, 1879.)

[365] . Mr. Foster to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Mexico, December 14, 1878. (Received January 2, 1879.)

[366] . Mr. Foster to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Mexico, December 16, 1878. (Received January 2, 1879.)

[367] . Mr. Foster to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Mexico, December 18, 1878. (Received January 9, 1879.)

[368] . Mr. Foster to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Mexico, December 23, 1878. (Received January 8, 1879.)

[369] . Mr. Seward to Mr. Foster.

Department of State, Washington, January 15, 1879.

[370] . Mr. Seward to Mr. Foster.

Department of State, Washington, January 15, 1879.

[371] . Mr. Foster to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Mexico, January 28, 1879.

[372] . Mr. Foster to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Mexico, February 7, 1879. (Received February 18.)

[373] . Mr. Foster to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Mexico, February 11, 1879. (Received February 24.)

[374] . Mr. Foster to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Mexico, February 18, 1879. (Received March 10.)

[375] . Mr. Evarts to Mr. Foster.

Department of State, Washington, February 20, 1879.

[376] . Mr. Foster to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Mexico, April 3, 1879. (Received April 22.)

[377] . Mr. Foster to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Mexico, April 4, 1879. (Received April 22.)

[378] . Mr. Foster to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Mexico, April 11, 1879. (Received April 29.)

[379] . Mr. Foster to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Mexico, April 12, 1879. (Received April 29.)

[380] . Mr. Foster to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Mexico, April 14, 1879. (Received April 29.)

[381] . Mr. Foster to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Mexico, May 21, 1879.

[382] . Mr. Foster to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Mexico, May 24, 1879. (Received June 12.)

[383] . Mr. Foster to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Mexico, May 27, 1879. (Received June 12, 1879.)

[384] . Mr. Foster to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Mexico, May 31, 1879. (Received June 17.)

[385] . Mr. Foster to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Mexico, June 7, 1879. (Received June 26.)

Inclosure 2 in No. 969.—Translation.

[386] . Mr. Seward to Mr. Foster.

Department of State, Washington, July 2, 1879.

[387] . Mr. Foster to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Mexico, July 18, 1879. (Received August 12.)

[388] . Mr. Foster to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Mexico, July 23, 1879. (Received August 12.)

[389] . Mr. Foster to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Mexico, July 28, 1879. (Received August 12.)

[390] . Mr. Foster to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Mexico, August 2, 1879. (Received August 26.)

[391] . Mr. Seward to Mr. Foster.

Department of State, Washington, August 13, 1879.

[392] . Mr. Foster to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Mexico, August 15, 1879. (Received September 7.)

[393] . Mr. Foster to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Mexico, August 16, 1879. (Received September 7.)

[394] . Mr. Foster to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Mexico, August 20, 1879. (Received September 7.)

[395] . Mr. Foster to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Mexico, September 13, 1879. (Received October 4.)

[396] . Mr. Foster to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States. Mexico, September 19, 1879. (Received October 6.)

[397] . Mr. Foster to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Mexico, September 24, 1879. (Received October 14.)

[398] . Mr. Strother to Mr. Hunter.

United States Consulate-General, City of Mexico, October 4, 1879. (Received October 20.)

No. 329. Mr. Foster to Mr. Evarts. [Document 358]

No. 329.
Mr. Foster to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Mexico, November 2, 1878. (Received November 19.) No. 827.]

Sir: In my No. 798, of the 5th ultimo, I sent the note of the acting minister of foreign affairs, denying the right to diplomatic intervention in the case of the forced loans exacted from Mr. Walter Henry in Chihuahua, and my reply thereto.

The minister has seen proper to continue the discussion, by a note of the 9th ultimo, in which he seems to profess an ignorance of the outrages inflicted upon the American citizens resident in Chihuahua during the last revolution; lays down the principle that the remedy, in case of forced loans and military exactions, is an appeal to the Mexican courts; indicates that such claims of American citizens must go into the general liquidation, which means that they are to be considered a part of the interior debt; and again refuses to consider the demand of the legation that the claim of the murdered American citizen Henry be adjusted through diplomatic intervention.

In my reply, inclosed herewith, I have thought it necessary to refer to the general character of the exactions and outrages perpetrated upon American residents of Chihuahua by the authorities of the present government; have shown the folly of seeking redress through the courts, and that the only method is by a diplomatic resort to the federal executive; that the latter has been repeatedly recognized; and that our government cannot consent to allow the claims of its citizens of the character in question to be made a part of the interior debt, which is virtually worthless, a course which amounts to an absolute confiscation of property, without compensation and by wholly illegal means.

I am, &c.,

JOHN W. FOSTER.

[Inclosure 1 in No. 827.—Translation.]

Mr. Avila to Mr. Foster.

Department of Foreign Affairs,
Mexico, October 9, 1878.

Mr. Minister: I have received your excellency’s note of the 4th instant, in which, after it had been made known that the vouchers for certain sums of money claimed from the Government of Mexico in favor of Walter Henry were opportunely transmitted to the department of finance for its information, your excellency insists upon considering the action which you take in the name of the said Henry as a matter which should be adjusted by diplomatic intervention, a position which your excellency supports by mentioning, without specifying them, many possible occurrences or consequences of the state of disorder existing on the northern frontier of the republic in the year 1876.

Your excellency will permit me to state and here make plain, that it is a principle of international law, universally admitted, that the person who establishes himself in a certain country subjects himself by this act to the laws existing there, and performs an act of tacit submission to the regulations and practices in force; and this could not reasonably be otherwise, since, on the contrary, it would result that the condition of the foreigner would not only be different, but better and more favorable than that of citizens. This principle being recognized, as without any doubt whatever it is, by your excellency, the intervention which you now claim in the matter of Walter Henry cannot be permitted except in the case of a denial of justice, or the pronunciation of a sentence which should be in notorious violation of the laws. As in the case of Walter Henry such antecedents have not only not taken place, but it has not even been presented before the Mexican tribunals, nor has the republic given occasion for discussion respecting that which has just been submitted to its authorities and is now pending examination, the President has communicated to me instructions to say to your excellency, that in virtue of former decisions it is not possible for him to admit the diplomatic intervention of your excellency in the present state of this matter, although, as I had the honor to inform you in my former note, it has been submitted to the department of finance, which, without doubt, will take it into consideration in the character of the collection of a credit against the national treasury.

I have the honor to reiterate to your excellency the assurances of my very distinguished consideration.

ELENTERIO AVILA.

[Inclosure 2 in No. 827.]

Mr. Foster to Mr. Avila.

Legation of the United States,
Mexico, October 22, 1878.

Sir: The pressure of other business has heretofore prevented me from acknowledging receipt of your honor’s note of the 9th instant, relating to the claims of Mr. Walter Henry presented by this legation.

While I have no disposition to enter at length upon a discussion of the principles raised by your honor’s notes on this subject, I deem it necessary to make some observations upon your note of the 9th instant.

Your honor does not properly interpret my note of the 4th instant, when you imply that I insist upon diplomatic intervention, because the vouchers in the claim were transmitted to the department of finance. My said note does not admit of a doubt that it was occasioned by the declaration made by your honor that, a denial of justice not having occurred, there was no motive for diplomatic intervention.

Your honor says I support my position by mentioning, without specifying them, many possible occurrences or consequences of the state of disorder existing on the northern frontier in 1876. Does your honor doubt these occurrences? or was it designed to challenge me to a recital of the long list of illegal and arbitrary exactions and outrages inflicted by the authorities of the present government upon American citizens in the State of Chihuahua during the last revolutions? These matters have been frequently discussed by me with the late minister of foreign affairs. Some of the American sufferers have made the journey of twelve hundred miles to this capital to lay their complaints in person before the Mexican Government, one of whom was the murdered man; in whose behalf I have been pressing the claim now the subject of discussion. These outrages have been widely published in the United States and have called forth the indignation of my countrymen. They have led my government to send urgent and positive instructions to this legation to secure a redress of the wrongs done American citizens. If detailed demands have not as yet been presented in all these cases, it has been for the reason mentioned in my note, 2d instant, when I first brought your honor’s attention to the claim of Mr. Henry. But in verbal conferences I have narrated to the late minister in charge of the foreign office repeated instances of forced loans having been levied on American residents in Chihuahua by revolutionary chiefs, so often repeated at times as to have been exacted from one mercantile house within six months no less than thirteen separate and distinct times. And in default or hesitation in paying promptly these illegal and arbitrary exactions, American citizens have been torn from their houses and families by bands of armed soldiers and held as prisoners until the money was paid. They have been required in lieu of personal military service, to furnish arms, horses, or other materials of war to sustain the revolution. Upon refusal to pay oft-repeated levies, after having in individual instances contributed tens of thousands of dollars, they have been carried off to the mountains by roving bands of revolutionists, $50,000 as ransom being demanded, and in default of payment in one case an American citizen was held a prisoner for thirty days by one of these bands acting under the direct orders of the present governor of Chihuahua, exposed in the mountains to all kinds of hardships of weather and dangers of warfare, and finally compelled to pay $3,500 to secure his release.

I did not think it necessary in presenting Mr. Henry’s claim to make a recital of all these outrages, nor can I believe your honor now desires it, notwithstanding the apparent challenge in your note of the 9th instant; I only deemed it requisite to present to the Mexican Government the unquestioned written evidences of the forced indebtedness contracted by the chiefs, who were duly commissioned by the present chief magistrate of the republic, in support of Mr. Henry’s claim.

But your honor says the President cannot allow the intervention of my government in behalf of one of its citizens, except in case of a denial of justice or the pronunciation by a court of a sentence in violation of law. What can constitute a greater denial of justice than that which exists in this case Military chiefs having the commission of General Porfirio Diaz, and sustaining his cause in the late revolution, having captured the city of Chihuahua, notify Mr. Henry that he is required within a certain number of hours to appear before officers designated and pay specified sums of money. Upon hesitation on his part, a file of soldiers breaks open his residence and carries him off to the military authorities, where he is held a prisoner till the last farthing is paid or secured. This is an illegal and unconstitutional act, and so pronounced by the supreme court of the nation, which says that not even in time of war has the executive or military the power to levy taxes. What opportunity had Henry to appeal to a court to interpose its authority to protect him? The strong arm of the military power had him in custody. But even if this were not the case, there were no courts in existence. The revolutionary authorities had overthrown the tribunals and the judges had fled or concealed themselves. The money once being paid, there was no other method of obtaining its return but to await the establishment of a new government and apply to the executive authority under that government. This Mr. Henry did to the authorities in Chihuahua, and they declined to restore to him the money exacted, but referred him to the general government in this capital. I have already stated that he came to this city nearly a year ago, and presented his claim to the minister of the treasury, securing my unofficial intervention. Nearly twelve months passed by without even a preliminary answer being given to either Mr. Henry or to this legation. Upon the occasion of his brutal murder, and the attempt to plunder his property by Mexcan officials, of which this legation received authentic information, the diplomatic presentation of the claim occurred. There is nothing unusual in this mode of procedure. The Mexican foreign office has repeatedly recognized such intervention in similar cases. I was therefore taken by surprise by the position assumed by your honor, especially in view of the recent event on the Rio Grande frontier.

Your honor says the case has not even been presented before the Mexican tribunals. What precedent is there for such a course? Is not this class of claims recognized as within the jurisdiction of the executive department of the government? And is there not a special Obligation resting upon it to examine and adjust these liabilities?

If Mr. Henry’s heirs are required to institute a legal proceeding to recover the forced loans exacted to sustain the revolution of the present government, against whom is the suit to be brought? Must it be against the military officers who levied the loans? In that case, as General Donato G____, to whom the most of the loans were paid, is dead, shall his heirs or estate, if he has any, be made defendants in a suit? Would you expect a proceeding to be instituted against General Trias, now governor of Chihuahua? Would it be probable that any tribunal in that State would mulct the man who was the chief instrument in establishing the very government which gave it existence, and especially for the acts which gave the revolution resources to triumph? Your honor can hardly mean that the heirs of the murdered Henry shall seek to bring the republic into court and prosecute a suit against it in these claims? The simple asking of these questions is their own answer. It is well known that the universal proceeding in the collection of these claims is through the executive department of the federal government.

Nor can I agree to the course which, in the closing part of the note, your honor indicates will be given to Mr. Henry’s claim, when you say that it has been submitted to the department of Hacienda, which will doubtless take it into consideration in the character of a credit against the national treasury. If it is meant by this that the claim for money which has been forced from Mr. Henry at the point of the bayonet, by military chiefs, without law or justice, and contrary to the Mexican constitution, is to partake of the character of, and be placed on a level with, the interior debt of the country, I must here protest against such a course, as I have heretofore done informally to the minister of finance in other cases. As that debt has no market value, and there is no early prospect of payment of either principal or interest of the same, my government cannot consent that the property of American citizens, taken in the manner as was that of Mr. Henry, shall be subject to such a virtual confiscation. In this, and in all similar cases, it will expect the Government of Mexico to make full reparation for all the losses and damages sustained by American citizens at the hands of its military authorities. The argument, often before made to me, that such a course would make the condition of foreigners in Mexico better than that of Mexican citizens, has no force with my government. It is enough for it to know that American citizens are treated with cruelty and outrage by military authorities, and in an arbitrary and illegal manner; that their money and property are forced from them under military duress. My government is not required in such cases to investigate whether the same injuries and wrongs are inflicted upon Mexican citizens. It would be a source of regret to know that the established and recognized Government of Mexico had not the power and the sense of justice to right the wrongs of its own citizens. But the Government of the United States would not, on this account, fail to protect its own citizens in Mexico, and require a reparation of the outrages and damages sustained by them at the hands of those who inflicted them, now the constituted authorities of Mexico.

I improve this occasion to renew to your honor the sentiments of my high consideration.

JOHN W. FOSTER.

No. 330. Mr. Foster to Mr. Evarts. [Document 359]

No. 330.
Mr. Foster to Mr. Evarts.

Legation Of The United States,
Mexico, November 4, 1878. No. 828.]

Sir: In my 809, of the 16th ultimo, I transmitted the correspondence between the Mexican foreign office and this legation in regard to the acts of Areola and his band in Texas.

The acting minister has taken exception to the reference in my note of October 14 (inclosure 4 in No. 809), in which I refer to the ready disposition of the Mexican Government to resort to technical defenses to excuse its failure to punish marauding Mexican citizens on the Rio Grande frontier. I inclose a translation of the minister’s note, in which it will be seen that he “defends the course of his government by the action of Mr. Secretary Fish in a note addressed to the Mexican legation in Washington, dated December 1, 1871.

I have replied to the minister’s note, showing the want of application of the circumstances referred to in Mr. Fish’s note to the present causes of complaint on the Rio Grande. I also add a brief recital of the conduct of the Mexican Government in the three cases where a disposition has been manifested by the local authorities to co-operate with the American troops in support of ray allegation.

Up to the present date no answer has been received from the foreign office to my note.

I am, &c.,

JOHN W. FOSTER.

[Inclosure 1 in No. 828.—Translation.]

Mr. Avila to Mr. Foster.

Department of Foreign Affairs,
Mexico, October 17, 1878.

Mr. Minister: Your excellency’s note of the 14th instant has been received in this department, in which you are pleased to make certain rectifications relative to what you had said before concerning an individual called Areola, who, it is asserted, is chief of a band of outlaws in the State of Coahuila. In the said note Your Excellency, after copying certain clauses from a letter addressed to you by General Ord, in order to remove, as you say, the doubt which you think you note concerning its exactness in the communication which I had the honor to address you on the 9th of the same month, in regard to this matter, informing your excellency of the measures which the Government of Mexico can adopt in the case and had already taken, acting within the sphere of its constitutional faculties, Your Excellency charges the said government with appealing to the defense of technicalities, or of strict legality, in order to excuse its failure to punish the acts of vandalism committed by Mexican maurauders on the Rio Grande frontier.

On informing your excellency, in my note of the 9th instant, that there was no evidence in this department of the complaint preferred against Areola, and against the authorities of the frontier for protecting this individual, I had no other object than to state the reason why measures in regard to the matter had not been adopted.

With respect to the charge which your excellency makes against the government of resorting to technical defenses to excuse its impotency, the best reply which I can give to your excellency is to request you to examine the copy inclosed of a note which the Hon. Hamilton Fish addressed to Señor Gomez del Palacio, chargé d’affaires of Mexico at that time, under date of December 1, 1871, relating to the demand for the trial of certain criminals. Your excellency will understand that for the same reason that the Secretary of State of the United States had to admit that American legislation provides that no one can be tried except within the judicial limits where he committed the crime of which he is accused; so also the Government of Mexico has to subject itself to its own legislation, which provides that crimes cannot be tried which are committed in foreign territory, except upon the petition of the injured party, as I had the honor to say to your excellency in my note of the 9th instant.

I improve this occasion, Mr. Minister, to renew to your excellency the assurances of my attentive consideration.

ELENTERIO AVILA.

His Excellency John W. Foster,
&c., &c., &c.

[Inclosure in Mr. Avila’s note.]

Mr. Fish to Mr. Palacio.

Department of State,
Washington, December 1, 1871.

Sir: This Department duly received your note of the 15th, referring to that part of that of the 3d ultimo in which you requested that certain persons, charged with the commission of murder in Lower California, whose extradition could not he demanded pursuant to the treaty on that subject, might be tried upon the charge according to the laws of this country.

In reply I have to inform you that it is a fundamental principle of the law of the United States that no person can be tried even for the commission of a crime or offense in this country, except in the neighborhood where the act charged may have been perpetrated. This will, of course, apply with peculiar force to crimes committed in a foreign jurisdiction. It is apprehended, therefore, that it would be as fruitless as inexpedient to prosecute the offenders whom you mention. It is undoubtedly desirable that the crime with which they are charged should never be committed with impunity. It seems, however, difficult to reconcile a prosecution against such persons even on the ground of expediency, with the principle of at least equal importance, that it is preferable for a criminal to escape punishment, to having the freedom and innonence of the many imperiled without cause, as they would be, should a different rule prevail.

I avail myself of this occasion to offer to you, sir, a renewed assurance of my high consideration.

HAMILTON FISH.

[Inclosure 2 in No. 828.]

Mr. Foster to Mr. Avila.

Legation of the United States,
Mexico, October 22, 1878.

Sir: Your honor’s note of the 17th instant was duly received, in which you acknowledge receipt of that Which I had the honor to address to the foreign office on the 14th instant, relating to the acts of one Areola, a Mexican citizen of the State of Coahuila.

The main object of my said note was to vindicate myself from inexact representations concerning this individual, which were implied, if not directly stated, in your honors note of the 9th instant. Omitting any recognition of the literal correctness of my representations, your honor devotes your reply to a portion of the closing sentence of my note of the 14th instant, in which I refer to the technical defenses resorted to by the Mexican Government to defend its failure to punish marauding Mexican citizens on the Rio Grande frontier. Your honor answers by inclosing a copy of a note written by the late Secretary of State of the United States to the Mexican legation in Washington in 1871, explaining the inability to punish offenses in the United States committed in Mexico.

In the case referred to, the Secretary of State only called the attention of the legation to a well-known fundamental principle of American law. But the state of affairs on the Rio Grande frontier does not present a parallel case. The main complaint of my government for years past has been, and now is, that Mexican territory is made the base of operations for armed bands of raiders to prey upon the people of Texas; that expeditions are there organized and raiding companies continually cross the frontier to murder American citizens and rob them of their property; and that they bring the stolen property over into Mexican territory and openly dispose of it in public market or private sale. These acts, committed on Mexican territory, constitute offenses punishable by the local law of all civilized nations. It is on account of the failure of the Mexican Government to inflict any punishment, so far as I am advised, in a single case in the course of a long series of years of disorder and plundering, that the Government of the United States complains, and why I was led to characterize as technical the defenses which your honor’s government has so often set up to excuse its neglect of duty towards a neighboring nation. The inquiry which I had the honor to propound in my note of the 4th instant on this subject was, “What means, if any, have been or will be taken to prevent such lawless measures?” My note plainly shows that what my government expected was that the Mexican side of the border should cease to be made the base of armed organization and operation by Mexican citizens into American territory and the receptacle of the property stolen in Texas.

So, also, while the cases as presented in the notes of Mr. Fish and of your honor are widely different, the opposite conduct of the two governments has been very marked. While a well-known principle of constitutional law prevented the punishment by American courts of offenses committed in Mexican territory, the authorities of the United States did not reward the criminals by appointing them to official positions where their opportunities for evil would be immensely increased, as I informed the minister of foreign affairs on the 22d of August last, was charged by General Ord as having been done in Arrcola’s case.

And in this connection it is appropriate to refer to the conduct observed by your honor’s government in cases wherever any Mexican official or citizen has manifested a disposition to co-operate with the American authorities to prevent or punish the raids from Mexican territory into Texas. I will cite, by way of illustration, three eases which have occurred during the administration of President Diaz: Early in 1877 certain Mexican citizens offered to act as guides to the American troops in pursuit of Mexican Indians who were escaping from a murderous raid into Texas. As soon as the governor of Coahuila heard of this friendly act he caused the guides to be arrested as traitors to the Mexican nation, and their execution, it is alleged, was only prevented by the prompt action of the American commander whom they aided.

In December last, while an American force was pursuing a Mexican band raiding in Texas, an officer of the Mexican army united his troops with said force and co-operated in the pursuit. As soon as that fact was known in this capitol, the government announced in the Diario Oficial that the trial of the Mexican officer had been ordered, and that the President was determined to make a severe example in his case, should he be found guilty.

I need hardly repeat the facts of the case of the alcalde of Las Vacas, who aided the American authorities in recovering property stolen in Texas and brought into Mexico, which has recently been the subject of correspondence. I will only repeat the words of your honor, in said case, that “such conduct if it is true, merits and will receive * * * the most explicit and severe reprobation from the government.”

With such repression and condemnation by the Mexican Government of the friendly co-operation of its own officials and citizens to prevent raiding on the Rio Grande frontier, it is not surprising that the outlaws are unpunished; and these facts justify my charge as to the failure of said government to punish the marauders.

I subscribe myself, with the highest consideration, your honor’s obedient servant,

JOHN W. FOSTER.

No. 331. Mr. Foster to Mr. Evarts. [Document 360]

No. 331.
Mr. Foster to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Mexico, November 22, 1878. (Received December 17.) No. 834.]

Sir: The Monitor Republicano, a newspaper of this city, published the following paragraph a few days ago: The Carbajal Bonds.—A telegram to the New York Herald asserts that the government of General Diaz has recognized the bonds of the Carbajal loan and agreed to pay the interest on them.

Will the Diario tell us what truth there may be in this?

In yesterday’s issue the Diario Oficial, quoting the above item, answered as follows: The Carbajal bonds, recognized since 1867, have had the same lot as the others, whose legitimacy the government of the republic has accepted, and have been paid at different times, according as the circumstances of |he treasury have permitted.

These statements, appearing in the official journal of the government, may have a tendency to mislead the holders of the bonds referred to, who are mainly citizens of the United States. The fact is that none of these bonds, either in principal or interest, have been paid according to their tenor since they were issued in 1865. In 1868 the Mexican Congress made an appropriation to enable the treasury department to purchase at auction or by negotiation any of its foreign bonds at the greatly depreciated price to which they had fallen, owing to the failure of the government for several years to pay the interest. Under this arrangement, a few of the Carbajal bonds were bought in by the government in 1868 and 1869 at 18¾ cents on the dollar of their face value. I have not been able to learn that since that date any portion of either the principal or interest of any of these bonds has been paid by the government, except in a single instance.

This exception was the case of a holder of a bond, who, having sought in vain in the United States to get some information in regard to its payment, came to this capital about two years ago, and presented his bond in person to the President of the republic. He became so persistent in his visits to the government building that the minister of the treasury found it convenient to make him a payment, which I was informed was barely sufficient to pay his traveling expenses and enable him to return to the United States.

My dispatch No. 802, of the 8th ultimo, contained full information in regard to the Carbajal bonds.

I am, &c.,

JOHN W. FOSTER.

No. 332. Mr. Foster to Mr. Evarts. [Document 361]

No. 332.
Mr. Foster to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Mexico, November 29, 1878. (Received December 17.) No. 838.]

Sir: The consul at Guaymas, Mr. Willard, has communicated to me the fact that the treasure express of Wells, Fargo & Co., had been recently repeatedly robbed in Arizona Territory by Mexican outlaws, who had taken refuge in the State of Sonora, Mexico, and that he had advised the governor of Sonora of these facts, and suggested to him the propriety of giving orders to the local authorities to co-operate with the agents of the company robbed, in order to secure their arrest and delivery to the proper authority for punishment. The object had in view by the consul was to secure the extradition of the criminals, although that is not expressly stated in his communication to the governor of Sonora.

Upon the receipt of the consul’s dispatch to the legation and accompanying papers, I sent a copy thereof to the foreign office, stating that it was done for its information, and added that I hoped the Mexican Government would see the necessity for adopting vigorous measures for the punishment of the criminals and the prevention of similar depredations in the future.

After sending my note to the foreign office, I received a second dispatch from the consul at Guaymas, with accompaniments, copies of which I now inclose; from which it appears that some of the criminals referred to have been arrested, but that the governor of Sonora states that, they being Mexican citizens, he has not the power to surrender them to the American authorities without express instructions from the federal Government of Mexico, and that the persons arrested will be held in custody until orders are received from the capital as to their disposition. The governor further says that all criminals, not Mexican citizens, upon proper proof will be delivered for extradition, as has already recently occurred in some cases; and that the pursuit and arrest of all outlaws from American territory taking refuge in Sonora shall be earnestly carried out.

Under date of the 25th instant, the acting minister of foreign affairs, in acknowledging receipt of my note, said that both the federal and state governments would earnestly endeavor to prevent that the criminals referred to should remain unpunished 5 but in that connection he alluded to the legal difficulties in the way of their punishment for crimes committed in foreign territory.

With respect to the extradition of Mexicans for crimes committed in Arizona, the minister states that the Mexican Government is disposed to concede it as soon as it may obtain a formal promise of reciprocity from the Government of the United States, and that to this end the Mexican minister in Washington had been instructed to ask for such a promise. He further refers to the proposition heretofore made by Mexico upon this point, and concludes by asking that I will urge upon you the importance of a declaration on the subject, in order that it may decide as to the extradition of the criminals in question now held in prison.

I answered the minister, thanking him for the assurances given that efforts would be made to prevent the criminals from remaining unpunished, which I hoped would not be without good results, and stating that I would call your attention in a special manner to the proposition contained in his note.

In response to the repeated complaints of our government that Mexican territory was made a safe place of refuge for criminals from the United States, the foreign office has proposed two remedies to the existing evil. One is contained in Mr. A Vila’s note, inclosed herewith, to wit, that each government will agree to extradite its own citizens. The other is embodied in the proposition first presented in Mr. Mata’s project of treaty of 1877, providing by federal legislation for the punishment of crimes committed in the territory of the other nation.

* * * * * * *

In the course of a correspondence recently exchanged with the foreign office, of which I hope to forward copies by this mail, I had occasion, in a note to Mr. Avila, to say that the disorders on the frontier can hardly be eradicated by the simple negotiation of new treaties; that the outlawry there has not originated so much from defective treaties as from the failure of the federal Government of Mexico to make its power felt and its orders respected in those regions; and that until it can overcome the difficulties arising from these causes, it would seem useless to discuss new treaties or agreements.

It is due, however, to the Mexican authorities adjoining the Arizona frontier to say that a better state of affairs, and a greater disposition to co-operate with the American officials, exist, than on the Rio Grande border; and in view of the growing spirit of outlawry which appears to have lately manifested itself there, and of the proposition now made by the Mexican Government for a reciprocal extradition of citizens guilty of crimes, it would appear desirable to take the condition of disorder in that region into careful consideration, with the object of agreeing upon some method whereby the frontier line should not be made a sure barrier against pursuing justice.

I am, &c.,

JOHN W. FOSTER.

[Inclosure 1 in No. 838.]

Mr. Foster to Mr. Avila.

Legation of the United States,
Mexico, November 21, 1878.

Sir: I inclose herewith, for the information of your honor’s government, a copy of a communication, with its accompaniments, from the consul of the United States at Guaymas, containing information of robberies recently committed by Mexican outlaws in Arizona, and that the criminals habitually take refuge with their plunder in Mexican territory, in the State of Sonora.

I trust your honor’s government will see the necessity of adopting vigorous measures for the punishment of the criminals and the prevention of similar depredations in the future.

With sentiments of the highest esteem, I am your honor’s obedient servant,

JOHN W. FOSTER.

[Inclosure 1 in Mr. Foster’s note to Mr. Avila.]

Mr. Willard to Mr. Foster.

Consulate of the United States of America at Guaymas, Mexico,
October 7, 1878.

Sir: I beg leave to herewith inclose, marked A, a copy of a letter which I have received from Mr. L. F. Rowell, assistant superintendent of Wells, Fargo & Co. banking express company), whose principal office is at San Francisco, Cal.; also, a copy of my communication to the governor of Sonora, accompanied by a copy of said letter, calling attention to the facts therein mentioned of the robberies of the treasure express of said company by Mexicans, the robbers taking refuge in Sonora.

The Mexican Government, I am aware, has opposed the extradition of its own citizens for crimes committed outside of its own territory; but in the cases referred to by Mr. Rowell, the robbers are confirmed criminals, and positive proof can be furnished as to their guilt and complicity in said robberies.

The governor of Sonora, I am satisfied, has every disposition to surrender criminals of this class, irrespective of nationality, but has informed me on former occasions that he has not the power to act without orders or instructions from Mexico.

As this question is one that may in the future lead to serious complications along the Arizona and Sonora frontier if not settled, and particularly is one that interests our citizens in Arizona, for this reason I respectfully ask that you call the attention of the Mexican Government to the facts contained in the referred-to inclosure; so that, if possible, power or instructions maybe given to the governor of Sonora to surrender criminals of the class referred to. I am fearful, if some measures are not taken to check Mexicans who commit crimes in Arizona from taking refuge in Sonora, border troubles and disorders will follow, injurious alike to the citizens of both sides of the boundary line.

I am, &c.,

A. WILLARD, Consul.

[Inclosure A in Mr. Willard’s dispatch of October 7.]

Mr. Rowell to Mr. Willard.

Wells, Fargo & Co. Exchange, Banking, and Express,
San Francisco, Cal., September 24, 1878.

Dear Sir: Our express between Yuma and Tucson has been robbed by Mexicans three times in the past six weeks; in each case they have taken a bee-line for Sonora. By employing Indian trailers, our special officers, R. A. Paul and J. W. Evans, have followed them to Altar and other towns in Sonora, but the authorities refuse to surrender them. Paul has one under arrest in Altar and is endeavoring to induce the Mexican authorities to hold him until proper papers can be procured from the government of Arizona, but it is extremely doubtful if they will do so. Will you please try and induce the governor of Sonora to issue the necessary order to the prefects on the border to deliver up these marauders to our officers on a proper showing being made of their guilt? We will be obliged to withdraw our express from Southern Arizona unless we can put a stop to the frequent robberies by these brigands from a sister republic.

Please give this matter immediate attention and communicate by overland mail with our agent at Tucson, Mr. Claude Anderson. Mr. Valentine is now in New York (general superintendent).

Yours, &c.,

L. F. ROWELL.

We have lost nearly $16,000 in the past six weeks by the above-mentioned robberies.—L. F. R.

[Inclosure B in Mr. Willard’s dispatch of October 7.]

Mr. Willard to General Mariscal.

Consulate of the United States of America at Guaymas, Mexico,
October 6, 1878.

Sir: I have the honor to herewith inclose a translation (from English into Spanish) of a communication received by me from Mr. L. F. Rowell, assistant superintendent of Wells, Fargo & Co., of San Francisco, Cal.

By it you will learn of the occurrences which have taken place in the southern part of Arizona, with great detriment to the interests of said American company, and of the necessity which exists of giving some orders with the object of having a cessation or an end made to the insecurity to which said express line is exposed.

As the marauders referred to (in the inclosed translation), after having committed their robberies in American territory, take refuge in the frontier districts of the north of Sonora, it would be, perhaps, fit and proper that the State government under your charge would give the necessary orders, so that the authorities in the referred to districts would co-operate with the special agents of the company to apprehend the criminals and deliver them, after full and ample proofs of their guilt are shown, so that they can be tried according to law.

An order of this character will be favorable to both countries, and will save us from these brigands that are causing injury and damage on both sides of the line.

I fully comprehend that in relation to this business the government of the State is in a delicate position, but I hope you will study the situation with the calmness and care which the case requires, and give such orders as will be best for the interests of both countries so as to avoid complications which might originate from this source, and which has happened on the Rio Grande.

Accept, governor, the considerations of esteem with which I am at all times,

A. WILLARD.

[Inclosure 2 in No. 838.]

Mr. Willard to Mr. Foster.

Consulte of the United States of America at Guaymas, Mexico,
October 18, 1878.

Sir: Referring to my dispatch of the 7th instant, I now have the honor to inclose yon, marked A, the reply of General V. Mariscal, governor of Sonora, to my communication addressed to him oi the 6th instant regarding the robberies committed on the treasure express of Wells, Fargo & Co., in Southern Arizona, the robbers taking refuge in Sonora.

In a private letter which I have received from Governor Mariscal, he informs me that he has written to the governor of Arizona, suggesting that the extradition of the Mexican criminals referred to in his communication be asked for direct from the Mexican Government. He also says that he has solicited from the general government the power to surrender to the American authorities these criminals (Mexicans) that may be apprehended in the future, when positive proofs of their criminality are shown.

I am, &c.,

A. WILLARD.

[Inclosure A in Mr. Willard’s dispatch of October 18.]

Mr. Mariscal to Mr. Willard.

[Copy of translation from Spanish into English.]

(seal.) mexican republic—government of the state of sonora.

I have the honor of receiving your communication, date of the 6th instant, in which you inclose me a translation of the note directed to you by Mr. L. F. Rowell, assistant superintendent of the Exchange, Banking, and Express Company of Wells, Fargo & Co., of California, United States, in relation to the robberies which have been committed in the south of Arizona, upon the express line of said company, to their great detriment and loss, and the necessity which exists of some measures’ or orders, with the object of having a cessation made to the risks which the said company are exposed; for the reason that the marauders, which are referred to in said inclosed note, after having committed robberies in Arizona, take refuge in the border districts of Sonora.

In answer, I am pleased to say that immediately on receipt of those occurrences, which I received from the prefect of Altar, and of the requisitions which were presented from the authorities of Arizona, I had the same sent to all of the prefects of the State, ordering a prompt prosecution and apprehension of the criminals as fugitives from justice from the United States, who had taken refuge in Sonora.

In consequence of said orders, as you will see by the copies of the demands which accompany this, a vigorous prosecution has been made which has resulted in the apprehension, in the district of Altar, of one Joaquin Franco, who is mentioned as one of the robbers of the stage between Tucson and Fort Yuma, and in Magdalena of two others. I have ordered said persons to be kept under secure arrest, but not to deliver them, they being Mexican citizens; I not having power to do so under the sixth article of the treaty of extradition between the United States and Mexico. This can only be done by an order from the general government of Mexico, to whom I have addressed myself, giving full information of this business and asking for instructions. In the mean while a persistent prosecution of this class of criminals is being made throughout the State, as you will see by the report which I inclose you from different prefects. You will also see that all criminals arrested, not Mexicans, have been immediately placed at the disposal of the American authorities or their agents.

Acknowledging fully the principles of morality and of justice, I am at all times ready and willing, to the extent of my authority, to curtail the evils to which the line of express in Southern Arizona is exposed, and have given a full account of the same to the general government, suggesting the necessity of those means which the case requires for the interests of both countries.

I renew to you, Mr. Consul, my appreciation and attentive consideration.

Liberty in the constitution.

Ures, October 11, 1878.
V. MARISCAL.

[Inclosure B in Mr. Willard’s dispatch of October 18.—Translation.]

mexican republic—government of the state of sonora.

The governor has information that on the 7th instant, and under the charge of Ensign José M. Michelena and twelve federal soldiers, the criminal Oliver Boyd was sent to the frontier point called “La Chosia,” in order that from that place the extradition which the governor of Arizona has requested may take place.

I have orders from the governor to ask if the expenses of prison and extradition of Boyd have been paid by the authorities of Arizona.

Liberty in the constitution.

Ures, October 11, 1878.
JESUS QUEJADA,
Secretary.

To the Prefect of the District of Arispe.

[Inclosure C in Mr. Willard’s dispatch of October 18.—Translation.]

prefecture of the district of magdalena.

The prisoners Gregorio Arce and Florentino Sains, accused of having murdered two American citizens near the Sierra de Guachuca, remain in prison awaiting further orders—informing you at the same time that no advice of this occurrence was given by me to the governor of Arizona, because he did not make any official request for their extradition, and I am only waiting for the judgment that will be given in consequence of the judicial investigation made by the judge of the first instance, a copy of which was forwarded to you by last mail.

Liberty in the constitution.

Magdalena, October 7, 1878.
JUAN E. DURAN.

To the Secretary of State, Ures.

Note.—The persons are held in custody until orders come from Mexico. The prisoners are Mexicans and are of bad character.

[Inclosure D in Mr. Williard’s dispatch of October 18.—Translation.]

state of sonora, prefecture of the district of montezuma.

Annexed to the official order of the 26th ultimo I received the information and description of the criminals, who, after having committed in Arizona depredations which said information gives, they have taken refuge in Sonora.

In attention to so important an affair, the said description was sent to all of the authorities of this district, ordering its prompt fulfillment; notwithstanding having information, not official hut from persons worthy of credit, that three individuals proceeding from Arizona had passed Montezuma, and after them a sheriff with a warrant, which notice was immediately sent by express to Tepache, where the criminals were. The authorities ordered their arrest, but before any action was taken they fired at the authorities, obliging them to return the fire. The result of this was the wounding of one of the criminals, the other two making their escape, one of them wounded in one arm. They were pursued a short distance, but having secured a favorable position farther prosecution was impossible—they (the criminals) being well-armed, while the pursuers had only three guns fit for use.

The horses and other articles taken from the criminals were delivered to the sheriff by order of the judge of first instance. All of which I will soon report officially to the governor of the State. I expect to receive orders as to the prisoner, his disposal, when he has recovered from his wound.

Liberty in the constitution.

Granados, October 4, 1878.
V. DURAZA.

To the Secretary of State, Ures.

[Inclosure E in Mr. Willard’s dispatch, of October 18.—Translation.]

prefecture of the district of magdalena.

Manuel Moreno, with ten men commissioned by this office, the 27th ultimo, to pursue the criminals whom the prefect of Altar informed me had come into this district, returned on the 1st instant without having been able to arrest them, and only was informed that they had taken the direction of the Sonora River, where it is believed they can be found. All of which I have the honor to inform you in answer to your note of the 26th ultimo.

Liberty in the constitution.

Magdalena, October 7, 1878.
JUAN E. DURAN.

To the Secretary of State, Ures.

[Inclosure 3 in No. 838.—Translation.]

Mr. Avila to Mr. Foster.

Department of Foreign Affairs,
Mexico, November 25, 1878.

Mr. Minister: The President being informed by your excellency’s note of the 21st instant, with its inclosures, relative to recent cases of robbery committed in Arizona, the authors of which have sought refuge in the State of Sonora, has instructed me to say to your excellency in reply, that the federal government and the government of that State will earnestly endeavor, in their respective spheres of action, to prevent that the criminals referred to shall remain unpunished, and that, it not being possible to try them or impose upon them condign punishment within the country for crimes committed in foreign territory, unless it be demanded in a legal way, and with the other concurring circumstances required by article 186 of the penal code of the district in force in various States for crimes of the common order, and in force in all the republic for those of the federal order, the government has charged the authorities of Sonora to endeavor to make this provision known to the authorities of the Territory of Arizona, to the end that the persons directly interested in such trials may institute them in conformity with said provision.

With respect to the extradition of Mexicans who, being authors of crimes committed in Arizona, take refuge in the state of Sonora, the federal government, as your excellency will see in the inclosed copies, is disposed to concede it as soon as it may obtain a formal promise of reciprocity on the part of that of the United States, instructions having been given to the minister plenipotentiary of Mexico in Washington to ask it.

Your excellency will remember that the Mexican Government in the project of treaty which it proposed to that of the United States for the adjustment of the difficulties of the frontier, included the stipulation for the reciprocal delivery of citizens—fugitives from justice. Experience is demonstrating how important it is that such a measure should be adopted upon the basis of reciprocity.

The request of a Mexican frontier authority has recently reached this department to the end that the extradition of two American citizens of Texas should he asked for, who were surprised in the act of stealing horses, and who, on seeing their pursuers, crossed to American territory. But the government has thought proper to refrain asking such extradition, because it doubts whether its demand would be complied with.

If your excellency should think proper, you will be pleased to impress upon your government the importance of the declaration which that of Mexico expects from it upon this point, in order that it may decide with respect to the extradition of various individuals held at present in prison.

With protestations of high consideration, I am your excellency’s obedient servant,

ELENTERIO AVILA.

[Inclosure 1 in Mr. Avila’s note.]

mexican republic—government of the state of sonora.

The government under my charge says to the Mexican consul in Arizona, United States, on this date, as follows:

“The prefect of the district of Arizpe, under date of the 14th instant, informs the department of this government that he has arrested in that district Nestor Estrada, the author of various crimes committed in Arizona. The government under my charge being interested in the punishment of the criminals who infest our frontiers between this State and that Territory, I have to-day decided that the said Estrada shall remain in safe custody to the end that if the superior political authority of that Territory desires the extradition of the said criminal it may be asked of the supreme government of the republic. With this in view, I hope that the consulate under your worthy charge will be pleased to report the arrest of the criminal to the governor of Arizona for such action as he may think fit to take, with the understanding that if he should not care to ask the extradition in the manner indicated you will be pleased to opportunely communicate it to me for my information. There are at present in the prisons of the State five criminals who have come to Sonora, fleeing from American justice which pursued them for highly criminal acts, and which deserve to be condignly punished. The government under my charge, upon arresting them in attention to justice and the demands of those authorities, has had the firmest disposition to effect their extradition; but as the parties arrested have proved to be Mexican citizens, the government has had to conform to the treaty of extradition existing between the two countries, which does not oblige either of the parties to extradite its own citizens, and for this reason the General Government of Mexico has been consulted and its decision asked with respect to the extradition of the said criminals, they being detained in the mean time with complete security. You may assure the governor of that Territory that, on the part of my government, no measures will be neglected for satisfying justice and the desires of the American authorities, and ail that which may tend to the preservation of the friendship and good relations which have happily existed in this region between Mexico and the United States, it being always understood that the dignity and honor of our country shall not be compromised thereby.

“I repeat to you on this occasion the consideration of my esteem.”

Which I have the honor to communicate for the information of the President of the republic and other ends.

Liberty in the constitution.

Ures, October 18, 1878.
VICENTE MARISCAL.

J. Quijada, Secretary.

The Secretary of Foreign Affairs, Mexico.

[Inclosure 2 in Mr. Avila’s note.]

Mr. Avila to the Governor of Sonora.

mexican republic—department of foreign affairs—section of america.

Your communication of the 18th ultimo has been received in this department, with which you are pleased to inclose that which you addressed to the consul of the republic in Arizona with regard to the extradition of Nestor Estrada, and to the existence in the prisons of your State of five other criminals, whose extradition can only be accorded by this government in view of the fact that the prisoners appear to be Mexicans.

The President, whom I informed of said communication, has learned with satisfaction of all its contents, due to the earnest wish felt by your government that the criminals referred to shall not go unpunished, and the desire which you express to attend to the solicitations of the American authorities, provided always that the dignity and honor of our country are not compromised thereby. Although the President is animated by the same spirit, he thinks, nevertheless, that it is not decorous to grant the extradition of Mexican citizens so long as a formal promise of reciprocity is not obtained from the Government of the United States, and to this end instructions have been given to our minister in Washington to ask it.

You will be pleased in the mean time to transmit to this department the requisitions for extradition now made or which may be made by the proper authorities of Arizona, and you will continue with earnestness to cause the arrest of all criminals who may take refuge in any part of your State proceeding from that Territory, causing your order to be enforced that on no pretext shall the criminals already arrested be set at liberty, or those who may be arrested in the future, until the proper information regarding extradition is transmitted to you through this department.

Liberty in the constitution.

Mexico, November 23, 1878.
ELENTERIO AVILA.

[Inclosure 4 in No. 838.]

Mr. Foster to Mr. Avila.

Legation of the United States,
Mexico, November 28, 1878.

Sir: I have to acknowledge the receipt of your honor’s note of the 25th instant, in reply to the one addressed by me to you on the 21st instant, giving information of Mexican criminals, who, having committed robberies in Arizona, had fled to Sonora for refuge.

I tender my thanks for the assurance given that the Federal and State governments of Mexico will endeavor to prevent these criminals from remaining unpunished, and I hope their efforts in that direction may not be without good results.

I will communicate a copy of your honor’s note to the Department of State at Washington, and call its attention in a special manner to the proposition contained therein for a reciprocal extradition by each nation of its citizens who have committed crimes in the territory of the other.

With the renewed assurances of my most distinguished consideration, I remain your honor’s obedient servant,

JOHN W. FOSTER.

No. 333. Mr. Foster to Mr. Evarts. [Document 362]

No. 333.
Mr. Foster to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Mexico, December 4, 1878. (Received December 17.) No. 845.]

Sir: On the 18th ultimo I received a letter from one Emil Boig, who claims to be an American citizen, stating that he had been seized at Queretaro by force, and placed in the Mexican army, and that he had been brought to this city with the regiment to which he was attached, where he was still held in military service contrary to his will. His papers of citizenship, he stated, had been taken from him when impressed; but as respectable American citizens interposed with me in his behalf, and his story bore internal evidence of genuineness, I thought it justified me in asking the Mexican Government to cause inquiry to be made. I was confirmed in this decision by the notices which were frequently appearing in the newspapers to the effect that the impressment for the army was being carried on in the interior of the republic; two of which notices I inclose.

I accordingly addressed the foreign office, giving Boig’s statement and a copy of his letter, and asked that inquiry be made as to its truth, expressing confidence that, if found correct, the government would order Ms release.

Under date of the 19th ultimo, the acting minister of foreign affairs stated to me that he had reported the case to the department of war, and that, although Boig could not be recognized in his character as a citizen of the United States, because his name did not appear in the register of matriculation in the foreign office, still, if the facts, as stated, appeared true, attention would be given to my recommendation.

In view of the position assumed by the minister that this legation could not claim citizenship for any American who was not registered in the Mexican foreign office, in acknowledging receipt of his note, I protested against such an assumption, while I thanked him for the consideration given to my intervention. I reminded him that I had heretofore notified the foreign office that the Mexican Government could not by any domestic legislation or regulations denationalize American citizens who may be traveling or resident in the country. I called attention to the fact that Boig had recently arrived, and was passing through the country, when he was impressed into the army, and that if the minister’s position was to be maintained, all Americans who come to Mexico on business or pleasure are subject to be seized and thrown into the army, notwithstanding their express exemption therefrom by treaty stipulation.

The minister replied on the 27th ultimo that the department of war had given orders for Boig’s discharge from the military service. He then proceeds to deny that Mexican legislation deprives foreigners of their respective nationalities, but only requires them to make themselves known to the foreign office, in order that the authorities may recognize them as such. He also states that if an American does not thus make himself known, he will not on that account be deprived of any of his natural and civil rights, since the law provides that all foreigners not matriculated may avail themselves of their rights before the courts and elsewhere, enjoying the same rights as the other inhabitants of the republic, and in such case as the present an appeal could be made to the courts for protection.

Replying on the 30th ultimo, I expressed to the minister my gratincation at Boig’s release, but could not avoid reference to the untenable position assumed by him in his second note, to the effect that Americans not matriculated were not deprived of their rights on that account, as, though they could not allege their nationality, they could appeal to the courts for protection the same as Mexican citizens. I called his attention to the fact that Mexican cilizens were on proper occasion subject to compulsory military service, while the treaty of 1831 expressly exempts American citizens from such service in Mexico. If an American citizen, as in the case in question, traveling through the country without opportunity to be matriculated, is seized and placed in the Mexican army, he cannot appeal to the protection of the treaty of 1831, but must receive the same treatment by the authorities and courts as Mexican citizens. The latter are subject to compulsory military service. Hence, for all purposes of his liberty and national rights an American citizen so circumstanced is denationalized by Mexican law and regulations.

As up to date I have received nothing further from the minister on the subject, the discussion may probably be considered as closed. While the main object of my intervention, the release of Boig, has been accomplished, it has afforded the Mexican government an opportunity to assume a position in regard to American citizenship, which I think you will not be willing to recognize or acquiesce in.

In previous correspondence with the Mexican foreign office, I have shown the unwarrantable results of the Mexican matriculation law and regulations when pressed, as that office seems disposed to do, to their extreme application. But the present case illustrates more fully than any that have yet arisen their glaring inconsistencies. If Mr. Avila is correct in his assumptions, any American traveler may be seized and placed in the Mexican army immediately after he has crossed the frontier and before he has had an opportunity to matriculate, and neither our government nor this legation can plead, his American citizenship to secure his exemption from military service under the treaty of 1831.

* * * * * * *

I have always encouraged American citizens permanently located in this country to observe the law and become matriculated; but, on the other hand, I have always contended that failure to matriculate did not strip such citizens of their nationality, and that in all cases where our government or this legation thought proper to intervene in behalf of American citizens the Mexican Government was bound to recognize the claim to citizenship thus made in official form.

* * * * * * *

JOHN W. FOSTER.

[Inclosure 1 in No. 845.—Translation.]
[From the Patria of November 19, 1878.]

Yesterday, at the hour when we were writing our daily, a body of about 80 men, tied one to the other and conducted by several guards, passed through our street. The public said that they were volunteer soldiers.

Will the Diario have the kindness to tell us the cause of this impressment to which those galley slaves were going, and why they were going?

[From the Monitor Republicano of November 19, 1878.—Translation.]

continuation of conscriptions.

Yesterday a tied body of volunteers entered the capital in open daylight, proceeding, as we are told, from Guanajuato. We suppose it is the quota contributed by that state for the formation of the army. We are going to ascertain if these individuals have all presented themselves voluntarily to serve in the army, which we much doubt, and, on the contrary, we will give them some advice. In the mean time, we would wish that the Diario Oficial would tell us if near forty thousand men under arms are not sufficient for the executive, and whether it is proposed to increase the army?

[Inclosure 2 in No. 845.]

Mr. Foster to Mr. Avila.

Legation of the United States,
Mexico, November 18, 1878.

Sir: I inclose to your honor herewith a copy of a letter from one Emilio Boig, who claims to be an American citizen, representing that three months ago he was taken by force at Queretaro and impressed in the army, in which he is now held in this city contrary to his will.

As he states that the papers establishing his citizenship were taken from him, I have no other means at hand of verifying his claim to the protection of this legation than his verbal statements; but his narrative bears such internal evidence of genuineness as to justify me in asking that your honor’s government will cause an investigation of his case to he made, not doubting that should it appear that he has been involuntarily placed in the army, the said government will order his release.

I embrace this opportunity to reassure your honor of my high consideration.

JOHN W. FOSTER.

[Inclosure in Mr. Foster’s note.]

Mr. Boig to Mr. Foster.

Mexico, November 18, 1878.

Sir: I would respectfully ask you to release me from the position I’m in. My name is Emilio Boig; was born in Russia; emigrated to the United States in 1871; and was naturalized in Virginia City, Nev. In 1871 taking out my first papers, and five years later my full papers.

Three months ago I was taken by force in Queretaro and put into the army. My citizen papers were taken from me at that time, and the following day I was sent to this city. Fm now a private soldier in the fifth regiment of infantry, second company, Capt. Manuel N. Oropega, Col. José del Valle, commanding.

I beg of you to procure my release from the service, as I suffer for the want of subsistence and only serve from compulsion.

I have, &c.,

EMILIO BOIG.

[Inclosure 3 in No. 845—Translation.]

Mr. Avila to Mr. Foster.

Department of Foreign Affairs,
Mexico, November 19, 1878.

Mr. Minister: With your excellency’s note of yesterday was received, in this department, the copy of the letter addressed to you by an individual named Emilio Boig, in which he states that he has been enlisted into the military service in Queretaro against his will.

In reply, I have the honor to say to your excellency that information was at once asked of the department of war respecting the facts stated by Boig, and which, if they prove true, although this department cannot recognize that individual in the character of a citizen of the United States, inasmuch as he is not recorded in the register of matriculation, it will cause the recommendation made by your excellency in the note to which I reply to be attended to.

It is pleasant for me to improve this occasion to renew to your excellency my protestations of attentive and distinguished consideration;

ELENTERIO AVILA.

[Inclosure 4 in No. 845.]

Mr. Foster to Mr. Avila.

Legation of the United States,
Mexico, November 23, 1878.

Sir: I am to-day in receipt of your honor’s note of the 19th instant, in which acknowledging receipt of my note of the 18th instant, relating to the forcible impressment into the Mexican army of Emilio Boig, who claims to be a citizen of the United States, you state that information was at once asked from the war department. Your honor further states that your department cannot recognize in said Boig the character of an American citizen, for the reason that his name does not appear in its register of matriculation; but notwithstanding this fact, you will give attention to the recommendation contained in my note.

I have to thank your honor for the prompt attention given to my note in asking information of the war department, and for the personal consideration extended to me; and I hope that if, upon investigation, the facts prove as stated in the letter accompanying my note, the said Boig may be released from impressed service without delay.

It is my duty, however, without loss of time, to enter my protest against the position assumed by your honor, that said Boig is not entitled to be recognized as a citizen of the United States because he is not inscribed in the register of matriculation of the foreign office. I have heretofore notified the department of foreign affairs, and now desire to repeat, in an earnest manner, that the Mexican Government cannot by any domestic legislation or regulations denationalize American citizens who may be traveling or resident in the country, and who have committed no act to forfeit said citizenship. In the present case, Boig states that he had recently arrived and was passing through the country when he was seized and impressed into the army. If your honor’s position is to he maintained, all American citizens who come to Mexico on business or pleasure are subject to be seized and thrown into the federal army, notwithstanding their express exemption therefrom by treaty stipulations; and neither they nor their government nor its diplomatic representative can plead their American citizenship if they do not happen to be registered in the Mexican foreign office.

The only claim which Boig has to the interposition of this legation is his citizenship; and my action in asking his release from the army was based solely upon that claim; and however highly I esteem the personal consideration which may be extended to me by your honor’s government, that ought not to influence its action if Boig is not held to be a citizen of the United States, for upon that ground alone I have the right to, and do I, ask his discharge from the army.

I improve this occasion to reassure your honor of my marked consideration.

JOHN W. FOSTER.

[Inclosure 5 in No. 845.—Translation.]

Mr. Avila to Mr. Foster.

Department of Foreign Affairs,
Mexico, November 27, 1878.

Mr. Minister: I have the honor to say to your excellency, referring to your note of the 23d instant, that the department of war informs me, under date of yesterday, that it has given orders to the effect that Emilio Boig should be discharged from the military service,

It would be satisfactory for the government if this resolution should entirely satisfy your excellency’s desires; but I note that this department, being unable to recognize the individual’ referred to in the character of a foreigner, inasmuch as he is not inscribed in the register of matriculation, your excellency has thought it your duty to protest against the claim which you attribute to the Mexican Government to denaturalize, by means of laws or regulations of the country, citizens of the United States traveling or resident in it; your excellency going so far as to express, in this connection, the fear that such citizens may be arrested and obliged to serve in the federal army if they do not possess the certificate of matriculation, without such citizenship being able to be alleged by them nor by their government, or its diplomatic representative; and notwithstanding the express stipulation of the treaty which exempts them; from that service.

I should, on my part, state to your excellency that the legislation of Mexico does not deprive foreigners of their respective nationalities, but that it only and exclusively requires of them that they make themselves known to this department, presenting the proofs which accredit them, in order that the government and all the authorities of the country may recognize such foreigners, and that the latter may benefit by their rights as such.

The said legislation adds no requisite to those established in each country for the acquisition of nationality.

Thus, then a person who may be a citizen of the United States in accordance with the laws of the same will be recognized as such in Mexico by his simply proving that, in conformity with those laws, he is a citizen of the United States.

On the other hand, if he does not make himself known in this character, he will not for this reason be deprived of the exercise of all of his natural and civil rights, since article 1st of the law of December 6, 1866, has very explicitly declared that foreigners who may come to the republic or reside in it, although they may not have inscribed themselves in the register of matriculation for foreigners, nor have the proper certificate, may avail themselves of their rights before the courts or elsewhere, execute writings and other public instruments, and appear before any authority or office, enjoying the same rights as the other inhabitants of the republic, in conformity with the laws of the same.

In order to put in force the special rights of a foreigner, the interested parties have simply to obtain certificates of matriculation; and in the case which your excellency supposes, and which is very rare, in which a citizen of the United States may be obliged to serve in the army, it would not be necessary for such person to appeal to his right as a foreigner, as it would be sufficient for him to resort to the competent authority and solicit protection for the violation of individual guarantees, which appeal is always successful in cases of this nature.

If, then, in the case of Boig, attention was paid to the complaint through this department, it has been solely from the consideration which the government takes pleasure in showing to the recommendation of your excellency, and not because the interested party was recognized as a foreigner, as this is prohibited by article 7 of the law of May 16, 1861, to which, as a public functionary, I should subject myself, having also the conviction that it does not in any manner whatever impair the rights which may pertain to citizens of the United States.

The president being desirous that the latter as well as the other foreigners resident in Mexico, may not suffer any injury from ignorance or oversight of the laws relative to matriculation, has ordered them to be published anew.

It is pleasant for me to reiterate to your excellency the protestations of my high consideration.

ELENTERIO AVILA.

[Inclosure 6 in No. 845.]

Mr. Foster to Mr. Avila.

Legation of the United States,
Mexico, November 30, 1878.

Sir: I have been gratified to be informed by your honor’s note of the 27th instant that the department of war had given orders for the discharge of Emilio Boig from the military service into which he had been impressed. Since that date the individual has reported to me in person that said order has been carried into effect.

I have no disposition to continue the discussion of the question raised by your honor in regard to matriculation, further than to notice one point made in the note of the 27th instant. Your honor states that while an American citizen in Mexico cannot be recognized in that character unless he is inscribed in the register of matriculation in the foreign office, still he is not on that account deprived of his natural and civil rights, for the maintenance of which he can appeal to the courts and other authorities, enjoying the same rights in this respect as Mexican citizens.

But your honor seems to forget that Mexican citizens are, on proper occasion, subject to compulsory military service by their own government, while the treaty of 1831 expressly exempts American citizens from such service in Mexico. If, as in the present case, an American recently arrived, traveling from the frontier towards the capital, and before he has any fixed residence of even a temporary character, and hence no opportunity to become matriculated, is seized and placed in the Mexican army by force, he cannot obtain the protection of the treaty of 1831, but is to receive the same treatment from the courts and authorities as Mexican citizens. Mexican citizens are subjected to forced military service. Hence, for all the purposes of his liberty and national rights, an American citizen, circumstanced as above, is denationalized by the operation of the laws and regulations of the Mexican Government relating to matriculation. It was against such an unwarrantable claim that I was forced to enter my protest.

Renewing my expression of gratification at Boig’s release, I remain, with the highest respect, your honor’s obedient servant,

JOHN W. FOSTER.

No. 334. Mr. Foster to Mr. Evarts. [Document 363]

No. 334.
Mr. Foster to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Mexico, December 9, 1878. (Received January 2, 1879.) No. 849.]

Sir: Owing to the poverty of the various state treasuries, and the disorders which exist in many of them, causing more than the ordinary expenses of government, in several states extraordinary contributions or taxes have been levied, which are weighing heavily upon all industries and commerce, and in some cases have caused open resistance on the part of the people. In the state of Jalisco the governor, by virtue of his “ample faculties,” decreed an extraordinary contribution or tax last month, the resistance to which caused a riot in Guadalajara, the capital of the state, which resulted in the death of a number of persons, and but for the interference of the federal army bid fair to result in the overthrow of the State government.

There are a number of American citizens resident in that state engaged in commerce, manufacturing, and other industries. They appealed to me, asking the intervention of this legation with the Federal Government of Mexico against the tax as unconstitutional and oppressive. I inclose herewith a copy of a letter from one of the leading American citizens resident in Guadalajara, Mr. F. A. Newton, to which is attached a translation of the decree levying the tax.

I also inclose a copy of the telegraphic answer I sent to Mr. Newton, in which I stated that the tax was clearly unconstitutional, but, being general and levied equally, I would not feel authorized to intervene without instructions from Washington; and recommended resort to the Mexican courts for protection.

Within a few days thereafter I received a similar letter from an American citizen resident in San Luis Potosi, informing me of an extraordinary contribution in that state and asking my intervention. To this letter I felt compelled to give the same answer.

The unconstitutionality of the tax levy in the state of Jalisco, a copy of which decree I inclose, consists in the fact that it is imposed by the simple order of the governor, who claims the power to do so by virtue of the “ample faculties” with which he has been invested by the state legislature. But the federal supreme court decreed last year in the Goribar case, a copy of which I sent to the Department with my No. 595, of September 4 (inclosure 5, No. 2), that no other body or authority but the legislative power of the government can levy taxes, and that this latter power cannot delegate or transfer this faculty to any other power or authority, even in time of war.

Up to the present I have not been able to obtain from the Mexican Government any recognition of the right of American citizens to exemption from forced loans, levied and collected by military chiefs with the most arbitrary disregard of person and property, without the pretext of authority which the governors claim to have received from the legislatures, and in cases where there is no claim of a general or equal levy. It would, therefore, be a fruitless and unwelcome task for me to intervene in such cases as those cited herein until the claim of exemption of American citizens from forced loans was made valid and enforced. It will be noticed by the correspondence sent by this mail (see dispatch No. 850) that the Mexican Government reiterates in the most explicit terms the right of the executive power, even through its subordinate military chiefs, to levy and collect forced loans against American residents in Mexico. Before the recognition it was not so stout in the maintenance of this power, and virtually recognized the impropriety of its enforcement by repaying to a few American claimants the forced loans which had been levied upon them, and by interposing with State authorities; to prevent their enforcement against American citizens. But since the recognition of the Diaz government by that of the United States, not a single claim of this character has been paid, notwithstanding a number of Americans have been in this city urging their payment. I confess I was not prepared to expect such a course, as I supposed recognition would facilitate their settlement.

In view of the present phase of the question and of our relations, and in the absence of instructions from the Department of State, I did not feel authorized to protest against the tax decree referred to herein, especially as it had some of the forms of law and was a general and uniform tax, although clearly illegal, and I confined myself to recommending the American citizens in question to resort to the courts for protection. Their answer in such cases, however, is that the courts are under the control of the authorities who levy the taxes, and that no injunction or “amparo” can be obtained until after the tax decree is enforced by the collection of the taxes, if not by payment thereof, then by embargo, confiscation, and sale of property, as these tax proceedings are violent and speedy.

If the court gives a judgment in favor of the complainant, which is by no means certain, it is given after long delay and heavy expense of litigation, and after property to a large amount has been seized and sold for the taxes: And the judgment for damages when rendered is worthless, as it can never be collected in Mexico on execution against the government treasury or the individual officials. Numerous instances of this kind could be cited, but the most recent is that in the case of Mr. Blumenkron (see legation dispatch No. 844, of December 3), which is a parallel case to those presented in the present dispatch. When the decree was issued and his property seized, he applied to me, and I told him he must first exhaust his remedies in the courts. This he did, and after long litigation and expense secured the decisions of the courts in his favor and against the legality of the tax. He has sought in vain to make effective the judgment of the courts for the heavy loss sustained in the embargo and sale of a large amount of property to pay a small tax levy. He has applied to both State and Federal Governments in vain. Both the State treasury and the officials who levied and collected the tax are bankrupt. The Federal Government denies any responsibility, notwithstanding the governor in levying the tax acted under the military authority of the Federal Executive, the revolution being in progress. And such is the usual result of resort to the courts for redress against the illegal acts of the authorities.

In view of the general poverty of the State and national treasuries, and of the unsettled condition of the country, these extraordinary contributions may be expected to have frequent occurrence. It, therefore, presents to the department a question of considerable importance to determine what course is to be pursued when their enforcement against American citizens by the authorities occurs.

Until further instructed by the Department I will continue to act as in the present cases.

I am, &c.,

JOHN W. FOSTER.

[Inclosure 1 in No. 849.]

Mr. Newton to Mr. Foster.

Guadalajara, November 21, 1878.

Dear Sir: This state government has just imposed an extraordinary tax on all kinds of property in this state, as you will see by the inclosed decree.

Will you please inform me per telegraph in answer to this, if, according to international law, I, as an American citizen, am to pay this extraordinary tax.

The first half of this tax is to be paid on the 1st of December, from which fact allow me to ask of you an early answer. Oblige me by sending your telegram to the office of Messrs. Ag. Gutheil & Co., of your city, who are instructed to forward the same to me.

J. A. NEWTON.

[Inclosure in Mr. Newton’s note of November 21.—Translation.]

Jesus L. Camarena, constitutional governor of the State of Jalisco, to the inhabitants thereof:

Know ye, that in the use of the faculties conceded to the executive power of the state by decree No. 550, and considering that, with the object of preventing the revolution which threatens the state, the government has had to take precautionary measures ordering the organization of forces of national guards in all of the cantons, besides the forces provided for by the estimates;

That for such organization, as well as for moving the troops charged with pursuing the bands which initiated the disturbance of order, extraordinary expenses were incurred and continue to be incurred by the executive;

That to meet these expenditures the receipts fixed by the present estimates have not been sufficient, and it has been necessary to raise funds by private loans, and to divert from their object various special funds;

That in compliance with justice and for the honor of the state the deficit which has resulted in consequence of these exceptional circumstances should be met; and

That, although in normal times to decree an extraordinary tax would not be in conformity with the spirit of the constitution, this is made indispensable under anomalous circumstances, in order to save society from the evils which threaten it;

In view of which the said executive has thought proper to decree: Art. 1. An extraordinary contribution is imposed for once only, of three-fourths per cent, upon mercantile and industrial capitals; of one-half per cent, upon town estates, and of one quarter per cent, upon country estates.

Art. 2. One half of this contribution will be paid within the ten days following the publication of this decree, and the remaining half within thirty days counted from the same publication.

Art. 3. The revenue employés, in order to collect this tax, will make use of the coercive faculties given to them by existing laws for the collection of ordinary contributions, all debtors who are delinquent or who resist being subject to the penalties established by the said laws.

Art. 4. The compensation which the treasury employés will receive for the collection of this tax will be three per cent, of the amount collected. The bureau of rents is authorized to distribute among said employés the amount of said compensation.

I accordingly order it to be printed, published, and circulated, and that it be given due fulfillment.

Palace of the government of the state.

Guadalajara, November 21, 1878.
JESUS L. CAMARENA.

Ignacio Aguirre,
Secretary pro tem.

[Inclosure 2 in No. 849.]

Mr. Foster to Mr. Newton.

[By telegraph.]

Legation of the United States,
Mexico, November 29, 1878.

F. A. Newton, Guadalajara:

I regard tax as clearly unconstitutional, according to decision supreme court, Goribar case. Bat being general and levied equally, I would not feel authorized to intervene without express instructions from Washington. Americans subject to same taxes as Mexicans. Is a question of law. Remedy may be had by resort to courts for amparo.

JOHN W. FOSTER.

[Inclosure 3 in No. 849.]

Mr. Pigeon to Mr. Foster.

San Luis Potosi, November 30, 1878.

Dear Friend: My father, Mr. Eugene Pigeon, has requested me to write to you and entreat you to inform him with regard to an extraordinary tax which must be paid. It is truly and really a very extraordinary tax, being 9¾ per cent, on the profits, which all the commerce of this city refuses to pay, and in virtue thereof has asked amparo at Guanajuato.

We would desire to know, as American citizens, whether we are compelled to pay such contributions.

Please be kind enough to inform us immediately by telegraph or by letter at Libro Mayor.

Receive beforehand our most sincere thanks for the many favors we permit ourselves to trouble you with.

Hoping soon to hear from you, I am, &c.,

RUDOLPH PIGEON.

No. 335. Mr. Foster to Mr. Evarts. [Document 364]

No. 335.
Mr. Foster to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Mexico, December 10, 1878. (Received January 2, 1879.) No. 850.]

Sir: Referring to my No. 827, of the 2d ultimo, regarding the forced loans levied upon the American citizen, Walter Henry, murdered in the State of Ooahuila, I now have to inclose further correspondence with the Mexican foreign office on the subject.

After considerable delay, Mr. Avila responded to my note of October 22 last, in a lengthy review of the right of diplomatic intervention in behalf of such claims, denying the same, and maintaining the right of the Mexican authorities to levy forced loans upon American citizens, and that their enforcement does not afford the basis of a claim for damages against the Mexican Government. You will notice that the broadest and most extreme position is assumed on this question. The acting minister also thinks the spirit of my note of October 22 was not very conciliatory.

I regard the question of forced loans as of equal importance with any other affecting American interests in Mexico, although not so manifest in its evil results as the frontier raids.

* * * * * * *

I answered the point of the right of diplomatic intervention by quoting from your dispatch No. 525, approving my action therein. I declined to continue a discussion of the general question of forced loans, which must be fruitless, unless he could give me an assurance that his government was prepared to take up the subject with a view to reaching an international agreement thereon. I concluded by saying that if the language of my note appeared harsh the fault must rest with the subordinate Mexican officials, at whose hands American citizens had suffered so many exactions and outrages, but that it was not susceptible of an offensive construction.

* * * * * * *

I am, &c.,

JOHN W. FOSTER.

[Inclosure 1 in No. 850.—Translation.]

Mr. Avila to Mr. Foster.

Department of Foreign Affairs,
Mexico, December 6, 1878.

Mr. Minister: I informed the President of your excellency’s note of the 22d of last October relating to the character of the claim made in favor of Mr. Walter Henry; but, although I did so as soon as that note reached my hands and its reply was opportunely decided upon, it seemed prudent to delay the latter, in order that it might not be written while under the impression which the unconciliatory spirit of your note could not do less than cause.

The point whose discussion has given rise to the present case is, as I understand it, whether the nature of a diplomatic claim can be attributed to the one presented for the purpose of collecting the amount of forced loans imposed upon citizens of the United States.

Your excellency was pleased to say to this department in your note of October 2 last that, inasmuch as there was no general arrangement or basis of recognition of the claims of American citizens which originated in the last revolution, of which the present President of the republic was the chief, your excellency had abstained, as a general rule, from presenting the claims of this class which have accumulated in the egation, and from urging their adjustment; but that in consequence of the lamentable event which occurred near Piedras Negras (the murder of Mr. Walter Henry, whose circumstances are unknown), and the Government of the United States being desirous that the affairs of the deceased should be completely arranged through diplomatic intervention, your excellency would require the Mexican Government to pay, for the benefit of the estate and heirs of Henry, the sums which he paid for forced loans, with interest.

The case being presented thus, and attention being given by this department to the object of your excellency’s intervention in the matter, which was to promote all that related to the interests of a deceased American citizen, it did not hesitate for a moment to admit such intervention in the character of the interposition of good offices, and for this reason transmitted your excellency’s note at once to the department of finance to be taken into consideration as a matter pertaining to it; but for the same reason which your excellency gives in the before-mentioned part of your said note, to wit, that in view of the fact that the government had not diplomatically recognized the claims of the American citizens which originated, in the last revolution, maintaining, on the contrary, that, in general, the forced loans imposed upon citizens of the United States resident in the republic are not cause for diplomatic intervention, the government did not think it its duty to admit with this character that presented by your excellency in the case of Mr. Henry.

On referring in my note of the 9th of last month, to the mention made by your excellency of certain acts attributed to military chiefs in the last revolution, limiting myself to admitting their possibility, it was not my purpose to raise a doubt that they may have taken place in certain cases, but simply to indicate that in the present case there were no data to justify the concession that it was attended by circumstances of the grave character insinuated.

The first of the documents inclosed in copy with your excellency’s note of October 2, shows that Mr. Henry furnished a certain amount in various quantities to the revolution; the second, that in conformity with a decree of the headquarters of the army of the west, there was imposed upon Mr. Henry a loan of $2,500 with which he was assessed, and that he delivered that sum in the three payments fixed by the said decree, furnishing a large part of it in copper; and the third, that in virtue of another decree Mr. Henry paid as a war contribution, $300 upon the capital of $30,000 which he possessed according to his statement, for the payment of direct taxes.

It might have happened that for the exaction of some of the loans whose sum is given by those documents, means were employed which were not justified by the circumstances; but I repeat that there being no proof of this in this department, it should not consider them otherwise than as possible.

Your excellency nevertheless found it opportune, in your last note upon this subject, to reproach the government for the loans imposed upon American citizens during the last revolution, mentioning several cases in which American citizens, whose names are not given in the said note, were objects of violence for resisting or delaying to pay such loans.

It might be said to your excellency with respect to the case whose details are more particularly given, that of the American citizen retained as a prisoner for thirty days by a band of revolutionists under the command of a chief who is now governor of Chihuahua, that perhaps special circumstances concurred, such as that of the said American citizen having taken part in the political struggle; but I consider it more proper to give to the said reproaches a reply of a general character.

As your excellency alludes in your note to the frequent discussions which you have sustained with the late secretaries of foreign affairs, concerning the subject of forced loans, it appears to me proper to state here the meaning of the expressions made on the part of the Government of Mexico.

Deploring as it does that the political circumstances of the country may have made necessary on certain occasions the imposition of forced loans and extraordinary war taxes, it has not been able nor can it now consent that citizens of the United States shall be considered exempt from being subject to the exactions paid by the other inhabitants of the republic, citizens or foreigners.

With respect to the legality with which such taxes and loans may have been decreed by the executive power invested with extraordinary faculties, and by its authorized agents, and although a decision of the supreme court has in a particular case failed to recognize it, it has always been accepted by the nation and its representatives, and in conformity with the fundamental law, that sentence of the court has neither the character nor the effects of a general declaration in the instance of an amparo granted to a private individual.

But if in principle the government sustains the non-exemption of American citizens from the payment of extraordinary taxes, and forced loans, it does not for this reason approve nor has it ever authorized personal violence in order to carry into effect such exactions.

Whoever may have employed such violence in special cases will have incurred personal responsibility which it pertains to the injured parties to demand of them before the competent authorities, and only when the complaint may be unheeded by the latter, constituting a case of notorious denial of justice, will there be occasion for diplomatic intervention as in a matter between two governments.

This order of proceeding is unavoidable in that which relates to abuses of any kind committed in the exaction of war taxes and forced loans by authorities or military chiefs, however high may be their rank.

With regard to the recognition of what has been received from forced loans imposed by the executive or by its duly authorized agents, or referring to the last revolution by its chiefs or by the chiefs of forces with the necessary authorization who sustained it, the government is of the opionion that such recognition should be made and has initiated a law for the adjustment of the debt thus contracted, but without proposing, nor being disposed to establish on its part, any preference whatever in the payment of foreign citizens or subjects over natives.

Your excellency opposes to these theories sustained by the government, the theory that citizens of the United States who have suffered outrages at the hands of certain chiefs are not obliged to require personal responsibility of them before the competent authorities, but that they have the right to hold the government of the country directly responsible; and that the latter, whatever may be the mode of recognition and adjustment which it may establish with respect to loans imposed on citizens, should recognize and pay at once the amount of those made upon citizens of the United States.

For the first theory your excellency gives as a reason that in a certain case the party responsible for the alleged outrages had died, and in the other that the person who ordered them occupied a position so elevated that justice could not be expected against him.

It is true that a criminal action could not be instituted against the presumed author of a crime, committed in the exercise of public functions, who has ceased to exist; but the same happens in treating of any crime, and the government of a country cannot be made responsible for all the crimes whose authors die before being tried and sentenced.

With respect to the position that owing to the elevated rank of a person, the punishment of the abuses committed by him may not be expected, the request for his trial should not for this reason be omitted, reserving the right to appeal to those means customary in cases of denial of justice.

In order to establish that the government should pay citizens of the United States the amounts furnished by them in the nature of forced loans, independently of that which may be done in this respect towards citizens, your excellency says that the argument “which has been made to you upon various occasions to the effect that the condition of foreigners in Mexico would be made better than that of citizens of the country, has no force with the government of your excellency, for which it is sufficient to know that certain American citizens have been treated with cruelty, and that forced loans have been arbitrarily and illegally imposed upon them, without its being necessary to investigate whether Mexican citizens have been proceeded with in the same manner.

I cannot refrain from calling your excellency’s attention to this phase of your note to which I am replying, since, far from finding foundation for it in the stipulations of the treaty of friendship between Mexico and the United States, it seems contrary to its spirit, and even to its very liberal text, as on agreeing that special protection should be conceded to the citizens of each of the contracting parties, it is explained in what this latter should consist, it being stipulated that the tribunals of justice of each country shall be open to the citizens of the other in the same manner as is usual and customary with natives and citizens of the same without conceding for non-judicial matters other protection still more especial.

I think I can cite in this respect an authority which, if not to be considered as irrefutable by the Government of the United States, should have at least much weight with it. I refer to the opinion of the American commissioner, Hon. William H. Wadsworth, in the case of Salvador Pratz against the United States (No. 748) decided by the mixed commission at Washington in the spirit of the foregoing.

“In the argument of the claimant,” says Mr. Wadsworth, “the agreement for special protection is considered as a guarantee of security in all cases and circumstances.

“This is not, nevertheless, the point of view in which we see it.

“The most liberal interpretation of the words special protection van never convey the idea that they are taken in the sense of an assurance. The article of the treaty in which said words are found, and which defines the character of this protection, on being examined in its totality, will demonstrate that the governments in drawing it up, proposed only to place foreigners traveling or resident in their respective territories upon a footing of complete equality with their own citizens respecting this point.

“We have here the meaning of this special protection. It is true, that in the article nothing was stipulated except what each government justly is in duty bound to procure for its own citizens within the limits of its respective territory. And we do not believe, nor can we believe, in such a case, that by virtue of the said article, the two governments agreed to concede to foreigners a greater and more efficacious protection than that due in justice to their own citizens, nor that it was proposed to establish inequality regarding protection between citizens and foreigners respecting the manner or the means of reparation due for the damages which might be occasioned in person or property” This interpretation made by the American commissioner of the clause of the treaty between Mexico and the United States regarding special protection due respectively to the citizens of each one of these countries, sufficiently rectifies the view that the government of your excellency, without attending to the manner and terms of payment of the amounts furnished by Mexicans in the character of forced loans, has the right to demand that its citizens shall be paid, without delay, that which may be due them from like cause.

With respect to your excellency’s insinuation concerning the pain which it would cause to know that the government established and recognized in Mexico had not the power nor was sufficiently just to repair the injuries caused to its own citizens, I understand that your excellency did not intend to cast an offensive doubt upon the present administration, since few persons can know and appreciate as well as your excellency the upright intentions of the President and his advisers, and the assiduous pains with which they promote all that affects national interests, and that of all the inhabitants of the republic.

I improve this occasion to reiterate to your excellency the protestations of my distinguished consideration.

ELENTERIO AVILA.

[Inclosure 2 in No. 850.]

Mr. Foster to Mr. Avila.

Legation of the United States,
Mexico, December 9, 1878.

Sir: Your honor’s note of the 6th instant, relating to the questions occasioned by the presentation of the claim of Walter Henry, deceased, has been received and carefully considered. It discusses in the main the right to diplomatic intervention of the said claim before a resort to the Mexican tribunals, and the exemption of American citizens from forced loans.

On the first point, it is probably only necessary to say that, having referred to the Department of State at Washington copies of your honor’s previous note and my reply thereto, in approving of the course pursued by this legation, the Secretary of State uses the following language: “Your reply to Mr. Avila presents very cogently the views entertained by this government as to the perfect right of diplomatic intervention for redress in such case of wrong. The inferential doctrine now set up by the Government of Mexico, that only a judicial denial of justice may warrant foreign intervention through diplomatic channels, is wholly inadmissible.”

The question of exemption from forced loans opens up a subject of fruitful discussion, which was quite lengthily considered in the conferences which took place in August and November of last year between your honor’s predecessor and myself, when, under instructions from my government, I was seeking to effect some treaty stipulation or other satifactory agreement upon the subject. As the present discussion is only an incident to the presentation of the claim referred to, I do not consider it profitable to enter at length upon an answer to the points presented by your honor, unless I can have an assurance from you that it is the desire of the Mexican Government to take up the question with a view to reaching an international agreement thereon. Such agreement my government considers as of essential importance to the maintenance of cordial relations of friendship, because so long as the Mexican Government tolerates or refuses to make redress for the character of exactions and outrages as were inflicted upon American citizens during the last revolution, there will always exist a cause of disturbance to the friendly relations which ought to exist between the two, republics. The claim of exemption from forced loans which my government makes on behalf of its citizens, is a right recognized by all nations ruled by a constitutional system of government which embraces the legislative power, from which nations Mexico would not willingly consent to be excluded. It is an exemption which Mexico has in times past conceded to the subjects of Great Britain and other nations. It is an exemption which Mexico proposed to France in 1838 to guarantee to all its inhabitants. It is an exemption which the republican government of Juarez, at Vera Cruz, in 1859, by the complete ratification of a treaty stipulation on its part, offered to the United States. It is an exemption which the Mexican Government, through its minister of foreign affairs, on the 27th of March, 1881, expressly recognized and enlarged to embrace extraordinary contributions, and in the most solemn language interpreted the tenth article of the treaty with Great Britain, removing therefrom any possible doubt as to its meaning. Finally, it is an exemption which the highest authority known to the Mexican system of government has declared to be the right of every inhabitant of this republic. This decision of the supreme court, although given in a single suit, as must necessarily be the case, is the interpretation of the constitution for the entire nation and for all branches of the government, and should have greater weight with the existing administration because that court was created by the same revolution, and came into judicial power at the same time.

It only remains for me to notice a reference in the first and last paragraphs of your honor’s note of the 6th instant. The spirit of my note of the 22d of October last was made necessary by the facts which I was called upon to relate. If the language thereof has been considered harsh, the fault must rest upon the subordinate Mexican officials at whose hands American citizens have suffered the exactions and outrages of which it was made my duty to complain. But in presenting these disagreeable matters, and in discussing the principles of law and government and the international rights, duties, and obligations growing out of them, it has been the most distant from my design to reflect in the remotest degree upon the motives and good intentions of the present executive of Mexico. While it has been a source of regret to my government and to me that there has been so wide a difference on almost all the questions which have been presented for adjustment, I well understand that it is not my province, neither is it my desire, to question the honesty of the motives which influence the decisions of your honor’s government on these matters. Neither have I on fitting opportunity omitted to advise my government of the successful work which the executive of this country has accomplished and is accomplishing in preserving the peace, and of the earnest efforts made to secure the blessings of law and order to all the inhabitants. I need hardly add that my government is deeply interested in the continued success of that of Mexico in this good work, and that your honor will always find me ready to aid and encourage therein.

I improve this occasion to renew to your honor the sentiments of my distinguished consideration.

JOHN W. FOSTER.

No. 336. Mr. Foster to Mr. Evarts. [Document 365]

No. 336.
Mr. Foster to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Mexico, December 14, 1878. (Received January 2, 1879.) No. 854.]

Sir: In my No. 828 of the 4th ultimo, I transmitted copies of correspondence had with the Mexican foreign office, growing out of the complaint which you had instructed me to make to the Mexican Government in regard to the acts of the outlaw Areola.

Under date of the 11th ultimo, the acting minister of foreign affairs continued the correspondence by sending me a lengthy note. It presents no new facts in regard to the original cause of complaint, but is a discussion of the general questions of the Rio Grande frontier, and has evidently been prepared with much care, and designed to place on record the position of the Mexican Government on these matters.

After making an explanation of a portion of his previous note relating to General Ord’s letter, he asks and seeks to answer the two following questions: Is Mexican territory made the base of operations of raiders into Texas, and are they protected or tolerated by the Mexican authorities? And, 2d. If the Mexican Government has up to the present not been able completely to suppress the marauders, does this prove its impotency? The minister answers both these questions in the negative, in the course of which he makes some curious statements, among others, that the authors, in great measure, of crimes committed by raids from Mexican territory into Texas, are citizens and residents of the United States. He also repeats the statement heretofore made, that the Government of the United States does not furnish to that of Mexico sufficient facts and evidence upon which to proceed against the marauders, and intimates that the proper evidence could easily be obtained from American residents in Mexican territory, if not from the American authorities in Texas; and refers to the withholding of detailed facts in the case of Areola. (See your dispatch No. 514 of September 10.)

The minister states that Mexico has demonstrated its desire to adopt adequate measures to suppress raiding, and in proof of this assertion he quotes from the project of treaty presented by Mr. Mata when in Washington last year, showing that Mexico has been the first to suggest the adoption of treaty measures to that end, and that they were not accepted by the United States.

He refers again to the opposition of the Mexican Government to the orders to the American troops to invade Mexican territory, and says it would impliedly consent to such crossing, if it did not condemn the action of whatever Mexican authorities or individuals who co-operate with said troops in Mexican territory.

He informs me that the Mexican Government is obliged to state that, since that of the United States does not care to employ other means to suppress marauders on the Bio Grande frontier than the passage of troops into Mexican territory, and similar offensive acts, it is the Government of the United States, and not that of Mexico, which opposes a grave obstacle to the peace of the border. And he closes by asking that the invasion of Mexican territory, the well-known cause of the absence of harmony, may cease, and it be followed by sincere co-operation on the part of the authorities of both governments, which will result in cordial relations, notwithstanding the influence of persons in Texas interested in prolonging difficulties between the two governments.

While it was not my desire to continue discussion of the questions, I felt that the character of the minister’s note required an assurance from me. In the first place I sought to correct the impression entertained by the minister that the Bio Grande frontier trouble was the only unsettled and important matter pending between the two governments, and I referred briefly to the other cases of difference, which I stated our government was not willing should be treated with silence and neglect.

In regard to the inability of the Mexican Government to properly enforce its authority and repress outlawry on the Rio Grande, I cited several facts connected with the late and the present administrations which indicated such inability. I thought it was sufficient to state that during my residence in Mexico (more than five years) notwithstanding repeated complaints, not a single punishment had followed the long list of raids and crimes, to establish either the protection or tolerance of the raiders by the Mexican authorities.

In answer to the assumption that our government had not furnished sufficient facts and evidence to enable that of Mexico to proceed against the marauders, I told the minister that it ought not to be expected that the Government of the United States would assume the role of public prosecutor, and present a penal indictment against the criminals; and that it ought to be sufficient for it to notify Mexico of the organization on its soil of raiding expeditions, and of crimes and injuries inflicted upon Americans, to lead the latter to adopt adequate measures for the prevention and punishment thereof. To ask American citizens resident in Mexico to become public informers, was to subject them to the persecution not only of the outlaws but of the local authorities) in support of which I cited a recent case in Santa Rosa.

I corrected an error in the minister’s note concerning the Mata project of treaty, and in reply to his argument on that point I answered that the evils on the Rio Grande were hardly to be eradicated by the simple negotiation of new treaties 5 that the outlawry there had not originated so much from the defective treaties as from the failure of the federal Government of Mexico to make its power felt, and its orders respected in that region, and that until the difficulties arising from these causes were overcome, new treaties would be useless.

I declined to rediscuss the propriety or legality of the instructions to General Ord, but referring to the language of your dispatch No. 495, stated that if their enforcement was offensive to Mexico, that could be avoided by the latter suppressing the raids and punishing the raiders. I recognized the truth of the minister’s assertion that crime had diminished on the Rio Grande, if he applied the statement to the lower part of the river, but that the reverse was the case on the upper part of said river, where the raids from Mexico have been more frequent, murderous, and destructive during the present administration than for years past. It was also to be noted that no effort was made by Mexico to suppress the outlawry until after the instructions to General Ord were issued.

The foregoing is a summary of the important points of the correspondence herewith transmitted, and to which I ask your attention, trusting that the positions assumed therein by this legation may meet with the approval of the Department. * * *

I am, &c.,

JOHN W. FOSTER.

[Inclosure 1 in No. 854.—Translation.]

Mr. Avila to Mr. Foster.

Department of Foreign Affairs,
Mexico, November 11, 1878.

Mr. Minister: On replying, in conformity with instructions which I have received from the President, to your excellency’s note of the 22d of last month, relating to the individual called Areola, I think it unnecessary to commence with a general abstract of it, because I propose to consider separately the points which it contains.

Your excellency is pleased to remind me that I omitted in my former note, referring to this same matter, and dated on the 17th of the said month, to recognize the correctness of your assertion in regard to having informed Mr. Mata, he being secretary of foreign affairs, on August 22 last, of the complaint made in a letter of General Ord’s against the said Areola, and against the local authorities of Jimenez.

When I said to your excellency in my mentioned note that in stating in my note of the 9th of the same month that there was no evidence in this department of the said complaint, my only object was to give the reason why no measure whatever had been adopted with regard to the matter, and I thought that this would be sufficient to prevent your excellency from understanding that I had called into doubt the correctness of your assertion, especially when I had stated afterwards to your excellency that perhaps the matters considered in the conferences of the 22d and 23d of August did not sufficiently fix the attention of Mr. Mata upon that which your excellency might have said respecting Areola and his band.

Believing, then, that your excellency would not interpret as a doubt of the correctness of your statement what was on my part simply an expression of the absence of previous information of the complaint against Arreola, I considered, as the principal point of the note which your excellency was pleased to address me with that at present occupying my attention, the refutation of the charge that the Government of Mexico employed technical defenses for the purpose of excusing its impotency to punish the Mexican bands which raid on the frontier of the Rio Grande; and hence, with that object, I cited to your excellency the reply given by the Hon. Hamilton Fish to a diplomatic representative of Mexico, who asked him to bring to trial certain citizens of the United States accused of crimes committed in Mexican territory. But your excellency considers the cases as different, impliedly maintaining that the said Secretary of State did right in refusing to try said criminals, basing the refusal upon a well-known principle of American law, to the effect that no one can be tried in the United States, except within the judicial district or in the neighborhood where he committed the crime of which he is accused; while the Government of Mexico, in not punishing the acts which the Government of the United States has principally complained of, fails to fulfill a duty recognized by the local laws of all civilized nations.

Your excellency enumerates the following as criminal acts on the part of the government: That Mexican territory is the base of operations for armed bands of raiders who prey upon the people of Texas; that expeditions are organized there, and bands of marauders start out who continually cross the frontier line to murder American citizens and rob them of their property; and that to the said territory they bring the articles stolen and openly dispose of them, either in the public market or at private sale.

The facts being thus stated, the principal charge may appear not unfounded, which your excellency and your government have been making against Mexico, and which really constitutes the alleged cause of the difficulties pending at present between the two governments.

It is notorious that in Mexico, as well as the United States, a state of uncertainty reigns, not free from inquietude and alarm, owing to the character which these difficulties have been taking, and to the danger with respect to which even your excellency has thought proper to call the attention of the President, in the audience which he was pleased to concede to you on the 23d of August last, to the effect that they may occasion a rupture of the friendly relations of the two countries.

It is, for this reason, necessary that the facts alleged as the principal cause of these difficulties, and which appear to be the most serious if not the only cause of the danger of the interruption of peace between Mexico and the United States, should be again rectified through this department.

There are two things to carefully determine in this matter: 1st. Is, in fact, Mexican territory the base of operations of all the marauders who murder American citizens in the State of Texas and rob them of their property?

Is there, in truth, protection or toleration shown on the part of the Mexican authorities toward the bands of outlaws which start from Mexican territory to commit crimes on that of the State of Texas, or towards those who bring from Texas and publicly sell the property stolen from citizens of the United States?

2d. If from the special circumstances of the frontier, its great extent, its sparse population, the demoralization which has spread there, and its distance from its centers of action of both governments, the latter have not, up to the present, been completely successful in suppressing the crimes which are committed there, (although their repetition and importance have been notoriously diminished), and in punishing the authors of said crimes, does this prove the impotence of the Government of Mexico only, causing the responsibility for the present condition of said frontier to rest exclusively upon the government of the latter?

It is concealed from no one that, for reasons differently interpreted, upon which I think proper to refrain from passing judgment, the press of Texas, and, echoing its tone, a large part of that of the rest of the United States, have enormously exaggerated the frequency and the gravity of the crimes committed on the left bank of the Bravo; neither are there persons who can rationally doubt that many of those crimes have been committed by citizens of the United States residing in Texas, although some of them are Mexicans by origin. This circumstance has doubtless had considerable influence, as a general thing, in attributing to Mexican citizens the perpetration of all or almost all of the crimes mentioned.

But if the circumstances of each one of the cases of murder and robbery of which information is had were impartially and scrupaously examined, it would surely be found that the number of those crimes committed by Mexican citizens living in Mexican territory is so small that it could be called insignificant.

Although your excellency, in saying that this territory has been made the base of operations for armed bands of marauders, appears to include even the bands formed of individuals who are not citizens of Mexico, and, as your excellency refers in the note containing this charge against the Government of Mexico to the impotency which you attribute to it to punish Mexican citizens who raid on the frontier of the Rio Grande, the fact that those who commit all or the greater part of the crimes referred to are Mexican citizens not being proved, as I think I can assert it is not, should be sufficient to refute the said charge as unfounded.

But even admitting that the Mexicans by origin, citizens of the United States and residents of Texas, who are the authors in a great measure of those crimes, may also have made Mexican territory the base of their operations, it would remain to be proved that these individuals openly prepare their expeditions without concealing themselves from the authorities which might prevent their being carried into effect.

It does not appear reasonable that they should proceed thus, even when in fact they may not fear the action of the authorities, because they would expose themselves, if their preparations were publicly made, to the liability that information might reach the very persons against whom they wish to raid, or to the American, authority nearest at hand, which might frustrate their criminal intentions, since, although (with offense Jo all the Mexican residents on the right bank of the Bravo) it should be supposed that there was not among them a single one sufficiently honorable to give such information, there is hardly an inhabited point £here where there are no American residents who cannot be thought to be interested in preventing in the mentioned way the consummation of the said crimes. It is natural that those who prepare to commit them should act with caution and reserve, it being impossible to presume in consequence that the authorities have opportune notice of their acts, and that, having such notice, they do nothing to prevent them.

Nothing but satisfactory proofs of acts of a contrary nature can outweigh this rational presumption. And when these acts are the basis of charges as grave as those which have been made against the Government of Mexico by the United States, and when by its being understood that such charges are not successfully refuted, the peace is endangered between two republic’s whose inhabitants in great majority are positively interested in its preservation, it seems to be opportune that these acts should be specified and their proofs indicated and examined.

It is well understood that in order to assist in the repression of crimes under consideration proofs should not be required as perfect as those demanded by the laws of all countries for the decision of contested points between private individuals, but at the least it is to be ascertained that they embrace the indispensable requisites for convincing those who, without prejudice, are to investigate the truth.

It would be proper, first, to individualize the cases in which bands of marauders have been formed in Mexican territory with the certain or probable knowledge of the local authorities, for the purpose of examining afterwards the proofs of complicity or culpable tolerance attributed to those authorities.

Perhaps the case of Areola may be the first in which the authority has been designated which is charged with protecting marauders.

Your excellency was pleased to say to me in your note of the 5th of last month the following:

“It is reported on the best authority that the officer in command of the Mexican troops at Piedras Negras is not merely cognizant of the repeated thefts of American cattle, but that he positively protects the raiders, furnishing them with arms, on occasion, and is moreover a receiver to a large extent of the stolen property, feeding his troops even, upon the beef.”

After mentioning certain names of persons, many of whom, if not all, your excellency is certain, in conformity with your information, may be counted among the marauding Mexican-citizens, your excellency is pleased to add: “Upon such a statement of facts (which, for sufficient reasons, is not made more definite) there can exist no reasonable doubt that the central authority of Mexico should find it feasible, even in the absence of supplementary information, to pursue and vigorously punish these particular offenders.”

I do not remember, nor have I found among the documents which I have been able to hastily consult relative to complaints more or less direct of the United States against Mexican authorities for robberies committed on the frontier, whether before now any charge has been made with the specifications given by your excellency in the preinserted paragraphs of your said note; and, nevertheless, even your excellency states that the relation of the facts referred to might be more exact. In fact, in order to hope for a complete result from the investigation of the facts which may be instituted, it would have been proper to determine one or more particular facts, designating even approximately the date when it occurred and the place from which the property might have been stolen which the commander of Piedras Negras is accused of receiving.

So much with regard to the acts upon which it has been attempted to base the charge. With regard to their proofs your excellency has limited yourself to a single reference to those in your possession, stating that they are of a respectable character, but not stating even in what they consist; nor less do you transmit a proof of them, which might occasion the immediate trial of the chief denounced as guilty.

The government could only, in view of your excellency’s complaint, order an investigation to be instituted with regard to the conduct of that chief, and it ordered it at once through the respective channels, as I had the honor to state to your excellency in my note of the 8th of last month.

But if your excellency had been pleased to communicate to this department the proofs which you may have had of the charge made against said chief, or if you had designated the person who could furnish them on proceeding to the trial, the government would have at once ordered it, and it is disposed to do so if your excellency will be so kind as to furnish such proofs.

It will also order the trial of Areola as soon as it may obtain the necessary data for that purpose; since without such data, although the said individual should be arrested, his detention could not continue longer than three days without the existence of some proof of the culpability attributed to him.

Up to the present time this department has, as the only datum, the fragment of the private letter of General Ord, addressed to your excellency on the 25th July last, and included in your note of the 14th of last month: “You know,” says General Ord, “that the remedy rests with the Mexican Government. If it desires to prevent United States troops from crossing the Bravo, it has only to punish the raiders severely enough so stop their raiding. Then they won’t make any trails. We, of course, cease to cross in pursuit when there is no one to pursue. That can he done by expelling or returning the Kickapoos, and arresting and extraditing a few such men as Areola, who is the head raider at a place on the river called Newtown (Ximenez), and where the Mexican authorities, to show their contempt for our application for his punishment, have made him the military commander.”

This fragment of a letter contains two positive assertions regarding Areola, to wit, that the punishment of this individual has been asked of the authorities of Jimenez, and that those authorities, in place of complying with such petition, have made him the military commander.

With respect to these two points, information has been asked of the superior military and civil authorities of the said place, and if it should result from this information that the charge against them is well founded, the government will cause the proper punishment to be inflicted upon them.

But with regard to the said Arreola, no specification of the crimes attributed to him is contained in the letter of General Ord, in the part inserted in the note of your excellency; and the only act of which, up to the present time, this department has information, is the threat which your excellency, in your note of the 4th of last October, stated that Arreola had made, on the 8th of August last, against Don Jose Maria Cardenas, he being upon the ranch of the latter, to burn the said ranch and another adjoining it.

This act having taken place in the territory of Texas, it is not comprehended in the enumeration made by your excellency of the criminal proceedings of Mexican authorities.

I believe, hence, that I can affirm, in concluding, that which relates to the supposed impotency of the Government of Mexico to punish the crimes committed within national territory, that such impotency is not established by the specification of facts proven in any proper manner.

I hasten, nevertheless, to add that the Mexican Government, understanding that the situation of the frontier demands unusual measures on its part, as well as on the part of the Government of the United States, in the treaty project which it proposed, under date of June 30, 1877, for the adjustment of the difficulties occasioned on this account between the two governments, included the following clause:

“Each nation shall provide adequate legislation imposing penalties: 1st, on the authors of the crime of cattle-stealing; 2d, on the persons who, not having been authors of the crime, conduct into its territory the stolen animals; 3d, on persons who, within its territory, buy and traffic in animals stolen in the other; 4th, on persons inside of its territory who agree together and conspire to commit those crimes in the other nation; 5th, on the persons who hide the stolen animals, or favor in any other way the commission of the crime.”

The Government of Mexico in proposing to that of the United States a reciprocal agreement of this character has very clearly demonstrated its desire to adjust the legislation of both countries to the peculiar circumstances of the frontier; and if, in fact, in the local laws of the frontier States there may be certain amendments required for the purpose of securing the efficient suppression of the crimes planned in the territory of one of the two nations in order that they may be committed in that of the other, or for the purpose of preventing the marauders from profiting by the fruits of their robberies, in no manner can a charge on this account be made against the Government of Mexico, which has been the first to suggest the adoption of those measures, upon the irrefutable basis of perfect reciprocity.

But the said project of international agreement, which contained various other measures direct to that object, has not been taken into consideration by your excellency’s government because it was indicated in it that the project for the passage of the forces of one nation to the territory of the other in pursuit of thieves was not admissible by the Mexican Government.

The same spirit which inspired the Government of Mexico to make this determination, to wit, the desire to preserve inviolable the national sovereignty, has also inspired the reprobations of the said government in the cases mentioned by your excellency in the note to which I reply, regarding the co-operation lent by two officials, and a certain subordinate authority, to parties of troops of the United States which have invaded the territory of Mexico in pursuit of marauders or to recover objects stolen.

The co-operation which the Government of Mexico has shown itself disposed to lend for the repression of the crimes committed on the frontier of Texas, whoever the authors may be, is not of this kind, Mr. Minister. It has very clearly stated that in no manner will it give its consent for the passage of American troops to Mexican territory, if not in virtue of a special agreement, and only for the pursuit of savages in desert regions; and it would impliedly consent to such passage of troops if it should not condemn the co-operation with invading parties of persons constituted as authorities, however low their office, and even of private individuals who should consent to serve as guides or otherwise to such parties.

Besides the passage of troops in pursuit not only of savage Indians in desert regions hut of marauders, which latter would certainly, far from being efficacious in the accomplishment of its object, create imminent danger of collisions, and give occasion for grave abuses, the Government of Mexico has shown itself disposed, and is so at present, to agree with that of the United States upon the adoption of unusual measures, equal for both parties, for terminating the depredations committed on the frontier of the two republics.

It has also shown its positive anxiety in the repression of crimes, and it is notorious that, due to it, these crimes have considerably diminished in the last two years. If they are still committed it is in a relatively very small number for constituting a cause of serious difficulty between the two governments, especially when that of Mexico simply refuses, for their adjustment, its consent for the passage of troops to its territory unless under the restrictions of a special convention, and only for the pursuit of savages in desert regions.

Your excellency closed your note, of which this is the answer, by asserting that since the Government of Mexico disapproved of the co-operation of its own officials and citizens in the repression of the marauders of the frontier of the Bio Grande, it is not strange that the latter are unpunished, and that such proceedings justify the charge of the impotency of the government to punish said criminals.

The Government of Mexico, on its part, finds itself obliged to state that, since that of the United States does not care to employ other means for the repression of the marauders of the frontier of the Bravo than to cause the passage of its troops to Mexican territory, at one time in the pursuit of marauders and at others in order to recover property stolen by them, and even to threaten the inhabitants of the frontier towns and arrest their authorities, as was done at Las Vacas and at Jimenez, and since it appeals to these violent measures which constitute an offense to the national sovereignty without having other result than to irritate passions upon the frontier and a natural resentment in the rest of the republic; while, with the measures proposed by the Government of Mexico, or similar ones, the prompt re-establishment of security in that region might be expected, it is the Government of the United States and not that of Mexico which opposes a grave obstacle to the consummation of so desirable an object.

Nothing would be so efficient for this purpose as a good understanding between the military chiefs and between the local authorities of both frontiers, since the co-operation which they would mutually lend within their respective territories would, in a short time, cause the success of marauding expeditions to be impossible, and the raiders would soon be known and tenaciously pursued until exterminated; but nothing makes this harmony so difficult as the profound displeasure which excites the passions upon the repetition of so grave an offense as that of the passage of troops from one nation to the territory of the other.

Let, then, this well-known cause for the absence of harmony cease, and let it be followed by sincere co-operation among the said chiefs and authorities, and without any doubt, whatever, the pursuit of the marauders of the frontier will be efficient.

If there is in the State of Texas, as is generally believed, a number of persons, more or less considerable, who are interested in the existence of difficulties upon the frontier, the Governments of Mexico and the United States, which have in charge respectively the general interests of these two republics, and understand how prejudicial it is to these interests to prolong the existence of such difficulties, will, without doubt, make loyal and simultaneous efforts to reach promptly a pacific adjustment, and insure for the future, upon the solid basis of the interests of both countries, the most cordial relations of their governments.

I improve this opportunity to renew to your excellency the protestations of distinguished consideration, with which I am your excellency’s obedient servant,

ELEUTERIO AVILA.

[Inclosure 2 in No. 854.]

Mr. Foster to Mr. Avila.

Legation of the United States,
Mexico, November 26, 1878.

Sir: Temporary absence from this capital has prevented my earlier attention to your honor’s note of the 11th instant. It would seem to be a reply to my brief note of the 22d ultimo, occasioned by the acts of one Areola, a Mexican outlaw, who, for a long time past, has been using Mexican territory as a safe base of operations for raids into American territory adjacent to the Rio Grande; but it is in fact a discussion of almost all the points at issue connected with frontier affairs, which have for so long a period occupied the attention of the two governments. I had hoped that we had, in great measure, passed the stage of detailed discussion of these questions, and that the Mexican Government had taken the resolution to adopt vigorous and adequate measures to prevent its territory from being made the secure base of operations for raiding parties into the United States, and the safe and profitable place of deposit of the plunder of these bandits. But it would appear from your honor’s note that the Mexican Government still regards discussion of these questions as desirable. While I do not consider it necessary to enter at length upon the broad field to which said note seems to invite me, and to repeat considerations so often presented in conferences and correspondence between your honor’s department and this legation, the nature of your said note requires that I should notice some of the points contained therein.

It is true that the condition of affairs on the Rio Grande frontier is the most serious present cause of danger of the interruption of peace between the United States and Mexico, owing to the exposure of the forces of the two governments to conflicts; but it must have been an inadvertence on the part of your honor to indicate that it was the only cause of danger to the friendly relations which ought to exist between the two republics. To make such an assertion is to cast aside or hold as of no consequence the many repeated and grave complaints and demands which the Government of the United States has made through this legation to your honor’s government in the past two years, and which have been wholly rejected or treated with silence.

It ought not to be expected that because the Mexican Government has definitely refused to satisfy these complaints and demands, or has for a long period of time neglected to respond thereto, that on this account my government would desist from its determination to secure a just settlement thereof. When the honor of the American flag is involved, or the lives, liberty, and property of American citizens are concerned, it is difficult to weigh in scales and precisely designate the relative importance of one question or outrage over another. While the long-existing depredations and outlawry on the Rio Grande have greatly irritated the people of the United States, and their government has, after much waiting and remonstrance, decided upon measures which it hopes will tend to give relief to that distracted frontier, it has not forgotten nor abandoned, nor is it willing that the Government of Mexico should forget or neglect, other very important and serious questions, without a just settlement of which it is useless to expect a state of cordial and friendly relations to exist.

To be satisfied that this assertion is well founded, your honor need only refer to the conferences and correspondence had between this legation and the Mexican foreign office since the advent of the present administration of Mexico. They will show that said administration has refused or failed thus far to meet the demands of the Government of the United States on account of the forced loans exacted from American citizens, the imprisonment and outrages inflicted upon them, and the illegal and arbitrary confiscation of their property, all of which acts were by the direct orders of the officers of the present Mexican Government. The insults to the American flag, the outrages upon American commerce, and the arbitrary arrest and imprisonment of an American consul and other acts of Mexican officials at Mazatlan and Acapulco yet remain unatoned. To the complaint of my government, made nearly twelve months ago, against the action of the State authorities of Yucatan in nullifying provisions of the treaty of commerce of 1831, no answer has been made by the Federal Government of Mexico, although repeatedly asked for by me.

A reference to the records of your honor’s department will show that there are other grievous complaints and wrongs unsettled, which my government will not consent to have remain in their present unsatisfactory state. However great, therefore, as is the importance of an adjustment of frontier difficulties, your honor ought not to infer that it is the only question of importance requiring the earnest attention of the Mexican Government.

In the note of the 11th instant your honor propounds and answers negatively two questions: First, whether the Mexican authorities protect or tolerate the outlaws who make its territory the base of their raids; and, second, whether the failure to punish the outlaws proves the impotency of the Mexican Government.

It is to be borne in mind that the disorders on the Rio Grande, and the injuries suffered by the citizens of the United States therefrom are not of recent origin, but have existed in greater or less degree for many years. It is also to be remembered that during these years the general, if not normal, state of the Mexican territory adjacent to the Rio Grande has been one of revolution, or suspended civil authority of the central government. In the past twenty years, for say three-fourths of that time, the established Federal Government has been more or less impotent to enforce its authority in that region. In the brief intervals of peace which remained, so much of the energies of the central government have been devoted to repairing the ravages of war and in consolidating its own power, that it had given very little attention to the disordered state of its northern frontier. For a considerable period after the accession to power of the government of General Diaz, the Minister of Foreign Affairs excused to me the want of attention to the Rio Grande border on account of the imperative necessity which he said it felt to re-organize its interior regimen; and no longer ago than in the interviews which I had the honor to hold with President Diaz on the 23d of August last, His Excellency referred to this state of affairs as having existed. In view of these historical facts, it is to be inferred that your honor intended to claim that the Mexican Government was able to enforce its authority on the Rio Grande in a period of comparative tranquillity such as at present exists in this republic.

In the year 1875, when the country was enjoying a condition of tranquillity relatively as great as for the past six months, I urged some active measures upon the then Minister of Foreign Affairs, in view of the recent occurrence of a disastrous raid into Texas. Mr. Lafagua, whose long and intimate knowledge of the condition of the country, and the power of his government, I have no doubt your honor will readily recognize, answered me, in effect, that it was very difficult for the Mexican Government to maintain in that region a large force to suppress the raiders, for the reasons, 1st, that troops could not be sent to that quarter without fear of desertion; 2d, the internal troubles of the country rendered it impossible; and 3d, in the state of the national treasury a sufficiently large force could not be maintained there. Do not these reasons exist even with greater force now than in 1875? Your honor may answer that the forces which the government has been maintaining on that frontier disprove this assertion; but it is understood that, excepting the city of Matamoras, the greater portion of these forces have been stationed at Monterey or other interior points where they could be of no service in preventing or punishing the raids; and that even those which were adjacent to the frontier have been mainly engaged in suppressing revolts against the government. Your honor will remember that the Diario Oficial has announced that the campaign in which these forces are now said to be engaged against the raiding Indians has been delayed till the present time on account of the civil disturbances—all of which goes to establish either the neglect or inability of the government to discharge its international obligations.

The fact, which I have more than once cited, that during my residence in Mexico, notwithstanding repeated complaints and demands on the part of my government, not a single punishment has been inflicted upon raiders into American territory by the Mexican authorities, ought to be sufficient to establish either the protection or tolerance of the raiders by those authorities if, as your honor contends, they possess the power to punish them.

The leading point urged in the note of the 11th instant is that the Government of the United States has not furnished data sufficient upon which the Mexican Government and its authorities could proceed to the trial and punishment of the raiders who organize expeditions on its territory, or bring therein their plunder stolen in the United States; and your honor insists upon detailed facts as to events, dates, and persons, such as would justify criminal proceedings, and that until these are furnished the authorities cannot be charged with protection or tolerance of the outlaws. In the intercourse of nations, and especially in the friendly state of relations which ought to exist between two neighboring republics, it appears to me that the government of the one ought not to be required by the other to assume the role of public prosecutor, and be expected to present a penal indictment, or the facts necessary to constitute a formal arraignment of criminal raiders. It ought to be sufficient for the United States to notify Mexico of the organization on its soil of raiding expeditions, and of the crimes and injuries inflicted upon American citizens and property thereby, to lead the latter to the adoption of such measures as would secure the punishment of the criminals and the prevention of future raids. After these long years of murder and plunder of American citizens in their own homes by bands of outlaws proceeding from Mexican territory, and after repeated notice and complaint on the part of my government, it does not evince a proper disposition to discharge international duties to be told by the Mexican Government, as the note of the 11th instant virtually does, you have furnished no proofs; we want detailed facts, names of particular criminals, and the witnesses, before we can proceed, and until you do this you cannot allege that crimes are committed or that we fail to punish the criminals.

Your honor would seem to maintain that it would not be difficult for my government to furnish detailed proof of the organization of raids and of the neglect of the Mexican authorities to prevent or punish them, as you state that American citizens are residing at all points along the Rio Grande where raids are said to be committed, I am not informed by the Secretary of State of the reasons why he refrained from entering more into detail as to the sources of information or the facts connected with the late acts of the Mexican outlaw, Areola, to which your honor refers; but you can hardly be ignorant of the state of lawlessness and disorder which has prevailed on the Mexican side of the frontier, and of the spirit of hostility and resentment manifested there on slight occasion against Americans, both by the people and, in too many cases, by the authorities. In such a state of affairs it could not reasonably be expected that when the authorities themselves stand in awe of the outlaws, American residents would voluntarily and publicly appear as witnesses against them. This may be illustrated by facts which have recently been made public in the press. After the disastrous raid made last spring by Mexican Indians into Texas, information was given to General Ord by certain residents of Santa Rosa, that the authorities and people of that locality were harboring some of the Indians who participated in that raid and profiting by their plunder. When the news of this report reached the authorities of Santa Rosa, it is stated that they summoned all the American residents of the locality before them, and sought to require them by force and threats to sign a declaration that the former report was not true! When such irregular and unwarranted proceedings are enacted by the local functionaries, how can it be expected that American residents will become voluntary witnesses against the raiding outlaws? And until the Federal Government of Mexico will lay aside its technical demands, and will by most energetic measures put an end to the reign of terror inspired by the criminals, it need not expect American residents or its own citizens to become informers or witnesses, nor its local authorities to be just and earnest administrators of the criminal laws.

Your honor asserts that the persons who make Mexican territory the base of their operations into Texas are, in most part, not Mexican citizens, but citizens of the United States of Mexican origin. The citizenship of the thieves and raiders is of very little consequence. It should be enough for the Mexican Government to be informed that its territory is being thus used for criminal purposes, and is made a place of refuge by depredators on American territory. It is very little consolation for the people of Texas, when they complain of the murder of their relatives and friends and the destruction or robbery of their property by outlaws proceeding from and fleeing to Mexican territory, to be told that the authors of the crimes are citizens of the United States of Mexican origin. Your honor furnishes no evidence to establish that fact, and I have none such in my possession; but even if true, it does not make the duty of the Mexican Government to punish them the less imperative, nor does it relieve the local authorities from the charge of protecting the thieves of their own blood and kin, that they are citizens of the United States by treaty.

I think your honor has fallen into an error, possibly on account of your brief connection with the foreign office, in stating that the project of treaty presented by Mr. Mata, while in Washington in 1877, was not taken into consideration by my government, because it was indicated that the passage of the boundary by troops in pursuit of thieves was not admissible by the Mexican Government. In the first place, the said project of treaty is entirely silent on that point. In the second place, my government did not decline to take it into consideration solely on the ground that it did not contain a provision as to the pursuit of thieves across the boundary by the troops of one or the other nation. In my conference with Mr. Vallarta, on the 22d of August, 1877, I informed him that my government recognized in said project several desirable provisions, but that it was not accepted because it was not adequate and complete. As your honor seems to consider the treaty project made by your government as a full remedy for the evils existing on the Rio Grande, it is proper to remark that the disorders on that frontier can hardly be eradicated by the simple negotiation of new treaties. There is no good reason why, under the existing treaties between the two countries, the raids should not be suppressed, the thieves punished, and protection afforded to life and property on the Rio Grande. The outlawry in that region has not originated so much from defective treaties as from the failure of the Federal Government of Mexico to make its power felt and its orders respected there, and from the sympathy or tolerance of the local authorities toward the outlaws. And as I have repeatedly said, this is the important matter to which the Mexican Government should address its attention; and until it can overcome the difficulties arising from these causes, it is useless to discuss new treaties, or make conventions or agreements, which Mexico may not have the power to enforce.

The Mexican Government has, your honor states, indicated very clearly that in no manner will it consent to the passage of American troops into its territory, except by special agreement, in pursuit of savages, and only in desert regions. A more careful examination of the records of the department over which your honor so worthily presides, will show you that when the Government of Mexico was desirous of securing its official recognition by that of the United States, the minister of foreign affairs made me a written proposition for the crossing of the boundary by the troops of either nation in pursuit not only of savages, but of cattle thieves, and not only in the desert, but also in the populated regions of the frontier. It was not until after the official recognition took place, and after much hesitation, that the limited proposition to which you refer was made.

I do not desire at this time to rediscuss the propriety or legality of the instructions to General Ord, so often referred to in the note of the 11th instant. Your honor does injustice to the friendly disposition of my government in asserting that it does not care to employ other means to restrain the marauders on the Rio Grande than the enforcement of those orders. What other means, I may ask, remain for it? For many years its citizens have suffered from these marauders, issuing from Mexican territory, and it has patiently waited, hoping that its repeated remonstrances and requests for vigorous measures would have some effect upon the Mexican Government. It has in vain proposed reciprocal co-operation. It has given information of repeated raids, and asked for the punishment of the criminals without avail. It has, time and again, requested permission for its troops to follow the raiders into their places of refuge in Mexican territory, only to he refused. As stated in the dispatch of the Secretary of State, a copy of which I sent to your honor’s department on the 10th of September last, the first duty of a government is to protect life and property. This duty the Government of the United States has determined to perform to the extent of its power toward its citizens on the border. It has not sought the unpleasant duty forced upon it of pursuing offenders, who under ordinary usages of municipal and international law ought to be pursued and arrested or punished by Mexico. Whenever Mexico will assume and efficiently exercise that responsibility, the United States will be very glad to be relieved from it. It will be seen that these views of the Secretary of State are only repeated in other words by General Ord, in the extract quoted in your note of the 11th instant. “You know,” he says, “that the remedy rests with the Mexican Government. If it desires to prevent United States troops from crossing the Bravo, it has only to punish raiders severely enough to stop their raids.”

Your honor refers to the diminution of crimes on the Rio Grande under the present administration of the Mexican Government. As I have had occasion to say before, such declaration cannot have reference to the Upper Rio Grande, where the raids from the State of Coahuila into Texas have been more frequent, murderous, and destructive during the present administration than for years past. It is true that outlawry has considerably diminished on the Lower Rio Grande. But it is also true that no effort was made by the Mexican Government to suppress it until after the instructions to General Ord were issued. It is claimed by the American authorities in that region that the existence of these instructions has been the chief influence in bringing about this long-desired result, and that following their promulgation two marked effects have been noticed: 1st, the Mexican authorities have been awakened to the necessity of some decided action on their part; and, 2d, the raiders know that if they commit depredations in Texas Mexican Territory will no longer afford them a safe refuge from pursuit.

With the part of your honor’s note I can heartily agree, in which you state that nothing would be so efficient for the re-establishment of security on that border as a good understanding between the military chiefs and between the local authorities of both frontiers. This is precisely the measure which I have so often urged upon the Mexican Government. The first suggestion which I made to the minister of foreign affairs, after the accession to power of General Diaz, was that a prudent and prominent general should be sent, with a sufficient force, to the Rio Grande, with orders to place himself in direct and friendly communication and co-operation with General Ord. It is to be regretted in this connection that the effort which this officer made last month to have a conference with General Trevino, by special appointment, at Piedras Negras, was not successful, owing to the failure of the latter to meet his engagement, as I am informed. It is to be hoped that the movement now said to be on foot for the arrest, punishment, and removal of the Lipan, Mescalero, and Kickapoo Indians by General Trevino may prove entirely successful and complete. I have already reported it to my government and will be highly gratified to be able to announce its perfect consummation. Its accomplishment will be an earnest of the power and good disposition of your honor’s government which I will not fail to recognize, and which I trust will be the beginning of an era of co-operation by the authorities referred to by your honor which cannot fail, if followed up, to have the best results.

With the renewed assurance of my marked consideration, I remain your honor’s obedient servant,

JOHN W. FOSTER.

No. 337. Mr. Foster to Mr. Evarts. [Document 366]

No. 337.
Mr. Foster to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Mexico, December 16, 1878. (Received January 2, 1879.) No. 855.]

Sir: On the 6th instant the Mexican executive sent to Congress a contract made by the minister of finance with certain holders of government bonds, which contemplates a new funding of the public debt, coupled with an arrangement for the construction of an extensive system of railroads in Mexico. The instrument, however, should more appropriately be termed bases for future contract, as in its express terms it binds no one but the parties who may hereafter enter into the arrangement designated.

As stated, the arrangement has a two-fold object, the funding of the public debt, and the railroad system, and the former is made dependent upon the latter. The main provisions of the agreement are as follows: The public creditors of Mexico who may enter into the contract are to construct, at their own cost, an interoceanic railroad from the city of Mexico to some point on the Pacific Ocean between San Bias and Mazatlan, and such other branches as they may choose, the whole to consist of not less than 1,000 kilometers, or say 625 miles, and the whole to be completed within six years from the approval of the contract by Congress. The construction and management of the road is to be upon bases hereafter to be agreed upon with the minister of public works. In consideration of the construction of the railroad, the Mexican Government agrees to recognize the public debt represented or held by the company which constructs the railroad, and to issue therefor a new consolidated fund in bonds, converting the capital and accrued interest as a rule at 50 per cent, of their face value, and which new bonds shall bear 1 per cent, the first year, and increasing 1 per cent, each year, as the building, of the road progresses, until at its completion, and thereafter they will bear 6 per cent, interest. The government also agrees to redeem and pay off in cash $8,000 of the new funded bonds for each kilometer of the railroad built; but in case it is not able to make this redemption and payment, it agrees to issue new bonds therefor, which, together with the coupons on the funded bonds, shall be receivable for 10 per cent, of the customs and other federal taxes. Nineteen separate classes or descriptions of public debts are to be admitted in this agreement, which embrace the London bondholders, the English and Spanish convention debts, the Carbajal-Corlies American bonds, and all kinds and descriptions of the domestic or interior debt, including claims for forced loans, damages, back salaries, pensions, &c; but it is expressly provided that none of these bonds or obligations are to be prejudiced in their present status, if the holders thereof do not enter into this agreement.

As I have stated, the contract was submitted to Congress on the 6th instant, and the approval of that body is required before it can have any binding effect or validity, but an adjournment of the session occurred on yesterday without any action whatever being taken upon the subject, so that the whole matter is held in abeyance until the next session in April.

In addition to the general interest which our country feels in the prosperity and development of the resources of Mexico, which would be greatly improved if such an arrangement as that contemplated could be carried out, many of the citizens of the United States are pecuniarily interested in the subject as holders of the Carbajal-Corlies bonds, which are allowed to be embraced in the agreement. To them it presents three questions: 1st, the probability of the ratification of the contract by Congress; 2d, the practicability of the scheme, and the ability of the Mexican Government to meet its obligations thereunder; 3d, does it offer them greater probabilities of payment of the principal or interest of their bonds, or of security therefor than they now hold?

The first question, as to the probability of the approval of the scheme by the Mexican Congress, is difficult to answer with any degree of assurance. The contract was made by the government mainly to arrange a settlement with the London bondholders, and there has always been, both in Congress and the country, a strong opposition to such a measure, and up to the present time has prevented any agreement, but the executive has strong hope that it will be approved at the next session.

Second, as to the practicability of the scheme and the ability of the Mexican Government to meet the obligations stipulated: The first difficulty will be to find any sufficient number of bondholders who will be willing to form a company and contribute the necessary funds to inaugurate the building of the railroad. It will require considerable capital to commence and carry forward such a work, and with the experience already had by the bondholders as to Mexican investments, it presents a very doubtful question. The only persons likely to undertake it are the London bondholders. If this class of bonds are alone represented in the company, and the road is built, it will require on the part of the Mexican Government during the next six years the payment in cash, in redemption of funded bonds and interest, of say from $12,000,000 to $18,000,000, according to the basis upon which the old bonds are funded. If other classes of bonds are also represented in the company, and the funded debt and interest proportion ably increased, the cash payments of the government will be likewise increased. When it is remembered that the government has not paid its current subsidy to the only completed railroad in the country for nearly three years, and that there is due thereon approximately $2,000,000, and that the current revenues are insufficient to pay the army and government employés, some estimate may be formed of the ability of the government to meet its obligations under the proposed scheme.

On the third question, as to whether the condition of the American holders of Mexican bonds would be improved either as to probability of payment of principal or interest or as to security thereon, several points are to be noted. It has been seen that it is proposed to fund the debt to be embraced in the contract at 50 per cent, of its face value. In many classes of bonds interest is to be forfeited altogether, and in all others, except the American bonds, to be allowed at 50 per cent, of the amount due the latter, however, to be allowed in full, for which the executive is entitled to all proper consideration. When it is remembered that the American bonds were issued to obtain arms and materials of war to maintain the republican government of Mexico against the European intervention and the Maximilian empire, it would seem that there is no good reason why the American bondholders should be placed on the same footing with European bondholders, whom the republican government have always charged with sympathizing with and aiding the intervention and empire. The American bonds bear 7 per cent, interest, and are secured by a pledge of a large body of public lands and 60 per cent, of the receipts of several important custom-houses, and of the federal and State taxes in two States of the republic. If these bonds are surrendered and the new funded bonds are accepted under the contract inclosed, the holders thereof consent to a reduction of one-half of the principal of their bonds, a great diminution of the rate of interest, and, as a security for payment, only 10 per cent, of the federal customs and taxes, and are placed on a level with all other creditors entering into the agreement, whatever may have been the origin of their bonds, besides incurring heavy obligations for the construction of a long line of railroad.

It would hardly seem, therefore, to offer much inducement to the American holders of Mexican bonds. Although, as stated in my No. 802, the Mexican Government has not paid interest on the bonds, according to their tenor, since their issue in 1865 up to the present date, it has always recognized them as a valid debt, and it is to be hoped that at no distant day it will make effective the solemnly pledged security for the payment of principal and interest which its financial necessities have induced it to divert to other uses.

I inclose herewith a copy and translation of the contract referred to, together with a printed copy of the documents sent to Congress with said contract by the minister of finance.

I am, &c.,

JOHN W. FOSTER.

[Inclosure in No. 855.—Translation.]

Contract entered into between the United Mexican States and the creditors of the republic for the construction of a railroad from the city of Mexico to the Pacific, and for the adjustment of the national debt and the payment of the interest thereon.

The Government of the United Mexican States and Messrs. Edward J. Perry and Pedro del Valle in behalf of the holders of Mexican bonds in London, and Pedro del Valle for himself and in the name of other creditors of the republic, whom he represents, have agreed on the following bases for the construction of a railway from the city of Mexico to the Pacific Ocean, connecting this work with the adjustment and payment of the Mexican debt, on the terms set forth in this agreement:

Chapter I.

regarding the construction of the railroad from the city of mexico to the pacific ocean.

1st. The creditors of Mexico, represented by Messrs. Edward J. Perry and Pedro del Valle, obligate themselves to construct and put in operation, on their own account or through the person or company to whom they may transfer the right conceded to them by this agreement, a railway with its respective telegraph, which commencing at the city of Mexico will terminate at a point on the Pacific Ocean, between San Bias and Mazatlan.

2d. The construction and operation of the railroad and telegraph will be subject to the bases established in either of the concessions granted up to the present by the Government of Mexico for interoceanic communication through the center of the republic that the government may select, except regarding those points with reference to which something else may be stipulated by this contract. This agreement will not prejudice the rights of other companies that may have entered into contracts with the Government of Mexico for the construction and operation of railroads in the republic.

3d. The department of public works will designate, upon this contract being approved by the Congress of the Union, to which of the concessions spoken of in the preceding clause will the construction and operation of the railroads to which this agreement refers be subject.

4th. The creditors of Mexico, represented by Messrs. Edward J. Perry and Pedro del Valle, or the company to which the rights granted in this agreement may be transferred, obligate themselves to construct and put in operation the railroad and telegraph referred to in the first clause of this agreement within the term of six years, counted from the day that this contract may be approved by the Congress of the Union.

5th. The construction of the railroad and telegraph, to which reference is made in the preceding clause, will be executed in the following terms: During the first year, counting from the day the Congress of the Union approves this agreement, there will be constructed and put in operation at least seventy-six kilometers of railroad and telegraph; during the second year, one hundred kilometers of railway and telegraph will be constructed and put in operation, and in each of the four following years there will be constructed and put in operation two hundred and six kilometers of railway and telegraph. No part of the railroad and telegraph will be considered constructed and concluded until it be received to the satisfaction of the department of public works.

6th. In case that, for any reason, the creditors of the republic, or the person or company to whom the rights conceded by this agreement may be transferred, fail to comply with the obligations imposed upon them by the same with respect to the construction of the railroad within the terms which it fixes, after the completion of the first four hundred kilometers and the conversion of the bonds of the national debt, in conformity with clauses 8, 9, and 12 of this contract, the creditors, or whoever may represent them, as a penalty, will lose half of the road that they may have constructed, which will become the property of the nation, and may be disposed of to any individual or company, so soon as the expiration of this concession may have been declared by the executive.

7th. The creditors of Mexico who accept this agreement, or the company to which they may transfer the rights which it concedes to them, may construct another line of railway besides the trunk road spoken of in the first clause of this agreement on condition that they subject themselves to the provisions of this agreement; that the line referred to is not already contracted for with another company, and that they commence the construction within six months from the day on which they give notice that they intend to construct said line, with the understanding that they can only enjoy this privilege within the six years allowed for the construction of the trunk road. With respect to the railroads which the creditors of Mexico may construct by virtue of the right given to them by this clause, $8,000 in bonds of the debt will be redeemed on the terms established in clause 13 of this agreement for each kilometer.

Chapter II.

regarding the conversion of the national debt and the payment of its

interest.

8th. In consideration of the fact that the creditors of Mexico, or the person or company to whom they may transfer rights granted to them in this agreement, are to construct, on their own account, the railroad and telegraph to which this same contract refers, without any pecuniary subvention or other remuneration than that stated in clause 13 of this agreement, the Mexican Republic will establish a new consolidated fund, in bonds which will bear an interest of 6 per cent, per annum, which will commence to have effect and be paid on the terms expressed in clause 15 of this agreement, a part of the capital being redeemable in the manner stated in clause 13.

9th. The cousolidated fund spoken of in the preceding clause will be formed of the following credits, which capital and interest will be converted at the rate of 50 per cent, on their face value, except in cases where something else may be determined in reviewing each one of said credits, and totally redeeming the capital as well as the corresponding interest of each one of the converted credits.

I. Bonds of 3 per cent. created by the law of November 30, 1850, and issued up to December 16, 1857, capitalizing their interest.

II. Bonds of 3 per cent. created by the aforesaid law and issued after December 17, 1857, on condition that they bear the annotation directed in the order of January 17, 1861, capitalizing their interest.

III. Bonds of 5 per cent, created by the law May 19, 1852, and issued up to December 16, 1857, capitalizing their interest.

IV. Bonds of 5 per cent. created by the said law and issued after December 17, 1857, on condition that they bear the annotation directed in the order of January 17, 1861, capitalizing their interest.

V. Bonds created by the decree of September 12, 1862, losing their interest.

VI. Bonds issued in San Carlos, Tamaulipas, July 4, 1866, capitalizing their interest at par.

VII. Credits of different classes issued before November 30, 1850, and which by the law of that date were deferred, losing their interest.

VIII. Certificates which the general treasury issued in accordance with the order of January 14, 1881, and circulated by the treasury the 17th of the same month, instead of the bonds created by the laws of November 30, 1850, and May 19, 1852.

IX. Certificates issued by the general treasury in accordance with the different orders of January 17 and 22, 1861, circulated by the treasury the 4th of the following February, and with the laws of February 14 and 16 of the same year.

X. Certificates issued by the auditor’s bureau of the treasury and the sections of liquidation in conformity with the law of November 19, 1867.

XI. Credits not converted according to the provisions of the laws of November 30, 1850, and May 19, 1852, and which appear represented in the receipts issued in the liquidation section created by the dispositions of the first of the laws cited.

XII. Balances due on salaries and civil and military pensions, loans, advances, contracts, &c., from November 20, 1867, to June 30, 1878.

XIII. Certificates of redemption of copper coin in Chihuahua issued in conformity with the bases accorded August 20, 1868.

XIV. Certificates of deposit of copper coin called in in the State of Sinaloa, issued by virtue of the determination of the department of finance September 25, 1875.

XV. The capital of the Mexican bonds issued in London in conformity with the law of October 14, 1850.

XVI. The coupons of the Mexican bonds issued in London in conformity with the law of October 14, 1850, due and unpaid, since July 1, 1867, until their conversion be effected.

XVII. Bonds issued by virtue of the conventions of December 4 and 6, 1851, and their interest legally due until the date of their conversion.

XVIII. The capital of the bonds issued by virtue of the convention of November 12, 1853, losing their interest.

XIX. The sum that may be liquidated as just of the bonds issued in London, besides those converted in conformity with the law of October 14, 1850, losing their interest.

10th. The classification and liquidation referred to by traction XIX of clause 9 of this contract, will be made by an arbiter appointed by the Government of Mexico, and another appointed by the holders of those bonds. The arbiters shall meet in the city of Mexico, and they shall appoint, before commencing their labors, an umpire for any case of discord.

11th. The holders of the bonds referred to in clause 9 of this agreement, who for any reason may not accept the obligations which it imposes, will not enjoy the advantages stipulated in it, and will remain in the position they occupy at present, with the modifications that may result from any ulterior arrangement that may be made with them, or from the laws that the Congress of the Union, in the exercise of its attributes, may dictate, without their present titles or rights being modified or prejudiced in any manner by virtue of this agreement.

12th. So soon as the department of public works shall have received to its satisfaction the first four hundred kilometers of railroad and telegraph to which this contract refers, the executive of the republic will liquidate and make the conversion of the bonds spoken of in clause 8 of this agreement, and will put in the way of payment the interest of the debt alluded to in clause 9, making the payment in the proportion and manner established in clause 15.

13th. For each ten kilometers of railroad and telegraph constructed and received to the satisfaction of the department of public works, the Mexican. Government will redeem in money and at par $80,000 or £16,000 sterling of bonds of the new emission spoken of in clause 8 of this agreement. With respect to the first three hundred and eighty-two kilometers that are to be finished before the new emission is made, the credits stated in clause 9 of this agreement will be redeemed with the reductions established in the same clause.

14th. If at the expiration of six months after the Mexican Government has received a completed branch often kilometers of railroad and telegraph, it shall not have redeemed the titles of the national debt in the terms established by the preceding clause of this agreement, the executive will issue in favor of the company bonds for the sum due, which will bear 6 per cent, interest per annum, and be redeemable with 10 per cent, of the importation duties collected in the custom-houses of the republic.

15th. For the first seventy-six kilometers of railway constructed by the company in the first year, conformable with clause 5, the Mexican Government will allow the bonds of the new emission 1 per cent, of interest; for the hundred kilometers constructed in the second year, in conformity with said clause, another 1 per cent, of interest will be allowed to said bonds; and for each two hundred and six kilometers of railroad and telegraph constructed in the third, fourth, fifth, and sixth years, respectively, conformable to the same clause, there will be allowed progressively 1 per cent, interest for each year, until reaching 6 percent., which will be commenced to be paid on the conclusion of a thousand kilometers of railroad and telegraph within the term of six years.

16th. The Mexican Government obligates itself to set aside the necessary sums to pay semi-annually the amount of the interest accrued and due in accordance with the last foregoing clause, and the payments will be made the 30th of June and the 31st of December of each year; the funds being sent opportunely to London or Paris, as the Government of Mexico may elect, for the payment of the interest which on account of the origin of the titles should be paid there, and the expense of exchange and commission being on account of the Mexican Republic.

17th. If the creditors of the republic who accept this agreement, or the company or person to whom they may transfer the rights which it concedes to them, should only construct a part of the railroad and telegraph to which this agreement refers, the Mexican Government will not be obliged to pay more interest on the bonds belonging to the creditors who accept it, than that corresponding to part of the railroad and telegraph constructed and in the proportion fixed in clause 15, the rest of the debt being comprehended in the consolidated fund, in the state which it is in at present, and with the rights actually possessed in conformity with clause 11 of this agreement.

18th. The credit of the nation being interested in the punctual compliance with this contract, the coupons due on the liquidated bonds will be admitted for their value in the payment of 10 per cent, of all imposts or contributions levied by the federation.

19th. Half of the transit-tax collected on goods crossing from one ocean to the other by the railroad to which this contract refers will be destined with all preference to the payment of the interest on and the redemption of the bonds issued by the government by virtue of this agreement and in conformity with its clauses 13 and 15.

20th. If the Mexican Government should at any future time enter into an arrangement for the payment of all or any of the classes of the bonds of the public debt, enumerated in clause 9 of this agreement, more favorable than that made with those who accept the present, it will be extended to those who accept this arrangement, if those advantages be conceded without conditions.

TRANSITORY.

21st. This agreement will be submitted to the ratification of the Congress of the Union, and will not be valid without it.

Mexico, December 6, 1878.
M. ROMERO.

EDUARDO J. PERRY.

PEDRO DEL VALLE.

A true copy.

Mexico, December 6, 1878.
JESUS FUENTES CHUÑIZ,
Chief Clerk.

No. 338. Mr. Foster to Mr. Evarts. [Document 367]

No. 338.
Mr. Foster to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Mexico, December 18, 1878. (Received January 9, 1879.) No. 858.]

Sir: In conformity with the legal requirements, before the adjournment of Congress the minister of finance submitted to the Chamber of Deputies the estimates of receipts and expenses of the federal government for the next fiscal year. From the minister’s report I have compiled the following tables:

estimated receipts.

Import duties at custom-house $10,561,007 62

Export duties—silver, gold, and orchilla 936,416 59

Tonnage dues 43,578 64

Introduction and consumption duties of federal district 1,109,920 00

Direct taxes, real estate, &c., federal district 525,150 00

Product of stamp-tax 1,800,000 00

Rent of mints 342,014 87

Post-office gross receipts 445,156 29

Lottery tax 269,408 66

Miscellaneous sources 269,802 38

Total receipts 16,303,455 05

estimated expenses.

Legislative power $979,862 00

The executive office 48,572 40

The judicial power 346,878 00

Department of foreign affairs 193,960 00

Department of government 2,628,819 50

Department of justice 1,236,592 20

Department of public works 3,642,380 00

Department of finance 5,595,840 39

Department of war 8,661,912 45

Total expenses 23,334,636 94

The foregoing shows an increase in the estimates of expenses over those of the current year of $1,585,000. It also shows that the total receipts will fall over seven millions of dollars short of the estimated expenditures, or that the government will only be able to pay about seventy per cent, of its current expenses. The minister, in view of this prospective embarrassment, calls the attention of Congress to the necessity of equalizing the receipts and expenses, which can only be done by reducing the expenses or increasing the receipts. He states that the first method, which appears to be the most simple, has, up to the present, been decided to be impracticable, as since 1867, when the republic was reestablished, continuous efforts have been made to reduce the expenses, and so far from being successful the estimates approved by Congress have each year, with few exceptions, amounted to a greater sum than those of the year preceding. It being regarded as impossible to decrease the expenses, the minister recommends as the best method of increasing the receipts, that additional stamp taxes be imposed. He recognizes that this method of taxation is unpopular, but in view of the great difficulties presented to the imposition of new taxes of any description, that of stamps appears to offer the fewest obstacles.

The stamp tax, which is already regarded as burdensome, only produces $1,800,000 at present, and it would seem impracticable to so enlarge its operations as to yield four times that sum.

It may be confidently anticipated, therefore, that, even if peace continues, there will be, during the next fiscal year, a large deficit in the federal treasury.

I am, &c.,

JOHN W. FOSTER.

No. 339. Mr. Foster to Mr. Evarts. [Document 368]

No. 339.
Mr. Foster to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Mexico, December 23, 1878. (Received January 8, 1879.) No. 862.]

Sir: Under date of the 18th instant, the acting minister of foreign affairs sent me a note, inclosed in copy, informing me that the raider Areola, of whose acts you had instructed me to complain, had been arrested, and the minister asked that I would furnish his department with the data in my possession concerning crimes committed by Arreola, in order to communicate them to the judge having jurisdiction of his case.

I answered the minister, on the 21st, that I had already furnished him all the facts possessed by me, but stated that I would send you a copy of his note for your information and action. I also took occasion to refer him to my view of this matter of evidence, as set forth in my note to him of the 25th ultimo (see my dispatch, No. 854, of the 14th instant, inclosure 2); and closed by saying that my government would doubtless recognize in Areola’s arrest an evidence of the good disposition of that of Mexico, and would be gratified to know that this step would result in relieving the Texas frontier from his depredations in the future.

I have to suggest that information of Areola’s arrest, and of the inclosed request of the Mexican Government for evidence of his crimes, be sent to the American authorities in Texas, in the vicinity of Piedras Negras; and also that I be furnished with any further information in the possession of the Department.

I am, &c.

JOHN W. FOSTER.

[Inclosure 1 in No. 862.—Translation.]

Mr. Avila to Mr. Foster.

Department of Foreign Affairs,
Mexico, December 18, 1878.

Mr. Minister: The governor of the State of Coahuila addressed a telegram to the department of government on the 11th of the present month, inclosing another one transmitted to said governor on the 4th by the judge of first instance of Piedras Negras, giving information of the arrest of fourteen individuals, among whom is found Apolonio Areola, whom your excellency has specified as one of those who commit depredations in Texas.

Referring to the note which I addressed to your excellency on the 9th of October last respecting said individual, I pray of your excellency to be pleased, if you think proper, to transmit to this department the data which you may possess concerning the crimes committed by Arreola, in order to communicate them to the judge to whom it pertains to try this individual, if there should be legal ground for it.

I improve this occasion to reiterate to your excellency the protestations of high consideration with which I am your excellency’s obedient servant.

ELENTERIO AVILA.

[Inclosure 2 in No. 862.]

Mr. Foster to Mr. Avila.

Legation of the United States,
Mexico, December 21, 1878.

Sir: I have to acknowledge receipt of your honor’s note of the 18th instant, in which you inform me of the arrest of the Mexican citizen Areola, and request that I will send to your department the data which I may possess concerning the crimes committed by him, in order to communicate them to the judge who has jurisdiction of his case.

I have already communicated to your honor’s department all the information which I have received up to this date. I will transmit a copy of your said note to the Department of State at Washington, for its information and action; and I will not fail to advise your honor of any further data I may receive.

It will, however, be remembered that in my note of the 25th ultimo I stated the general view of this question as to evidence. Areola has for a long time borne the reputation of a notorious raider and outlaw. It may be difficult to establish his guilt, in the form required by the Mexican code, by specific proof of particular acts committed in Texas, but there can be no question of the tact of his outlawry, and it would seem from the reports of the American officials that he has, up to the recent arrest, been tolerated by the Mexican local authorities on the Rio Grande.

My government will, doubtless, recognize in his arrest an evidence of the good disposition of the Federal Government of Mexico to give attention to the complaints made through this legation, and will be gratified to know that this step has been followed by such measures as will relieve the Texas frontier from his depredations in the future.

I embrace this opportunity to reassure your honor of my very distinguished consideration.

JOHN W. FOSTER.

No. 340. Mr. Seward to Mr. Foster. [Document 369]

No. 340.
Mr. Seward to Mr. Foster.

Department of State,
Washington, January 15, 1879. No. 568.]

Sir: Your dispatches No. 849, of the 9th ultimo, and No. 850, of the 10th, have been read with attention. The first of these relates to the general question of extraordinary taxes, and the complaints preferred to you by American residents in Mexico against their exaction, while the second refers to the special case of the forced loan imposed on the late Walter Henry, and transmits the recent correspondence between yourself and Mr. Avila on that subject. Your note to the minister meets with the full approval of this Department. It is observed that the ground taken by Mr. Avila in regard to the recent decision of the supreme court of Mexico amply justifies the conclusions reached here in November last, and made the occasion of an instruction to you of the 22d of that month, which you have already acknowledged. The guarantees of the treaty securing to our citizens in Mexico the protection of the laws of that country cannot but be regarded as illusory and unsubstantial so long as those laws are ignored through the acts of subordinate military authorities, and the judgments of the highest tribunals of the land are unheeded.

The situation is one which in the highest degree warrants and demands diplomatic intervention, the right to which is certainly not debarred by the unsatisfactory assurance that the wrongs of our citizens are shared in common with those of natives.

The Department concurs in your belief that further discussion of the question of forced loans must be fruitless, unless the Mexican Government can give assurance of its willingness to take up the subject with a view to reaching an international agreement thereon.

I am, &c.,

F. W. SEWARD,
Acting Secretary.

No. 341. Mr. Seward to Mr. Foster. [Document 370]

No. 341.
Mr. Seward to Mr. Foster.

Department of State,
Washington, January 15, 1879. No. 569.]

Sir: Your dispatch No. 854, of the 14th ultimo, has been received. It is accompanied by a note to you from the Mexican foreign office, and by your reply, relative to Areola and his depredations and those of other bandits, from Mexico into Texas.

You appear to have omitted nothing toward refuting the allegations of Mr. Avila on this subject.

One of these, however, namely, that the raids into Texas are planned by citizens of the United States in Mexico, is at once so strange and so incredible, that proof of the charge should be asked for. Granting, however, for the agument’s sake, that it be as represented, yet as the conspiracy was entered into within Mexican jurisdiction, the offenders are liable to prosecution under Mexican law, if there be any, making it penal to organize an expedition to rob and murder in a neighboring country.

You are aware that there is a statute of the United States which provides ample punishment for that offense. (Revised Statutes, section 5286).

While alleging that this government has omitted to furnish such proof of the acts complained of as Mexico expects, it is gratifying to notice that Mr. Avila has the candor to acknowledge that that proof need not be as conclusive as would be required for the conviction of individuals.

The unquestionable facts are that persons in Texas are shot down by armed bands from Mexico, who then run off with the animals which the victims were watching. Even supposing that these were only wounded, their assailants were probably at too great a distance to be identified, while a murdered man cannot testify.

Mr. Avila also has the candor to assent that nothing would be so efficient for checking the raids into Texas as a good understanding between the military chiefs and local authorities on both frontiers. In this I heartily concur, and hope that such a good understanding may be had and preserved. If, as he also says, the crossing of United States troops into Mexico in pursuit of bandits is offensive to the government, and to public sentiment in that country, it is hoped that he will make a due allowance for a similar sentiment here, and especially in Texas, at the murders and robberies and burnings by Mexican outlaws.

I am, &c.,

F. W. SEWARD,
Acting Secretary.

No. 342. Mr. Foster to Mr. Evarts. [Document 371]

No. 342.
Mr. Foster to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Mexico, January 28, 1879. No. 874.]

Sir: I am constantly in receipt of inquiries from citizens of the United States as to the state of Mexican legislation regarding the construction of railroads, the sentiment of the people and present government of this country upon a railroad connection with the United States, and the probability and possibility of the latter rendering any aid by way of subsidy to such construction.

The Hon. Matias Eomero, the Mexican minister of the treasury, is now engaged, by direction of the President, in publishing in the Government Official Gazette a series of lengthy articles upon the financial, commercial, and political condition of this country, which is designed, as he states, to be a vindication before the civilized world of its disposition and ability to develop its great natural resources and invite foreign capital to aid in this work. A large part of his article has thus far been devoted to the question of railroads. But as it is only a partial and imperfect statement of the present condition of this subject, designed for circulation in the United States, and, in view of the repeated inquiries made to me as referred to above, I have thought it would be desirable to send to the Department a full statement of all the acts of the present Government of Mexico, with copies of all official documents relating to railroads, especially connected with foreign interests and concessions, in the hope that the information contained therein may be of some interest and value to our government and its citizens.

1. The first indication given by the present administration of the Mexican Government of its sentiment in regard to foreign railroad enterprises, and to foreigners, is found in the revolutionary “plan “or proclamation of General Porfirio Diaz, dated at Palo Blanco, March 21, 1876. In that proclamation he gives, among others, as reasons for “raising the standard of war against the government of President Lerdo,” that the country has been delivered to the English company with the concession of the Vera Cruz Railroad; attacks the Lerdo government for granting a charter, as it alleges, to the same company for a railroad to the city of Leon 5 states that “it has been agreed to sell the English debt to the United States, which is equivalent to selling the country to the neighboring nation”; and charges that the Lerdo government “rob us of our future and sell us to foreigners.” This proclamation is herewith transmitted in an extract marked inclosure No. 1.

2. During the progress of the revolution, General Diaz, from his headquarters in Oaxaca, issued a decree dated September 26, 1876, in which he declared “null and without any force and effect” certain specified contracts made by the Ledro government, and also “any contract which may result in any burden to the nation.” After the triumph of his revolution and the occupation by him of this capital, this decree was published in the first issue of the Official Government Gazette, and was understood to be in execution of the spirit set forth in the proclamation above referred to. At the time of the overthrow of the Lerdo government, a contract made by the minister of public works with the International Railroad Company of Texas, for the construction of a road from this city to the Rio Grande, was pending in the Mexican Congress. Upon the publication of said decree of nullification, the representative of said company, Hon. E. L. Plumb, considering that this publication rendered his contract of no effect, withdrew from the country, and the subject was never called up in the new Congress. It is due to the present government, however, to say that it has only in exceptional cases insisted upon the absolute abrogation of the contracts of the late administration, although in some cases it has required material modifications of them. The decree is herewith inclosed (No. 2).

3. The revolutionary proclamation of General Diaz denounced the contract made by President Lerdo with the Central Railway Company to construct a road from this city to Leon. In November, 1874, the Mexican Congress had granted a charter to certain parties for that purpose. A company had been formed, the surveys had been made for a large part of the distance, and the active operations of the construction were being pushed forward with commendable energy, when the revolution broke out and soon spread into the section of country where the work of construction was in progress. The result was that the workmen were in large numbers impressed into the opposing armies, the disturbed condition of that region paralyzed the efforts of the constructors, and the company was compelled to suspend its work. To this embarrassment was added another, to wit, the revolution had so impaired the credit of the country in Europe, where the company was placing its bonds, that it rendered the negotiation at that time impossible.

One of the first acts of the Diaz government, after its accession to power, was to declare, in December, 1877, the charter of this company forfeited, and it proceeded to collect the bond of $150,000 which the company had given for the faithful fulfillment of its contract. At this juncture, the principal member of the company, Mr. William Barron, a British subject, solicited my good offices in the absence of any diplomatic representative of his own government, to prevent the execution of the harsh measures decreed. My efforts were only partially successful, as the government enforced the forfeiture of the charter, including all the work done upon the road, amounting to about $80,000, and the payment to the government of $32,000, which the company had received for the lottery franchise. This subject with a statement of the reasons of the government for enforcing the forfeiture, was reported in full to the Department in my dispatch No. 524, of April 30, 1877, which is made inclosure No. 3, herewith.

4. Soon after the Mexican Railway Company (from Vera Cruz to the city of Mexico) was completed, on the 15th of March, 1873, the executive, with the full authorization of Congress, made a contract with said company, formally entered into by both contracting parties, with mutual concessions and considerations, by which a new tariff of passenger and freight charges was agreed upon, and a settlement or new arrangement of the subsidy due for the construction of the road was made. By the latter, the government agreed to pay to the company $560,000 annually for the term of twenty-five years.

At the first session of the Congress elected under the new government of General Diaz, and in execution of the programme marked out in the revolutionary proclamation appended hereto, a committee was appointed to report upon what measures were necessary to be taken in regard to the contract of tariffs of March 15, 1873. At the following session, in October, 1877, the committee submitted its report, and on the 9th of said month a bill or project of law was presented, which was, after observing the usual legislative methods of debate and readings, adopted on the 9th of November, 1877, by the unanimous vote of the chamber of deputies, and was sent to the senate. This bill authorizes the executive to stipulate for a reduction of the tariff under the contract of March 15, 1873, and if no arrangement can be agreed upon with the company, the bill expressly provides for rescinding the contract by legislative act, and sets forth a tariff of freights in view of that contingency. A copy is transmitted herewith, marked No. 4. This bill caused such a feeling of opposition on the part of the more intelligent and liberal of the public men of this country that up to this date the friends of the bill have not been able to procure its passage by the senate.

Reference has been made to the clause of the contract of March 15, 1873, which stipulates that the Mexican Government shall pay to the railroad company, in lieu of the subsidy due at the completion of the road, an annual sum of $560,000. The government of Mr. Lerdo was able to make this yearly payment until the revolution of General Diaz broke out in 1876, when, owing to the state of war into which almost the entire country was thrown, occasioning a disorganization of the finances and a large increase in the expenses, the payment of the subsidy was suspended about the 1st of March, 1876. This suspension has been continued during the period of the present administration, for more than two years and a half, notwithstanding the revolution terminated successfully more than two years ago, and in spite of the constant and persistent efforts of the company to obtain the contracted payments. The amount due the company from the government on this account at the end of last year was, say, $1,800,000.

5. Thus far I have referred to the executive and legislative acts as to railroad matters affected by the Diaz revolution. I come now to speak of the conduct observed in reference to new railroad projects.

On the 12th of November, 1877, the minister of public works celebrated a contract with William J. Palmer & Co., of the United States, for a system of railroads from the city of Mexico to the Pacific Ocean, and to the frontier of the United States, to connect with the railroad system of our country. A Translation of the material articles, and an abstract of the others of said contract or charter, are made a part of inclosure No. 5.

It will be noticed that this contract provides that the line from this city to the Pacific shall be first commenced, and that the line to the Rio Grande shall not be commenced until that to the Pacific is completed; and also that the line to the American frontier shall be commenced, not on the Rio Grande, but at the point on the line to the Pacific where the frontier branch leaves the Pacific line. The contract also stipulates that the company and all persons who may take part in it as bondholders, employés, or in any other character, “shall be considered as Mexicans in everything connected with the enterprise”; they cannot allege their foreign nationality, nor can they appeal to their government or diplomatic representative “even in case of a denial of justice.” These latter conditions as to nationality have been inserted in all railroad contracts proposed by the Mexican Government for years past, and in the opinion of American capitalists, present a serious impediment to the investment of foreign capital in Mexican railways. This contract was submitted to the Mexican Congress for its approval in November, 1877. No definite action was had, and it came up again in the session of April–May, 1878, when a strong opposition was manifested to it, in the course of which one of the leading members of the majority of that body, the Hon. Alfredo Chavero, made a notable speech, which will be referred to hereafter, opposing all railroad connections with the United States as dangerous to the independence of the country. While the contract was pending a law was passed authorizing the executive to contract with the governors of States for the construction of railroads within their respective State limits. Under this law the federal executive has made thirteen contracts for as many independent roads or branches, which form a serious impediment to the carrying out of any general system of trunk lines. The friends of the Palmer contract urged its passage, but in lieu and as a modification thereof the committees of industry, to whom the general subject belongs, introduced a bill on the last working-day of the session, which was passed immediately, by a vote of 115 to 12, authorizing the executive to contract for a railroad from the city of Mexico to the Pacific Ocean only, thus defeating the Palmer contract. This latter bill, of which I transmit a translation as a part of inclosure No. 5, was sent to the senate, but has not as yet received any definite action of that body.

The Palmer contract was again brought up, with the approval of the minister of public works, in the last Congress, which met in September last. But all the efforts of the friends of a railroad connection with the United States proved fruitless, as the joint committees to whom the contract was referred did not report till the last working-day of the session, December 14, 1878, and then only obtained leave to submit their report in writing, which has just within the last few days been made public. I send a translation of those parts of the report of interest to the subject of the present dispatch, as a part of inclosure No. 5.

It will be seen that this report, which is a unanimous one on the part of the joint committees, asserts: (1st) that the most important railroad for Mexico is an interoceanic one within Mexican territory; (2d) that the Palmer contract should be amended so as to require the road to the Pacific to be the main trunk line, to avoid being subjugated to the monopoly of an American company, to the serious danger of the national independence; (3d) that the contract should be so amended as to require the company not to construct lines parallel or in competition with the state railroads without the consent of the latter; and (4th) that the railroad towards the United States should not make a connection with the American system, but should be required to go to Tampico or Matamoros, and thus the communication with the United States would be by water. The report concludes that the objects had in view in making these amendments have been to free Mexico from being made a colony or kind of a dependency of the United States and to prevent the two countries from being united by iron bands, which latter would cause only the scorn and indignation of future generations.

Such is the past and present state of the Palmer contract or charter, which has been the leading American enterprise before the Congress of the Diaz government.

6. On the 12th of October, 1877, the minister of public works made a contract or charter with Messrs. Ferguson & Lynion, representing American interests, for the construction of a railroad from the Mexican seaport of Guaymas, in the State of Sonora, to the American frontier, to connect with the Southern Pacific Road in Arizona. A translation of the material parts of said contract is inclosed (No. 6). This contract was submitted to Congress for approval in October, 1877, but no definite action being had, it went over to the session in April–May, 1878. Here it encountered much the same opposition and fate as that of the Palmer contract just stated, and it failed to pass that body at that or the subsequent and last session, ending December 15, 1878.

I have been informed that Messrs. Ferguson & Lymon have abandoned the hope of securing the approval of Congress to the Sonora charter, and are now seeking to revive, through the minister of public works, an old charter granted to David Boyle Blair in 1875, which had lapsed from the disinclination of capitalists to accept its provisions.

7. The last contract made by the executive with American parties was that for the construction of a railroad across the Isthmus of Tehuantepec, in favor of Mr. H. H. Hall, in representation of a New York company, which contract was signed on the 31st of October, 1878, and immediately submitted to Congress, and of which a partial translation is inclosed (No. 7). This charter, although it was not open to the objections urged against the lines leading to the American frontier, met with such opposition that it failed to pass Congress, and is still pending in that body. A considerable majority of the Chamber of Deputies seemed to favor the measure, and the company hope to secure its passage at the next session.

8. On the 6th of December, 1878, the Mexican minister of finance signed and sent to Congress a conditional agreement with certain parties, having in view a new funding of the public debt and the construction of a railroad from this city to the Pacific Ocean, with branches. The instrument should more properly be termed bases for a future contract, as it in express terms binds no one but the parties who may hereafter enter into the arrangement. I have already transmitted a translation of the agreement with my dispatch No. 855, of December 10 last, with full explanation of its contemplated objects. As it has met with and will encounter serious opposition in this country, and as there appears almost no probability of its realization, I do not think it worth while to do more in this connection than refer to my previous dispatch on the subject.

9. One phase of the railroad connection between Mexico and the United States is illustrated by the sentiments developed in this country on account of a series of resolutions introduced into the Senate of the United States by Senator Morgan on the 8th of May, 1878, of which I inclose a copy herewith (No. 8). These resolutions breathe a most friendly spirit, and were designed to develop a better state of political and commercial relations between the two republics. The last of the series contemplated a “treaty for the protection and encouragement of such citizens of either country as should with the consent of the Government of Mexico build and equip a line of railroad from the city of Mexico to the Rio Grande.” These resolutions, being published in this city, were denounced by the press as “a proposition to establish a protectorate” over Mexico. I give an extract from the comments of the oldest and one of the most prudent and influential newspapers in this country, the Siglo XIX, in inclosure No. 8.

The same subject has been within a few days past referred to in an official paper, prepared by order of President Diaz, by Senor Romero, minister of the treasury, and published in the official government newspaper. Señor Romero states that Mexico would not consent to celebrate with any government such a treaty in regard to railroads as that proposed by Senator Morgan, and least of all with the United States. (See inclosure No. 8.)

10. One of the leading speeches delivered in Congress in May last in opposition to the Palmer contract was that made by Hon. Alfredo Chavero, a gentleman of long experience in public life, of education and intelligence, and one of the most prominent and influential members of the ruling party in Congress. This speech, while it attacks the financial responsibility of the company, maintains that “it is very poor policy, very injudicious to establish within our country a powerful American company”5 that “we should always fear the United States,” and that the contract ought to be rejected in order to avoid “a danger for the independence and the future of the country.” The speech is inclosed, marked No. 9. It is similar in sentiment to those which have frequently been delivered in Congress of late years by some of the most distinguished statesmen whenever the question of railroad charters to the United States has been under consideration. Additional significance has been given to this speech from the fact that at the opening of the next Congress, newly elected in September last, Señor Chavero was chosen speaker of the Chamber of Deputies; and in reply to the opening address of the President of the Republic, in the presence of the diplomatic representatives as invited guests, in replying officially to the President’s address, he referred to the action of the previous Congress in regard to the Palmer contract, and stated that subsequent events had shown the wisdom of that action.

11. To complete the foregoing statement it is proper to add an exhibit of the present financial condition of Mexico, in order to form an estimate of its ability to pay subsidies for railroad construction. This statement is appended, marked inclosure No. 10. From this it appears that the government owes a foreign debt of over $130,000,000; that it has pledged the entire available receipts of the custom-houses and repledged a part of them, to the extent of 60 per cent., to secure the payment of the interest and the redemption of the principal of that debt, but for nearly a generation past has not been able, owing to its financial necessities, to make effective those pledges or pay the interest; that the present receipts of the federal treasury are only 70 per cent, of the expenses; that the receipts are decreasing and the expenses are increasing; that it has suspended for nearly three years its subsidy to the only completed line of railroad in the country, and that it has a large domestic or interior debt of unknown amount.

The foregoing statement is submitted in the hope that it may in some degree furnish the information asked of this legation in regard to Mexican railroads and railroad charters and construction.

I am, sir, &c.,

JOHN W. FOSTER.

[Inclosures.]

1. General Diaz’s revolutionary plan.

2. Decree annulling contracts of the Lerdo government.

3. Forfeiture of Central Railroad charter.

4. Bill modifying tariffs of Mexican Railroad Company.

5. Palmer contract; bill for interoceanic road; and report of joint committees of Congress.

6. The Sonora charter.

7. The Tehuantepec charter.

8. Senator Morgan’s resolutions; comments of Mexican press; and opinion of Mexican Government.

9. Chavero’s speech.

10. Financial statement of Mexican treasury.

[Inclosure 1 in No. 874.]

General Diaz’s revolutionary proclamation.

[Extract.]

Camp of Palo Blanco,
March 21, 1876.

To the Mexican People:

Considering * * * that the country has been delivered to the English company, with the concession of the Vera Cruz Railroad, and the scandalous agreement in regard to tariffs; that the excessive freights collected have stagnated commerce and agriculture; that by the monopoly of this line the establishment of other lines has been impeded, causing thus a lack of equilibrium in the commerce of the interior, the extinction of all the other parts of the republic, and the most frightful misery in all parts; that the government has granted to the same company, under pretense of a railroad to Leon, the privilege of instituting lotteries, thus violating the constitution; that the President and his favorites have stipulated for the acknowledgment of the enormous English debt, in consideration of $2,000,000 paid to them through their agencies; that this acknowledgment, besides being immoral, is unjust, as Mexico has not been indemnified for losses caused by the intervention; that aside from this infamy, it has been agreed to sell that debt to the United States, which is equivalent to selling the country to the neighboring nation; that we do not merit the name of Mexican citizens, not even of men, if we consent that those persons shall remain at the head of the administration, who thus rob us of our future, and sell us to foreigners.

* * * * * * *

In the name of outraged society and of the vilified Mexican people, we raise the standard of war against our common oppressors, proclaiming the following plan:

* * * * * * *

PORFIRIO DIAZ,
(and others.)

[Inclosure 2 in No. 874.]

[From the Diario Oficial, Mexico, December 4, 1876. General Diaz’s decree nullifying contracts or Lerdo Government.]

Porfirio Diaz, general-in-chief of the national constitutional army of the United Mexican States, to its inhabitants:

Know ye, that in the exercise of the war powers with which the national will has invested me, I have thought proper to decree the following: Article 1. The contracts of lease of the mints of the republic are null, and without any force or effect, which Sebastian Lerdo de Tejada or his agents may have made, as shall also be other contracts which he may make in the future, whether they refer to these mints or to any other branch of the administration.

Article 2. The obligations shall likewise be null and of no value which the so-called government of Sebastian Lerdo may contract with the bondholders of the English debt, in any negotiation which may be agreed upon with them or their agents relative to the recognition of said debt.

Article 3. Any contract which may result in any burden to the nation shall also be null and of no force.

Article 4. The signers of any of the contracts to which the preceding articles refer, and all the individuals who directly or indirectly participate in their celebration, shall be deprived of every right, shall be judged by military commissions, and punished as traitors to the country, with the penalty which belongs to that crime, without prejudicing the civil responsibility which they may incur to the treasury or to the private individuals who may be damaged by reason of any contract with the said persons.

Article 5. The sales, mortgages, or agreements which the responsible parties referred to in this decree and that of August 28 last may pretend to make, in order to avoid the civil responsibility which they may incur, apparently disposing of the property which they possess, shall have no force or effect from the moment in which the military commission which may judge them imposes upon them any penalty. Let it be printed, circulated, and communicated to whom it pertains for its most exact observance.

Given in Oaxaca the 26th of September, 1876.
PORFIRIO DIAZ.

Luis G. Curell, Secretary.

[Inclosure 3 in No. 874.]

Forfeiture of Central Railroad charter and confiscation of property.

Legation of the United States,
Mexico, April 20, 1877. No. 524.]

Sir: In the month of December last I was called upon by the English banking and business house of Messrs. Barron, Forbes & Co., of this city, in the absence of a British diplomatic representative, to interpose my good offices with the government of General Diaz to prevent, if possible, the forfeiture of the concession granted by the Mexican Government to the Central Railway Company, of which company this firm was the leading member; and if the forfeiture of the concession was not to be avoided, to use my influence to save the property of this house from confiscation or embargo, as a threatened consequence of the forfeiture of the concession.

The facts of the case, as I found upon investigation, were as follows: In November, 1874, the Mexican Congress granted to certain specified persons a concession to construct a railroad from the city of Mexico to Leon in the State of Guanajuato, a distance of near three hundred miles, with power to organize a company to carry out the concession. The company was organized in conformity with the law of concession, under the name of the Central Railroad Company, the said house of Barron, Forbes & Co. being the leading members thereof. A bond in the sum of $150,000 was executed for the faithful performance of the terms of the concession on the part of the company, and as a security for the bond the hacienda of Barron, Forbes & Co., in the State of Morelos, and the country seat of St. D. Antonio Escundon, another member of the company, were mortgaged to the government. In due time the company proceeded to make the surveys and commenced the actual work of construction. But the revolution, which finally triumphed in December last, having been inaugurated, the company claimed that on account of its existence it was impossible to comply with the stipulations of the concession in respect to the times fixed for the completion of a certain extent of the road, for various reasons, among which were the following: the formidable character of the revolution threatening the overthrow of the then existing government had greatly impaired the credit of the company in the foreign money markets; and the forced impressment for the opposing armies and the disturbed condition of the country having greatly raised the price of labor, made it difficult to procure workmen and paralyzed the efforts of the company. Application was accordingly made to the minister of public works for an extension of the time fixed for the completion of the specified extent of the road before the date specified. The application was not acted upon by the government until after the expiration of the date fixed for completion of the extent of road required; but when acted upon (within a few weeks after the date) the government granted the application of the company in full and authorized the extension of the time.

Since the overthrow of the constitutional government of President Lerdo, the present revolutionary government of General Diaz, without giving the company any opportunity to be heard, declared the forfeiture or caducity (caducidad) of the concession, and this declaration was soon after followed by the embargo of the hacienda of Messrs. Barron, Forbes & Co., and the other mortgaged property, and the same were placed in the hands of government receivers, with instructions to proceed by summary sale to realize the amount of the bond of $150,000 as the penalty for the failure to construct the extent of road specified in the time fixed by the concession.

In view of the fact that there was no official representative of the British Government in this country, and that I am accustomed in urgent cases to exert my good offices, when requested, in behalf of resident British subjects and interests, I consented to endeavor to modify the action of the government of General Diaz, especially as I was satisfied that the course being pursued was not only an injustice to Messrs. Barron, Forbes & Co., but prejudicial to the credit and material development of tins country. I therefore called upon Mr. Vallarta, General Diaz’s minister of foreign affairs, and had a lengthly conversation with him in December, and have referred to the subject at various interviews I have had with him since that date.

The position assumed by the present government was that the action of the Lerdo government was void in attempting to renew the concession after it had expired by the failure of the company to construct the extent of road in the time fixed, and that that failure had forfeited the concession. I endeavored to impress upon Mr. Vallarta the bad policy of a new and revolutionary government declaring null and void the acts of a preceding government relating to contracts, especially with foreigners who are investing their capital in public improvements; and I called Ms attention to the fact that the company had made its application to the government for an extension of time, with the reasons thereof, some time before the time fixed had expired, and that if the government had neglected to give the application prompt attention, the company ought not to be punished for this failure on the part of the government. I also remonstrated against the hasty action of General Diaz’s government in declaring the concession forfeited without giving the company an opportunity to be heard, and in proceeding so summarily to embargo the property of Messrs. Barron, Forbes & Co. I regarded it as a violation of individual rights which was wholly unwarranted by any principle of law, and expressly so when the concession itself expressly provided, in its fifteenth article, that “when any doubt or question shall arise respecting the interpretation or compliance with any of the stipulations of the present contract, it shall be decided by the competent federal tribunals of the republic, and in conformity with the laws thereof.” Mr. Vallarta claimed that the fifteenth article did not confer upon the courts the right to decide upon the question of the failure of the company to comply with the requirements as to progress of construction of the work, which he claimed was an administrative function, and that the government, in declaring the concession forfeited, was clearly justified by the principles of the civil law, which was the basis of Mexican jurisprudence. To which I replied that I did not understand that party to a contract freely entered into could plead a general principle of the civil, common, or any other law in avoidance of the plain stipulation of the contract of such a character as the fifteenth article. I transmit herewith a printed copy of the law or contract of concession for your information.

The government persisting in its action, as heretofore stated, Messrs. Barron, Forbes &Co. applied to the federal court of this district for a writ of “amparo,” or injunction, against the proceedings of the government. In the mean time, however, they continued to bring to bear upon General Diaz and the minister of public works whatever influence they could command; and after much delay, negotiations, and expense they have been able to obtain the release from embargo of their valuable hacienda by recognizing the forfeiture of the concession, including all expenditures made upon the road, amounting to about $80,000, and the payment of $32,000 to the goverment, which it alleged the company had received for the lottery franchise granted in the concession.

The loss sustained by Messrs. Barron, Forbes & Co. has been very considerable, but they congratulate themselves that it has not been so great as the government at first threatened.

I am, &c.,

JOHN W. FOSTER.

[Inclosure 4 in No. 874.]

Bill for the modification of the tariffs of the Mexican Railway passed by the Chamber of Deputies November 9, 1877.

Article 1. The executive is authorized to stipulate with the Mexican Railway Company for a reduction in the present tariffs that may facilitate the exportation of national products.

Article 2. In case it does not succeed, the necessary measures will be taken to bring about the rescinding of the contract of March 15, 1873.

Article 3. The basis for the reduction referred to above shall be the following: 1st. National products destined for exportation shall be divided into first, second, and third classes, and the freights paid to the Mexican Railway from Mexico to Vera Cruz per cargo of sixteen arrabos (25 pounds each) shall be $3 for the first class, $2 for the second, and $1.25 for the third; and from intermediate stations rates in proportion to these quotas shall be paid, according to the number of kilometers passed over from the intermediate stations to the port.

2d. The classification of the goods into the three classes stated shall be made in proportion to the value of each one of them; and consequently, cereals and all kinds of grain will be placed in the third class; cereals and grain whose value exceeds $20 per cargo being excepted from this rule.

3d. An equitative reduction shall also be made in the rates paid at present by national products going to the port, even when not intended to be exported.

4th. A similar reduction will be made on the freight of national products coming up the road, wherever they may come from; the rates to be calculated in proportion to the distance traversed.

5th. The classification referred to in the second clause shall continue in force five years, and at the expiration of this term it will be revived with the mutual agreement of the department of public works and the railway company.

6th. National products intended for exportation may remain as long as twenty days in the warehouses of the company without paying storage; after this they will pay the quotas fixed by the present regulations of the company for the first week.

7th. Upon issuing regulations for the use of the wharf and steam-launches possessed by the company, the executive will see that such a use does not become a monopoly in favor of the company, that may injure the working class of the port or curtail the liberty of exporters to select any point for embarkation.

8th. The executive is authorized to purchase the wharf in case the company shall not be satisfied with the conditions re-established for its use.

Article 4. The agreement which, in accordance with these bases, or others similar to those, may be made by the executive, will be submitted to the approval of Congress? and will in no way affect the legislation at present before the tribunals, nor any of the other questions pending between the executive and the Mexican Railway Company.

Committee-room of the Chamber of Deputies, Mexico, October 8, 1877.
BLAS ESCOUTRIA.

FELIX ROMERO.

G. ROSAS.

ANTONIO CARVAJAL.

[The report was adopted on the 9th of November, 1877, by the unanimous vote of all the deputies present, 134 members. See Diario Oficial, November 14, 1877.]

[Inclosure 5 in No. 874.—Translation.]

The Palmer-Sullivan Charter.

Contract of the minister of public works with W. J. Palmer & Co. for the construction of a railroad from the city of Mexico to the Pacific Ocean, and to the Rio Grande.

Chapter I.

Article 1. The firm of W. J. Palmer, James Sullivan & Co., and the limited companies it may organize, are authorized to construct and to operate during ninety-nine years, a line of railroad and its corresponding telegraph from the city of Mexico to the Pacific Ocean, and to the Rio Grande. (Here follows a provision that the government may purchase the road at the expiration of ninety-nine years.)

Art. 2. The route the line shall follow from the city of Mexico to the Pacific Ocean shall be that which, being surveyed by the company and approved by the department of public works, may result the most convenient to place the capital of the republic in communication, either by means of the principal line or the shortest branches which may be practicable, with the cities of Queretaro, Celaya, Salamanca, Irapuato, Marelia, Guanajuato, Silao, Leon, Lagos, Guadalajura, and Toluea (in case the company which at present hold the concession for the line between the city of Mexico and that named last should not conclude it within the term stipulated in this new concession, or in case said company should make an agreement with W. J. Palmer, James Sullivan & Co.) and to establish communication from the city of Mexico to the Pacific Ocean, at any point of the coast from the port of Manzanillo to that of San Bias, inclusive, that may be selected by the company with the approbation of the deparment of public works. The branches which the convenience of the routes oblige the company to construct in order that none of the aforementioned places remain unconnected with the trunk line, shall be constructed, kept in order, and operated by it on the same bases as the principal line.

Article 3. The line to the Rio Grande shall branch off from the road to the Pacific at the point which, according to the surveys of the company approved by the department of public works, may appear most convenient, and shall follow the course which, in conformity with the same requisites, may appear most appropriate to place the capital of the republic in direct communication, either by means of the principal line or the necessary branches, by the shortest practicable route (and which branches the company is obliged to construct, keep in order, and operate on the same basis as the principal line), with the cities of Aguasealientes, Zacatecas, Dnrango, Chihuahua, San Luis Potosi, Saltillo, and Monterey, striking the Rio Grande in Chihuahua or anywhere else the company, after the necessary surveys, may choose, with the approbation of the executive, at which point the railway will make connections, if it is convenient and possible, with some other road of the United States.

Article 4 provides for the necessary surveys and report thereof to the department of public works.

Article 5. The work of construction on the principal line of railway from Mexico to the Pacific shall commence so soon as the plans of the first section of one hundred and fifty kilometers are approved, and within eighteen months, counted from the same date, one hundred and fifty kilometers of said line shall be completed. In each of the subsequent years, after the expiration of the eighteen months, there shall be constructed at least one hundred and fifty kilometers more.

Article 6. So soon as the necessary surveys shall be completed and the point on the Pacific where the railroad is to touch is determined, the work shall commence at that point. The construction of the line from the Rio Grande cannot be commenced until the completion of the trunk-line from Mexico to the Pacific, and then it shall be commenced exactly at the point of union with that of the Pacific.

Article 7. The trunk-line to the Pacific shall be completed within the term of five years, and that to the Rio Grande within the term of eight years, counted from the date of the promulgation of the present concession.

Article 8 provides for a premium or bonus if the two roads are finished before the time fixed.

Article 9 provides that the gauge of the road shall be three feet.

Chapter II.

Article 10. The possession and exercise of all the rights and concessions to which the present law refers, as well as the compliance with all the obligations which it imposes, will pertain to the company or companies which William J. Palmer may organize.

Article 11. That said company or companies which it may organize, and all the persons who may take part in the former or the latter as bondholders, employe’s, or in any other character whatever, shall he considered as Mexicans, in everything connected with the said enterprise within the territory of the republic. They cannot allege rights with respect to the interests or business relating to the enterprise, nor can they have, even when they allege a denial of justice, other rights or other means of enforcing them, in anything concerning the said enterprise, than those which the laws of the republic concede to Mexicans; nor shall they employ other proceedings than those established by the Mexican tribunals; the enterprise remaining, in consequence, deprived of all right of foreign nationality, and the introduction of diplomatic agents in business relating to it being forever prohibited.

Article 12 provides that, within three months after the acceptance of the required bond, $4,000,000 shall be subscribed, of which 10 per cent, shall be paid up; subscriptions to be opened in Mexico as well as abroad.

Article 13. The statutes or regulations of the company to be approved by the department of public works.

Article 14. The company to keep an office in Mexico with a resident directory of five members, two of whom to be appointed by the government.

Articles 15 and 16. An agent to be kept in the city of Mexico, and all questions to be settled by the Mexican courts.

Articles 17 and 18 relate to the bonds, responsibility of holders, and the property of the company.

Article 19. Right to connect with the other roads and manner of making connection with them.

Chapter III.

Article 20. Neither the contracting company, nor any other that may succeed it in the future, can at any time transfer, dispose of, or hypothecate the concessions of the present law, relating to the railroad, the telegraph, or the annexed property, or the shares that may be issued, to any foreign government or state, nor admit a foreign government or state, in any case, as a partner in the enterprise, and any stipulation that may be made in violation of this article will be null and of no value.

Article 21. Right to emit preferred bonds, execute mortgages and obligations, with the method of registering them.

Article 22. To aid the construction of the lines of railway and telegraph to which this concession refers, the government obligates itself to give to the company a subsidy of $7,000 for each kilometer of railroad constructed and approved by the department of public works, according to the terms of this law, without duplicating the subsidy in case the company should construct a double track. This subsidy will only be commenced to be paid when the company shall have constructed and put in running order the first hundred and fifty kilometers. After this it will be paid by sections of twenty kilometers completed and approved by the department of public works. The obligations contracted by the government will in no case extend to giving a subsidy for a distance exceeding a total of two thousand seven hundred kilometers, without embracing in this extent the Toluca line in the case already mentioned in article 2, nor that from Durango to the Rio Grande, the sections of which will be subventioned the same as the others at the rate of $7,000 per kilometer constructed. The subsidy will be paid by the general treasury of the nation; but if any general law should create a more favorable mode for the payment of subventions of railroads, this contract will be accommodated to it. The company can under any circumstances export, free of duties, sums equal to the amount of the subventions when they shall be due.

Articles 23 and 24. Concede a right of way of 70 meters in width and the free use and working of all public grounds and mines in their limit, specifying the method of appropriating private property.

Articles 25 and 26. Free importation of all materials and supplies of every description for the construction and operation of the railroad for the term of twenty years, and exemption from internal taxation for fifty years. The officers and employés to be exempt from military service.

Article 27. Responsibility of the company for wages and materials on account of sub-constructors.

Article 28. The company to provide docks, wharves, and warehouses at the termini of the roads for the convenience of foreign commerce.

Article 29. The first line of steamers that shall be established from the Pacific terminus to Australia, Asia, North, South, or Central America, shall be exempt from all port duties. Vessels loaded with coal, machinery, or supplies for said steamers shall enjoy the same privileges as shall also those bringing rails and other materials for the railroad. Vessels coming to Vera Cruz conveying the same material shall enjoy the same rights. These privileges shall continue five years after the line to the Rio Grande is finished.

Article 30. The government will not collect transit tax during the first twenty-five years after the conclusion of the different lines, but the company will be allowed to collect $1 for each passenger and each ton of freight making through transit. Passports for passengers will not be required.

Artice 31. The terms fixed in this contract will be extended in cases of fuerza mayor.

Article 32. * * * 3. Within six months, counted from the promulgation of this law, the company will deposit the sum of $300,000 in the Monte de Piedad, of this capital, or give as security for an equal amount solvent proprietors or merchants domiciled in the republic, to the satisfaction of the government, the deposit or the security being indispensable to the existence and validity of the concessions made in this law, and the company losing the stated sum in case of not complying with the obligations stipulated in article 5. * * *

Article 33 gives causes for the forfeiture of the concession.

Article 34 provides for an annual report to be made by the company.

Article 35. Tariffs * * * Passengers: first class, 3 cents per kilometer; second class, 2 cents per kilometer. Freights per kilometer: first class, 5 cents per ton; second class, 4 cents per ton; third class, 2½ cents per ton.

Article 36 authorizes the company to establish discriminating tariffs in favor of large amounts or great distances.

Article 37 authorizes a special tariff for baggage and exceptional goods.

Article 38. No increase of the tariff can be made without the approval of the department of public works, and then requires to be published two mouths before taking effect.

Article 39. Charges shall always be made on a basis of perfect equality.

Article 40. The dividing of the three classes of freight to be approved by the department of public works.

Article 41. Transportation for the government to be done at a reduction of 50 per cent, on the ordinary tariff.

Article 42. Mails to be carried free for twenty years.

A bill conferring upon the executive power to contract for a railroad from the city of Mexico to the Pacific.

[Extract from official debates of the Chamber of Deputies, May 29, 1878, page 450.]

[Translation.]

The first and second joint committees on industry presented the following amendment to the projected law under discussion relative to an interoceanic railroad (W. J. Palmer & Co.):

Sole Article. Authorization is given to the President of the Republic to the end that during the recess of the chambers he may contract for the construction and operation of an interoceanic railroad, with the understanding that the (other) contracting party will be obliged to avail himself of the concessions for lines conceded to the States, which will construct them themselves, or by means of the companies to which they concede such right; in order to do which, the executive will have to obtain the consent of the said States, and without being permitted the construction of parallel lines or lines in competition with the States.”

This bill being immediately taken into consideration, it was approved in general by 116 votes to 7, and in detail by 115 votes to 12; then being sent to the Senate according to the constitutional requirements.

[Translation.]

Report of the first and second joint committees of industry of the Chamber of Deputies upon the contract entered into by the executive of the union with James Sullivan, for himself and in the name of William J. Palmer & Co., for the construction and operation of various railroads from Mexico to the Pacific Ocean and to the River Bravo del Norte (Rio Grande).

preliminary notes.

Note No. 1.

On the 12th of November, 1877, the minister of public works of Mexico celebrated a contract with William J. Palmer & Co., of the United States, through their representative, Mr. James Sullivan, for the construction of a system of railroads from the city of Mexico to the Pacific Ocean and to the frontier of the United States, to connect with the railroad system of that country.

Article 2d of said contract provides for the construction of the railroad from the city of Mexico to some point on the Pacific Ocean at or between the ports of San Bias and Manzanillo, passing through en route the cities of Queretaro, Celaya, Salamanca, Irapuato, Morelia, Guanajuato, Silao, Leon, Lagos, Guadalajara, and Toluca, or connecting the said cities with the main line by branch roads.

Article 3d provides that the line to the Rio Grande shall leave the line to the Pacific Ocean at such point as shall appear the most convenient, after the proper surveys are made, with the approval of the minister of public works; that this line shall touch the Rio Grande in Chihuahua or such other point as the company, after the necessary surveys, may select, with the approval of the said minister; and that said line shall connect either directly or by branches the cities of Aguascalientes, Zacatecas, Durango, Chihuahua, San Luis Potosi, Saltillo, and Monterey.

Article 6 provides that the line to the Pacific Ocean shall be commenced at the point fixed on said ocean immediately after the surveys; and that the line to the Rio Grande shall not be commenced until the line from the Pacific to the city of Mexico is finished.

Note No. 2.

This contract was submitted to the national Congress for its approval at its session in November, 1877. No definite action was had at that session of Congress. At the next session, in April-May, 1878, a strong opposition was manifested. During the pendency of the contract a law was passed authorizing the federal executive to contract with the governors of States for the construction of railroads within their respective State limits. Finally the contract of W. J. Palmer & Co. failed to pass, and in lieu thereof a bill was introduced into the Chamber of Deputies by the committees of industry on the last working day of the session and passed immediately on the same day by a vote 115 yeas to 12 nays authorizing the executive to contract for a railroad line from the city of Mexico to the Pacific Ocean only, and upon the express condition that arrangements must be made with the States with which the executive may have made contracts, and that in no case should lines he constructed parallel to the State railroads or in competition with them. A new Congress was elected in July, 1878, and when it convened in September last the contract of W. J. Palmer & Co. was, with the approval of the minister of public works, submitted to the new Chamber of Deputies. The contract was again sent to the Committees of industry of the Chamber of Deputies for examination and report. Notwithstanding the earnest and persistent endeavors of the friends in Congress of an international railroad to connect with the American system of roads, no final report could be obtained from the committees until the day before the adjournment, December 14, 1878, when it was impossible to obtain any action of Congress on the contract. The report of the committees has only been printed and made public within the last few days. Translations of extracts from said report are given below, embracing such parts of the report as relate to the 2d, 3d, and 6th articles of the contract referred to above and to the general subject of a railroad connection with the United States.

Note No. 3.

Upon reading the extracts hereafter given from the report of the committees of industry of the Chamber of Deputies it will be seen that the following points are made therein: 1st. That the most imporant railroad for Mexico, the most beneficial to its nationality, and the most convienient for commerce, is an interoceanic road, from ocean to ocean, within Mexican territory.

2d. That article 2d to the contract should be so amended as to expressly require that the line to the Pacific should be the main trunk, in place of the line to the Rio Grande, to avoid being subjugated by the monopoly of an American company, to the serious danger of the national independence.

3d. That the contract should be so amended as to require the company not to contact lines parallel with or in competition with those projected by the States, and with permission to obtain from the States the right of way or connection with their lines.

4th. That article 3d of the contract should be so amended as to fix the point where the branch line should leave the main trunk at or beyond Guadalajara; and that said branch line should only extend, in the direction of the Bio Grande, to Tampico, or at the farthest to Matamoros. The report states that if these modifications are not made, and a direct connection with the American system of railroads is permitted (as contemplated in the original contract) at a point not a Mexican seaport, the benefits to be derived from the railroad would be realized outside of Mexico and without profit to it. The report contemplates that the competition in Mexico of American commerce with that of Europe must be by water communication and not by railroad.

The report concludes by stating that the object which the committees have had in view in proposing the amendments to the Palmer contract referred to, which require the proposed railroad to be (1st) a purely interoceanic line, and (2d) which prevent its connection with the American system of railroads, has been to free Mexico from being made a colony or kind of a dependency of the United States; that only by a system of railroads confined to Mexican ports alone can the country advance with liberty and its independence be guaranteed; and never would the committees consent to having the two republics united by iron bands (a railroad), as by doing so they could hope for nothing but scorn and indignation from future generations.

The translation of the extracts from the report is as follows:

Mexico, January 28, 1879.

secretary’s office of the chamber of deputies of the congress of the union.

first and second joint committees of industry.

* * * * * * *

Referring to an interoceanic communication the committees say:

“The first attempts were made by Tehauntepec, as was natural, and even to-day this respectable chamber has pending the discussion of the last project; but as the most important road in our opinion is that which would pass from ocean to ocean through the center of the republic, touching at its most important centers of population, we think this is the most worthy of the care and attention of the legislative power of the union, as it is the most beneficial to our nationality, the most convenient for commerce, until the Tehuantepec canal is realized perhaps the shortest and safest, and finally would result in making Mexico the radiating center of universal commerce, at the same time developing its own commerce, as, being midway between Asia and Europe, it could realize this result at the least price, being in advantageous competition with all markets.

* * * * * * *

“With respect to article 2d, it is indispensible to make some observations of grave importance. The first that occurs is the simple consideration of its views, and is the following: Will the line from Mexico to the Pacific necessarily be a trunk line? It appears not, as the connection of these two points, according to the wording of the article, may he by means of a principal line or the necessary branches; so that in this part the fundamental idea of the concession specified in article 1st is departed from, making possible as a result the ambiguity that the line from the Pacific would come directly, not to the capital of the republic, but to some point which the company might consider convenient to its interests. The princial interoceanic communication, the true trunk-line, would result to be that which would afterwards be constructed in the direction of the Rio Grande, which is the straightest under this system; the greater part of the republic remaining, by the realization of this idea [cunningly involved by the wording of Article No. 2], at one side of the American trunk-line, as a species of appendix or tributary of secondary importance; and besides, the republic would be constructing through its territory, with its own money and its own elements, a direct interoceanic line for the United States of the North, and the so-called interoceanic road of Mexico would never exist solely and exclusively of and for this country. The second observation is also grave, as conceding the construction and operation of the branches to Queretaro, Celaya, Salamanca, Guanajuato, Silao, Leon, Lagos, Guadalajara, and Toluca, and these branches being united with those spoken of in article 3 in the line to the Rio Grande, would result in the government disposing of the entire system of railroads in the center of the republic, with serious damage to commerce, to the industries, and to agriculture, which sooner or later would be subjugated by the monopoly of a company whose principal interests are in the neighboring republic; and would also result in a serious danger to the national independence and autonomy, and the country being enveloped in a real network of iron would be deficient in elements for its real progress and in resources for its defense in case of necessity. The third and last consideration has, in our opinion, as much importance as the preceding ones, consisting in the fact that Mr. Sullivan’s concession, as it now exists, would kill the concessions which have been made to the States, because either there would be established by his company parallel lines, or they (the States) would be compelled to contract with Mr. Sullivan, or, finally, they would be cast aside by means of a general combination of interests which would be superior to the interests of the States; so that the result would in any case be that these enterprises could not exist, and that the money of the republic, with its own resources conceded to Mr. Sullivan by way of a subsidy or otherwise, would destroy the interests of the republic itself in the States, and close the door to all spirit of Mexican or European enterprise.

“For these reasons the committees are of the opinion that the conditions of article 2d should not be approved, unless amended so as to only embrace a trunk line direct from the most convenient point on the Pacific Ocean to the capital of the republic, touching the most important centers of population in its route, and with permission for the companies to afterwards make contracts with the States for the construction, right of way, or connection with their private lines.

“With respect to article 3d the same observations should be made in general as with regard to the foregoing, but there are others proper and especial with respect to the different points which it embraces. In the first place, the committees think, the existence of the trunk road from the Pacific to the capital of the republic being taken for granted, that the branching off of the line going to the north or northeast should not take place this side of the capital of the State of Jalisco (Guadalajara), a point by which doubtless it would have to pass in order to fulfill the requirements of the national interests, this being understood even in case the aforesaid trunk line should in the course of time have a double track; in the second place, the committees also think the line in question should go to Tampico or at the farthest (north) to the port of Matamoros; in the third place, that the company could also make contracts of connection, right of way, or construction with the States of Aguascalientes, Zacatecas, San Luis Potosi, and Nuevo Leon, which already have their own concessions, as the article being amended in this manner it would produce the results which the country expects to obtain by the construction of a road really interoceanic, and would place in connection our lines of mercantile communication at that point, without damaging either the material interests of the country or those of any kind, or those of the contracting company, which would have at the point selected communication in a Mexican port with the commerce of Europe and with that of the United States in its transit to India; the United States being able to enter into competition as to the value of European goods on account of the nearness and the facility for communication by water, that port being, as it would be, approximately half-way between the Asiatic and European continents, and having besides a facility for commerce with Mexico on account of the closeness of communication; otherwise the advantages of that great mercantile movement would never be for Mexico, as, if that interoceanic line should be diverted to any other point of our frontier in order to effect its communication with European commerce through any port not Mexican, all the profits of the mercantile transactions, of exchange and of the other operations of traffic, would be realized outside of our territory and without benefit to us.

* * * * * * *

“We must conclude by manifesting that the committees, being convinced of the immense importance of a road really interoceanic, all they have attempted to attain has been that the benefits that should; result remain definitely assured to Mexico, their country; the future of the nation is what they have endeavored to procure, and for this reason they hope their imperfections and errors will he excused with a goodwill; to free the country from becoming converted into a great colony, into a species of dependency, has been our aim; to consent to leave it forever united with real bands of iron, in order to hope for nothing but scorn and indignation from future generations, we could never have consented nor even imagined such a thing. The blessings that would result to Mexico by the construction of an interoceanic road on the soil of its territory, touching at its important “centers of population and terminating at its ports on the Atlantic and Pacific Oceans, would give as a result that our territory would become one of the centers of the commerce of the world, realizing the prognostications of the wise Baron Humboldt, that this great line would serve as the true base and foundation of the lines of the States, which only by contact with it could be formed and exist; that only by this system can the exportation of our tropical fruits be facilitated, equalizing the exports and imports, the only means by which our country can commence to advance with liberty, and constituting an epoch in which the agricultural, mercantile, and industrial development would have the beginning of true progress, and finally that once realized the great end of transit and traffic of a great part of the commerce of the world, through the center of our territory, our independence would be guaranteed in the most just, the most powerful, and the most indestructible neutrality—by that of the security and guarantees of the interest of the most powerful nations of the world; for these grave reasons, which require essential amendments of the contract, the committees conclude by submitting to the respectful consideration of the chamber the following proposition:

“With the amendments contained in the following report, the clauses of the agreement entered into between Mr. Sullivan, W. J. Palmer & Co., and the secretary of public works are submitted to discussion for its approval and amendment, in accordance with the prescriptions of the regulations.

“Hall of sessions of the Congress of the Union, Mexico, December 14, 1878.
“IGNACIO TRUJILLO.

“PEDRO COLL ANTES.

“J. FLORE’S.

“PABLO MACEDO.

“WENCESLAO RUBIO.

(On the margin:) “December 14, 1878. By order of the committee this report is ordered to be printed.”

This is a true copy, to which I certify.

Mexico, December 16, 1878.
J. G. BRITO,
Chief Clerk.

[Inclosure 6 in No. 874.]

The Sonora Charter.

[From the Diario Official, October 20, 1877.]

Contract made by the minister of public works with Messrs. David Ferguson and Sebastian Camacho, representing Mr. Robert R. Symon, for the construction of a railroad from Guaymas to the north of the State of Sonora or Chihuahua.

Article 1. Authority is given to Messrs. David Ferguson and Robert R. Symon, or the limited company which they may organize in or out of the country, to construct and operate a line of railroad, and its corresponding telegraph, from the port of Guaymas to the northern frontier of the State of Sonora or of that of Chihuahua.

Article 2. The route which said railroad shall follow shall be that which, in view of the surveys made by the company, and approved by the department of public works, may be found most appropriate in order to place the port of Guaymas in communication with the city of Hermosillo, and continuing towards the north until reaching the point of the frontier already stated, the company being at liberty, if agreeable to its interests, to unite the principal line by means of the necessary branches with the cities of Ures and Alamos and connect it with some railway of the United States of North America, but without occupying the public roads.

Note.—It is required in subsequent articles that the surveys of the first 100 kilometers shall be completed within fourteen months and the remainder within twenty months from the date of approval of the contract.

The work of construction shall commence within twelve months from the approval of the first plans of surveys by the department of public works, and within twenty months from said approval 50 kilometers shall he completed from Guaymas, and each subsequent year 100 kilometers shall be constructed, until the entire line is finished.

The gauge of the railroad shall be 4 feet 8½ inches.

All the other articles of the contract not quoted below are similar in their provisions to those contained in the contract of W. J. Palmer & Co. referred to in inclosure No. 5, accompanying herewith.

Article 12. Said company and all persons who may take part in it, either as shareholders, employés, or in any other character whatever, shall be considered as Mexicans in everything within the territory of the republic relating to the said enterprise. They cannot allege the rights of foreign nationality with respect to the interests or business connected with the enterprise, nor will they have other rights or means of enforcing them in anything referring to the said enterprise, not even when alleging a denial of justice, than those which the laws of the republic concede to Mexicans, nor can they employ other proceedings than those established before the Mexican tribunals.

Article 22. To aid the construction of the railroad and its branches, wharf, telegraph, and other dependencies, to which this accession refers, the federal government obligates itself to give to the Limited Railway Company of Sonora, in the character of a subsidy, the sum of $5,000 for each kilometer of railway which it constructs. This subsidy will be paid to the company or to its agents by the general treasury of the nation in installments of $50,000 for each section of 10 kilometers of railroad, and telegraph constructed to the satisfaction of the department of public works and in conformity with the stipulations of this contract.

Article 35. All foreign effects and goods only destined to cross the country by this road going to a foreign country and not for consumption in the republic will be free from all kinds of duties, as well as from all contributions and imposts of every class, for five years. The secretary of the treasury will fix the formalities which will be observed in the loading and unloading of the effects and goods at the two extremities of the said line and in their transportation by the railroad, to the end of preventing any fraud or abuse that might be committed during the transit through Mexican territory; but those formalities or precautions shall be such as not to tend to delay or embarrass the punctual and rapid dispatch and transit of the trains and goods, baggage and passengers, without prejudice to the right which the executive reserves to examine them at any point on the road.

Besides the price stipulated in the tariff, the company will collect a maximum addition of $1 for each passenger and $1 for each ton of effects or goods making the whole transit across the country, and the company will collect this addition on account of the government, without cost to the latter, making the liquidation and paying the balance every six months.

Article 36. * * * III. Six months from the date of the approval of this contract the company will give a bond, to the satisfaction of the government, for the amount of $50,000, this requisite being indispensable to the existence and validity of the concessions made in this contract, and said company losing the stated sum in case it does not construct the principal line from Guaymas to the frontier of Sonora or Chihuahua within the terms stipulated in articles 7 and 8.

Article 40. So soon as the branches of the road are placed at the service of the public, the company shall fix the tariff of prices which are to be collected for the transportation of passengers, effects, &c., which cannot exceed the following: Freight per ton.—First class, 10 cents per kilometer; second class, 7 cents per kilometer; third class, 5 cents per kilometer.

For the transportation of passengers.—First class, 7 cents per kilometer; second class, 4 cents per kilometer.

Mexico, October 12, 1877.
VICENTE RIVA PALACIO,
Secretary of Public Works.

DAVID FERGUSON,

For ROBERT W. SYMON.

S. CAMACHO.

[Inclosure 7 in No. 874.]

Tehuantepec Railroad Charter.

Contract entered into between the department of public works, representing the executive of the union, and Mr. Eayden H. Hall, representing Mr. Edward Lamed, for the opening of interoceanic communications and the execution of hydraulic works on both coasts of the Isthmus of Tehuantepec.

Article 1. Authority is given to Mr. Edward Larned, or the company which he may organize, to construct a railway and its corresponding telegraph across the Isthmus of Tehuantepec, and to operate them during ninety-nine years, tinder the conditions expressed in this contract.

Article 2. The grantee obligates himself to deposit in the Monte de Piedad, of this capital, as a bond, within the terms of six months, counted from the date of the approval of this contract, the sum of $100,000 in Mexican silver coin. If, at the time above indicated, the company shall have constructed hydraulic works of the value of $200,000, or introduced railroad material of an equal amount, or constructed 26 kilometers of railroad, the subvention of which is equivalent to the sum already stated, the deposit may be substituted with $200,000 worth of mortgage bonds of the company.

Note.—The surveys shall be commenced immediately, and the work of construction shall be begun within four months after the contract is approved by Congress, and the entire road to be completed within three years from said date, at least 73 kilometers in each year. Privilege is conceded to the company to make all necessary improvements and hydraulic works at the bars and in the rivers and waters at the termini of the road.

The gauge of the road is to be 4 feet 8½ inches and either single or double track.

The other articles of the contract not quoted below, as to free introduction of material, organization of the company, and other matters, are similar in their provisions to those contained in the contract of Messrs. W. J. Palmer & Co., referred to in inclosure No. 5, accompanying herewith.

Article 8. To aid the construction of the railroad and telegraph line, the government, beside the stipulations contained in this contract, obligates itself to give to the company a subsidy of $7,500 for each kilometer of railroad which it constructs, and is approved by the department of public works. The government obligates itself not to subvention another enterprise for similar works on the same line for twenty years. The obligations contracted by the government will in no case be extended to giving a subsidy for a number of kilometers exceeding 300.

Article 9. This subsidy will be satisfied by sections of 5 kilometers, completed and approved by the department of public works, and paid as it falls due by the general treasury of the federation. But should any general law create a more favorable mode of payment, accorded to enterprises of this class, this contract will be accommodated to it. The company can, in any case, export, free of duties, a sum equal to the subventions, so soon as they are due.

Article 10. For the construction and operation of the railway and telegraph lines authorized by this contract a right of way of 70 meters in width along the whole extent of the railway is conceded. Of the public lands that may exist, the government gives to the company, besides the strip necessary for the road, half of the public lands that may be found within a league on each side of the railway throughout its whole extent; by public lands being understood only those lands not disposed of to individuals at the date of the approval of this contract.

Article 14. The company will be under obligation to construct and keep in order two coast-lights of the first class, of the most perfect French model, one in Coatza-coalcos and the other in the Upper Laguna, which must be finished within the limits fixed for the termination of the railroad; which lights will belong exclusively to the government. The company will establish, besides, under the same conditions, the lights that may be necessary to indicate the entrance to the ports.

Article 16. The company will be under the obligation to dredge that part of Coat-zacoalcos River which it intends to navigate.

Article 17. Power is granted to the company to collect tolls, transit dues, wharfage, storage, and any others for freight goods, transportation of passengers, and transmission of telegrams, but the tariff fixed by the company for the total of all these charges, only excepting that of storage, shall not exceed 5 cents per league for each arroba (25 pounds) of goods, one per cent, of the value of precious metals and jewels, it being understood that these figures are for the whole line. Passengers making the transit will pay 30 cents per league.

Article 22. The concession made to the company will continue in force ninety-nine years, counted from the date upon which the railway and telegraph are placed at the service of the public in their whole extent; during the first thirty years the government will receive by means of liquidation and monthly payments 12 cents for each passenger and 25 cents for each ton of goods making the transit of the whole line. The government in order to make sure of the correctness of the company’s accounts will have a representative with power to intervene in all the operations of the latter. The interest on bonds or the obligations that may be emitted will not be held as expenses of operation except in the part corresponding to the amount really invested in the construction of the railway and its dependencies

Article 24. * * * Tariff B.—For the transportation of passengers for each kilometer of distance and for each person transported: First class, one cent and a half; second class, one cent; third class, one-half cent. Tariff C—For freight per ton and each kilometer of distance: First class, five cents; second class, four cents; third class, three cents; baggage in passenger trains and explosives in freight train, 10 cents.

The company will be obliged to carry to any point on the whole line, free of expense, the letter and newspaper mail sent over it, dispatched by a proper officer receiving it and delivering it with due punctuality. It will also transport all products and effects belonging to the government for half of the tariff price. It will also transport, free of charge, the officers, troops, employés, or agents of the general government or of the States when traveling in the public service. It will likewise transmit free of expense by its telegraph line all the messages sent by the functionaries of the Mexican Republic or of any of the States thereof, relating to public business.

Article 31. The company undertakes to pay what may be legally and justly due of the loan made by Mr. Falconett to the Sloo Company, the government continuing free from all presenter future responsibility for this loan, as well regarding the present-enterprise as the former ones, without this diminishing the profits due it, of the products of the road.

Article 32. The enterprise to which this law refers is and will always be Mexican, and the company for the transit of Tehuantepec, even should it be organized abroad, will always be considered as now constituted in the Mexican Republic, as if it had been formed and organized in it, in accordance with Mexican laws, but if it should be thought proper to constitute separate companies under the company name that may be selected for each or several of the branches comprehended in the work to be executed, such companies may be formed and organized either in the republic or in the United States, in conformity with the general or special laws of the place where they are constituted, although they must always be comprehended in the dispositions relative to the principal company, and as dependent in everything upon the same exclusively Mexican, and consequently subject to the prescriptions of this contract, the present company being in everything responsible for the business as a whole for the subdivisions into which it may be divided.

Article 33. In virtue of the provisions of the foregoing article the company organized by Larned and any other that may succeed it, as well as all the foreigners and their successors who may take part in the enterprise, either as shareholders, employés, or in any other character whatever, will be considered as Mexicans in everything referring to said enterprise; they cannot allege in any case the right of foreign nationality respecting the business relating to the enterprise; they will only have in case of denial of justice the same rights and means of enforcing them in everything concerning the enterprise that the laws of the republic concede to Mexicans, and can only make good the rights to which they are entitled before the Mexican tribunals.

* * * * * * *

Mexico, October 31, 1878.
VICENTE RIVA PALACIO,
Minister of Public Works.

H. H. HALL.

[Inclosure 8 No. 874.]

Senator Morgan’s resolutions introduced in the Senate of the United States, May 8, 1878.

Whereas the people of Mexico, animated with the love of free government which distinguishes the people of the United States of America, have long adhered to a republican form of government as that which is best suited to preserve their liberties, and have maintained their free republican institutions, under the embarrassment of the most adverse circumstances, with an honorable devotion to their principles, which merits the sympathy and regard of the American people; and

Whereas the most essential interests connected with the welfare and prosperity of the people of both governments in their various relations require that permanent peace should be maintained between them, and that confidence, good will, free intercourse, and liberal reciprocal advantages of trade and commerce should be established:

Resolved by the Senate (the House of Representatives concurring therein), 1. That in defining and settling by treaty the relations of the United States of America with the Republic of Mexico, it is just and expedient and in accordance with the interest which the people of the United States have in the maintenance of the right of self-government on this continent that the present boundaries between Mexico and the United States shall be guaranteed as permanent and inviolable.

2. That it is proper that both governments shall engage that the territory of each shall be protected against conquest by any power residing beyond the seas.

3. That it is expedient that liberal provisions shall be made by treaty to secure to the people of both countries the equal and reciprocal advantages of intercourse, trade, and commerce with each other, and that, to increase the advantages of such intercourse and to place upon a stable footing the peace and friendship of the two republics, it is expedient that such mutual agreements shall be entered into as will protect the borders of both countries from the predatory raids of bands of outlaws, and that persons who are citizens of either country residing in the other shall enjoy the rights of hospitality secured to the citizens of the most favored countries, and shall be free from all unlawful interferences with or arbitrary exactions and assessments upon their persons or property.

4. And it is also expedient to provide by treaty for the protection and encouragement of such citizens of either country as shall, with the consent of the Government of Mexico, build and equip a line of railroad from the city of Mexico to the Rio Grande, in the direction of San Antonio, or in Texas, to any point on the borders of the United States to connect with a line or lines of railroad at the boundary between the United States and Mexico, and to secure the safe transit of the citizens of each republic and their property over such line or lines of railroad within the territory of each republic, subject to such commercial regulations as shall from time to time be agreed upon by the respective governments.

Comments of Mexican press on Senator Morgan’s resolutions.

[From the Monthly Review of the Siglo XIX, June 29, 1878.]

The newspapers from the United States refer to two events which have produced a deep impression in this capital. * * * The other event is that which relates to a proposition presented to the North American Senate to establish a protectorate in respect to our country. * * *

The proposition in regard to a protectorate has a significance of another kind. For the present it is nothing more than the idea of a Senator, but it is impolitic and opposed to the favorable exit of the negotiations pending between the two republics. All that which in Mexico affects the sentiment of neutrality causes a prejudice against those who in any manner may succeed in offending.

Opinion of Mexican Executive on Senator Morgan’s resolutions.

[Extract from the reply of Sr. Romero, minister of finance, to Mr. Foster’s letter to Chicago manu facturers, prepared by order of the President.]

100. * * * Mexico could not celebrate a treaty with the United States nor with any other power by means of which she would consent that a foreign government might guarantee the fulfilment of a private contract made by Mexico for the construction of a work within her own territory. This would be equivalent to recognizing beforehand, and in a solemn and formal manner, her impotency to comply with the obligations which she might contract; and a nation which should commence by recognizing this impotency would merit no respect whatever from the civilized world, and for its own decorum ought to abstain from celebrating a contract which it itself knows it could not fulfill unless stimulated and obliged by the nation whose guarantee it should accept for the fulfillment of the agreement.

101. If the events be considered which have occurred between Mexico and the United States, concerning which notice will be taken further on, it will not appear strange, but on the contrary very natural, that Mexico has with the United States greater difficulties even than those encountered in treating with any other power for the celebration of a treaty of this kind.

[Inclosure 9 in No. 874.]

opposition to american railroads in mexico.

Speech of Hon. Alfred Chavero in the National Chamber of Deputies, May 22, 1878.

[The first part of the speech is an attack upon the responsibility of persons who apply for the concession, charging that they do not possess or represent the pecuniary capital necessary for the enterprise, which, owing to its personal character, is omitted.]

The argument which I am about to make has already been made on another occasion by a man as patriotic as Mr. Lomus, one of the most valiant men whom I have known, and who has also been very cowardly when the future of the nation has been under discussion. It is a pleasure for me to be a coward in company with such valiant men.

I think, sir, that it is very poor policy, very injudicious, to establish within our country a pewerful American company. Perhaps I should not venture to meet this question; but when I believe that I comply with my duty, although I fear for the good of the country, I have no fear of anything else. Let ine suppose that this company is exceedingly rich; let me suppose that this company is going to build the railroad for us in five years, in five days; then I tremble at this, because we are going to establish within our territory an American influence.

I do not fear to speak of the American question. In the Senate and in the Congress of the United States they talk of our questions, and they are neither more valiant nor have they a better right than we to consider them.

The United States have at the present time slight difficulties with us; the gentlemen deputies see that I am kind and call them slight. It is very probable that in the future they will continue to have them, that they may even have graver difficulties. The whole nation has seen the attitude taken by the United States upon the change of situation, and how much time has been consumed in the recognition of our government; and they did it, not from good will; and they did it, not as the result of our measures, but because a Senator named Conkling, an enemy of Mr. Evarts, in order to make war upon him, brought about the recognition of our government. And a question of internal politics, one of opposition on the part of Mr. Conkling and of adjustment on the part of Mr. Evarts, produced this recognition; it was neither kindly feeling nor the recognition of justice of our case which produced it.

It is necessary to speak the whole truth, and it is known that difficulties are pending.

In a former Congress a minister of foreign affairs of Mr. Juarez, who never had fear, presented these same observations, these same difficulties; there was no lack of deputies who called him a coward, and who said that in the United States the Republican party was in power, which was the friend of Mexico.

But we have seen during the administration of the Republican party that General Grant, our friend, did not hesitate to state in a message that the manifest destiny of the United States was to acquire territory. Very well; to-day things have changed; the Democratic party, our enemy, has such influence in the United States that it already has the ascendency and influences Mr. Hayes himself, and Mr. Hayes has given us no other proof of regard than the postponement of our recognition for a year and a half. But I desire to think that the United States are our best friends and not to doubt that Mr. Hayes has the desire to always preserve a good understanding with us; but are we Mexicans so inferior that we can see nothing but the present hour and have no thought for the future?

There are two severe laws in history, and these laws are not to be forgotten. The first is this: Border nations are natural enemies. A certain English writer said, “Happy Great Britain, that has no other frontier than the seas”; and without referring to history, but considering only contemporaneous acts, who despoiled France of a section of territory? The bordering nation, Germany. Who is invading Turkey at the present time? The bordering nation, Russia. Why are preparations being made for a war between England and Russia? For the border possessions of Asia, possessions of England and Russia. What war is there between Spain and Switzerland, between Italy and Russia? None. It is a natural law of history that border nations are enemies. They may appear to be very friendly in their relations, because one fears the power of the other on account of its superior diplomacy or of its peculiar policy; but at the bottom, naturally, in conformity with the laws of history, border nations are enemies.

And this is so true, gentlemen deputies, that at the present time we have no difficulties either with England, which we do not recognize, nor with France, with whom our relations are severed, nor with Austria, for whom we have shot an archduke; but we have them with the United States, the border nation on the north, and with Guatemala, the border nation on the south.

Hence, sir, the United States, according to the law of history, are naturally our enemy. What ought we to do? Be always strong, be always prepared, even in the moments of greatest friendship with them. Because we do not know what may come later on, what difficulties may take place. And will it be prudent in this case to place the enemy within our house? Is it bravery in a general to let the enemy get in his rear, or is it imprudence? And we are here, sent by the people, to be prudent, and to watch for their well-being and for their future.

There is also another law in history: Nations of the north necessarily invade the nations of the south. Let the history of the emigrations of the different races be read from prehistoric times, and the nations of the north will always be seen tending to conquer the nations of the south. Unfortunately, we do not need to recur to foreign histories; a rich part of our territory has become the prey of the United States; and we do not wish to learn, nor to open our eyes! Hence, if, in accordanse with the laws of history, we should always fear the United States, what are we to do? Strengthen ourselves. What are we to do? Unite ourselves. What are we to do? Progress, and progress in such a manner that there will be no danger for us not establishing within our territory an American company which will have a most powerful influence.

We have seen that a hundred leagues of railroad from here to Vera Cruz have given such influence to the English company that many times this very influence has been sufficient to decide the votes of the Chamber, and shall we be so insane as to consent to the establishment of an American influence by a company which will embrace the whole country, as the committee has said, all our sections and all our roads? What a powerful influence that would be! And could not this powerful influence be converted into a hostile influence? What would all the advantages which the railroad may bring to the States be worth then?

You, the deputies of the States, would you exchange your beautiful and poor liberty of the present for the rich subjection which the railroad could give you? Go and propose to the lion of the desert to exchange his cave of rocks for a golden cage, and the lion of the desert will reply to you with a roar of liberty.

We desire material improvements; we have approved of the general idea of the construction of the railroad; but we do not wish to subject ourselves either to the ridicule of granting this railroad to a company which has not the necessary funds, nor to a danger for the independence and future of the country.

For this reason, I pray you, gentlemen deputies, to reject the article discussed. The committees at the most offer you riches for the country; I beg you for liberty. [Applause of the deputies and in the galleries.]

[Inclosure 10 in No. 874.]

Financial exhibit of the Mexican Government.

foreign debt.

According to an official statement of the Mexican Government, made in 1862, and revised by Hon. Matias Romero, Mexican minister at Washington in 1865, its foreign debt was as follows: Total British debts $69,311,657

Spanish debts 9,460,986

French debts 2,859,917

Sixteen years’ interest, to 1878, at $2,760,022 per annum 44,160,352

Total European debts 125,792,912

To which is to be added:

American bonds 1865 2,746,620

American claims awards 3,075,123

Total foreign debt 131,614,665

On the European debt the government has not been able to pay a single half-year’s interest for twenty-four years, and on the American bonded debt it has never paid a single semi-annual dividend of interest since the bonds were issued. For the payment of the European debts the government has pledged the entire available customs receipts of its ports (see government statement of 1862, p. 322), and it subsequently pledged 60 per cent, of a part of the same customs to secure the American debt; but for nearly a generation these pledges have not been observed by the government owing to its immediate financial distresses.

estimates for 1879–’80.

On the 14th of December last the minister of finance submitted to Congress the estimates of the Federal Government for the next fiscal year, the totals of which were as follows: Estimated receipts $16,303,455

Estimated espenses 23,334,636

Showing a deficit of 7,031,181

The increase of the expenses over those of the last year is $1,585,000, and a decrease in receipts of $1,108,000.

The government owes, in addition to other overdue obligations, to the Mexican Railway Company, on its annual subsidy, on which it has defaulted for nearly three years, since March, 1876, the sum of, say, $1,800,000.

To the foregoing is to be added a large domestic or interior debt, a great part of which is still unadjusted, and the total amount of which is unknown even to the government.

No. 343. Mr. Foster to Mr. Evarts. [Document 372]

No. 343.
Mr. Foster to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Mexico, February 7, 1879. (Received February 18.) No. 883.]

Sir: On the 14th ultimo an excursion party of American citizens arrived in this city. The excursion was organized in Chicago, but was composed in greater part of persons from Saint Louis, Milwaukee, Cincinnati, Wheeling, and other cities. Upon their arrival at Vera Cruz they were met by a committee appointed by the government, were entertained by the latter at said port and en route to this city; and since their arrival here have been the object of marked attention by the federal authorities, having been entertained by them with excursions, dinners, a grand ball, and other civilities.

The majority of the excursionists were simple tourists; but quite a number of them were representatives of manufacturing and commercial houses, and brought with them samples of their products and merchandise. Every facility was given them in the way of dispatch at the custom-houses, and they were furnished by the government with a suitable building in which to exhibit their articles, and the exhibition was opened by the President of the Republic. In view of the great attentions bestowed, and the special facilities offered by the federal officials, it is to be regretted that the representation of the commercial and manufacturing interests of the United States was so meager.

The excursionists left this city on yesterday on their return to the United States, greatly pleased with their visit, and highly appreciating the attentions they have received from the Government and people of Mexico.

* * * * * * *

I am, &c.,

JOHN W. FOSTER.

No. 344. Mr. Foster to Mr. Evarts. [Document 373]

No. 344.
Mr. Foster to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Mexico, February 11, 1879. (Received February 24.) No. 886.]

Sir: As instructed in your No. 539, of November 15 last, after delaying until the 24th ultimo in the hope of receiving an answer on the subject, on that date I addressed the Mexican foreign office a note, again calling attention to the discriminating bounty offered for the exportation of hemp (henequen) to Europe by the State government of Yucatan. In my note, of which I inclose a copy, I recited the repeated efforts which I had made to obtain some action on the part of the federal government, and referred to its singular indifference to the subject.

In a visit which I made to the foreign office a few days thereafter, I called Mr. Avila’s attention to the matter, and he said that although he was just about to leave the department he would commend the question to the preferred and early attention of his successor.

On the 7th instant the new minister, Señor Ruelas, invited me to call that day at the foreign office, which I accordingly did, when he informed me that he expected to answer my note of the 24th ultimo at once, but desired to see me in the mean time to say that he was desirous of attending to my note, and that he recognized the principle laid down in your first and last dispatches that such legislation as that enacted by the State of Yucatan was in violation of the treaty of 1831, and was, besides, an encroachment on the powers of the federal government, to which pertained exclusively the faculty to regulate foreign commerce. He stated, however, that the question had already been settled, as the decree granting the bounty on hemp (henequen) was only to remain in force for two years, and that it had expired by limitation.

I expressed my gratification that the minister concurred so fully in your view of the question, but I said that, in order prevent the action of the State government from becoming a precedent for the future, it would be well to convey to the governor of Yucatan the views of the federal executive on the subject, which the minister promised to do.

* * * * * * *

I am, &c.,

JOHN W. FOSTER.

[Inclosure 1 in No. 886.]

Mr. Foster to Mr. Avila.

Legation of the United States,
Mexico, January 24, 1879.

Sir: On the 28th of September of last year I addressed your honor a note in regard to the complaint which I had presented to the Mexican Government on the 4th of December, 1877, under instructions from the Department of State, in regard to the special privileges conceded by the State government of Yucatau for the exportation of hemp to Europe. The said note shows that I have brought the subject to the attention of the Mexican foreign office four several and distinct times during the past year, without being able in the course of more than thirteen months, to obtain any satisfactory or even definite answer on the subject.

In view of this apparent indifference on the part of the Mexican Government to this important subject, which involves the equality of privileges of the citizens of the United States with those of European nations in the commerce of Mexico, I have been instructed by a recent dispatch from the Department of State to again bring the question to your honor’s attention. I do not deem it necessary to present again in detail the facts and arguments heretofore submitted, to your honor’s predecessors. Reference is made to my past notes and interviews in the note which I sent to your honor on the 28th of September last, and which remains unanswered.

The Secretary of State, in directing me to make a new effort to obtain an answer from the foreign office, says there can be no doubt that the action of the State of Yucatan, in granting a special bounty on the exportation of hemp to Europe, is not merely opposed to the intent of Article IV of the treaty of 1831, but is in distinct contravention of the second article thereof. Nor can there be any doubt, he states, of the duty of the federal or treaty-making power to require from the individual members of the federation compliance with the international obligations contracted. He regrets that there should be such apparent hesitancy in meeting the simple issue which this question presents. He therefore instructs me to submit the subject in such a manner as will be likely to prove effective, and to request an early reply from your honor’s government.

I trust that the foregoing statement may be sufficient, without the repetition of former arguments or the addition of new ones, to satisfy your honor that the complaint of my government as originally presented was well founded, and that it has not been treated with that attention which both the subject and a due deference for the representations of a friendly power demanded. I have, then, to repeat my request made in September last, that the matter may be squarely met, and an early and definite answer may be given me thereon.

I remain, with sentiments of marked consideration, your honor’s obedient servant,

JOHN W. FOSTER.

[Inclosure 2 in No. 886.—Translation.]

Mr. Ruelas to Mr. Foster.

Department of Foreign Affairs,
Mexico, February 9, 1879.

Sir: Referring to the attentive note of your excellency, dated January 24, of this year, and to the conversation had in this department on the 7th instant, in which I manifested the opinion reached relative to the decree of the legislature of Yucatan conceding a premium to the hemp in the stalk produced in that State, which should he exported to Europe, I have the honor to renew my considerations in the same terms in which I expressed them to your excellency, and which are in accord with the note of the Secretary of State of the United States of America, dated in Washington, November 14, 1877.

Consequently I reiterate to your excellency that, in regard to the Mexican Government causing the cessation of the difference established between the exportations of hemp to Europe, on acccount of the premiums conceded to them, and the exportations of the same product to the United States, the period of two years fixed by the decree of the legislature of Yucatan for the enjoyment of the premium having expired, the difference which caused the said note of November 14, 1877 (whose object is now satisfied), has also ceased; and it being convenient to the interest of the Government of the Mexican Federation to give its attention and have the government of the States give their attention to whatever concerns the faculty of legislating with respect to importations and exportations, and with respect to other points connected with the stipulations of the federal constitution, and with the international treaties the President will give to this question the preference which it justly demands.

I have the honor to renew to your excellency the protestations of my attentive and distinguished consideration.

M. RUELAS.

No. 345. Mr. Foster to Mr. Evarts. [Document 374]

No. 345.
Mr. Foster to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Mexico, February 18, 1879. (Received March 10.) No. 890.]

Sir: On the 4th of the present month the Mexican minister of public works and colonization made a contract with Messrs. W. Iberri & Co. for the colonization of the island of Oiare in the Gulf of California, oft the coast of the State of Sonora, between the mouths of the Yaqui and Mayo Rivers. The island to be colonized is, on a direct line, say 250 miles from the American frontier, and by the coast line much more distant.

The second article of the contract reads as follows: 2d. Sonora being a frontier State of the Mexican Union, the company of W. Iberri & Co., in conformity with the existing laws and regulations regarding colonization, shall not admit as colonists the natives of the foreign nation (the United States) which borders upon said State, nor the naturalized citizens of the said nation.

In answer to Department dispatch No. 486, I had occasion to quote in my No. 756 the Mexican law prohibiting American citizens from acquiring public lands in the frontier States. From the foregoing quoted article, it “would appear that the executive gives the said law such latitude of construction as to prohibit Americans from being accepted as colonists in said States, or the islands adjacent thereto, by companies organized for colonization purposes, while foreigners of all other nations are received as such.

I have, &c.,

JOHN W. FOSTER.

No. 346. Mr. Evarts to Mr. Foster. [Document 375]

No. 346.
Mr. Evarts to Mr. Foster.

Department of State,
Washington, February 20, 1879. No. 590.]

Sir: Your No. 883 of the 7th instant has been received, and the account it gives of the proceedings of the excursion party which recently visited Mexico from this country has been read with interest. The attainment of any very practical and lasting results in favor of enlarged commerce between the two countries by means of such a demonstration is open to doubt.

While the declarations of the Mexican Government in that direction are appreciated, it is felt that the first effective steps toward the desired end must be the insuring of the safety of the lives and property of citizens of the United States sojourning or doing business in Mexico, and the faithful observance of international obligations. Without these it is hardly to be expected that responsible capital from without will seek a legitimate field for its employment in Mexico.

I am, &c.,

WM. M. EVARTS.

No. 347. Mr. Foster to Mr. Evarts. [Document 376]

No. 347.
Mr. Foster to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Mexico, April 3, 1879. (Received April 22.) No. 922.]

Sir: I have heretofore reported the rejection by the English bondholders of the provisional agreement made by the resident agent of the latter with the Mexican Government, for the recognition and funding of the Mexican foreign debt, which was the subject of my dispatch No. 855, of December 16 last.

I now inclose the letter of the secretary of the council of foreign bondholders of London, addressed to the Mexican minister of finance, as published in the Diario Oficial of yesterday, in which he states that the holders of the bonds “lose no time in refusing in the most emphatic manner to confirm or recognize that instrument” (the agreement).

I am, &c.,

JOHN W. FOSTER.

[Inclosure in No. 922.]

Mr. Holmes to Mr. Romero.

[From the Diario Oficial, April 2, 1879.]

letter of secretary of bondholders.

Sir: I am instructed by the Mexican bondholders committee to inform you that, having been apprised of the terms of a contract which on the 6th December, 1878, Mr. E. J. Perry purported to enter into on behalf of the holders of the bonds of the Mexican debts of 1851 to 1864, they lose no time in refusing in the most emphatic manner to confirm or recognize that instrument. The terms on which it affects to settle the claims of the above-mentioned public creditors of Mexico are not only entirely different from those which this committee had expressed their willingness to recommend for adoption, but are also inadequate to meet the just requirements of such creditors, besides imposing fresh and onerous obligations on them as conditions precedent to the partial satisfaction of claims which ought to be met at once, and without such conditions, by the Mexican people. It is unnecessary to discuss the practicability of such a seheme or its details. The committee would only observe that it is idle to suppose that the capitalists of England or Europe would ever be willing to advance further funds for the public works of a state which does not unconditionally acknowledge its past obligations to its creditors, and make all the immediate provision of which its present resources will admit to fulfill them.

The committee further consider it pertinent to remark that in affecting to sign any contract of a definite character Mr. Perry exceeded his powers, which were simply to discuss, for submission to the bondholders, terms of settlement.

I have, &c.,

WM. W. HOLMES,
Secretary.

No. 348. Mr. Foster to Mr. Evarts. [Document 377]

No. 348.
Mr. Foster to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Mexico, April 4, 1879. (Received April 22.) No. 924.]

Sir: I am in receipt of your dispatch No. 601, of the 11th ultimo, in closing a letter addressed by Mr. Arthur C. Jackson, of Illinois, to the Hon. Joseph G. Cannon, M. C., in relation to the practicability of making a living by teaching English in this city, or in any other way.

In compliance with your instructions, I have to reply that the demand for teachers of the English language is not very great, as the Mexicans generally give the preference to the study of French; that the number of teachers of English now in the city appears to be greater than the demand, as few of them are doing more than making a bare living, and some are altogether without employment, and that persons coming to the country without some knowledge of the Spanish language would labor under considerable embarrassment, both in giving instruction in English to Mexican pupils and, on account of the competition, in obtaining pupils. There are a few American and English ladies who have good positions as governesses in private families, but, as a general rule, these positions were secured through friends before they left their homes, and there are, also, a few teachers who have engagements in the public and private schools and colleges, but the pay is not large, and they are generally persons who have been some years in the country and are familiar with the Spanish language.

My advice to all persons making inquiry about the possibility of obtaining employment of whatever kind in Mexico is, that if they come to this country without a positive and responsible engagement they should bring with them enough money to maintain them for six months, or for such time as will enable them to test the possibility of obtaining remunerative employment, and enough additional to pay their expenses back to the United States in case of failure.

The American Benevolent Society of this city is appealed to every week by intelligent and worthy Americans for aid to return home, because they are without means and can obtain no employment here. What this country most needs from abroad is money capital. Its industries are greatly depressed, and labor, both manual and intellectual, is very cheap, and the supply much larger than the demand.

* * * * * * *

Trusting the foregoing will throw some light upon the inquiries contained in the inclosure to your dispatch,

I am, &c.,

JOHN W. FOSTER.

No. 349. Mr. Foster to Mr. Evarts. [Document 378]

No. 349.
Mr. Foster to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Mexico, April 11, 1879. (Received April 29.) No. 930.]

Sir: In my No. 907, of the 15th ultimo, I transmitted the correspondence had with the Mexican foreign office, growing out of the communication to the latter of the contents of your dispatch No. 589, of February 20, regarding the hostile attitude of the Mexican Indians on the Rio Grande frontier.

Since I transmitted my former dispatch I have received from the minister of foreign affairs a note inclosing a communication from the War Department stating that troops had moved in pursuit of the Lipan Indians, and that the greatest vigilance has been recommended to the authorities on the frontier.

My information, received from the consul at Monterey and the Mexican press, in regard to the so-much-talked-of removal of the Indians from the Rio Grande frontier by the Mexican Government, is to this effect: The greater part, if not all, of the peaceful Indians, or those having fixed abodes, as the Kickapoos, have been removed as far towards the interior as Monterey, and some of them have been brought to this city. The campaign against the Lipan and other marauding and warlike tribes has been comparatively unsuccessful. A few warriors were taken by stratagem, but the only persons captured in open campaign were some women and children who have been brought into the interior of Mexico. The effect of the campaign has been to exasperate the Lipans on account of the loss of a portion of their families, with the result indicated in your dispatch No. 589. The consul at Monterey reports this tribe as recently committing depredations on the Mexican settlements, and the organization of movements on the part of the latter to resist and punish them.

I am inclined to believe that the reported crossing of warlike Indians from the United States, on the 11th of March, in the vicinity of Fort Clark, charged in the minister’s note inclosed with my No. 907, is nothing more than the movements within Mexican territory of the exasperated Lipans. This belief is confirmed by the fact that I have received no further information as to this event, or as to the hostile movements of Apaches or raiders in Arizona, of which the minister complained, and about which, at my request, he promised to send me detailed data. As a month has passed since the complaint was made and the promise given that I should have the facts, it is reasonable to presume that they do not exist in the executive departments of the Mexican Government.

I am, &c.,

JOHN W. FOSTER.

[Inclosure in No. 930.—Translation.]

Mr. Ruelas to Mr. Foster.

Department of Foreign Affairs,
Mexico, March 29, 1879.

Mr. Minister: With reference to my note dated the 12th of this month, I have the honor to remit to your excellency a copy of a communication from the department of war, in which I am informed that the forces at Mier and Laredo have moved in pursuit of the Lipans that were threatening the State of Texas. I improve this opportunity to renew to your excellency the assurances of my distinguished consideration.

M. RUELAS.

mexican republic, department of war and marine staff section 2, table 1, 1131.

I have received with your note of the 12th instant a copy of that sent by the minister of the United States of America, asking that the proper measures may be dictated to prevent any hostile demonstration or incursion into the territory of Texas, on the part of the Lipan Indians, who have risen against the authorities. I have to inform you that the forces in Mier and Laredo have moved in pursuit of the Indians in question, and that the greatest vigilance has again been recommended.

Liberty and constitution.

Mexico, March 22, 1879.

On account of the occupation of the minister.

JOSÉ JUSTO ALVAREZ.

No. 350. Mr. Foster to Mr. Evarts. [Document 379]

No. 350.
Mr. Foster to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Mexico, April 12, 1879. (Received April 29.) No. 931.]

Sir: In my No. 773, of September 3, 1878, I reported the progress had in the adjustment of the question of the firing upon the consul’s flag by Mexican troops in the port of Acapulco, in May, 1877. At that time the trial of the officer in command of the fort had been ordered for a failure to investigate the outrage at the time of its occurrence.

I now have to report that, in a note of which a copy is herewith inclosed, the minister of foreign affairs informs me that the said officer has been tried by a military court in this city, and has been condemned to the loss of his commission in the army.

* * * * * * *

I am, &c.,

JOHN W. FOSTER.

[Inclosure 1 in No. 931.—Translation.]

Mr. Ruelas to Mr. Foster.

Department of Foreign Affairs,
Mexico, February 26, 1879.

Mr. Minister: The note of your excellency, dated August 31 of last year, was opportunely received by this department. Being informed of its contents, and upon sending you the inclosed copy of a communication in which the department of war reports the sentence pronounced upon Col. Vicente Sanchez on account of the occurrences which took place in Acapulco the 28th of May, 1876 (1877), I have the honor to reproduce the expressions with which my predecessor, Mr. Mata, concludes the note sent to your excellency the 5th of last August, and embrace the occasion to renew to your excellency the assurances of my very distinguished consideration.

M. RUELAS.

republic of mexico, department of war and marine.—section 1, no. 43.

Mexico, February 24, 1879.

The military commander of the federal district, in a communication dated the 18th of January last, says to me the folio wing:

“The court of general officers held the 16th instant condemned Col. Vicente Sanchez to the loss of the commission which he holds in the army, for not having ordered the institution of the necessary investigation in order to ascertain whether or not, on the 28th of May, 1876 (1877), the boat in which were the consuls of the United States, Colombia, and Guatemala, was fired upon from the fort of Acapulco; which I have the honor to participate to you for your superior information.”

Which I have the honor to transcribe to you for your information.

Liberty and constitution.

GONZALES.

[Inclosure 2 in No. 931.]

Mr. Foster to Mr. Ruelas.

Legation of the United States,
Mexico, March 29, 1879.

Sir: In examining the correspondence, received from your excellency’s department, I find that I have omitted to make acknowledgment of your note of the 26th ultimo, conveying to me a copy of the judgment of the court-martial which sentenced Col. Vicente Sanchez to the loss of his commission in the army for his failure to order an investigation regarding the firing upon the American flag in May, 1877.

In begging your excellency to excuse the omission, I have to add that I have no doubt my government will be gratified to learn of this act, which is in consonance with the spirit of Mr. Mata’s note of August 5 last, although its effect would have been more salutary if the trial and punishment had more speedily followed the outrage, and been given publicity in the port where it occurred.

I embrace this new occasion to repeat to your excellency the assurances of my distinguished consideration.

JOHN W. FOSTER.

No. 351. Mr. Foster to Mr. Evarts. [Document 380]

No. 351.
Mr. Foster to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Mexico, April 14, 1879. (Received April 29.) No. 933.]

Sir: In my No. 929, of the 10th instant, I communicated the resignation of the new minister of finance. His letter of resignation has been published by the Diario Oficial.

* * * * * * *

I have thought it of sufficient interest to send you a translation of the same.

* * * * * * *

I am, &c.,

JOHN W. FOSTER.

[Inclosure in No. 933.—Translation.]

Resignation of Minister of Finance.

department of government.

When, a few days ago, I was called to take charge of the department of finance, I stated to the President the inconveniences, personal as well as public, which interposed for the administration as well as for myself in accepting such a difficult post, to the discharge of whose duties I could bring neither the great knowledge which is indispensable, nor the political influence, separated as I am from the parties which have unfortunately divided our country, although I do not think that in order to serve the country it is necessary to belong to a faction, the opposition which it was presumed my appointment would meet in Congress, figuring very especially among the motives of my excuses. With all due frankness I stated to him that although I did not feel capable of changing the actual situation of the treasury, I did think adopting strict economy, and procuring order and honesty in the collection and disbursement of the taxes, might save the nation from the crisis through which it is passing. I particularly called the attention of the President to the inconveniences which, in my judgment, are presented by the initiative sent to the chamber asking authorization to hold a universal exposition, endeavoring, as far as was possible, to enforce my arguments, in order to convince him that neither the state of the public treasury nor the foreign relations, nor the condition of the country which is threatened by new disturbances, would permit of our inviting the other nations to a competition in which we could present nothing but our poverty and our ill-concealed discord. As the President did not oppose to my objections any other consideration than the obligation contracted, and recognized the weight of my observations, I had a right to think that they had effected the conviction in his mind that it was necessary to desist from the idea, and I accepted the post to which I was called.

Upon informing myself of the condition of the federal treasury, I found that it was much worse than could have been imagined, my resolutions took new force, to the extent of convincing me that no amount whatever should be spent, no matter what the object to which it might be destined, except to meet the necessities and obligations of the nation.

The idea which I previously had of the inconvenience of defraying the large expenses demanded by a universal exposition became more and more strengthened, and for this reason as well as because I found the appropriations of the estimate covered by the demands that were made on them, my first act upon entering the department, was to order the suspension of the daily payment of $500 which the tax office was delivering for the works, which, inasmuch as they were not to be completed, were wholly unnecessary.

The situation of the public treasury at present may be judged, if not with all exactness, at least with considerable precision, by having in sight a few data. The probable receipts relied on for meeting the demands on the treasury amount to $557,724.12, while the expenditures reach $867,812, producing a monthly deficit of $308,078, which obliges the administration to live on the resources of the future.* This explains the large debt which exists in favor of the officers of the administration, which corresponding to the civil list alone, already amounts to $442,815.75, while that of the military exceeds a million dollars.

In the presence of this situation, which could not be more precarious, I do not think that it is either my duty, or that I would act conscientiously, to accept the responsibility of the situation which will have to be brought on the treasury by the burden of $500,000 which has been estimated for the exposition. With this conviction, and when, as I have indicated, the suspension of the payments made by the tax office had been ordered, you will understand the disagreeable impression caused on me upon learning that the President had ordered the continuance of said payments, and insisted upon carrying out the exposition. If to this is added the wholly gratuitous opposition excited against me in the Chamber of Deputies, impelled by bastard interests, when I had relied on having its support in carrying out the work of reforming the public treasury, it will be understood that it is not possible for me to continue in a post in which I would have remained notwithstanding finding myself attacked from the very commencement by calumny and defamation; solely animated by the conviction which I have always entertained that order and economy constitute the best financial plan that can be adopted, and that it does not consist in imposing on society new sacrifices which it cannot support, hoping that the day of justice and reason, which I did not consider very distant, would vindicate me.

To-day being deficient in the faith which impelled me to confront a difficult situation, I should abandon the post in order to remove the obstacle which my presence might offer to the following of the course which the administration propose to pursue.

I beg you, upon bringing this resignation to the knowledge of the President, to be pleased to reiterate to him my gratitude, and accept for yourself the assurances of my consideration.

J. H. RAMIREZ.
Mexico, April 9, 1879.

* A slight inaccuracy.

No. 352. Mr. Foster to Mr. Evarts. [Document 381]

No. 352.
Mr. Foster to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Mexico, May 21, 1879. No. 958.]

Sir: Ten days ago I accepted an invitation from one of the largest hacendados (planters) of the Yalley of San Martin, in the State of Puebla, to witness the trial of American agricultural machinery which he was making. This valley is one of the best wheat-growing regions in this republic, and the present is the harvest season.

Mexico, notwithstanding it lies mainly in the tropics, has a considerable area of lands very suitable for the production of wheat of good quality. At an elevation of from 6,000 to 8,500 feet above the sea, wherever the soil is sufficiently fertile, it is produced; and at these altitudes there are many broad valleys and table lands where the cultivation is extensively carried on, mainly by irrigation, although in many localities an annual crop is raised without irrigation. And even at a lower elevation than 6,000 feet wheat is grown. In the Valley of Oaxaca and elsewhere, say 4,000 feet above the sea, I have seen large fields of wheat and sugar-cane cultivated with success side by side. Besides in the northern States of the republic, as Sonora and Chihuahua, there are large tracts of lands adapted to wheat-cultivation much nearer the sea-level; so that Mexico is capable of producing not only all the wheat which is needed for its own consumption, but under favorable circumstances, it might be able to export this grain in considerable quantities. Up to the present time it has not been able to accomplish either of these most desirable objects, but it is hoped that the movement now being made to introduce American agricultural machinery may be an important factor in hastening their realization.

Notwithstanding there is so large a portion of territory admirably adapted for wheat production, wheat-bread is virtually a luxury in this country, as only the upper and more well-to-do classes are accustomed to its general use. Cakes made of Indian corn or maize (undergoing a peculiar preparation) constitute the bread of the large majority of the population.

Mexico feels the great need of increasing its products for exportation, and it has been a fondly-cherished desire of the government and planters to so adapt the laws and the system of cultivation to such a condition as to promote the exportation of wheat and other small grains, and thus increase the capacity of the country for sustaining a large foreign trade.

The two chief reasons why wheat-bread is a luxury in Mexico, and why the country cannot export this product to foreign countries, are (1st) the cost of cultivation, and (2d) the difficulty and heavy cost of transportation. The first of these it is hoped may be obviated by the use of improved agricultural implements and machinery, with an indirect influence also upon the second. At the first glance it would seem that almost all circumstances favored the cheap production and sale of wheat. Labor is low, averaging about 25 cents per day, which is increased to say 31 cents during the harvest season. The government apparently does everything possible to encourage this industry. It has levied duties upon the importation of wheat and flour, which are almost prohibitory, in order to keep out competition from foreign countries, the import duty on wheat being $1.08 per bushel, and on flour $8.90 per barrel. The entire taxation, federal, State, and municipal, on the planters of the Valley of San Martin, one of the most productive and prosperous in the republic, does not amount to 1 per cent, upon a low appraisement of their lands. But with all these favoring conditions, wheat averages say $1.70 per bushel, and good flour $10 per barrel These figures represent the price of this product in the City of Mexico, which is near to the best wheat-growing regions of the country; but in all the districts on the Grulf and on the Pacific coasts, more or less distant from these regions, the price of flour is very much higher—even, in some seasons of scarcity of the wheat crop, reaching starvation prices.

From the foregoing figures it may be readily seen that it is an article beyond the reach of the poorer classes, especially in a country where wages are so low, and where corn, which is grown in every section, is much cheaper, and that until the cost of production is considerably reduced, it cannot be exported with profit. Although labor is so cheap, the complaint of the hacendados is that the supply is limited, and that it is very indifferent. The methods of cultivation also are of the rudest and most ancient character, which cause the sowing and harvesting to be very tedious and expensive. The plows most generally in use are of wood and of the most clumsy pattern, as are the other implements. Iron plows are being gradually introduced, but as yet they are by no means common; and drills, cultivators, and such class of machines and improved implements for sowing and cultivation are almost unknown for practical use here. And it is a safe estimate to say that 95 per cent, of all the wheat and other small grains is harvested by hand with the ancient small sickle, and that the same proportion is trodden out on the thrashing-floor with animals, and winnowed by the wind without the aid of any other implement or machinery than a flat wooden shovel.

The hacendados have long felt that these processes must be abandoned and a resort be had to the modern methods of cultivation, with the aid of improved machinery; and of late years a number of reapers, thrashers, drills, and other machinery have been imported from the United States and Europe; but to the present their working operations have not been so fully satisfactory as to lead to greatly increased importations and their general use.

Among the reasons for these unsatisfactory results have been that the persons who sought to use the machines were entirely unacquainted with their practical working—were unable to make changes to adapt them to the peculiarities of the grain and surface—and hence the machines never have had a fair trial; when they got out of order, or parts were broken or lost, it was found very difficult to repair them, and as native laborers were generally opposed to their use, it has in most cases resulted that after a short and imperfect trial the machines have ceased to be used, and were stored away in barns and warehouses to rust and decay.

The proprietor of the hacienda of Chualta (the hacienda, or plantation, visited by me in the valley of San Martin, referred to in the opening of this dispatch) is thoroughly impressed with the necessity of the application of modern improvements to grain cultivation, and he has comprehended the reasons for the failure heretofore of the improved agricultural machinery, and has taken measures to secure for them a fair trial. He has within the past three months brought from the United States the following (among others) machines and implements of the most accepted manufacturers: Havesters and binders self-rakers, droppers, thrashers with steam and horse power, drills for wheat, barley, and alfalfa (clover), corn-planters and cultivators, gang-plows, and a full variety of agricultural implements. With these instruments he has also brought out three American practical machinists and workmen, intimately acquainted with the construction of the machines and their operations, for the purpose of instructing the native laborers in their working management, to keep them in order, and to explain their merits and operation to the Mexican hacendados (planters). It was very gratifying to me to visit the hacienda of Chualta and witness the trial of two of the American harvesters (McCormick’s, of Chicago, and Osborne’s, of Auburn, N. Y.), which are attended by the special agents of the manufacturers in order to see what, if any, changes were necessary in order to adapt their machines to the Mexican wheat and fields. These agents inform me that they find the Mexican wheat very dry and feathery, from the long, dry season in which it always ripens; it has heavy heads, the stalks without blades, and short, and often standing very thin on the ground, for which reason a little difficulty was at first experienced in the machine gathering and binding the stalks. But with very few and simple modifications which they were able to make at once, they adapted them to these peculiarities. From the result of previous trials, it has been thought by some hacendados that a serious obstacle would be found to the successful operations of the machines in the ditches which line and intersect the fields for irrigation; but these have encountered no difficulty on that account. So far as I was able to judge, their operations were a complete success, and were so regarded by the Mexican hacendados who have witnessed their workings.

I regard this trial and the effort now being made by the proprietor of the hacienda of Chualta to introduce improved American agricultural machinery as a significant event for Mexico, for with its success there may be anticipated the following important results to flow from it: 1st. It will diminish the demand or necessity for manual labor which can be employed in other departments of agricultural work. The general complaint in all departments and by all writers who account for the backward condition of the country, is that there is a great want of more labor or workmen. This is especially the case with agriculture.

2d. It will cheapen the cost of production and will result in lower prices, This will be specially beneficial to the country in regard to wheat, bringing it within the reach of the common people, and it may eventually result (with improved means of transportation) in an ability to export it to foreign countries.

3d. It will shorten the period or season both in planting and of harvesting. The first begins in October, and owing to the rude methods and implements for doing the work, as also on account of the deep planting or sowing required here, say 6 inches, a long time is necessarily consumed, the season lasting into and sometimes to the end of December. The natural result of this is that the harvesting is scattered along through two months or more, as the crops must ripen in the order of their sowing. With improved plows in place of the old wooden Asiatic pattern now in general use, and with drills and planters the planting or sowing season can be greatly shortened, and, with harvesters and thrashers, such as are now being operated in the haciendas of Chualta, the grain can be reaped and made ready for market in short order. This prompt harvesting will be particularly valuable in this climate, where the crops are often lost at the end of the season by the hail-storms and the early beginning of the rainy season.

4th. An indirect effect will be in an improvement in the system of irrigation so largely practiced in Mexico. In most haciendas the system is very rude and unmethodical. The use of modern improvements in agricultural machinery will lead to better methods of irrigation and a consequent enlargement of the crops.

5th. The influence of placing agriculture abreast with modern improvements and civilization will be to greatly elevate this industry and enlarge its importance in a country which has been too long devoted almost exclusively to mining. Notwithstanding Mexico has great capacity for wheat-production and for almost unlimited cultivation of coffee, sugar, and other tropical agricultural products, of the $28,700,000 of its annual exports last year more than $22,000,000 were gold and silver, or more than 77 per cent, of the entire exports. Besides the general effect cannot fail to be most salutary in quickening the intelligence and inquiry of the people, awakening them from the lethargy of past ages and turning their attention from revolution and civil strife to the development of the wonderful resources of the country.

The trial which is now being made for the introduction of improved American agricultural machinery will demonstrate its fitness for Mexico, and it is to be hoped that the hacendados and citizens generally of this country will avail themselves of their use to such an extent as to reap the benefits to which I have alluded.

I am, &c.,

JOHN W. FOSTER.

No. 353. Mr. Foster to Mr. Evarts. [Document 382]

No. 353.
Mr. Foster to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Mexico, May 24, 1879. (Received June 12.) No. 962.]

Sir:—The Mexican foreign office has sent me a printed copy of the balanza general de la exportacion, just issued by the finance “department, showing the exportation of Mexican products for the fiscal year ending June 30, 1878, giving in detail the articles exported from the different parts of the republic. I accompany this dispatch with the publication, from which it will be seen that the total exports from Mexican ports for the year amount to $28,777,508.

From the general statement I have prepared the following table, embracing all articles whose total exportation exceed $100,000, as follows:

Mexican exports for year ending June 30, 1878: Coffee $1,275,058

Fiber, (henequen, istla, &c.) 1,259,233

Gold 1,265,199

Silver, coined and bullion 20,493,129

Ores, unreduced 267,311

Hides 578,822

Skins, goat, &c. 461,156

Orchilla 234,312

Sugar 276,479

Vanilla 346,133

Woods:

Mahogany 379,365

Cedar 357,340

Campeche, &c. 174,893

Moral 549,654

All other articles 859,424

Total exports 28,777,508

A few interesting facts may be noted in the publication and the above table. It will be seen that of the $28,777,508 of total exports, $22,000,000 are of precious metals, or 77 per cent, of the total. It is a bad indication of the state of prosperity of the country that, notwithstanding its great agricultural fertility and its capacity for tropical products, excluding gold and silver, its total exports do not reach $7,000,000. It is our nearest tropical neighbor, and has the natural capacity to supply the United States with all the sugar, coffee, and tropical fruits we consume, yet its exportation of these articles makes a most beggarly exhibit.

The following table shows the amount of sugar, coffee, and tropical fruits imported and consumed in the United States in 1878, and the amount of these articles exported from Mexico: Consumed in United States. Exported by Mexico.

Sugar $81,000,000 $276,479

Coffee 52,000,000 1,275,058

Tropical fruits 10,000,000 27,514

In previous dispatches I have referred to the unwise policy which has been pursued for many years by the governments of Mexico of levying an export tax upon its native products shipped abroad.

By reference to this published statement of the finance department, it will be seen that on four of the leading articles of exportation an export duty is charged, to wit, on silver, gold, precious woods, and orchilla, and that their total exportation amounts to $22,583,264, or say 80 per cent, of the entire exports of the country. The more liberal of the public men have long advocated the abolition of this export duty, but the present Congress, now in session, has just rejected a bill to repeal the duty on silver, so that it would seem the old system of repression of foreign trade is to be persisted in.

An extensive foreign trade cannot be maintained without a large exportation of native products, and the latter this country does not at present possess, as its per capita exportation is lower than almost all the other Spanish American countries; nor can a large increase be anticipated so long as it persists in the policy of exacting a tax upon 80 per cent, of its exportations, nor until its tropical agricultural productions can be much more largely developed than at present, not to speak of the prime conditions requisite for foreign commerce in all countries, the maintenance of peace and security to property.

I am, &c.,

JOHN W. FOSTER.

No. 354. Mr. Foster to Mr. Evarts. [Document 383]

No. 354.
Mr. Foster to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Mexico, May 27, 1879. (Received June 12, 1879.) No. 964.]

Sir: Referring to your dispatch No. 609, of March 26 last, relating to the contract made by the Mexican Government for the colonization of the island of Ciari, I have to report that, in a note dated on the 21st ultimo, I communicated to the Mexican foreign office the substance of your said dispatch, protesting against the invidious distinction made by the Mexican Government in excluding American citizens from the rights conceded to other foreigners as to the ownership of real estate in the frontier States.

The minister of foreign affairs, in reply thereto, sent me a note on yesterday, of which I inclose herewith a translation. It will be seen that he claims for Mexico the full right to place limitations upon the privilege conceded to foreigners to acquire and hold real estate in this country, and that he maintains that such limitations or prohibition as to citizens of the United States are not a violation of either the letter or the spirit of the treaty of 1831. It will also be noticed that he plainly indicates that such prohibition against American citizens holding real estate in the frontier States is inspired by the fear of territorial encroachment to the danger of the Mexican autonomy.

In acknowledging the minister’s note to-day, I have limited myself to saying I would forward a copy to you and await your indication before making a reply thereto.

If your dispatch and protest have had no other result, they have at least led the Mexican Government to state its real feeling in regard to frontier intercourse with our people, which is a fear that the acquisition of American interests across the border may result in the dismemberment of its territory.

This feeling has been most marked in the present session of Congress, which adjourns on the 31st instant, wherein the most decided hostility has been manifested against any railroad connection with the United States, the two bills for that object pending in that body having made no successful progress towards their passage.

Awaiting your further instructions on the subject of this dispatch.

I am, &c.,

JOHN W. FOSTER.

[Inclosure in No. 964.—Translation.]

Mr. Ruelas to Mr. Foster.

Department of Foreign Affairs,
Mexico, May 26, 1879.

Mr. Minister: I have received the note of your excellency dated the 21st of April last past, in which you are pleased to inform me that the Department of State of the United States of America, to which your excellency transmitted a translation of the contract made on the 4th of February last by the department of public works for the colonization of the island of Ciari, in the Gulf of California, has called your attention to the second clause of that contract, which does not admit as colonists the native or naturalized citizens of a foreign country bordering on the State of Sonora, to which the island of Ciari belongs. The Department of State, as your excellency states, considers that exclusion invidious, and in direct opposition to article 3 of the treaty of 1831, which stipulates for perfect equality between citizens of the United States and other foreigners who may visit or reside in Mexico.

Your excellency adds that, under instructions from the Department of State, you protest in the name of the Government of the United States against the exclusion and discrimination adverted to, characterizing them as a direct violation of the treaty.

Your excellency further adds that the Government of the United States considers that the Mexican law prohibitirlg citizens of the United States from holding real estate in the country, within certain limits, while that privilege is open to other aliens, may be regarded as incompatible, if not with the letter, certainly with the spirit of the treaty, the purpose of which was to provide for equality generally between American citizens and other foreigners in this republic; and your excellency concludes by expressing the opinion that these injurious discriminations cannot fail to occasion distrust of the friendly disposition of the Mexican Government in respect to the Government and citizens of the United States.

Having informed the President of the republic of the contents of this note, by his direction I have the honor to make the following reply:

The right which a sovereign state has to concede or refuse to foreigners the privilege of acquiring real estate in its territory is indisputable and universally recognized, as well as to establish a limit to this right when it has been conceded. In use of that right, in exercise of its sovereignty, Mexico has issued different laws upon the subject, among them that of the 11th of March, 1842, which, on permitting foreigners established and resident in the republic to acquire and possess city and rural property in the territory, made exceptions of those departments adjoining or fronting other nations, determining that in them foreigners could not acquire real estate without express permission from the government; and that of the 20th of July, 1863, which prohibits native or naturalized citizens of the adjoining countries to acquire public lands in the States of the republic bordering on those countries.

Mexico, upon issuing these laws, has not infringed the stipulations of article 3 of the treaty of 1831, nor has it violated the spirit which prevailed in that convention, because nothing is established in them which should be considered as contrary to the liberty, privileges, and security guaranteed to North American citizens, in order that they may go with their vessels and cargoes to any market, port, or river of the republic to which other foreigners are admitted; nor are said citizens prevented from renting houses and warehouses for the purposes of their commerce; nor are they prevented from dealing in all kinds of products, manufactures, and goods; nor are they obliged to pay higher duties, imports, or emoluments than are paid by the citizens of the most favored nations; nor is there anything, in a word, conceded to the latter with respect to navigation and commerce which is denied to North American citizens.

On the other hand, the equality of privileges, exemptions, and rights with the most favored nations, stipulated with the United States in article 3 of the treaty of 1831, refers to navigation and commerce; but, although it should extend to another subject (capitulo), that equality should be understood to be under circumstances also equal; and with reference to the acquisition of lands in the frontier States, it cannot be sustained that the United States, which adjoin Mexico, are in the same condition as the nations of Europe or of South America. For instance, I should at the same time call the attention of your excellency to the exception contained in the law of July 20, 1863, which is the most peremptory disposition referred to by the clause of the contract which gave rise to this note, which should not be considered as referring exclusively to the citizens of the United States, as it also comprehends those of the neighboring Republic of Guatemala, having the same conditions of boundary with Mexico; hence there is not nor can there be any justifiable motive for the Government of the United States to consider the prohibition established by the aforesaid law as an exclusion injurious to its citizens, and which refers to the nations bordering on the republic. I consider it proper to conclude this note by stating to your excellency that the Government of Mexico, upon exercising its right to limit the permission granted to foreigners of the adjoining nations to acquire real estate in this territory, making the exception of not allowing them to acquire in the frontier States, is not wanting in powerful reasons upon which to found its action; it acts in this manner guided by experience which is furnished by not very remote events recorded in its own history.

The separation of the vast territory of Texas, which, being colonized by North American citizens in virtue of the generous concessions of the same government, cut loose its destinies from those of the Mexican nation, is a severe lesson, which the latter should not forget, that it may be more cautious and far-seeing in the future. Its want of foresight then, judged by a representative of the United States was thrown in its face when its prejudicial effects were scarcely realized. In a note of the 17th of March, 1846, addressed to the department of foreign affairs of Mexico, Mr. Slidell said:

“* * * It has never been pretended that the project of colonizing the territory of Texas with citizens of the United States was suggested by that government. It was the effect of the deliberate policy adopted by Mexico, and she should blame herself for the result, which the slightest foresight might have anticipated, of introducing a population whose character, habits, and opinions were so extremely opposite from those of the people with whom it was intended to amalgamate them. * * *”

Consequently, it is not to be wondered at that the Government of Mexico, taking advantage of these lessons and these admonitions, has taken care to avoid the recurrence of such great evils in the future; and these precautionary measures should not be considered by the Government of the United States as the expression of unfriendly sentiments, or of an offensive distrust on the part of Mexico, but a just and legitimate resort in defense of the dearest interests of the republic.

Upon making the foregoing statement to your excellency, in compliance with the instructions which I have received, I have the honor to reiterate to you the assurances of my most distinguished consideration.

M. RUELAS.

No. 355. Mr. Foster to Mr. Evarts. [Document 384]

No. 355.
Mr. Foster to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Mexico, May 31, 1879. (Received June 17.) No. 966.]

Sir: The Mexican Congress adjourned to-day after the usual session of two months. The preferred business of the session was the consideration of the government financial estimates, which were voted in accordance with the recommendations of the different executive departments.

In previous dispatches I have referred to the annual heavy deficits in the federal treasury. An effort has been made to equalize the receipts and expenditures by reducing the latter, and especially by increasing the receipts by voting additional taxation. Extra stamp duties have been levied, but the measure which has provoked the most discussion has been the bill proposed by the executive establishing a tax upon cotton and wool fabrics of domestic manufacture, which, after very strong opposition, was finally passed just at the close of the session.

With the object also of improving the financial situation, a law was passed making smuggling a penal offense. I will have occasion to refer to these subject! in a subsequent dispatch, when I have an opportunity to examine the laws.

The bill authorizing the holding of an international exposition was not passed, it never having been reported from the committee to which it was referred in the Chamber after its return from the Senate.

The contract or concession which the executive made last year with H. H. Hall, in representation of certain New York gentlemen, for the construction of a railroad across the Isthmus of Tehuantepec, was approved by Congress with certain amendments. Although the concession is not all that the company desire, I believe it is the intention to accept it and proceed with the organization and work, in the expectation of securing the desired provisions by future legislation.

The charter or contract for a submarine telegraphic cable from Vera Cruz to Galveston, or other point in the United States, made by the executive with a New York company, failed to be approved by Congress.

Congress has continued to show itself unfriendly to railroad connection with the United States. Two concessions or contracts made by the minister of public works with American citizens or companies were pending in Congress—the International Railroad from this city to the Rio Grande frontier, and the Sonora Railroad from Guaymas to Tucson. Neither of these received sufficient support to be brought to a vote in the lower house.

The next session of the present Congress will meet on the 16th of September.

I am, &c.,

JOHN W. FOSTER.

No. 356. Mr. Foster to Mr. Evarts. [Document 385]

No. 356.
Mr. Foster to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Mexico, June 7, 1879. (Received June 26.) No. 969.]

Sir: In my No. 966, of the 31st ultimo, on the adjournment and action of the Mexican Congress, I referred to the revenue laws passed levying new taxes upon textile fabrics of domestic manufacture, and in regard to smuggling.

For many years past it has been the settled policy of all administrations of the Mexican Government to encourage home manufacturers, and especially those of cotton and woolen goods. To this end they have been in great measure exempted from taxation and are protected by a tariff on the importation of similar foreign goods so heavy that in most cases the duties exceed the cost of the articles. For instance, the following are some of these duties in the existing tariff: Unbleached domestics, 9 cents per square meter; bleached domestics, 16 cents; prints or calicoes, 14 cents; white cotton-thread, 60 cents per kilogram$ colored thread, 96 cents; cassimeres and similar woolen goods, $1.40 per square meter. I inclose herewith an extract from the revenue law passed at the recent session of Congress, which levies a tax upon all this class of goods of domestic manufacture. It is estimated that the total annual production of the cotton and woolen manufactories aggregate $20,000,000 at the least, and that the tax levied thereon will yield the government, say, $500,000, so that the rate of the levy on the total product is about 2½ percent. It will be noticed that to prevent this tax from operating favorably upon the importation of foreign goods, the same rate of taxation is also levied upon all similar articles imported through the customhouses, so that the foreign goods, whose duties are above stated, are to be burdened in addition with the same tax as that levied on domestic fabrics. This measure has evoked the most strenuous opposition, not only of the manufacturers but also of the trade unions and the protectionists generally, and nothing but the most urgent necessities of a government with an exhausted treasury could have secured the passage of the law. Some of the factories threaten to stop when the law goes into effect on the 1st of July, and labor demonstrations unfriendly to the administration may be anticipated.

I also inclose a translation of the law making smuggling a penal offense punishable by imprisonment. The contraband trade has become so general, as I have heretofore had occasion to notice, as to very seriously affect the revenues of the government, and it has been thought necessary to resort to the present law in the hope that its vigorous provisions may materially restrain this illicit commerce.

I am, &c.,

JOHN W. FOSTER.

[Inclosure 1 in No. 969.—Translation.]

Mexican law levying taxes upon domestic manufactures and similar foreign goods.

[Extract.]

The Congress of the United Mexican States decrees:

Article 1. The revenues of the federal treasury for the fifty-fifth fiscal year, which commences the 1st of July, 1879, and terminates the 30 th of June, 1880, shall he composed of the following items:

* * * * * * *

14. Of the products of the new imposts which are hereby established and are the following, which shall commence to be collected from the 1st of July of the present year, and the articles manufactured in factories or shops whose capital does not exceed $500 are excepted.

A. Three cents for each gross kilogram of cotton woven goods, smooth and brown, manufactured in national territory under the denomination of domestics (mantas) or otherwise.

B. Four cents for each gross kilogram of smooth cotton goods, white or colored, manufactured in national territory.

C. Two cents for each gross kilogram of cotton thread of whatever class or factory manufactured in national territory.

D. One cent-for each gross kilogram of yarn of all classes and of cotton, manufactured in national territory.

E. Two cents for each square meter of carpet, rug, counterpane, and other analogous woven woolen goods, or wool and cotton or of other materials with a mixture of any other, manufactured in national territory.

F. One cent for each square meter of baize, nubias, and other analogous woolen goods, or wool and cotton, manufactured in national territory.

G. One cent for each gross kilogram of woolen thread, white or colored, manufactured in national territory.

H. Duties of importation on the foreign goods similar to the national goods taxed in the clauses A, B, C, D, E, F, G, adding to the duties which the former now have fixed by the existing tariff, a sum equivalent to that established by this law on each one of the latter.

Inclosure 2 in No. 969.—Translation.

Mexican law imposing penalties of imprisonment for smuggling.

[Extract.]

The Congress of the United Mexican States decrees: Article 1. Besides the penalties established in chapters 20 and 21 of the maritime and frontier custom-house tariff of the 1st of January, 1872, the authors of contraband or fraud against the rights of the treasury, their accomplices, the receivers of goods, and the employés who may he in collusion with any of the persons as before described, shall be punished with the penalties hereafter stated.

Art. 2. In the cases mentioned in the clauses I, II, and III of article 86 of the said tariff, if the owners, conductors, captains, or any other persons transporting the goods should be apprehended, they will undergo five years’ imprisonment and their names shall be published in the newspapers; if it be proven that any commercial house established in the republic has carried on or favored contraband after this law shall have gone into force, besides the foregoing penalties which shall be applied, according to the case, its name shall also be published in the newspapers, its name shall not be recognized in any transactions with the public treasury and will not be admitted in any official or commercial transaction by any government office.

Art. 3. In all the other cases stated in articles 86 and 87 of the tariff, a corporal punishment of from six months to five years imprisonment will be imposed, under the following conditions: If the total amount of the duties defrauded passes one hundred dollars without exceeding a thousand dollars, an imprisonment of from two to six months will be imposed; if it exceeds a thousand dollars without reaching two thousand, double the time; if it passes two thousand and does not reach three, triple the time; and thus successively, without exceeding the maximum of five years.

Art. 4. Corporal punishment shall not be inflicted in the cases comprehended in clauses IV, V, and VI of article 86, chapter XX of the said tariff, when the amount of the duties does not exceed $200.

Art. 5. When the manifestation of the goods in the consular documents is done in an ambiguous manner, without being subject to the nomenclature of the tariff, the penalty of double duties will be imposed on the goods which arrive ambiguously manifested; in this case every package of the cargo should be examined.

Art. 6. Accomplices in the offenses of contraband or fraud in which the penalty of imprisonment is imposed, half of the punishment shall be inflicted on the first named, and a fourth on the second, which should or may be imposed on the principal authors of the contraband or fraud.

Art. 7. The government employés who may be proven to be complicated in the aforesaid offenses shall suffer the penalties established in the present law, and those imposed by the tariff in force, and other laws on the subject; but in every case with the understanding that the imprisonment inflicted can never be less than double the time imposed upon the principal delinquent or delinquents of the contraband or fraud.

No. 357. Mr. Seward to Mr. Foster. [Document 386]

No. 357.
Mr. Seward to Mr. Foster.

Department of State,
Washington, July 2, 1879. No. 649.]

Sir: Your No. 974, of the 13th ultimo, presents a recent case in which application was made to your legation for a passport for the minor son of a naturalized citizen of the United States, the father having been born in Germany, while the son was born in Mexico. You refer to a law of Mexico, by which children born in that country of alien parents shall, on attaining their majority, elect for either Mexican citizenship, or that of their parents, and in view of those antecedents you inquire, (1st) whether it is the practice of the Department to issue separate passports to the minor children of citizens of the United States unaccompanied by their parents; and (2d) whether, in the case reported, you would have been justified in issuing a separate passport to the minor son.

It is observed that you omit to mention whether the father was a naturalized citizen of the United States at the time of the birth of the son. If not, residence in the United States is a condition of the son’s citizenship. (See section 2172 of the Revised Statutes.) It is presumed, however, from your statement, that the father was an American citizen sojourning in a foreign land at the time of the son’s birth.

Answering your inquiries in general terms, and without assuming to decide the case now presented without fuller information, it may be observed: First. That a passport can properly be issued to a minor of discreet age, unaccompanied by his parents, when the facts show honest and bona fide motive for soliciting a separate passport 5 and,

Secondly. That, until coming of age, a child born abroad of American parents and continuing abroad, is an American citizen, and as such entitled to a passport. If on attaining majority the laws of the country of his birth require option for either his inherited or his native citizenship, and if he chooses to avail himself of such laws and renounce his American status, that is another matter and such option is all that is contemplated by the Mexican law referred to, as it is here understood from your description. But that statute does not make such a minor a Mexican during minority, nor prevent his remaining an American under American law; still less can it leave him a nondescript with no nationality whatever.

I am, &c.,

F. W. SEWARD,
Acting Secretary.

No. 358. Mr. Foster to Mr. Evarts. [Document 387]

No. 358.
Mr. Foster to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Mexico, July 18, 1879. (Received August 12.) No. 996.]

Sir: I transmit herewith a copy of a communication from Mr. Strother, consul-general in this city, referring to citizenship of James W. Smith, lately deceased, and to the rights of his minor children.

During the French intervention and Maximilian empire in Mexico in 1866–’67, Mr. Smith rendered important services to the republican army and government, both personal and of a pecuniary or property character, whereby a claim accrued to a considerable amount, say $150,000 or more. In 1876 Mr. Smith took part in the revolution under General Porfirio Diaz, and upon the triumph of the revolution and the establishment of the same as the government of Mexico, Mr. Smith was appointed to and accepted the position of colonel in the Mexican army, and was understood to be in said service at the time of his death.

The Mexican law of January 30, 1856, now in force, says: Art. 7. The foreigner shall he held as naturalized:

I. If he accepts any public charge (cargo) of the nation or belongs to the army or navy.

The government official organ has recently referred to this law and stated that according to its provisions foreigners who accept any office in the government, either civil or military, by that act become Mexican citizens.

It is highly desirable that the status of American citizens who accept service under the Mexican Government be fixed and made known, as the cases are not unusual.

I have, therefore, respectfully to request the views of the Department upon the questions presented in Consul-General Strother’s communication and the facts noticed in the present dispatch.

I am, &c.

JOHN W. FOSTER.

[Inclosure in No. 996.]

Mr. Strother to Mr. Foster.

United States Consulate-General,
City of Mexico, July 15, 1879.

Sir: I would beg leave to present for your consideration some questions which have been suggested by the application of Mrs. Mary Smith for permission to register the birth of a child at this consulate-general.

The case may be stated as follows: It appears from the official records that on the 6th day of April, 1864, James Wiley Smith, a native of Louisiana, and recognized citizen of the United States residing in Mexico, and Mary Miller, a daughter of John Miller, a citizen of the United States residing in the city of Puebla, were lawfully married in the presence of Marcus Otterbourg, United States consul at this city, and other witnesses. It further appears from the same record that on the 15th of June, 1869, the said James Wiley Smith, before John S. Cripps acting vice-consul of the United States, made declaration that on the 30th of May, 1869, a son was born to him by his lawful wife, Mary Smith, and named James Wiley Smith, which birth was duly registered in the consular record book for the uses and purposes thereto pertaining.

There is evidence to show that a second son was born on the 27th January, 1872, named John Barton Smith, but for some reason not explained, the birth of this son was not entered on the consular record.

It is also of public notoriety that some time during the year 1877, the said James Wiley Smith, otherwise known as “Santiago Smith,” accepted a position in the Mexican military service under General Porfirio Diaz, since President of the republic.

Oh the 5th June, 1879, the said James Wiley Smith died leaving a widow and two sons.

On Monday, 14th instant, the widow, Mary Smith, appeared at this consulate-general, attended by the proper witnesses, and requested permission to register the birth of her second son, John Barton Smith, born January 27, 1872, as above stated, desiring to secure for him such claim to American citizenship as the act of registration is presumed to exhibit.

Under the circumstances I decided to accord the permission, and the registration was completed.

Nevertheless, the case suggests three questions which I beg leave to present to higher authority for solution.

First. If a native-born citizen of the United States residing in a foreign country should, under any circumstances, enter the civil or military service of the said country without first obtaining permission from his own government, does he thereby forfeit his claim to his former citizenship?

Second. If so, does this forfeiture react upon the claims and privileges supposed to be secured to a child previously registered at an American consular office?

Third. After the death of the father, under the circumstances as stated, will the declaration and registration by the widowed mother be recognized as of any validity in securing the desired privileges to the orphaned children?

I am, &c.,

DAVID H. STROTHER,
United States Consul-General.

No. 359. Mr. Foster to Mr. Evarts. [Document 388]

No. 359.
Mr. Foster to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Mexico, July 23, 1879. (Received August 12.) No. 999.]

Sir: Upon receipt of your dispatch, No. 647, of the 26th ultimo, transmitting a letter and accompanying documents from the Secretary of War relating to the reported depredations in Mexico of Indians from the United States, I sent to the minister of foreign affairs a copy of the said documents, and accompanied it with a note, on the 18th instant, of which I inclose copy. In this note I expressed to the minister my gratification that the reports of General Ord and Colonel Hatch (May 6 and May 28), commanding in Texas and New Mexico, proved that there was no remissness on the part of the American authorities on the Rio Grande frontier. I also called attention to the fact that while the whole of the American side of the Chihuahua frontier was patrolled by the Regular Army, it would seem that no such duty was performed on the Mexican side of the border named, and that this being the case the Mexican Government could not with reason charge that the United States was neglecting its duty in that regard.

On yesterday I received from the minister a note, in which he acknowledges the receive of my note of the 18th, and states that he will bring its contents to the attention of the President. He adds that in support of his former communications he incloses a copy of a telegram from General Trevino, stating that barbarous Indians are passing to Mexican territory, proceeding from the reservations in the United States. A translation of the note and telegram are inclosed herewith.

I replied on the same day to the minister, saying I would bring the report to your notice, but I directed attention to the fact that General Ord’s report (as well as Colonel Hatch’s) showed that the crossing last reported must be extremely improbable, but if it had occurred it was the work of Mexican Indians; and I requested that General Treviño be directed to accurately ascertain by what Indians the crossing had been made. I further suggested that the Mexican agents ought to be enjoined to be more careful in transmitting to their government current rumors containing charges of neglect or bad faith on the part of the American authorities, especially as former reports regarding the Indians had been shown to be unfounded.

While the telegram does not state where the Indians are crossing from the United States into Mexico, as the report is sent by General Treviño, I infer that it is somewhere in the State of Coahuila, in front of General Ord’s department. It will be remembered that a similar crossing was reported to me by the Mexican Government in March last, but if it was made by American Indians it is singular that no further details have been furnished me, according to my request.

I am, &c.,

JOHN W. FOSTER.

[Inclosure 1 in No. 999.]

Mr. Foster to Mr. Ruclas.

Legation of the United States,
Mexico, July 18, 1879.

Sir: In your excellency’s note to this legation of March 12 last, you referred in’ general terms to certain depredations of Indians and other raiders in Chihuahua and Sonora. On the next day I suggested in a note that you would furnish me with detailed information on the subject. Your excellency promptly responded under the same date that you would cause certain data to be prepared and sent me; but in the mean time you informed me that on the 11th of the said month a band of sixty Indians, proceeding from the United States, crossed the Rio Grande in the vicinity of Fort Clark, Tex., and were committing depredations in Mexico.

Almost simultaneously with your excellency’s first note there appeared in the Diario Oficial of March 10, official reports from the State of Chihuahua, of depredations of Indians in said State, some of whom it was alleged came from the United States-Having read these reports carefully, from my knowledge of the situation of affairs in. Chihuahua obtained from minute inquiry of residents of said State, I was satisfied; that the Indians referred to belonged to or had their usual haunts in Mexican territory. I inferred, however, that these were the depredations to which your first note, alluded, and being desirous of bringing the whole subject speedily to the attention of my government to enable it to correct any possible remissness of its authorities, I, sent to it, together with copies of our correspondence, full translations of the publication in the Diario Oficial, and recommended a prompt investigation, and vigorous measures, if the reports should prove well founded.

My surmise as to the publication of the Diario Oficial was in part confirmed by your excellency’s note of April 22, which latter was also forwarded to Washington, but to which I have not yet received a reply, awaiting the investigation which it has doubtless occasioned.

But I am now able to give your excellency the results of the investigations occasioned by your note of March 13 and the publication in the Diario of March 10, which will be found in the copy of the communication of the Secretary of War and accompanying papers which I inclose herewith; and I am gratified-to be able to say to your excellency that they prove that there exists no remissness on the part of the American authorities on the Texas and New Mexico frontier in the cases alleged. General Ord’s report, as well as that of Colonel Hatch, shows that if the crossing of Indians into Mexico, near Fort Clark, Tex., ever occurred, as reported, it must have been by Indians belonging to Mexico, returning from a raid in Texas, although it would seem that the crossing reported is extremely doubtful.

This supposition is confirmed by the fact that your excellency did not in your note of April 22 refer to the event, nor have you since alluded to it. It is to be borne in mind, in this connection, that notwithstanding the Mexican Government has interned most of the Kickapoos, who were on friendly terms with its people, the hostile Indians in its territory are, as I am informed, in great part still in their old haunts and liable to continue their depredations both in Texas and Mexico.

Colonel Hatch, commanding in New Mexico and on the northwest frontier of Texas, gives good reasons upon which to base the assertion that the crimes reported to have been committed in Chihuahua were by Indians inhabiting or hiding in Mexican territory, and that the American authorities ought not to be held responsible for their acts. In the unpopulated regions of the Upper Rio Grande there is doubtless considerable insecurity on account of the vagrant Indians, but it is evident from the reports of the officers just referred to that the American authorities cannot be charged with neglect of duty or want of vigilance, much less with furnishing the Indians with facilities for their depredations. It is to be borne in mind that while the entire frontier of the United States bordering on the vast extent of Chihuahua is constantly and systematically patrolled by troops of the Regular Army of the United States for the express purpose of restraining the Indians and punishing outlaws, it would appear both from the publication in the Diario and from a general knowledge of the occupation and position of the Mexican army that no such duty is performed on the Mexican side of the border named. If such is the case, it cannot with reason be charged by the Mexican Government that that of the United States is neglecting its duty with regard to the peace and good order of that frontier.

I have, &c.,

JOHN W. FOSTER.

[Inclosure 2 in No. 999.—Translation.]

Mr. Ruclas to Mr. Foster.

Department of Foreign Affairs,
Mexico, July 19, 1879.

Mr. Minister: I have the honor to say to your excellency that I have received your esteemed note dated yesterday, relative to the incursions of the savage Indians on the border of Mexico and the United States of America, and that I will bring its contents to the opportune knowledge of the President of the republic.

In support of former communications upon this subject, and of the internation of the savage Indians of the United States resident in the reservation near the frontier, I inclose to your excellency a copy of a telegram received to-day in the department of war.

I improve this opportunity to renew to your excellency the assurances of the high consideration with which I am your very attentive servant.

M. RUCLAS.

Mexican Republic.—Department of War and Marine.—Section 1.

General Geronimo Trevino, from Ventura, says, in a telegram which I have just received, the following:

“I have the honor to inform you that the expeditionary columns against the Indians have departed; the first left the 10th of June, and the second the 18th. Barbarous Indians pass to Mexican territory, proceeding from the reservations of the United States.”

Which I transcribe to you for your information.

Liberty in the constitution.

Mexico, July 19, 1879.
GONZALES.

To the Secretary of Foreign Affairs.

[Inclosure 3 in No. 999.]

Mr. Foster to Mr. Ruelas.

Legation of the United States,
Mexico, July 22, 1879.

Sir: I am only this morning in receipt of your excellency’s note, dated 19th instant, in which, acknowledging the receipt of my note of the 18th instant, you inclose to me a copy of a telegram from General Trevino to the minister of war, stating that barbarous Indians were passing to Mexican territory, proceeding from the reservations of the United States.

I will, without delay, communicate the said telegram to my government for its information, but I beg to remind your excellency that the official reports of General Ord and Colonel Hatch, which I sent to you with my note of the 18th instant, render extremely improbable the existence of the facts alleged in said telegram. The point from which the latter was sent indicates that the incursions are supposed to have occurred in the locality described by General Ord as a region where no Indians from the United States are found, and if the incursions have occurred, they are most probably the work of the hostile Mexican Indians still at large in the States of Coahuila and Chihuahua. I have, therefore, to respectfully suggest that General Trevino be informed of the contents of General Ord’s report, and directed to obtain accurate details as to the alleged incursions last telegraphed, especially to ascertain by what Indians they were committed. In the light of General Ord’s report, I am fully persuaded that the raid, of which your excellency’s note of March 13 last gave the details, was made by Mexican Indians.

I have been prompt to bring all the reports to the knowledge of my government which your excellency’s department has from time to time communicated to me, and my government has shown a great readiness to investigate all these reports with a view to suppressing the evils on the frontier. But thus far these reports, in great measure, have been shown to be so unfounded that I must insist that the Mexican Government will require its agents on the frontier to be more careful in transmitting current rumors, especially when they contain charges of neglect or bad faith against the American authorities.

I repeat, with this occasion, the assurances of my most distinguished consideration.

JOHN W. FOSTER.

No. 360. Mr. Foster to Mr. Evarts. [Document 389]

No. 360.
Mr. Foster to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Mexico, July 28, 1879. (Received August 12.) No. 1002.]

Sir: I am gratified to announce that the matriculation of American citizens through this legation has been resumed by the Mexican Government, upon the basis insisted upon by me, though the minister of foreign affairs reserves the question under discussion for future liberty of action.

On the receipt of your dispatch No. 642, of the 16th ultimo, I embodied the same in a note which I sent to the minister of foreign affairs on the 2d instant. Under the same date I addressed the minister a second note, of which I inclose a copy, in which I renewed the application for the matriculation of Mr. Gustavus Sommer, whose matriculation had heretofore been refused and which had given rise to the discussion in question.

Under date of the 9th instant Minister Ruelas sent me a note acknowledging receipt of my note of the 2d instant, in which I had embodied the views of your said dispatch, and stated that it would be made the object of a special study. The next day he sent me a note in reply to my new application for the matriculation of Mr. Sommer, inclosing the desired certificate of matriculation, and stating at the same time that his government reserved liberty of action in analogous cases, and even in the case of Mr. Sommer.

As the point at issue had been waived by the Mexican Government in granting the matriculation, I did not think it desirable to prolong discussion by making any reply to the reservation mentioned in Mr. Ruelas’s note.

Pending the foregoing stated correspondence, Mr. Blanchard B. Kelly, following the example of other American residents during the suspension of applications through the legation, went in person to the foreign office to obtain his matriculation, presenting in support of his application the passport of the Department of State, No. 4939, of March 14, 1878. His application was refused upon the ground that he must present evidence to show whether he was a native or naturalized citizen of the United States, as appears by his letter addressed to the consul-general, of which I inclose a copy.

After the action of the Mexican Government in the matriculation of Mr. Sommer, which occurred subsequent to the refusal in the case of Mr. Kelly, I advised the latter gentleman to renew his application through the legation. I accordingly sent a note to Mr. Ruelas on the 25th instant, making application for Mr. Kelly’s matriculation, basing it exclusively upon his passport from the Department of State. Mr. Ruelas replied promptly on the next day, sending the certificate of matriculation without any question as to the insufficiency of the passport. It is to be hoped, therefore, that a similar course will be followed in the future, and that thus the past difficulty may be avoided. Since the 10th instant I have also obtained the matriculation of several citizens upon naturalization papers, certificates of consuls, &c.

I have, &c.,

JOHN W. FOSTER.

[Inclosure 1 in No. 1002.]

Mr. Foster to Mr. Ruelas.

Legation of the United States,
Mexico, July 2, 1879.

Sir: In view of the explanations contained in my note of this date regarding the regulation under which passports are issued to citizens of the United States, and of the position maintained by my government, I have respectfully to renew the application heretofore made for the matriculation of Mr. Gustavus Sommer, a resident of this city, whose American citizenship is attested by the passport of the Secretary of State of the United States.

With an earnest desire to meet the views of your excellency’s department and to comply with the requirements in regard to matriculation, I have indorsed on said passport the certificate of this legation that said document is in full force and vigor for the purpose indicated, and that Mr. Sommer is recognized by this legation as a citizen of the United States and entitled to all the rights and privileges as such. As your excellency’s department has frequently matriculated American citizens upon the simple statement of this legation to that effect, it is believed that such declaration will facilitate the matriculation now asked.

Your excellency will please accept with this opportunity the reassurance of my high respect and esteem.

JOHN W. FOSTER.

[Inclosure 2 in No. 1002.—Translation.]

Mr. Ruelas to Mr. Foster.

Department of Foreign Affairs,
Mexico, July 9, 1879.

Mr. Minister: I have had the honor to receive yonr excellency’s note of the 2d of the present month, relative to the matriculation of American citizens. Its contents shall be the object of a special study, and, as soon as it shall be possible for me, I will hasten to communicate to your excellency the resolution of the President.

Meanwhile, I improve the opportunity to reiterate to your excellency the expression of the distinguished appreciation with which I am your very attentive servant.

M. RUELAS.

[Inclosure 3 in No. 1002.—Translation.]

Mr. Ruelas to Mr. Foster.

Department of Foreign Affairs,
Mexico, July 10, 1879.

Mr. Minister: I have had the honor to receive the attentive note of your excellency, dated the 2d of the present month, and with it the passport issued in favor of Mr. Gustavus Sommer by the Department of State in Washington, on the 16th of May, 1873, countersigned by your excellency on the 1st instant, and the effect noted of having made known that the legation in your worthy charge recognizes said Sommer as a citizen of the United States of America, and entitled to all the rights and privileges as such.

Without entering upon an examination of the principles set forth in the note to which you refer me, and giving attention only to the simple manifestation of the legation of the United States of America, which, without doubt, has reliable proofs of the American citizenship legally acquired by Mr. Gustavus Sommer, I have the honor to send inclosed with the passport before mentioned the certificate of the matriculation in the books of this department, at the same time that the government of the republic reserves the liberty for its proceedings in analogous cases, and finally to act in accordance with the law in the case even of Sommer.

I have the honor to be, with the expression of my highest esteem, your excellency’s very attentive, faithful servant,

M. RUELAS.

[Inclosure 4 in No. 1002.]

Mr. Kelly to Mr. Strother.

No. 24 Calle be Cadena,
City of Mexico, July 5, 1879.

Dear Sir: A few days since I called at the office of foreign affairs for the purpose of obtaining from the Mexican Government a letter of matriculation in conformance with a requirement of this government.

I presented my passport dated at the Department of State, City of Washington, March 14, 1878, which I was requested to leave a few days.

To-day on applying again for letter of matriculation, I am told that my passport is not sufficient; that it must be accompanied by a certificate from the United States consul-general that I am a native born citizen of the United States.

It is in order to obtain such a certificate that I have the honor to address you, and of subscribing myself your most obedient servant,

BLANCHARD B. KELLY.

[Inclosure 5 in No. 1002.]

Mr. Foster to Mr. Ruelas.

Legation of the United States,
Mexico, July 25, 1879.

Sir: I respectfully request your excellency to issue a letter of matriculation to Mr. Blanchard B. Kelly, resident in this city, who is registered in the consulate-general in this city as a citizen of the United States, and recognized by this legation as entitled to all the rights and privileges as such, upon the faith of the passport of the Secretary of State inclosed herewith.

With a renewed expression of my high esteem, I remain your excellency’s obedient servant,

JOHN W. FOSTER.

[Inclosure 6 in No. 1002.—Translation.]

Mr. Ruelas to Mr. Foster.

Department of Foreign Affairs,
Mexico, July 26, 1879.

Sir: In reply to your excellency’s note of yesterday, I have the honor to send to you inclosed the certificate of matriculation which has been issued to Mr. Blanchard B. Kelly as a citizen of the United States of America, and I return to you his passport.

I have the satisfaction of renewing to your excellency the assurances of my distinguished consideration.

M. RUELAS.

No. 361. Mr. Foster to Mr. Evarts. [Document 390]

No. 361.
Mr. Foster to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Mexico, August 2, 1879. (Received August 26.) No. 1008.]

Sir: Upon receipt of your dispatch No. 629 of May 23 last, I sent a note to the minister of foreign affairs soliciting the information desired by the Secretary of the Treasury. On yesterday I received from the minister the reply which I inclose herewith, which he states contains all the reliable information attainable. It will be seen that the statistics furnished contain (1st) the amount of coinage of silver and gold for the past ten years, and (2d) the amount of the metals exported in three years, from 1872 to 1875. To the official figures of exportation, a considerable sum is to be added to cover the silver illicitly sent out of the country to avoid the government duty of 5 per cent.

There are no data existing whereupon to make any estimate of the amount of silver and paper currency in circulation in this country. Gold has ceased altogether for a few years past to circulate as currency, and the amount in the country is too small to be estimated. Owing to the depreciated price of silver, which is an unlimited legal tender, gold is exported as fast as produced from the mines.

There is no general banking law, and no banks in the republic existing under government charters. Only one of the private banks of this city issues circulating notes and they are confined to the city, so that the paper currency is hardly to be considered in the general estimate of the republic.

I have to express regret that the statistics furnished are so imperfect, but they are the best attainable.

I have, &c.,

JOHN W. FOSTER.

[Inclosure in 1008.—Translation.]

Mr. Ruelas to Mr. Foster.

Department of Foreign Affairs,
Mexico, July 26, 1879.

Mr. Minister: As I had the honor to say to your excellency in my note of June 12 last past, I asked of the department of public works the data which the Government of the United States desires referring to the amount of gold and silver coined and in bullion, as also of paper money in circulation in Mexico. The said department has sent me to-day the communication which in copy I have the satisfaction to transmit to your excellency as well as the original tables which are mentioned in it, that department noting that these are the only reliable data which it can give in answer to the questions contained in your excellency’s note dated on the 9th of June last.

This occasion is agreeable to me to renew to your excellency the assurances of my very distinguished consideration.

M. RUELAS.

Mr. Fernandez to Mr. Ruelas.

mexican republic, department of public works, colonization, industry and commerce, Mexico.—Section 2, No. 639.

I have the honor to send you two tables which show, the first the coinage had in the mints of the republic in the last ten years, and the second the exportation of gold and silver, both bullion and coined, in the fiscal years from 1872 to 1875, which are those which are complete and worthy of confidence.

The data which these tables set forth are the only ones which can be given by this department in reply to the inquiries which the minister of the United States made to that of your worthy charge in the note which, under date of the 11th ultimo, you were pleased to transmit to me.

Liberty and the constitution.

Mexico, July 26, 1879.
M. FERNANDEZ,
Chief Clerk.

[Translation.]

No. 1.
Statement of the amount of gold and silver in the mints of the republic during the period from July, 1869, to June, 1879.

Fiscal years. Gold. Silver. Total.

1869–’70 $1,182,628 00 $19,813,821 10 $20,996,449 10

1870–’71 1,150,512 00 21,823,644 65 22,974,156 65

1871–’72 1,113,007 00 20,570,662 69 21,683,669 69

1872–’73 813,415 00 19,680,811 55 20,494,226 55

1873–’74 866,743 50 18,846,067 65 19,712,811 15

1874–’75 866,619 00 19,386,958 50 20,249,577 50

1875–’76 806,417 50 19,460,562 59 20,266,980 09

1876–’77 625,890 00 21,795,113 00 22,421,003 00

1877–’78 689,688 00 22,112,680 50 22,802,368 50

1878–79, first six months 345,681 00 10,476,377 15 10,822,058 15

Total 8,456,601 00 193,966,699 38 202,423,300 38

Annual average 21,306,716 00

Notes.—In the coinage of the fiscal year there are wanting reports for five months from the mints of Alamos, Oaxaca, Culiacan, and Hemosillo. To supply them an average is taken of the coinage for the year.

In the fiscal year 1878 to 1879 the coinage of the first six months only is given, as the reports from all the mints are not yet received.

Mexico, July 26, 1879.
For the chief of the section:
M. OROSCA,
First Clerk.

[Translation.]

No. 2.
A table showing the amount of silver and gold, coined and in bullion, which has been exported from the Mexican Republic during the fiscal years stated, as follows:

Fiscal year— Silver.

Coined. Worked. Bullion.

1872–’73 $22,626,064 57 $8,715 61 $1,459,426 38

1873–’74 17,021,404 91 1,359 31 1,217,853 14

1874–’75 14,190,771 85 3,920 42 1,843,522 95

Totals 53,838,241 33 13,995 34 4,520,802 37

Fiscal year— Gold. Total silver. Total gold. General total.

Coined. Bullion.

1872–’73 $636,737 96 $286,791 50 $24,094,206 46 $923,529 46 $25,017,735 92

1873–’74 2,081,949 20 487,192 19 18,240,617 36 2,569,141 39 20,809,758 75

1874–’75 2,701,478 00 194,387 00 16,038,215 22 2,895,865 00 18,934,080 22

Totals 5,420,165 16 968,370 69 58,373,039 04 6,388,535 85 64,761,574 89

Mexico, July 26, 1879.
For the chief of the section:
M. OROSCA,
First Clerk.

No. 362. Mr. Seward to Mr. Foster. [Document 391]

No. 362.
Mr. Seward to Mr. Foster.

Department of State,
Washington, August 13, 1879. No. 667.]

Sir: Your dispatch, No. 996, of the 18th ultimo presents an interesting question concerning the citizenship and rights of the minor children of the late James W. Smith, which had been submitted to you by the late consul-general.

It appears that, after lending important services to the republicans of Mexico during the French intervention, and the empire of Maximillian in 1866–’67, Mr. Smith took active part in 1876 in the successful revolutionary movement of General Diaz, became a colonel in the Mexican army, and was understood to be in such service at the time of his death, of which the date is given as June 5, 1879.

You further quote the provision of the Mexican law of January 30, 1856, enacting the naturalization, apparently without any additional formality beyond the fact of service, of a foreigner who “accepts any public office of the nation, or belongs to the army or navy,” and in view of this you ask in general terms for the views of the Department upon the status of Americans accepting service under the Mexican Government, and also specific instructions on the points presented in Mr. Strother’s letter to you of the 15th ultimo, a copy of which you transmit.

In answer to the first point presented by you, I may observe that on the 27th of July, 1868, Congress declared that the right of expatriation is a natural and inherent right of all people, indispensable to the enjoyment of “life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness.” (Section 1999, Revised Statutes.) The act of changing allegiance and citizenship must necessarily conform to the laws of the country where the American who voluntarily expatriates himself becomes a citizen or subject. No law of the United States, for instance, can make a Mexican citizen out of one of our own citizens, or prevent him from becoming a Mexican citizen by the operation of Mexican law. Mr. Smith, by the act of voluntarily taking military service under the Government of Mexico while a law was in existence by which such an act on his part conferred and involved the assumption of Mexican citizenship, must be deemed to have understanding conformed to that Mexican law, and of his own accord embraced Mexican citizenship. Under the enactment of Congress, previously quoted, no permission of the Government of the United States is necessary to the exercise of the right of expatriation. This answers the first question put by Mr. Strother.

The second and third inquiries respecting the status of the minor children are not so easy to answer. The two sons of Mr. Smith, aged respectively seven and ten years at the time of their father’s death, were undoubtedly American citizens by birth, inasmuch as the father’s change of allegiance occurred after the birth of the youngest child. If within the jurisdiction of the United States, their right to American citizenship would be unimpaired, and even if within Mexican jurisdiction during minority they would, in the absence of any Mexican law specifically attaching the altered status of the father to his minor children within Mexican jurisdiction, be still properly regarded as American citizens. But if there be such a law, or if on attaining majority they remain in Mexico and come within any provision of Mexican law making them citizens of that republic, they could not be regarded as citizens of the United States.

The registration of the younger son, by the widowed mother, after the death of the father, although irregularly and unnecessarily delayed, is in contravention of no rule, the child’s citizenship at birth being clear.

I am, &c.,

F. W. SEWARD,
Acting Secretary.

No. 363. Mr. Foster to Mr. Evarts. [Document 392]

No. 363.
Mr. Foster to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Mexico, August 15, 1879. (Received September 7.) No. 1013.]

Sir: The representative in the Federal Congress from the Territory of Lower California, Hon. Felix Gibert, has made a report to the department of government on the state of the administration of affairs in that Territory. From the “fact that the Territory adjoins the United States, and the neighboring officials are frequently brought into intercourse with each other, and on account of the American interests invested in and the commercial relations existing with that district, I have thought proper to transmit you herewith a translation of said report.

Omitting any comments of my own upon the report, I quote the criticism of Hon. J. M. Vigil, whom I have heretofore had occasion to refer to as one of the most intelligent public men and circumspect writers in the country, published in the Monitor Republicano, a recognized independent newspaper. The editorial referred to says: We have read with real surprise the report rendered by Mr. F. Gibert, deputy from Lower California, to the secretary of government, relative to the administrations of the prefects sent to that Territory by the Presidents of the republic from 1868 up to date, and published in the Libertad. We say that we were surprised by its reading, because it would be difficult to draw a picture more somber as a whole, more repugnant in its details, than that resulting from this report, which is a curious document that will give to future generations, less unfortunate than the present, an idea of what the Mexican Republic was during the last third of the nineteenth century, after near seventy years of war and revolution in order to conquer liberty and the rights of men, and under the empire of a constitution which leaves nothing to be desired from a theoretic point of view.

Mr. Gibert, in a hard style, almost violent, paints the situation of the condition of the Peninsula of California in a manner so horrible that, upon concluding its reading, one cannot do less than ask, in the greatest stupefaction, “How! Does this occur in Mexico? Is this possible in a civilized country—in a Christian country—in a country that has been bathed in blood to throw off tyranny?” And nevertheless the authorized voice of the representative of that distant Territory is there, implacable and severe, denouncing to the supreme government of the republic the horrors taking place there, designating the culprits by their own names, enumerating the crimes, to which he does not hesitate to apply the most terrible epithets, presenting proofs in support of his sad narrative.

After noticing the report in detail, the editorial concludes as follows: We have arrived at an extreme when it is absolutely indispensable that the nation should know what to expect. The vast territory of this country is in its greater part divided into petty kingdoms, subject to the whims of little local tyrants, who inflict upon their unfortunate subjects every class of outrage and vexation. Neither life nor property, nor any of the other individual rights, have guarantees of any kind; of the administration of justice there exists nothing but a vain pretense, and public morality has passed into the category of unrealizable dreams.

Well, then, what role does the supreme government of the republic play in this? Will it remain indifferent, will it assist disorder, or will it endeavor to put a dike to the anarchical tyranny which overflows in every direction We have here a question of life and death for the country and for the government itself. With respect to Lower California, we abstain, as we said before, from giving a definite opinion; but the acts officially denounced to the government are serious to such a degree that an investigation is absolutely necessary. In thus acting, the present administration will give a proof of the rectitude of the intentions that animate it, dissipating the clouds that obscure the prestige of all public authority.

I am, &c.,

JOHN W. FOSTER.

No. 364. Mr. Foster to Mr. Evarts. [Document 393]

No. 364.
Mr. Foster to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Mexico, August 16, 1879. (Received September 7.) No. 1014.]

Sir: In my No. 966 of May 31 last, in noticing the adjournment of the Mexican Congress, I stated that that body had continued to show itself hostile to railroad connections with the United States, and cited the failure of the projected railroad from the port of Guaymas, in the State of Sonora, to the American frontier, to connect with the Southern Pacific Railroad. Since that date the report of the committee of Congress, to whom the Sonora project was referred, has been printed and circulated, and which goes to confirm what I stated in my previous dispatch. That report contains a letter from Gen. G. Sanchez Ochoa, chief of engineers of the Mexican army, addressed to the minister of war, which letter has been recently republished by the newspaper press of this city, and its publication therein has evoked considerable discussion, especially involving the question of the propriety of such a railroad connection with the United States, and its danger to the autonomy of the Mexican territory. In order that you may understand the merits of the letter which has created the discussion, I send you a full translation of the same. It appears that Gen. Sanchez Ochoa was, as he himself states, asked by the minister of war to make a report upon the advantages or inconvenience of the projected Sonora railroad for the military service of the government: but he ignores almost completely the object for which the report was asked, and proceeds with a long dissertation upon the trans-continental traffic and the commercial relations between China, Japan, and Australia, and America and Europe, with a climatic discussion on the Pacific Railroad of the United States, and a scientific analysis of the winds and currents of the Pacific Ocean, from which to deduce the impolicy of allowing a railroad connection through Mexican territory to a southern Pacific route across the United States, which would result in the loss to Mexico and annexation to the United States of more than half of the territory of this republic. The value of the general’s dissertation of these topics may be inferred from his statements in his letter that the Union Pacific Railroad, in its passage of the Rocky Mountains, is in perpetual snow, and that during eight months of the year an extent of more than 600 miles of the road is covered with from 30 to 40 feet of snow!

I also inclose an extract from the report of the congressional committee, referring to the phase of the Sonora railroad project discussed by General Sanchez Ochoa so unfavorably to a connection with the United States. It will be seen that the committee confesses the gravity of the subject, and owing to its importance to the national autonomy it declines to pass judgment upon it, but refers the matter to Congress for resolution.

The general sentiment of the newspaper press may be inferred from the article, a translation of which I inclose, from the leading journal of this city.

The republication of Ochoa’s letter has evoked a reply from Hon. Antonio Moreno, senator in the Federal Congress for the State of Sonora, of which I inclose an extract in translation. This reply very plainly points out the great neglect of the interests of the Mexican border States by the Federal Government and their consequent decadence and poverty refers to the effects upon these States of the marked contrast across the American frontier of prosperity, thrift, and the wonderful development of resources; makes a significant allusion to the mooted Sierra Madre Republic, an independent confederacy of the northern Mexican States; and shows that if it is the desire to attach these States to the Mexican Republic, it is very poor policy to refuse them the means and opportunities to keep pace with the progress and prosperity of the American side of their frontier. The Congressional committee in its report in alluding to this point, it will be seen, uses the following language: The inhabitants of our frontier States are eye-witnesses to the development of the neighboring nation, and they do not see nor can they see with indifference the poverty and decadence in which they live, when they are only separated from prosperity and abundance by an imaginary line, which some look upon as the wall which shuts off material prosperity and intellectual progress.

In the report which the congressional representative from Lower California makes to the minister of government on the condition of that Territory (see my No. 1013) he does not hesitate to charge the Federal Government with neglecting that portion of the republic, with turning a deaf ear to their wants and complaints, and with delivering them to the unbridled rapacity of dishonest and immoral petty rulers.

I have, etc.,

JOHN W. FOSTER.

[Inclosure 1 in No. 1014.—Translation.]

sonora railroad.

Report of General G. Sanchez Ochoa, chief of the department of engineers of the Mexican Government.

Report of the chief of the department of engineers, presented to the minister of war, concerning the concession solicited for the establishment of an interoceanic railway across the States of Sonora and Chihuahua.

Mexican Republic, Department of War and Marine.

Having attentively examined the contract made between the department of public works and the English subjects, Messrs. David Ferguson and Robert R. Symon, for the establishment of a railway in the State of Sonora, starting from the port of Guaymas and terminating at some point on the frontier of the north in the State of Chihuahua, I proceed to comply with your instructions, dated the 5th of the present month, to make a report relative thereto. Said report should be confined, according to the text of my instructions, to giving the information asked as to whether the railroad would be advantageous or inconvenient for the service of troops, the transportation of artillery, equipage, &c., &c.; but’ that contract would bring such great political and economical inconveniences to the future of our country in the development of its natural elements and the commercial movement to which it is entitled by reason of its geographical position, with danger to its autonomy, that I cannot refrain from discussing them, in order that you may resolve what may be most convenient.

The utility of the road for military service is of slight consideration when we bear in mind the disadvantages which I am about to demonstrate.

I will commence by stating the difficulties against which the interoceanic railroad which starts from San Francisco, Cal., crosses the Rocky Mountains, touches the principal centers of the American Union, and terminates in the city of New York, has to contend at present, in order to show the absolute necessity there is for the establishment of another of better conditions, and which, in view of the position of our country, should pass through it, considering the capital as an entre depot for the principal towns of the republic.

The extensive railway communication possessed by the United States, for the convenience of the great commercial interests existing between Australia, China, and Japan, and the United States and Europe, met with inconveniences from the commencement. In fact, the steamers that sail from Sidney and Melbourne, in Australia, for San Francisco, described a diagonal in those seas in a direction from the southwest to northeast, starting from latitude 30° 52' south and longitude east 151° 14' from the meridian of Greenwich, and arriving at latitude north 37° 47' and longitude west 122° 28'from the same meridian, the distance traversed being 4,500 nautical miles, with twenty astronomical days’ navigation.

Upon making their trips direct to the ports of Manzanillo, Acapulco, or any other port on the Mexican-Pacific coast, although there is a longitudinal difference in favor of San Francisco, this is not the case as to latitude, which gives the advantage to our ports over those of the United States, as the difference of latitude with respect to Australia is 1,400 nautical miles, or six days’ less navigation in favor of our ports compared with those of Upper California; hence the trips which the steamers make in twenty days from Australia to San Francisco can be made in fourteen days from the ports of Sidney and Melbourne (Australia) to the Mexican ports of the Pacific. To this economy of time may be added the fact that the sea south of Lower California is quieter and more protected than that in the north, as in the latter the prevailing winds are always tempestuous. Coming from the west, they chill the coast of Upper California as they pass over the frozen seas of Asiatic Russia.

The winds that blow in Manzanillo and Acapulco are known to sailors as the “trade winds,” or those which nine months of the year blow parallel with the equator between the tropics, generally called the intertropic winds. They are very gentle, and give a great advantage to our seas over those over which vessels sail that go from the ports of Australia to San Francisco.

The nations of China and Japan possess a peculiar industry, which is rich and prolific, and, having large commercial intercourse with the United States and Europe, they would obtain the same advantages as Australia upon accepting direct navigation to the Mexican ports of the Pacific, ridding themselves, in consequence, of the serious inconvenience of the present navigation to the North American ports.

The steamers which at present sail from the ports of Nagasaki, Yokohama, Hiogo, Hakaidadi, in Japan, and those of Hong Kong, Shanghai, and Canton, in China, would make in the naval trip a diagonal less inclined than that made by sailing from Sidney and Melbourne, in Australia, to San Francisco; but as the longitudinal difference of China and Japan is greater than that of Australia, it gives an increase of 2,000 miles, or eight days more, the whole trip from China and Japan to San Francisco being in consequence twenty-eight days.

Now, the Mexican ports of the Pacific having the advantage of seas, currents, and winds for the navigation from Australia as from the other nations I have mentioned, and there being besides a difference of more than 1,000 miles less of distance, the result would be, adding this to what we have demonstrated, that the voyage to Manzanillo or Acapulco would be only twenty-four astronomical days.

Having demonstrated the fact of the great advantages had by vessels sailing from the coasts of Australia, China, and Japan to the Mexican ports of the Pacific, compared with those going to San Francisco, Cal., we will also demonstrate those that would exist by land in favor of an interoceanic railroad traversing the territory of the Mexican Republic, as against that crossing the Rocky Mountains in the United States of America.

This admirable and long railway starts from parallel 37° 47' latitude north, and its length, which is 3,300 English miles, is comprehended between 122° 26' and 74° west of the meridian of Greenwich. It commences in the port of San Francisco, ascends the Sierra Nevada, descends to the immense plains near the mining districts of Austin, Eureka, White Pine, and others; passes through Ogden, in Utah, over the way to Salt Lake City, or of the Mormons, ascending the frozen summits of the Rocky Mountains, to cross afterwards the sandy deserts of Platte River to the new town of Omaha; it runs along the southern border of the State of Iowa, crosses that of Illinois, and continues, in a word, through those of Indiana, Ohio, and Pennsylvania, until it finally terminates in the port of New York.

Upon arriving at the top of the Rocky Mountains this road is in perpetual snow, and during eight months of the year, on its respective ascents and descents, there is an extension of more than 600 miles of surface covered with snow. This snow is, during all this long time, as much as 30 or 40 English feet deep, constituting a serious obstacle to regular traffic.

There have been cases of passengers consuming thirty-five days from San Francisco to New York.

It has been attempted to protect those crossing the mountains from the dangers of the avalanches by means of wooden roofs or snow-sheds, but the snowfalls in such abundance as to always make all efforts useless, as the rails of the road are covered, and there have been winters when it has been necessary to suspend traffic for several months. These inconveniences presented by nature, by its latitude and altitude, are always practically insurmountable during the greater part of the year.

Bearing in mind these difficulties encountered by the North American interoceanic line, in connection with those of the vessels going to San Francisco, we come to the conclusion that an international line commencing at one of the Mexican ports of the Pacific, and passing through the principal centers of population of the Mexican Republic, presents, on account of the geographical position of the country, great advantages to the commerce of Australia, China, and Japan with the United States and Europe.

The concession asked for the construction of a railroad in the State of Sonora, commencing at the port of Guaymas, passing through Hermosillo, and terminating at some point on the frontier of the north, will doubtless seek to go through the great opening or pass of Guadalupe, in the Sierra Madre or Tarahumara, in the State of Chihuahua, in order to unite with one of the railways of the American Union to reach New York. Thus a new interoceanic line of communication, not having the inconveniences of that already constructed in the United States, will be established, and which will have immense advantages for the future commerce of the world.

Mexico, upon permitting the construction of this road in question, which only passes through the territory of one distant State, which is coveted by our neighbors on account of being one of the richest of the country, we may properly say, would voluntarily renounce the advantages of the interoceanic route which has been initiated and which should pass through its principal towns, making its capital the center where great commercial transactions would be made; besides, it would, lose the abundant pecuniary products which should be afforded by the transit duty, which cannot be estimated at less than $30,000,000 per annum.

When, in 1870, the concession sought by the American citizen Rosecrans was discussed, he and his associates took pains to prevent the road from passing through the capital, on its way to a port of the gulf, sometimes by evasions and at other times by absolute refusals, because this would amount to nothing less than the said right of transit which they would have had to pay to the government of the republic; it being worthy of note that in all the expedients resorted to at that time, by those seeking the concession, may be seen an absolute decision to carry the line to the territory of the United States.

That solicited at present for the establishment of a railway in the State of Sonora, from the port of Guaymas to a point on the frontier of the north, has exactly the same tendencies and conceals similar interests and projects, even more than sought by Rosecrans.

Consequently the said concession is highly prejudicial to Mexico, because it would increase North American interests to the detriment of the prosperity of the republic.

Having demonstrated the great inconvenience in its economical aspects of the contract entered into by the department of public works with Messrs. David Ferguson and Robert R. Symon for the construction of a railway in Sonora, we will point out the danger it would doubtless bring to the autonomy of our territory.

The railway starts from parallel 27° 55' 42 latitude north, and will probably terminate at the point of intersection of parallel 31° 47' with the boundary line between Mexico and the United States, to connect with one of the different lines. The meridian which passes through Guaymas encountered parallel 31° 39' latitude north, at Bamon, from which it appears that the route of the railroad comprehends a zone of 3° 52', which gives an extension of 228 English miles. Its extent from the point of departure to the point of intersection with parallel 31° 47' latitude north is near 400 miles.

By the project of the contract it is at once seen that it is intended to pass through the richest lands of the States of Sonora and Chihuahua, probably to attract, by the discovery of the many metallic veins, American colonists, who are the least agreeable to the interests of the country in those States.

We know that in 1819 the Spanish Government permitted Moses Austin to found a colony in Texas, and upon Austin’s death his son Stephen formally commenced the colonization. This was succeeded on the 18th of August, 1824, by a law emanating from the republic by which the emigration of American citizens was permitted, the result being that in a short time our hospitality was repaid by the said colonists with treason and ingratitude, who proclaimed the annexation of Texas to the United States. Mexico could not support such an offense, and in order to defend her rights, her honor, and outraged dignity she plunged into a fatal war, which brought upon her the saddest and most unfortunate results, losing the greater part of her territory.

The bloody pages of our modern history will recall to us with bitterness that unjustifiable usurpation on the part of the United States, and this will always be a severe lesson, which will teach us to know with exactness the masked and concealed intentions entertained toward-us by our neighbors of the North.

The concession asked contains in itself a fatal germ, and abounds in projects contrary to the autonomy of Mexico. In order to become convinced of this truth, it is sufficient to compare the elements of the humble Texas colonists with the very powerful ones of those who would come to Sonora and Chihuahua, who would from the beginning count upon the incalculable advantage of railway communication.

It is necessary to repeat that the annexation of the States of the republic would be inevitable, and Mexico would see floating on the territory which belongs to her the banner of the stars and stripes, and the repetition of the scenes which occurred at the time of the annexation of Texas. She would not only lose the States mentioned, but she would also have torn from her by force Sinaloa, Lower California, Durango, Coahuila, Nuevo Leon, and a large part of Tamaulipas.

This is, in the opinion of the undersigned, the future which awaits Mexico with the intended establishment of a railway passing through Sonora and Chihuahua. Nevertheless, the national government, in view of the arguments given, will, with its recognized enlightenment, dictate in this question the resolution considered most convenient.

GASPAR SANCHEZ OCHOA.
Mexico, November 1, 1877.

[Inclosure 2 in No. 1014.—Translation.]

report to congress.

[Extract from report of committee of public works, presented to the Chamber of Deputies May 13, 1879.]

* * * * * * *

It (the committee) studied the question with special attention before deciding to accept or modify the report of the former committee; it has asked data and particulars from the different departments of the government, and, in its opinion, the questions which should be particularly examined are those referring to the political convenience of granting the concession in question.

Two principal considerations have been adduced in opposition. The first refers to the fact that, by authorizing the construction of a railway between Guaymas and the northern frontier of the State of Sonora, the republic would voluntarily renounce the immense benefits which might at no distant day be offered by the construction of an interoceanic line across its territory and touching at its principal centers of population.

The second consists in the danger to the autonomy of the republic and to the integrity of the territory which might be caused by permitting the construction of the railway discussed, inasmuch as it would facilitate the means for effecting an armed invasion, and, besides, it would attract a dangerous colonization to distant States, which are weak at present, and only united to the federation by moral ties, which it would not be difficult to break.

As to the first of these reasons, the commitee does not give it serious importance, because it can never be successfully sustained that a line commencing at Guaymas can compete advantageously with one commencing at some port of the Pacific situated south of that and terminating in Tamaulipas or Vera Cruz, because our territory becomes narrower as we advance towards the south, and it is evident that the farther north a railway is built, the less is its competition in interoceanic traffic to be feared. The committee is not of the same opinion in regard to the second of the reasons mentioned. If it can be denied that there is danger in giving vigor to the distant States before those of the center, it cannot be considered just to deprive indefinitely those regions of the benefits of civilization and progress.

On the other hand, the inhabitants of our frontier States are eye witnesses to the development of the neighboring nation, and they do not see, nor can they see, with indifference the poverty and decadence in which they live, when they are only separated from prosperity and abundance by an imaginary line, which some look upon as the wall which shuts off material prosperity and intellectual progress.

The committee certainly does not think that these persons are in the right, but it understands that when such weighty reasons can be presented on both sides, an error, a mistake, might have sad consequences. For this reason it does not venture to solve such a delicate problem, which is one that the chamber should consider in all its seriousness and decide with its recognized patriotism.

* * * * * * *

[Inclosure 3 in No. 1014.—Translation.]

Opinion of the press.

[From the Monitor Republicano, July 24, 1879.]

the sonora railway,

The printed report has been circulated which General Gaspar Sanchez Ochoa presents to the secretary of war, as the chief of the department of engineers, upon the project presented to the department of public works by the English subjects David Ferguson and Robert B. Symon for the establishment of a railway in the State of Sonora, which, commencing at Guaymas, should terminate at some point on the northern frontier of that State or of that of Chihuahua.

General Sanchez Ochoa thinks the utility of the road for military service merits very little consideration; he then examines the project, and concludes by saying that the concession asked contains in itself a fatal germ and abounds in projects contrary to the autonomy of Mexico, and that the annexation of Chihuahua and Sonora to the United States would be inevitable.

We have not stopped to examine the concession and will not say whether it is good or bad, but in this particular we agree with General Sanchez Ochoa. For years past projects for a railroad uniting the principal cities of Sonora with some point on the American frontier have been presented, and we have always maintained that the construction of that road before the extremities of the republic are united to the center by the trunk line of the interoceanic route is dangerous, because otherwise it would give the result that the troops of the United States could invade our frontier cities without it being possible for the government of the capital to aid them. There is no country in the world where such an absurdity would be permitted.

This refers to the military phase. Commercially it would give the result of the traffic being carried on with the American cities and not with those of the center and from the coast of our republic.

[Inclosure 4 in No. 1014.—Translation.]

reply to ochoa’s report.

[Extract from a letter of Hon. Antonio Moreno, senator in the Mexican Congress from Sonora.]

* * * * * * *

When a country is as large as ours, and its means of connection so imperfect the distant States are necessarily badly attended to by the center, and the latter should allow them to employ all the resources at their command in order that they may enter upon the path of civilization and progress, which is the urgent necessity of our epoch. This it is that causes the, equilibrium between nations to be sustained, and which not being employed makes miserable the life of those who look on at the feast of civilization, possessed of a desperate inertia, which is the destructive characteristic of degenerate and abject races. Thus it is that our soil, so marvelously rich, contains a population so shamefully poor; hence it is that our consumption is so meager, our revenues so small, our government so weak, our productions so difficult, our political lifeless than impossible; thus it is that we exist in such a manner as causes us to represent in the eyes of the other nations the role of a sickly, decrepid man, by the side of a hale, robust one; thus it is that our right is measured, not with the rule of justice, but with the balance of force; thus it is that many of our States sink into ruin; thus that Sonora, once rich and fairly populated, is now poor, and sees her towns abandoned and her fields deserted; hence it is that tribes of Indians that are not strong can dominate in the most important districts of that state.

Considering the radical changes that a railroad would effect in Sonora; being convinced, as any one can be who will bear in mind the relation which must necessarily exist between the elements of vitality and their development; betweeen the past, the present, and the future; between the irregular and imperfect state of those settlements and the regular and perfect state to which they must be advanced by the spirit and the efforts of the present epoch—considering this, nobody of foresight, and who feels the beatings of an upright and just heart, will fail to agree that those people should not be chained down; that they should not be subjected to a forcible poverty, because they have a right to different treatment, and because exasperation will drive them nearer our neighbors than anything alleged by those who fear that the influence and the elements of the American Union may produce another mutilation of our territory. If Texas could have been united to Mexico by a railroad in 1836, Texas would belong to Mexico to-day, and not to the American Union.

The contrary happened; and this we owe, rather than to our want of foresight, to the want of a strong will on the part of our government to aid frankly the frontier States. Nobody changes nationality to assume a worse condition, and it is very dangerous to see just beyond a conventional line prosperity and wealth, and on this side destitution and poverty; on the other side of the line a people who move with life, under a government that omits nothing in order to give them everything in its power; on this side of the same line a poor, deceived people, who beseechingly turn their eyes toward a government that denies to them everything it can; that abandons them; that forgets them, in order to give its attention to the States of the center, which have greater power to shake a government.

Our government should remember that it was one of those States that in 1846 fired the first cannon at the American Army, at a distance of more than a hundred leagues from its capital, where it took its sons, armed at its own expense, to defend the autonomy of Mexico; they should recollect that when this capital had already been occupied by the invading forces the disinherited sons, of the frontier still fought on March 6, 1848, with the invaders; they should remember that those same frontiersmen conquered laurels for Mexico in Guaymas in 1850 by the purest patriotism; they should remember that in San Pedro those same frontiersmen gained one of the most beautiful victories of the unfortunate epoch of the intervention; and all this should be remembered so as not to place in doubt the patriotism of those people; in order not to believe our autonomy is in danger there, because American elements come to assist us to develop our wealth. Those people, enriched and progressing, will be the most powerful bulwark that can be opposed to any American invasion, whatever character it may have; but if those same people are sufficiently patriotic not to extend the hand and grasp the apple of good or evil presented to them by the increasing prosperity of our neighbors, they cannot see with indifference that she who should be for them a good mother is a distrustful and egotistical stepmother.

The government should fix its attention steadily on this. It should be remembered that only a short time ago the formation of the republic of the Sierra Madre was openly discussed; the President should remember that on his passage through Chihuahua, in one of the revolutions that has agitated Mexico, one of the prominent men, after having spontaneously praised that State, said: “Sir, what I regret is that we have not ten times more population than we have, in order to become an independent nation, and be the owners of the elements which are now taken from us by the federation, without our receiving any benefit from them he should remember that those States, and by different decrees, have assumed their own sovereignty, one of them having done it when it thought that the present administration wished to interfere with its politics in a way not agreeable to that State. It should be considered that those decrees, although this may not have been the intention of their authors, have tended to break in an abrupt manner the ties of union with the rest of the republic; and what will become of Mexico if the mutual aid of the federation for the States and that of the latter for the former should cease to exist, and one of our imprudent and unpatriotic intestine wars should shake more than any previous ones our social edifice? Who could insure that, the material interests binding the States to the center being nullified and the moral or patriotic interest in that union debilitated, we would come safely away from the field of Agramante to which we would he driven by a war, no longer of principles, for now these have been won, but of unworthy ambitions and disunion views, or, when best, purely personal, from those wars, the motto of which, concealed among the folds of the revolutionary banner, would be “Get out, so as to make room for me.”

It is absolutely necessary to pay attention to the first demands of the frontier States. Since, on account of circumstances it would be tedious to narrate here, the government cannot even do that which it is obliged to by our constitution, the greatest pains should be taken to prevent them from being hindered from doing what is done in the other States, which has frequently been done from the federal district to Vera Cruz. The aspirations of those federal entities, which are in keeping, shoulder to shoulder, so to speak, with those of the present epoch, must be satisfied; if we oppose ourselves to them, that torrent of civilization which causes to spring up, as if by enchantment, cities from deserts, will pass over us, and we will be crushed and forgotten beneath the ruins of the old, which will be razed in order to be built upon.

* * * * * * *

ANTONIO MORENO.

No. 365. Mr. Foster to Mr. Evarts. [Document 394]

No. 365.
Mr. Foster to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Mexico, August 20, 1879. (Received September 7.) No. 1017.]

Sir: On the 17th ultimo I communicated to the Mexican foreign office, in a note of that date, the substance of your dispatch No. 646, of June 23, relating to the prohibition to citizens of the United States from acquiring real estate and public lands in the Mexican border States. * * *

I inclose herein an extract from a recent circular addressed by the governor of the State of Sonora to the prefects of districts, referring to the law of February 1, 1856, and which law is by said circular construed to include mines, enjoining upon the prefects “very special care” to report whether mines within the interdicted zone of twenty leagues from the frontier are owned in whole or in part by foreigners.

It is worthy of mention in this connection that under the old Spanish law, accepted and now in force in this republic, mining rights are not acquired and held in fee simple in Mexico, but are held by a conditional tenure dependent upon the constant working of the mine, and that a failure to observe this condition forfeits the rights of the owner in favor of any person who chooses to denounce the mine and comply with the law for working the same. The section of the law of 1856 containing the prohibition against foreigners is quoted in my dispatch No. 756.

The consul at Guaymas, in a recent unofficial letter, advised me that along the frontier in that State, within the prohibited zone, a number of American companies have purchased mines and are now engaged in erecting mills, machinery, &c., under the belief that mining property could be held by law. The consul says he has advised the superintendent of one of the mines, the San Antonio, of Chicago, that he had better take a lease for ninety-nine years, in view of the circular inclosed herewith. It would seem questionable whether even such a title would save the holder from the prohibition of the law as construed by the circular.

I have, &c.,

JOHN W. FOSTER.

[Inclosure in No. 1017.—Translation.]

mines in sonora.

[From the Monitor Republicano, August 6, 1879.]

The government of the State has issued a circular to the prefects of the districts which in its essential part says:

“It being ordained by the general law of the 1st of February, 1856, that foreigners cannot acquire in the frontier States or territories of the nation real estate, including mines, within a zone of twenty leagues from the dividing line, unless by the previous permission of the President of the republic, the governor of the State of Sonora ordered the prefects to have very special care that in the registers or pre-emptions (denuncios) of mines forwarded to the government through the prefectures, and in which one or more foreigners are interested, they always state the distance from the dividing line of the United States of the North the mine referred to in the document is located, to the end that the executive may the more easily decide which can or cannot be admitted in view of the prohibition referred to.”

No. 366. Mr. Foster to Mr. Evarts. [Document 395]

No. 366.
Mr. Foster to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Mexico, September 13, 1879. (Received October 4.) No. 1028.]

Sir: The Mexican minister of government sent to the Federal Congress a report of his department, which report has recently appeared in a volume, a copy of which I send you as an accompaniment to this dispatch. It will be found to contain a great variety of statistical information on the various branches of administration and public institutions in charge of that department.

From the statistics of the States I have compiled the following table relating to area, population, Congressional and State representation, value of taxable property, State revenues, and school statistics, although in some instances incomplete: States. Area square leagues. Population. Federal Congress, No. of duputies. Legislature, No. of members. Taxable property. State revenues. State schools. No. of pupils.

Aguas Calientes 427 140,430 4 9 $4,053,530 $61,085 * 15 1,060

Campeche 3,810 89,481 2 7 1,243,795 123,496 57 3,500

Coahuila 7,506 121,895 2 11 4,154,837 77,532 88 4,634

Colima 552 65,827 2 2,221,537

Chiapas 2,367 203,494 5 11 2,276,276 83,692 † 90 1,682

Chihuahua 12,352 191,200 4 15 3,565,742 119,253

Durango 6,270 190,846 4 13 8,952,333 231,729 † 57 2,493

Guanajuato 1,683 729,988 18 11 30,002,994 851,000 172 9,668

Guerrero 3,621 301,207 8 8 656,207 123,544 359 11,217

Hidalgo 1,204 427,350 11 11 15,079,417 361,026 † 442 19,190

Jalisco 5,777 984,213 21 12 28,410,476 597,922

Mexico 1,156 696,068 16 17 28,098,918 404,813 † 987 52,200

Michoacan 3,497 661,534 15 13 20,849,385 682,100 126 5,545

Morelos 262 159,160 4 9 5,255,086 252,478 209 13,000

Nuevo Leon 3,486 189,722 4 11 12,706,830 96,083 170 9,133

Oaxaca 4,953 728,559 16 16 9,028,189 681,288 110 9,315

Puebla 1,773 783,466 20 19 29,021,544 773,312

Queretaro 473 203,370 4 13 9,070,479 167,102 76 5,165

San Luis Potosi 4,056 516,486 12 13,553,656 280,869

Sinalca 5,339 169,231 4 10 4,818,897 232,131

Sonora 11,655 110,837 3 10,000,000

Tobasco 1,748 104,747 2 7 2,601,328 93,878 82 2,249

Tamaulipas 4,458 140,137 3 3,999,731

Tlascala 239 133,498 3 10 5,816,148 81,117

Vera Cruz 3,869 538,628 11 11 23,117,001 560,471 623 22 523

Yucatan 4,361 302,315 8 14 2,963,641 201,000 194 9,224

Zacatecas 3,392 422,502 10 12 15,615,652 531,875 † 507 20,609

Federal District 68 351,804 10

Lower California Territory 9,080 28,746 1 7,500,000 18 813

Total 109,434 9,686,777 227 313,633,629

In the matter in which it is most desirable to have accurate statistics, that of population, I regret to say there can be no great reliance placed in the above table, as no official census has been taken, and the figures given are merely an estimate made upon very insufficient data. Upon this subject, the minister in his report to Congress says: The number of inhabitants of the republic being one of the bases of our electoral system, it is indispensable to know it, as well as its distribution; and up to this date, if the truth must be told, we are wanting in a statistical table which meets the conditions required to serve as a basis in the elections; a want so much the more to be deplored, because, as the chambers very well know, the cases are frequent in which it is necessary to consult private works to act with greater probabilities of correctness.

My own opinion, formed from observation and study, and a comparison of the views of persons who have a general knowledge of the country, is that the estimate of population given in the table is rather above than below the correct number. For instance, the city of Mexico is estimated to contain 250,000 inhabitants, when I believe an accurate census would not place the number above 200,000. As there is no national census taken, the federal authorities must rely upon the estimates furnished by the respective States, and the latter are interested in fixing the supposed population as high as possible, to affect the representation in the National Congress and for other similar considerations.

The same defect is to be noted in respect to the value of property, but in this instance I think the figures given are much too small. The table, without including the Federal District, shows the total taxable value to be $313,633,629. A recent publication places the total value of taxable property in the republic, including the Federal District, at $344,979,490.

The American reader will be surprised to be informed that Mexico, with a population of 9,000,000 of people and an area of, say, 750,000 square miles, has a taxable property only equal to the taxable property of, for instance, the single State of Wisconsin, the half of that of Indiana or New Jersey, and the fifth of that of New York.

In examining the statistical tables furnished by the different States and published in the volume transmitted herewith, an interesting fact is developed which illustrates the condition of the country and the demands which it makes upon the State governments. Notwithstanding the federal government is intrusted with the preservation of peace, and maintains a standing army of more than 30,000 men, for whose maintenance two-fifths of the entire federal revenue is required, still the tables referred to show that the chief item of expenditure of the State governments also is for military purposes.

It is the practice of the States generally to maintain a regularly organized army, usually called State guards, independent of the detachments of the federal army which may be stationed in the respective States. This practice has grown out of the revolutionary character of the country. In addition to its evil effects in facilitating the overthrow of the central government, it proves to be the greatest drain upon the State revenues. This is shown by comparing the total revenues with the military expenses of some of the central and most populous States, nearest to the capital, where the influence of the federal power is most felt, or in which industries are most flourishing, and where security should naturally be the greatest, as follows: Total revenues. Military expenses.

Guanajuto $851,000 $224,314

Hidalgo 861,026 83,280

Jalisco 597,922 208,847

Mexico 404,813 130,000

Oaxaca 681,288 260,615

Puebla 773,312 258,174

Queretaro 167,102 50,000

Zacatecas 531,875 129,378

To this department is attached the administration of the post-office. The report shows the receipts for the fiscal year 1877–’78 to be $543,157, and the expenditures $527,493. The movement of mail matter stated is as follows: Letters of the public 1,750,345

Official 927,873

Foreign 162,638

Registered:

Public 9,256

Official 28,925

38,181

Total letters 2,879,037

Newspapers:

Domestic 2,194,839

Foreign 96,018

Total newspapers 2,290,857

The government of the federal district and territory of Lower California, the public health, the prisons, and various benevolent institutions pertain to this department, and in reference to which interesting facts will be found in the report, which is one of the most complete and valuable which has been issued, and reflects much credit upon the minister in charge of the department.

I have, &c.,

JOHN W. FOSTER.

* Schools reported in part only.

† Including private schools.

† Including private schools.

† Including private schools.

† Including private schools.

† Including private schools.

No. 367. Mr. Foster to Mr. Evarts. [Document 396]

No. 367.
Mr. Foster to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States.
Mexico, September 19, 1879. (Received October 6.) No. 1034.]

Sir: The finance department published on yesterday a statement of the receipts of the federal treasury for the fiscal year ending June 30, 1879, an abstract of which is as follows: I. Maritime and frontier customs $9,949,708

II. Local customs city of Mexico 1,018,483

III. Stamp tax 3,003,258

IV. Contribution of States 559,217

V. Sale of nationalized property 27,254

VI. Mints 367,922

VII. Public instruction 24,725

VIII. Post-office 679,392

IX. Lotteries 31,822

X. Minor branches 284,942

XI. Balances from last year 1,404,144

Total 17,350,867

The statement shows a decrease of receipts compared with the previous fiscal year of $2, 136,602; and as the estimates of expenses were fixed at $21,748,000, the deficit is $4,378,000.

The chief source of federal revenue is from its customs, being more than 50 per cent, of the entire amount. The falling off in the customs receipts amounts to $3,214,933, or 25 per cent., compared with 1877–’78, which would seem to indicate that the foreign commerce of Mexico had largely declined in the past year, or that, as charged by the press, the contraband trade had greatly increased. It is probable that both causes have combined to occasion this heavy decrease in the customs receipts.

I have, &c.,

JOHN W. FOSTER.

No. 368. Mr. Foster to Mr. Evarts. [Document 397]

No. 368.
Mr. Foster to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Mexico, September 24, 1879. (Received October 14.) No. 1039.]

Sir: In my No. 1029 of the 17th instant I transmitted the address of President Diaz at the opening of Congress. This document has been commented upon by the press quite generally, and the prevailing sentiment of the public is favorable to the executive statement of political affairs, and of the condition of the country.

The present administration has been in power for near three years, and even its enemies are forced to confess that it has been successful in its general results. Coming into power by revolutionary means and by the forcible overthrow of the constitutional government, it was to be anticipated that it would be subject to similar attacks, and that its own existence might be terminated by conspiracy. But thus far all attempts at counter revolution (and there have been several) have been futile and never have assumed a threatening aspect. * * *

The general authority of the federal government has been as fully maintained and respected as under previous administrations.

The great embarrassment with which the executive has had to contend has been, and continues, the poverty of the federal treasury. While the expenses have increased, mainly owing to the large regular army, the resources of the government have considerably decreased. The deficit has been mainly borne by the department of public works and the executive branches, the army, the judiciary, and the legislative powers having had preference in the disbursements, especially the army. Considering the depressed condition of all industries, and the straitened condition of the treasury, it is highly creditable to the existing administration that it has been able to maintain a reasonable degree of peace, and carry on the government without resorting to extraordinary contributions or forced loans.

Its success is to be attributed, in a great measure, to the personal qualities of President Diaz. Probably no other individual in the republic could so fully have controlled the turbulent and discontented elements of his own revolutionary party, or have inspired so much fear in the ranks of his opponents.

This fact is so generally recognized that there has been a strong influence within his own party insisting upon his re-election or continuance in power. Notwithstanding this influence General Diaz has declared, in the most solemn manner, as you have seen by his address to Congress, that he will never accept a candidacy for re-election. It is, therefore, to be feared that when the time approaches for his presidential successor to be chosen the country may again be thrown into disorder, if not, as many think, into anarchy.

Another hopeful feature of the present administration is shown in the President’s address. The nation has for some years past been almost without foreign credit, and hence very little capital has been available from abroad for public improvements. But as better means of communication are recognized as the first and great need of the country, the different localities have, with some degree of diligence, aided by the federal government, set to work to do something themselves to remedy this defect, and various lines of railroads have been projected and are in course of construction. A considerable portion is for tramways, and all are somewhat cheaply built, it is true, but the amount of work which has been done indicates progress, and if peace and order could be assured would presage a better future for the country.

I have, &c.,

JOHN W. FOSTER.

No. 369. Mr. Strother to Mr. Hunter. [Document 398]

No. 369.
Mr. Strother to Mr. Hunter.

United States Consulate-General,
City of Mexico, October 4, 1879. (Received October 20.) No. 23.]

Sir: I have the honor to acknowledge receipt of your dispatch No. 18, inclosing copies of correspondence from A. Willard, esq., United States consul at Guaymas.

It must be confessed that the general tone of the consular correspondence from the States on the west coast is extremely discouraging, especially to those who have indulged in hopes of a rapid and profitable extension of commercial relations between the United States and this Republic; nevertheless it is possible that observations from a more central and comprehensive stand-point may enable us to view these dark pictures in a more cheerful light.

The temptations to smuggling offered by a high tariff and an extensive sea-coast and frontier line imperfectly guarded, are patent enough and readily understood. So the waspish temper and hostile relations between revenue officers and traders in their respective endeavors to enforce and evade the revenue laws. These we may hope are temporary evils which more advanced views in political economy may enable the Mexican Government to modify if not to correct entirely.

Besides these special causes, have we not good reasons to believe that the decadence of commerce and prosperity on the western coast, so vividly depicted by the consul at La Paz, is only a reflected consequence of the general suffering which has been more or less felt by all the great nations of the world during the last decade, and have we not equally good reasons to hope that, in spite of special vexations and hinderances, this unfortunate region will again revive with that general return of prosperity to which we are all looking forward with well-founded confidence?

The law referred to in Consul Willard’s letter “prohibiting foreigners from acquiring property within twenty leagues of the border,” and to which you have especially directed my attention, is a tradition of the old Spanish viceroys, who watched their northern frontier with a kind of Oriental jealousy.

Mexican writers of distinction attribute the loss of Texas, and all the humiliations and misfortunes of the war of 1847–’48, to the ignoring of that policy, and the generous but short-sighted invitation to free immigration which was proclaimed by Mexico after the establishment of her independence.

In brief, the key to all Mexican policy in dealing with the United States is to be found in one simple and controlling idea, the natural jealousy and instinctive dread felt by a nation conscious of its weakness in the presence of a rival whose power and resources are comparatively unlimited.

Consul Turner has well understood and applied this idea in describing affairs in Lower California. To this feeling must be attributed the recent rejection by this government of the petition of the people of that region for the opening of a new port on their coast, and still further the proposition to close the consulate at the important port of San Jose del Cabo, recently made vacant by the death of Consul Gillespie.

To this sentiment, which prevails to a greater or less extent in all sections and controls all parties, may be also attributed the persistent rejection of all plans for international railroads presented by American companies upon the principle “that it is better to forego the evident and acknowledged advantages proposed than to run the risk of national absorption.”

This feeling has been recently aroused into greater activity by the discovery of silver mines of extraordinary richness near the northern border, and the consequent influx of large numbers of American adventurers into the Mexican Territory.

It also appears that these mining lands are located in a desert region near the undefined boundaries of three adjoining sovereign States, Chihuahua, Coahuila, and Durango, whose governors and people are reported to have risen in arms to assert and defend their respective rights and boundaries. Three thousand Federal troops have been ordered to the Sierra Mojada, for the purpose of preserving order. The Federal Congress in secret session, it is said, has ordered the occupation of the disputed territory, including the mines, and its erection into a separate State under federal jurisdiction. The opposition papers denounce this action as usurpation and unconstitutional, and maintain that it will provoke combined resistance from the injured and insulted States. The government press support the legality of the act, and justify its necessity for the preservation of public order.

In the foregoing presentation of facts and observations maybe found, perhaps, a sufficient explanation of the recent promulgation and enforcement of the law alluded to in Consul Willard’s dispatch.

Meanwhile, the more fully and clearly to express my understanding of the feeling toward the United States in this country, I will continue my observations on that subject.

Notwithstanding the political and national jealousies controlling all public action, a very large and respectable class in this capital and elsewhere in this Republic are ready to welcome Americans and American influences with friendly cordiality.

The Liberal party, which now has undisputed control in the country, has modeled itself upon American institutions and opinion. All their political forms and formula are closely imitated after those of the United States. They have proclaimed and maintained perfect religious liberty. They have a free press, which discusses all questions of public interest with an ability, dignity, and freedom not surpassed in any other capital. The subject of public education is entertained with especial zeal and solicitude, and few cities can boast of schools in greater numbers or higher character than the city of Mexico. They have shown the greatest earnestness and persistence in their endeavors to promote the material prosperity of their country, and are developing, slowly indeed, but with zeal and intelligence, a net-work of railroads which will in time connect all their chief cities and sea-ports. In short, in this capital and in her principal centers of population, Mexico is slowly, but decidedly, moving with the age in opinion, manners, and material improvement. Her statesmen understand the difficulties and obstructions with which she has to contend, and recognize her need of assistance. Immigration from Europe is encouraged and cordially welcomed. The Germans are especially esteemed, because of their intelligence, thrift, and industry, and unobtrusive habits.

But among the thinkers here, as elsewhere, it is well understood that the Great American Republic is the arbiter of the destinies of Mexico. From that quarter only can come such immigration or pecuniary assistance as might in a brief period develop the resources and change the character of Mexican civilization.

As the recognized model and protector of Mexican Republicanism, that power alone stands ready and able to accomplish that which every patriotic Mexican most desires for his country. A frightful specter stands in the way—the dread of absorption. Whether the United States Government may see fit, or may be able, to adopt a policy that might serve in some degree to allay this controlling apprehension, is a question to be considered by those to whom it pertains.

With but few advantages for observation and my brief residence here, I should perhaps apologize for having undertaken to write so much at length upon subjects which have been carefully investigated by those whose opportunities and abilities may have enabled them to form juster judgments, but since my coming here I have become deeply interested in the subject before us, and, in response to your courteous invitation for a freer and fuller correspondence, I submit my hasty observations for what they may be worth.

We have daily and agreeable news from Minister Foster, who, in his journey through the Republic, is everywhere received with cordial welcome and distinguished honors.

I have, &c.,

DAVID H. STROTHER.

Morocco.Morocco.

[399] . Mr. Mathews to Mr. Evarts.

Consulate of the United States, Tangier, March 24, 1879. (Received May 14.)

[400] . Mr. Mathews to Mr. Evarts.

Consulate of the United States of America, Tangier, June 5, 1879. (Received July 30.)

[401] . Mr. Mathews to Mr. Evarts.

Consulate of the United States of America, Tangier, July 9, 1879. (Received August 25.)

[402] . Mr. Mathews to Mr. Evarts.

Consulate of the United States of America, Tangier, July 20, 1879. (Received August 28.)

[403] . Mr. Mathews to Mr. Evarts.

Consulate of the United States of America, Tangier, July 21, 1879. (Received September 3.)

No. 370. Mr. Mathews to Mr. Evarts. [Document 399]

No. 370.
Mr. Mathews to Mr. Evarts.

Consulate of the United States,
Tangier, March 24, 1879. (Received May 14.) No. 314.]

Sir: The malignant typhus fever, referred to in my dispatch No. 303 as having appeared at the city of Morocco, where the daily mortality reached as many as 300 people, has now spread itself throughout all the Empire of Morocco, with more or less intensity according to the hygienic state of the towns and villages, making dreadful havoc, carrying away many of the strongest and healthiest of the population, the European portion suffering to the same extent as the Moorish. At Mogador, where the disease prevails with great severity, the Italian and Portuguese consuls, and many of the European merchants have succumbed to its baneful effects; the French and English consuls, with the latter’s children, have also been attacked. At Saffi the Italian vice-consul and a number of respectable European merchants have fallen victims to the dreadful fever. At Mazagan, the Portuguese and the Austrian vice-consuls, and many Europeans died also of typhus, and at Casablanca and Rabat even the only European doctor fell a victim to the contagion, together with many of the European residents. The American artist Mr. L. E. Weeks, who, with his wife, were visiting Rabat and Sallee, were severely attacked with the typhus fever and both very nearly died. Here in Tangier we have had from 12 to 17 cases per week, and the disease still continues unabated. It is a noteworthy fact that during the prevalence of the late cholera epidemic we foreigners were spared from that dreadful disease, but it is otherwise with the typhus, now raging with great virulence, attacking all alike, with the same intensity. The trade of the empire is paralyzed, and a heavy gloom seems to pervade the whole country.

The crops are getting on as well as can be expected. The maize has been greatly benefited by the late rains, and wheat, beans, &c., are looking well. This favorable aspect of things has brought dullness in regard to imports, and consumption is decreasing daily. On the other hand, there continues dreadful distress among the Arabs, with which the generous efforts of Christians are inadequate to cope. Thousand of lives have been and are being sacrificed, which a prompt distribution of the enormous stocks of grain in the hands of the governors of provinces could have saved. A fearful responsibility rests upon these and other Moorish officials, whose duty it was to inform the Sultan of the state of his subjects.

In consequence of the existing mortality and shallowness of the graves of natives (18 inches), with the approach of hot weather, it is feared epidemics will reign, as with the present comparatively cool weather the fever is carrying off so many. The suggestion offered to the Moorish authorities of covering the graves with quicklime to reduce the danger has been rejected as being against their religion.

Owing to a large number of poor people from the interior of Morocco having again assembled within the town and precincts of Tangier, seeking for relief, and as this most unfortunate people had no domiciles, but squatted about the streets at night, to the great inconvenience of passengers, the foreign representatives urged the Bash a of Tangier to take active steps to cause these strangers to return to the districts to which they belonged, offering once more to provide a sufficiency of food and money to enable them to reach their destinations. This step was urged, as with the prevailing typhus fever there are grounds for apprehension, if these poor people remained, that there might be an outbreak of other dangerous epidemics in the approaching warm weather. On Monday morning, therefore, 789 pauper strangers, men, women, and children, were assembled at the castle, each family receiving a small sum of money and loaves of bread in proportion to the distance of the journey they had respectively to perform, and afterward left Tangier, accompanied by guards, who were ordered to escort them out of the Tangier province.

The ministers of France, Great Britain, and Spain provided the money distributed to these people from the charitable funds collected in France and England, called the “Morocco famine relief fund.” The other representatives provided the bread. I contributed with 1,000 pounds of bread, in addition to pecuniary donations.

The departure of these poor people is not only a prudent measure in a hygienic point of view, but also necessary as a precaution for the general safety of Europeans and other foreigners in Tangier.

I have furnished the Surgeon-General of the United States Marine Hospital Service with weekly reports of the effects of the prevailing diseases, with its description and most successful mode of treatment.

I have, &c.,

FELIX A. MATHEWS.

No. 371. Mr. Mathews to Mr. Evarts. [Document 400]

No. 371.
Mr. Mathews to Mr. Evarts.

Consulate of the United States of America,
Tangier, June 5, 1879. (Received July 30.) No. 322.]

Sir: I have the honor to inform you that the Sultan of Morocco has encamped with his army near Rabat, where he is expected this week.

He has brought under subjection during his progress the Berber tribes in the province of Fedla, who have been in a state of insurrection during the last twenty years. Thirty-four heads of rebels have been sent to be exposed on the walls of Rabat to inspire terror among the rebel tribes of Zayr, who have been committing numerous robberies and murders this year in the neighborhood of that town.

It is reported that the Sultan will not remain more than ten days at Rabat, but will proceed without further delay to Mequinez.

Sid Mohamed Bargash, the Moorish minister for foreign affairs, has engaged one of the Gibraltar steamers to convey him to Rabat, having been summoned to the court.

* * * * * * *

The tribe of Angera, dwelling in the district between Tangier and Ceuta, are in a state of insubordination against their governor, Kaid Kanja.

I have, &c.,

FELIX A. MATHEWS.

No. 372. Mr. Mathews to Mr. Evarts. [Document 401]

No. 372.
Mr. Mathews to Mr. Evarts.

Consulate of the United States of America,
Tangier, July 9, 1879. (Received August 25.) No. 329.]

Sir: I beg to transmit to you herewith the answers to the interrogatories (for the information of the Secretary of the Treasury) of your dispatch No. 146.

In compliance with your instructions, I presented the interrogatories to the Moorish minister of foreign affairs, who made about the same remarks thereto as those contained in my inclosure accompanying this dispatch.

* * * * * * *

I have, &c.,

FELIX A. MATHEWS.

[Inclosure in No. 329.]

Interrogatories to dispatch No. 146 and answers thereto for the information of the Secretary of the Treasury.

1. What is the amount of gold coin and bullion in the treasury, in the banks, and in circulation in the country to which you are accredited?

Answer. I am unable to reply to this query, for the Moorish Government has hitherto declined to impart to any person the state of their finance, or to give any information respecting the expenditure and receipts of the government. There are no banks in Morocco. The Moorish gold coin has disappeared of late years, having been exported to Europe, as the gold was of a high standard. Spanish and French gold coin are current, but it would be difficult, and indeed almost impossible, to state the amount in circulation.

2. What is the amount of silver coin and bullion in the treasury, in the banks, and in circulation?

Answer. Same remarks as above.

3. What is the amount of outstanding paper currency?

Answer. None.

4. What is the amount of gold produced annually from the mines?

Answer. None; but gold is brought in dust and in trinkets, made at Timbuctoo, by caravans from the interior across the Desert of Sahara.

5. What is the amount of silver produced annually?

Answer. None.

6. What is the amount of gold annually coined, imported, exported, and consumed in the arts and manufactures?

Answer. According to the statement of the Moorish minister for foreign affairs, and as far as I am aware, gold coins have ceased to be struck during the last twenty years. I can form no estimate of the amount of gold employed in the arts and manufactures. The average of gold dust exported from 1871 to 1875 was $8,900.

7. What is the amount of silver annually coined, imported, exported, and consumed in the arts and manufactures?

Answer. Same remarks as above. The average during the last five years of silver coin annually exported is $12, 500.

The coins which are current in the Empire of Morocco are Moorish, Spanish, and French. The coins of the Emperor are the gold bontkee, equal in value to the 10-franc gold piece, 19c. 3 per franc value in United States money; the silver ounce, equal in value to the twentieth and tenth part of a French 5-franc piece or Spanish dollar; and the copper floos, 24 to the copper ounce or 6 to a blankil, 4 blankils making a copper ounce. The value of the French and Spanish silver is not fixed, but subject to variations according to the amount of copper floos in market. In January last the Spanish dollar circulated for 51 copper ounces of 4 blankils, and the 5-franc piece for 50. During last month the accumulation of floos increased the exchange of the silver dollar to 60 ounces, and brought the Spanish and French dollar to an equal value. The exchange of these coins now are 55 ounces.

But few Moorish gold coins are in circulation in the interior; none to be seen at Tangier. The Moorish silver coins are also exceedingly scarce, and therefore little in circulation; none of them to be seen at Tangier.

The custom-house rates of exchange are as follows, namely: 34½ ounces (silver) to the Spanish dollar: 32½ ounces (silver) to the 5-franc piece.

FELIX A. MATHEWS.

No. 373. Mr. Mathews to Mr. Evarts. [Document 402]

No. 373.
Mr. Mathews to Mr. Evarts.

Consulate of the United States of America,
Tangier, July 20, 1879. (Received August 28.) No. 330.]

Sir: I have the honor to inform you that on the 9th instant the Sultan Muley Hassan made his entry into Mequinez, after having subdued the Kabyle of Benimteer. This Kabyle had refused submission to the authority of the Sultan. His Majesty, on approaching them, sent a message saying that he had come to punish them severely for their revolutionary conduct and character, and that he expected that they would submit to his authority before he took more serious measures. The Benimteer Kabyle, fearing the consequences, immediately dispatched a deputation of the principal Moors of the place to His Majesty’s camp, and sacrificed several head of oxen before His Majesty’s tents, promising to obey His Majesty’s order in every respect.

The Sultan imposed upon them a fine of $150,000 and 500 horses, and ordered that 500 respectable people of their Kabyle should proceed with him as hostages for their future good conduct; all claims against the Kabyle for robberies said to have been committed by them they are to make good. Some of the other Kabyles in the neighborhood interceded in their behalf.

Yesterday at ten o’clock a royal letter was read in the mosque here, in the presence of the governor and other Moorish authorities, in which His Majesty made known the results of his expedition to the Benimteer Kabyle, and a salute of twenty-one guns was fired from the batteries of the town in celebration of the event.

It is reported that great sickness prevails among the troops of the Emperor’s army. The mortality reached 300 in one day, which compelled the Sultan to withdraw his forces from Mequinez, in which city a great panic exists, and the well-to-do inhabitants are abandoning the city in great numbers. It is not known yet the nature of the disease, whether it is the reappearance of cholera or the prevailing malignant typhus which of late has made such a havoc in the inhabitants of Morocco.

The Moorish Government is fortifying Tangier on a large and improved scale. They intend in a few days to mount six 20-ton guns on the batteries of the town; they have demolished part of one of the forts and rebuilt, to suit this heavier ordnance. Foreign engineers direct the works.

I have, &c.,

FELIX A. MATHEWS.

No. 374. Mr. Mathews to Mr. Evarts. [Document 403]

No. 374.
Mr. Mathews to Mr. Evarts.

Consulate of the United States of America,
Tangier, July 21, 1879. (Received September 3.) No. 331.]

Sir: I have the honor to acknowledge receipt of your circular dispatch No. 13, under date of 10th June last, the instructions of which will be carefully complied with.

I beg to inclose herewith for your information a copy of my reply, transmitted to Mr. Wines, president of the International Penitentiary Commission, to his letter requesting information on the state of prisons, and the administration of criminal justice, &c., in Morocco.

I have, &c.,

FELIX A. MATHEWS.

[Inclosure in 331.]

Mr. Mathews to Mr. Wines.

United States Consulate,
Tangier, July 20, 1879.

Sir: I have the honor to acknowledge receipt of your circular letters hearing date September 6, 1877, and November 8, 1878, relative to the state of prisons and the administration of criminal justice, &c., and requesting information on the subject as regards the country where I am residing.

Reformatory institutions for the prevention of crime in the young have no existence in Morocco. The administration of criminal justice is radically bad, and is conducted on no principle of improving the moral character of the people, and owing to injustice of the executive, the innocent being punished almost as frequently as the guilty; punishment loses much of its influence as a deterrent from the commission of crime.

A criminal who has the means of purchasing by bribes his liberation from prison finds greater facility in obtaining his freedom than a poor innocent man who has been unjustly condemned to imprisonment.

The prisons in Morocco are in the most lamentable condition of barbarism. No care or attention whatever is bestowed upon the prisoners, no medical assistance is afforded them when sick, and they are left dependent on the charity of their friends for their subsistence; a small ration of the poorest bread being all that is supplied to those who would perish were it withheld from them.

There is one useful custom, however, which obtains generally in Moorish prisons, and that is that poor prisoners have facilities afforded them by their jailers to learn or practice some trade by which they may maintain themselves; basket and rope making are the industries most commonly practiced. The jailer gives them instructions and often supplies material, and he is paid by a part profit when the articles are manufactured and sold.

Little is known of the state of the prisoners in the interior of Morocco. The prison at Tangier (this town being the seat of the foreign representatives) is situated in the Kasbah, or citadel. Part of the interior can be seen from an aperture in the den, from which at all times issues an affluvium that makes a long inspection undesirable; it is a damp, dark chamber, as dreary and dreadful a place of confinement as can ever be conceived.

The prison at Fez, the capital, although not very extensive, is always much crowded, at times containing over a thousand inmates, and as the food supplied to those who have no friends is very limited in quantity and very bad in quality, and the sanitary condition of the place is bad in the extreme, the mortality among the prisoners is appalling.

Little is to be learned from the prison system, or more probably want of system, in such a country as Morocco, unless it be the experience of what a wretched state of things can exist in uncivilized and barbarious countries, and under the most arbitrary and despotic system of government.

There is no code of laws in the Empire of Morocco, but instead of a civil they have a religious code. The practice of jurisprudence is reduced to the application of certain principles to be found in the Koran, and is the practical knowledge of the precedents established in the various jurisdictions. There are kadis and governors in the cities and countries for the administration of justice and notaries or talbes to certify deeds, and all which relates to the security of property. The laws of the Koran admit no evidence but from those professing the Mohammedan religion.

All litigations concerning property, succession, and the various claims of interest are brought before the kadi of each town or district of the province.

The kadis or judges are appointed by the Sultan, with a salary barely enough for subsistence.

The governors of cities are also appointed by the Sultan, and are entirely unpaid by the state. It is their duty to maintain order, and they can punish by fine, imprisonment, and the bastinado. Capital punishment alone is inflicted by direct order of the Sultan.

The governor also levies taxes for the imperial treasury, and it is in connection with this part of his duties that he is induced to exercise his functions of inflicting tines in a most arbitrary and irregular fashion. Sheikhs and umkadams are also unpaid officials.

The result of such a state of things is that the unpaid governors and sheikhs squeeze the people committed to their charge as much as lies within their power. Pillage, extortion, corruption, and injustice are universal; so with the almost unpaid kadis or judges the longest purse invariably prevails. Justice is not administered; it is sold. Even the police are unpaid or receive only a slender allowance, which is supplemented by what they can extract from those who come within their clutches. The judgments of the governors are always arbitrary, and generally consist in distributing the bastinado with equal liberality to the guilty and innocent, committing them to some days’ imprisonment, whence they are released by money. The rich, therefore, rarely suffer any great punishment, though they should have been concerned in criminal affairs.

To this wretched system of administration the chronic state of disorder which always exists is in greater part to be attributed.

I have, &c.,

FELIX A. MATHEWS.

Netherlands.Netherlands.

[404] . Mr. Birney to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, The Hague, March 27, 1879. (Received April 10.)

[405] . Mr. Birney to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, The Hague, April 21, 1879. (Received May 5.)

[406] . Mr. Birney to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, The Hague, August 26, 1879. (Received September 19.)

[407] . Mr. Birney to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, The Hague, September 17, 1879. (Received October 2.)

[408] . Mr. Birney to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, The Hague, September 19, 1879. (Received October 4.)

[409] . Mr. Birney to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, The Hague, September 30, 1879. (Received October 13.)

[410] . Mr. Birney to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, The Hague, October 30, 1879. (Received November 11.)

No. 375. Mr. Birney to Mr. Evarts. [Document 404]

No. 375.
Mr. Birney to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
The Hague, March 27, 1879. (Received April 10.) No. 107.]

Sir: Your dispatch No. 94 requests information in regard to the systems of railway taxation in use in the Netherlands, as a subject of national interest. In answering your questions one or two general statements may be relevant.

The laws for the government of the Netherlands are, for the most part, general, not local nor special. The principle that seems to pervade her taxing system is to derive revenue for the state from the avails or products of property and the earnings of individuals or associations, avoiding as far as practicable encroachment upon the substance or principal.

Of the railways in the Netherlands, a part of them have been constructed and are owned by the government, and the remainder have been constructed and are owned by companies. In those built by the state the chief object appears to have been to supply gaps that seemed essential to the convenience of the people and of commerce, and which individual or private enterprise was not inclined to undertake.

The government gives leases of these roads to companies, allowing them to reserve for themselves 4½ per cent. of the net earnings, the government taking its compensation out of the balance of the receipts. No other return to the state is exacted. In most cases her compensation is small, not exceeding from 1 to 2 per cent, upon the cost.

The routine that private companies who undertake the building of railways have to observe is as follows: When organized, application is made on their behalf to the government for a concession authorizing them to build, own, and operate the road between certain named points upon a designated route. The feasibility and utility of the road is then a matter of consideration with the proper department of the government. If the concession is granted, the company undertaking is required to deposit with the government such sum of money as may be regarded as security amply sufficient for the completion of what is proposed. The main object of this requirement is to prevent damage to citizens by the issue of bonds and shares founded upon a work which might be abandoned after partial progress. Forfeiture to the government follows non-completion of the contract; restoration upon fulfillment.

When the road is ready for operating, the company is obliged to apply to the state for what here is called a “patent”; with us, a license. For this is paid, once a year, 2 per cent, upon the dividends of the business. If there are no dividends nothing is paid.

This is not a requirement applicable to railroads exclusively. It is under a general provision of law embracing all similar classes of business. They pay nothing otherwise for the franchise.

It may be correctly stated that in the Netherlands there is no system of taxation made specially applicable to railroads as such. They come under the operation of general laws which apply equally to all pursuits that may be classified with them. Bankers, merchants, tradesmen, common carriers, and others are required by a law enacted in 1819, before any railroad was built, to obtain a license from the government, upon which they pay a percentage upon the extent of their business.

Thus, in regard to the realty of a road, it is taxed not as a specialty, but as agricultural land would be, upon the estimated yield it might give as such, and not upon the intrinsic value of the land. Also in respect to the personalty, such as rolling-stock, furniture at station-houses, and plant, regarded as implements of a mechanic would be, and as contributing to the result or dividends, no tax is assessed.

There is a general law requiring stamped paper to be used in business transactions for evidences of indebtedness, bonds, shares of stock, &c. Railways pay upon these as companies organized for any other business would pay. The cost of stamps is 5 cents (Netherlands) for each 100 florins, equivalent to 5 cents American upon each $100, expressed in the instrument.

Another general law assesses a tax according to the number of employés, classifying them according to their salaries and the district in which they live.

Bonds and stocks held by owners are not specifically taxed. There is, however, at the moment pending before the staats-general a project of the minister of finance to increase the revenue of the state by imposing upon bonds and securities of all kinds a tax of one per mill. If it should become a law, it would embrace bonds and shares of railways. As these statements cover all the information asked for in your six questions, it may not be necessary to reply further to them seriatim.

I have obtained a recent map of the Netherlands, with its railways, showing which belong to the state, which to companies, their length, when built, &c. It is forwarded with this by the same mail.

The whole system is very simple, and I hear of no complaint as to its practical operation.

I have, &c.,

JAMES BIRNEY.

No. 376. Mr. Birney to Mr. Evarts. [Document 405]

No. 376.
Mr. Birney to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
The Hague, April 21, 1879. (Received May 5.) No. 113.]

Sir: In my No. 107, of date March 27th ultimo, in regard to the system of railway taxation in Holland, I said that if I received other facts I would add them. In order to have the most authentic information, I had, on the 7th March last, addressed a note to the minister for foreign affairs, in which I set forth the interrogatories in your No. 94, and asked him to refer them to the proper official, that I might transmit the answer given to my government.

Not receiving a reply before the 27th March, I answered without, giving such information as I had obtained from other quarters. Having now received the reply of the minister, with a memorandum from the minister of finance, I herewith inclose both, with translations.

The statement of the minister contains nothing additional to what I sent unless, it be on the recital of certain exemptions in favor of this government on the part of the railway companies.

I have, &c.,

JAMES BIRNEY.

[Inclosure 1 in Mr. Birney’s No. 113.—Translation.]

The Hague, April 15, 1879.

Mr. Minister: I have had the honor to receive your note of 7th March last, in which you have been so kind as to ask of me some information on the subject of the taxes levied upon railroads in the Netherlands.

Pursuant to this request I hasten, Mr. Minister, to inclose to you a memorandum just received from the minister of finance, and which contains the desired information and special replies to the questions asked in your note.

Accept, Mr. Minister, renewed assurance of my high consideration.

HEECKEREN VAN KELL.

[Translation of memorandum from the office of minister of finance.]

There are no special taxes on railway works. The railway companies are subjected to the same rules as other companies except that the grants for the right of way, and an act of 9th April, 1875, regulating the operating of railways by private companies stipulate some immunities in favor of the realm, viz: 1. Transport of soldiers and munitions, including horses, for half price.

2. Free passage to policemen traveling on duty.

3. Free passage to people traveling under direction of the public authority.

4. Free passage to the mail.

5. Free passage to custom-house officers traveling on duty.

6. Offices free of rental for custom-house officials, and sufficient space for the erection of government buildings for the State telegraph.

Answers to the six queries.

1. As above stated, there are no special railway taxes.

2. The railway companies pay for the ground they hold the same rate of tax on realty as was paid for it before said ground became its property; for the buildings on the ground, the same tax is paid as would be for other buildings of a similar kind.

3. There is no tax on personalty except a tax named personal rate, which is raised according to six bases, viz: The rental, the value of the buildings occupied, the number of doors and windows in the buildings, the number of chimneys, the marked value of their furnishings, the number of domestics and horses. To this tax railroad companies are liable. Their warehouses, like the warehouses of other kinds of business, are exempt.

4. They are not subjected to a tax on their shares or capital. They pay a license fee to an amount of 2 per cent, of their dividends, all business being liable for a license tax; their employés pay the same as all other clerks in trade.

5. Their shares and bonds are, at their issue and when passing to ineritors, subjected to the same stamp duties and taxes as all other shares and bonds.

6. There is no tax on their net or gross receipts.

No. 377. Mr. Birney to Mr. Evarts. [Document 406]

No. 377.
Mr. Birney to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
The Hague, August 26, 1879. (Received September 19.) No. 118.]

Sir: I have the honor to inform you that there has been an entire change of the ministry or cabinet of this government.

The present incumbents, inducted into office on the 19th instant, are as follows: Foreign Affairs.—C. Th. Baron van Lynden van Sandenburg, formerly (three years ago) minister of justice.

Justice.—A. E. J. Modderman, law professor in the University of Leiden.

Interior.—W. Six, late governor of the province of Zeeland.

Marine.—W. F. van Erp Taalman Kip, formerly (two years ago) minister of marine.

Finance.—M. S. Vipering, professor at Leiden.

War.—A. E. Reuther, colonel of the artilley.

Colonies.—Baron van Goldstein, ex-minister of colonies.

Waterstrat.—G. J. Klerck, ex-minister of war.

This change of ministry does not appear to have been brought about by any triumph of the opposition, known as conservatives. The dissolution is attributable to various circumstances, the chief of which was want of union in the dominant party. Its leader, the head of the cabinet, attempted a measure of internal improvement, consisting of a grand canal connecting the Rhine with the Zuider Zee, by which there would be direct transportation between Germany and Amsterdam. Failing by one vote, he resigned. A large number of the majority were disposed to revise the constitution, but they could not carry all with them. Beside there were elements of weakness, that made it necessary for them to give way.

The present cabinet is called one of fusion. It represents all the factions. It is regarded as having much more of ability than the one it succeeds. To myself personally, it is a matter of gratification that Baron van Lynden van Sandenburg has taken the portfolio of the foreign office. Having known him personally since my residence here, I have found him genial and communicative. * * * Although called to form the cabinet, and will be regarded as the chief or president, he declined to take the position of minister of interior, which is usually regarded as the first place, preferring the supervision of foreign affairs. As minister of justice three years ago, he was very acceptable, and I doubt not he will be equally so in his present position.

It may be a remark not unworthy of mention in this connection that while the chief employé of the foreign office has been at the same post for the past twenty-four years, he has served during the same period under twenty-six different ministers. A change of the head does not ordinarily affect subordinates.

I inclose herewith a copy of correspondence between the outgoing and incoming minister of foreign affairs and this legation.

I have, &c.,

JAMES BIRNEY.

No. 378. Mr. Birney to Mr. Evarts. [Document 407]

No. 378.
Mr. Birney to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
The Hague, September 17, 1879. (Received October 2.) No. 122.]

Sir: The regular session of the Staats General of the Netherlands was opened on the 15th instant, in the customary form, by His Majesty the King. I have the honor to inclose herewith copies of the address which he read on that occasion, with a translation. There are in it three references, which may have significance enough to interest you. When he speaks of “the free principles which have governed their commerce and industries” it is inferred that the new ministry adhere to “free trade” as against an inclination slightly manifested in this and neighboring countries to experiment with partial protection.

By his allusion to “primary education” it is to be understood that the new government promises to carry out the provisions of the law relating to that subject promoted by the late ministry and adopted by the last Parliament. This topic has been the occasion of no inconsiderable controversy in this country. Sectarians who rally under the name of “Orthodox” have insisted upon retention of denominational control, while the liberal party advocated more of State management. Under the act referred to, the government pays 30 per centum of the cost of schools, localities providing the remainder. At the same time, the government chiefly regulates.

The other reference is to Curaçoa. It is not often that such a specific allusion is made from the throne in an address so brief and general. The government no doubt intends by it to show that its regard for the island as a possession has not weakened.

I have, &c.,

JAMES BIRNEY.

[Inclosure in Mr. Birney’s No. 122.—Translation.]

opening of the staats general, 1879—1880.—address from the throne.

Gentlemen: It is very pleasant to me to again meet the representatives of the Netherlands people.

On the occasion of my marriage I received proof of a general participation, which I highly appreciate.

The love of my people was again so strongly manifested when I and my house were plunged into mourning.

My relations with foreign powers are most friendly.

The armies on land and sea continue to perform with devotion their important duties.

The languishing situation of the industries, of commerce, and of navigation has been equally felt in this country. The efforts made to combat disease among cattle have been crowned with success. On the other hand, I fear that in different parts of the country the harvests have suffered by unfavorable weather and high water. Under such circumstances it is to be expected that there will be diminution of the amount of our State taxes. An increase of the State revenues becomes more and more necessary. At the same time it will be well, as far as possible, to aim at a better distribution of the taxes.

The firm maintenance of free principles, which have regulated our commerce and industries (and thanks to which the country has always prospered), continued conjointly with the improvement of our canals, will sustain the energy of the people and increase the public prosperity.

I consider the introduction of a natural penal code as a work that much concerns the interests and honor of the country. In the mean time my government will occupy itself on the revision of different parts of legislation.

A project of law for the repression of the abuse of strong drink will be presented, to you at this session.

I propose to make practical the amended law as to primary instruction as promptly as the preparations it requires will permit.

Important results have been obtained at Atcheen, thanks to the courage and perseverance of our army.

I have the hope that a more regular state of affairs will succeed to the war.

The other parts of the Netherland Indies furnish general reasons for satisfaction. The energetic prosecution of useful public works which have been commenced there will certainly promote the national prosperity. The administration of the finances of those vast possessions demands, nevertheless, a great deal of care and circumspection.

The migration to Surinam of free laborers should receive continued favor. A better future is promised to the colony of Curaçoa, through the working of the large mines her soil produces.

May our united efforts, gentlemen, under the blessing of God, promote the happiness of our dear country.

I declare the session of the Staats General to be opened.

No. 379. Mr. Birney to Mr. Evarts. [Document 408]

No. 379.
Mr. Birney to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
The Hague, September 19, 1879. (Received October 4.) No. 123.]

Sir: Referring to your No. 106, in which you say you have been requested by the Secretary of the Treasury to obtain certain information respecting the amount of gold and silver coin and bullion and paper currency in the Netherlands, and in which you instruct me to present interrogatories therein set forth to the minister of foreign affairs of His Majesty, I have the honor to state that on the 28th August last, I addressed a note to the minister for foreign affairs, a copy of which is hereto annexed.

The reply of his excellency, the minister, has been received, a copy of which, with a translation, is herewith inclosed, together with exhibits. On this subject, if reference be had to my dispatch, which should have been numbered 19 and to dispatch No. 21, a very full and elaborate report will be found, giving all the facts obtainable up to this date, viz, November 13, 1876. It was accompanied by a letter from the superintendent of the mint college at Utrecht, and the laws and decrees of Holland in regard to money. In the preparation of the report, I was favored with the personal assistance of Mr. Vrolix, ex-minister of finance, and regarded as the most reliable financier of Holland. This showing may be advantageously referred to.

The inclosed statement, while not so complete, gives the facts up to the present date.

I have, &c.,

JAMES BIRNEY.

[Inclosure 1 in Mr. Birney’s No. 123.]

Mr. Birney to Baron van Lynden van Sandenburg.

Legation of the United States,
The Hague, August 28, 1879.

Sir: My government requests me to obtain through you for the use of the chief financial officer of the United States, full and detailed information respecting the amount of gold and silver coin and bullion and paper currency in the Netherlands. It is desired that such statistics as you may deem proper to furnish may be, not only those of the past year, but also those of as many previous years as may be procurable. Answers to the following interrogatories will cover the ground contemplated.

(Here are set forth idem verbis the seven questions of No. 106.)

The request of my government herein expressed was forwarded to me in May last, with the suggestion that the Secretary of the Treasury desired to receive the information at the earliest practicable moment. It reached this legation after my departure for vacation, and has been awaiting my return.

As my absence has occasioned delay, may I ask, as a great favor, that you will make such reference of this communication as will secure a reply as soon as convenient.

Your excellency will please accept assurances of my high consideration.

JAMES BIRNEY.

[Inclosure 2 in Mr. Birney’s No. 123—Translation.]

Baron van Lynden van Sandenburg to Mr. Birney.

The Hague, September 17, 1879.

Sir: According to the desire that you have been so kind as to express to me by your note of the 28th of last August, I have the honor to send you, inclosed, accompanied by your annexes, marked A—D, a note prepared by the minister of finance, containing replies as exact as possible to the questions propounded by the Government of the United States relative to the amount at present in circulation in the Netherlands of gold, silver, and paper moneys.

Be so kind, Mr. Minister, as to accept the renewed assurance of my high consideration.

VAN LYNDEN VAN SANDENBURG.

[Inclosure 3 in Mr. Birney’s No. 123.—Translation.]

memoranda of the minister of finance.

Answer to questions 1 and 2. A statement, even by approximation, of gold and silver at present in the country cannot be made. The two returns, marked A and B, contain a review of the coinage of silver since 1840, and of gold since 1875, the year in which the golden standard was introduced next to the silver standard. Besides this coinage, there has been from time to time some coinage of gold trading-money in small amounts, and chiefly on account of the Dutch East Indies, so that it may be taken for granted that none of that trading-money is at present in this country.

Of the gold coin, little has been exported. Of the silver coin, it is quite different; much has been exported, especially to the Dutch East Indies.

An approximation of the mint college as to the amount of silver coin that may be estimated as held in this country on the 1st of January, 1879, amounts to 144, 160,855 florins (in dollars, 57,664,342). Of this amount there was, on the 1st of September, 1879, in the Netherlands banks 74,901,099.518 florins, which in American money would be $29,960,439. At the same time there was in the bank golden standard to an amount of 41,378,930 florins, and fractional silver money to an amount of 988,369.35 florins.

The stock of mint material amounted, on the 1st of September, to 22,424.5 kilograms (a kilogram being 10 ounces, or a Dutch or French pound).

Answer to third question. Of the ten millions paper currency, there was on the 1st of September, 1879, in the bank an amount of 3,909,950 florins (in American currency, $1,563,980). Of the issue of bank-notes, there was in circulation on the 1st September, 1879, 185,451,380 florins.

Answer to questions 4 and 5. There are no silver or gold mines in this country.

Answer to questions 6 and 7. The annexed returns, marked C and D, contain an answer to those queries.

On examining all these apparently dissimilar figures, one has to keep in mind that no coinage of silver has taken place since the 17th of December, 1874, and with regard to gold that it became standard on the 1st of July, 1875.

S. GRAYENSHAGE.
September 11, 1879

No. 380. Mr. Birney to Mr. Evarts. [Document 409]

No. 380.
Mr. Birney to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
The Hague, September 30, 1879. (Received October 13.) No. 125.]

Sir: I have the honor to state that upon receiving your No. 114, of date 9th August, relating to Mormon migration, I had an interview with his excellency Baron van Lynden van Sandenburg, minister for foreign affairs.

I explained to him the purport of your dispatch. He seemed interested in the object proposed, and promised that his government would have done whatever could be found practicable to prevent proselyting by Mormons among the people of the Netherlands. He thought it might be difficult in many cases to discover motives of immigrants, but said they could instruct officers at the several ports of the country to make investigation.

The minister on the next day sent one of his secretaries to my bureau to obtain the law of Congress upon the subject, manifesting an interest to be fully advised.

I then addressed to him the note hereto annexed. It was accompanied by a copy of the major part of your dispatch; all indeed, except the instructions addressed to me personally.

I have received the reply of the minister, a copy of which is herewith inclosed, with a translation.

So far as I can learn, the agents of the Mormons have not made much effort within the Netherlands during the last two years. They are more active in Sweden, Norway, and in England.

I have, sir,

JAMES BIBNEY.

[Inclosure 1 in Mr. Birney’s No. 125.]

Mr. Birney to Baron Van Lynden van Sandenburg.

Legation of the United States,
The Hague, September 6, 1879.

Sir: My government instructs me to lay before you a subject to which it attaches much importance. Its views are set forth in the accompanying paper, which is an extract from a dispatch of Hon. Mr. Evarts, Secretary of State, addressed to the undersigned.

I am requested to urge earnest attention to the subject-matter of this communication, in the interest not merely of a faithful execution of the laws of the United States, but of the peace, good order, and morality which are cultivated and sought to be promoted by all civilized countries.

I will be pleased to learn from you how far the United States may depend upon the sympathy and co-operation of the government of His Majesty in relation to the subject herein referred to.

Your excellency will please accept assurances of my high consideration.

JAMES BIRNEY.

His Excellency Baron Van Lynden van Sandenburg.

[Inclosure 2 in Mr. Birney’s No. 125.]

The Hague, September 26, 1879.

Sir: I have the honor to inform you that I have hastened to communicate to the minister of marine, of commerce, and of industries the note of your government, of which you have been so kind as to send me an extract through your favor of the 6th of this month, No. 3.

My colleague has, at my request, made known the contents of this document to the commissioners authorized in different parts of the country to watch over the passage and transport of the emigrants, inviting them to kindly inform the Government of the King if they have been able to discover that migration has taken place for the Territory of Utah from the Netherlands; and whenever the case occurs to call the attention of persons interested to the penalties imposed by American legislation against polygamy in practice among the Mormons.

As soon as these steps shall have led to any result, I will not fail, Mr. Minister, to revert to this subject; and, in awaiting, I seize the occasion to reiterate to you the assurances of my high consideration.

VAN LYNDEN VAN SANDENBURG.

Mr. Birney,
Minister Resident of the United States of America.

No. 381. Mr. Birney to Mr. Evarts. [Document 410]

No. 381.
Mr. Birney to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
The Hague, October 30, 1879. (Received November 11.) No. 132.]

Sir: Referring to your No. 114 and to my No. 125, both relating to the migration of inhabitants of the Netherlands to the United States with the avowed purpose of joining the Mormon community at Salt Lake, in the Territory of Utah, I have the honor to inform you that I have this day received a second letter from His Excellency Baron Van Lynden van Sandenburg, the minister of foreign affairs, upon this subject. He kindly informs me of the result of inquiries he had caused to be made through certain of the officials of the country. He states that in 1878, from the port of Rotterdam, the immigrants of this character were 119 from Switzerland, accompanied by 17 from the Netherlands; that during the months of May and June of the present year there were 103 Swiss, but no Dutchmen; that no such immigrants during the same period have left the ports of Amsterdam, Dordrecht, Flushing, or of Harlingen.

His excellency assures me that the commissioners at Rotterdam have undertaken to do all in their power to discourage the migration of Mormons to Utah, by pointing out to them the severe penalties prescribed by the laws of the United States against polygamy. He gives me these facts as to what has been done since I first brought this topic before him, with the belief that the Government of the United States will be fully convinced that the Government of His Majesty the King is sincerely desirous of concurring in the object proposed.

I annex hereto a copy of the letter of the minister of foreign affairs, herein referred to, together with a translation of the same.

I have, &c.,

JAMES BIRNEY

[Inclosure 2, in No. 132.—Translation.]

Baron Van Lynden Van Sandenburg to Mr. Birney.

The Hague, October 29, 1879.

Mr. Minister: In referring to my communication of 26th of September last, No. 23, I have the honor to inform you that the result of the information I have been able to obtain through the mediation of the minister of water interests, commerce, and of industry, and of the commission authorized on the part of Rotterdam to watch the passage and transport of emigrants, is that only exceptionally do Netherlanders join companies of emigrants destined, for the Territory of Utah. Such companies, as it appears, are composed chiefly of Swiss subjects. For example, in the month of June, 1878, seventeen inhabitants of the Netherlands went in company with 119 Swiss from Rotterdam to Liverpool in order to embark there for Utah, and the 103 Swiss who, during the months of May and June of the present year, passed through Rotterdam en route for the same destination were not accompanied by any of the Netherlanders.

According to the reports addressed to my colleague by the resident commissioners at Amsterdam, Dordrecht, Flushing, and at Harlingen, no emigrant has taken passage from either of these ports having for their destination the State (Territory) of Utah. I am able to add that the Rotterdam commissioner has undertaken to do all in his power, whenever the case occurs, to call attention to the severe penalties affixed by the laws of the United States of America to the practice of polygamy.

Flattering myself, Mr. Minister, that by informing you of what has been done the Government of the King will have been able to convince you of its sincere desire to concur in the aim proposed by your government, I seize, Mr. Minister, this occasion to renew to you the assurance of my high consideration.

VAN LYNDEN VAN SANDENBURG.

Peru.Peru.

[411] . Mr. Gibbs to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Lima, Peru, November 20, 1878. (Received December 10.)

[412] . Mr. Gibbs to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States of America, Lima, Peru, February 10, 1879. (Received March 10.)

[413] . Mr. Gibbs to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Lima, Peru, March 19, 1879. (Received April 14.)

[414] . Mr. Gibbs to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States of America, Lima, Peru, March 25, 1879. (Received April 15.)

[415] . Mr. Gibbs to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Lima, Peru, April 1, 1879. (Received May 5.)

[416] . Mr. Evarts to Mr. Christiancy.

Department of State, Washington, April 9, 1879.

[417] . Mr. Evarts to Mr. Christiancy.

Department of State, Washington, April 24, 1879.

[418] . Mr. Christiancy to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Lima, Peru, April 29, 1879. (Received May 27.)

[419] . Mr. Christiancy to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Lima, Peru, April 29, 1879. (Received May 27.)

[420] . Mr. Evarts to Mr. Christiancy.

Department of State, Washington, May 8, 1879.

[421] . Mr. Christiancy to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Lima, Peru, May 12, 1879. (Received June 9.)

[422] . Mr. Christiancy to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Lima, Peru, May 20, 1879. (Received June 16.)

[423] . Mr. Christiancy to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Lima, Peru, May 21, 1879. (Received June 16.)

[424] . Mr. Christiancy to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Lima, Peru, June 1, 1879. (Received June 25.)

[425] Mr. Christiancy to Mr. Irigoyen.

Legation of the United States, Lima, Peru, June 1, 1879.

[426] Mr. Irigoyen to Mr. Christiancy.

Lima, June 4, 1879.

[427] . Mr. Christiancy to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Lima, Peru, June 3, 1879. (Received June 25.)

[428] . Mr. Evarts to Mr. Christiancy.

Department of State, Washington, June 18, 1879.

[429] . Mr. Evarts to Mr. Christiancy.

Department of State, Washington, June 20, 1879.

[430] . Mr. Evarts to Mr. Christiancy.

Department of State, Washington, June 26, 1879.

[431] . Mr. Christiancy to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Lima, Peru, July 15, 1879. (Received August 7.)

[432] . Mr. Christiancy to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Lima, Peru, July 23, 1879. (Received August 15.)

[433] . Mr. Christiancy to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Lima, Peru, July 30, 1879. (Received August 22.)

[434] . Mr. Christianey to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Lima, Peru, August 5, 1879. (Received September 4.)

[435] . Mr. Evarts to Mr. Christiancy.

Department of State, Washington, August 8, 1879.

[436] . Mr. Christiancy to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Lima, Peru, September 24, 1879. (Received October 15.)

[437] . Mr. Evarts to Mr. Christiancy.

Department of State, Washington, December 26, 1879.

No. 382. Mr. Gibbs to Mr. Evarts. [Document 411]

No. 382.
Mr. Gibbs to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Lima, Peru, November 20, 1878. (Received December 10.) No. 286.]

Sir: Don Manuel Pardo, chief and leader of the Civilist party and ex-president of this republic, was foully assassinated on the 16th instant, 2 p.m., in the act of entering the Senate chamber, of which he was the president.

To understand the present condition of affairs, I will relate the principal political events since the 14th of August, the date of my No. 273, premising that Mr. Pardo was elected in the October election of last year as senator from the department of Junin, and shortly after the opening of the Congress he was chosen president of the Senate by almost a unanimous vote, although then absent in Chili.

On the 2d of September last he returned from his self-imposed exile. I inclose an extract from the South Pacific Times, of Callao, September 5, relative to his return; also, another extract from the same paper of the 10th of September, Mr. Pardo’s address to the Senate on taking the chair as presiding officer of that body.

Many of his friends thought it was braving fate in returning to Peru. He answered that it was a duty to do so, as a citizen and a patriot to lead and consolidate his party which he considered necessary for the welfare of the republic. The Civilists having full power in Congress, with great majorities in both houses, considered it their political right to cause investigation into various acts of the government, one, particularly, of a loan of nitrate bonds given to the public works company; also of an over-emission in bank-notes. Another investigation proposed was of the attempted political movements in Puno and Arequipa, referred to in my dispatch No. 272.

The result was that the ministers of the interior and of finance resigned. It is a law of the country that ministers can be summoned before Congress and interrogated or questioned as regards their acts or policy in their various departments. Mr. Palacios, of the interior, was asked why the prefects of Puno and Arequipa were not submitted to trial for treasonable acts; the answer was that the government had discretionary power and in this case it was policy not to act. His resignation was demanded by a vote of censure; he resigned. Mr. Burinage, minister of finance, defended the action of the government in its loan of nitrate bonds as being justly due, and for the emission of the banknotes, because there were no funds in the treasury; and for the welfare of the country and to preserve peace they had to lay hands on any money they could get hold of to be replaced, and that, as his honesty of purpose had been questioned, he then and there resigned, stating that it was thought in Peru a man could not be honest in being a minister of finance. His resignation was not accepted, and a vote of confidence was passed, but he insisted upon resigning, and both ministers’ portfolios were delivered on the 19th of October.

On the 26th Dr. Don Burno Bueno, as minister of the interior, and Don Rafael Zene, as minister of finance, took office. Mr. Bueno has held various positions as prefect of departments, and lately was minister to Bolivia from Peru. Mr. Zene is an old employé of the treasury, of unblemished name, and last held position as chief collector of customs at Callao when appointed minister. On the same date Dr. Tabar a clergyman, deputy from Cuzco, offered to the House of Deputies a resolution to reward the persons who were aboard of the Huascar when in combat with the Shah and Amythist, May 29, 1877. The resolution asked for a gold medal, set in diamonds, for Pierola; gold medals for chiefs, officers, and civilians; and to the soldiers and sailors silver medals, all with inscriptions suitable to the event; to the mother or sisters of the soldier who was killed in the combat the pension due to the widow of a sublieutenant. The resolution was not admitted to debate. The Pierolist press attacked the Civilists for want of patriotism; thus the nation had been humbled by the English, who had not given any satisfactory answer to the demand of the government in relation to this affair.

A report was made in Congress by a commission to inquire into a mode of reducing the great number of officers on the pay-rolls of the army, and if carried out it would reduce the great number of half-pay, or “indefinites,” officers, which is judged by all thinking persons of the country to be very necessary; and lately a proposition was made in the Senate to impose direct contributions on the people. Mr. Pardo was the projector of the plan, having spoken in the Senate at great length of time on the 14th and 15th instant. On the 16th Mr. Pardo went to the office of El Comercio, leading party organ of the Civilists, and corrected the proofs of his speech to be published, and left there for the Senate, to be there at the opening of the session at 2 p.m. Passing through the entrance, where a guard was stationed, as customary when the president of the Senate appeared, the guard formed and presented arms as he passed. When near the side entrance, the sergeant of the guard lowered his rifle and fired, the ball passing through his body from the back and lodged in the wall. Mr. Pardo died in about an hour afterwards.

The assassin ran into the street, but was brought back. From various incidents that took place, there is no doubt that a deep and immense conspiracy was planned that included the death of Pardo, the massacre of the Congress, and also the assassination of President Prado. Great consternation reigned in the city as the news was spread. The stores were closed, and general fears of a revolution of some character were entertained. All dreaded some great catastrophe, and knew not from whence the blow would come. The Congress declared its sittings permanent, and demanded the appearance of the cabinet before it to answer the questions that should be asked.

I refer to the inclosed statement, with full details, taken from the South Pacific Times of yesterday, of the murder and general proceedings in Congress.

On the night of the 16th Mrs. Pierola, wife of the celebrated revolutionary character so often mentioned in the despatches from this legation, was arrested and is still imprisoned. Many other persons of more or less importance have been arrested. It is said that the authorities have a clew to the whole conspiracy, and the principal characters in it are known.

Yesterday the battalion Pichincha, of which the assassin was sergeant, was formed in the artillery barracks and disbanded, the soldiers being distributed around among the other regiments. The minister of war, in his declaration before the Congress on the 17th, stated he had no faith in this corps; it was entirely corrupted; but had full confidence in the rest of the troops.

I think the end is not yet, and fear there will be a serious outbreak. I must impartially relate that I noticed on the afternoon of the assassination very little regret marked on the faces of the masses, which were composed mostly of the lower classes; on the contrary, satisfaction. There is no doubt that the greater number of the unthinking mass are opposed to the “Civilists,” and justify in their own minds the terrible crime. From many instances that come under my own immediate observation, it is plain to me that there is a subtle current directing all feeling in favor of Pierola, now partly suppressed by the greater sentiments of regret of Mr. Pardo’s partisans, who no doubt represent the wealth and intelligence of the republic.

Mr. Pardo was born in Lima, son of a distinguished Spaniard and of a Peruvian lady; educated in the University of San Carlos, in this city; in early life a journalist, showing great talent in his articles on financial affairs and political economy; went to Europe on financial affairs connected with the state; in 1865 was minister of finance under Colonel Prado, then dictator, and one of the cabinet that signed the papers which brought on the conflict with Spain. His financial ideas were not acceptable, and to avoid making difficulties for the government, he resigned. In 1868, under the Batta government, he was director of the public charities of Lima, during the terrible yellow fever epidemic of that year; in 1869, mayor of the city of Lima; deputy from the province of Jauja in 1871, and in the same year elected President.

Mr. Pardo was the leading man of Peru; statesman, politician, literateur, linguist; and of deep thought, with a thorough love of country, and a great desire to improve its institutions; great abnegation and force of character; a great loss to his country; a man who might have been of use to the republic for many years to come if he had not been taken off at the very prime of life.

I have, &c.,

RICHARD GIBBS.

[Inclosure 1 in No. 286.]
[From the South Pacific Times, Thursday, September 5, 1878.]

It is satisfactory to us to remark, in our present review, that perfect harmony apparently exists among the high powers of the state, a circumstance which, in spite of the several antagonistical demonstrations recently made by the one side and the other, guarantees that peace will be maintained at all hazards.

We have frequently stated the fact that we make it a rule to eschew political matters; but as the most notable event of the week has been the arrival of Don Manuel Pardo, the ex-president of the republic and chief of the Civil party, after a prolonged absence in Chili, and all the journals make it their chief topic of remark, we must necessarily allude at some length to so important a circumstance, in order to give a comprehensive idea of the effect likely to be produced thereby on the present political situation.

Señor Pardo is the center of that party now dominant in the Chamber of Representatives, which has so recently given evidence of its strength in the elections, and in the adherence to its principles of the chief capitalists and representatives of the higher classes of society in the republic.

Mr. Pardo was elected, during his absence, president of the Senate, and he has, in all probability, returned to occupy himself with the duties of his important office, and at the same time to strengthen and unify his party, and prevent any possibility of dissension among the numerous partisans of what is known here as “Civilismo.”

It will be remembered that fourteen months ago Señor Pardo voluntarily left the country, in order to avoid serious complications, which it was thought his presence here would give rise to, and which at one time caused the government also to be apprehensive.

Since then, however, it may be remarked that Mr. Pardo has abstained from any interference with the course of political affairs here, holding himself entirely aloof; but his partisans having invested him with the representation in Congress of one of the departments of the republic, his patriotic feelings have compelled him to return, in order to fulfill his duties. Hence he has abandoned his self-imposed exile, and is once more among his friends. His arrival here on the 2d instant was marked by an enthusiastic ovation in his honor; and, although some little show of opposition was made by a few of his political opponents, the powerful support of his friends on the one hand, and the effective precaution taken by the local police authorities on the other, prevented any obstacle being opposed to his peaceable return to his home. Since his arrival he has received the congratulations of his excellency the President, an act of courtesy to which he responded by going in person to call upon General Prado on the day of his arrival. The interview which took place lasted about half an hour, but as it was entirely private nothing is publicly known as to its purport. Many comments, however, have been made by the press as to the existence of a future good understanding.

[Inclosure 2 in No. 286.]

[From the South Pacific Times, Tuesday, November 19, 1878.]

Don Manuel Pardo, Ex-President of the republic, leader of the political party now predominant in the country, senator for the department of Junin, and president of the Senate, has been the victim of a perfidious and cowardly assassination, committed within the very sanctuary of the law, by one of those placed there to protect it. The foul hand of the assassin, the blackest treason, the most horrible crime, has rudely ended an illustrious existence.

The president of the Senate, while on his way to assume the duties of his august position, and whilst the honors due to the elevated rank conferred on him by the law and the will of the people were being paid him, was, almost at the same moment, struck down by the mortiferous projectile which issued from an arm placed by the nation in the hands of one of its servants for the purpose of defending its honor. This is strange and unprecedented in a country where the kindness and mildness of its inhabitants are as remarkable as is their repugnance for everything infamous and criminal.

The entire nation, without distinction of party or of political creed, and with it every honorable man, be his nationality what it may, bitterly deplores this terrible calamity, unique of its kind, which it considers as a stain never to be effaced, and whose authors merit universal execration.

Who are the miserable wretches that have thus wounded their mother-country to its heart’s core? So infamous a crime has undoubtedly been instigated in the darkness by treason, cowardice, and envy, the implacable enemies of all that is good. It cannot have been the result of political fanaticism, for this produces heroes, not vile and miserable assassins who treacherously wound and then seek safety in cowardly flight; much less can it he attributed to personal vengeance, as some have conjectured, for this could have been realized in another manner and under other and less aggravating circumstances. A deed of this nature can have no other origin than a horrible intrigue, participated in by depraved wretches who dishonor the society of which they are members.

The investigations now being actively made, and the declaration of the assassin himself, who was fortunately apprehended, lead to the suspicion that such a presumption is not devoid of foundation. Should it be confirmed, we are convinced that the weight of the law will fall upon the delinquents with all the rigor demanded by public vengeance and in the interest of society.

The members of the foreign communities established in the country, who, with the strictest impartiality, have been able to appreciate the noble qualities of the distinguished statesman, the valiant patriot, the good citizen, and the exemplary parent, and who measure with sound, judgment the enormity of the crime of which he has been the victim, unite themselves to the sons of the soil in the manifestation of the profound sorrow by which they are moved for the irreparable loss experienced by the nation.

The mourning is general, just, and spontaneous, and in thus expressing it, clothing to-day the columns of the South Pacific Times in their mourning garb, we make ourselves the interpreters of the public sentiment, which we most sincerely share.

We also fulfill a solemn duty in conveying to the desolate family of the illustrious victim and to the entire nation our heartfelt expressions of sympathy.

* * * * * * *

The following proclamation was published on Saturday afternoon by the President of the Republic:

“The President of the Republic to the Nation:

“Fellow-Citizens: An atrocious crime, unique of its kind in the annals of Peru, has been committed to-day, in broad daylight, and the august threshold of the Senate, in the person of his excellency the president of that honorable chamber, Don Manuel Pardo, A wretched soldier, who can only be the blind tool of a premeditated crime, has been the perpetrator of this horrible assassination, which has deeply affected the government, and which will meet with the condemnation of the whole country.

“Immediately upon receiving the fatal news, I hurried to the theater of the crime, but all efforts were useless to save the illustrious victim, who expired a few moments later.

“The criminal was instantly apprehended, and justice has already set on foot his trial, which will be actively carried on, and whose results will satisfy the public craving for due punishment of the assassin, and will likewise serve as a salutary warning against the repetition of such crime.

“Fellow-citizens, you cannot but unite with the government in condemning and punishing such a monstrous crime, one of fatal remembrance for the country.

“MARIANO IGNACIO PRADO.
“Lima, November 16, 1878.”

* * * * * * *

No. 383. Mr. Gibbs to Mr. Evarts. [Document 412]

No. 383.
Mr. Gibbs to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States of America,
Lima, Peru, February 10, 1879. (Received March 10.) No. 305.]

Sir: In the dispatch No. 304, of this date, on the financial affairs of this country, I refer to a law to impose an extra tax on commerce. The object of the impost is to create a special fund for the amortization of the treasury notes.

As this law will to some degree affect our commerce, I inclose copy of the law in the original Spanish, and a translation taken from the South Pacific Times of Callao of the 8th instant.

I have, &c.,

RICHARD GIBBS.

[Inclosure No. 1 in No. 305.—Translation.]

additional export and import duties.

[From the South Pacific Times, Saturday, February 8, 1879.]

The government has ordered the following law to be put in force:

The Congress of the Peruvian Republic, considering: That in accordance with article 26 of the law of 27th January last a special law has to be enacted determining the manner and form in which the paper money issued from the exchequer is to be withdrawn from circulation;

That the actual revenues of the State not being sufficient for the expenses of the budget, it is indispensably necessary to create the necessary recourses for the carrying out of that operation, it has given the following law: Article 1. For the redemption of the money of the exchequer the following taxes are established: 1st. Twenty-five cents of a sol per hundred kilograms on all packages of merchandise embarked or disembarked in any of the ports of the republic. For fractions of less than fifty kilograms the tax will be 10 cents, and 15 cents for those exceeding fifty kilograms.

2d. Eighty cents of a sol on each ton of weight or measure of charcoal or coal, crude or wrought iron, firewood or timber for building purposes imported from abroad, and on each ton of any metal that may be exported from the ports of the republic.

This article is not applicable to the coal and charcoal, nor to the firewood that may be conveyed from one port of the republic to another, nor to the eatables necessary for consumption.

Art. 2. The existing specific customs duties on the following articles are increased 30 per cent: Beer, spirits, wines, and liquors of all kinds, tobacco, cigars, and playing cards.

Art. 3. The regulations by which certain rights and perquisites are granted to the customs officials on the revenues and increased duties of such establishments are not applicable to the imposts created under the present law.

Art. 4. The custom-houses of the republic that collect the taxes established by this law will remit fortnightly the sum collected to the board of management and superintendence of the fiscal emission, and the said board is authorized to dictate, in accordance with the government, all the measures of security and vigilance that it may deem needful for the collection of the said taxes in places where there is no customhouse.

Art. 5. The aforesaid board has the power, at any time when it may deem it convenient, to lease out the collection of the said taxes.

Art. 6. From the proceeds of the taxes established by this law, the board shall redeem one hundred thousand soles (?) per month, at least, of the paper money, after previously deducting its expenses of administration; and if such proceeds shall be insufficient, the government shall place at its disposal the funds necessary for the redemption of the stated sum of one hundred thousand soles. But if those proceeds should exceed the amount mentioned, the amount in excess should be applied to the further redemption of the said paper money at the end of each year.

Art. 7. In addition to the funds created in virtue of the present law, the sums apportioned for the purpose in the general budget of the republic shall be applied to the redemption of the paper money of the State.

Art. 8. As soon as the exchange on London falls to 39 pence per sol in paper money of the State, the board shall invest the funds destined for the resumption of such paper money in the purchase of gold and silver bullion which it shall have coined; and the money so obtained shall be given in exchange for the aforesaid paper money, which it shall destroy by burning. If no paper money should be presented for the purpose of effecting that exchange, the money coined with that object shall be deposited in a place to be designated by the board until a sum is accumulated equal to the paper money that shall remain in circulation, and on this being attained the board shall fix a period of three months for the departments of Lima and Callao, and of six months for the rest of the departments of the republic, in order that the circulating fiscal paper money be presented for its exchange, declaring devoid of value any that may not be presented within the periods mentioned. If, on the completion of the said periods, there shall remain any surplus of the coin so deposited, it shall be placed at the disposal of the government for the requirements of the exchequer.

Art. 9. Within the first fifteen days of the month of January of each year the board of administration and superintendence of the State emission shall pass in the respective accounts of the fund which they administer to the chief tribunal of accounts, which shall examine and pass them as is done with the rest of the treasury accounts. On the expiration of one year from the date of the presentation of the said accounts, the responsibility of the board shall cease, and the accountant or official intrusted with the examination of the same shall be liable to the responsibilities and penalties prescribed by the regulations of the said tribunal.

Art. 10. The taxes established by the present law shall come into force three months after the promulgation of the present decree, and shall cease to be collected as soon as the redemption of the paper money of the State is terminated in accordance with the provisions of said law.

To be transmitted to the executive power, in order that it may give the necessary orders for its fulfillment.

Given in the sessions hall of the Congress in Lima on the 4th day of February, 1879.
J. DE LA RIVA AGUERO,
Vice-President of the Senate.

CAMILO N. CARRILLO,
President of the Chamber of Deputies.

JOSE V. ARIAS,
Secretary of the Senate.

MANUEL MARIA DEL VALLE,
Secretary of the Chamber of Deputies.

To be printed, published, circulated, and duly complied with.

Given at the government house in Lima, on the fourth day of February, 1879.
MARIANO I. PRADO.

J. R. Izcue.

No. 384. Mr. Gibbs to Mr. Evarts. [Document 413]

No. 384.
Mr. Gibbs to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Lima, Peru, March 19, 1879. (Received April 14.) No. 320.]

Sir: On the 12th instant I read in the morning’s edition of El Comercio that on that date there had arrived from Valparaiso, in Chili, and intermediate ports, the steamship Itata, under the American flag.

I wrote a note to Mr. Clayton, United States consul at Callao, in reference to the statement, requiring an answer. I inclose copy.

Before receiving an answer the evening papers of the same date confirmed the information given by El Comercio. I then wrote Mr. Clayton, as per copy inclosed, requesting a meeting with Captain Barclay, Lieutenant-Commander United States ship Onward.

On the 13th I went to Callao, held a consultation with Captain Barclay, and gave him verbal instructions of what I thought it would be necessary to do.

Mr. Clayton wrote me on the 13th, sending to the legation copy of the bill of sale, as inclosed.

I sent Mr. Clayton by Captain Barclay written instructions what to do, as per copy. I also conversed with Captain Barclay, and requested that the instructions be carried out in a quiet way, to inform the captain, or in his absence the chief officer, that the flag must be lowered, should not be hoisted again, and instructions to Mr. Clayton to return the papers and give no clearance. These orders were carried out satisfactorily, and the Itata sailed for Valparaiso and intermediate ports, under her true flag, the Chilian. I inclose copies of Mr. Clayton’s report, and the clearance given by the consuls at Valparaiso and Iquique.

The Itata, Loa, and Rimac are three large English-built merchant steamers belonging to the Chilian Compañia Sud Americaña de Vapores. They formerly were in opposition to the Pacific Steam Navigation Company, but some time ago were, by contract, taken by this company and run in connection with the English boats, all under one agency.

It is thought that, owing to the threatened rupture between Chili and Peru, the owners had them transferred by sale to a person named Henry L. Stevens, an American citizen residing at Valparaiso, with the idea that this simple sale gave the right to carry the American flag.

I have been informed that the sister ships are also carrying the flag. If they arrive at Calloa during my stay here, I shall pursue the same course as with the Itata—order the flag down.

I will call the attention of the department to the fact that, as far as I can learn, and by the papers presented, the captain and crew were all aliens, with the exception, I understand, of one person in the crew.

I did not call upon the Peruvian authorities, which I suppose I had a right to do, to order the flag down, but used simply the moral force of an intimation from the United States minister. Any other course would have complicated matters here, and at the present state of excitement could easily have been made a source of trouble.

I have, &c.,

RICHARD GIBBS.

[Inclosure 1 in No. 320.]

Mr. Gibbs to Mr. Clayton.

Legation of the United States of America,
Lima, March 12, 1879.

Sir: By the Commereio, of this day’s date, I see that it reports that the Chilian steamer Itata entered the port of Callao under the flag of the United States of America.

You will please inquire into the truth of this statement and report as soon as possible to this legation.

I am, &c.,

RICHARD GIBBS.

[Inclosure 2 in No. 320.]

Mr. Gibbs to Mr. Clayton.

Legation of the United States of America,
Lima, March 13, 1879.

Sir: I wrote you yesterday relative to the steamer Itata sailing under the American flag. I have seen since the statement confirmed by last night’s papers.

You will please send word to Captain Barclay of the United States ship Onward that I will meet him at the consulate on official business. I will go down on the eleven o’clock train.

I am, &c.,

RICHARD GIBBS.

[Inclosure 3 in No. 320.]

Mr. Clayton to Mr. Gibbs.

United States Consulate,
Callao, March 13, 1879.

Sir: In answer to your dispatch of the 12th instant, I have the honor to inform you that the steamship Itata, one of the vessels belonging to the South American Steamship Company, arrived at this port, on the morning of the 12th, from Valparaiso and intermediate ports, flying the United States flag; that about eleven o’clock, same date, the purser of the said steamer Itata appeared at this consulate and informed me that he desired to enter the said vessel, and, at the same time, presented me with a bundle of papers, which, on examining, I found, first, a bill of sale of the said steamer Itata to one Henry L. Stevens, an American citizen residing in Valparaiso (copy of which is herewith inclosed); also, a document inclosed, “United States Consular Instructions, respecting American or foreign-built vessels transferred to citizens of the United States of America,” which, on examination, I found to be nothing more or less than Article XVII and paragraphs 219 to 226, both inclusive, of the Consular Regulations; also, two certificates of clearances, one dated Valparaiso, March 1, 1879, and signed P. A. McKellar, United States vice-consul at said port, and the other dated Iquique, March 7, and signed by J. W. Merriam, United States consul, and shipping articles containing the names of sixty-six men, which was also made put and signed by the United States vice-consul at Valparaiso.

As I am of the opinion that the steamship Itata has no right to wear the American flag, she being a foreign-built vessel and commanded by an alien, I hasten to lay the case before you for such action as you may deem proper.

I am, &c.,

ROBERT T. CLAYTON,
United States Consul.

[Inclosure 4 in No. 320.]

consulate of the united states of america, at valparaiso, republic of chili.

I, Petar A. McKellar, vice-consul of the United States of America for Valparaiso, do hereby certify that the hereunto annexed bill of sale, bearing date the 21st day of February, A. D. 1879, of the late Chilian steamer Itata, measuring 1, 129 tons, according to United States measurement, having three decks, schooner rig, two masts, round stern, cut-water, and figure-head, built of iron, 300–horse power, sold and transferred by Horatio Lyon, manager of the Compañia Sud Americana de Vapores, unto Henry L. Stevens, is in form and in substance valid and effective in law, and has been duly recorded in this consulate; and that the said Henry L. Stevens is a native citizen of the United States of America.

Given under my hand and the seal of this consulate the 21st day of February, 1878.
[seal of consulate.]
P. A. McKELLAR,
United States Vice-Consul.

Know all men by these presents that I, Horacio Lyon, manager of the steamship company entitled “Compañia Sud Americana de Vapores,” for and in consideration of the sum of $150,000, lawful Chilian currency, unto aforesaid company well and truly paid at or before the ensealing and delivery of these presents by Henry L. Stevens, a native citizen of the United States of America, residing in Valparaiso, Republic of Chili, the receipt whereof is hereby acknowledged, have granted, bargained, sold, assigned, transferred, and set over, and by these presents do grant, bargain, sell, assign, transfer, and set over unto the said Henry L. Stevensand his legal representatives the Chilian steamer Itata, together with all and singular her boilers, machinery, furniture, tackle, apparel, and appurtenances, as the same now exist, and as the said steamer is more particularly described in a certificate of admeasurement thereof, on file in the United States consulate at Valparaiso, whereby it appears that said steamer has three decks, two masts, schooner rig, round stern, cut-water, and figure-head, built of iron, is propelled by screw, worked by compound direct-acting engine, with surface condensers of 300 horse-power, is in length 290.7 feet, in breadth 39.9 feet, in depth 19 feet, and measures, with the necessary deductions for engine space, 1, 129 tons, according to the United States measurement: To have and to hold the said steamer Itata, and the appurtenances thereunto belonging, unto the said Henry L. Stevens and his legal representatives, to the only proper use and behoof and as the proper goods and chattels of the said Henry L. Stevens and his legal representatives from henceforth forever.

And I, the said Horacio Lyon, as manager of the “Compania Sud Americana de Vapores,” do hereby covenant and agree to and with the said Henry L. Stevens and his legal representatives that at the execution of these presents the said steamer, called the Itata, together with the appurtenances thereunto belonging, is the true and lawful property of the “Compañia Sud Americana de Vapores,” said company having full right and authority to sell and dispose of the same, and that she is free from and clear of all claims, incumbrances, or demands whatsoever.

In witness whereof I have hereunto set my hand and seal at Valparaiso aforesaid, this 27th day of February, A. D. 1879. HORACIO LYON, [seal.]
Manager of the Compañia Sud Americana de Vapores.

Signed, sealed, and delivered in the presence of us:

P. Bourchier,

August Moller, Jr.

Consulate of the United States of America at Valparaiso,
February 21, 1879.

I, Peter A. McKellar, vice-consul of the United States of America at Valparaiso, do hereby certify that on the day of the date hereof before me personally appeared Horacio Lyon, manager of the Compañia Sud Americana de Vapores, and in my presence and in the presence of the subscribing witness thereto, signed, sealed, and delivered the foregoing bill of sale of the steamer Itata, and acknowledged the same to be as well his own act and deed, as the act and deed of the aforesaid company. Given under my hand and the seal of this consulate, the day and year aforesaid.

[seal of consulate.] P. A. McKELLAR,
United States Vice-Consul.

[Inclosure 5 in No. 320.]

Mr. Gibbs to Mr. Clayton.

Legation of the United States of America,
Lima, March 14, 1879.

Sir: Your communication of yesterday’s date, with inclosure relative to the steamer Itata, has been received. The bill of sale of which you send a copy gives no right to carry the United States flag. The Article XVII, sections 219 to 226 inclusive, of Consular Regulations, of which copy was given to you by the purser of the steamer, is no evidence as regards the vessel’s nationality; to the contrary, section 226 states clearly “The privilege of carrying the American flag is under, regulation of Congress, and the statutes have not made that privilege available to any ships except those duly registered or enrolled at some custom-house.” According to section 4132, chapter 1, Title XL VIII of the Revised Statutes of the United States, no vessel can be registered or enrolled at any custom-house that is not wholly built in the United States, or a vessel captured by American citizens and condemned as a prize. Therefore the Itata is not entitled to carry the flag of the United States.

You will write an official note to the captain of the steamer informing him that according to the laws of the United States he cannot use the American flag as a national one, and if he persists in flying it he must take the responsibility of forfeiture of the vessel. I would recommend that you go in company with Captain Barclay and another officer of the United States ship Onward, and present the note to the captain in person, or, in his default, to the chief officer.

I think there has been a misconception of the United States laws in this matter, which give American citizens the right to purchase foreign shipping property, and the United States Government would protect them to a certain degree, but not allow, in any case, the use of the flag, an emblem of nationality that can only be used afloat on American-built vessels, or those legally condemned as prizes.

You may return the captain the papers deposited in the consulate, but I doubt the right of your giving him a clearance or any other document, as you may be complicated according to section 4191 of chapter 1, Title XLVIII, or section 5423, chapter 5, Title LXX.

I think it necessary that you take copies of the clearances given by the consuls at Valparaiso and Iquique, and send to this legation certified copies also. And, if possible, I would wish a copy of any clearance that may be given to clear the Itata from Callao by the Peruvian authorities.

I am, &c.,

RICHARD GIBBS.

[Inclosure 6 in No. 320.]

Mr. Clayton to Mr. Gibbs.

United States Consulate,
Callao, March 15, 1879. No. 34.]

Sir: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your dispatch of the 14th instant, in regard to the steamship Itata, and in reply I have now to inform you that according to instructions therein contained I, in company with Lieut. Commander Chas. J. Barclay, United States Navy, repaired on board of said vessel and presented the captain with a written request to haul down the American flag, and to desist in future from raising the same on said vessel, which request has been complied with. I have returned to the captain of the Itata the papers, deposited in my keeping by the purser of said vessel, taking a receipt for the same. I have to inform you that the Itata is now flying the Chili flag.

As requested, I inclose copies of the clearance of said steamer given by the consuls at Valparaiso and Iquique and will endeavor to get a copy of her clearance from the Peruvian authorities when she sails from this port.

I am, &c.,

ROBERT T. CLAYTON,
United States Consul.

[Inclosure 7 in No. 320.]

Certificate given to master on delivery of ship’s register and papers.

Consulate of the United States of America at Valparaiso,
March 1, 1879.

(Form No. 14.)

(Paragraph 123.)

I, the undersigned vice-consul of the United States of America for Valparaiso and the dependencies thereof, do hereby certify that Peter Lantrop, master of the steamer called the Itata, of Valparaiso, having this day exhibited to me the clearance of said steamer from the proper authorities of this port, I have delivered to him, the said master, the bill of sale and papers of the said vessel duly deposited in this consulate on the 27th day of February, 1879.

Given under my hand and the seal of this consulate the day and year first above written.

[seal of consulate.] P. A. McKELLAR,
United States Vice-Consul.

Certificate given to master on delivery of ship’s register and papers.

Consulate of the United States of America,
March 1, 1879.

(Form No. 14.)

I, the undersigned consul of the United States of America for Iquique and the dependencies thereof, do hereby certify that Peter Lantrop, master of the steamer called the Itata of Valparaiso, having this day exhibited to me the clearance of said steamer from the proper authorities of this port, I have delivered to him, the said master, the register and papers of the said steamer, duly deposited in this consulate on the 27th of February, 1879.

Given under my hand and the seal of this consulate the day and year above written.

[seal of consulate.] J. W. MERRIAM,
United States Consul.

No. 385. Mr. Gibbs to Mr. Evarts. [Document 414]

No. 385.
Mr. Gibbs to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States of America,
Lima, Peru, March 25, 1879. (Received April 15.) No. 324.]

Sir: In my dispatch, No. 320, of 19th instant, I referred to a steamer Loa, sister ship of the Itata, belonging to the same company.

The Loa arrived on the morning of the 23d at Callao, from Valparaiso and intermediate points, entering under the Chilian flag.

According to the papers of this city the Loa left Valparaiso under the American flag, and at Arica, a Peruvian port, changed flag and crew-list, and on arrival at Callao presented a document (“pasavante”) or sea letter, made by the Chilian consul-general at Callao, dated the 16th instant.

The Opinion Nacional, of this city, of the 24th instant, in its correspondence from Callao, states that under the American flag the Loa carried seventy artillerists from Valparaiso to the Bolivian port Antofa-gasta, now occupied by Chilian forces. If this is true, it is compromising the neutrality of the flag in a serious manner. The agent of the British steamers on this coast, after consulting Her Britannic Majesty’s minister at this capital, prohibited their vessels from transporting troops or munitions of war.

I have, &c.,

RICHARD GIBBS.

No. 386. Mr. Gibbs to Mr. Evarts. [Document 415]

No. 386.
Mr. Gibbs to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Lima, Peru, April 1, 1879. (Received May 5.) No. 328.]

Sir: On the 5th instant I received a circular note from the Peruvian Government, of which I inclose a copy and translation, in reference to the status of American vessels, what constitutes nationality, and if foreign vessels have the right to carry the American flag.

I have answered this day as per copy annexed.

I have, &c.,

RICHARD GIBBS.

[Inclosure 1 in No. 328.—Translation.]

Mr. Irigoyen to Mr. Gibbs.

Bureau of Foreign Affairs,
Lima, April 5, 1879.

Sir: As in the war initiated by the Government of Chili there may possibly arise cases in which it may be necessary to use the right of visitation to neutral vessels, I beg of your excellency to answer the following questions: 1st. What are the conditions the laws demand so a vessel may be considered to belong to the United States?

2d. What is necessary, that said laws consider indispensable, that foreign vessels may in good faith and legally use such flag?

As in these matters the public treaties of Peru, and international law, refer to the laws of each State to determine the nationality, it is to be expected that your excellency, in the interest of those belonging to your country, will please give the data referred to as soon as convenient.

I am, &c.,

M. IRIGOYEN.

[Inclosure 1 in No. 328.]

Mr. Gibbs to Señor Manuel Irigoyen, minister of foreign affairs.

Legation of the United States of America,
Lima, April 7, 1879. No. 109.]

Sir: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your excellency’s circular note of 5th instant, in which it is stated that, as Chili has commenced a war, there is a probability that occasion may arise when it will be necessary to exercise the right of visiting neutral vessels; also stating that it is desirous that the undersigned give information on the following subjects: 1st. What are the conditions that the laws of my country exact so that merchant vessels may belong to the United States?

2d. What is necessary, that said laws consider indispensable, that foreign vessels may in good faith and legally use the flag?

Your excellency also states that in such matters the public treaties of Peru and international law refer to the laws of each State to determine the nationality of its vessels; presuming that the undersigned, in the interests of those belonging to the United States, will be pleased to answer the above questions in as brief a time as possible.

In answer to the first question, the undersigned has the honor to inform your excellency that, according to the Revised Statutes of the United States, Title XLVIII, “Regulations of Commerce and Navigation,” chapter 1, section 4131, defining what are vessels of the United States, says “vessels registered pursuant to law, and no others, except such as shall be duly qualified according to law for carrying on the coasting trade and fisheries, or one of them, shall be deemed vessels of the United States, and entitled to the benefits and privileges appertaining to such vessels, but they shall not enjoy the same longer than they shall continue to be wholly owned by citizens and to be commanded by a citizen of the United States. And officers of vessels of the United States shall in all cases be citizens of the United States.”

And under the head of “what vessels are entitled to register,” Section 4132 of the same chapter says: “Vessels built within the United States, and belonging wholly to citizens thereof, and vessels which may be captured in war, by citizens of the United States, and lawfully condemned as prize or which may be adjudged to be forfeited for a breach of the laws of the United States, being wholly owned by citizens, and no others, may be registered as directed in this title.”

In answer to the second question, the undersigned has the honor to state there is no law that permits foreign vessels to use the American flag.

I have, &c.,

RICHARD GIBBS.

No. 387. Mr. Evarts to Mr. Christiancy. [Document 416]

No. 387.
Mr. Evarts to Mr. Christiancy.

Department of State,
Washington, April 9, 1879. No. 4.]

Sir: Mr. Gibbs’s dispatch No. 317, in relation to the approaching conflict between Chili and Bolivia and the attitude of Peru with respect thereto, has been read with interest. * * * *

The position of Peru in relation to the struggle now reported as having been inaugurated is one of considerable interest. The latest news represents that the Peruvian Government has decided to maintain an attitude of strict neutrality. It is sincerely hoped that this decision will be successfully observed, for, besides restricting the arena of the deplorable strife between peoples of one blood, the pacific course of Peru makes her a notable example, and it may be a directly potential agent in the interest of the speedy restoration of peace, so earnestly to be hoped for.

I am, &c.,

WM. M. EVARTS.

No. 388. Mr. Evarts to Mr. Christiancy. [Document 417]

No. 388.
Mr. Evarts to Mr. Christiancy.

Department of State,
Washington, April 24, 1879. No. 7.]

Sir: I have to acknowledge the receipt of Mr. Gibbs’s No. 320, in relation to the arrival of the steamship Itata, of the South American Steamship Company, at the port of Callao, flying the flag of the United States, and his action in the case. It seems that the American flag was flown on the ground of an alleged purchase of the ship by an American citizen.

I have only to observe, in reply, that under the circumstances the right of the Itata to fly our flag was properly challenged, and the ready submission of the master and owners clearly justifies the intervention of Minister Gibbs.

I am, &c.,

WM. M. EVARTS.

No. 389. Mr. Christiancy to Mr. Evarts. [Document 418]

No. 389.
Mr. Christiancy to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Lima, Peru, April 29, 1879. (Received May 27.) No. 6.]

Sir: For your Information as to the causes and objects of the existing war between Chili and Peru, I transmit herewith certain papers bearing upon the question.

No important intelligence in reference to the military operations has been received since my former dispatches.

I have, &c.,

I. P. CHRISTIANCY.

[Inclosure 1 in No. 6.—Translation.]

the alliance with bolivia.

[South Pacific Times, Saturday, April 26, 1879.]

The following decree has been issued:

Mariano I. Prado, President of the Republic, considering:

First. That by the treaty of the 6th of February, 1873, the Republics of Peru and Bolivia are solemnly bound to mutually guarantee one another their independence and sovereignty, and also the integrity of their respective territories.

Secondly. That the insult offered by Chili to Bolivia by the occupation of the 23d and 24th degrees of that country’s sea-coast, under the pretense of revindicating their own, is equivalent to an attack on the said rights of Bolivia, and is expressly pointed out in the first portion of the second article of the treaty referred to as the chief and principal cause why the alliance should come into force.

Thirdly. That the envoy extraordinary and minister plenipotentiary of Bolivia, on a special mission, has requested, by order of his government, the declaration of the casus fœderis, and the consequent bringing into effect of the said treaty; and that Peru has endeavored by every conciliatory measure possible to keep the peace between the republics in question, first interposing her good offices and afterwards offering her mediation in due form, whose only result has been the declaration of war made by the Government of Chili against Peru:

I decree—

The Republic of Peru decrees the casus fœderis mentioned in the treaty of the 6th of February, 1873, with Bolivia has arrived; and consequently the time has come when the alliance must come into effect and all its stipulations.

The respective ministers of state are encharged with the issuing of the necessary orders for the faithful and exact fulfillment of this decree, and of making it known and published.

Given in the Government House of Lima this 6th day of April, 1879.
MARIANO I. PRADO.

Manuel Irigoyen,

[Inclosure 2 in No. 6.]

Note from the Chilian Government to the Peruvian Minister, granting him his passport.

Ministry of Foreign Affairs,
Santiago, April 2, 1879.

Sir: The reply given to the Chilian envoy in Lima a few days ago by your government, that it could not observe neutrality in our present conflict with Bolivia because there existed a treaty of defensive alliance between them—which is the same that you read to me in the conference held on the 31st ultimo—has forced this government to the conclusion that it is impossible to maintain friendly relations with Peru.

Considering the assurance you gave me in the first conference we held on the 17th ultimo, in reply to my interrogation whether such treaty existed or no, that you had no knowledge of it; that you believed it had no existence, and that it could not have been approved by the Peruvian Congress of 1873 (when it was said to have been approved), and much less in the succeeding years, when you formed part of the diplomatic commission; considering this assurance, I repeat, my government sees that yours, as well as yourself, in denying this treaty, have placed yourselves in an exceedingly irregular position.

My government is surprised to learn that that of Peru projected and signed that treaty at the time that it professed sentiments of cordial friendship towards Chili.

To this secret transaction, in which the strictest reserve was stipulated, the Government of Chili replies with the fullest frankness, declaring that its relations with that of Peru are broken, and that it considers it belligerent, in virtue of the authority to that effect received to-day from the high authorities of the State.

In forwarding you your passports, I have to assure you that the proper orders have been issued, in order that you and the personnel of the permanent legation of Peru may receive all due consideration and facility in returning to your country.

With sentiments of distinguished consideration, &c.,

ALFJANDRO FIERRO.

[Inclosure No. 3 in No 6.]

opening of congress.

Message of the President of the republic.

Shortly after two o’clock on the afternoon of the 24th, Congress was formally opened.

The following is a translation of the message of his excellency the President of the republic to the special Congress of 1879.

Honorable Representatives:

At a time when the sentiment of confraternity seemed to be most deeply rooted in the heart of America, the fruit not only of the identity of origin of its nations, and of the glorious traditions which form their modern history, but also the offspring of mutual convenience, very grave and important events, brought about most abruptly by the Chilian Government, have startled our repose.

After the unanimous cry of indignation uttered throughout the entire continent, when the agents of the Spanish Government attempted to revive the deeds of the time of its famous conquests, after the outburst of brotherly feeling which united all the South American republics to one another to protest solemnly against acts odious to all laws which civilized nations have laid down as rules of government, it appeared impossible that those very nations should have recourse to arms without previously employing all rational methods of conciliation, without observing the forms which give to war the character of legality, of which the violent aggressions and the hostilities commenced before the enemy, is either notified or prepared to repulse them, are destitute. Such a course of conduct which outrages the precepts of morality by which governments should be guided, and ruins nations by exciting in their midst, under a cloak of patriotism, passionate feelings of hate and vengeance not certainly in accordance with modern civilization nor with the respect ever due to any people, whatever their class and status, nor is it such as should be adopted by generous nations who confide their destinies to the manifest justice of their cause rather than to the employment of brute force.

Peru and her government were rejoicing the more to see the nations of this continent cementing closer, day by day, the bonds by which they are united by nature, since she observed the willingness with which they all received and realized the idea of assimilating their laws, with the object of giving unity and conformity to their interests, moral as well as material; and doing away with unimportant matters the odious distinction born of the word “foreign,” a word which should be banished from amongst the citizens of South America. To these useful and important labors would doubtless have succeeded others, tending to produce in as great a degree as the peculiar conditions of each State would permit of, the same benefits that were looked for from the unity of the principles of internal law.

Peru has so far entertained these laudable desires that, whenever she has had cause to fear the least interruption taking place in the peaceful relations of the other re publics, she has hastened to interpose her good offices towards advocating the maintenance of peace and the adoption of whatever measures that were conducive to that end.

The Peruvian Government has always possessed the profound conviction that the disasters which a state of war brings on in all the nations of the universe, and especially in those newly formed, which need to employ all their vigor, means, and activity in consolidating their institutions and in acquiring that moral force which places nations in the first rank of their fellows, giving them prestige and glory, can alone be acceptable when the independence of States is menaced or their dearest interests involved.

If unfortunately the heroic deeds of the days of independence, and after them the different principles which have been the cause of political events more or less turbulent, have delayed the prosecution of those ideas, there exists without doubt an inexplicable virility which, when exercised in the cause of peace, opens the door to the development of all the elements of rational prosperity.

The actual contest between Bolivia, Peru, and Chili, the preconceived work of the cabinet of Santiago, has not failed, therefore, to affect most deeply the minds of the nations of this continent; and all the more so, since all nations, with that providential intuition with which they are gifted see, or rather feel, that the occupation of Bolivian territory by Chilian forces is a positive usurpation, taking into consideration the attendant circumstances, and is an act of a nature opposed and repugnant to the commonest dogmas of law and justice, and also that the war declared against Peru, on account of suppositions more or less whimsical, has not in its favor a Single argument to support it.

In truth, neither the ostensible reason of the measures taken, nor the questions at issue, authorized an attack which is as unjustifiable as it is odious.

To revindicate one’s right to territory which has always been in possession of another country, and recognized as such by solemn treaties, has no other meaning than the setting about a conquest, taking advantage of the debility of the offended country. The abrupt and motiveless declaration of war against Peru is nothing less than a preconceived plan, whose aim is to take possession of a long coveted piece of territory.

The conflict arisen so suddenly between the Republics of Bolivia and Chili gave rise to the necessity of convoking you to special sessions, in order that, duly appreciating the importance of the causes which induce the same and the tendencies they display, you may determine upon, the line of conduct which the government should pursue under such difficult circumstances; and, taking in the true situation in which we are placed, that you may adopt such measures as you may deem convenient

Meanwhile, without the remotest imagination that a declaration of war would be the reply to our generous mediation for the maintenance of peace between the contending parties, the government, interpreting the sentiments of the country as expressed in all classes of society, and ardently desirous of preventing a bloody strife between two sister republics, hastened to put its good offices at the disposition of the cabinet of Santiago; our chargé d’affaires having attained a promise from the President of the republic that no definite steps would be taken without his knowledge.

Notwithstanding this, the Chilian government caused its military forces to occupy the port of Antofagasta, dislodging the Bolivian authorities and hoisting their own flag over its buildings, with the intent to “revindicate” that territory.

The Chilian press, revealing the hidden views of the government, allowed it to be understood from the very first that the occupation of Antofagasta was the preliminary step to making war against Peru. The violence of their warlike proceedings; the secrecy observed with our chargé d’affaires, notwithstanding the promise to hide none of their proceedings from him; the frequent and offensive manifestations of the popular assemblies, tolerated in spite of the good relations then existing between the two countries; the numerous forces sent to Antofagasta; the concentration of the Chilian squadron in that port, and the works of fortification commenced there, allowed it to be clearly seen that the operations were in reality directed against Peru, since the hostilities with Bolivia, a country not possessing a navy, did not call for the necessity of maintaining a fleet and army in Antofagasta, nor for the erection of harbor fortifications there.

Notwithstanding the significance of all these proceedings, the Peruvian Government, with a lively interest in the maintenance of peace between the South American Republics, and faithful to its traditions, again offered its mediation and appointed a minister plenipotentiary near the cabinet of Santiago, in order that the two republics, yielding their mutual pretensions, might submit the settlement of their differences to arbitration, in accordance with the terms of the treaty entered into between them in 1874. The negotiations, undertaken in the best faith by our plenipotentiary, Don José Antonio Lavalle, far from persuading the Chilian Government to desist from its views, caused it to abruptly break off its relations with us, under various frivolous pretexts, to declare against us a war completely unjustifiable from all points of view, and to set about immediately instituting every species of hostilities, blockading, bombarding, and burning our defenceless ports in the south.

Our military preparations, the dispatching of Peruvian troops to the department of Tarapacá, and the existence of a secret treaty of defensive alliance, are the motives which have contributed to apparently make Chili doubt our desires for peace, and to cause her to look upon us as belligerents in her quarrel with Bolivia.

The falseness and inefficiency of such motives are apparent to all. Immediately upon difficulties arising between Chili and the Argentine provinces, my government, faithful to the duties which the love of peace and the desire for the progress and prosperity of the South American nations impose upon it, proffered its good services, in order that both countries should settle their dispute in an amicable manner, and avoid the misfortunes attendant upon a war, and having acted in the same way as soon as it knew of the question with Bolivia, Chili could not doubt our good faith, and still less so, since I myself, then a friend of Chili—I, who, in my public or private capacity, have never practiced duplicity either with men or nations—had the honor of being at the head of the Government of Peru, directing the diplomatic negotiations.

The illegal act of Chili in invading Bolivia, and taking possession of territory which did not belong to her, and the accumulation of war materials on a large scale in Antofagasta, suggested the entertainment of hostile views against Peru, and prudence counselled us to put ourselves in a position to defend, if necessary, the honor of the nation and the integrity of its territory. This circumstance satisfactorily explains our military preparations and the forwarding of troops to the southern frontier. An armed neutrality has never been a cause of offense to other nations at war with one another.

The treaty of defensive alliance entered into with the Republic of Bolivia could have been no motive for supposing that the Government of Peru was acting with bad faith towards Chili; since that treaty, which might well have been subscribed to by Chili herself, and whose sole object is to assure the independence, sovereignty, and integrity of the territories of the contracting parties, impose upon Peru the obligation of employing with preference, when feasible, every conciliatory measure possible in order to avoid a rupture or prevent a war, should the rupture have taken place, holding as the most effective of those measures the arbitration of a third power. In fact, the treaty itself, which does not call upon the ally to declare war, justified the good offices of Peru, and was a guarantee for the good faith of her irreproachable conduct.

Notwithstanding the instances of the plenipotentiaries of Bolivia, my government, faithfully fulfilling the duties which the character of mediator imposed upon it, flatly refused, not only to bring the treaty into effect, but also to supply the arms and other aid which Bolivia asked of it.

Neither the military preparations which prudence dictated, nor the movements of troops called for, amongst other reasons, by the peculiar conditions of the department of Tarapacá; nor the treaty of defensive alliance, whose existence if it remained officially secret in accordance with one of its stipulations, was not unknown to the plenipotentiary Señor Godoy, nor to the members of the Chilian Government; not one of these circumstances, or all of them combined, are sufficient to excuse the conduct of that nation, nor justify the violent and illegal aggression which has broken off at one blow the relations existing between nations who have fraternally shared together the benefits of peace, the calamities of war, and the lustre of glory.

The Republic of Chili has declared war against us because the Government of Peru endeavored to prevent that which had arisen between that country and Bolivia; and Peru has accepted it with the high and generous enthusiasm which characterizes her on great occasions; with the enthusiasm inspired by justice, the precursor of victory.

The doing away with the old territorial boundaries, in obedience to interested and avaricious motives, is a pretension bordering upon impossibility, because neither Peru nor the other South America States could consent to it without compromising the integrity of their respective territories; and the force of this consideration manifests clearly that the war declared against us is devoid of political or social motives which can be adduced in its support.

Since the efforts for the preservation of peace have proved fruitless; since Chili, who has taken up arms with the sole intent to attack us, going so far as to offer her material and moral aid to the Bolivian commanders in case they should attempt to take possession of the old department of Moquegua; since Chili, I repeat, is satisfied with nothing but war with Peru; since, giving the lie to her boasted good sense, she has madly thrown herself into the fields of battle, Peru will also march to them, as suits her offended dignity and the valor other army and navy.

It was sufficient that Chili should proclaim the war, in order that Peru should rise as one man to place at the disposal of the government the lives and fortunes of her sons. Peru, is presenting to all civilized nations the most beautiful and touching spectacle of patriotism. If the treasury was empty, her citizens have striven for the honor of refilling it; if the army and navy were reduced to the limits which the law assigns for a state of peace, to-day all are soldiers, ready to sacrifice themselves on the altar of their country. Peru, face to face with her gratuitous enemy, will avenge the insult so treacherously offered her.

Legislators: I convoke you to special sessions in order that you may decide upon the conduct which it would have been the duty of the government to observe in view of the war between Bolivia and Chili, but unlooked for events have happened, which simplify your mission. We are at war with Chili, and it is your duty to dictate the measures which you may deem best in order to assure the triumph of our arms, jointly with the honor and glory of the country.

May Divine Providence assist you in your deliberations.

The sessions of the special Congress of 1879 are now declared opened.

MARIANO I. PRADO.
Lima, April 24, 1879.

[Inclosure 4 in No. 6.]

Reply of his excellency the President of the Congress, Dr. José Antonio Garcia y Garcia.

Citizen President: It is, perhaps, the first time that the representatives of the nation listen to the authorized voice of the head of the State, under the influence of feelings so opposed and so painful as those which in this solemn moment dominate their spirits.

The certain knowledge that, along with the entire country, the delegates in parliament possess of the premeditated conduct of Chili in her relations with Peru; the suspicion and astonishment which the accumulation of hasty and intemperate acts signalizing the policy of that country, in the continuous changes of great American interest, has not failed to awaken in their minds; and the indignation naturally be got in upright and high-principled minds by the deliberate transgressions of the rules which serve as law to States, and guarantee, consequently, the maintenance of justice as the common and necessary principle to guide their mutual relations—in a word, every one of the acts practiced, which, in the order of principles and deeds, has wounded the sentiment of national dignity and profaned the rigid dictates of law and reason, and whose authenticity and details you have proved with the clearest testimony in your important message, could not but call forth in the bosom of the legislative chambers the grievous and opposite sentiments of which I have made mention. Once that cruel strife lighted in our spirits, which the sacred fire of patriotism fans, it is doubtless, Citizen President, that it would lead us to the greatest extremes in repressing and punishing such unheard-of crimes were another moral influence to predominate in the national Congress other than that which, until now, has served as a sure and certain guide to the government, and which inspires in the entire nation the highest sentiments. But it is not so, most excellent sir; in the legislative body, as in the government and the people, the sentiment of justice and their own dignity, the knowledge of their duty, the sacred respect for the rights of others, and an absolute confidence in their power to chastise all rash aggression, as well as the outrageous offenses to the beloved flag of our country, happily rise superior to the bursts of anger and the impatient feeling which, far from denoting strength and reason, betrays debility or pitiful irregularities.

The calm, correct, and dignified exposition which you have given of the historical antecedents of the unjustifiable and, therefore, ignominious war which Chili has declared against Peru, will allow the national assembly to duly appreciate by the light of same, and with the aid of the papers which the minister of foreign affairs will in due time lay before it, the prevision, the correct judgment, and the patriotic zeal displayed by the executive, as well in the praiseworthy end to avoid the disasters of a war between sister nations and allies of Peru, as to maintain with proper splendor the principle of good confraternity as the indissoluble link of happy union between the republican States of the New World.

The same notable document will, I am convinced, convey to the mind of the entire nation, and to the governments not affected by these events, the intimate persuasion that if the efforts of Peru to maintain the peace between Bolivia and Chili have not alone been of no avail, but, what is truly surprising, have been replied to by the most offensive and senseless threats, the work of evil is the exclusive work of Chili and the result of the long cherished and iniquitous plan to disturb the repose and sully the splendor, not of Bolivia, but of Peru alone, the country which the hand of Providence has seen fit to shower its favors upon, and the growing development of whose riches, knowledge, power, and legitimate influence in the continent of South America Chili has ever desired and to-day strives to arrest.

Profoundly true are your words, Citizen President, when you state that Peru is offering a most beautiful and touching spectacle to all civilized nations; for, in reality, most excellent sir, there is nothing greater, more beautiful, or sublime than the resolution and energy with which the Peruvian nation, without excepting the last of her sons, has risen as one man, full of ardor and vigor, to assist the public authorities with their lives and fortunes in the glorious task of saving the honor and dignity of the republic in the fratricidal war to which Chili has provoked her.

In this redeeming work, in this most noble and patriotic labor, the legislative body, I can declare in their name, most excellent sir, will know how to rise to the height of their mission. Your suggestions, your proposals, the initiative of the government in one word, as also that of the representatives in all relating to the defense of the country and the triumph of her arms, will find in these chambers a ready acceptance and the solution most favorable to the well-defined interests of our cause.

Peru, who has fulfilled a noble and disinterested duty towards the people of Bolivia without being wanting in the considerations due to Chili, will also comply with, to her own honor, and glory, the obligation which she has imposed upon herself of triumphing. Divine Providence, whose aid we invoke with you, Citizen President, ever concedes the victory to the cause of justice, which is manifestly our own cause; we shall conquer, therefore, because our triumph as a necessary law of moral order is plainly the will of that Providence.

No. 390. Mr. Christiancy to Mr. Evarts. [Document 419]

No. 390.
Mr. Christiancy to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Lima, Peru, April 29, 1879. (Received May 27.) No. 7.]

Sir: On the 26th instant I signed with the British, French, and Italian Ministers, and the German chargé d’affaires, a document addressed to the officer in command of the Chilian fleet on the Peruvian coast, of which I inclose you a copy.

The document as at first drawn up and presented to me assumed the truth of the reports contained in the newspapers, in reference to the action of the fleet, and the British minister assured me that the official information he had from the British consuls at the various places along the coast fully justified the statements referred to in the document. But as I had no official information, except from our consul at Iquique, which exhibited the transactions there in a somewhat less flagrant light, I declined to join in the document, unless so altered as not to assume or assert the truth of the statements referred to, believing it to be in the interest of humanity, as well as for the interest of our own citizens along the coast who are the great sufferers by the war. And it seemed to me to be wise as a precautionary measure to put our citizens in as favorable a position as possible to claim damages for any violation of neutral rights.

The truth is, that most of the damages done and likely to be done along the coast in this war will fall upon neutrals, much the larger share of the heavy business in the coast towns being carried on by foreigners. And no nation, as it seems to me, is more interested than our own in maintaining a high standard of neutral rights.

I am responsible for the assertion in this document of the principle of declaring the duty of belligerents towards neutrals, it having been suggested by me and readily approved by all the other ministers signing the document.

I have, &c.,

I. P. CHRISTIANCY.

[Inclosure in No. 7.]

The ministers of France, United States, England, Italy, and Germany to Bear-Admiral Williams Rebolledo, commander-in-chief of the Chilian squadron.

Admiral: The undersigned, though desirous of preserving the strictest neutrality in the war now being carried on between Chili and Peru, consider it also their bounden duty to protect, as far as possible, the interests of the subjects and citizens of their respective countries.

The undersigned are perfectly aware that neutrals residing in a belligerent country must, to a certain extent, submit to many risks similar to those sustained by the natives; but they cannot admit that a belligerent has any right wantonly to destroy the property of neutrals, or to put them in peril of their lives.

The undersigned would remind your excellency that it is a principle of modern warfare not to destroy unfortified commercial towns, nor to fire into any peaceful community, without affording neutrals and non-combatants the time necessary to withdraw not only themselves but their personal property out of reach of the fire of the attacking belligerent.

Should this principle be or have been neglected, the undersigned may add that their respective governments will be entitled to hold the Government of Chili responsible for all losses to which their subjects or citizens may have been subjected.

According to the information we have received, but without wishing to decide as to the exact facts, it would appear that the commander of the Chilian iron-clad, the Admiral Cochrane, in reply to some rifle-shots discharged upon his boats, which were engaged in destroying the property of the inhabitants, suddenly opened fire with shot and shell on the large commercial town of Mollendo, inhabited by thousands of unoffending people, both foreign and Peruvian.

In Pisagua the course pursued is stated to have been even more regrettable, as, after a skirmish between the Chilian boats engaged in destroying trading launches, and the soldiers on the beach, the Chilian squadron opened fire upon this purely commercial town without any previous notice, and did not cease firing until nine-tenths of the houses were laid in ashes, with immense loss to neutrals, as at least two-thirds of this loss will fall on foreigners.

It will be the painful duty of the undersigned to draw the attention of their respective governments to these bombardments of unfortified commercial towns, and to the heavy losses thus unnecessarily inflicted on neutrals.

They consider also that they are but fulfilling a distinct duty in thus drawing your excellency’s attention to the opinion they have formed of the proceedings of the Chilian squadron in Mollendo and Pisagua, and in a lesser degree at Iquique.

Accept, Admiral, the assurance of our high consideration.

(Signed by the ministers of France, United States, England, Italy, and Germany.)

No. 391. Mr. Evarts to Mr. Christiancy. [Document 420]

No. 391.
Mr. Evarts to Mr. Christiancy.

Department of State,
Washington, May 8, 1879. No. 11.]

Sir: Mr. Gibbs’s dispatch, No. 328, of the 7th ultimo, has been received. It is accompanied by a copy of a circular from the Peruvian foreign office, which had been addressed to the legation, inquiring, 1st, as to the requisites pursuant to law for a merchant vessel to be regarded as a vessel of the United States; 2d, as to the conditions required by law for a foreign vessel to display in good faith the flag of the United States.

In view of Mr. Gibbs’s dispatch, I have to state that his answer to the first question appears to be in conformity to the provision of the Revised Statutes, to which reference is made. His answer to the second question, in stating that there is no law which permits a foreign vessel to use the flag of the United States, is also correct as far as it goes. It might, however, have been added that there is no prohibition of such use by a foreign vessel beyond the jurisdiction of the United States, or any penalty provided therefor. You are aware that the consular regulations provide for the purchase of foreign vessels abroad by citizens, and (section 220) that if such purchase is in good faith it entitles the vessel to protection as the lawful property of a citizen the United States. The practice of making such purchases has advantageously been pursued from the origin of this government. There may have been instances in which it has been abused by collusion between a consul and the parties to the sale. If, however, circumstances justify on the part of that officer an opinion that the sale was honest, and that the vessel has really become the property of a citizen, she may properly fly the flag of the owner’s country as an indication of her ownership, and as an emblem of his nationality.

I have, &c.,

WM. M. EVARTS.

No. 392. Mr. Christiancy to Mr. Evarts. [Document 421]

No. 392.
Mr. Christiancy to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Lima, Peru, May 12, 1879. (Received June 9.) No. 13.]

Sir: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your dispatch to me (No. 145 series of dispatches to my predecessor) in reply to that of Mr. Gibbs, No. 317.

You will have seen by the dispatch of Mr. Gibbs of April 2, No. 326, as well as mine since that time, that prior to the date of your dispatch Peru had become a party to the war, Chili having declared war against Peru.

On looking over the dispatches of my predecessor, I find that he had given you a very correct and clear statement of the causes which led to the war. But aside from and back of all avowed causes of hostility between Chili and Peru, it is not difficult to discover a bitter prejudice and traditional animosity, originating with the conquest of Peru and Chili, between the Pizarros and the Almagros, a feud which resulted in the mutual extermination of both these families of butcher “conquistadores,” the retributive justice of which result will be equally accepted by the verdict of history, whether attributed to the working out of natural laws or to the dispensations of Providence, but the beneficence of which, to the present limited scope of human vision, would have been more apparent had it been accomplished before these monsters had been permitted to land on the shores of the New World, to extinguish a civilization more humane than their own, and to destroy (at least in Peru) useful improvements which the conquering race have never been able to equal or replace.

But little progress has been made in the prosecution of the war since my former dispatches, except in the raising of troops, which goes vigorously on. Chili thus far appears to have command of the sea.

* * * * * * *

The Chilian fleet has completely put an end to the shipping of guano and nitrates, both held as government monopolies until now, and worked by neutrals on government account, the proceeds of which constituted the principal source of public revenue. The same fleet has bombarded some of the small towns along the southern coast, and established a blockade, which, however, is not kept up by the presence of an adequate force. They have also cut the cable, first at Iquique, and a few days past at Arica; and now, as the papers report, have prohibited the sending of messages in cipherby the cable, over which they have control, by any parties but the officers of their government.

Many of the operations of the Chilian fleet have probably been carried on, in part at least, for the purpose of provoking the Peruvian fleet to come out from the harbor of Callao and meet them on the open sea, away from the protection of the powerful forts and batteries by which this port is protected.

The Peruvians have been constantly repairing, strengthening, and fitting out their fleet, and there are now some indications of their undertaking some enterprise at sea.

While matters remain in their present condition upon the water, there is very great difficulty in bringing the opposing land armies near enough to each other to inflict any injury upon either. The desert of Atacama separates them, and it is very difficult, if not impossible, to transport an army or its supplies across it. This difficulty, while the Chilians dominate the sea, operates most injuriously upon Peru and Bolivia, as, from the nature of the country between the Andes and the sea, and that in the interior, among or between the two ranges of the Andes, the march of armies and the transportation of supplies are necessarily tedious.

The great need of Peru, especially, seems to be fast-sailing steam transports to carry her land forces, now concentrated here and at Callao, to the seat of war without being liable to be captured by the Chilian fleet. To supply this need, Peru has recently purchased from the Pacific Steam Navigation Company the steamers Casma and Oroya, and there are indications that one, if not both, of them is preparing for leaving port.

In the mean time, the delay in taking the offensive, and making their army actively efficient, seems to have produced a feeling of impatience, and charges of incapacity against the Peruvian Government, much like those which prevailed in our own war just previous to the battle of Bull Run, and the government will be compelled soon to make a forward movement of some kind or lose the confidence of the people, the great masses of whom are ignorant and impulsive, and easily led by demagogues or ambitious aspirants into any revolutionary movement.

* * * * * * *

In the mean time, the effect of the war upon the finances has been most disastrous. Government paper, which is practically the only currency known here, and had sunk to less than 50 per cent of its nominal value before the war, has been sinking very rapidly since. The greatest reliance for its redemption was upon the guano and the nitrates, and these being cut off at the same time that immense expenditures are called for, for the support of the war, it is difficult to find methods of keeping up the public credit or supporting the operations of war.

The citizens have in great numbers enthusiastically tendered a large proportion of their wealth to support the war; but help from this source will be but temporary, or not in sufficient amount, though the war is popular with all classes.

The plan which seems just now most likely to be adopted by the government is that of issuing 8,000,000 of paper soles, in addition to the 17,000,000 already out.

Under the influence of all these causes, the paper sole (whose nominal value was equal to five francs in silver) had, when I arrived here, a month since, so far depreciated that it was worth slightly less than 20 pence in exchange on London, which consisted of drafts at ninety days’ sight, equal to 120 days’ date, and to-day the paper sole is worth, in that kind of exchange, only 16 pence, and even a little less. The American double eagle will, for limited amounts of a few thousand dollars, to-day purchase from 58 to 60 soles paper.

The effect upon neutral shipping, especially that engaged in the shipment of the guano and nitrates, has been still more disastrous; nothing short of ruinous. The whole business is utterly destroyed; the loss falls heaviest, it is true, upon British ship owners, most of these products being shipped to that country; but a large number of American ship owners were engaged in the same trade, under charter parties taken from an English company, describing themselves as agents of the Peruvian Government, by which the ship owners were made to assume all the risks of war. Some of these had part of a cargo on board, some waiting to begin loading; but all were compelled to leave, and the works were destroyed.

The government seems to wish to act in entire good faith, and gives notice that all these vessels may abandon the contract with the government or wait till the government can open other deposits, which they are attempting to do $ that any vessel partly loaded may proceed to deliver at the port of destination in England what it has on board or put it on any other vessel for that purpose, &c.; or it may abandon the contract.

Neutral commerce in every form along this coast is suffering severely, and most of the business employing much capital is carried on by neutrals. In short, neutrals are losing more heavily by this war than citizens of any of the belligerents, because they had much to lose and the belligerents very little.

The Government of Peru is doing all it can to encourage neutral commerce. Some days since a prominent member of Congress introduced a measure to prohibit all vessels touching at Chilian ports from landing in Peruvian ports, and all touching at Peruvian ports from proceeding to Chili. But the British and French and the Italian minister and myself contrived, in an informal manner, to suggest that such a measure would conflict with the eighteenth article of our treaty, and like provisions of the French and Italian treaties, and even with the British, which under a peculiar “favored nation” clause, gave the same rights as ours. The measure contemplated (by the member) has not been pushed. The government never favored it, and now an act has just been passed by Congress and approved and promulgated by the executive, May 9th, which throws open the coasting trade of Peru to foreign vessels on the same terms as allowed to the vessels of Peru, until otherwise ordered by Congress.

* * * * * * *

Peru was drawn into this, war in consequence of her treaty with Bolivia, and because the latter when attacked by Chili claimed of Peru the fulfillment of her treaty stipulations.

* * * * * * *

May 13, 1879.

Since writing the above, the lower house of Congress has by a decisive vote, rejected the proposition to issue more government paper, and seems now disposed to resort to a loan for $15,000,000; $8,000,000 of which to be applied to the redemption of government currency now outstanding, and the balance to meet war expenses.

The two houses have also just resolved, by a vote of 77 to 44 to put on only 2 per cent. ad-valorem export duty on sugar, and by an absolute majority reject the plan recommended by the executive for increasing all custom-house duties 25 per cent.

I have, &c.,

I. P. CHEISTIANCY.

No. 393. Mr. Christiancy to Mr. Evarts. [Document 422]

No. 393.
Mr. Christiancy to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Lima, Peru, May 20, 1879. (Received June 16.) No. 15.]

Sir: I have the honor to inclose to you the copies of two letters of Hon. Thomas A. Osborn, of the 2d and 26th April, in reference to the use of the American flag by foreign-built ships, and a copy of my answer to same of this date, so far as the case of the Itata is involved.

I have, &c.,

I. P. CHEISTIANCY.

[Inclosure 1 in No. 15.]

Mr. Osborn to Mr. Gibbs.

Legation of the United States,
Santiago, Chili, April 2, 1879.

Sir: I have to acknowledge the receipt of your note of the 15th ultimo, referring to your action in the matter of the steamship Itata.

It appears that you directed the consul at Callao to notify the captain of the Itata that he had no right to use the American flag, and that you advised the consul against giving such vessel a clearance or any other document.

I find that I am unable to agree with you fully in your understanding of the law, and I have therefore deemed it advisable to communicate with the State Department on the subject and solicit the advice of the honorable Secretary. I am informed by those competent to know that it has been the custom for foreign-built ships wholly owned by American citizens to carry the American flag, and that their right to do so has been generally recognized by our public officers on this coast.

To avoid any clashing, however, I have directed that only vessels duly registered under the law shall be cleared from Valparaiso to Peruvian ports by our consul, until he is further advised.

Very respectfully, &c.,

THOMAS A. OSBORN.

Hon. Richard Gibbs,
United States Minister, Peru.

[Inclosure 2 in No. 15.]

Mr. Osborn to Mr. Christiancy.

Legation of the United States,
Santiago, Chili, April 26, 1879.

Sir: I see published in the Lima papers what purports to be a note addressed by Mr. Gibbs to the foreign minister in Lima, under date of the 7th instant, which I fear may result in seriously imperiling the property interests of American citizens in foreign-built ships on this coast.

It is unquestionably true that no law of the United States directly authorizes this class of vessels to carry the American flag. Nor is there any statute, so far as I have observed, directly conferring this privilege upon any class of vessels whatever; but that the Government recognizes the right of American citizens to purchase foreign-built ships, and acknowledges its obligation to protect them in their property thus acquired, is an undoubted fact.

I am credibly informed that there are many vessels of this character, owned by American citizens, now doing business on this coast. Some of them have been so engaged many years, and have been recognized by our consular officers as American vessels. The consul at Valparaiso informs me that only yesterday a vessel so owned came into port flying the American flag, having been dispatched in due form by our consul at Lambayeque, Peru. Her papers show that she was purchased by an American citizen and the bill of sale recorded in the consulate at Lambayeque, as is provided in sections 220 and 221 of Consular Regulations.

I am not prepared to believe that the State Department intended to be understood as saying that our citizens might purchase foreign-built ships, but that they should not sail them; hence, I cannot agree with Mr. Gibbs in his understanding of section 226 of Consular Regulations. A vessel without a country, to me, seems an anomaly. It would be in quite as pitiable a condition as was the man without a country, of whom we have read. To fully guard against fraud in these transfers, however, it seems to me that some more stringent rules concerning them should be adopted. I should be pleased to exchange views with you on this subject.

Permit me to call your attention to the opinion of Mr. Cushing, referred to on page 6 of the Digest of Opinions and Leading Cases on International Law.

I am, &c.,

THOMAS A. OSBORN.

Hon. I. P. Christiancy,
United States Minister, Peru.

[Inclosure 3 in No. 15.]

Mr. Christiancy to Mr. Osborn.

Legation of the United States,
Lima, Peru, May 19, 1879.

Sir: Your note of the 2d ultimo to my predecessor and that of the 26th ultimo to me have been received.

I did not answer the first note, as it was rather a question between you and Mr. Gibbs which would soon be decided by the State Department, Mr. Gibbs having written to the department fully on the subject.

I expected to have had an answer to that dispatch by the last mail, but no mail came from New York this week.

While awaiting the reply of the department I will only take occasion to say that I am inclined to agree with the decision arrived at by Mr. Gibbs in the case of the Itata, but I think I should not have placed the decision wholly, at least, upon the same ground upon which he rested it.

I am prepared to admit, or at least do not for the present dispute, that there may be cases in which a foreign-built ship, purchased and owned by an American citizen, especially if officered and run by American citizens, might be entitled to the protection of the American flag outside of American waters.

It is not necessary to controvert your statement “that the government recognizes the right of American citizens to purchase foreign-built ships and acknowledges its obligation to protect them in their property thus acquired;” but certainly no mere form of transfer under circumstances which show that transfer to be merely formal and colorable, for the purpose of fraudulently obtaining the protection of our flag, can create any such obligation on the part of the United States, nor entitle the parties making use of so palpable a fraud to claim protection, especially when the circumstances are such that to grant the use of our flag virtually to one of the belligerents might justly be complained of by the other belligerent as a breach of that good faith which the duties and advantages of neutrality impose upon the United States.

If our government could be bound by the necromancy of any such mere forms, its good faith as a neutral and its peaceful relations might at any moment be impaired or endangered at the will of any adventurer or any belligerent who might choose, for his own private interest, to avail himself of the like formal transfer. In such a case such mere formal transfer is, in my opinion, not even prima-facie evidence of a real and bona-fide sale; but in the absence of express law, the onus of proving the good faith of the transfer should, I think, rest, upon the pretended purchaser, and he must show the fact satisfactorily before he can claim any right to the protection of the American flag.

Perhaps a certificate of a collector of customs as to citizenship and transfer might give a prima-facie right. But this we need not discuss, as clearly there was no such certificate here; and all the circumstances connected with the transfer, so far as I have any information, tend to show it to have been a palpable trick, a mere colorable sale.

I await the Secretary’s opinion upon the dispatch of Mr. Gibbs, and you will doubtless receive a communication upon the same matter.

I am, &c.

I. P. CHRISTIANCY.

Hon. Thomas A. Osborn,
Envoy Extraordinary and Minister Plenipotentiary, Santiago, Chili.

No. 394. Mr. Christiancy to Mr. Evarts. [Document 423]

No. 394.
Mr. Christiancy to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Lima, Peru, May 21, 1879. (Received June 16.) No. 18.]

Sir: Since my last dispatch of May 21 (No. 16), viz, on the morning of the 22d, the Chilian fleet (with the exception of the Esmeralda and Covadonga) appeared off the harbor of Callao and remained for several hours, when, without attempting anything, it sailed for the South, having, as is supposed, learned from some fishermen the previous departure of the first division of the Peruvian fleet (mentioned in my last). Their expedition to Calico had given the Peruvian fleet time to transport in safety a considerable part of their army here, with munitions and supplies to the towns along the southern coast of Peru—Mollendo, Pis-agua, Arica, and Iquique—and also to transport a part of the Bolivian army from Arica as far as Pisagua, and to form a junction of the Peruvian with the Bolivian army.

Since that time, and while the Peruvian and Chilian fleet were mutually ignorant of the whereabouts of the other, it is reported here, and I think correctly, that the Huascar (Peruvian) attacked and sank the Chilian steam-corvette Esmeralda at or near Iquique; and the steam frigate Independencia, chasing the Chilian Covadonga, and when on the point of reaching her (on her flight for the shore) ran aground or upon a reef, from which it was found impossible to get her off, and she was abandoned and burnt or blown up by the Peruvians themselves.

This is a serious loss to Peru, but does not, in my estimation, overbalance the advantages gained by Peru in this expedition to the South. But this may yet depend much upon what the Huascar may have been able to accomplish before the arrival there of the Chilian fleet, and upon her success in avoiding the Chilian fleet. But unless she waits too long she will probably easily evade that fleet, as it is composed of very slow vessels; and some of the Peruvian transports which went south have returned without seeing the fleet.

The effect of the war upon the finances becomes every day more disastrous. Exchange on England is now quoted at 16 pence per sole, and an American double eagle is worth to-day 62 soles.

I inclose a copy of the act of the Peruvian Congress passed for the purpose of providing ways and means by loan and taxes. This is taken from the South Pacific Times, but is translated with substantial accuracy.

I have, &c.,

I. P. CHRISTIANCY.

[Inclosure 1 No. 18.—South Pacific Times.—Translation.]

Luis La Puerta, first vice-president of the republic, in charge of the executive power.

Whereas the Congress of the Republic of Peru has given the following law: Article 1. Let a national loan be effected for the sum of ten million soles in current money of the republic, at the figure of eighty per cent., and eight per cent. interest per annum, with ten per cent. accumulative amortization.

Art. 2. The service of this loan will be effected at the termination of every quarter, beginning with the quarter expiring on the 1st of October, 1879, and the amortization will be made by lot and at par.

Art. 3. The amortization and interest funds will be guaranteed by the product of the capitation and income taxes, and the tax on the exportation of sugar, sanctioned by the present special Congress, and will also, as a subsidiary guarantee, be assured by the product of such national property as may be of easy appropriation.

Art. 4. The sale of the national property subject to the service of this loan will be effected at public auction, and the payment must solely be made in bonds of the loan authorized by this law.

Art. 5. The loan must be effected within the peremptory term of forty-five days from the date of the publication of this law.

Art. 6. If, at the expiration of the said term of forty-five days, the subscriptions should not cover the full amount of the loan, the actual issue of notes shall be increased in the proportion of the sum wanting to complete the eight millions which the loan will produce.

Art. 7. Let the committee appointed by the law of the 27th January last be empowered to deliver to the executive, in notes of the new issue, the complement of the eight millions to which the preceding article refers, and also to effect the issue and the service of the loan in the proportion subscribed; to which end the funds appointed by this law for said service shall be handed over to them.

Art. 8. The sum of one million eight hundred thousand soles out of the funds for the service of the loan shall be set aside for the payment of amortization and interest of the same loan, should it be entirely covered. If not, of this amount the necessary sum shall be applied to the service of the loan as far as covered, adding the remainder to the fund of amortization of the fiscal issue.

Art. 9. If the funds set aside by this law for the service of the loan should exceed one million eight hundred thousand soles, the administrating committee shall deliver the excess to the executive.

Art. 10. The two millions of soles in restamped notes, which the associated banks had in deposit for the exchange of the unstamped notes, and which the executive has been authorized to issue by the legislative resolution of the 13th instant, shall be considered as an integral part of the subsidiary issue authorized by this law, which in no case can exceed eight millions. Should the loan he effected in its entirety, the two last millions received will be used for the amortization of the two million of soles in notes referred to in the article.

Notify the executive, &c.,

Given in the hall of sessions in Lima on the 17th day of May, 1879.
JOSÉ ANTONIO GARCIA Y GARCIA,
President of the Senate, &c.

Therefore, I order the same to be printed, published, and received as law.

Given in the house of government in Lima this 20th day of the month of May, 1879.
LUIS LA-PUERTA.

J. R. de Izcue.

No. 395. Mr. Christiancy to Mr. Evarts. [Document 424]

No. 395.
Mr. Christiancy to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Lima, Peru, June 1, 1879. (Received June 25.) No. 19.]

Sir: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your dispatch No. 11, of the 8th ultimo.

I am glad to see that the latter substantially approves, in advance, of the views I had expressed to Minister Osborn in mine of the 19th ultimo, of which I sent you a copy in mine of the 20th (No. 15).

I shall take occasion to communicate to the minister of foreign relations the substance of so much of your dispatch (No. 11) as tends to explain and modify the note of Mr. Gibbs to that minister of April 7th.

Accept the assurance of the high regard and esteem of your friend, &c.,

I. P. CHRISTIANCY.

Mr. Christiancy to Mr. Irigoyen. [Document 425]

Mr. Christiancy to Mr. Irigoyen.

Legation of the United States,
Lima, Peru, June 1, 1879.

Mr. Minister: On the 7th of April last my predecessor, Mr. Gibbs, in answer to your note of the 5th of that month, undertook to define the cases in which vessels were entitled to use the American flag, and in answer to your second question stated that “there is no law that permits foreign vessels to use the American flag.”

I have now the honor to inclose to you a copy of the letter of the Secretary of State of the United States to me in answer to Mr. Gibbs’s letter to the Secretary (inclosing the copy of Mr. Gibbs’s note to you), from which you will discover that the answer of Mr. Gibbs to your second question needs a slight modification as applied to such foreign-built vessels as may have been purchased by American citizens in good faith. But this modification is not, as I conceive, of any practical importance upon any question likely to grow out of the present war, as all sales of vessels by citizens of either belligerent would require almost scrupulous investigation on the part of the United States consuls, showing affirmatively the good faith of such sales before they would be recognized, such transfer, owing to the very nature of the case, being liable to strong suspicion of fraud.

Accept the assurance of the high consideration and esteem with which I have the honor, &c.,

I. P. CHRISTIANCY.

Mr. Irigoyen to Mr. Christiancy. [Document 426]

Mr. Irigoyen to Mr. Christiancy.

[Translation.]

Lima, June 4, 1879.

Sir: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your excellency’s dispatch No. 6, of the 1st instant, received yesterday, in which your excellency communicates the opinion of your government upon the use of the flag by foreign vessels, according to the laws of the United States of America.

I have transcribed its contents and the note of the Department of State in Washington, to the minister of war and marine, and I take advantage of this occasion to reiterate to your excellency the assurance of my high regard and esteem.

M. IRIGOYEN.

No. 396. Mr. Christiancy to Mr. Evarts. [Document 427]

No. 396.
Mr. Christiancy to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Lima, Peru, June 3, 1879. (Received June 25.) No. 21.]

Sir: I inclose a copy of my letter of yesterday to Minister Osborn, and I take the liberty of asking your special attention to the remarks I have made upon what I understand to be the law, as well as the fair interpretation of your two dispatches in answer to Mr. Gibbs’s letters upon the subject of the purchase of foreign-built vessels by our citizens and their right to use our flag.

I also ask your attention to the advice stated to have been given to our consuls, in Peru, to the end that I may withdraw or modify such advice if not approved by the department.

With the highest esteem, I remain, &c.,

I. P. CHRISTIANCY.

[Inclosure 1 in No. 21.]

Mr. Christiancy to Mr. Osborn.

Legation of the United States,
Lima, Peru, June 2, 1879.

Sir: I presume you will have received from the Secretary of State, before this reaches you, a dispatch in reference to the rights of foreign-built ships, purchased by Americans, to use the American flag; but lest you should not, I inclose copy of a dispatch to me in answer to Mr. Gibbs’s dispatch on same subject.

The Secretary had already, by a dispatch to me, approved the action of Mr. Gibbs in reference to the Itata, which, taken in connection with that of which I inclose copy, I understand to mean just what I had already said in my letter to you.

In short, I think the mere transfer papers formally showing such a sale should by our consuls be treated as of no effect, and that they should not authenticate or recognize it, unless and until full affirmative evidence is produced to them showing to their satisfaction that the sale was real and not merely colorable; that it was in good faith, and not for the mere purpose of obtaining the protection of our flag.

Especially should this be the rule in case of the sale by any of the belligerents in this war to American citizens, as such sales, from the very nature of the case, rest under a strong suspicion of fraud. I have advised our consuls in Peru to be guided by these principles, unless otherwise instructed by the department.

There is one other point in reference to the use of our flag which I consider of grave importance, and to which I invite your special attention.

I am informed by our consul at Iquique, Mr. Merriam, by letter dated May 23, that, in the naval engagement or engagements at and near that port, on the 21st May last, the Lamar, a Chilian transport, raised the American (our) flag. If this report be true, the use of our flag for such a purpose can only be considered in the light of a very grave insult to the flag and the Government of the United States. And I would suggest that it may be a very proper subject to be called to the attention of the Chilian Government, and, if the report be found to be correct, for a proper protest on the part of the United States against the repetition of so grave an insult to our government.

I have, &c.,

I. P. CHRISTIANCY.

Hon. Thomas. A. Osborn,
United States Minister, Chili.

No. 397. Mr. Evarts to Mr. Christiancy. [Document 428]

No. 397.
Mr. Evarts to Mr. Christiancy.

Department of State,
Washington, June 18, 1879. No. 20.]

Sir: Your dispatch (No. 7) of the 29th of April last has been received. It relates to neutral rights and the rights of peaceable and unarmed citizens in bombarded towns. The general views upon these subjects which you express are approved, and you were judiciously cautious before you joined your diplomatic colleagues in signing the protest which was addressed to the commander of the Chilian fleet, to require that paper to be so changed as to make the protest dependent upon the truth of the facts which originally was assumed. The prudence of this step is understood to have since been illustrated by the disclosure that the bombardment of at least one of the points named was by no means unprovoked, but was in retaliation for the firing upon boats of the Chilian squadron which approached the port under a flag of truce for the purpose of announcing the blockade. The firing upon a flag of truce is notoriously one of the gravest breaches of the laws of war which a belligerent can commit, and is held to justify severe measures of retaliation, such as were adopted in the instance adverted to.

Although the policy of this government has heretofore shown a leaning towards neutral rights, this has never been or intended to be such as to extinguish the just rights of belligerents, especially of comparatively weak powers. It is apprehended that the capitalists of great European States, who have heavy investments in the funds and in the trade of the South American countries, are so alarmed about their interests that they may not be indisposed to deny any belligerent rights to those countries in the war now unhappily on foot. Undoubtedly they endeavor to impress their views and their anxieties upon their governments at home. This department is not aware how these may have been received. It is hoped, however, that in deciding upon the subject that no neutral will omit to bear in mind that an acknowledgment of the independence of the belligerents implies a concession to them of all the rights in that character which they may claim under the public law, however the exercise of those rights may infringe upon the interests of neutrals.

The war adverted to is much to be deplored and, for the sake of humanity at least, it is hoped that it may soon be brought to an honorable close. Although our own citizens have a much smaller interest in this than those of European countries, complaints upon the subject, especially from owners of vessels in the carrying trade, have reached this Department. Hostilities in this case, however, are not likely to be soonest ended, or peace to be permanent, if neutrals show such impatience as they would not be likely to acquiesce in if the situation were to be reversed.

In regard to the law applicable to the bombardment of unfortified places permit me to refer you to the opinion of Attorney-General Henry Stanbery, of the 31st of August, 1866, relative to the bombardment of Valparaiso by the Spaniards. A manuscript copy of the paper is herewith transmitted to provide for the contingency of your not having a printed one.

I am, &c.,

WM. M. EVARTS.

[Inclosure in Instruction No. 20.]

Attorney-General’s Office,
August 31, 1866.

Sir: It appears from your letter of the 27th iustant that the American commercial houses of Wheelwright & Co. and Loring & Co., domiciled for commercial purposes at Valparaiso, sustained losses of their merchandise in the conflagration caused by the bombardment of that city by the Spanish fleet on the 31st of March last.

The question presented for my opinion is, whether a case is made for the intervention of the United States on behalf of these citizens for indemnity against Spain or Chili?

I do not see any ground upon which such intervention is allowable in respect to either of those governments.

The bombardment was in the prosecution of an existing war between Spain and Chili. Although, under the circumstances, it was a measure of extreme severity, yet it cannot be said to have been contrary to the laws of war, nor was it unattended with the preliminary warning to non-combatants usual in such cases.

It does not appear that in carrying on the bombardment any discrimination was made against resident foreigners or their property. On the contrary, there was at least an attempt to confine the damage to public property.

Then, as to the Chilian authorities, it does not appear that they did or omitted any act for which our citizens there domiciled have a right to complain, or that the measure of protection they were bound by public law to extend to those citizens and their property was withheld.

No defense was made against the bombardment, for that would have been fruitless and would have aggravated the damage, as Valparaiso was not then fortified, and no discrimination was made by those authorities between their own citizens and foreigners there domiciled. All shared alike in the common disaster.

The rule of international law is well established that a foreigner who resides in the country of a belligerent can claim no indemnity for losses of property occasioned by acts of war like the one in question.

The bombardment of Copenhagen by the British in 1807 is a notable illustration of this rule. Immense losses were sustained by foreigners domiciled in that city. There was no previous declaration of war against Denmark, and no reasonable ground upon which the bombardment could be justified, and yet no reclamation upon the footing of these losses was ever admitted by Great Britain. The bombardment of Greytown, in May, 1854, by the United States sloop of war Cyane, is another instance of this rule. Losses were sustained by French citizens there domiciled, from the fire of the Cyane. A petition to the United States from those parties for indemnity was presented through the French minister, then resident at Washington, but without the express sanction of his government. Upon full consideration, this petition was refused. Mr. Marcy, then Secretary of State, in answer to the claim holds the following language: “The undersigned is not aware that the principle that foreigners domiciled in a belligerent country must share with the citizens of that country in the fortunes of war, has ever been seriously controverted or departed from in practice.”

I have therefore to repeat that I am of opinion no ground is laid for the intervention of the United States in favor of these parties.

I am, &c.,

HENRY STANBERY.

Hon. Wm. H. Seward,
Secretary of State.

No. 398. Mr. Evarts to Mr. Christiancy. [Document 429]

No. 398.
Mr. Evarts to Mr. Christiancy.

Department of State,
Washington, June 20, 1879. No. 23.]

Sir: Your dispatch (No. 15) of the 20th ultimo has been received. It relates to the right of foreign-built ships purchased by American citizens to carry the flag of the United States. The views upon this subject expressed in your letter to Mr. Osborn, of the 19th of May, are approved.

It is notorious that a maritime war scarcely ever occurs when at least one of the belligerents does not seek to protect more or less of its shipping by a neutral flag. In some instances this may honestly be done, but sales of vessels of belligerents to neutrals in apprehension of war, or when hostilities may have actually broken out, are always more or less liable to suspicion, and such transactions justify the strictest inquiry on the part of the belligerent who thereby may have been defrauded of his right to capture enemy’s property. There are various circumstances tending to show the good faith, or the reverse, of such transfers. Prominent among these is the ability of the alleged purchaser to pay for his bargain.

If, prior to the sale, he was notoriously incapable of making any such purchase, or if his previous pursuits did not fit him for the use of the property, these and other obvious circumstances will tend to show a want of that good faith which alone can impart the rights of a neutral to a vessel so acquired. I am sorry to say that instances are not wanting where impecunious citizens of the United States have claimed to be the purchasers of foreign craft, and in some of them have actually had the hardihood to apply to this department for its interposition, when the terms of their contract may not, in their opinion, have been complied with by the other party.

The acceptance of the pretended ownership of a foreign-built ship has undoubtedly proved profitable to many American citizens. This was particularly the case during the great wars between maritime states, growing out of the French revolution, when the United States were at peace. Ship-owners of this country, also, probably found a neutral flag a convenient cover for their property during our last war with Great Britain, and especially during the war of the rebellion in this country. It is understood, however, that when these hostilities were brought to a close, Congress rejected the application of parties who asked to have those of their vessels renationalized which had been transferred under the circumstances referred to.

It may have been the intention of Congress when it prescribed the national flag, that it should be used only by vessels of the United States, as defined by law. No such intention, however, is expressed in any statute. As a citizen is not prohibited from purchasing and employing abroad a foreign-built ship, when such purchase is made in good faith, there is no reason why he should not fly the flag of his country as an indication of ownership. This is frequently and constantly done, especially in Chinese and other Eastern waters. It also appears from Mr. Osborn’s letter to you that there are American vessels of foreign build frequenting Chilian ports, which were bought years ago. The right of these vessels to display the flag of the United States will not be questioned by this department, and probably would be respected by any court of admiralty.

It must be confessed that the regulations in authorizing a consul to authenticate and record a bill of sale of a foreign-built vessel, bestow a great power and responsibility on that officer in making him, in the first instance, at least, the sole judge of the good faith of the transaction. There must have been, and may be, times and occasions when the temptation to abuse such a power may have been, and may be, irresistible. Although the validity of the transfer may, in the end, be judicially inquired into, much harm might result from a simulated sale, before a final decision on the subject could be reached. Still the possible abuse of power by a consul is not a sufficient reason for abrogating the power, especially if Congress should abstain from forbidding the purchase and use abroad of foreign-built ships by American citizens.

I am, &c.,

WM. M. EVARTS.

No. 399. Mr. Evarts to Mr. Christiancy. [Document 430]

No. 399.
Mr. Evarts to Mr. Christiancy.

Department of State,
Washington, June 26, 1879. No. 24.]

Sir: I transmit herewith, for your information, copy of an instruction addressed by this Department on the 23d instant to Mr. Pettis, the United States minister resident and consul-general at La Paz, Bolivia, in relation to the intimation lately received through British official channels that the issuance of letters of marque had been decreed by the Bolivian Government, and that agents thereof were already on their way to the United States. A copy of the circular published by the Treasury Department on the 21st instant, addressed to collectors of customs and others whom it may concern, touching the observance of the neutrality laws of the United States, is inclosed.

In the fortunate absence of any intimation that Peru, as the ally of Bolivia, has contemplated, or contemplates, any action which might even remotely infringe the international obligations or domestic laws of the United States, it is unnecessary to instruct you to make official communication on this subject to the minister of foreign affairs, but you may, should you deem it pertinent, intimate to him that this government is using, and proposes to use, every effort to secure the complete observance of the neutrality laws of the United States, both by their own citizens and on the part of those of the belligerent.

I am, &c.,

WM. M. EVARTS.

Note.—For instructions to Mr. Pettis and Treasury circular, see Bolivian correspondence.

No. 400. Mr. Christiancy to Mr. Evarts. [Document 431]

No. 400.
Mr. Christiancy to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Lima, Peru, July 15, 1879. (Received August 7.) No. 34.]

Sir: I inclose a copy of my letter of June 8 to J. W. Merriam, esq., our consul at Iquique, on the subject of blockade. This ought to have been sent you promptly at the time, but I was deficient in clerical force, and it was laid aside for the time, and overlooked until now.

I will say that at the date of the consul’s letter, May 23, the blockade of Iquique had been raised by the Peruvian forces, and the consul stated he had been informed, by some gentlemen who professed to know, that by the rules of international law it could not be re-established without a three months’ notice.

I will further say, as relating to the same subject (the blockade of Iquique) that both Chili and Peru have become parties to the treaty of Paris, which, among other things, defines what shall constitute a sufficient blockade. That from the time of re-establishment of the blockade at Iquique, about the 1st of June, until the 10th instant, or about that time, no question has been made of the sufficiency or efficiency of the blockade. But it seems that about the time last mentioned, or a little before, the Chilian blockading-squadron adopted the plan of withdrawing at night from the vicinity of the town to the distance of four, five, or six miles or more—fearing, as it is believed, the effect of torpedoes which the Peruvians and Bolivians (who are in possession of the town) might be able to use—and on the night of the 10th instant the Huascar, a Peruvian iron-clad, turreted vessel, of greater speed than the Chilian ironclads, made her way without difficulty into the port, remained there long enough to communicate with the allied forces on shore, and then, toward the dawn, sailed out in search of the Chilian fleet. She soon fell in with the Chilian transport Matias Cusino, a partially armed wooden vessel, and immediately attacked her, principally with small-arms, and demanded her surrender, which demand was at once complied with, and a prize-crew sent off in boats to take possession; but at that moment the Chilian corvette Abtao, the Magallanes, and later the ironclad Cochrane made their appearance.

The Huascar at once recalled the prize-crew she was sending out, and, having no time to take possession of the prize, she fired some heavy shot into her hull, disabling her. Then, seeing the Chilian fleet coming down upon her, she sought to make her escape, and in doing so, came in contact with the Abtao, with whom she at once engaged, and the combat was continued nearly an hour, when first the Magallanes and next the Cochrane coining within range, the Huascar left after doing serious damage to the Abtao, and by reason of her greater speed was enabled to make her escape, with very slight injury. What may have taken place since in the port of Iquique, I am not informed.

But it is now insisted here by the Peruvian press, that the blockade is shown to be ineffectual, and that it should be treated as absolutely ended for all purposes. A strong effort, I have no doubt, will be made to induce the diplomatic representatives (of the neutral powers) here to take this ground. What may be the opinion of the other ministers here upon the point, I am not yet informed; but, for myself, I am not yet prepared to take so broad a ground upon the facts already existing, but on the other hand I am inclined to think the facts only show an unsuccessful attempt to raise the blockade by force.

If any mercantile vessel had in the night (say of the 10th instant), and without actual notice of the blockade, got into the port, she could not have been held guilty of a breach of the blockade for so doing. And it may be worthy of careful consideration whether, if this practice of withdrawing the blockading force so far from the port at night should be generally kept up hereafter, neutral nations might not be justified in treating it as ineffectual, and therefore null. But I do not intend to come to any hasty opinion upon this point, and propose to wait till the contingency renders its determination necessary.

I have, &c.,

I. P. CHRISTIANCY.

[Inclosure 1 in No. 34.]

Mr. Christiancy to Mr. Merriam.

Legation of the United States,
Lima, Peru, June 8, 1879.

Sir: I notice that in writing to you on the 1st instant, I overlooked one point in your letter, viz, that in reference to the fact of the blockade having been raised, and the question of the length of time necessary to re-establish it. I will say in answer to your question that I know of no rule of international law which would require three months’ notice to re-establish the blockade. But it requires the same notice (and no other) that it required to establish it in the first instance; and that, as I understand it, is reasonable notice, having reference to all circumstances existing at the time and place. The notice is mainly if not entirely for the benefit of neutrals, and should be sufficient to all or any neutral ships in port to leave with any cargoes they may have on board at the time; but they can take on no more cargo after noticed of the blockade, except with the assent of the blockading squadron, as the recognized purpose of a blockade is to put an end to the foreign commerce of the port, and thus to weaken the power of the nation to which the port belongs.

And as to vessels approaching the port for commercial purposes, they will not be liable to capture unless, after they receive actual notice of its existence, they attempt to enter, in which case they would be liable to capture and forfeiture. But this blockade, not having been formally notified to the governments of neutral powers, so as to give room for the doctrine of implied notice to the ships of such nations; such ships are not to be seized until they shall have received actual notice, which naturally will be given them on their approach by the blockading squadron.

And as to the nature of a blockade itself, you may take it for granted that no mere paper blockade will be recognized by neutral powers, but only such as are maintained by an adequate force. Such an actual force as to render it impossible, or, at least, imminently dangerous, for a vessel to enter the port. But, of course, this doctrine is liable to some qualification. The presence of such force is not required to be absolutely perpetual under all circumstances; as in the case of a storm which may temporarily disperse the blockading force, they will be allowed a reasonable time to resume their position. But, if they voluntarily and completely leave the port so as clearly to indicate a disposition to abandon the blockade, or if they are driven off by the enemy, and the enemy get complete control of the port for a few days (perhaps for;a single day) the blockade is ended.

I am, &c.,

I. P. CHRISTIANCY.

J. W. Merriam, Esq.,
United States Consul, Iquique.

No. 401. Mr. Christiancy to Mr. Evarts. [Document 432]

No. 401.
Mr. Christiancy to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Lima, Peru, July 23, 1879. (Received August 15.) No. 39.]

Sir: I have the honor to inclose copy of my letter of this date to Mr. Merriam, our consul at Iquique, together with an extract of the letter of the consul to me of July 10 (his No. 38), in reference to the right of the Chilian fleet to prevent the shipping of nitrates from Pisagua.

As to the circumstances going to show whether the blockade of Iquique had been raised, you will find them stated with substantial accuracy in my dispatch No. 34 (July 15). * * *

I have, &c.,

I. P. CHRISTIANCY.

[Inclosure 1 in No. 39.]

Mr. Christiancy to Mr. Merriam.

Legation of the United States,
Lima, Peru, July 23, 1879.

Sir: Your two notes of the 10th instant (Nos. 38 and 39) received.

As to the blockade, you are undoubtedly right in your conclusion (stated in your No. 39) that, upon the facts stated by you, and as appears by all accounts I have seen, the blockade has not been raised. The whole proceeding must be treated rather as an unsuccessful attempt to raise it.

As to the other matter mentioned in your No. 38, the question of the right of the Chilian fleets to prevent the loading of nitrates at Pisagua, I will say that I do not think those nitrates, considered with reference to their agricultural use and their destination to European ports, can be treated as contraband of war, properly so called; and if the nitrate-beds are owned by individuals and worked on their account only, I do not think the Chilian fleet could lawfully prevent such commerce by neutral vessels in any other way than by establishing an effectual blockade of the port.

But if the nitrate-beds are owned or worked or the nitrate shipped on the part of the Peruvian Government, so that the proceeds or part of them go into the Peruvian treasury, then I am inclined to think the Chilian fleet has, under the laws of war, a right to stop that commerce if they can, and to use any means for that purpose properly calculated to reach the end, such as preventing the loading of vessels or destroying any of the works or lighters used in loading, after having notified the neutral vessels to leave or cease to load. Nevertheless, should such a course be attempted by the Chilian fleet towards the American vessels, it might be well for you to protest in due form against such proceeding, so as to save any rights which American shipowners or American citizens engaged in that commerce may in the end be found to have. Such protests can do no harm, and it is better in such circumstances to err by claiming too much than too little.

I am, &c.,

I. P. CHRISTIANCY.

J. W. Merriam, Esq.,
United States Consul, Iquique.

[Inclosure 2 in No. 39.—Extract of letter from United States consul at Iquique, of July 10, 1879.]

As the mail closes in a few minutes, I have only time to add that I have just been informed that Commander Simpson, of the Lord Cochrane, verbally notified the captain of the American brig Mary Greenwood, on the 1st instant, at Pisagua, where she is taking in a cargo of nitrate of soda for the United States, that she will not be allowed to continue loading after the 15th instant, and that if he finds her in port after that date he will take her to a Chilian port and confiscate her cargo.

It is said that the Chilian commander would not give any written order, and that he inquired particularly as to whether the Peruvian Government was the owner of the nitrate, and that the captain would only reply that he was chartered by Grace Bros., of Callao, and that he was ignorant of the ownership of the cargo.

I am waiting for an official statement of the facts from the agent of the Peruvian Nitrate Company, before taking action in the matter, and am also endeavoring to find out whether nitrate of soda can be considered contraband of war.

I shall keep you informed on the subject.

No. 402. Mr. Christiancy to Mr. Evarts. [Document 433]

No. 402.
Mr. Christiancy to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Lima, Peru, July 30, 1879. (Received August 22.) No. 41.]

Sir: I have the honor to inclose to you, 1st, the letter of Mr. Merriam, our consul at Iquique, of the 17th instant; 2d, extract from his letter of the 21st instant; and, 3d, a copy of my answer to those letters.

I also inclose copies of the correspondence between the consul, as dean of the consular corps, and the Chilian admiral, in reference to the bombardment of Iquique, first in Spanish and second by translation.

This correspondence, as well as that between the consul and myself, will explain itself.

I am, &c.,

I. P. CHRISTIANCY.

[Inclosure 1 in No. 41.]

Consulate of the United States,
Iquique, July 17, 1879.

Sir: I have the honor to inform you that the Chilian fleet bombarded this town last night between the hours of half-past seven and half past nine, having fired in all forty shots.

This act of barbarism was committed without previous notice upon a town containing thousands of defenseless inhabitants, including women and children, of whom some of the latter fell victims to the murderous assault. The exact number of casualties is not known at the hour of writing, but it is thought to be small. Two of the national guards were killed outright. A shot struck the custom-house, passing through one of the windows of a room where a few minutes before the Chilian officers, prisoners of war, were confined. It then burst, passed up through the ceiling into the room above, where a group of Peruvian officers were seated, slightly wounding three of them, and finally passed through the southern side of the custom-house. Other buildings in different parts of the town were also seriously damaged, and one, at least, completely destroyed. Among those damaged may be mentioned the dwelling-house attached to the gas-works, and the buildings and large tank of the Arica Water Company, the property of English citizens.

The mutilated remains of two small children have been found in the outskirts of the town.

As dean of the consular corps, I have called the body together to meet at twelve o’clock to-day, to take action in the premises, to protest against the act of barbarism, and if possible secure immunity against its repetition.

As the mail is about to close, I have not time to send a dispatch to the Department, and would be greatly obliged to you if you would embody in one of your dispatches the fact of the bombardment. If we had had a foreign man-of-war in port, I do not think that the scandalous event would have happened.

J. W. MERRIAM.

[Inclosure 2 in No. 41.—Extract of letter from J. W. Merriam, United States consul at Iquique, July 21, 1879.]

To the last note of the consular corps of the 19th instant, no answer has as yet been received. The absence of the signature of the French vice-consul on the protest and on the subsequent note is explained by the temporary absence from town of that gentleman.

With reference to the assertion of Admiral Williams that torpedoes were employed against one of the vessels of his command on the night of the 8th instant, and also against the Blanco Encalada, on the night of the 16th instant, I will state that General Buendia has most solemnly assured me that on neither of those occasions, nor on any other, have torpedoes been employed against the Chilian vessels in Iquique. We, as members of the consular corps, did not feel it incumbent upon us to deny the truth of the statement of the Chilian admiral on this point, for no assertion of ours would be taken as evidence in a matter in which we cannot be considered competent witnesses; you will also observe that, in the only allusion which we have made to the charge referred to, we have made use of a saving clause, which shows that we do not concede the fact of the employment of this weapon.

On the points of law which we have tried to make, I should be very glad of your opinion, and particularly as to whether the Chilian commander is not bound, by principles of international law and by the usage of civilized nations, to give sufficient notice of his intention to bombard, to allow neutrals and other non-combatants to leave the town, no matter what provocation he may think he has for resorting to this extreme measure.

With reference to Admiral Williams’s statement that, from humane motive, he directed that the shots should be fired at a great elevation, it is difficult to understand why, if he was actuated by such humane sentiments, he should have fired at all, or, at least why he should have expended more than forty shots, a large number of 250 and 300 pounds, upon a defenseless town, and at night, and still at such a low elevation as to cause destruction of property and loss of life in various parts of the town.

Moreover, the most convincing proof of all that his intention was to destroy the town is to be found in the fact that many of the missiles were filled with explosive substances, which only failed to set fire to the town from the fact that the wooden walls of the houses, from their thinness, did not afford sufficient resistance to cause their explosion. Several of these shells were picked up in a perfect state and carried to General Buendia, who caused them to be carefully emptied, and found them to contain, among other things, resin and sulphur.

* * * * * * *

[Inclosure 3 in No. 41.—Translation.]

Iquique, July 17, 1879.

[From the South Pacific Times, Callao, Tuesday, July 29, 1879.]

Sir: We have not forgotten the distinct declarations that your honor was pleased to make on the 6th of April to the delegates of the consular corps, and, in view of the confidence which those declarations merited from us, we could never have imagined that events would happen in direct contradiction to the guarantees spontaneously offered by your honor.

Contrary to all our expectations, last night, for the space of two hours, for motives that we fail to understand, and without prior warning as required by international law, the vessels under your honor’s command threw a considerable number of cannon-shots into this town with disastrous effects, various defenseless people, old men, women, and children, and several neutral persons having been killed, and some private property belonging to foreigners, of whom, as your honor must be aware, the majority of the inhabitants of this town is composed, destroyed.

The protection of the lives and interests of our respective countrymen being en-charged to us, in fulfillment of the duties of our trust, at a special meeting we have unanimously resolved to protest, as in due form we hereby do protest, against the bombardment of last night as unjustifiable and contrary to the most sacred and current practices of international law, and throw the responsibility of the consequences to which this act may lead upon your honor.

We remain. &c.,

J. W. MERRIAM,
Consul of the United States of America, and senior of the Consular Corps.

MARCOS F. AGUIRRE,
Ecuadorian Consul.

JUDALECIO GOMEZ,
Consul of the Argentine Republic.

HERMAN J. SCHMIDT,
Consul of the Austrian-Hungarian Monarchy and Acting Consul of the German Empire.

M. JEWELL,
Acting Vice-Consul of Her Britannic Majesty.

HUGO ROSSI,
Consular Agent for Italy.

To the Commander-in-Chief of the Chilian feet in this harbor.

[Inclosure 4 in No. 41.]

Mr. Christiancy to Mr. Merriam.

Legation of the United States,
Lima, Peru, July 30, 1879.

Sir: Your two letters of July 17 and 21 (Nos. 40 and 41) received. I shall write to the Department to-day giving the information contained in those letters, with extracts from them.

I will only say here that you did well in placing your protest upon the distinct ground of the assurances given by the admiral to the consular corps on the 6th of April, which, being public and known to the people of the town, they (as well as the consular corps) had a right to rely upon those assurances. If no such assurances had been given, the case would have been very different. This town being occupied by, if not the headquarters of, the military forces of Peru and Bolivia, the Chilian fleet undoubtedly had the right to attack and even to destroy the town itself, according to the laws of war. And such occupancy by the military forces of the allies, might itself be looked upon as notice to the inhabitants that if they continued to reside in it, they must do so subject to all the risks of war; and that among these risks is that of ^a bombardment, and though, even without the assurances of the 6th of April, humanity might dictate that a notice should be given before openings fire, so that the peaceable inhabitants might fly from the danger, yet this would not have been imperative according to the laws of war. But the attacking party must be allowed a liberal discretion in judging of the exigencies which justify the omission of such notice.

The case is quite different from what it would have been if the town had not been held or controlled by the military forces of the allies, and had been occupied by peaceable inhabitants only.

And in the present case what I have said of the inhabitants applies equally to the people of other (and neutral) nations there residing and to their property. By continuing their residence in, such a place under such circumstances, they all equally, assume all the risks incident to the situation, and the attacking party are not bound to make (and practically could very seldom make) any discrimination.

It is, therefore, the violation by the admiral of the assurances he had given on the 6th of April, which alone can be held to have constituted the bombardment without notice an act of vandalism, and a violation of the laws of honorable warfare. And the merits of the question must depend upon the validity or sufficiency of the excuse which he alleges, the attempt to use torpedoes against his vessels. Opinions might differ as to the validity of this excuse, if true. For myself I should not consider it a valid excuse for the neglect to give any notice; hut if the excuse which he alleges had no existence in fact, then I think all would agree that the admiral had violated the rules of honorable warfare, unless he was himself deceived as to the facts; and in this view I regret that you did not in your note to him of July 19 either deny, upon information and belief, the use of torpedoes as alleged by him, or protest that you were ignorant of the facts so that you could not be held to have admitted it, as I fear will now be held to be the effect of the correspondence when taken together. But this effect will be removed if hereafter it should be made clearly to appear that the excuse alleged did not exist in fact.

I. P. CHRISTIANCY.

J. W. Merriam, Esq.,
United States Consul, Iquique.

On board of the iron-clad Blanco Encalada,
Iquique, July 17, 1879.

Mr. Consul: I have had the honor of receiving the protest-note of the consular corps resident in this port, and shall lay same before my government by the first opportunity.

In the mean time I consider it right to assure your honor that I do not deny the fact of my having offered the consular corps that, in the event of the circumstances of war obliging me to bombard this place, I would, with due anticipation, notify the consular corps of same, for the personal safety and interests of their countrymen. And I possess the satisfaction, Mr. Consul, of having acted strictly in accordance with my promise, in spite of the hostile acts of the military forces on shore, practiced against the corvette Esmeralda, during the first naval engagement, and the attempted destruction of one of the ships of the fleet under my command, by means of a torpedo on the night of the 8th instant.

The repetition, however, last night of the latter act against my flag-ship, authorized me, in fact, to destroy the town; but, even then, and solely in obedience to sentiments of humanity, I gave orders that the shots should be fired high, as your honor must have observed.

I deplore the loss of lives of defenseless persons which your honor assures me has occurred; but your honor cannot be ignorant of the fact that the successful exit of the torpedo scheme would have destroyed the lives of numberless persons also defenseless against this treacherous arm of warfare.

Up to the present, the war in which we are engaged has been, for our part, carried on with entire good faith; your honor can assure your countrymen of this, and add that it will be continued in the same way, so long as the enemy do not employ arms of the above kind.

Finally, I must beg to remind your honor that this town, to-day the headquarters of the army, with its fortifications and defenses, has become a military stronghold, and its inhabitants are therefore subject to all the fortunes of war, for which reason I am sincerely sorry that neutral citizens, and very particularly your honor and the other members of the consular corps, over which you so worthily preside, still remain in the town.

With sentiments, &c.,

J. WILLIAMS REBOLLEDO.

To the Consul of the United States of North America,
and Senior member of the Foreign Consular Corps in Iquique.

Iquique, July 19, 1879.

Sir: We have read with careful attention the note that your honor has been pleased to address to the senior member of the consular corps in this port, and after meditating upon all the reasons adduced in justification of the bombardment of the night of the 16th instant, and in support of the right to repeat same in future, whenever the hostilities be renewed which your honor asserts have been put into practice against the fleet under your command, we beg to state that on this subject we are of another opinion.

We do not believe that international law authorizes and makes legitimate the destruction of private and neutral property, as a mere measure of reprisal, but only in the distinct and extreme case where the necessity of bringing the war to a speedy termination or of executing some highly important operation make its destruction inevitable. Neither do we think that this open town can be properly termed a fortified place; but however this may be, and leaving the responsibility of future events to whoever incurs same, we beg to inform you that at the same time that your honor makes use of the power in your hands, after the manner and way in which you may think fit, your honor will be pleased to remember that the same civilized nations which classify a bombardment, when legitimate, as a measure of extreme rigor, stigmatize it as a crime if it is effected without previous warning, however legitimate it may otherwise be.

Trusting in the promise which your honor made us on the 6th of April, indirectly confirmed by the note to which we have the pleasure of replying, we request your honor to be good enough to inform us whether we can assure our respective countrymen that, in the unfortunate event of their lives and properties running the risk of bombardment, this may not happen unawares, but be advised beforehand, according to the practice of civilized nations.

In conclusion, and thanking your honor exceedingly for the interest shown for our personal safety, we hasten to remove the feeling of surprise that our actual presence in this port causes your honor, assuring you that it is explained by the guarantees which your honor gave us; and that the duties of our trusts oblige us to remain where the interests of our countrymen are threatened.

We are, &c.,

J. W. MERRIAM,
Consul of the United States of America, and senior member of the Consular Corps.

MARCOS F. AGUIRRE,
Ecuadorian Consul.

JUDALECIO GOMEZ,
Consul of the Argentine Republic.

HERMAN J. SCHMIDT,
Consul of the Austrian-Hungarian Monarchy and Acting Consul of, the German Empire.

M. JEWELL,
Acting Vice-Consul of Her Britannic Majesty.

HUGO ROSSI,
Consular Agent for Italy.

To the Commander-in-Chief of the Chilian fleet in this harbor.

No. 403. Mr. Christianey to Mr. Evarts. [Document 434]

No. 403.
Mr. Christianey to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Lima, Peru, August 5, 1879. (Received September 4.) No. 46.]

Sir: I have the honor to inform you that President Prado telegraphs from Iquique that the Chilian fleet has voluntarily raised the blockade of that port, and by a subsequent dispatch he says they are at present in Autafogasta.

I have, &c.,

I. P. CHRISTIANCY.

No. 404. Mr. Evarts to Mr. Christiancy. [Document 435]

No. 404.
Mr. Evarts to Mr. Christiancy.

Department of State,
Washington, August 8, 1879. No. 29.]

Sir: I have to acknowledge the receipt of your dispatch No. 34, in regard to the blockade of the port of Iquique, Peru.

Your comments upon the subject have been attentively read and considered, and the view formed by you, as communicated in the dispatch concerning the maintenance of the blockade, is concurred in. Your proceedings thus far respecting it seem to be tempered with wisdom and discretion, and meet with approval. If at any time the blockade proves, to be ineffectual, and any combined action be taken by the diplomatic corps at Lima judiciously declaring it inoperative, you will promptly unite in the same. The Department in this matter feels that it can place full confidence in your able judgment and long and ripened experience.

I am, &c.,

WM. M. EVARTS.

No. 405. Mr. Christiancy to Mr. Evarts. [Document 436]

No. 405.
Mr. Christiancy to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Lima, Peru, September 24, 1879. (Received October 15.) No. 62.]

Sir: Referring to my dispatch No. 53, upon the question of intervention of foreign powers, I have the honor to state, as having a possible bearing upon that question, the fact, which I have ascertained from the most authentic source, that England, which has already upon this coast the Turquoise, a wooden corvette, and the Triumph, a first-class iron-clad, has ordered another iron-clad to this station, which may soon be expected to arrive.

It is true that England has a larger commerce upon this coast than any other nation, but I have not been able to discover that it has been or is likely to be interfered with by either of the belligerents in violation of any principle of the law of nations. But there may be an apprehension that, under the decree of President Dazo in reference to privateers, there may result injury to British commerce; and though England has no treaty with Bolivia, I have the best evidence that England intends to claim for her commerce the same advantages in this respect secured to the United States by our treaty with Bolivia.

Bolivia, at present, has no port on the Pacific to which prizes made by her privateers (if any) could be brought for adjudication; and Peru, her ally, having become a party to the treaty of Paris against privateering, it becomes a serious question whether she could lend her ports to Bolivia for such purpose.

My opinion is that the increased naval force of England on this coast has reference mainly to this question of privateering.

If the Department has any instructions to give me in reference to the probable questions to arise upon this aspect of affairs, I should be very glad to receive them soon.

I am, &c.,

I. P. CHRISTIANCY.

No. 406. Mr. Evarts to Mr. Christiancy. [Document 437]

No. 406.
Mr. Evarts to Mr. Christiancy.

Department of State,
Washington, December 26, 1879. No. 53.]

Sir: Your dispatch No. 77, of November 5, 1879, has been received.

You express in it the opinion that the time has arrived for a definite and precise declaration of the principles which are to govern the ministers and consuls of the United States, and more especially our naval officers, in reference to the use of the American flag by foreign-built ships, claimed to have been purchased by American citizens from subjects or citizens of a belligerent power, during the existence of an actual war between such belligerent government and another belligerent, toward both of which our government mantains the position of a neutral. You say that if left to your own judgment, you would decide at once and without reserve, that any transfer made by citizens of one of the belligerents to a citizen of the United States, during the pending war, so far from being treated as prima facie evidence of good faith and valadity, should be treated as prima facie fraudulent and void; and that it should be so held, as well by our consuls as by our naval officers, until clear and satisfactory evidence of the reality and good faith of the transfer should be produced. You then go on to say that your doubts in regard to the matter arise from the fact that you are informed this Department has approved not only your views, but also those of the minister of the United States in Santiago, and our consul at Valparaiso, which you say are diametrically opposed to yours. You then proceed to state the views of these officers in a manner which, it is necessary to say, is not justified by any dispatches which have been received from them at this Department. You next refer to the case of the Itata, expressing your opinion that that vessel is about to assume again the American flag, and that a large part of the Chilian merchant marine will range itself, by means of fraudulent transfers, under the same colors. You ask, therefore, for definite instructions, in view of these possibilities, as to the duty of diplomatic representatives and consular officers, as well as of officers of the United States Navy.

This Department in its instructions numbered 7, 11, and 23, to your legation, and instructions of similar purport numbered 65 and 67 to the legation in Santiago, has already defined the principles which should guide you in the determination of these questions. In reply to your request for further instructions, this Department can do little more than reiterate and reaffirm the leading principles hitherto laid down, relying upon your discretion and judgment for their proper application in matters of detail, as it is manifestly impossible to frame an instruction which shall meet every possible incident as it may arise.

The right of Americans to buy foreign-built vessels, and to carry on commerce with them, is clear and undoubted. A reference to paragraphs 220 and 221 of the Consular Regulations will show how perfectly this right is recognized, and how clearly the exercise of it is defined. It has existed as stated in instruction to your legation, No. 11, of May 8, ever since the origin of this government. The fact that it is possible for collusion to take place between consuls and American merchants in foreign countries in connection with these transactions, is not a sufficient reason to invalidate a right which exists independently of statute law, and which is advantageous to the interests of American commerce and enterprise.

As a consequence and adjunct of this right, the flying of the American flag cannot be absolutely prohibited. As stated before in the above-mentioned instruction, if circumstances justify on the part of the consular officer an opinion that the sale was honest, and that the vessel has really become the property of a citizen, she may properly fly the flag of the owner’s country as an indication of such ownership, and an emblem of the owner’s nationality.

The duty of the consul, in reference to these transactions, is clearly enough indicated in Article XVII of the Consular Regulations. He is forbidden by law to grant any marine document or certificate of ownership, but he may properly make record of the bill of sale in his office, authenticate its execution, and deliver to the purchaser a certificate to that effect, and also certify that the owner is a citizen of the United States. A considerable discretion and responsibility rest upon consuls in regard to determining the good faith of such transactions. They are not to conclude, as matter of course, that all such transactions are genuine and honest. They are to take notice of any circumstances which would indicate that the transfer is fraudulent, and in all such cases it is their duty to refuse the certificates referred to. But on the other hand, they are certainly not required to consider the mere fact of the transfer of a foreign-built vessel to an American citizen as an evidence of bad faith. The presumption is rather on the other side, as in all transactions in civilized countries. In the absence of any indication of fraud, a sale in the regular way, with the usual business formalities, is to be regarded by the consul as made in good faith.

When such transactions have been perfected, and when a consul, thoroughly satisfied of the good faith of the parties, has given his certificate of the transfer of a foreign-built vessel to an American citizen, and a vessel furnished with such consular certificate has been regularly cleared from the port where the consul referred to is stationed, and has come within the jurisdiction of another consular officer, or diplomatic representative of the United States, it should require very strong evidence of fraud to induce the second consular officer to deny the American character of the vessel, to refuse the regular and necessary clearance to enable the vessel to pursue its voyage, and still more, to insist upon such a vessel hauling down its flag. In cases where a consular officer or diplomatic representative is thoroughly convinced that a vessel has no right to an American certificate of sale, and consequently no right to the use of the American colors, he will be justified in going to the extent indicated; but this discretionary power should be used with the utmost caution and reserve.

Vessels in these circumstances, of course, cannot claim the privileges and immunities, and the thorough protection, which are accorded to regularly registered American vessels plying between ports of the United States and those of foreign countries. The American owners domiciled abroad, engaging in business of this sort, take upon themselves all the risks incident to such traffic. If they are seized by the war-vessels of one or the other belligerent and carried into courts of admiralty as prizes, they have no right to demand from the diplomatic officers of the United States that they shall be accorded anything more than fair treatment in such courts; that is to say, the fact that they are provided with consular certificates of American ownership secures for them only a presumption that such is the fact, and they are not necessarily for that reason entitled to demand from the legations of the United States anything more than that protection afforded to every other species of property belonging to American citizens domiciled in foreign countries.

In the absence of any statutory provisions in regard to these important and delicate matters, it seems to be the duty of the executive branch of the government to prevent, as far as possible, any damage or danger to American interests, and in addition, to guard and cherish, to the, extent of its power, the right of neutrals to carry on honest commerce between nations engaged in hostilities, reducing’ to the least possible degree the hindrances to neutral trade which inevitably arise from a state of war. You will, therefore, in all cases that may arise, keep these considerations constantly in sight, and apply them with that judgment and discretion which have hitherto won the approval of the President.

Your action and that of your predecessor, in the matter of the Itata has been commended, because there seemed sufficient reason to doubt the regularity of the transfer, in virtue of which she was displaying the American flag. If, as you intimate, that vessel and her consorts are now about to resume our flag, and other merchant-vessels are preparing to pursue the same course, it will be the duty of the consul, under the direction of the legation, in that country where these ships first display American colors, to inquire strictly into the circumstances of the alleged transfers, and refuse or grant clearances, according to the merits of each particular case. This being done, it is obvious that the act of one American consul or minister should not be challenged or reversed by another, except upon the strongest proof of mistake or collusion.

I am, &c.,

WM. M. EVARTS.

Note.—A similar instruction was sent to Mr. Minister Osborn at Santiago, Chili.

Portugal.Portugal.

[438] . Mr. Moran to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Lisbon, January 6, 1879. (Received January 29.)

[439] . Mr. Moran to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Lisbon, March 20, 1879. (Received April 10.)

[440] . Mr. Moran to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Lisbon, April 9, 1879. (Received April 26.)

[441] . Mr. Moran to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Lisbon, April 11, 1879. (Received May 1.)

[442] . Mr. Moran to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Lisbon, May 1, 1879. (Received May 19.)

[443] . Mr. Moran to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Lisbon, May 1, 1879. (Received May 19.)

[444] . Mr. Moran to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Lisbon, May 19, 1879. (Received June 4.)

[445] . Mr. Moran to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Lisbon, June 18, 1879. (Received July 5.)

No. 407. Mr. Moran to Mr. Evarts. [Document 438]

No. 407.
Mr. Moran to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Lisbon, January 6, 1879. (Received January 29.) No. 225.]

Sir: The new Cortes were opened by the King in person on the 2d instant, when His Majesty delivered a speech, a printed copy and translation of which I forward herewith.

As this speech gives a clear and concise statement of the present conditions of the kingdom and colonies, and suggests certain needful legislation, there is nothing for me to add that will be of interest to the Department. I therefore forward the speech for your information, and have the honor to be, &c.,

BENJAMIN MORAN.

[Inclosure 1 in No. 225.—Translation.]

King’s speech, January 2, 1879.

Honored Peers of the Realm and Gentlemen Deputies of the Portuguese Nation: The will of the country having been consulted in the terms which the constitutional charter of the monarchy directs, I feel happy on seeing myself surrounded by the representatives of the nation, who have lately been freely elected by it, after the proclamation of the late law, which liberally enlarged the popular suffrage.

Our amicable relations with all foreign powers remain unaltered.

The question pending with the government of His Catholic Majesty respecting the fishing-industry in the waters of the two states has been settled by a provisional convention between both governments on the basis of reciprocity. This convention, with the documents attached to it, will be presented to the Cortez, and I hope that it may receive your approbation.

In order to ameliorate and develop the commerce of our provinces in Asia, and to place them in direct and rapid communication, by railway, with British India, a treaty has been made with the Government of Her Britannic Majesty. My government is also engaged on a treaty with the same power, with the purpose of cementing our relations with the region of Transvaal, by the construction of another railway in the province of Mozambique, thus adding to the importance of the harbor of Lourenço Marques. I trust that you will attentively examine these documents when presented to you, and I shall be gratified if they receive your sanction.

Public tranquillity has generally been maintained everywhere. Some aggressions, which we have lately suffered in Zambesi at the hands of the natives, have just been duly requited, the sovereignty of law being re-established. Of the means employed by the government to maintain order and security in those vast regions, and in other parts of the ultramarine provinces, the minister of that department will render account.

In order to establish the civil registration as regards Portuguese subjects not Catholics, my government has published an adequate regulation, a pressing and absolute necessity being thereby provided for. The government will propose on a fitting occasion suitable legislative measures towards making this institution general without producing annoyances among the population or prejudice to legitimate interests.

Among the proposals which the government has to submit to your examination and approbation, I especially call your attention to the reform of secondary instruction, and to that of the law of recruiting, which is urgent, with the object of rendering this impost equal and general, and to remove it from the action of injurious influences of every character. From a well-considered reform in this important branch of the public service there will result greater justice, in the distribution of this duty, and greater certainty and facility in the raising of the army, when necessary, to the requisite force.

Agreeably with the authority granted to my government by the law of the 23d of last March, the construction of the Beira Alta Railway has been put up to public competition, and adjudicated to a company which accepted all the terms of the proposal, and which had no competitor. The government will give you an account of the terms on which the said concession has been granted.

Works on the highways and railways are being actively carried forward, and additions to the Minho and Douro lines have been opened to circulation as far as Caminha and Juncal respectively. The works on the Beira Railway have been commenced.

Proposals for legislation will be presented to you by the minister of public works towards completing the network of our railways and settling the general bases of their endowment and concessions, as well as other proposals for the construction of the docks of Lisbon and of the artificial port of Leixœs. To these measures, and to that which aims at the improved lighting of our coasts and bars, I call for your close attention.

The works of the fortifications and port of Lisbon have been continued with all the activity compatible with the resources voted. Using the authority granted by law, the government has contracted for making eight field batteries and some fortress guns, with their requisite material. To improve army instruction, to continue works of defense, and to satisfy some other important military requirements, the minister of war will lay before you suitable proposals. The same minister will also acquaint you with the contracts effected.

The construction of some ships of war have been contracted for by the minister of marine and colonies agreeably with the authority granted by law.

Various and important administrative measures for the ultramarine provinces have been decreed in virtue of the authority granted by the fifteenth article of the additional act of the charter. The competent minister will inform you on all these matters.

Not only as monuments of past glory, but as elements of greatness and wealth now and hereafter, we ought to regard those vast regions which yet remain under Portuguese rule in different parts of the world. In the path begun we must not stop, but promote, according to our means, the development of the prosperity of those provinces, some of which nature has so generously endowed. To guarantee in them security of person and property, which is an absolute condition of all enterprises, and to establish between them and the metropolis regular and rapid communication, are measures which, among others, recommend themselves by their immediate utility. My government will present to you proposals requisite for these ends.

The state of the treasury continues to demand the serious attention of public powers and counsels prudent economy in expenditure, without prejudice to the development of national wealth. Our credit has been maintained, but the difficulties with which we have to contend increase, resulting from the general state of the markets, the deficiency of the harvests, and others peculiar to our own market. My minister of finance will present you the state estimate for the economic year 1879–1880, and some proposals for legislation which may, within the present amount of taxation, by the addition to and extension of some taxes, and the better economy of all, tend to a sensible addition of income. You will examine this important subject with the attention it deserves, and I am sure that you will form resolutions most adapted to the welfare of the state.

Honored peers of the realm and deputies of the Portuguese nation: When opening the first session of the present legislature, and fully trusting in your wisdom and patriotism I have no need to appeal to the eminent zeal of the representatives of the country; but am assured that you will correspond with the expectations which the nation has in you. Animated by a like spirit, and in full accord with you, I am certain that, by the favor of God, we shall be constantly busied in all which can contribute to the happiness, greatness, and prosperity of the country.

The session is opened.

No. 408. Mr. Moran to Mr. Evarts. [Document 439]

No. 408.
Mr. Moran to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Lisbon, March 20, 1879. (Received April 10.) No. 242.]

Sir: On the 14th instant, Mr. Corvo addressed to me a note, a copy and translation of which I inclose, with a copy of my reply, in which he says that American whaling captains have been in the habit of contracting with crews in the Cape Verde Islands, observing, however, the legal requirements for such contracts, except in the island of Fogo, where it is the custom of these captains to evade the fulfillment of Portuguese regulations in regard to such enlistments by receiving persons on board who are leaving the island clandestinely.

The governor-general of that province has accordingly requested such additional power from His Majesty’s government as may enable him to prevent such enlistments in future, and such orders are about to be issued.

In view of this step, His Majesty’s government has seen fit to call my attention to this subject, with the request that I will bring it to your notice in order that the owners of the said ships may be warned not to receive on board at those places Portuguese crews without the indispensable papers, and thus endeavor to avoid all conflicts which such official supervision might give rise to, and which, Mr. Corvo states, the authorities of that Archipelago ought not to relax in the waters under their jurisdiction.

I have no means of knowing how far these charges are true against American whalers; but I have written to Mr. Terry, the consul at Cape Verde, asking him to bring the matter to the notice of American captains, so that they may give no cause of complaint in future. I inclose a copy of my letter to him.

I beg respectfully to call your attention to this note of Mr. Corvo, and to request that you will favor me with a reply at your early convenience.

I have, &c.,

BENJAMIN MORAN.

[Inclosure 1 in No. 242.—Translation.]

Mr. Corvo to Mr. Moran.

Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Political Division,
March 14, 1879.

The number of American ships which put into the Cape Verde Islands at the season suitable for the whale fishery being great, the captains in some of those islands have been in the habit of contracting with crews, observing the legal requirements for such contracts; in others, however, as for example in the island of Fogo, it is frequently the habit of these captains to evade the fulfillment of these regulations by receiving persons on board who are leaving the island clandestinely.

The governor-general of that province, giving information of these facts to His Majesty’s government, requests such powers as will enable him to exercise the necessary supervision in this respect, which powers will be shortly sent him.

It seemed, therefore, fitting for His Majesty’s government to at once call your attention and that of your government to this subject, in order that the owners of the said ships may be warned not to receive on board at those places Portuguese crews without the indispensable papers, and thus endeavoring to avoid all conflicts which such official supervision might give rise to, and which the authorities of that Archipelago ought not to relax in the waters under their jurisdiction.

Whilst bringing the subject to the knowledge of your excellency, I avail myself of the opportunity to renew the assurances of my distinguished consideration.

JOĂO DE ANDRADE CORVO,
Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs.

[Inclosure 2 in No. 242.]

Mr. Moran to Mr. Corvo.

Legation of the United States,
Lisbon, March 19, 1879.

Mr. Minister: I had the honor on the 17th instant to receive the note which your excellency addressed to me on the 14th instant, notifying me of the intention of His Majesty’s Government to issue powers that will enable the governor-general of the Cape de Verde Islands to prevent the clandestine departure of Portuguese subjects from those islands, and asking me, in consequence of the number of American whaling-vessels visiting those seas, to notify my government of this intention, in order that the owners of said ships may be warned not to receive on board in those islands Portuguese crews without the indispensable papers.

I will immediately communicate your excellency’s letter to my government and also to the United States consul at Santiago, in order that masters of American whalers may be made acquainted with this intention, so as to avoid any violation of the proposed new regulations, or, indeed, any infringement of the laws of Portugal.

I avail myself, &c.,

BENJAMIN MORAN.

[Inclosure 3 in No. 242.]

Mr. Moran to Mr. Terry.

Legation of the United States,
Lisbon, March 19, 1879.

Sir: I have the honor to call your attention to the inclosed translation of a note addressed to me on the 14th instant by Mr. Corvo, His Majesty’s secretary of state for foreign affairs. From this you will see that it is insinuated that American whalers are in the habit of violating the laws of conscription in the Cape Verde Islands, and clandestinely shipping Portuguese subjects, especially in the Island of Fogo; and in order to prevent this in future, new regulations are about to be issued by His Majesty’s Government.

How far these insinuations may be correct I, of course, have no means of knowing. But, in order to avoid difficulty, I have to request you will inform American captains of the intended new regulations, and impress upon them the vital importance of observing and respecting all these laws, especially while they are within Portuguese jurisdiction.

I am afraid there are just grounds for some of these complaints of violation by American whalers of Portuguese laws, but I will not pronounce an opinion until I hear from you on the subject, which I hope will be soon.

I have, &c.,

BENJAMIN MORAN.

Thomas W. Terry, Esq.,
Consul of the United States, Santiago.

No. 409. Mr. Moran to Mr. Evarts. [Document 440]

No. 409.
Mr. Moran to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Lisbon, April 9, 1879. (Received April 26.) No. 248.]

Sir: On the 1st instant the Diario do Governo contained a proclamation of the King promulgating a law passed by the Cortes on the 29th March last, immediately raising the import duty on all tobacco about 20 per cent. The bill is full of technicality, and therefore I do not send a translation of the whole of it; but I forward herewith, for the information of the Department, translations of the first two articles of the said law, which are the only ones having any interest for foreign nations. The measure is purely a financial one, and while the government strongly advocate it as wise and needful, the opposition regard it with unfavorable eyes, as they assert that the great increase of duty will lead to a serious loss of revenue from the two causes of increased expenses of collection and smuggling. This bill was so long before the Cortes, and its passage so seemingly inevitable, that an unusually large quantity of tobacco, both manufactured and unmanufactured, has been hurried through the customs to take advantage of the old rate of duty; it is said, to the value of more than a million dollars.

I have, &c.,

BENJAMIN MORAN.

[Inclosure 1 in No. 248.—Translation.]

Article 1. The duties on tobacco, established by article 1 of the law of April 1, 1871, are substituted by the following: Tobacco in rolls, each kilo 1$440

Tobacco in leaf, each kilo 1$680

Tobacco in cheroots (cigars), each kilo 2$640

Tobacco, all other manufactures, each kilo 2$160

Article 2. The impost is re-established of 2,000 reis on every 50,000 reis on licenses for the sale of tobacco, which shall be in force agreeably to the law of May 13, 1864, thus being revoked the twenty-first article of May 14, 1872, and also abolished the industrial tax on the sale of tobaccos.

No. 410. Mr. Moran to Mr. Evarts. [Document 441]

No. 410.
Mr. Moran to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Lisbon, April 11, 1879. (Received May 1.) No. 250.]

Sir: On the 18th of February, the United States frigate Constitution, last from Portsmouth, England, was reported off this port, and on the 19th, Captain Badger paid me a visit and announced that the rudder of his ship was disabled and required repairs; to effect which it would be necessary for her to be docked. As there is no private dry-dock in Lisbon large enough to receive such a vessel as the Constitution, I found it necessary to apply to His Majesty’s Government for permission for the Constitution to enter the royal dock for the necessary repairs. At the time it was occupied by two vessels of His Majesty’s navy; and Mr. Corvo, while expressing his great readiness to permit the repairs on the Constitution, informed me it would be forty days before the vessels then occupying the dock could be taken out to enable her to take the place of them. This was very discouraging, but hearing that it was just possible His Majesty’s vessels would be taken out of dock if I requested it in order to admit the Constitution, I renewed my application and with success. The Constitution was accordingly docked and repaired. Captain Badger expressed his warmest thanks for the service in a letter to me, a copy of which I transmitted to Mr. Corvo with a note of my own expressing my acknowledgments of the great kindness thus shown by His Majesty’s Government to the United States.

I inclose herewith for your information copies of all the correspondence which passed between me and Captain Badger and Mr. Corvo on this interesting subject; and I trust that I may soon be instructed by you to convey to Mr. Corvo the thanks of the Government of the United States for this remarkable act of courtesy of His most faithful Majesty’s Government in taking out of dock, in an unfinished state, two of His Majesty’s vessels of war in order that the injuries to the Constitution might be promptly repaired. The act is exceptional and seems to me deserves special recognition.

The Constitution sailed from this port for New York early this morning.

I have, &c.,

BENJAMIN MORAN.

No. 411. Mr. Moran to Mr. Evarts. [Document 442]

No. 411.
Mr. Moran to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Lisbon, May 1, 1879. (Received May 19.) No. 254.]

Sir: Referring to my No. 179 and to previous dispatches on the same subject, I have the honor to forward herewith for your information copies of a correspondence which has taken place between me and Mr. Terry and Mr. Corvo since the date of my above-named dispatch about the naval cemetery at St. Vincent.

It will be seen by Mr. Terry’s note of 20th February, 1878, that the local authorities at Porto Grande refused to erect a wall around the new cemetery at their expense; and by mine to Mr. Corvo of 4th March, 1878, that I brought this refusal rather firmly to his notice, and that he disapproved of it, and directed the wall to be built at the expense of His Majesty’s Government. This was done, and every arrangement made for the transfer of the remains of the dead from the old cemetery to the new one. But owing to sanitary causes this appears not yet to have been done. This I learn by a private letter from Mr. Terry, from whom I have not heard officially on the subject since the date of his last letter, 1st December 1878, although I am sure that the matter has his constant attention. So soon as I hear of the transfer of the remains I will report the fact to you.

It occurs to me that it would be well after the transfer has been made that our government should make a small annual appropriation to keep the cemetery in repair, otherwise it may fall into a neglected state and share the fate of the former one. Such sum should be intrusted to the consul at Santiago, with instructions for its proper application.

I have, &c.,

BENJAMIN MORAN.

No. 412. Mr. Moran to Mr. Evarts. [Document 443]

No. 412.
Mr. Moran to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Lisbon, May 1, 1879. (Received May 19.) No. 255.]

Sir: On the receipt of your No. 134, I addressed a note in the sense thereof to Mr. Corvo, a copy of which I inclose, expressing the satisfaction of the Government of the United States with the action of the governor-general of the Cape Verde Islands in providing a new cemetery for the remains of the Americans now lying in the old naval cemetery there, and requested that information of these sentiments of his kindness may be officially communicated to the governor-general in question.

My note was addressed to Mr. Corvo on the 4th of March. But should one come I will immediately forward a copy.

I have, &c.,

BENJAMIN MORAN.

No. 413. Mr. Moran to Mr. Evarts. [Document 444]

No. 413.
Mr. Moran to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Lisbon, May 19, 1879. (Received June 4.) No. 260.]

Sir: Referring to instruction No. 141 from the Department of State, signed by Mr. Seward, I have now the honor to report that I addressed a note to Mr. Corvo in the sense thereof on the 5th instant, in reply to the complaints made to me by the Marquis d’Avila on the 31st December, 1877, of alleged violation of Portuguese laws and regulations by the masters of American whaling-ships visiting the Azores, and encouraging the departure from those islands of Portuguese subjects liable to conscription for military service, and especially the case of the captain of the William A. Grozier; and I also replied in the same note to Mr. Corvo’s letter to me of the 14th of March last, in which he says that American whaling-vessels are in the habit of contracting with crews in violation of the law in Fogo, one of the Cape de Verde Islands, and I now forward a copy of my above note for the information of the Department. Mr. Corvo has not yet replied, and probably will not do so soon.

I also add a copy of a letter from Mr. Terry of the 28th of April on the subject of American whalers taking men from the island of Fogo without the necessary papers from the authorities of the island, and a copy of a note based on Mr. Terry’s letter which I addressed to Mr. Corvo on the 17th instant.

It is clear, from Mr. Terry’s report, that no specific charges have been made against American ship-masters for violation of the law at Fogo, and it is to be hoped that the measures taken by Mr. Terry to warn American captains to observe the regulations in regard to these alleged shipments will put an end to further complaints.

I have, &c.,

BENJAMIN MORAN.

[Inclosure 1 in No. 260.]

Mr. Moran to Mr. Corvo.

Legation of the United States,
Lisbon, May 5, 1879.

Mr. Minister: Referring to the note which the Marquis d’Avila addressed to me on the 31st December, 1877, in which his excellency informed me that Capt. William Roberts, of the American whaling-vessel Wm. A. Grozier, when his ship was about to sail from Ponta Delgada, caused, it was alleged, a boat to be lowered and received onboard his vessel four Portuguese subjects liable to military service, and that the American consul, whose interference the administrador solicited towards his forbidding” Captain Roberts in further prosecuting his designs, wholly set at naught so just and reasonable a request.

Immediately on the receipt of the above note, I sent a copy of it to Mr. Dabney, the consul of the United States at Fayal, with a request that he would investigate the charge against Mr. Ivens, the consular agent at St. Michael’s. Mr. Ivens, in reply to inquiries, clearly showed that no communication had been made to him hy the authorities on the subject, and that every application made to him to assist the authorities in preventing the conscription laws being evaded has always met with his immediate attention. Mr. Dabney, therefore, acquitted Mr. Iyens of any knowledge of, or complicity in, the transaction, and as no new information was gained in relation to the matter, the United States Government naturally supposed that the affair might have been one of those difficulties which sometimes occur between ship-masters and customs authorities where the fault is not altogether on one side. I fully reported the case to Mr. Evarts at the time, and the above is the view he arrived at on the subject.

Mr. Evarts, in a recent dispatch to me on the subject of the note which your excellency addressed to me on the 14th of March last, incidentally refers to the above case in the language I have used. It is stated in your excellency’s above-named note that masters of American whaling-vessels are in the habit of contracting with crews in the Cape Verde Islands, “observing, however, the legal requirements for such contracts, except in the island of Fogo,” where, as the complaint alleges, it is the custom of such captains to evade fulfillment of Portuguese regulations, adding that the governor-general of that province has accordingly requested from the home government such additional powers as will enable him to prevent such enlistments in future, and that such orders are about to be issued.

To this Mr. Evarts, to whom I duly referred your excellency’s letter, replies that the complaint is general in its character, and it will be at once perceived that in order to the efficacy of such measures as His Majesty’s Government may find it necessary to adopt with a view of obviating any cause for any renewal of such complaint, it would have been desirable to have had some specific case of the kind referred to as being of frequency at the island of Fogo presented for its consideration, and Mr. Evarts adds as illustrative of this view, that “that very day, and just at the moment that the subject of Mr. Corvo’s complaint is under consideration, the Department has received from his excellency the governor of Massachusetts the complaint of a citizen of the United States and of that commonwealth, who alleges that is son, a citizen of the United States, has been called upon to perform compulsory military duty by the Portuguese authorities at the island of Flores.” Mr. Evarts says inquiry will be made, and the matter will constitute the subject of a future instruction. And he adds that this incident is introduced now only as illustrative of the suggestion that complaints on either side, arising from any conflict between the Portuguese authorities and citizens of the United States, should in each case be made the subject of careful and specific inquiry.

Finally, Mr. Evarts instructs me to take the earliest opportunity of conveying to your excellency the views and disposition of the United States Government on the general question that has given rise to these complaints. He says so far from giving countenance to any proceedings on the part of ship-masters, or other citizens of the United States, who may find it necessary to visit or sojourn in the colonial possessions of His Majesty the King of Portugal, the President desires that all citizens of the United States under such circumstances shall observe strictly and in good faith the local laws and regulations of Portugal, and of the colonial possessions of that kingdom.

Instructions will be at once transmitted to the consul of the United States at Fayal to take the necessary steps to bring to the notice of American ship-masters, and other citizens of the United States visiting the islands in question the desire of the Government of the United States that they shall observe the local laws and regulations of Portugal with the same fidelity and respect with which they feel bound to observe and obey the laws of the United States; and I am at the same time to express the hope entertained by the President, that these preventive and precautionary measures on the part of the United States Government will obviate the necessity of any extraordinary measures or regulations by that of Portugal.

I avail myself of this occasion to renew, &c.,

BENJAMIN MORAN.

[Inclosure 2 in No. 260.]

Mr. Terry to Mr. Moran

Consulate of the United States of America,
Santiago, Cape Verde Islands, April 28, 1879.

Sir: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your dispatch bearing date 19th March, 1879, in reference to American whalers taking men from these islands, especially Fogo, without the necessary papers in such case required to be obtained from the authorities of the islands.

My attention was called to the subject by the secretary of the governor-general about the 1st of February last, and he only complained as to the island of Fogo. I asked him why the police did not interfere, and he informed me that they, the police, would run also!

I have had a conversation with the governor-general, and he told me the same. No complaint is made, so far as I know, in reference to this island. I asked the governor what I could do, and he seemed to think I could only inform the masters of American vessels to not infringe upon the laws in reference to taking men from the islands of this Archipelago. Of course I will do everything in my power to prevent the taking of men as charged in the complaint.

As to the grounds of complaint, I have no personal knowledge more than what I have already informed you.

As you request, I will inform captains of the intended new regulations. I trust there will be no cause for further trouble or complaint.

I have, &c.,

THOMAS W. TERRY.

[Inclosure 3 in No. 260.]

Mr. Moran to Mr. Corvo.

Legation of the United States,
Lisbon, May 17, 1879.

Mr. Minister: Referring to your excellency’s letter of the 14th of March last, and to my note to you of the 5th instant, respecting the alleged violation of the laws by the masters of American whaling-vessels in taking men from the island of Fogo without? the necessary papers, I have now to state that I have received a report upon the subject from Mr. Terry, consul of the United States at Santiago, Cape de Verdes, who says that his attention was called to the allegation by the secretary of his excellency the governor-general, about the 1st of February last, and that subsequently he had a conversation with his excellency on the subject. When he asked the governor-general what he was to do, his excellency seemed to think that Mr. Terry could only instruct the masters of American vessels not to infringe the laws of the island in reference to taking men from them. But neither the governor-general nor his secretary brought any specific charges to Mr. Terry’s notice, their complaints being only general.

Nevertheless, Mr. Terry has notified masters of American vessels always to observe Portuguese laws in reference to the enlistment of men in any of the Cape de Verde Islands. He knows of no such cases as those complained of, but will do everything in his power to assist the authorities in preventing the clandestine departure of Portuguese subjects on board American vessels. And in pursuing this course he but fulfills the desire of the Government of the United States, as expressed by Mr. Evarts, that all American citizens shall observe the local laws and regulations of Portugal with the same fidelity and respect with which they feel bound to observe and obey the laws of the United States.

I avail myself of this occasion to renew to your excellency the assurances of my distinguished consideration.

BENJAMIN MORAN.

No. 414. Mr. Moran to Mr. Evarts. [Document 445]

No. 414.
Mr. Moran to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Lisbon, June 18, 1879. (Received July 5.) No. 264.]

Sir: Referring to your No. 145, I now have the honor to inclose herewith a copy of a note which I addressed under your instructions to His Majesty’s Government, on the 26th of May last, expressing the most sincere thanks of the Government of the United States for the marked act of courtesy in admitting the United States frigate Constitution to the royal dock at Lisbon for repairs, to the inconvenience of the King’s service.

I have, &c.,

BENJAMIN MORAN.

Legation of the United States,
Lisbon, May 26, 1879.

Mr. Minister: Referring to the note which I addressed to your excellency on the 6th of April last, I have now the honor to state that immediately after that date I wrote to Mr. Evarts, giving him an account of the extraordinary courtesy shown to my government by that of His Majesty, in admitting the United States frigate Constitution to the royal dock in Lisbon, for repairs, to the inconvenience of the King’s service; and I am now instructed by Mr. Evarts to express to His Majesty’s Government, a duty which I discharge with great pleasure, the most sincere thanks of the Government of the United States, for this marked act of international courtesy.

With assurance of the highest consideration, I have, &c.,

BENJAMIN MORAN

Russia.Russia.

[446] . Mr. Stoughton to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, St. Petersburg, December 28, 1878. (Received January 20, 1879.)

[447] . Mr. Edwards to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, St. Petersburg, Russia, March 20, 1879. (Received April 14.)

[448] . Mr. Hoffman to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, St. Petersburg, April 4, 1879. (Received April 21.)

[449] . Mr. Hoffman to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, St. Petersburg, April 14, 1879. (Received May 5.)

[450] . Mr. Hoffman to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, St. Petersburg, April 14, 1879.

[451] . Mr. Hoffman to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, St Petersburg, April 15, 1879. (Received May 5.)

[452] . Mr. Hoffman to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, St. Petersburg, April 15, 1879. (Received May 5.)

[453] . Mr. Hoffman to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, St. Petersburg, April 16, 1879. (Received May 5.)

[454] . Mr. Evarts to Mr. Hoffman.

Department of State, Washington, April 19, 1879.

[455] . Mr. Hoffman to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, St. Petersburg, May 5, 1879. (Received May 20.)

[456] . Mr. Hoffman to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, St. Petersburg, May 12, 1879. (Received May 29.)

[457] . Mr. Hoffman to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, St. Petersburg, May 13, 1879. (Received May 29.)

[458] . Mr. Hoffman to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, St. Petersburg, May 26, 1879. (Received June 9.)

[459] . Mr. Hoffman to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, St. Petersburg, May 29, 1879. (Received June 14.)

[460] . Mr. Hoffman to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, St. Petersburg, June 17, 1879. (Received July 3.)

[461] . Mr. Evarts to Mr. Hoffman.

Department of State, Washington, July 18, 1879.

[462] . Mr. Hoffman to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, St. Petersburg, August 1, 1879. (Received August 21.)

[463] . Mr. Hoffman to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, St. Petersburg, September 16, 1879. (Received October 2.)

[464] . Mr. Hoffman to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, St. Petersburg, November 3, 1879.

[465] . Mr. Hoffman to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, St. Petersburg, November 4, 1879.

No. 415. Mr. Stoughton to Mr. Evarts. [Document 446]

No. 415.
Mr. Stoughton to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
St. Petersburg, December 28, 1878. (Received January 20, 1879.) No. 63.]

Sir: I have the honor to forward to you herewith military dispatch No. 21, of Lieut. F. Y. Greene, military attaché of this legation.

I have the honor, &c.,

E. W. STOUGHTON.

[Inclosure in Mr. Stoughton’s No. 63.]

United States Legation,
St. Petersburg, December 26, 1878. No. 21.]

Sir: I have the honor to report that, in obedience to orders received some months since from the War Department, I shall take my departure on the 29th of December, and expect to reach Washington about the 28th of January.

In view of my departure, I notified the commandant of the imperial headquarters of my desire to take leave of the Emperor at the last Sunday morning inspection, but at that inspection that official informed me that the Emperor would receive me at the Winter Palace. I accordingly presented myself there this morning and had a short interview with the Emperor, whose manner was most cordial. I endeavored to express my thanks for all the courtesy and assistance I had received from Russian officers of every grade during my stay in Russia. The Emperor was good enough to say that he regretted my departure; that I left a good impression (un très-bon souvenir) behind me in Russia, and to make one or two other complimentary remarks. He also gave me his photograph and autograph as a souvenir.

In the anteroom I met several members of the imperial family, including the Grand Duke Constantino (high admiral of the navy), who all took leave of me with kind expressions of regret, &c.

Yesterday I presented myself at the palace of the Grand Duke Nicholas, late commander-in-chief of the army in Bulgaria, and at the offices of the minister of war, and chief of the general staff, and took leave of those officials.

In conclusion I ask permission to express my thanks and appreciation of the uniform courtesy, consideration, and assistance that have been shown to me throughout the whole time that I have been attached to the legation by the Hon. Mr. Stoughton, United States minister to Russia, and by his predecessor, the Hon. Mr. Boker.

I inclose herewith some notes concerning the general duties and position of military attachés in Europe, which may possibly be of service upon a future occasion, in the event of officers being sent abroad.

I have the honor, &c.,

F. V. GREENE,
First Lieutenant Engineers, U. S. Military Attaché.

The Hon. Secretary of State,
(Through the United States Minister to Russia.)

[Inclosure to military dispatch No. 21.]

Memorandum concerning the position and duties of military attachés.

Each of the great nations of Europe keeps permanently attached to its embassies and legations, at the principal foreign capitals, one or more military officers, as follows: British embassies at— Paris.—One officer of the army. One officer of the navy.

Berlin.—One officer of the army.

Vienna.—One officer of the army.

St. Petersburg.—One officer of the army.

Rome.—One officer of the navy.

Washington.—One officer of the navy.

French embassies at— Berlin.—Two officers of the army.

Vienna.—Two officers of the army.

St. Petersburg.—One officer of the army.

Rome.—One officer of the army.

London.—One officer of the army. One officer of the navy.

Madrid.—One officer of the army.

German embassies at— Paris.—Two officers of the army.

Vienna.—One officer of the army.

St. Petersburg.—One officer of the army.

Rome.—One officer of the army.

London.—One officer of the army.

Madrid.—One officer of the army.

Russian embassies at— Paris.—One officer of the army. One officer of the navy.

Berlin.—One officer of the army. One officer of the navy.

Vienna.—One officer of the army. One officer of the navy.

Rome.—One officer of the army. One officer of the navy.

London.—One officer of the army. Two officers of the navy.

Austrian embassies at— Paris.—One officer of the army.

Berlin.—One officer of the army.

St. Petersburg.—One officer of the army.

Rome.—One officer of the army.

London.—One officer of the navy.

Constantinople.—One officer of the army.

Italian embassies at— Paris.—One officer of the army.

Berlin.—One officer of the army.

Vienna.—One officer of the army.

London.—One officer of the army. One officer of the navy.

These officers are known as “military (or naval) attachés.”

In addition to the above the Emperor of Russia sends one of his aides-de-camp of the rank of major-general, or colonel, as military plenipotentiary attached to the person of the Emperor of Germany, and another to the Emperor of Austria, and these courtesies are returned in the same manner by the two latter emperors.

The military attachés vary in rank from major-general to captain. The naval attachés from rear-admiral to lieutenant. They are usually chosen from among the officers of the general staff (état major), although sometimes from the artillery or engineers. In the English service the military attaché, if of the rank of general, takes precedence of all the embassy, except the ambassador; if below the rank of general, of all except the ambassador and first secretary. In the other services he takes precedence according to his own rank and the assimilated rank of the secretaries.

In the English service the correspondence of the military attachés is forwarded through the ambassador and foreign office. In other services it is communicated direct to the minister of war at home, and in the Russian service even the chiefs of bureaus (engineers, artillery, &c.,) correspond directly with the military attachés abroad without submitting their communications to the minister of war.

The military attaché is, of course, in general terms subject to the ambassador, but he is never called upon for ordinary office work or service of any kind other than that pertaining directly to his military duties. As a general rule he has his own office apart from the embassy. AH the privileges and courtesies extended to the diplomatic corps as a body are also extended to the military attachés, besides a great many invitations to purely military affairs, reviews, parades, military dinners, &c., in which the diplomats, properly speaking, are not supposed to be interested.

The duties of these officers, in general terms, are to keep their own governments always informed of the course of military affairs and the military strength of the countries to which they are accredited. For this purpose they are (usually) furnished, by courtesy, copies of all orders published by the minister of war, or by the chiefs of the bureaus of that ministry; they are invited, as part of the suite of the emperor or commander-in-chief, to reviews, to annual maneuvers and camps, to certain drills, and inspections, &c. They subscribe to the military newspapers and periodicals, and they have, of course, a wide acquaintance among the army officers in the capitals where they are stationed.

From all these sources they keep themselves constantly informed upon military affairs, and promptly transmit to their own governments any changes in the organization, strength, armament, &c., of the army. They also keep the ambassador informed in general of these changes, and are expected to be sufficiently familiar with the military system of the country where they are stationed to be able to state at any time its resources in men and arms in a military emergency. Their reports in detail are sent home to the minister of war, and by him referred to the general staff (état major). In the five great military nations, Germany, France, Russia, Austria, and Italy, there is a section of the general staff (usually known as that of “foreign statistics”) whose special duty it is to arrange and classify these reports of the military attaches in connection with data received from other sources on the same subject; so that the general staff is always in a condition to know with considerable exactitude the military resources of neighboring nations. The valuable service which this section of the Prussian staff rendered to their army in 1864, 1866, and 1870 is well known, and it is also well known that the French entered into the war of 1870 in great ignorance of the military strength of their enemy, principally because Marshal Le Boeuf, the minister of war, refused to credit the valuable reports of Baron Stoffel, the military attaché in Berlin, which reports were subsequently completely verified by the facts.

Besides the military attachés (who are always invited to the maneuvers), each of the great military nations sends to each of the others, upon invitation, two or three officers usually of the infantry, artillery, or cavalry, to witness the maneuvers which take place in the summer or autumn of each year, usually lasting about six weeks. These officers are lodged, fed, and mounted at the camp at the expense of the government to which they are accredited, and accompany the emperor or commander-in-chief throughout the whole time of the maneuvers, after which they return at once to their own countries.

Thus the military attaché permanently stationed at the embassies, and familiar with the language and all the details of the military organization, keep their governments constantly informed of the course of military affairs, while the officers sent especially for the maneuvers have an opportunity of seeing the practical exercises of the troops in camp, of observing the appearance of the men, their arms, equipments, &c., and at once returning to their own countries to explain in person the result of their observations and to corroborate, modify, or amplify the report of the military attachés.

At the outbreak of war extra officers (of friendly nations) are usually sent to the army in the field for the express purpose of witnessing the campaign. Thus in the recent war there were four German and three Austrian officers with the Russian army, five or six English officers with the Turkish.

The practice of our own government in this matter of obtaining military information has been of a very different nature. We have never had any permanent military attachés, and until the recent war in Turkey no military attachés of any kind; but from our earliest history we have been in the habit of sending from time to time “military commissions,” composed of two or three officers (the first of which, if I am not mistaken, was during Mr. Jefferson’s Presidency). The best known of these was the commission composed of Colonel Delafield of the engineers, Major Mordecai of the ordnance, and Captain McClellan of the cavalry, which visited Europe in 1855 and 1856, and whose reports upon fortifications, artillery, and army organization became standard authorities with all United States military officers, and so continue till now, except in so far as they have been modified by the changes which have taken place in the last twenty years.

But besides this commission numerous others have been sent from time to time to collect information concerning the fortifications, concerning questions of civil engineering, of torpedoes, of artillery and ordnance, of army organization.

All of these commissions have had a special technical object, have usually visited more than one country, have been presented to the military authorities by the United States legation or consulates, have made their notes, then returned home at once, and there composed their reports, which were submitted to the chiefs of the department, or to the Adjutant-General and deposited among their archives, usually being also published.

No statistical bureau or section concerning foreign military affairs exists in our War Department. At the beginning of the recent war in Turkey, three officers were sent abroad to observe and report its progress and collect other military information; these officers did not form a commission hut were appointed military attaché to the United States legations in Russia, Turkey, and Austria. Their instructions from the Secretary of State were to forward all their correspondence through the ministers of their legations and the State Department. At the conclusion of the war they were all three recalled. As I had the honor to be selected to be attached to the legation in Russia, and as from various circumstances my facilities for observation in the field and at the legation have been greater than those of the other two officers, I have ventured before returning to America to submit these notes upon the subject of military attaches in general, which, although a novelty in our service, is a custom of long established usage in Europe.

I also venture to say a few words as to the propriety of keeping permanent military attachés at the United States legations, as is urged by a number of Army officers.

Not only our military organization but our military policy in general is fundamentally different from that now pursued by every nation in Europe of the same importance as our own—thanks to our having weak nations on two sides and broad oceans on the other two, and thus being secure from any sudden attack. From this fortunate geographical situation it results that information concerning the strength of European armies has the same interest for us but no more than other statistical information, such as population, public debt, revenue expenditure, &c. But in Europe it is far different. The strength of the German army, for example, is, to France, Austria, and Russia, not a matter of mere statistical interest, but a question of vital importance upon which perhaps the safety of the nation may depend. Hence, the necessity of having a trained officer constantly on the spot to take cognizance of everything that occurs affecting the military strength of a neighboring nation.

This state of affairs not existing for us, the prime necessity for these officers has also no existence. There still remains, however, the secondary object of keeping up with the times in the technical part of the military profession. Our infantry musket, for instance, is probably as good as any in the world, but our artillery, both field and siege, is inferior in every respect, to that of every great nation and is at least fifteen years behind the age, i. e., it is of the same quality as that in common use fifteen years ago, and vastly inferior to that in present use, in range, in accuracy, in penetration, in mobility, in every essential quality. The reason of this (I hasten to say lest I should be misunderstood as making improper criticisms) is not due to our ignorance of what foreign nations are armed with, since the Ordnance Bureau has kept itself well informed of this by means of the commissions which it has sent abroad, but to the fact that Congress has not thought it necessary to appropriate the money requisite for providing our service with artillery equal to that of foreign nations. Yet I believe the last board of ordnance officers which visited Europe for the purpose of inspecting artillery was in 1873 or 1874; since that date every great nation on the Continent has completely changed its system of field artillery, and by this change has nearly doubled its range and general efficiency.* Were an officer properly qualified to report on these matters, stationed permanently in Berlin or Paris to take note of these changes, I feel sure that he would collect a great deal of information of the greatest utility to our service.

The leading military nations of to-day are Germany and France, and the great naval nation, I need hardly say, is England. The military system of the whole of Continental Europe is based upon that of Germany devised by King William, Count Roon, and Count Moltke between 1859 and 1864, and perfected by the experience of the wars of 1864, 1866, and 1870. All the other nations have adopted this system (i. e., universal military service for short terms, peace and war footings, mobilization, active army with its eisatz, reserve or landwehr, militia or landsturm, &c.), with only such modifications as their national characteristics demanded. It is, therefore, at Berlin that the system can behest studied, not only in organization, but also in armament, equipment, &c. The Russian and Austrian armies bear a great resemblance to, and have borrowed much from, the Prussian; and the points of dissimilarity are abundantly explained in the numerous German military periodicals published at Berlin.

The military literature which until twenty years ago was so nearly monopolized by France, has now passed very largely to Germany, and is very abundant at Berlin, and also at Vienna. The French military periodicals, as well as those of Belgium and Switzerland, published in the French language, are, however, still numerous, and contain a vast amount of useful military information.

It therefore seems to me that if an officer of the Adjutant-General’s, the Engineer, or Ordnance Departments were stationed in Berlin as military attaché to the United States legation, and another at Paris in the same capacity, and an officer of the navy at London, they would be able to furnish our military service an amount of military information of very great utility, more than the equivalent of their expenses, and would avoid the necessity of a great many of the special commissions. Such an officer’s usefulness, however, would he reduced almost to nothing if he were not able to speak and write fluently in the French language, and read German with the aid of a dictionary. The knowledge gained through an interpreter is very expensive and usually untrustworthy.

I do not think that there is any necessity of having an officer permanently in Russia, except in case others were sent to Germany and France, as a matter of courtesy, in view of the friendly spirit Russia has always shown to our country. The military is the predominant class in Russia, and that an officer would be cordially received and welcomed here I am able positively to state; and he would be able to gather a good deal of useful information here, although it would be somewhat in duplicate of that from Berlin. Fluency in French and a smattering of German would answer all his purposes in the matter of languages.

I do not think that an officer in Austria or Italy would be of any real service.

The pay of an officer of the rank of captain or higher is quite sufficient for his support as a military attaché in any of the capitals of Europe—if unmarried. He would need a certain contingent fund, not large in amount, for the purchase of military periodicals, maps, stationery, office rent, &c.

A married officer below the grade of general in our service would find his pay totally inadequate to his expenses, unless he lived in such a way as to lower the dignity of his government in the eyes of his colleagues. If he had means independent of his pay he would find the post a most agreeable one, provided he was familiar with the language of the country to which he was accredited.

To recapitulate, I respectfully submit as the result of my experience during the eighteen months that I have been engaged upon my present duties, that an officer of the Army stationed in Berlin, as a military attaché to the United States legation, another in Paris in the same capacity, and an officer of the Navy in London would be able to collect and report to the government a great deal of military information of the highest value.

Respectfully submitted.

F. V. GREENE,
First Lieutenant Engineers, Military Attaché.

* The last nation to change its field artillery was Russia, and the change is not yet completely effected. I shall submit to the proper authorities upon my return complete working drawings of the new system in all its details, together with comparative tabular statements of the difference between the old and the new systems. I have cited the question of artillery as merely one of a number of examples that could be given of the usefulness of a few officers permanently stationed in Europe.

No. 416. Mr. Edwards to Mr. Evarts. [Document 447]

No. 416.
Mr. Edwards to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
St. Petersburg, Russia, March 20, 1879. (Received April 14.) No. 71.]

Sir: Referring to your dispatch No. 39, addressed to Mr. Stoughton, relative to methods of taxation as respects railroads, and railroad securities, in use in Russia, I have the honor to report: 1st. That the railroad companies are free from taxation as holders of property real or personal.

2d. The stock is free from taxation to its owner.

3d. On the 1st day of January, 1879, the government levied a tax of 25 per centum on all passenger tickets of the first class, 20 per centum on second class, and 15 per centum on third class. With the above exception, there is no direct tax on the receipts of the companies, net or gross.

4th. The railroad companies of Russia are under the control and exercise of the government, and by their respective statutes subject to a general franchise tax.

But before the usual conditions of a franchise can be satisfactorily stated, an explanation must be given of the method followed to obtain it.

The founders of the company must, in accordance with the form instituted for that purpose in the empire, present to the minister of ways of communication an outline of the enterprise.

By direction of the minister the matter is then intrusted to a board of engineers belonging to the ministry, with instructions to examine and report as to the feasibility of the project, and to prepare plans and estimates of construction. If after examination it be deemed beneficial to give effect to the enterprise, the plans and estimates are placed by the minister before the committee of ministers for their consideration and action, and, if approved, are submitted for the inspection of His Majesty the Emperor.

After the imperial sanction has been obtained for the organization of the company, the ministers of ways of communication and finance, elaborate the conditions of the concession, and the statutes of the company.

The concession, with the statutes elaborated and recommended by the ministers of ways of communication and of finance, are submitted to the committee of ministers, and if approved are presented for the inspection and sanction of His Majesty the Emperor.

The concession usually defines— 1st. The name, object, and extent of the undertaking.

2d. The duty of the founders of the company, including the amount of caution money to be deposited by the founders in a government depository in order to guarantee the establishment of the company within a specified time.

The statutes of the companies are the laws to be observed by the companies, and are invariably after the sanction of the Emperor printed and filed among the collection of laws for the empire.

The following appear to me to be the principal provisions of the statutes of the various companies: 1st. They fix the duration of the franchise, usually from seventy-five to eighty-one years, at the expiration of which period the exclusive ownership of the entire line, with all the real estate and rolling-stock of the company, is vested in the government, without any payment therefor.

2d. They specify the amount of the capital of the company, which is, usually, one-third in shares and two-thirds in bonds.

3d. They define the number and dimension of the postal cars to be furnished by each company for the gratuitous transportation of post officials, mails, packages, &c.

4th. They exact the gratuitous use by the government of the company’s telegraph.

5th. They define the quantity of rails, rolling-stock, bridges, &c., which must be bought in Russia.

6th. They determine the percentage of reduction, usually from 40 to 75 per cent., of the tariff by which soldiers under arms are to be transported.

7th. They determine the percentage of the net receipts to be paid to the reserve fund and as dividends to shareholders.

8th. They concede to the companies, free of cost, all government land, stone or other material within certain specified limits, and which may be required for the legitimate use of the company in the construction or improvement of their lines.

9th. They declare the property shares and bonds of the companies exempt from taxation.

10th. They guarantee to the companies an annual net revenue of five per cent. on the share and bonded capital.

I am trustworthily informed that with the exception of three companies the government pays annually to the various companies from 1½ to 4 per cent. of this guarantee.

The companies are all under the control of the minister of ways of communication, who among other things determines the tariffs for passengers and freights.

It will be seen from the statements here presented that the government takes away from the founders substantially the control and exercise of the roads. The above answers are therefore as complete as circumstances will admit of their being made, and I trust they will be found satisfactory.

I have the honor, &c.,

W. H. EDWARDS.

No. 417. Mr. Hoffman to Mr. Evarts. [Document 448]

No. 417.
Mr. Hoffman to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
St. Petersburg, April 4, 1879. (Received April 21.) No. 79.]

Sir: Referring again to your dispatch, No. 43, inclosing copies of the “Regulations of the Treasury Department, to prevent the introduction of the epidemic disease now prevailing in Russia into the United States.”

The plague, so called, which appears to be rather a virulent form of typhus, has never extended beyond a small district, a few leagues square, in the extreme southeast of European Russia, and even there it has been effectually extirpated. In Northern Russia it has produced much less excitement than it did in the United States, and in St. Petersburg it forms no more a subject of conversation than if it had appeared at Rio Janeiro. It is thought and stated here that the exaggerated importance given it in Western Europe arose from commercial rather than from sanitary reasons.

* * * * * * *

Germany appears to have become satisfied that there is no longer any danger to be apprehended from this source, and the German Government has materially modified its order upon this subject. Under these circumstances I shall not communicate the “regulations” to the Russian Government unless instructed to do so.

I have the honor to forward to you herewith a translation of the order of the German Government above referred to, bearing date April 1, 1879.

I have the honor, &c.,

WICKHAM HOFFMAN.

[Inclosure 1 in No. 78.]

Berlin, April 1, 1879.

[Journal de Petersburg, April 3, 1879.]

The Reichsansiger publishes a decree of the minister of public worship (as chief of the department of medical affairs), and of the minister of commerce, as follows:

Considering that the epidemic of the plague may be considered, in general, as extirpated in the province of Astrakan, and that it may be admitted with certainty that it does not prevail in any other part of the territory of Russia, the decree of the 20th February, regarding the means of prevention against the introduction of the plague by the way of maritime traffic, is modified with the assent of the chancellor of the empire in this respect, that the sanitary inspection of ships is limited to those coming from the Black Sea and the Sea of Azoff, and is abolished for those coming from the Baltic, &c.

No. 418. Mr. Hoffman to Mr. Evarts. [Document 449]

No. 418.
Mr. Hoffman to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
St. Petersburg, April 14, 1879. (Received May 5.) No. 87.]

Sir: As the Emperor was taking his accustomed walk this morning, at about nine o’clock, an attempt was made upon his life. The assassin discharged the five chambers of his revolver at him, happily without effect.

The circumstances, as near as I can gather them at this hour, are as follows:

The Emperor has the habit of walking on the quai or in the streets near the palace every morning and unattended. Of course the police, in and out of uniform, are on the watch for his safety. This morning, a man in the uniform of an employé of a government office was observed to be near him, but as he was in a government civil uniform, and the neighborhood is filled with government offices, no particular attention was paid to him. Suddenly he drew a revolver and fired at the Emperor. The distance was considerable, and after the first discharge the Emperor, I am told, walked in a zigzag course, so as effectually to derange the aim of the assassin, who was at once seized by the passers by and by the police. The Emperor was unhurt. A policeman was slightly wounded.

Immediately after his arrest the assassin lost consciousness, and at the hour I write it is unknown whether he received a severe blow upon the head at the time of his arrest, or whether he has poisoned himself. The city is, of course, much agitated. A large crowd assembled round the palace, sang the national hymn, and cheered the Emperor. He drove out almost immediately in an open carriage, accompanied by one of his sons, and followed by the Empress in a close carriage. Flags were at once displayed upon the public buildings and upon most of the private houses, and I see preparations for an illumination this evening.

As no book is kept at the palace in which visitors may inscribe themselves for the Emperor, I called upon Prince Gortchakoff and left my card. I called also and inscribed myself on the members of the imperial family, which is customary at Easter.

* * * * * * *

I sent you this morning a telegram in the following words:

“Attempt made on life of Emperor this morning while walking near palace. Assassin fired five shots from revolver. Emperor unhurt. Assassin arrested.”

I have the honor, &c.,

WICKHAM HOFFMAN.

No. 419. Mr. Hoffman to Mr. Evarts. [Document 450]

No. 419.
Mr. Hoffman to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
St. Petersburg, April 14, 1879. No. 88.]

Sir: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your dispatch No. 44, in reference to the claim of Mr. John Calvocoressi, an American citizen residing at San Stephano, against the Russian Government, for injury done to his house and furniture during its occupation by Russian officers. I have forwarded Mr. Calvoeoressi’s petition to Mr. de Giers, and have the honor to inclose herewith a copy of my note.

You will observe that I have confined myself to stating the circumstances and asking for compensation, without submitting any arguments in support of the claim as of right If it is your intention to press it as of right (and you refer me to your No. 42 for instructions, case of the Rev. Mr. Cole), I am compelled to ask for further instructions.

It appears that an American citizen residing in Turkey suffers injury from the Russians, then at war with Turkey. The treaty of 1832 applies exclusively to Americans residing on Russian territory. I am unable, therefore, to bring this case within the purview of the treaty.

On the other hand, I find it laid down in the books that the property of a foreigner residing and doing business on a belligerent’s territory, is, so far as the other belligerent is concerned, hostile property, and may be treated like that of a native. He pays taxes, may be called upon for military service, and contributes in various ways to the strength of the country of his residence.

Baptiste Guillem was a French cook, residing in Mexico at the commencement of our war with that country. He left it immediately on the breaking out of the war, on his return to France, and was captured by our fleet with his property. In the opinion delivered by Mr. Justice Taney (United States vs. Guillem, 8 Howard), he says: The hostile character which his domicile in Mexico had imposed upon him and his property had therefore been thrown off, and as soon as he sailed from Vera Cruz he recovered the character of a French citizen, and as such was entitled to the rights and privileges of a neutral in regard to his property, as well as in his person.

Had he not left Mexico, therefore, his property would have remained hostile property, and he would not have been entitled to the rights and privileges of a neutral.

Mr. Dutilth, an American citizen, resided in Holland in 1794, when Great Britain was at war with Holland. His property was captured, part of it before he went to Holland, and part during his residence there. The former was restored to him; the latter was condemned, upon the ground that while he was a neutral resident of Holland his property was hostile property (the Hannibal and Pomona, Lords, 180 a), and the same principle was laid down by Mr. Justice Washington in the case of the Venus (8 Cranch).

If I am not mistaken, too, in the United States we have always refused to admit the claims of foreigners domiciled in the Southern States during our war for damage to their property. An exception was made in favor of British subjects, but this exception was specially secured to them by the treaty of Washington, and we were supposed to have received an equivalent for it. In France damage done to property in Paris during the commune was paid for but this I take to have been upon the principle that the municipality is liable for the acts of a mob and for injuries committed by the authorities in putting down the mob.

I became aware, during my residence in Paris, of many instances in which American property in France was occupied and injured by the Germans during the French-German war. I have in my mind particularly the case of Mr. Charles Moulton, whose property at Pahtval was occupied during the siege and much damaged. Mr. Moulton submitted a claim at Berlin, and, although I cannot speak with certainty, I am confident that neither this nor any similar claim has ever been allowed. If there have been exceptions, they have been made in cases of special hardship, and an appeal to the benevolence rather than to the justice of the Emperor.

As you may readily suppose, many claims of this kind have been submitted here by Great Britain, and especially by Italy. I am informed that they are submitted as cases of special hardship, and rather as requests than as claims; and I am further informed that not one of them has been paid, or is likely to be.

It may be that a residence in Turkey is not to be treated like a residence in the United States or in Western Europe. I have seen it laid down in an old English case, that a resident in Turkey remains a foreigner in the strictest sense of that term. That he does not mix with the people, become incorporated with them, or in any way identified with their interests, but remains a foreigner as much as he would be if confined to a factory in China, and so acquires in no respect the character of a Turkish subject.

This distinction may have existed at the time of the decision I refer to, seventy or eighty years ago, but I think it would be difficult to maintain it now.

However this may be, as at present informed, I see no other ground on which to press Mr. Calvorcoressi’s claim as a matter of right, and I have therefore the honor to request that if you intend it to be so pressed you will point out to me the grounds on which I am to urge it, that I may lay them before the Russian Government at the proper time.

I have, &c.,

WICKHAM HOFFMAN.

[Inclosure 1 in No. 88.]

Mr. Hoffman to Mr. De Giers.

Legation of the United States,
St. Petersburg, April 14, 1879.

Excellency: I have the honor to forward herewith to Your Excellency the petition of Mr. John Calvocoressi, asking that compensation may he made to him by the Imperial Government for the nse of his house and damage to his furniture.

It appears that Mr. Calvocoressi, an American citizen, was residing temporarily at San Stephano, and that during the occupation of that place his house was taken possession of by the Russian military authorities, and officers quartered there.

I am instructed by my government to bring this case to Your Excellency’s notice. I trust that compensation will be made to Mr. Calvocoressi for the injury he has suffered. This case appears to be one of peculiar hardship, for not only was occupation maintained during the entire stay of the Russian forces at San Stephano, and his furniture subjected to ordinary use, but unusual damage was done to it, amounting, as can be shown by the officers who occupied the house, to at least £1,500.

I take this opportunity, &c.

WICKHAM HOFFMAN.

No. 420. Mr. Hoffman to Mr. Evarts. [Document 451]

No. 420.
Mr. Hoffman to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
St Petersburg, April 15, 1879. (Received May 5.) No. 89.]

Sir: I have the honor to inform you that very early this morning I received your telegram of yesterday in the following words:

“President and people cordially congratulate His Majesty on providential escape.”

I wrote at once to Prince Gortchakoff, and beg to inclose herewith a copy of my note.

The Austrian ambassador, as dean of the diplomatic corps at St. Petersburg, called upon Prince Gortchakoff to state the desire of the corps to express their congratulations to the Emperor in person. The Emperor while thanking them for their congratulations and good wishes, which he highly appreciated, preferred not to receive them in special audience.

I have heard nothing new in regard to the attempted assassination beyond the details I gave you in my No. 87.

I have, &c.,

WICKHAM HOFFMAN.

[Inclosure 1 in No. 89.]

Legation of the United States,
St. Petersburg, April 15, 1879.

Prince: I telegraphed to my government yesterday the news of the infamous attempt upon the Emperor’s life, and of his happy escape.

To-day I am in receipt of a telegram in reply instructing me to say to His Majesty that “the President and people of the United States cordially congratulate His Majesty on his providential escape.”

I need scarcely add that I heartily join my own felicitations to those of the President and of my countrymen.

Will your highness kindly convey to the Emperor the expression of these cordial congratulations.

I take this opportunity, &c.

WICKHAM HOFFMAN.

No. 421. Mr. Hoffman to Mr. Evarts. [Document 452]

No. 421.
Mr. Hoffman to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
St. Petersburg, April 15, 1879. (Received May 5.) No. 90.]

Sir: After closing my dispatch to you, No. 89, of this date, I received from Prince Gortchakoff a note in answer to mine of this morning, conveying the congratulations of the President and people of the United States to the Emperor on his providential escape. I have the honor to enclose a translation of this note.

I have, &c.,

WICKHAM HOFFMAN.

[Inclosure with No. 90.—Translation.]

Prince Gortchakoff to Mr. Hoffman.

Sir: I did not fail to bring to the knowledge of His Majesty the Emperor the letter you addressed to me with the object of making known to His Majesty the expression of the congratulations and good wishes of the President and people of the United States of America on the occasion of the attempt on his life, from which he has so providentially escaped.

I am expressly charged, by the order of my august master, to beg you to transmit to the President and to your compatriots, and to receive for yourself the thanks of His Majesty for this expression of cordial sympathy.

I take this occasion, &c.

GORTCHAKOFF.
St. Petersburg, April 3/15, 1879.

No. 422. Mr. Hoffman to Mr. Evarts. [Document 453]

No. 422.
Mr. Hoffman to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
St. Petersburg, April 16, 1879. (Received May 5.) No. 91.]

Sir: Since the attempt upon the life of the Emperor, very stringent regulations in reference to passports and residence here have been enforced, to which it might be well to call the attention of our traveling countrymen.

Every one coming here must be provided with a passport duly viséd by a Russian consul. On arrival every one must be inscribed on the registers of the police, and every proprietor and porter of lodging-houses and hotels must see that this is done. The police are ordered to visit every house, and ascertain if every one is so inscribed; to impose fines of 50 to 500 roubles on the proprietors of lodgings, hotels, and houses who have not notified to the police the arrival of persons at their respective houses and inscribed them. The porters who have neglected this duty are to be discharged, and are forbidden to employ themselves again in the same capacity.

All persons without passports are to be arrested, if the prefect of police thinks proper, and the results of their examination communicated to the chief of the gendarmerie, or to the minister of the interior. If such persons have simply failed to comply with the regulations, they are to be fined.

These regulations apply to St. Petersburg, Moscow, Kieff, Kharkoff, Odessa, and Talka.

All the principal ministers and the chiefs of police are now accompanied by two mounted armed Cossacks, when they drive out, and at night by four.

In this connection, allow me to call your attention to a law of a very different character, lately promulgated upon the subject of usury, and which I think some of our States might adopt with advantage. Hereafter the borrower and lender may agree upon any rate of interest; in the absence of agreement it is fixed at 6 per cent. If they agree upon less, and the interest is not paid when due, the lender can raise the rate to 6 per cent. If they agree upon more, at the expiration of six months, and upon a notice of three months, the borrower may pay off the principal.

I have, &c.,

WICKHAM HOFFMAN.

No. 423. Mr. Evarts to Mr. Hoffman. [Document 454]

No. 423.
Mr. Evarts to Mr. Hoffman.

Department of State,
Washington, April 19, 1879. No. 48.]

Sir: On the receipt of your telegram of the 14th instant, which is hereby acknowledged, you were addressed by cable communication on the same day as follows: “President and people cordially congratulate His Majesty on providential escape.”

The appreciation entertained in this country of His Majesty’s exalted character, as the wise and firm friend and protector of the great Russian people, has greatly intensified the satisfaction which would naturally follow his escape from the bullets of the assassin. The President, calling to mind the expression of the deep sympathy of His Imperial Majesty, which was conveyed by Prince Gortehacoff to the minister of the United States at St. Petersburg, on the assassination which, upon the 14th day of April, 1865, plunged the American people and the world into mourning, tenders in return his especial congratulations upon His Majesty’s providential escape.

I am, &c.,

WILLIAM M. EVARTS.

No. 424. Mr. Hoffman to Mr. Evarts. [Document 455]

No. 424.
Mr. Hoffman to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
St. Petersburg, May 5, 1879. (Received May 20.) No. 99.]

Sir; An officer of the Russian army, Second Lieut. Hadimir Dombrovine, was tried by court-martial on the 25th ultimo, condemned as a member of a secret Nihilist society, and for resisting the officers sent to arrest him, and hung on the 2d instant.

As capital punishment, which has been substantially abolished in Russia for many years, is now revived by decree of the Emperor, this execution is perhaps worth reporting in some detail.

There can be no doubt of the guilt of the prisoner. Compromising documents in his handwriting were found in his room, and when the gendarmes came to arrest him, he seized a revolver and fired upon them. When this was taken from him, he caught up a poniard and inflicted slight wounds upon two of the officers.

But while there was no question of his guilt, there was question of his sanity. Two physicians, however, were sent to examine him, and they pronounced him to be sane.

But what strikes one accustomed to the care with which the rights of the prisoner are protected in the United States and Great Britain is the absence of counsel for the defense. As far as appears from the published record, no officer was assigned to defend the prisoner, to bring more prominently before the court the question of his sanity, or to urge extenuating circumstances if any existed. The testimony was all adduced by the prosecution.

Again, the proceedings were had in the absence of the accused. When brought into court he was violent and would not remain in his place. He was removed from the room and the witnesses examined, and the trial continued in his absence, and without giving an opportunity for cross-examination. It appears to have occurred to the prosecuting officer that the prisoner ought to be present, and he sent to invite him to return to the court-room. As he refused to answer the messenger he was left where he was. He was subsequently brought in, however, to hear his sentence pronounced, when he appears to have been quiet enough. The governor-general of St. Petersburg approved the sentence and the man was publicly hanged at the Fortress of Peter and Paul on Friday last.

All governments seem to be liable at times to panic, or to undue excitement when the ordinary safeguards thrown round life and property are thrust aside or disregarded. We have seen this in our own country at the time of the assassination of Mr. Lincoln. It was seen in the Indian mutiny, and notably in France immediately after the Commune.

At the same time, I see by the London and New York papers that exaggerated statements are current in Western Europe and the United States in regard to the condition of affairs here. The London Times of the 1st instant has an editorial from which I learn that “the population of this city is to be disarmed”; that our “houses are converted into prisons”; that we are not allowed to stir out after nine o’clock at night, and that “the lights must be extinguished at ten.” Until I read the London Times I was not aware of the pitiable condition to which we are reduced. Except that citizens must report their arms and receive permission to retain them, there is not a word of truth in this affecting picture of our sufferings.

I have, &c.,

WICKHAM HOFFMAN.

No. 425. Mr. Hoffman to Mr. Evarts. [Document 456]

No. 425.
Mr. Hoffman to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
St. Petersburg, May 12, 1879. (Received May 29.) No. 100.]

Sir: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your dispatch No. 48, in reference to the attempt upon the life of the Emperor, and to say that I have to-day addressed a note upon this subject to Prince Gortchakoff, a copy of which I beg to inclose.

I have the honor, &c.,

WICKHAM HOFFMAN.

[Inclosure 1 in No. 100.]

Mr. Hoffman to Prince Gortchakoff.

Legation of the United States,
St. Petersburg, April 30, 1879.

Prince: On the 3d-15th April I had the honor to inform your highness that I had received a telegraphic communication from my government instructing me to convey to His Majesty the Emperor the cordial congratulations of the President and people of the United States upon his providential escape.

I am now in receipt of a written dispatch upon the same subject, in which to his previous telegram Mr. Evarts adds:

“The appreciation entertained in this country of His Majesty’s exalted character as the wise and firm friend and protector of the great Russian people, has greatly intensified the satisfaction which would naturally follow his escape from the bullets of the assassin. The President, calling to mind the expression of the deep sympathy of His Imperial Majesty, which was conveyed by Prince Gortchakoff to the minister of the United States at St. Petersburg, on the assassination which, upon the 14th day of April, 1865, plunged the American people and the world into mourning, tenders in return his especial congratulations upon His Majesty’s providential escape,”

May I ask your highness to take an early opportunity to convey these sentiments to His Majesty?

I take, &c.,

WICKHAM HOFFMAN.

No. 426. Mr. Hoffman to Mr. Evarts. [Document 457]

No. 426.
Mr. Hoffman to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
St. Petersburg, May 13, 1879. (Received May 29.) No. 102.]

Sir: I have the honor to inform you that several cases of cattle disease (peste bovine) have appeared at St. Petersburg, and that active measures have been taken to stamp it out. Orders have been issued: 1st. To kill all animals infected or supposed to be infected, paying the owners therefor.

2d. Forbidding the cattle at St. Petersburg to be allowed to graze in common.

3d. Establishing a strict veterinary inspection in all parts of the city where the disease has already made, or may hereafter make, its appearance.

Some thirty cases have been reported thus far.

I have, &c.,

WICKHAM HOFFMAN.

No. 427. Mr. Hoffman to Mr. Evarts. [Document 458]

No. 427.
Mr. Hoffman to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
St. Petersburg, May 26, 1879. (Received June 9.) No. 107.]

Sir: Referring to my No. 104 of the 15th instant, I have the honor to inform you that of the fourteen persons tried by court-martial at Kioff on the 12th instant, two, a man and a young woman, have been condemned to be shot, eight, including two young women, have been sentenced to fourteen years and ten months hard labor in the mines, two to four years and some months hard labor, and two have been acquitted.

The fires continue in Eastern Russia. The city of Arenburg has suffered from a fourth fire, and is nearly destroyed. Collections have been made for the sufferers and stringent orders have been issued by the minister of the interior to the governors of the cities.

The plague of grasshoppers has appeared in the Caucasus. In the village of Elizabethpol the streets were so blocked up with them that circulation was seriously impeded. They have destroyed the vines and the fruit trees, and infested the houses. The wells and springs are so infected by them that the water is offensive and unhealthy.

The police have ordered that each inhabitant should kill two poods (36 pounds to a pood) of them, but such is the superstition of the people that it is with the greatest difficulty that the order is enforced. In some neighborhoods the people regard the grasshopper as powerful and malignant spirits, and, instead of destroying, seek to propitiate them by crossing themselves and burning tapers before them, as they do before the sacred pictures of the Saviour and the Virgin.

Orders have been given to check migration from one province to another. The peasants in North Central Russia have such difficulty in procuring the means of subsistence on account of the poverty of the soil and the heavy taxation, that they are emigrating in large numbers to the richer provinces of the black-earth zone in Central Russia. The authorities have forbidden this emigration, upon the ground that the northern villages will be depopulated, and propose to permit a certain fixed percentage to emigrate and no more.

A new device of the secret societies is giving the police much trouble. They find from time to time in the streets small pieces of tin, of the size and shape of a clover leaf. They are satisfied that these are signals understood by the initiated, but thus far have been unable to ascertain their meaning. General Gourko, commanding St. Petersburg, has thought it necessary to add one hundred and fifty soldiers to the police force of the city.

I have, &c.,

WICKHAM HOFFMAN.

No. 428. Mr. Hoffman to Mr. Evarts. [Document 459]

No. 428.
Mr. Hoffman to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
St. Petersburg, May 29, 1879. (Received June 14.) No. 109.]

Sir: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your dispatch No. 52, calling my attention to the case of Mr. H. Rosenstraus, a naturalized citizen of the United States, of the Jewish persuasion, and inquiring whether any preference is extended to British Jews over those of other nationalities in the matter of holding real estate in Russia; and if so, under what circumstances, and by what legal instrument such exceptional privileges are conferred.

And, first, I am requested by Mr. Edwards to state that he did not inform Mr. Rosenstraus that British Jews are allowed to hold real estate in Russia, as alleged by Mr. Wise in his letter to the Department. As consul, Mr. Edwards declined to give any opinion upon the subject, but while temporarily representing the minister of the United States he thought it right to answer Mr. Rosenstraus to the effect that, in his opinion, “the treaty in force between the United States and Russia conceded to him no rights in addition to those enjoyed by Russian subjects of like faith.” I have the honor to inclose a copy of Mr. Edwards’s letter.

In July last, at the request of Mr. Rosenstraus’s brother and partner, Mr. Stoughton inquired of Mr. de Giers if alien Jews are allowed to hold real estate in Russia. Mr. de Giers was unable to answer, but promised to inquire in the proper quarter and inform Mr. Stoughton. No reply has yet been received. Since my return I have reminded Mr. de Giers of Mr. Stoughton’s inquiry, but I should not be surprised if I received no answer. The foreign office in several countries of Western Europe refuses to answer questions of law. It points you to the published statutes of the country, and if these are of difficult interpretation to the foreigner he must have recourse to his own counsel. Most of the embassies and legations here have counsel attached to them. As this legation does not enjoy this advantage, I am compelled to give you the result of my own examination of such books as are accessible to me, and of my inquiries in well-informed quarters.

The laws of Russia bristle with so many exceptions that the exceptions frequently appear to be the rule.

The strong personal element which pervades the administration of the government frequently enables many individuals of a class to do what is forbidden to the class. Then the ancient laws of the states which have from time to time been annexed to the Russian Crown, and the dangers apprehended from local political disturbances; or, on the other hand, the loyal and “well-intentioned” character of the community, and even the social status of the individual, have a most marked effect in modifying the application of the law.

In the old Polish provinces Roman Catholics, native as well as foreign, are not allowed to hold land. In the Grand Duchy of Finland no alien is allowed to purchase real estate, not even a Russian, unless of noble birth, and in the Baltic provinces all persons, foreign or native, who are not of the noble or “citizen” class are subject to many annoying restrictions in the purchase and tenure of land. While in Russian Poland, the code enacts that a foreigner shall enjoy in Poland only those civil rights which are accorded to a Pole in the foreigner’s country.

This system of exceptions is applied to the Jews. Under article 1516, vol. ix of the code, foreign Jews are not allowed to settle in Russia or become Russian citizens. But as under several treaties, and especially under that with Great Britain, their right so to settle is clear, they are in point of fact permitted to reside here. They do so, however, under restrictions, one of which is that they must receive the permission of the three ministers—of finance, of the interior, and of foreign affairs—and another that they must belong to the first commercial guild, and, of course, pay accordingly. (Article 1523, vol. ix of code.)

So as regards real estate, native Jews are not permitted by law to hold land in Russia; yet it is notorious that many do hold it. When they reside far from the Polish frontier, when they live in a peaceful and loyal part of the empire, when their social position and wealth area guarantee that they will earnestly support the government, the authorities close their eyes and do not see the most transparent subterfuges.

Foreign Jews stand upon a better and more legalized footing. Under article 1523, it is permitted to “alien Jews distinguished by their position in society, or their extensive business transactions, to establish banking houses and manufactories, and to hold real property”; and in this respect all alien Jews, American and British, stand upon precisely the same footing.

This position of British Jews has, as far as I can learn, given rise to no reclamation on the part of Great Britain. They are allowed under the treaty to settle in Russia, and they are granted privileges not accorded by law to native Jews. * * *

In Mr. Rosenstraus’s case the reasons why the authorities in Kharkoff do not find in him the qualities necessary to bring him within article 1523 of the code are easily guessed.

Since 1865 his brother and partner has been in a chronic state of difficulty with these authorities. In that year he wrote to Mr. Clay that he would not be permitted to continue his business unless he produced his certificate of christening. Mr. Clay intervened, and in due time was answered by the foreign office that, as an American, Mr. Rosenstraus had enjoyed “exceptional tolerance,” but that he had abused the protection extended to him by the legation. Again, in 1873, Mr. Rosenstraus complained; the principal cause of complaint on this occasion being that he was compelled to belong to the first guild, and pay 600 roubles, instead of to the second guild, and pay 150 roubles. Mr. Jewell intervened, expressly disclaiming, however, a demand for any privileges not extended to native Jews, and in due time was answered that the laws as regards the different guilds had been amended (paragraph 5 of the annex of article 128 of the Code of Commerce), and that Mr. Rosenstraus was clearly included in the first guild. Mr. Westermann added that this was a matter within the exclusive competency of the municipal authorities, and that the central government never interfered with them.

I have the honor to call your attention to the fact that Mr. H. Rosenstraus is a naturalized citizen of the United States; that he has now been absent from the country for over three years; that he manifests no intention of returning, but on the contrary speaks as if he was permanently settled at Kharkoff, and is desirous of buying real estate there; that apparently he pays no taxes, performs no militia or jury duty; in short makes no return whatever for the protection he claims from the United States.

I have, &c.,

WICKHAM HOFFMAN.

[Inclosure 1 in No. 109.]

Mr. Edwards to Mr. Rosenstraus.

United States Consulate-General,
St. Petersburg, Russia, March 8, 1879.

Sir: With reference to your communication of a recent date relative to your right to purchase and hold real estate in the city of Kharkoff, I have the honor to inform you that the treaty in force between Russia and the United States concedes to you no rights in addition to those enjoyed by Russian subjects of like faith.

It is difficult to perceive upon what ground an American citizen can claim in Russian territory rights not conceded to Russian subjects.

Your position would, therefore, seem to be, so far as I am at present advised, the same as Russian subjects of like faith in Kharkoff. If, therefore, the laws now in force in Kharkoff prohibit those of Jewish faith from purchasing property in Kharkoff, then you are prohibited.

You should, therefore, seek the advice of local lawyers and be governed in your action by the laws now in force in the province where the property is situate.

W. H. EDWARDS.

No. 429. Mr. Hoffman to Mr. Evarts. [Document 460]

No. 429.
Mr. Hoffman to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
St. Petersburg, June 17, 1879. (Received July 3.) No. 115.]

Sir: Referring to your No. 56, in reference to certain statistics upon gold and silver and paper currency in Russia, requested by the honororable Secretary of the Treasury, I have the honor to inform you that I applied to Mr. de Giers for this information on the 9th instant. In the mean time I have endeavored to collect such data as the Russian Government permits to be published. I find, however, that the statistics are not looked upon by business men as altogether reliable, especially those relating to the paper currency.

In partial reply to Mr. Sherman’s first and second questions, I have the honor to state that on the 12th of this month there was in the bank, Roubles, in gold 144,423,246

Roubles, in silver 3,398,480

Roubles, in metallic values (funds publics metalliques) 25,229,693

In this connection it may be well to state that the bank for many months past has been steadily reducing its stock of silver, and increasing its gold. In January last it had more than nine millions of silver and only 138½ millions of gold.

In answer to the third question, the authorized paper currency in circulation amounted, in January last, to 720,265, 125 roubles 5 but in addition to this, the branches of the Bank of Russia had emitted 455,550,000 roubles; total paper circulation, 1,175,815, 125 roubles. The rouble is to-day worth $0.47.

In answer to the fourth and fifth questions, there was produced from the mines in 1877 (the latest published statistics), gold, 2,515 poods; silver, 1,202 poods. A pood is 36.08 pounds avoirdupois.

I have been unable to obtain any information as regards the quantity of gold and silver used in the arts and manufactures, and I doubt if any have been published. Judging, however, from the number of sacred pictures in Russia, in the manufacture of which silver is the principal ingredient, I should say that the quantity of this metal used in the arts and manufactures is large, while gold is very little used.

I have, &c.,

WICKHAM HOFFMAN.

No. 430. Mr. Evarts to Mr. Hoffman. [Document 461]

No. 430.
Mr. Evarts to Mr. Hoffman.

Department of State,
Washington, July 18, 1879. No. 64.]

Sir: An examination of the case of Mr. John Calvocoressi with a view to giving you the further instructions asked in your No. 88, of the 14th of April last, has been deferred through press of urgent business until now.

Your conclusion that, as a matter of right, the presentation of the case to the Russian Government, as reported by you, is now complete, is regarded as sound. As a principle of international law, the view that a foreigner domiciled in the territory of a belligerent cannot expect exemption from the operations of a hostile force, is amply sustained by the precedents you cite, and many others. Great Britain admitted the doctrine as against her own subjects residing in France during the Franco-Prussian war; and we, too, have asserted it successfully against similar claims of foreigners residing in the Southern States during the war of secession.

Nevertheless, considering that San Stefano was not the scene of active hostilities which would justify the apparently wanton damages done to the property of Mr. Calvocoressi, and that the lengthy occupation of his dwelling was for the discretional convenience of the Russian officers rather than from any strategic necessity or urgent military purpose, and therefore was of a nature for which compensation is, according to the usages of war, generally allowed by military commanders, the claim is deemed a proper one to submit, as you have already done, to the sense of equity and fair-dealing of the Government of His Imperial Majesty, and it is hoped that it will have received favorable consideration before this reaches you. Should the Russian chancellor, however, reply, denying responsibility, as of right, for the military occupation of Mr. Calvocoressi’s dwelling, you will briefly urge the claim as one of equity. You will, however, take no action upon this instruction unless a negative reply of the Russian Government should make it opportune to act in the sense indicated.

I am, &c.,

WM. M. EVARTS.

No. 431. Mr. Hoffman to Mr. Evarts. [Document 462]

No. 431.
Mr. Hoffman to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
St. Petersburg, August 1, 1879. (Received August 21.) No. 129.]

Sir: It may interest you to read a short account of a visit I made yesterday to the three cruisers, built on the Delaware for the Russian Government, and now lying at Cronstadt.

One of the smaller yachts of the Grand Duke Constantine, commander-in-chief of the Russian navy, was placed at my disposal, and every courtesy was shown me as the representative of the United States.

I first boarded the Europe, the largest of the three vessels. She was on the stocks intended for the California trade when she was purchased by the Russian Government. She is large and roomy, well lighted and ventilated, and thoroughly comfortable. The cabin is spacious, and is fitted up in excellent taste in mahogany, walnut, and bird’s-eye maple. Every modern improvement has been introduced into her, and among other arrangements for the comfort of the Russian crew is a Russian steam-bath room. Every part of the ship was thoroughly clean. The hospital is a large, light, and well-ventilated room. In short, everything possible has been done for the comfort and health of the crew. Her speed is 13½ knots. The Emperor, who visited her on Wednesday last, is so much pleased, with her comfort and beauty that he expressed his intention of using her temporarily, at least, as his seagoing yacht.

The Asia, formerly the Columbus, running between New York and Havana, is also a fine, roomy, comfortable ship, but her speed is somewhat less, and her cabins are fitted up more plainly in soft wood. It is understood that she is ordered to the Pacific station, headquarters at Vladiovostock, where she is to become the flagship of the squadron.

The Africa is a smaller ship than the Europe, and not so fast. She was formerly known as the Saratoga, and ran between New York and Havana. She has the same thoroughly comfortable qualities, light, airy, and healthy. Her cabins are even more beautifully fitted up than those of the Europe.

The officers appeared to take great pride in their ships. They spoke of them with evident admiration, and were never tired of repeating that everything on board of them, even the photographs of the imperial family, was American. I was told that a great desire exists among the officers of the Navy to be transferred to these ships.

I learn from good authority that the Russian government is so much pleased with these vessels, and especially with their comparatively small cost (they cost one-half the price of a similar ship built in Russia), that they will probably order five or possibly ten more to be built in the United States.

I have, &c.,

WICKHAM HOFFMAN.

No. 432. Mr. Hoffman to Mr. Evarts. [Document 463]

No. 432.
Mr. Hoffman to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
St. Petersburg, September 16, 1879. (Received October 2.) No. 138.]

Sir: I find in the Journal de St. Petersburg of this morning, extracts from an official report upon the subject of the locusts in Southern Russia. These extracts may interest our board of agriculture, more particularly in connection with the grasshoppers, so troublesome in some of our Western Territories. I therefore send you two copies of the Journal, and a translation of the extracts in question.

I have, &c.,

WICKHAM HOFFMAN.

[Inclosure in No. 138.—Translation.]

Locusts in Russia.

[From the Journal de St. Petersburg, September 4–16, 1879.]

Mr. Portchinsky, secretary of the Russian Society of Entomology, having been sent last summer to the southern provinces of the Empire to ascertain what places grain locusts (anis opolia austriaca) prefer to lay their eggs in, has made numerous researches in the province of Pultava and has come, the Gazette of Agriculture tells us, to the following conclusions:

The grain-locust generally deposits its eggs in wheat-fields, and as soon as they are hatched the attacks of the insects on the grain commence. There are generally from 20 to 50 locusts per square archine (an archine is 27 inches) of wheat. Rye and barley fields contain comparatively much fewer larvae (from 2 to 5) a square archine, but if these fields are near wheat-fields the larvae are then just as numerous.

The fields which have been sown with wheat the preceding autumn are the receptacles of an immense quantity of larvae, which it is impossible to destroy before they have become chrysalids.

The state of the fields whence the owners have driven the locusts is very different. The pursued insects fly in masses to the neighboring fields, and the wheat-field where they have fought these insects does not retain more than 3 to 16 larvae a square archine; on the other hand all the fields of flax, buckwheat, oats, &c., which are not generally attacked by the locusts, become infested and contain from 16 to 26 larvae an archine.

It follows that the use of ropes or machines to drive away the locusts is very dangerous, because instead of laying eggs in wheat-fields, where they may be destroyed in the spring while in the state of chrysalids, they settle upon the surrounding fields, no matter what they are sown with.

Experiments made on the spot by Mr. Portchinsky prove that the larvae turned up by the plow re-enter the earth quickly, but if they can be kept exposed ten minutes to the sun they infallibly perish under its heat. He concludes that in the spring, when the larvae (become chrysalids) are in a state of complete immobility, plowing the fields will be of great use, because the chrysalids exposed to the action of the sun will certainly perish.

As to fighting the locusts by destroying its eggs, Mr. Portchinsky considers this to be impossible, inasmuch as the period during which the eggs remain in the ground, before they become larvae, is precisely that during which the grain is standing.

Mr. Portchinsky is convinced that this year the locusts have left only an insignificant number of larvae, which permits us to hope that the crops of 1881 will run no serious risk in this respect.

As to next year, according to the researches he has made in three townships, the fecundity of the locusts has been very great.

He concludes that as the wheat-fields of last year contained 20 to 50 larvae a square archine, we get, counting only an average of 30 larvae a square archine, a total of 648,000 locusts to the “deeiatine,” (.37 of an acre). In the village of Kroutoyar, where the wheat-fields cover 200 deciatines, each archine contained at least 50 larvae. It follows that these 200 deciatines will contain next year more than 2,000,000 of locusts, and that consequently, if the spring of 1880 is favorable to the increase of this insect, we must unfortunately expect great ravages from it.

No. 433. Mr. Hoffman to Mr. Evarts. [Document 464]

No. 433.
Mr. Hoffman to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
St. Petersburg, November 3, 1879. No. 150.]

Sir: Referring to my correspondence with the department upon the subject of the claim of Mr. Calvocoressi to compensation for injury done to his property at San Stefano by the Russian troops, I have the honor to inclose to you herewith copy of note received from Baron Jomini upon this subject, together with a translation of the same. In accordance with the instruction contained in your No. 64, I shall, in a few days, address a note to Baron Jomini urging Mr. Calvocoressi’s claim as one of equity.

I have, &c.,

WICKHAM HOFFMAN.

[Inclosure in No. 150.—Translation.]

Baron Jomini to Mr. Hoffman.

Ministry of Foreign Affairs,
October 29, 1879.

Sir: In reply to your note of 29th August, 1879, concerning the claim of the American citizen Calvocoressi, on account of damage done him by the Russian troops in Turkey, I have the honor to inform you that according to the principles of international law, injuries done to private property are excusable when military operations require it, and that in general, the person who has suffered from war should consider himself the victim of a scourge of nature, such as hail, inundation, &c.

International law, besides, recognizes no difference between the state of things created by war, and the occupation of the enemy’s territory. Consequently no obligation to indemnify private individuals for losses occasioned during the war, or the occupation of the enemy’s territory, can result to the imperial government.

Receive, sir, &c.,

BARON JOMINI.

No. 434. Mr. Hoffman to Mr. Evarts. [Document 465]

No. 434.
Mr. Hoffman to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
St. Petersburg, November 4, 1879. No. 152.]

Sir: Referring to my No. 150, I have the honor to inclose to you herewith a copy of a note I yesterday addressed to Baron Jomini in the case of Mr. Calvocoressi. In accordance with your instructions, I have endeavored to present his case briefly, and as a claim in equity rather than in law.

I have, &c.,

WICKHAM HOFFMAN.

[Inclosure 1 in No. 152]

Mr. Hoffman to Baron Jomini.

Legation of the United States,
St. Petersburg, October 22, 1879.

Excellency: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your excellency’s note of October 20, 1879, in reference to the case of Mr. Calvocoressi, an American citizen, whose house at San Stefano was occupied by Russian troops during the late war, and much damage done to it and to the furniture.

The principle that neutral property on belligerent territory becomes hostile property as far as the other belligerent is concerned, is so well established, that I had not proposed to claim compensation for Mr. Calvocoressi as of right; but the case appeared to me to be one of peculiar hardship, as I had the honor to state in my note of the 14th April last, and it is as a claim in equity, rather than under international law, that I am instructed to bring it to your excellency’s attention, and to ask for it the favorable consideration of the imperial government.

San Stefano was not the scene of active hostilities, such as would have justified the great damage done to Mr. Calvocoress’s property, and the prolonged occupation of his house, running over many months, was not due to any strategic necessity or urgent military purpose, but was simply for the convenience of the Russian officers. I therefore submit to your excellency that, according to the ordinary usages of war practiced by military commanders, a compensation should have been paid to Mr. Calvocoressi by the military authorities. Your excellency will observe, too, that Mr. Calvocoressi does not complain so much of the ordinary wear and tear of the house and furniture during its occupation, as of the unnecessary and apparently wanton injury done them, amounting to over £1,000 sterling.

It is upon the ground of prolonged occupation not required by military operations, and of damage inflicted far beyond the ordinary wear and tear arising from the occupation of the house and the use of the furniture, that I am instructed to request a favorable consideration of the imperial government for the claim of Mr. Calvocoressi.

I take this opportunity, &c.

WICKHAM HOFFMAN.

Siam.Siam.

[466] . Mr. Sickels to Mr. Payson.

Consulate of the United States of America, Bangkok, Siam, February 19, 1879. (Received April 10.)

[467] . Mr. Sickels to Mr. Payson.

Consulate of the United States of America, Bangkok, Siam, July 10, 1879.

[468] . Mr. Sickels to Mr. Payson.

Consulate of the United States of America, Bangkok, Siam, August 25, 1879. (Received October 13.)

[469] . Mr. Evarts to Mr. Sickels.

Department of State, Washington, August 29, 1879.

[470] . Mr. Sickels to Mr. Payson.

Consulate of the United States of America, Bangkok, Siam, October 6, 1879. (Received November 28.)

No. 435. Mr. Sickels to Mr. Payson. [Document 466]

No. 435.
Mr. Sickels to Mr. Payson.

Consulate of the United States of America,
Bangkok, Siam, February 19, 1879. (Received April 10.) No. 103.]

Sir: I have the honor to inform the Department that two official dispatches have been received at this consulate during the past week, of a nature which would seem to demand a special report to the Department.

The first covers a letter from the Supreme King of Siam, incased in royal-purple satin, and addressed to Ex-President Grant, containing (I am advised) an invitation from His Majesty to that gentleman to visit his kingdom as the guest of the government.

The second is in reference to the proposed dispatch to the United States of an embassy from this country.

Translated the dispatch reads: His Majesty the King of Siam has commanded me to state for your information, that in regard to arrangements for sending an embassy to America, the Government of Siam have held a consultation upon it (i. e., have concluded to send it). When the details have been fully arranged, the Sennabodi (Grand Council of State) will give notice to the consul as to the time of leaving, that appropriate preparations may be made by both parties.

I have, &c.,

DAVID B. SICKELS, Consul.

No. 436. Mr. Sickels to Mr. Payson. [Document 467]

No. 436.
Mr. Sickels to Mr. Payson.

Consulate of the United States of America,
Bangkok, Siam, July 10, 1879. No. 111.]

Sir: I have the honor to refer to paragraph 3 of my No. 103, under date of 19th February of the current year. As therein set forth, the embassy from this kingdom to the United States was determined on, the details arranged, and the personnel selected. But when it seemed that everything was prepared some of my foreign colleagues (I have reason to believe), who were jealous of the increase of American influence in Siam, were good enough to suggest to His Majesty that it was not in conformity with European customs for states to send embassies uninvited that it lowered them in the eyes of the powers to whom they were sent, if it was done; and that the representative of no power in Siam had the right to pledge the hospitality of his country unauthorized, especially by its head.

The Siamese, in common with most Asiastic natives, are very punctilious in matters of etiquette, and His Majesty informed me, in a recent audience, that he had concluded to defer the dispatch of the embassy to the United States until officially informed from Washington that it would be welcome.

I have, &c.,

DAVID B. SICKELS,
United States Consul.

No. 437. Mr. Sickels to Mr. Payson. [Document 468]

No. 437.
Mr. Sickels to Mr. Payson.

Consulate of the United States of America,
Bangkok, Siam, August 25, 1879. (Received October 13.) No. 115.]

Sir: I have the honor to acknowledge receipt of Department dispatch No. 50, under date of June 9, 1879, instructing me to furnish the Department with information regarding the proposed embassy from Siam to the United States; its objects, its constitution, and the proposed time of dispatch.

Siam has, at various periods dating back some two centuries, sent embassies, at intervals, abroad for the purpose of observing the customs and manners of foreign nations, inaugurating or confirming friendly relations, and noting improvements in the arts and sciences which would benefit the country by their introduction and adoption. The first of these embassies to a western power, of which there is reliable official record, was sent to France during the reign of Louis XIV. Later ones have been dispatched to the same state, as well as to Great Britain, and there is one now abroad, which at last accounts was in Germany.

Some thirty years since, before the present treaties with the great powers had an existence, the missionaries, who were the pioneers of civilization, possessed considerable influence in this kingdom as the connecting links between the Siamese and foreigners. Being Americans, that influence was naturally exercised in behalf of their friends in the United States. They were the first to introduce steam-machinery into Siam, and at one time they and their lay associates controlled to a considerable extent the foreign import trade.

American manufactures then fell into disrepute 5 and the English traders who flocked in shortly after took advantage of it. They sneered at anything and everything American, and the trade fell into their hands.

A Mr. Mason, a bankrupt trader, was appointed consul-general of Siam at London, through the influence of the British consulate, and orders for steamers, guns, ammunition, arsenal stores, in fact everything required by a nation who really had nothing, were sent through him to England.

The unpaid consular officers who occupied at first the United States consulate here did very little to raise the character of our country in Siamese estimation, and the trade was lost. The British merchants, though they charge high prices and make great profits, furnish good and satisfactory articles. Thus the king’s new yacht, the Vesatri, of about 250 tons, although she lays down in Bangkok at $80,000, leaving certainly $20,000 profits to Mason, yet is a beautiful and well-finished steamer.

But latterly there have been symptoms of a revival of direct American trade. The partial and indirect business done via Singapore and Hong-Kong has created an interest in it. More Siamese have been abroad, and American travelers of a higher class than heretofore have visited Siam. It is to one of these latter gentlemen that we owe the origin of the embassy. While dining with His Majesty the King, about a year or more since, he interested His Majesty very much by his descriptions of the new and wonderful inventions of our country, and in answer to His Majesty’s eager inquiries, advised him to send on an embassy to the United States to examine for themselves the wonderful inventions and improved manufactures in use there.

The idea was favorably entertained by His Majesty, and shortly after he spoke to me informally on the subject. As I understood His Majesty, the embassy would be charged with no definite diplomatic objects. They would simply proceed to the United States, and, after officially paying their respects to the President and the officers of government, and presenting their letters of credence from the King, would traverse the country, observing all matters of interest, and particularly every species of manufacture which, in a military, naval, or industrial sense, would be of value in their own country.

* * * * * * *

I do not think that the efforts being made to prevent or direct the course of this mission will ultimately succeed.

I am thoroughly of opinion that this course on the part of the Siamese, if carried out, will have a beneficial effect upon our trade with Siam, and I regret that circumstances should so long have delayed it.

I am, &c.,

DAVID B. SICKELS,
United States Consul.

No. 438. Mr. Evarts to Mr. Sickels. [Document 469]

No. 438.
Mr. Evarts to Mr. Sickels.

Department of State,
Washington, August 29, 1879. No. 53.]

Sir: Referring to your dispatches Nos. 103 and 111, in relation to the proposed visit to the United States of an embassy from His Majesty the King of Siam, I have to instruct you to take occasion to say to the government of His Majesty that the President has received with pleasure the information that an embassy is proposed; and you are further authorized to assure the Siamese Government, that it will give the Government of the United States great satisfaction to receive the embassy, in the belief that it will tend to develop international commerce and good feeling between the two countries; and that, with a view to that end, the President will call the attention of Congress to the subject at the coming session. For your own information I have to say to you, as it is supposed, in view of the past history of the Siamese embassies to Great Britain and France, that it will require some unusual expense not now provided for by law (presents, transportation on national ships, &c.), that it would not be practicable to receive the embassy as they would expect to be received without an appropriation by Congress, as was made in the case of the first Japanese embassy.

The matter, however, will be laid before the proper committee, and no doubt is entertained that a suitable appropriation will be made.

Whenever assured in this respect, you will be informed by telegraph, in order that you may advise the Siamese Government as to the time when we shall be able to receive them.

This delay, of a few months, will, however, enable the government to send a ship of war to Bangkok, to receive the embassy and bring them to the United States, as was done by Great Britain and France.

I am, &c.,

WM. M. EVARTS.

No. 439. Mr. Sickels to Mr. Payson. [Document 470]

No. 439.
Mr. Sickels to Mr. Payson.

Consulate of the United States of America,
Bangkok, Siam, October 6, 1879. (Received November 28.) No. 121.]

Sir: I have the honor to inclose herewith copy of an address prepared by the American residents, on the occasion of the birthday of the King, for presentation to His Majesty. It was extensively signed and sent to the consulate to be forwarded.

As a literary effort this document was not a particularly elegant specimen, but as it was perfectly respectful, and, I had reason to believe, tolerably sincere, I sent it in through the proper channels.

I have further the honor to inclose originals of His Majesty’s reply to the address of the citizens, and to my own inclosing it.

I have, &c.,

DAVID B. SICKELS,
United States Consul.

[Inclosure 1 in No. 121.]

Congratulatory address to the King.

We, the undersigned citizens of the United States residing in Siam, beg leave to present to His Majesty the Supreme King of Siam our congratulations on this anniversary of His Majesty’s birthday, and to offer our best wishes for his continued health and happiness and the prosperity of his kingdom.

We congratulate Your Majesty on the friendship and good will of all other nations for the Kingdom of Siam, and for the progress of civilization and improvement in this kingdom. Roads and bridges have been built to facilitate travel. Ships and steamboats have been constructed for navigating the rivers and surrounding waters. Canals have been dug for bringing timber from the forests and opening new regions of the country for cultivation. Elegant palaces have been erected for Your Majesty and the nobility. Improved buildings have been made for the market-places and the dwellings of the people, and a general air of progress apparent to recent visitors to Siam and especially to the older residents of the country.

With respectful deference we beg to suggest to Your Majesty that still higher improvements, and a pledge of still greater prosperity to Siam, might be secured by abolishing the gambling stalls, the spirit-shops, and the sale of opium.

We renew our congratulations for Your Majesty’s good health, wise government, and prosperous reign, and pledge our prayers for your continued happiness, and growing kingdom.

(Signed by William Dean and twenty-eight others.)

[Inclosure 2 in No. 121.—Translation.]

To David B. Sickels,
United States Consul:

Your letter of congratulations, and also inclosing the congratulations of the American citizens residing in Siam, we have received with pleasure. The answer to the congratulations of the American citizens we inclose in this cover also.

We now beg to answer you personally. In your letter you show your good will to us personally, and also invoke a blessing for our future prosperity. We thank you very much, and hope that you will remain in Bangkok many more years, far beyond the time you yourself have set to leave. We invoke a blessing for your future prosperity in all things.

SIAMAIN.

[Inclosure 3 in No. 121.—Translation.]

To the American citizens who reside in Siam:

You have been the source of joy to us on account of your words of encouragement in regard to the prosperity of Siam, and that you believe that we will administer the affairs of the nation so as to insure its prosperity. Your congratulations give me great pleasure. We beg to inform you that ever since we attained to the kingdom we have had the best interests of Siam constantly in mind, which is a country built up by the strength of our ancestors. We have also had it as our constant care to preserve those treaty relations with foreign powers which our father in his wisdom entered into. We hope to have the treaty relations constantly prosper.

In regard to those things which you advise me are evils to the people, we beg to inform you that we have seen those evils and think continually that we may be able to change them. It is a work which must be done, but cannot yet be done, and must be postponed, but, though postponed, we are thinking constantly that these evils are a matter which we shall regulate in future.

We thank you all that you have thought of the affairs of our country, and have thought of ourself, also invoking a blessing upon us. We pray that the thing which is great in the universe will grant you all to live in our country in peace and prosperity.

Throne Barone, Aracba satis Moholan, Sunday, 6 of waxing moon, 11th month, year of Rallit, 1st of the decade, 1241 of civil era, corresponding to September 21, 1879, of Christian era.

SIAMIN.

Spain.Spain.

[471] . Mr. Evarts to Mr. Lowell.

Department of State, Washington, September 24, 1878.

Contents

Circular. (Documents 472-484)

No. 440. Mr. Evarts to Mr. Lowell. [Document 471]

No. 440.
Mr. Evarts to Mr. Lowell.

Department of State,
Washington, September 24, 1878. No. 98.]

Sir: On receipt of your dispatch No. 110, of the 30th ultimo, in relation to the return to Madrid of certain packages of La Ilustracion Española? and “La Moda Elegante,” which has been sent by mail to the United States, on account of non-payment of the duties thereon, inquiry on the subject was made of the Postmaster-General.

His reply, dated 20th instant, states that the packages, being regarded as dutiable, were returned in conformity with the construction given to the postal-union treaty by the international bureau at Berne, to the effect that duties may not be collected upon dutiable matter sent by mail within the limits of the union.

A copy of the letter of the Post-Office Department, with its accompanying circular, explanatory of the rules adopted in the matter, is herewith transmitted for your information.

I am, &c.,

WM. M. EVARTS.

[Inclosure in No. 98.]

Post-Office Department,
Washington, D. C., September 20, 1879. No. 47322.]

Sir: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your letter of the 18th instant, inclosing a copy of a dispatch, dated the 30th ultimo, from the minister of the United States in Spain relative to the return to that country of certain packages containing dutiable matter sent by mail to the United States, and to inform you, in reply, that as the general postal-union treaty, under the provisions of which all postal exchanges between this country and Spain are conducted, stipulates that any article whatever liable to custom duties shall not be admitted for conveyance by the post, such articles received by mail from postal-union countries as are pronounced by the customs officers to be subject to duty in the United States, are returned as undeliverable matter to the country of origin.

This practice is based upon a construction by the international bureau at Berne that the provisions of the treaty do not authorize the collection of customs duties on articles sent by mail within the limits of the postal union, and that the postal administrations which cannot deliver such articles sent to them from postal-union countries, are required to return them immediately, through the respective offices of exchange.

Under our customs-revenue laws the only books which are absolutely free of duty are those which have been printed and manufactured more than twenty years, and pamphlets, periodicals, and other like publications for the personal use of the party to whom they are addressed; and the regulations of the Treasury Department provide for the free admission through the mails, in the discretion of the collector of customs, of books valued at less than one dollar, and of photographs, in limited numbers, of private individuals for their own use or for distribution to relatives or personal friends.

The illustrated periodicals referred to by Mr. Lowell in his dispatch were, no doubt, pronounced by the customs officers detailed to inspect the foreign mails received at New York to be subject to duty, and were for that reason returned to the country of origin.

The order of the Treasury Department directing the admission through, the mails free of duty of packages of periodicals not exceeding the weight of 1,000 grams (2 pounds 3 ounces), which Mr. Lowell mentions as having read an American newspaper, was issued by the Secretary of the Treasury, under date of June 18, 1878, in consequence of complaints made to this department, that customs officers at New York were returning to countries of origin, as subject to duty, all newspaper’s and periodicals received in the mails from abroad; and the subsequent instruction from the Treasury Department, published in a circular issued from this department on the 5th instant, a copy of which is herewith inclosed, resulted from further efforts by this department to obtain from the Treasury some fixed rule defining clearly the limits within which the discretionary power of customs officers would be exercised in remitting duties on articles valued at not, more than one dollar. It was deemed important for the information of the public that the Treasury regulations should specify what books, periodicals, &c., not exceeding the value of one dollar, would be permitted to pass in the mails free of duty; but as all books, periodicals, &c., printed and manufactured less than twenty years are by our revenue laws subject to duty, the Secretary of the Treasury did not feel warranted in issuing any more definite regulations on the subject than those contained in his letters published in the inclosed circular, which authorizes the delivery through the mails free of duty, of unsealed packages of newspapers and periodicals not exceeding in weight 1,000 grams, when intended mainly for the personal use of the party to whom they are addressed, and when not sent as merchandise for trade and profit, and which also states that it may be presumed that the discretionary power of customs officers, to remit duties on books not exceeding one dollar in value, will not be exercised in regard to books except in the case of single copies of books transmitted through the mail for the use of private persons, sent in good faith for that purpose.

I am, very respectfully, your obedient servant,

JAS. N. TYNER,
Acting Postmaster-General.

[Inclosure in Mr. Tyner’s letter.]

Post-Office Department,
Office of Foreign Mails,
Washington, D. C., September 5, 1878.

[Official.]

In order that postmasters and the public may be fully informed relative to the regulations and instructions issued by the Treasury Department for the treatment by collectors of customs of dutiable books, newspapers, &c., imported in the mails from foreign countries, copies of the following documents are, by direction of the Postmaster-General, annexed hereto, viz: 1. Treasury circular No. 61, relative to newspapers imported through the mails.

2. Letter from the Acting Secretary of the Treasury to the Postmaster General, dated August 28, 1878, inclosing copy of letter addressed to the collector of customs at New York, under date of August 24, 1878, prescribing limitations under which importations of dutiable books and newspapers may be made through the mails.

3. Letter from the Secretary of the Treasury to the Postmaster-General, dated September 2, 1878, in explanation of the Treasury rules which permit custom officers to exercise a discretion as to admitting free of duty any articles of merchandise which have not a dutiable value of over one dollar.

It should also be stated that, as any article whatever subject to customs duties is by the provisions of the general postal union treaty declared to be unmailable, any unsealed packet received from countries of the postal union, which is pronounced by officers of the customs to be subject to customs duties, is returned immediately to the country of origin through the post-offices of exchange.

JOSEPH H. BLACKFAN,
Superintendent.

Circular.Circular.

[472] newspapers imported through the mails.

Treasury Department, Washington, D. C., June 18, 1878.

[473] . Mr. Lowell to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Madrid, October 29, 1878.

[474] . Mr. Lowell to Mr. Evarts.

United States Legation, Madrid, February 11, 1879. (Received March 1.)

[475] . Mr. Lowell to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Madrid, February 14, 1879. (Received March 5,)

[476] . Mr. Lowell to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Madrid, February 20, 1879. (Received March 10.)

[477] . Mr. Evarts to Mr. Lowell.

Department of State, Washington, March 5, 1879.

[478] . Mr. Lowell to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Madrid, June 2, 1879. (Received June 18.)

[479] . Mr. Lowell to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United Stated, Madrid, August 19, 1879. (Received September 10.)

[480] . Mr. Lowell to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Madrid, August 20, 1879. (Received September 10.)

[481] . Mr. Lowell to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Madrid, August 22, 1879. (Received September 10.)

[482] . Mr. Lowell to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Madrid, August 22, 1879. (Received September 10.)

[483] . Señor Mendez de Vigo to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of Spain at Washington, Washington, March 29, 1879.

[484] . Mr. Evarts to Señor Mendez de Vigo.

Department of State, Washington, April 1, 1879.

newspapers imported through the mails. [1878.—Department No. 61. Secretary’s Office.]

[Document 472]

newspapers imported through the mails.

Treasury Department,
Washington, D. C., June 18, 1878.

To Collectors of Customs and others:

In view of the difficulty of collecting the small amount of duties accruing on newspapers forwarded in packages to the United States by post from foreign countries, and of the delay attending their delivery by the customs authorities, it is directed that unsealed packages of newspapers from foreign countries, not exceeding in weight one thousand (1,000) grams (2 pounds 3 ounces), may be delivered to the persons to whom they are addressed, at the post-offices, without detention by the officers of the customs, provided the postal authorities at the United States exchange-offices where such packages are received from abroad, declare that the papers consist of newspapers or of periodicals entitled to pass in the mails as newspapers.

JOHN SHERMAN,
Secretary.

Treasury Department,
August 28, 1878.

Sir: Referring to the letters of this department, addressed to you under dates of October 15, 1877, and January 10, 1878, in regard to the importation of newspapers and books through the mails, I have the honor to inclose for your information a copy of a letter addressed by this department to the collector of customs at New York, under date of the 24th instant, prescribing limitation under which such importations may be made in the manner mentioned.

Very respectfully,

JOHN B. HAWLEY,
Acting Secretary.

Hon. David M. Key,
Postmaster General.

[Copy of letter from the Secretary of the Treasury to the collector of customs at New York, inclosed with above letter.]

Treasury Department,
Office of the Secretary,
Washington, D. C., August 24, 1878.

Collector of Customs, New York:

Sir: Your letter of the 25th of June last was duly received, in which you refer to circular of this department No. 61, of June 18, 1878, relative to the transmission through the mails free of duty, from foreign countries, of packages of newspapers and periodicals not exceeding the maximum Weight of two pounds and three ounces.

You state that no limitation is made by such circular to the number of packages of newspapers which may be delivered; nor is there any discrimination made between papers received as merchandise by dealers, and those for personal use or by subscribers.

In reply thereto I have to state that such circular was intended to relieve from the exaction of customs duties newspapers and periodicals intended mainly for the personal use of the party to whom they were addressed. Such circular was not intended, and should not be construed, to confer any privileges whatever upon dealers in newspapers and periodicals, or other parties importing such newspapers or periodicals as merchandise for trade or profit.

It is therefore directed that where quantities of newspapers and periodicals imported through the mails are directed to any person presumably a dealer in such articles, such articles shall be considered as not within the scope of circular No. 61, but should be returned to the foreign country from which they came, as non-mailable matter.

I have further to state that complaints have been made to this department that books in large quantities, addressed to dealers, have been imported through the mails, free of duty, under the supposed authority of this department. In a letter addressed by this department to the Postmaster-General under date of October 15, 1877, it was stated that books imported through the mails, not exceeding one dollar in value, might be regarded as exempt from duty. This limitation, however, is one to be exercised within the discretion of the collector of customs, and the Postmaster-General was so informed, under date the 10th of January, 1878. (See circular of June 6, 1878.)

You will hereafter decline to permit delivery of books imported through the mails which, from the quantity or other circumstances, are presumably intended for the use of any other person than to whom they are addressed, or as merchandise; and in no instance will the use of the mails be permitted to enable parties to import articles of merchandise which should be properly treated as subject to duty under the customs-revenue laws; and books in the latter case, as in the case of newspapers and periodicals, should be returned to the foreign country from which they came, as nonmailable matter.

Very respectfully,

JOHN B. HAWLEY, Acting Secretary

Treasury Department,
September 2, 1878.

Sir: Referring to the letter of this department, addressed to you under date of the 28th ultimo, transmitting for your information a copy of a letter addressed to the collector of customs at New York, on the 24th ultimo, relative to the importation of books through the mails, I have the honor to inform you that, as a rule, it maybe stated that no books are exempt from customs duties because of their importation through the mail, and that this mode of transmission confers no rights upon books other than those which attach when imported in the ordinary manner.

The general rules of this department permit customs officers to exercise a discretion as to admitting free any articles of merchandise which have not a dutiable value of over one dollar, and this applies to books as well as to other articles, whether coming through the mails or otherwise.

It may be presumed, however, that such discretion will not be exercised in regard to books except in the case of single copies of books transmitted through the mail for the use of private persons, sent in good faith for that purpose.

Very respectfully,

JOHN SHERMAN, Secretary.

Hon. David M. Key,
Postmaster-General.

No. 441. Mr. Lowell to Mr. Evarts. [Document 473]

No. 441.
Mr. Lowell to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Madrid, October 29, 1878. No. 121.]

Sir: I have the honor to inform you that General Grant arrived here on the morning of the 18th.

At the station he was received by the civil governor of the province, by a general and two aids-de-camp, on the part of the minister of war, and by the members of this legation. At all the stations on the road he was greeted by the local authorities.

Though he arrived in Madrid on the day he originally fixed, he had entered Spain three days earlier than he had intended, in compliance with an invitation of the King (received through the Spanish consul at Bordeaux) to be present at the autumn maneuvers near Vitoria.

General Grant while there, was presented to the King, dined with him, and rode by his side during one of the reviews. He spoke in very warm terms of the excellent quality, appearance, and discipline of the Spanish troops.

During his stay here he visited the various museums, the Escorial, and Toledo. To the last place I was unable to accompany him on account of an engagement to dine with the minister of foreign affairs.

On Saturday he and Mrs. Grant were received in private audience by the Princess of Asturias. On Monday evening they dined at my house, meeting the president of the council, the ministers of foreign affairs and of war, the civil and military governors, and the principal foreign ministers. After the dinner a reception took place, where as many persons as my house would accommodate, were presented to General and Mrs. Grant.

The next day Mr. Cánovas del Castéllo gave a great dinner in honor of General Grant at the palace of the presidency, after which the chief guests withdrew to the opera, where the ministerial box had been put at their disposal, and whither Mrs. Grant had gone earlier in the evening.

General Grant left Madrid on Friday, the 25th, at 9 o’clock p.m., for Lisbon, the Portuguese minister here having already telegraphed his coming in order that he should be properly received. In consequence of this latter circumstance it was impossible for him to delay his departure in order to take formal leave of the King, as he otherwise would gladly have done. I made the proper explanations and apologies to His Majesty at our reception next day.

Every possible attention and courtesy were shown to General Grant during his stay by the Spanish Government, and the minister for foreign affairs took occasion to tell me that these civilities were intended not only to show respect and good will to General Grant, but to the Government and people of the United States.

General Grant several times expressed to me very warmly his pleasure and satisfaction at the manner in which he had been received and treated. Both he and Mrs. Grant spoke repeatedly of the great enjoyment they had had in their visit.

From Portugal General Grant goes to Cadiz, and thence to Malaga. From Malaga he will visit Granada, Cordova, and Seville, going thence to Gibraltar.

Mr. Sílvela begged me to keep him informed of the General’s movements in Spain, in order that the necessary orders might be given for his fitting reception everywhere by the public authorities.

I have, &c.,

LOWELL.

No. 442. Mr. Lowell to Mr. Evarts. [Document 474]

No. 442.
Mr. Lowell to Mr. Evarts.

United States Legation,
Madrid, February 11, 1879. (Received March 1.) No. 148.]

Sir: I have the honor to report that on the afternoon of Christmas day, 1878, General F. A. Starring called upon me with the necessary papers for the extradition of one Angell, arrested in Lisbon on a charge of embezzlement in the United States, and requested me to ask of the Spanish Government to allow his transport across Spanish territory should it prove necessary.

I informed General Starring that nothing could be done on that day, but that I would call upon the secretary of state for foreign affairs on the morrow, and state the case to him.

This I accordingly did, and that gentleman at once granted my request in the most courteous manner, and caused the necessary orders to be issued, on the understanding that I should make my wishes known to him in writing at my convenience. I did so on the same afternoon, receiving his answer the next day, and acknowledging it with a note of thanks. A copy of my note, and a copy and translation of his reply, with a copy of my acknowledgment, are appended.

* * * * * * *

I have, &c.,

J. R. LOWELL.

[Inclosure 1 in No. 148,]

Mr. Lowell to Mr. Silvela.

Madrid, December 26, 1878.

Excellency: A certain Angell, guilty of embezzlement, and under indictment in the United States for that offence, has been arrested in Lisbon. The Government of Portugal (although no treaty of extradition has been concluded between that country and the United States) has consented to the arrest and and delivery of the criminal.

The Secretary of State has deputed General F. A. Starring, because, having known the prisoner, he will be satisfactorily able to identify him, to take charge of and convey him to the United States for trial.

As it may be necessary to convey the said prisoner through the territory of His Catholic Majesty, I venture to ask your excellency, as a matter of international comity, that you would grant permission for that purpose, should there be occasion for it, and would issue the necessary orders for the purpose.

I beg to assure your excellency that I have seen the papers in the case, and that everything has been done in conformity with the treaty of extradition now in force between the United States and Spain.

I gladly avail myself of this occasion to offer to your excellency a renewed assurance of my most distinguished consideration.

J. R. LOWELL.

[Inclosure 2 in No. 148.]

Mr. Silvela to Mr. Lowell.

Palace, December 26, 1878.

Excellency: I have received your excellency’s note of yesterday’s date, in which you solicit in the name of your government permission granted to transport through Spanish territory a person named Angell accused of embezzlement, and who is to be sent from Lisbon to the United States in the custody of General F. A. Starring. Having read it and considering that, as your excellency affirms, in this case all the prescriptions required by the convention in force between Spain and the United States to regularize a demand for extradition have been complied with, the Spanish Government has the greatest pleasure in acceding to this request, and the necessary orders will be issued by the minister of gobernacion that a force of the civil guard be on the frontier to take charge of the prisoner, and render aid to the general in charge of him.

In having the honor to communicate this to your excellency, I cannot do less than indicate the propriety of your notifying me the port of the peninsula to which he is to be shipped for his destination in order that proper orders be given to the authorities at the point of transit.

I avail myself of this occasion to renew to your excellency the assurance of my most distinguished consideration.

MANUEL SILVELA.

[Inclosure 3 in No. 148.]

Mr. Lowell to Mr. Silvela.

Madrid, December 27, 1878.

Excellency I have the honor to acknowledge the reception of your excellency’s note of yesterday authorizing (should it be necessary) the passage over Spanish soil of a criminal now under arrest at Lisbon.

I beg to assure your excellency that this prompt act of international comity cannot fail to be warmly reciprocated by the government I have the honor to represent.

I directed the officer who is to take charge of the criminal to notify me by telegram of the route he intended to follow, and shall hasten to inform your excellency thereof, in compliance with your request.

I gladly avail myself, &c.,

J. R. LOWELL.

No. 443. Mr. Lowell to Mr. Evarts. [Document 475]

No. 443.
Mr. Lowell to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Madrid, February 14, 1879. (Received March 5,) No. 149.]

Sir: The successful importation of a cargo of American wheat at Barcelona, to which our consul at that port, Mr. Scheuch, has called your attention, has given rise to prolonged discussion in the Spanish press. This discussion has naturally turned upon the old question of free trade and protection; but has incidently raised others of some importance to the United States.

The general question is complicated here as with us by conflicting interests, and here as with us the different interests that desire protection, however hostile to each other on certain points, combine in the Cortes in favor of high duties. In the present case the Catalonians, though in favor of protective duties for their own manufactures, are in favor also of cheap flour for their operatives, and though the duties, amounting to five pesetas and eighty-two centimos (p. 5.82), have not prevented the consignees (it is said) from selling their wheat at a profit, they are yet enough to enable speculators in Spanish wheat to put a higher price upon it.

The newspapers comment on the absurdity of protecting a product which, without protection, could not compete with one of equal or better quality brought from a great distance, and still more on the folly of imposing heavy duties upon American wheat in the Antilles, in order to encourage a crop less profitable than that of the vine, and less adapted to the soil.

These considerations have led to the renewed expression, in various quarters, of the desire that a commercial treaty should be concluded between Spain and the United States by a modification of their respective tariffs to the advantage of both.

The excellent quality of the American wheat is admitted on all hands, and also that it produces a flour of which bread can be made of the particular consistency and flavor agreeable to Spanish palates.

That this branch of trade might become important may be inferred from the fact that the foreign importation of wheat from all quarters during 1878 is said to have amounted to three and a half million dollars, and this mainly since the month of September last.

I have, &c.,

J. R. LOWELL.

No. 444. Mr. Lowell to Mr. Evarts. [Document 476]

No. 444.
Mr. Lowell to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Madrid, February 20, 1879. (Received March 10.) No. 151.]

Sir: Just after I had dispatched my No. 150, a leading article appeared in the Epoca, a conservative journal, which supports the administration, bearing more directly than any other I have seen upon the question of a commercial treaty between Spain and the United States. I have accordingly Englished it, and the original together with the translation are appended.

You will observe whit is said about the American republics formerly dependencies of Spain. There is now in Madrid a minister of Colombia (accredited to Belgium), who will remain, he tells me, several months. The natural source for the supply of manufactured goods to those regions would seem to be in the United States. In case the lines of steamers between this country and South America were established, though they might carry some Spanish manufactures, yet I suspect that they would be in much greater proportion the mere distributors of English wares.

What is said also in the article from the Epoca about agricultural machinery is deserving of attention, the surface of the country in many parts of Spain being as well adapted to their use as our own prairies.

I have, &c.,

J. E. LOWELL.

[Inclosure in No. 151—Translation.]

Spain and the United States in a commercial point of view.

[From La Epoca, February 17, 1879.]

We have published the commercial statistics corresponding to the year 1874, that is to say, the movement of imports and exports between Spain and the United States of America. It results from these statistics, as the readers of the Epoca have seen, that the total value of exports amounted to 20,366,420 pesetas, and that of imports to 69,896,360 pesatas, a difference in favor of the latter of 49,529,940 pesetas.

To the United States we export raisins, grapes, lemons, almonds, galls, common and high wines, oils, cork, common salt, and other articles, and from the American Republic we import raw cotton, petroleum, staves, tobacco, grain, lard, butter, salted meats, leather, hides, &c.

It is plain that a great disproportion exists between the value of products imported and exported. And this disproportion has its origin not in the Spanish tariff, but in that of the United States; which is a revenue tariff to excess, which imposes increased duties on fruits and other articles, lessening the demands, as the Eco de las Aduanas says, which there would be for our products if the American tariff were different.

What is the conduct of Spain toward the United States? With the exception of petroleum, which now pays increased duties, but of an extraordinary and transitory character, the other articles either pay no duty, like tobacco, which is imported in such great quantities from Virginia and Kentucky, or pay weighing dues, like raw cotton, or a low revenue duty like staves.

One of our esteemed colleagues says that the commercial policy of Spain towards the United States is more acceptable than that which the American Republic concedes to us. It depends upon her whether a treaty of commerce maybe made, without preventing our considering with the greatest interest whatever relates to our colonies. Just at this moment the ministry of Hacienda is studying what modifications may be possible in our existing laws to facilitate the development of our commerce with Cuba, Porto Rico, and the Philippines.

The Eco de las Aduanas believes that the concrete question of the trade between Spain and the United States, may be settled, independently of the other by means of a commercial treaty, by which the treatment of the most favored nation should be granted, and the extraordinary duties on petroleum renounced, obtaining in exchange considerable reductions in the duties on fruits, wines, oils, and other articles which we export to North America.

This is a controverted question. Let us see what an enlightened writer says. According to him, should we conclude the treaty, the following articles should be excluded from it, or charged with protective duties: sugar, rice, flour, salt pork, lard, butter, refined petroleum, and lead. As for raw petroleum it should be included in the benefits of the treaty, because it lends itself to a new industry—refining—which may establish itself in Spain.

What would Spain lose by concluding a commercial treaty with the United States for two, three, or, at most, five years, by way of experiment?

We believe that she would lose nothing, and that, on the contrary, she would open a sure and very important market for all natural productions of which she has a superabundance, at the same time cheapening to her manufacturers the acquisition of products, without which the complete development of her manufactures of cotton and woolen cloths, tanned leather, dyes, casks, flour, and refined petroleum cannot take place. Neither would the United States be prejudiced by admitting the products of Spain at low duties.

But if a treaty is to be concluded, if its essential bases are to be agreed on, we must wholly free ourselves from the spirit of provincialism. The Catalans desire, and so does Spain, that their many and prosperous manufactures should be protected; the Castilians their wheat and flouring mills; Andalusians their wines, raisins, almonds, and oil. All those industries are Spanish, and all those products national, and accordingly we should not talk of this or that province, and of this or that district, but of the country.

If hitherto it has been difficult to compete, for example, with the grains of the United States in the principal European points of consumption, such as Liverpool, London, Antwerp, Bordeaux, and Marseilles; and if ships are constantly arriving at our Mediterranean ports, the facilities of transport increased and freights diminished, what will happen? Capital must converge toward the country and be directed to agriculture. If the national wealth is invested in stocks and withdrawn from agriculture, canals, forests, and machinery will be wanting in the Castilian provinces.

Usury is the most terrible enemy of the husbandman, and unfortunately it is a plant which just now grows and is spreading in Spain. Our farmers being reduced to mere sowers and reapers, machinery which might simplify operations and save manual labor is not introduced. We all know that by taking certain measures recommended by experience, much would be gained; but we know also that to carry them out a considerable previous outlay is necessary, which cannot be made, because the usurious interest of the money he absolutely needs compels the farmer to sell his crops before the harvest has supplied him. And this circumstance forcing him to sell unseasonably, that is to say, to pay in kind at a low price, without being able to profit by favorable circumstances, he often finds himself not only in no position to spend money in machinery, but commonly unable to devote himself adequately to the most necessary manual labor, since through want of resources he finds himself obliged to practice economy, an unwise economy it is true, but absolutely indispensable because nemo dat quod non habet.

Little can be hoped here from private enterprise; there are rooted vices in our habits, which not even experience itself demonstrating their harmfulness will ever be able to extirpate.

But aside from the above considerations, and returning to the main topic, we are bound to take up and present the opinion maintained by an enlightened review. According to that publication it is necessary, in order that Spanish products may compete with foreign, “First, to lessen the intrinsic cost of our goods, which necessarily implies a great development of manufacture, as we have already said at the beginning of this article; second, to make transport cheaper and more speedy, which requires considerable reforms in our ship-building industry; third, to unify our customs legislation till we reach a point where trade maybe carried on between Spain and the colonies on the same footing, so far as duties are concerned, as between the provinces of the Peninsula; and, fourth, to conclude commercial conventions with the American republics, which may stimulate the development of our mercantile relations.” That is to say, that the preponderance of a nation springs from the development of its foreign commerce, and the encouragement of its shipping interest, which carries the national flag to all regions of the known world.

Spain has the aptitude and the conditions for considerably extending her commerce; first to her colonies, then to the Spanish-American republics, and afterwards to neighboring countries. To attain this end we need administrative reforms, which may be adopted with greater or less speed; greater and more profound industrial knowledge, easily acquired by the efforts of all; and commercial conditions easy to be reached; and above all we need a most lively desire that our country may grow great, rich, and respected.

For example, the newspapers of Colombia desire and ask for the establishment of direct communication between Spain and the ports of that country.

Is not this a just desire and a legitimate aspiration? But the establishment of that line of steamers would develop the marine, and give new life to commercial transactions. Would not constant and favorable relations with South America bring with them an indirect protection to the flour of Castile, to the wines of Aragon. Andalusia, La Mancha, and Catalonia, to the fruit of the Mediterranean? Undoubtedly. A line of frequent and regular steamers between Spanish ports and the United States—would it not be opportune? Who doubts it? In the American Republic they want our wines, our corks, our dried fruits, our esparto-grass, as well as other products, like the Valencian pottery, which is beginning to be introduced. In Spain we need machinery, petroleum, cereals (when the crop of Castile fails or is short), cotton, and other products of the United States, which we generally buy at second-hand.

Commerce nowadays is the true diplomacy. Mercantile conventions are the treaties of alliance. But space fails us and we must suspend this important task till another day.

No. 445. Mr. Evarts to Mr. Lowell. [Document 477]

No. 445.
Mr. Evarts to Mr. Lowell.

Department of State,
Washington, March 5, 1879. No. 135.]

Sir: With reference to your dispatch No. 148, of the 11th ultimo, reporting the request made by you of the Spanish Government, at the instance of General Starring, for permission to have Charles W. Angell transported in custody across the territory of Spain, and the compliance of the Spanish Government therewith, I have to instruct you to convey to the Spanish minister for foreign affairs the sincere satisfaction with which this government has learned of that act of courtesy.

The question of the right of transit of an extradited criminal in custody across the territory of a foreign state, is now attracting to some extent the notice of this Department. It is presumed that, where the offender is regularly extradited in pursuance of a treaty, and the demanding state has a treaty of extradition with the state across whose territory transit is sought, it will be sufficient that the crime for which extradition is granted shall also be among those in the treaty with the country of transit, and that the warrant of surrender be exhibited.

If the procedure in this respect should be different in Spain, I will thank you to advise me.

I notice that in your note of December 26 to Mr. Silvela, you say that “the Secretary of State has deputed General F. A. Starring,” &c. In point of fact, General Starring was deputed by the governor of the State of Illinois as his agent to bring home the prisoner, and in my instruction to Mr. Moran I merely accredited that appointment.

I am, &c.,

WM. M. EVARTS.

No. 446. Mr. Lowell to Mr. Evarts. [Document 478]

No. 446.
Mr. Lowell to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Madrid, June 2, 1879. (Received June 18.) No. 186.]

Sir: I have the honor to report that the new Cortes were opened yesterday by the King in person with the usual pomp.

As it is an open secret that there are wide differences of opinion in the Liberal-Conservative party, which the present ministry are supposed to represent, as to certain questions of policy, especially as to the extent and nature of the reforms to be carried out in Cuba, it is not to be wondered at that the royal speech should deal mainly with generalities, which, if they do not satisfy, will at least not irritate any fraction of the dominant party.

After a very becoming allusion to the death of Queen Mercedes, the speech claims credit for the efforts made “to obtain complete liberty and sincerity in the expression of the public will.”

* * * * * * *

Then follow congratulations on the complete restoration of order in the whole peninsula, an expression of particular satisfaction at the establishment of a Chinese legation in Madrid, and an allusion to the meeting at Elvas between the Kings of Spain and Portugal.

The next paragraph is of more importance: With the intention to make the administration of justice more expeditious, my government will present to you various projects of reform in the penal code, in the law of civil process, in the organization of courts, and in judicial procedure, in order to reduce prosecutions for all kinds of crime to an oral and public trial.

The last-mentioned reform, if carried out, will have excellent effects, both in expediting justice, and making it more respected.

There are brief allusions to the army and navy and education.

The ministry of hacienda is felicitated on the success of the recent loan raised by public subscription— In which all classes of society have concurred, which has covered the deficits of the treasury, limiting the floating debt to the proportions which the annual estimates exact, and, the interest of money being thus reduced, capital will come to the aid of agriculture, manufactures, and commerce, contributing to the increase of wealth and to the solidity and improvement of credit.

The government is also occupied in rectifying the bases of taxation, in reducing arrears to order, and in collecting the necessary data and elements to propose to you the means of remedying or lessening the effects produced on our national industries by the economic crisis through which the world is passing.

The estimates will be at once presented to you without new burdens; and to facilitate their discussion, my government will propose to you separately the measures and regulations necessary to improve the revenue and the public economy.

Then follow a few words concerning reforms to be proposed in public charities, and in provincial, and municipal administrations.

The passage relating to Cuba is as follows: It is not possible that the traces of ten years of desolation and mourning which our colonies have undergone should be speedily obliterated, but my government will take care to present to you such measures as may tend to remedy past evils, and to draw constantly closer the bond of interest and affection now more than ever indissoluble, sealed as it is with the spirit of concord. Important have been the decisions adopted during the parliamentary recess to arrive with a firm step at the measure of possible assimilation between the administration of those provinces and that of the mother country, thus fulfilling the noble aspirations of centuries. Accounts will be rendered to you of all these measures, and the representatives of the Antillas being fortunately gathered in this chamber with those of the Peninsula, I am confident that with your patriotic help all these designs will be carried out and perfected. Among these new projects, the first place will be given to those intended to solve the social question of the island of Cuba, hastening the day of the complete extinction of slavery in accordance with principles already established, and to those which aim at reforming taxes, duties, and expenses of administration, all with the leading intention of reconciling interests and uniting desires, that being my earnest aspiration, and the end proposed by my government.

The result of this sound policy is already felt, for in spite of the many obstacles offered by industrial crises, and even by the rigors of nature, the receipts of the treasury in Cuba and Porto Rico are increasing, the administration is organizing, and the hope is renewed of discharging without unreasonable postponement sacred obligations necessarily neglected during the period through which we are still passing.

The speech was received in silence with the exception of the passage referring to the death of the Queen. This, however, was to be expected in listening to a document intentionally colorless.

The fate of the ministry will be decided in the discussions which are to follow, and is more likely to turn upon some subsidiary, and comparatively unimportant point, than upon any question of general policy.

* * * * * * *

A copy of the King’s speech in full is hereto annexed.

I have, &c.,

J. R. LOWELL.

No. 447. Mr. Lowell to Mr. Evarts. [Document 479]

No. 447.
Mr. Lowell to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United Stated,
Madrid, August 19, 1879. (Received September 10.) No. 192.]

Sir: I have the honor to inclose a copy and translation of so much, (about half) of a dispatch of General Martinez Campos, to the prime minister, as relates to the civil and diplomatic part of the pacification of Cuba which he accomplished. It was presented to the Cortes during their recent short session, mainly devoted to a discussion of the speech from the throne. It has an historical interest of its own, but beyond this is of value as illustrating the character of a man who is now, and perhaps for some time will be, at the head of affairs in Spain. The style is sometimes almost as intricately confused as in one of Cromwell’s speeches, but good sense, good feeling, and honest purpose are conspicuous throughout.

The position of General Martinez Campos when he became prime minister, was very analogous to that of General Grant, when he first became President. In Cuba he had been to all intents and purposes absolute, and found it easy without in any way compromising himself, while it made him popular, to concede theoretical reforms, the responsibility of realizing which would fall on the government at home. Coming into power with no knowledge of civil affairs or of administrative details, he found himself surrounded by men grown gray in the profession of politics, who raise objections and create difficulties, and who would be very glad to help him on the way to ruin if they found him too self-willed to be their tool, or too honest to be their accomplice.

Professedly, the new cabinet is of the same party and carrying out the same policy with that which it in part displaced. Senor Cánovas del Castillo supported it during the late Cortes in a very able speech, but there are said to be profound divergences of opinion, and even personal animosities, between the former and present official leaders of the Liberal-Conservative party. The divergence is said to be especially great concerning the reforms necessary in the island of Cuba. There is every reason to believe that the present prime minister is sincere in his opinions on this question, and resolved to carry them out in practice. This he perhaps cannot do with the existing Cortes, the members of which were returned in the interest of the former administration.

It remains to be seen whether the Martinez Campos cabinet, after the changes which the new minister of the interior is making in the provincial governors, who practically decide most of the elections, will have strength and courage enough to dissolve the Cortes, should they prove unmanageable, and appeal to the country. In any event the Cuban question will be the important one of the next session. Should General Martinez Campos prevail in carrying out his views it will give him great strength, and he has personal qualities which might insure him a long tenure of office and of propularity.

* * * * * * *

I have, &c.,

J. R. LOWELL.

[Inclosure in No. 192.—Translation.]

Extract from La Politico, of July 18 and 19, 1879.

Most Excellent Sir: Although I informed your excellency by telegram of the terms I had indicated to the president-elect of the Cuban revolution, Don Vicente Garcia, I feel bound to set forth to your excellency in greater detail this affair, in which if I have won the approbation of the government of His Majesty, it has been owing to the deferent attention, and never enough to be appreciated confidence, which they have shown to me.

Finding myself on the 18th of December in the Sierra Maestra of Cuba, inspecting the encampments there, which have been so fatal to the fourth brigade of that division, on account of its hygienic conditions, I received a telegram from General D. Manuel Cassola, in which he informed me that the prisoner D. Esteban Duque de Estrada, some time ago liberated, had manifested to him the desire of some important leaders, and some members of the congress, to enter into negotiations with a view to peace.

Although at some distance from Cuba, I embarked that very night for Santa Cruz in order to speak with Estrada, to communicate with Cassola, to decide on the spot and for myself what would be proper.

I have reported to your excellency the doings of Mr. Pope in the month of May, the distrust with which he inspired me, and my persuasion that he was an unprincipled adventurer. In spite of this I permitted him to go to the enemy’s camp, because I was confident that with all his untrustworthiness, he would serve to open for us a way to relations which, if leading to nothing immediately, would bear fruit later. I was not mistaken in my reckoning; those unofficial relations procured us the surrender of Don Estiban de Varona, with the permission, as he told me, of the then president, D. Tomás Estrada, and the capture of the latter’s kinsman, Duque de Estrada.

The moment Varona reached Manzanillo he put himself in communication with the leaders of those bands discouraged by fatigue, and at times by hunger, without resources, and who, desiring peace, did not dare to surrender, not only through fear of the treatment they might receive from us, but through distrust of each other. A few interviews and an armistice, which in a narrow, neutral ground permitted our soldiers to mix with the insurgents, and the discovery by the latter in our troops not only the generous character of the Spanish army, but also how well the country people were treated in the towns, at last broke their resolution, and the desire of peace made itself so manifest that the leaders agreed to send a committee to their government to try for it.

This committee obtained some guarantees from the president, but the irreconcilables were too strong for the government, and the committee were subjected to the law which imposed the penalty of death on all who should treat with us except on the basis of independence.

In spite of the assurances which Varona gave me, your excellency will recollect that I cherished no hope of result with Camugüey, that I believed that it was not yet time, that his presumption was not sufficiently humbled, but that I was confident that the greater part of the guerrilla parties of Manzanillo, and perhaps of Bayamo, would disband.

In spite of the obstacles which arose in the business, the result answered my expectations, though I will not conceal from your excellency that the government of the insurgents, by its treatment of the committee, contributed not a little to deepen the dissentions that existed among them. But that act of brute violence met with a prompt chastisement in the capture of the president of the executive council, and the death of the speaker of the congress, which delayed more than forty days a meeting for the choice of a new one, and the very active pursuit to which they were exposed, in spite of the rains which lasted longer than usual. The idea of peace introduced into their camp, which they had the baseuess to attribute to me, though they asserted that I proposed it through weakness, began to take root among the masses, and the impulse from below upward reached the head, a natural result of assertions disproved by our pursuit.

This was the state of things when, on the 21st of December, I talked with Duque de Estrada, and not trusting in the method, although I had no private or official letter to authorize my conduct, and even feared that another assassination would make the negotiations abortive, I ordered operations to be suspended between the sea, the river Sevilla, and the roads from Santa Cruz to Hato Potrero, and from that point to Brazo; that is, a seventh part of the Center. This was a serious measure. I was conscious of the objections to it; nothing positive authorized me to give assurances that this neutrality would be respected. I knew that it would give an opportunity for attacks [on me] by many; but if I wished to arrive at an understanding it was necessary to run the risk; and I believe that, holding such a position and command as mine, it behooves not to consider the personal annoyances which may result from failure, but the benefit which may redound to our country from success. The loss would be all my own; all the advantage my country’s.

Concert and meeting and consequently agreement were impossible if our troops continued operations. I fixed no period, but limited myself to declaring that the termination (of the armistice) should be announced three days beforehand. I reserved to myself the right of lengthening or shortening it, because to keep fixing periods and then extending them is, in my opinion, discreditable and a kind of higgling unworthy of soldiers.

I will not deny, your excellency, that I then expected that at the end of a few days-they would tell me that they wished to treat on inadmissible terms. I labored at that time under two mistakes: I believed their number smaller and their presumption greater than it was. I had studied the pro and the con, as is commonly said. I was not neutralizing more than a small part of the war (three hundredths), and it was accordingly prosecuted with the greatest activity when the matter began to improve, and the soldiers to come out of the hospitals. In the neutralized territory the contact of the insurgents with our soldiers was most advantageous for us, because the meeting of the weak with the strong, of the hungry with him who has resources, of the naked with the clothed, of Mm who has no place of shelter with him who has camps and sutlers’ shops, cannot but weaken the resolution of the former; the courteous treatment which had been ordered was sure to undermine the officers; the news of the suspension of hostilities where the congress was, and the negotiations with it, must have a decided influence in other departments.

What was lost, then, in case these conferences were broken off? On the part of the country nothing, and this is proved by the great number of surrenders which took place at this time. Much was gained for the future by dividing them; the three tendencies of the hostile camp, peace, autonomy, and independence defined themselves—for your excellency knows that in moments of danger the most opposite wishes unite, and that if a respite is given, they reappear again in greater strength.

So it happened here. In Sancti Spiritus some begged that the decision of the congress might be waited for, and I granted them a place of meeting, where I furnished them with supplies, and in that encampment cheers were given for peace and for Spain, and they embraced our officers. In Bagamo whole bands surrendered together; in Holguin and in Tunas they avoided any fighting; and in Cuba, Maceo made superhuman efforts to raise their spirits, summoning all to the last soldier, and attacking with an energy and success worthy of a better cause; but even in the midst of this desperate effort he did not wish to shut the door of the future, and, what he had not done for ten years, after a bloody advantage in which he kept possession of the field, he buries the dead, praises their valor, and sends back to us a few wounded and prisoners who escaped the fury of the combat.

All the advantage was on our side, we were always gaining ground. If any one lost it was I, for treating with rebels unsuccessfully lessens the credit, and there would not have been wanting those who would have talked of lost time, as if operations had not been going on everywhere else.

The desire to treat having been excited, and having told Estrada my own opinion concerning the island, and what I believed that of the government to be, judging by the private correspondence which was going on between me and the minister of Ultramar, I went to Havana to inform General Jovellar, to put myself in accord with him, and to hear his valuable counsels. That officer was, as he had been since the war began, in full agreement with me, and explained to me the embarrassed state of the treasury, the arrears of pay continually increasing, and the difficulties we should find ourselves in if the war was not ended before June. I made a tour of inspection through Las Villas and Sancti Spiritus, to see for myself the execution of my orders, and was satisfied that nothing more could be asked of the army. Pancho Jimenez had attempted an effective stroke, but as he had not the means, the destruction of part of his band, and the definitive dispersion of the rest were the consequence.

I returned to Principe to bring matters to a head, and because I thought there had been time to come to an understanding and to pass from a purely confidential character to a semi-official or official one, and having had an interview at Chorrillo with Messrs. Luaces and Roa, commissioned from the so-called commander-in-chief of the Center, Goyo Benitez, to General Cassola, who by my orders had announced to him the renewal of hostilities on the 20th, I was able to satisfy myself of the well-nigh general desire to come to a definite result, and of the impossibility of it by reason of the dispersion of the bands, and above all because it was not yet known whether Vicente Garcia would accept the presidency, nor what his aspirations and projects were. Believing in their good faith, I appointed the 10th of February as the day before which terms must be proposed, and permitted a commissioner to start for Sancti Spirit us and another in search of Vicente Garcia, but I reduced the neutralized territory to about eight leagues square on the banks of the Sevilla, setting a cordon of posts and sentinels all around it.

In fixing on the 10th February, I was thinking of the meeting of the Cortes on the 15th, and wished to give definite news to the government of His Majesty, so that they could in the royal message parry the attacks of the opposition, and if they did not approve of my conduct they could remove me from command, since I had neither consulted them nor given an account of the steps I had taken.

The reasons I had for acting thus are three: Not to solicit from the government an authorization which could not be understanding given at so great a distance; second, to assume all responsibility myself, leaving them in entire freedom; and, third, not to give rise in Spain to hopes that might prove illusions.

Some time before the first steps had been taken toward a conference between Vicente Garcia and General Prendergast, but since the former had been chosen president of the executive council, he thought that he could not be present at it, and sent his commissioners to Banchuelo (Tunas), to which place the general came. There, after long debates, I being in direct communication by telegraph, I answered all questions, and fixed as a limit the terms which I reported to your excellency the same day, 30th January, neutralizing the road between Tunas and the camp of the congress, so that messages and reports might pass, because we had unfortunately severely wounded their commissioner, who bore my safe conduct, which prevented the order for meeting from reaching Vicente Garcia in time.

On the 5th he asked for an interview with me, which could not take place on the 6th at San Fernando owing to a mistake; and on the 7th he came to see me, with seven other leaders and some of his officers, at Chorrilla. He presented himself in a very proper way, and I received him kindly, Generals Prendergast and Cassola being present at the conversation, which lasted seven hours. Those who took part in it manifested their desire for peace: they agreed that though they might prolong the war it would be the ruin of the country (Cuba); that in their present condition they could not conquer; that the happiness of Cuba was possible under the government of Spain; that the terms were not ample enough; and, above all, that the oath they had taken not to treat except on the basis of independence rendered all agreement null; that there was no provision in their constitution for such a case, and it was necessary to appeal to the people. All my arguments and those of the generals were unable to convince them.

Vincente Garcia told me that, to facilitate a prompt pacification, he had that day come and taken the oath of office. The definitive result was that I answered them that I did not make the terms more liberal because they had already received the sanction of the government; that I could not extend the period without receiving at least a moral guarantee that, in case those of the East and of Villas did not agree, the majority of Camaguey would accept; and we parted with the greatest courtesy.

I cannot express to your excellency the anxiety in which I was left. My presumption was that they were to be trusted; that the reserve they had shown was due to the character of the natives of this country, and to their want of confidence in Spain, which cannot easily be effaced; at the same time recognizing as one cause the oath they had taken, and the desire not to be accused of treachery by their companions, who still stood to their arms.

But these were nothing more than my presumptions; nothing more than my knowledge of the unfortunate state in which they were. There was the conviction that hatred of Spain was rapidly disappearing; there was the certainty that the favorable movement came from below upwards with a terrible pressure; but after all there was nothing but conviction and faith in myself; there was not a proof nor a material fact to confirm these; and when I entered on this line of thought doubt took possession of my mind.

The question was most serious. Should they persist in their choice of a new government by popular election, and I in not conceding a longer delay, then the pacification would be postponed, the war continued with the fury of despair, and I become an accomplice in the failure of peace. If, in virtue of my convictions, I conceded what they asked, a change of ideas might take place in the mass (of insurgents), and I should have lost a month and a half of operations in the best season of the year, equivalent to more than three months in the rainy season, to three thousand soldiers killed, to six millions more dollars spent, and to another effort on the part of Spain.

I leave to the consideration of your excellency the alternative in which I found myself. It was the traveler lost in the midst of the woods and lighted only by flashes, which served but to lead him further astray. I had the fate of my country in my hands, for your excellency knows better than I the consequences which an error of mine would have brought upon Spain; and I assure your excellency that my personal position was my least anxiety. I can say it now—I did not believe that I should be able to overcome the opposing elements here.

The country and the King had rewarded me beyond my deserts, and I could not refuse myself to the sacrifice, for such it was to me. I dissimulated with all, even with the government, even with my most intimate friends. I had only one hope, the thought that Divine Providence is stretching its protecting hand over Spain, and that to this I owe my good fortune, that it was my duty to expend the fame and popularity I then enjoyed for the common good, and that to arrive at a good result I ought to overcome difficulties in silence, and put forward only the favorable circumstances. I arrived in Cuba, and my ignorance of the state of things end the first successes carried me very far, for we always receive with delight what natters our wishes. I was impressionable, and thought the work more easy. In a short time, encountering almost insuperable obstacles, seeing them increased by a fatal season, finding myself without soldiers (they were all in the hospital), resources failing, for the loan was rather a relief than a solution, my courage sank at times, and, above all, when I saw that deceitful hopes led public opinion to expect a speedy issue; I saw that my reputation was wasting away in vain projects and illusions, and that, considering everything, I was, perhaps, the only person who could accomplish the undertaking with the least delay. I can assure your excellency that until I had on my shoulders the responsibility of my country’s well-being I had never known what anguish was; until I saw my mistakes I had not lamented the narrowness of my understanding. To decide rightly where only one’s own fortune is at stake imports little; to decide rightly or to err when that of one’s country is at stake is very grievous, is horrible, and I hope I may never pass through such risks again.

This explained, I need not attempt to make your excellency understand my hesitations on the 8th, which could not be removed by my colleague in command, D. Joaquin Jovellar, notwithstanding his devotion and friendship for me, because he was far from the scene of events.

On the morning of the 9th I removed to Zanjou, the point nearest the enemy’s camp, and at twelve next day Messrs. Rosa and Luaces presented themselves with a letter from Yicente Garcia accrediting them in their mission. These gentlemen stated to me that the executive and congress having met, had informed themselves of the result of the interview we had held on the 7th, and after a long discussion had agreed on the impolicy of continuing war, and on the impossibility of treating in which they found themselves, because they were not empowered to do so, and it would be illegal; that they were bound to give an account of the whole to the people; but that, considering the pressure of circumstances, they would resign and appeal to the people and troops gathered there; that this took place, and that a committee of seven persons (five of them irreconcilables) was chosen by popular election in order that negotiations might go on. The committee discussed and modified my terms, and submitted the result to the people, who accepted it unanimously under condition that the States of the East and Center should be heard. The people being asked if they were for peace, answered almost unanimously in the affirmative. Asked afterward if the war should be continued in case Oriente or Villars would not accept peace, three-quarters were in favor of peace even then, and the other fourth for war.

In view of this I went on to discuss the conditions, and, there being no difficulty except about the first, I consulted General Jovellar by telegraph, in the presence of the commissioners, and had the satisfaction of letting them see the identity of opinion of the two authorities. There remained the question of time to be allowed, which I proposed to leave to the government of His Majesty, and they returned to their camp to submit the modifications.

While they were absent I reflected maturely, and resolved on my part to concede a delay until the end of the month. The considerations which moved me to this were my not wishing to compromise General Jovellar, because if, contrary to all appearances, there were a change, he would remain disposable to relieve me in command if the government disapproved of my conduct, or the opposition and public opinion pronounced against me in case of failure. I not considering as such the continuance in the field of Maceo, as I was then inclined to do, having heard of the capture of the convoy of Florida, with 12,000 percussion caps, a case of medicines, and some loads of tinned meat, with a loss to us of one officer and 28 soldiers killed and 5 wounded, and of the defeat of a column of 200 men of the regiments of Madrid and Asturias in Juan Mulato, with the loss, as was then believed, of 100 men, though I know now it was not above 50, and of the commander, Lieutenant-Colonel Cabezas.

The commissioners returned in the afternoon of the 10th with the definitive terms, which I accepted, and a copy of which I inclose, and I at at once granted the delay, and then to facilitate matters, without their asking it, I ordered the generals in command to suspend offensive hostilities in the whole territory of the war.

The insurgents desire peace so sincerely that the commissioners elected for each state are the most influential and intelligent persons in it, and that your excellency may he sure of it I will give their names: For Cuba, Major-General Maximo Gomez, Brigadier-General Rafael Rodriquez, Major Enrique Callazo; for Bayamo, Major August in Castellanos, Ensign José Badraque; for Las Villas, the deputies Spoturno and Marcos Garcio, Colonel Enrique Mola and Don Ramon Perez Trujillo; for Tunas and Holguin, Vicente Garcia.

These elections are guarantees of good faith. Concerning Sancti Spiritus and Villas, with the exception of the thirty men of Cecilio Gonzalez, I harbor no doubt, only an outlaw or two and the runaway negroes will be left in the field, isolated, without flag and without arms. In Principe, possibly, a gathering or so of what are called planteados, who obey no one, and whom the very insurgents have almost exterminated.

In Bayamo the leaders who remain have given assurances that they will consult with the commissioners and are calling in their scattered followers. In Tunas and Holguin, Vicente Garcia has every kind of influence. In Cuba, Maceo respects only Maximo Gomez, and all affirm that he will obey the dispositions of his government. I am not confident but he will be left reduced to the last extremity without the bands of Edwardo Marinol, Limbano Sanchez, Martinez Freire, and Leite Vidal, and only a part of the people of his brother Antonio Maceo, Guellermon, and Crombet will follow him. In any event parties of banditti will remain in those mountains.

This is, in conclusion, a loose narrative of what has happened and of my present impressions and hopes. It only remains to set before you a sketch of the motives of my policy, and the reasons on which I have based my conduct in these sixteen months. I have not always been right, but I have tried to correct my mistakes the moment I became aware of them.

Since the year 1869, when I landed on this island with the first re-enforcements, I was preoccupied with the idea that the insurrection here, though acknowledging as its cause the hatred of Spain, yet that this hatred was due to the causes that have separated our colonies from the mother country, augmented in the present case by the promises made to the An till as at different times (1812–’37 and ’45), promises which not only have not been fulfilled, but, as I understand, have not been permitted to be so by the Cortes when at different times, their execution had been begun.

While the island had no great development, its aspirations were confined by love of nationality and respect for authority; but when one day after another passed without hopes being satisfied, but, on the contrary, the greater freedom permitted now and then by a governor were more than cancelled by his successor; when they were convinced that the colony went on in the same way; when bad officials and a worse administration of justice more and more aggravated difficulties; when the provincial governorships, continually growing worse, fell at last into the hands of men without training or education, petty tyrants who could practice their thefts and sometimes their oppressions, because of the distance at which they resided from the supreme authority, public opinion, until then restrained, began vehemently to desire those liberties which, if they bring much good, Contain also some evil, and especially when applied to countries that have so peculiar a life of their own, and are without preparation for them. A people sometimes vehemently desires what is not best for it—the unknown—and when everything is denied, aspire to everything. So it happened here. I do not blame the captains-general nor the government of that epoch. They thought they were acting for the best; but they were separated from the people, and had about them only partisans of the status quo, and very few of progress, and even these, persons of heated imagination, but cautious, did not make manifest their ideas, and even applauded acts which were carrying the ship on the reef, like those inhabitants of England who kindled bonfires to attract ships.

The 10th of October, 1868, came to open men’s eyes; the eruption of the volcano in which so many passions, so many hatreds, just and unjust, had been heaped up was terrible, and almost at the outset the independence of Cuba was proclaimed. The concessions which General Lersandi then made were of no avail; the triumph of Bayamo was not deadened by the heroic resistance of the garrisons of Tunas and Holguin; the army was very small, and they believed victory easy. Many Spaniards believed that autonomy should be granted; and who knows what might have followed if those masses had been well led, and had not quarreled with the natives of the Peninsula.

The certainty of triumph blinded them. In its turn public sentiment and patriotism were awakened in us, and the country was divided into two irreconcilable bands, extreme from the first, confiding the triumph of their cause to extermination and the torch; and although in these nine years there have been attempts at more humane systems, they have been of short duration. Public opinion was too strong for governments of whatever politics. Hardly was a governor-general appointed when they weakened his authority by allowing the press to speak of his dismissal; and these officers, not feeling themselves sustained by the government, tried to find some support in a public opinion continually more and more overexcited, and there were times when the war was on the point of being victoriously ended, when a change of commander came to undo all that had been gained to make the insurgents understand that their constancy would save them; and a serious succession of feats of arms raised their spirits, and by the advantage of ground and their familiarity with it, they defeated large columns with hardly a battalion of men. Hunger in the villages swelled the ranks of the enemy. They almost put us on the defensive, and as we had to guard an immense property, the mission of the army became very difficult.

The instability of governments in Spain, the cantonal war first, and the civil war afterward, encouraged our enemies, who began to doubt in proportion, as the throne of Don Alfonso became more firm, and when they found themselves shut up in villas and unable to carry out their project of extending the war to Matanzas and Cardenas. But public spirit had decayed, and the invasion of Spiritus and Villas marked a fatal period. It was our fortune that the military man who commanded against them had not, because a foreigner and because of his character, in spite of his courage, the sympathy of his subordinates, and that the battle of Palma Sola subdued his energy. But the war went on languidly for want of forces, public sentiment growing weaker, and the army remembering too well its reverses. The principle of authority was strengthened, and I believe that, with more resources, we should have triumphed in 1875 and 1876.

The insignificant affairs of the railway of Spiritus, the attack on Villa Clara, Ciego de Avila, and Moron made a great impression on public opinion, which saw in everything, with frightful exaggeration, to be sure, grave and irremediable evils, and the unfortunate carelessness at Victoria de las Tunas came to stamp the position of affairs at the very time when re-enforcements and help were expected from the mother country. General Jovellar was the victim of events, and when perhaps he was about to grasp the laurel of his toils the government decided that I should come.

These, roughly sketched, are in my conception the facts from 1868 to the end of 1876. I on the one hand found myself in an easy position. I brought large re-enforcements; I brought money (not half what was needed); I had a colleague in the captain-general, who lightened me of an immense labor and whose loyal help and prudent counsel were of so great service to me. I had re-established the principle of authority, but had against me a public spirit without life. Nobody had higher aspirations than to save his crop of sugar. In official regions the enemy was thought inferior, but the commanders generally believed it unsafe to operate with less than three battalions; there was no venturing beyond the highways; much was said of positions; displeasure showed itself among the higher officers through jealousy of those I brought with me; the rank and file reckoned the numbers of the enemy, and my first operation was universally condemned and feared. But confidence re-established itself when I presented myself in the camp, and (your excellency permit me the vanity) when they recognized in the commander-in-chief their old general of brigade. Then hope revived, and the operation was as fortunate as I hoped.

I had against me also the exhaustion of the country, the natural want of confidence produced by alternations of fortune, since successes did not encourage our people nor discourage the enemy. I had against me the not holding more territory than that in our immediate occupation, and that, as my war was essentially offensive, I was to make it in what was to me, unknown ground, and where they were at home; and I must carry everything, create everything, protect everything. The burning of a sugar-mill, the taking of a village, was more terrible than the cutting off of a column.

And after all what did we gain by beating the enemy? Little, unless we exterminated them; and extermination was impossible; it was not in my character; it was useless to try to employ it. Neither the fulfillment of duty nor fear of responsibility nor patriotic sentiment obliges me to commit cruelties, to be untrue to my conscience.

The war was one of separation, of independence, with all the horrors of civil war. My problem was to make it a civil war with all the generosities of international wars. The war was without quarter, and I expected to give and not receive it. If it was given there were no difficulty in surrendering; the defeated does not fly so swiftly as when he is trying to escape death; hatred is lessened, fear banished, and comparisons are drawn between the comfort enjoyed in one’s village and the alarms, dangers, and privations which are risked in the field. Not giving quarter to us, the shameful cases of feeble resistance could not occur. Excess of fear makes the soldier a hero.

My opinion for these nine years had been fixed; it was necessary to develop it. Two roads led to the same end—one slow, progressive, and little conformable to my character, but which was recommended by the circumstances. I at once issued public orders taking the first steps on this road, restricted orders, advancing somewhat more, and in proportion as the progress of the war authorized me, I took another step of policy in accord with General Jovellar and the government of His Majesty.

The second road—that which I would have followed, that which I have several times particulary indicated—was shorter, and I think that my indications were not pointed enough.

For my own part, had the responsibility been mine, free of the Cortes, and empowered to decide for the government of His Majesty, on condition of at once rendering an account, I would have ventured everything. On the 7th of November, 1876, there would have appeared in the Havana Gazette the disembargo of estates, a general pardon, the assimilation of Cuba with Spain, orders to treat prisoners well; and to show that this was not weakness, but strength, there was the argument of my one hundred thousand bayonets. Public opinion I should have little regarded. Perhaps the war might have been ended some time ago. It was policy; but war is made with policy. It was the flag with the motto of liberty. Or take away the flag and give, once for all, the liberty which at last must be given. When we are strong we are able and ought to be generous.

Since considerations of a higher order did not permit me to do this, I advanced by degrees, and after my orders of November, some of which were not approved, at the first positive advantage I gained, which was the breaking up of the bauds of villas, the decree of disembargo was issued, when some progress had been made in other departments, and in the regulation of towns the name of alcalde was introduced through modesty.

I have come now by slow stages to the question of the day, and perhaps some will ask how I offered the terms which I reported on the 30th of January, and will add that better might have been obtained.

At present, I suppose so, but I understand by advantageous terms for the government what contributes to satisfy the desires and aspirations of the people; I proposed the first condition, because I believe they must fulfill it. I wish that the municipal law, the law of provincial assemblies and representation in the Cortes, should be established. For the present we will make use of the laws now in force, and then with the assistance of the deputies, modifications and arrangements can be made to complete them. Technical details will be considered which are beyond my competence. The law of labor is to be settled, the question of labor supply, the necessary changes of property are to be studied, the fearful and unsustainable problem of slavery is to be studied before foreign nations impose a solution of it upon us, the penal code is to be studied and the province of the courts defined, the form of contributions and assessment of taxes determined, and some attention paid to schools and public works. All these problems whose solution concerns the people must be solved after hearing their representatives, not by the reports of juntas, chosen through favoritism or for political reasons. They cannot be left to the will of the captain-general, the head of a department, or the colonial minister, who generally, however competent, do not know the country.

I do not wish to make a momentary peace; I desire that this peace be the beginning of a bond of common interests between Spain and her Cuban provinces, and that this bond be drawn continually closer by the identity of aspirations, and the good faith of both.

Let not the Cubans be considered as pariahs or minors, but put on an equality with other Spaniards in everything not inconsistent with their present condition.

It was on the other hand impossible, according to my judgment and conscience, not to grant the first condition; not to do it was to postpone indefinitely the fulfillment of a promise made in our present constitution. It was not possible that this island, richer, more populous, and more advanced morally and materially than her sister, Porto Rico, should remain without the advantages and liberties long ago planted in the latter with good results, and the spirit of the age, and the decision of the country gradually to assimilate the oclonies to the Peninsula, made it necessary to grant the promised reforms, which would have been already established and surely more amply if the abnormal sate of things had not concentrated all the attention of government on the extirpation of the evil which was devouring this rich province.

I did not make the last constitution; I had no part in the discussion of it. It is now the law, and as such I respect it, and as such endeavor to apply it. But there was in it something conditional, which I think a danger, a motive of distrust, and I have wished that it might disappear. Nothing assures me that the present ministry will continue in power, and I do not know whether that which replaces it would believe the fit moment to have arrived for fulfilling the precept of the constitution.

I desire the peace of Spain, and this will not be firm while there is war or disturbance in the richest jewel of her crown. Perhaps the insurgents would have accepted promises less liberal and more vague than those set forth in this condition; but even had this been done, it would have been but a brief postponement, because those liberties are destined to come for the reasons already given, with the difference that Spain now shows herself generous and magnanimous, satisfying just aspirations which she might deny, and a little later, probably very soon, would have been obliged to grant them, compelled by the force of ideas and of the age. Moreover, she has promised over and over again to enter on the path of assimilation, and if the promise were more vague, even though the fulfillment of this promise were begun, these people would have the right to doubt our good faith and to show a distrust unfortunately warranted by the failings of human nature itself.

The not adding another one hundred thousand to the one hundred thousand families that mourn their sons slain in this pitiless war, and the cry of peace that will resound in the hearts of the eighty thousand mothers who have sons in Cuba, or liable to conscription, would be a full equivalent for the payment of a debt of justice.

The condition of freeing the slaves and Chinese who are among the insurgents has its inconveniences, These would be still greater but for the Moret law, and were not every one conscious that ampler modifications must soon be made. If the granting of the first condition is the fulfillment of a promise, there is as little new in that of which I am now speaking.

The third article of the Moret law expressly directs that fugitive negroes and Chinese shall not be sent back to their plantations, but assigned to the battalions of freedmen, their owners, if not in rebellion, being indemnified, and this was because the government then, as I do now, understood how dangerous the sending back of these slaves would be. They would demoralize the blacks and turn maroons. As to the Chinese, I asked some time ago for a change in the existing law. The negro has been discussed and pitied. He in the end can free himself with the product of his toil. The Chinamen never, and all make him their victim.

The other condition of oblivion and pardon I think is in the conscience of all, and in the character of the Spanish people, which is fierce in combat, and then generously forgives and pardons all, and gives the hand to him who a moment before was an enemy. This generosity is characteristic of our soldiers.

I say it with satisfaction, I proposed the conditions and have not modified them. I proposed at once what I thought just, without higgling, and since I was not dealing with foreigners, but with Spaniards, with brothers, I have given them everything I could without prejudice to any one, without placing them in the position of being peculiarly favored.

It will be asked if I could have obtained peace without concessions, and I will answer that I think I might—that by June I expected to have certainly finished, but that greater numbers would have remained in the woods, which would have been a disturbance to agriculture, a danger for the future; that they would not have struck their flag, which would have attracted those who had emigrated. It is better to convince than crush an enemy. We should have made of Cuba a new colony, with the disadvantage of climate, distance, and inequality of strength. As a soldier, I should have increased my fame, but as a Spaniard I should have felt remorse of conscience. More sacrifices would have been made, and force establishes nothing firmly.

Many accusations, many attacks will be directed against me whenever I return to Spain; much abuse of empty words will be made to censure me. Your excellency, I can answer all, although no orator, and if my policy is blamed by political civilians, I shall have the defense of the inhabitants, and, what is better, of my conscience. I say nothing of the approbation of the King and his ministers; the telegram of your excellency is the highest reward of my conduct to which I can aspire, and I avail myself of this occasion to have the honor of informing your excellency that the support of your excellency and the colonial minister, and the unlimited confidence which the government has shown me, the courage with which they have defended me from all attacks, giving a great prestige to my authority, has made my work easier, and I owe to the government of His Majesty this feeble testimony of my profound gratitude.

What shall I say of General Joaquin Jovellar? His devotion, his disinterestedness, his prudent counsels, his efficacious co-operation, make words, insufficient to express my gratitude.

The Spanish party and volunteers, respecting all orders even when most opposed to their former ideas, helping to relieve the necessities of those but yesterday our enemies, respecting the principle of authority and standing always in arms as a reserve and sometimes in the front ranks, are worthy of praise.

The army, your excellency—I feel more than ever that my style is so poor, and as my words would do no justice to the facts if I tried to relate them, it must suffice to indicate them—has fought whenever it saw the enemy, without reckoning his numbers; has had nothing but its rations and gone unpaid without murmuring; has not seen a town in sixteen months except When in hospital; has seen half its comrades march away to the other world or to Spain, and though cast down, has maintained discipline, has been generous with the conquered, who, being the weaker, employed surprise and ambuscade in fighting us. The Spanish soldier, I say it with pride, may bear comparison with the best in the world.

I will add, your excellency, that many sons of Cuba have fought at our side with heroic gallantry and excellent results, and that we owe to them many of our successes. To the valor of Spaniards they add a knowledge of the mountains, and they equal us in loyalty. This latter quality has been even more brilliant among the many people of color who fight in our ranks. I do not remember a case of desertion among them, and their temperance, subordination, and courage place them among our best soldiers.

I have thought it my duty to report to your excellency not only the facts but my own appreciation of them, in order that His Majesty and his ministers may have sufficient data to form air opinion.

* * * * * * *

ASSINIO MARTINEZ DE CAMPOS.
Puerto Principe, February 18, 1878.

No. 448. Mr. Lowell to Mr. Evarts. [Document 480]

No. 448.
Mr. Lowell to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Madrid, August 20, 1879. (Received September 10.) No. 194]

Sir: I have the honor to inclose copy and translation of an important decree concerning the island of Cuba, published in the Gaceta of the 17th instant.

From a perusal of it you will see how far-reaching and general are the reforms proposed by the present ministry, and how many interests and prejudices are likely to be roused to opposition when they come to be discussed in the Cortes. That General Martinez Campos, and the colonial minister believed them necessary, if Cuba is to be retained as a dependency, there can be no doubt, for the more intelligent Spaniards admit that the country cannot afford another war. But as the differences of opinion in respect of the nature and amount of these reforms extend to the Cubans themselves, it may be questioned whether so necessary a remedy will be applied promptly and boldly enough to be efficacious.

I have, &c.,

J. R. LOWELL.

[Inclosure in No. 194.—Translation.]

Ministry of Ultramar.

Sire: When in June last the labors of the legislature, called together by Your Majesty on the previous 10th of March, began, circumstances more powerful than the desire and wish of the government, irresistibly hindered the discussion and enactment of projects relating to the island of Cuba, bearing upon points and particulars demanding especial attention and care, and which it was wished to have examined and decided in Parliament, with the assistance of the deputies elected to represent those provinces in the national assembly.

One of these circumstances especially, perhaps the principal obstacle to designs so patriotic, was the real and insuperable impossibility springing from well-known causes and accidents, of having that representation during the first session of the Cortes as complete as was necessary to satisfy the mind of those who, for some time have been of opinion that those questions should be only provisionally settled until the deputies of the Antilles could be present to solve them definitively. Those of them who were present and took part in the deliberations of the lower house, and the senators, did not themselves hesitate to express the opinion that the debates on the question should begin only when the legislature came together again, and even considered it perilous and improper that the government should have introduced it by the draft of a bill when no one could doubt that it would be impossible to discuss and pass it before the inevitable suspension of the session.

Yielding, therefore, to so prudent and discreet a desire, the minister who signs this has postponed fulfilling the solemn promises contained in the august words pronounced by Your Majesty, at the solemn act of opening the Cortes, till the moment when they shall resume their deliberations, but with the firm intent not to delay longer nor for any reason the presentation of such formulations as come within his power, in order, so far as he can, to satisfy an honest zeal to submit to the wisdom of Parliament what he considers wisest for the definitive settlement of what suffers by being left provisional.

Certainly since the beneficent peace which, without cruelty, chastisements, rancor, or revenge, put an end to the ten years’ fratricidal war in those Spanish regions, now so much in need of repose, of industry, of security, and of confidence, much has been done, and in a short time, to settle upon bases of intelligent assimilation what forms the moral of the life of a people, its territorial and administrative division, its municipal and provincial organization, its electoral laws. It was the glory of the late ministry to carry out, proposing them opportunely for the wise approbation of Your Majesty, reforms so important and hitherto so easily and profitably put in operation. It has fallen to the undersigned to execute the orders of Your Majesty, after submitting his projects to the approval of the council of ministers and the sanction of the sovereign, in a more modest sphere, introducing into the island of Cuba in little more than three months the law of hypothecation, with its regulations, the penal code, the legitimate plan of a budget, which, besides normalizing an economical situation—unsettled, one might say, since 1868, and above all since 1874—contains the elements of reducing, as they have been considerably, the expenses and burden of taxation, and, lastly, the bases of a stable civil service, and of preparation for a period of imperturbable legality, the unanimous aspiration, doubtless, of whoever feels a truly Spanish heart beat in his breast.

But many of these reforms have had as a guaranty of their fitness the preparation and enlightenment of the knowledge and study of wise commissions, formed of men most competent, and of indisputably exceptional qualifications of wisdom and experience, excepting him who says this, of those of which he was a member.

Accordingly, as we are now concerned with projects in which it is essential to solve promptly questions far more difficult, if not for their novelty, for their complexity and special application, it cannot seem strange to any one that, in order to profit by the parliamentary interregnum, although on general principles the government has already marked out its line of conduct, we should seek as a previous study of what is most suitable to the island of Cuba in respect of the system of taxation, commercial relations, and the exceptional condition of some of its inhabitants, the special help of those persons who, as more immediately interested in the lot of all those inhabitants, and who at the present time know most nearly the state of opinion, and by a great preponderance its needs and demands, can lend the government greater and better help to go on with success in the course it has taken, a course which it is proposed to follow to the end without delays or vacillations of any kind whatever, in order to fulfill what it understands to be its mission, and which it is its duty to realize.

With this object, and considering who are the persons who can soonest accomplish it because already in Europe, the minister who has the honor to address Your Majesty thinks the opportune moment come for the naming of a commission, principally composed of senators and deputies representing the island of Cuba, who shall be charged as quickly as possible, and after examining the many and now classified documents collected in the colonial ministry, to report to the government what it thinks most adequate and suitable in respect of the questions above mentioned, and especially in what concerns the series of measures or the measure to be adopted in order to complete or change the laws in force concerning the social condition of the before-mentioned inhabitants, in order that the generous and noble sentiments of Your Majesty may be faithfully and loyally realized as soon as possible.

Relying, therefore, on these considerations, the undersigned minister, with the approval of the cabinet, has the honor to submit to Your Majesty’s approbation the following project of a decree.

Sire, your most obedient servant,

SALVADOR DE ALBACETE.
Madrid, August 15, 1879.

royal decree.

Considering the reasons set forth by the colonial minister, with the approval of the cabinet, I decree as follows: Article I. To report to the government on the terms in which shall be proposed to the Cortes, when they renew their labors, the system of taxation of the island of Cuba, that of its commercial relations generally and nationally considered, and that of its tariff, as well as concerning the definitive solution that should be given to the questions raised by the exceptional condition of many of the inhabitants of the said island, there shall be formed in Madrid a commission, of which shall form part the persons named by me on the proposal of the colonial minister, from among those who are now most fitted to know the situation of those provinces.

Art. II. The commission referred to in the preceding article, after examining all the numerous data existing in the central bureau of administration, shall present to the government so soon as possible, and before the reassembling of the legislature, the result of its labors, and a definitive report for the concrete solution of all the questions submitted to its examination and judgment.

Art. III. The colonial minister shall take all the most efficacious measures to provide the commission with the means of promptly and completely accomplishing its trust.

Given at the royal seat of San Ildefonso, 15th August, 1879. ALFONSO.

The colonial minister:
Salvador de Albacete.

royal decree.

In virtue of what the minister of Ultramar has proposed, and in accordance with the decree of this date, for the creation of a commission to furnish information as to the projects of a law to be submitted to the Cortes, when it shall renew its work, I nominate as members of said commission the Captain-General of the Army and Senator of the Kingdom, D. Joaquin Jovellar, who will discharge the duties of President; the Very Reverend Archbishop of Santiago de Cuba; D. Augusto Amblard, D. Juan Manuel Sanchez Bustamante, D. José Silverio Jorrin, D. Juan Bueno y Blanco, D. Leon Crespo de Laserna, D. Manuel Fernandez de Castro, the Marquises de la Victoria de las Tunas, of O’Gaban y de San Carlos de Pedroso, and D. Vicinte Galarza, senators of the Kingdom; D. Antonio Fernandez Chorah, D. Bernardo Portuondo, D. Calixto Bernal, D. Julio Apezteguia, D. José Argumosa, D. Martin Gonzalez del Valle, D. Manuel Arminan, D. Mariano Cancio Villaamil, D. Mamerto Pulido, D. Miguel Martinez Campos, D. Rafael Maria de Labra, and D. Santiago Vinent, deputies; D. Manuel Calvo and D. Pedro Sotolongo, counsels of the administration of the island of Cuba; D. Carlos Valcarcel, vice-admiral of the navy; D. Antonio Lopez y Lopez, marquis of Comillas; and D. Manuel José de Posadillo, ex-regent of the Audiencia of Havana.

Given at the royal seat of San Ildefonso, the 15th August, 1879.
ALFONSO.

The colonial minister:
Salvador de Albacete.

No. 449. Mr. Lowell to Mr. Evarts. [Document 481]

No. 449.
Mr. Lowell to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Madrid, August 22, 1879. (Received September 10.) No. 195.]

Sir: With reference to your instruction No. 146, relative to the extraordinary taxes imposed on certain American citizens in the island of Cuba, I have now the honor to inclose herewith a copy of my note to the minister of state upon the subject, and of a copy and translation of his note in reply, from which you will perceive that the matter has been referred to the governor-general of that island with a view to a definite decision in regard thereto.

I have, &c.,

J. R. LOWELL.

[Inclosure No. 1 in No. 195.]

Mr. Lowell to the Duke of Tetuan.

Legation of the United States,
Madrid, May 28, 1879.

Excellency: In a conversation which I had the honor to hold with the predecessor of your excellency in the ministry you so worthily fill, I represented to him in strong terms the hardships to which American citizens domiciled in the island of Cuba, conceived themselves to be exposed by the exaction from them of extraordinary imposts, higher than those paid by subjects of the German Empire.

The importance of the commercial intercourse between Cuba and the United States is so great, that they find it hard to understand why special difficulties should apparently be thrown in its way by subjecting them to what; when compared with some others, seems rather to be a special disability than their proper share in a general burden.

I represented to Mr. Silvela, though not for a moment admitting the justice of such an inference, how easily such a distinction might be taken advantage of by designing and interested persons, to misrepresent the friendly disposition and attitude of Spain toward the United States, and thus to give an unfavorable bias to public opinion in the latter country.

Mr. Silvela seemed to be impressed by the importance of these considerations, and suggested that I should furnish the government of His Catholic Majesty with a list of Americans domiciled in Cuba, on whom these exactions bore with peculiar hardships, giving me to understand that he would use his influence to have the excess of imposts in such cases remitted.

Having received a partial list of the American citizens domiciled in Cuba who feel themselves thus aggrieved, I have the honor to inclose a copy thereof for your excellency’s consideration.

The collection of the amount claimed was suspended on the representation of our consul-general in Havana in order to allow of remonstrance on the part of the United States, and accordingly the question is not of returning money already paid, but simply of allowing it to remain uncollected.

I feel sure that if the government of His Catholic Majesty could bring itself to see the propriety of making this concession (if concession there be, which I do not feel authorized to admit), it would be accepted by the government I have the honor to represent as a fresh proof of friendly feeling, and of a desire to draw closer amicable relations so important to both countries.

I gladly avail myself of this occasion to renew to your excellency the assurance of my most distinguished consideration.

J. R. LOWELL.

[Inclosure No. 2 in No. 195—Translation.]

The Duke of Tetuan to Mr. Lowell.

Ministry of State,
June 26, 1879.

Excellency: With reference to the latest note of the legation under your worthy charge, relative to the claims of certain North American citizens on account of the contribution exacted from them in the island of Cuba, I have the honor, to make known to your excellency that the minister of ultramar has communicated the contents of said note to the governor-general of the island of Cuba, in order that the direction of the treasury may be put in possession of the data relative to this affair, and in view of it, to report so soon as may be what it may judge proper, or may decide them if it should be possible, in strict accordance with existing laws.

I avail myself of this opportunity to reiterate to your excellency the assurances of my most distinguished consideration.

The Duke of TETUAN.

No. 450. Mr. Lowell to Mr. Evarts. [Document 482]

No. 450.
Mr. Lowell to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Madrid, August 22, 1879. (Received September 10.) No. 196.]

Sir: Referring to my dispatch No. 146, I have now the honor to inclose herewith a copy and translation of a note from the minister of state, informing me that the excess of tonnage dues exacted at Manila from the American vessels Bullion, Frank Lambeth, Washington, Henry A. Litchfield, and Stephen, has been ordered to be returned to the consignees of said vessels.

I have, &c.,

J. R. LOWELL.

[Inclosure in No 196—Translation.]

The Duke of Tetuan to Mr. Lowell.

Ministry of State,
July 31, 1879.

Excellency; I have the honor to make known to your excellency, referring to the affair which occasioned your note of the 30th December last, as to the arrival at Manila of the vessels Bullion, Frank Lambeth, Washington, Henry A. Litchfield, and Stephen, that the minister of ultramar informs me that he has ordered the restitution of the additional sum collected from the consignees of said vessels by exacting tonnage dues according to the number of Spanish tons, instead of those which appeared in the register of each vessel.

I avail myself of this opportunity to reiterate to your excellency the assurance of my most distinguished consideration.

The Duke of TETUAN.

No. 451. Señor Mendez de Vigo to Mr. Evarts. [Document 483]

No. 451.
Señor Mendez de Vigo to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of Spain at Washington,
Washington, March 29, 1879.

The undersigned, envoy extraordinary and minister plenipotentiary of His Catholic Majesty, has the honor herewith to transmit to the honorable Secretary of State of the United States, indorsed to his order, a draft for the sum of $10,000, in payment of the indemnity granted by the Government of Spain to the owners of the American barks Ellen Rizpah and Rising Sun, the promise made by this legation in its note of the 15th of February last to the honorable Secretary of State being hereby fulfilled.

The undersigned avails himself, &c.

FELIPE MENDEZ DE VIGO.

[Inclosure.]

Draft for ten thousand dollars ($10,000).

No. 452. Mr. Evarts to Señor Mendez de Vigo. [Document 484]

No. 452.
Mr. Evarts to Señor Mendez de Vigo.

Department of State,
Washington, April 1, 1879.

Sir: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your note of the 29th ultimo, together with a draft indorsed to my order for the sum of $10,000, in payment of the indemnity granted by the Government of Spain to the owners of the barks Ellen Rizpah and Rising Sun.

The admirable manner in which the just claim of the owners of these vessels has been met by His Majesty’s government, may be regarded as another gratifying exponent of those felicitous relations which have so long existed between Spain and the United States, and which, it is hoped, will hereafter be, if possible, even more close than heretofore.

I avail myself, &c.

WM. M. EVARTS.

Sweden and Norway.Sweden and Norway.

[485] . Mr. Stevens to Mr. Evarts.

United States Legation, Stockholm, January 20, 1879. (Received Feb. 10.)

[486] . Mr. Stevens to Mr. Evarts.

United States Legation, Stockholm, May 19, 1879. (Received June 9.)

[487] . Mr. Stevens to Mr. Evarts.

United States Legation, Stockholm, May 20, 1879. (Received June 9.)

[488] . Mr. Stevens to Mr. Evarts.

United States Legation, Stockholm, August 26, 1879. (Received September 17.)

[489] . Mr. Stevens to Mr. Evarts.

United States Legation, Stockholm, September 23, 1879. (Received October 13.)

No. 453. Mr. Stevens to Mr. Evarts. [Document 485]

No. 453.
Mr. Stevens to Mr. Evarts.

United States Legation,
Stockholm, January 20, 1879. (Received Feb. 10.) No. 35.]

Sir: Saturday, January 18, at noon, the annual session of the Swedish Parliament was opened by the King with the usual impressive ceremonies. The Queen, who was absent on a like occasion last year, owing to temporary residence in Germany because of serious ill-health, was present with three of the princes, the crown prince being now absent on a visit of some months in Southern Europe.

The foreign ministers and secretaries of legation at this court were generally present in the diplomatic gallery, and the large hall was compactly full of members of the Parliament, of Swedish officials, and citizens of both sexes. As usual, the King read his address in an admirable manner. A copy of the same, printed in French, sent to this legation from the department of foreign affairs, is inclosed, as well as an English translation of the same.

It will be observed that His Majesty alludes to the business depression which, sooner or later, has affected all civilized and commercial countries. Perhaps, relatively, tins country has suffered in a less degree than Great Britain and Germany. Yet Sweden is so closely connected with those two countries in her material interests that what strongly touches them affects all Scandinavia. Timber and iron being the chief articles of Swedish export, the greatly lessened foreign demand for these productions has seriously reduced, necessarily, the available exchange resources of the country during the past year. This, of course, has tended to embarrass home business and lessen the government revenues. During the last six months of 1878 there was a considerable number of heavy failures, chiefly in Gottenburg and Stockholm. But none of the banking institutions have suspended payment, and private parties have lost nothing by their misfortune or bad management. Generally these established financial associations seem to be administered with much caution and fidelity. The firmness with which they maintain their position tends to lessen essentially the evil consequences of the commercial depression.

It may be said also in justice to the Swedish people that they seem to avoid extravagance in dress and living, have a marked regard to economy, and appear strongly desirous of limiting their expenditures to their means.

It will be observed that the King advises the increase of the excise on brandy, and of the import duties on spirits, tobacco, coffee, and sugar. Change in the tariff laws seems to be the order of the day in most European countries. All that I can discover touching the facts and the discussion of this subject on this side of the Atlantic, but tends to confirm the opinion of the present financial policy of the United States, and regard for incidental protection to our industries in raising our national revenues, are wise and patriotic, because clearly proved to be promotive of the development of our vast natural resources as well as of the prosperity and happiness of the entire American people.

I have, &c.

JOHN L. STEVENS.

Royal address at the opening of the Swedish Parliament, January 18, 1879.

Gentlemen: Welcome to share with me the cares for the good of a beloved country. Having recently been united in our common prayers, let us here make the promise to devote to it our common efforts. While our amicable relations with all foreign powers have been uninterrupted, the development of all branches of the administration has progressed tranquilly at home. As the result of new bases already in a great degree applied for the organization of the central administration, the advantage of a simpler method of labor has been acquired without abrupt transition, while offering the employés of the State a more suitable remuneration for their labor.

The procedure in matters of judicial seizure has been regulated, and the new law relative thereto has been in force from the commencement of this year.

The general synod, after having deliberated on several questions of great importance for our church, has adopted various bills, which will be submitted to your approbation.

Public instruction, generously endowed by the Diet, sheds its benefits with success, according to a plan from day to day more generally applied. The labors of legislation are pursued without interruption, and new bills will be submitted to you in proportion as they shall have been definitively examined.

The law on the adoption of the metrical system for weights and measures has been promulgated, and the ordinance fixing a mean time for all the kingdom has gone into operation.

In an economical point of view the past year has not presented an equally satisfactory aspect. The country, it is true, has been favored with an abundant harvest, but the products of our mines and forests have not found advantageous markets. The financial situation has suffered so much the more because capital, too considerable perhaps for our resources, has been immobilized temporarily for the construction of private railroads. Not only has embarrassment resulted to a great number of private persons, but the consequences have been as sensibly experienced by the State. The sources of the public revenue have diminished and the budget of the coming year will have to be regulated without recourse to anterior excess at the same time that the available funds are reduced.

In this state of things it has been my duty to reduce as much as possible the appropriations which will be asked of you, and defer to a more favorable time such propositions as would have involved increased expenditure.

But the appropriations which are imperiously required could not be covered at this time without an increase of taxes. I have thought it then my duty to propose, in the first place, an increase of the excise on the manufacture of brandy and of the customs duty on the importation of spirits and tobacco; thus the greatest part of the new charges would affect articles which should not be classed among those of prime necessity, and which, until this time, have been with us less taxed than in most other countries.

To obtain the rest, I have thought it would be least onerous for the tax-payers to raise, in some degree, the duties on the importation of coffee and sugar.

I declare the present session opened, and I assure you, gentlemen, most earnestly, of my good will.

No. 454. Mr. Stevens to Mr. Evarts. [Document 486]

No. 454.
Mr. Stevens to Mr. Evarts.

United States Legation,
Stockholm, May 19, 1879. (Received June 9.) No. 42.]

Sir: The Swedish Diet has just completed the legislation increasing the custom duties on articles imported into this country, and the same is in force from this day, according to royal proclamation of this date. The increase has been made on the following articles, and the duties hereafter to be collected are represented by the annexed figures:

Ether and spirits of ether, or so-called Hoffman’s drops, various kinds of mixtures and preparations of ether, acetic ether, cognac, rum and arrack, essence or oil, also fruit ether, 3 crowns per kanna. (The kanna is about ½ of an English gallon.)

Rum and spirits in casks: Of grain, potatoes, or other roots, per kanna: Of arrack made from rice, sugar, or grapes, containing 50 per cent. of alcohol, 1 crown and 50 öre.

When the said rum or spirits is made in France and is imported directly by sea, 1 kanna containing 50 per cent. alcohol will be required to pay a duty of 1 crown and 15 öre.

Rum or spirits made of other fruits, containing 50 per cent of alcohol, will pay 1 crown and 50 öre per kanna.

In bottles or jugs, all kinds of rum or spirits, without regard to ratio of alcohol, will pay 2 crowns and 30 öre per kanna.

Coffee, 11 öre per pound.

Sugar, all kinds of refined, such as loaf, candied, cake, also crushed and pulverized, per cwt., 14 crowns.

Sugar, unrefined, in color not darker than Kb. 18 of the Holland standard used in commerce, of which the normal test is held by the general custom-house administration at the disposal of the custom-houses concerned, per cwt., 14 crowns.

Sugar darker than the above-mentioned standard, also if merchandise comes in a dissolved or liquid state, per cwt., 10 crowns.

Tobacco: Raw, leaf, and stalk, per pound, 42 öre; manufactured, cigars, cigarettes, per pound, 1 crown and 30 öre; cut, per pound, 50 öre; ground or powdered, per pound, 50 öre; folded, twisted, pressed, per pound, 50 öre; blocks or corots, per pound, 55 öre.

Wines all kinds, containing 21 per cent. or less of alcohol, in casks, per pound, 7 öre.

Wines all kinds, 21 per cent. or less of alcohol, in bottles, per kanna, 55 öre.

Wines containing more than 21 per cent. of alcohol, in casks, per pound, 20 öre; in bottles, per kanna, 2 crowns.

Vinegar all kinds, per pound, 8 öre.

The excise duties on the following articles have been raised to the annexed figures: Swedish brandy, pure, 1 crown per kanna; Swedish brandy, second class, 1 crown per kanna.

When said brandy is exported the excise duty is refunded in full, and at the ratio of 1 crown and 2 öre per kanna when it has been purified.

The provision relating to refunding the excise in case of exportation goes into effect October 1, 1879.

In every case where pound is used in this communication, the Swedish pound, or 94 of the English or American pound is meant, and the kanna signifies 2.3 imperial quarts, American or English standard.

The above changes in the custom duties are in force from this date in Norway as well as Sweden.

I have, &c.,

JOHN L. STEVENS.

No. 455. Mr. Stevens to Mr. Evarts. [Document 487]

No. 455.
Mr. Stevens to Mr. Evarts.

United States Legation,
Stockholm, May 20, 1879. (Received June 9.) No. 43.]

Sir: The Swedish Diet, which has been in session since the 18th of January, will close its labors to-morrow. Outside of its customary routine proceedings, its chief deliberations and measures adopted have had their origin, directly or indirectly, in the commercial depression which reached Sweden later than most European countries, and has more seriously affected its business the past ten months, than at any other preceding portion of the crisis which has more or less touched all nations. The increase of the customs duties and excise tax, the details of which I have given in dispatch 42, had its chief cause in the lessened receipts of the government on the former scale of taxation, the result of the business and financial depression.

The most important measure adopted by the Diet grew, in a large degree, out of the same cause. I refer to the enactment of a loan bill, authorizing the government to issue its bonds to the amount of 23,000,000 kronors, for the purpose of assisting the private banks and railroads of the country. It has voted also to allow the government to make a right-out purchase of one line of railway which is in an embarrassed condition, at the cost of 4,000,000 kronors, which will be paid partly from the revenue of a railroad loan granted at a previous session of the Diet, and partly by a loan for the special purpose of covering the purchase cost of this railway. The government in preceding years, beginning in 1855, had granted to railways cash to the extent of more than 190,000,000 kronors, and is the present owner of nearly one-half of the railway property of the country, including nearly all the main or trunk lines.

The banks and the railway associations to which the government is to advance the proceeds of the 23,000,000 loan just authorized, are to give satisfactory mortgages of completed railways in operation or other property which shall be regarded absolute security for the money advanced. Not unlikely the larger portion of the railway property thus mortgaged will sooner or later become the absolute property of the government.

This loan bill was under consideration for a considerable time in the Diet, and was fully discussed in both houses. It was adopted in the first chamber at the first trial by a large majority, and was refused passage in the second chamber by a small majority.

This would have been fatal to the measure in most parliamentary bodies. But there is a provision in the Swedish constitution relating to taking the vote in the two houses of the Diet, in case of disagreement on first trial, somewhat peculiar, to which there is nothing similar in American Congressional and legislative organizations.

In the contingency that a measure is voted affirmatively in one chamber of the Diet and negatively in the other chamber, a day is appointed when the two chambers vote again, and then the affirmative votes of the two houses are added together, and also the negative votes of the two houses, and if the united affirmative vote is one more than the united negative vote, the measure is adopted; if the combined negative vote is one more than the combined affirmative vote, the measure is defeated, and cannot be taken up again during the session.

It was by the application of this provision of the constitution that the branch of the Diet most conservative in its composition and character secured the passage of this important financial measure, which a majority of the lower chamber had rejected after much deliberation and discussion.

Judging by the prevailing tone of the Swedish press, the measure is well received by the business and financial men of the country. The bill provides for a five per cent. loan, which will be promptly taken at par in France, England, and Germany.

I have, &c.,

JOHN L. STEVENS.

No. 456. Mr. Stevens to Mr. Evarts. [Document 488]

No. 456.
Mr. Stevens to Mr. Evarts.

United States Legation,
Stockholm, August 26, 1879. (Received September 17.) No. 51.]

Sir: It will not be denied that questions of railroad legislation, ownership, and management are assuming more and more importance in the United States as well as in foreign countries. Therefore, I deem it not inappropriate to my official duties to furnish the following data concerning the railroad interests of Sweden and Norway:

The construction of railroads in Sweden, to any considerable extent, is comparatively recent. This is owing partly to the fact that this country has a very extensive water-frontage, affording favorable means of water transit, and neighboring to these navigable waters is a large proportion of its resources and population. In addition to her extented water-frontage on the east, south, and southwest, Sweden has various canals which unite her numerous interior lakes with each other, and these with the great Gottenburg canal, which allows a direct passage across the country by sail and steam vessels, thus uniting the Baltic and its adjuncts with the Oattegat, Skager Rack, and the North sea.

This system of canals was partially commenced nearly three centuries since, and substantially completed before the railroad building of the country was inaugurated. These canals were built at the expense of the government, and are under its exclusive control.

The extensive use that is made of these waterways for passengers and freight is shown in the fact, that in a single year there were 23,000 passages of steamers through them, and more than that number of sail-vessel transits, which, at very moderate rates of toll, paid 900,000 kronors, or $235,000 American standard.

Railroad building in Sweden may be said to date its beginning in 1856. In 1855 the national Diet authorized the construction at the expense of the government of certain important lines. The work on these lines was commenced in the following year, and in 1856 an inconsiderable portion of one of these roads was opened to traffic.

Maintaining in vigor the policy established by the Diet, the government continued the building of railroads, until at the commencement of 1878 it had completed five trunk lines of the united length of 1,005 English miles, therein including five short branch and junction lines.

The expense of these lines was entirely paid by the government, and amounted to $41,400,000.

The gauge of these roads is 4 feet 8½ inches, the original Stephenson gauge generally in use in England and the United States. The activity of the government in railroad building had the effect very soon to stimulate the construction of private lines. At the beginning of 1879, of the last-named roads there had been constructed 1,500 English miles, at the cost of $61,000,000; 1,240 miles, or five sixths, of these private railroads were opened in the four years 1874–1877. Toward the construction of these private railroads the national government gave a very effective assistance, either in the form of subscription or loans.

The liabilities assumed by the government for railroads exclusively owned by the nation, and by subventions and loans to private railroads, are expressed by the following tabular statement: Railroad loans of— Railroad loans of—

1855 $40,018 1870 $4,121,932

1858 4,042,760 1872 4,869,947

1860 4,871,700 1875 4,675,648

1861 605,350 1876 9,435,613

1864 2,390,225 1878 4,741,514

1866 6,680,243

1868 5,302,435 Total 52,299,535

1869 522,150

Of the above amount $7,457,810 were in aid of private railroads, mortgages or bonds being taken therefor by the government.

Of the above loans $4,909,965 bear an interest of 4 per cent., $30,762,810 at 4½ per cent., and $16,626,760 at 5 per cent.

The loans of 1864, 1868, and 1876, amounting to $17,128,273, were negotiated at the respective rates of 92½, 90 and 96½, per cent. All of these loans are to be paid off gradually by sinking funds carefully provided for.

The money not covered by the above loans for the building and the equipment of the State and private railroads, amounting to more than $55,000,000, was contributed by individual and municipal subscription for stock, or paid out of the earnings of the roads.

The highest speed for the express passenger trains permitted on the Swedish railroads is 40 miles per hour, medium speed being 30 miles; of the mixed trains 18½, and of the freight trains from 12 to 15 miles per hour.

The State railroads alone run night trains for passengers. In the fast trains there are only first and second class cars; and the cost of the passage in these trains is 4 cents per mile for the first-class ticket, and 3 cents per mile for the second-class.

The other passenger trains have three classes of cars. In the mixed trains the price of passage in the first-class cars is 3 cents per English mile, in the second-class 2¼ cents per mile, and in the third-class 1 cent per mile.

The cars are well constructed, of good model, and the station-houses are substantial and convenient.

As the government owns and controls nearly all the trunk lines, it is able easily to regulate the tariff-rates of passengers and freight, and to check exorbitant charges and varying and injurious competitions.

There is no complaint that the ownership and control of the trunk lines by the government operates unduly against the rights and legitimate interests of the private railroads.

This state ownership of the trunk lines tends to prevent all unfair discrimination of one line against another, or against the public interests and convenience, and to maintain a proper equilibrium between the interests of all.

norway railroads.

The extended facilities of water communication possessed by Sweden is enjoyed to quite as large a degree by Norway, which is bounded north and west by the ocean, and south by the Skager Rack, affording a great number of fjords, harbors, and navigable creeks.

On an area of 122,000 English square miles, Norway has less than 2,000,000 of inhabitants.

Along the coasts the population is chiefly engaged in navigation and fisheries, and in the interior in the pursuit of agriculture and the breeding of cattle, the former of which is, however, very limited on account of the nature of the country and the climate.

To these branches of industry must be added the important labor and commerce arising from the produce of lumber floated down the rivers at small expense, and contributing to the prosperity of the exporting towns. During the last thirty years, considering the limited taxable resources of the country, Norway has contributed liberally to the improvement of the highways of communication uniting the interior of the country with the towns on the coast, and these with each other.

The national government, with small contributions from the municipalities, has provided for the execution of these works. In 1854 was built the first railroad, 42 miles in length, which unites Mjösen Lake with Christiania.

This road was built chiefly by private capital, English and Norwegian, and under the supervision of Robert Stephenson, the distinguished son of the celebrated originator and pioneer of the British railroads, George Stephenson.

It was not until 1862 that another piece of road was completed eastward from Christiania, which was continued until it reached the Swedish border in 1865 and united with the Swedish trunk line. This railroad, and all those since constructed, have been chiefly at the expense and under the direction of the Norwegian Government.

Of railroads completed and open to traffic, Norway has now 656 English miles, and 362 miles well under construction. The total cost of these roads amounts to about 130,000,000, of which $22,500,000 has been paid by the government, $6,500,000 by private or municipal shareholders, and $1,000,000 by loan. Of these roads 367 miles are of the standard gauge, 4 feet 8½ inches, and 501 miles of the 3½ feet gauge.

A part of the capital for the building of a portion of these roads was obtained from the districts desiring the roads, which contributed a fraction of one-third or one-fifth of the amount required, the government contributing the remainder and reserving to itself the exclusive right of administrating the roads. In this way all the Norwegian railroads, with the exception of the first 42 miles opened in 1854, are government roads.

The rates of fare on the broad-gauge roads are, for the first class 3 cents per mile, second class 2 cents per mile, and the third class 1 cent per mile. There are but two classes of passenger cars on the narrow-gauge roads, of which the first class is at the rate of 2.3 cents per mile, and the second 1.3 cents per mile. Fast trains only run on one road, the speed of this being, including all the stoppages, 18 miles per hour. On all the other roads the usual speed is 14 to 15 miles per hour, including all stoppages, there being a station on an average every 5 or 6 miles.

The cars and other rolling stock of the Norwegian roads have been nearly all made in England, Norway, and Sweden. Some passenger cars have been built by a Danish company.

During the present year four powerful locomotives have been imported from the United States, built by the Baldwin Locomotive Works, of Philadelphia, and one American drawing-room car has been brought from the manufactory of Jackson & Sharp, Wilmington, Del.

The railroads of Norway and Sweden are run under an arrangement with the Danish roads.

The national debt of Norway, amounting to about $20,000,000, was contracted chiefly for the building of railroads.

It is seen by the above statement of facts that by nearly exclusive ownership in Norway, and the ownership of trunk lines in Sweden, the Norwegian and Swedish Government are enabled to exercise nearly full control of the railroads of the two countries, and to regulate the commerce and the transit of passengers in the interest of the public. Thus the rates continue about the same from year to year, and there are no deranging competitions by which the stocks and bonds of the roads are kept in feverish and injurious vacillation and uncertainty, and legitimate commerce and the price of commodities disturbed or rendered uncertain.

conclusion.

It is not improbable that how to govern railroads in the best interest of the public and with just regard to the rights and interests of their owners, at no distant day may become one of the leading questions for the American people, one of the toughest problems for their statesmen. It would seem to be a self-evident proposition, growing out of the very necessities and philosophy of human government, that national and international laws and regulations should exercise sway over the great routes of travel and commerce on land and sea.

That railroads are taking foremost place among the avenues and agencies of commerce, is made apparent by the measure and weight of facts obvious to all. That the constituted authority of the nation on whose territory railroads operate, and from whose resources they draw their life and power, should control and regulate their action seems to be the growing conviction of those who have devoted the most consideration to their history, operation, and the questions and interests which they involve. It is well known that such is the conclusion to which the ablest legislative and administrative minds of Germany and France have reached, and the general experience of Europe is tending in the same direction.

I have, &c.,

JOHN L. STEVENS.

For the convenience of the American roads, I have in the above reduced the unit of distance and money to the United States standard.— J. L. S.

No. 457. Mr. Stevens to Mr. Evarts. [Document 489]

No. 457.
Mr. Stevens to Mr. Evarts.

United States Legation,
Stockholm, September 23, 1879. (Received October 13.) No. 55.]

Sir: General Björnstjerna, the minister of foreign affairs, having just terminated his leave of absence, which began immediately before my reception of your dispatch 55, to-day I had a conference with him concerning the views and position of the United States Government as presented in your communication touching Mormon emigration, and gave him in writing the essential portion of your dispatch.

The minister of foreign affairs gave a frank and cordial reception to the conversation which I made in the spirit of your instructions, and to the reading of the substantial portion of your communication, and the interview was in all respects as satisfactory as could have been expected. He expressed himself gratified that the United States Government had moved in the matter, and implied the hope that it would act vigorously to abate the evil indicated. He seemed to think that there are obstacles rendering it somewhat difficult for the Swedish and Norwegian Government to act with entire effectiveness relative to persons leaving these countries in the usual way by the established lines of commercial transit. But whatever can be done, he had no doubt his government would most readily do. He thought the Swedish and Norwegian authorities could respond to the views and wishes of the United States Government by officially publishing the purport of the United States laws and penalties relative to Mormon polygamy, and the liabilities which the emigrant would incur in becoming a party to any designs or action involving the violation of the laws of the United States.

He furthermore indicated that the pastors in their respective parishes could render effective assistance in the same direction. Sweden and Norway are territorially divided and organized into parishes, and the pastor or clergyman of each parish is in some sense a civil officer as well as a religious teacher. The laws and determination of the United States touching polygamy, becoming officially known here, will enable the pastors to speak with directness as to the liabilities and evils which the Mormon disciple will incur by going to America and becoming an associate of the lawbreakers of Utah. So far as practicable and consistent with the Swedish and Norwegian laws, I think there are substantial and conclusive reasons for the hope that His Majesty’s Government of these countries will aid in preventing the Mormon agents and emissaries from seducing from their homes the men and women of Sweden and Norway, to help swell the numbers of the lawbreakers in that community beyond the ocean, where a strange fanaticism audaciously assumes to criminally confront the authority of a friendly nation, and to trample under foot the morality and teachings of Christian civilization. The government and the public sentiment of these countries are averse to having their population victimized and depleted by immoral and criminal means.

So often as it may be necessary, or seem to promise good results, I shall hold further interviews with the minister of foreign affairs relative to this question, will observe what action may be taken by the Swedish and Norwegian officials, and report to the Secretary of State accordingly.

I have, &c.,

JOHN L. STEVENS.

Switzerland.Switzerland.

[490] . Mr. Fish to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Berne, December 2, 1878. (Received December 27.)

[491] . Mr. Fish to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Berne, March 13, 1879. (Received March 28.)

[492] . Mr. Fish to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Berne, March 31, 1879. (Received April 16.)

[493] . Mr. Fish to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Berne, May 19, 1879. (Received June 2.)

[494] . Mr. Fish to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Berne, June 9, 1879. (Received June 23.)

[495] . Mr. Fish to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Berne, October 18, 1879. (Received November 3.)

No. 458. Mr. Fish to Mr. Evarts. [Document 490]

No. 458.
Mr. Fish to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Berne, December 2, 1878. (Received December 27.) No. 129.]

Sir: At the time of the attempts to assassinate the German Emperor, the police of Germany inferred that the would-be assassins were connected with the Socialists. Undoubtedly you have been informed by the legation in Berlin whether this inference had any just cause. The fact that Nobling had been in Geneva led the German police to suppose that his dastardly crime had been the result of socialistic doctrines imbibed on Swiss soil. At that time the newspapers stated that very strong representations were made by General de Roeder, the German minister here, on behalf of his government to the Federal Council, to induce them to take active measures against the Socialists, and to suppress any intrigues they might be plotting.

* * * * * * *

A few days afterwards I saw General de Roeder, who told me that the Swiss Government had, upon hearing of the attempt (Hoedel’s) on the Emperor’s life, at once expressed in the most decided terms, and in beautiful language, their abhorrence of the crime and their joy at the failure of the attack.

* * * * * * *

He said that he himself had not made, on behalf of Germany, any extraordinary demands of the Federal Council, but had had occasion to ask their aid in having certain suspected parties watched.

It is generally believed in diplomatic circles that after the second attempt on the Emperor’s life, General de Roeder did make a representation to this government, and that in presenting it to the President he used very decided language to the latter.

The recent attempts on the lives of the Kings of Spain and Italy, the throwing of bombs in Florence and Pisa, and the spread of the doctrines of the “Internationale,” have naturally created great alarm throughout the monarchies of Europe.

The Spanish chargé d’affaires, Viscount de la Vega (at one time secretary of legation in Washington), in whose veracity I have the most implicit faith, told me shortly after the attempt on King Alphonso’s life that he had obtained from Geneva, some time before that occurrence, information that such an attempt would be made, and that similar information had been obtained by the Spanish embassy at Paris. The newspapers report that the Italian embassy in Paris had information of the attempt on King Humbert’s life before that event.

These reports, and the almost simultaneous outbreak of the crime of regicide, have naturally increased the bitterness against Socialists, and have created a great hostility to the asylum which Switzerland, by her geographical position and free institutions, so readily furnishes to political refugees of all nations.

On the 23d ultimo the telegrams reported that the Correspondencia of Madrid stated that several cabinets of Europe had informed the Swiss Government “that they should recall their representatives at Berne if Switzerland continued to receive the anarchists of all countries.” This was immediately denied by the Swiss President by means of the press, and the following day the telegram from Madrid announced, “Although” the President of the Swiss Confederation has not yet received any communication, pour parlers exist between the powers with a view that Switzerland should put a stop to the tolerance which she shows toward the anarchists.” The same reports were likewise circulated by the more reliable Epoca of Madrid.

If the original story, which was undoubtedly exaggerated, was made of whole cloth, the last telegram was an ingenious method of covering up the fact.

* * * * * * *

On the 27th ultimo an article appeared in the Bund, of this city, which, if not an official organ of this government, is in such relations with the political department as to entitle its expressions to great credit, defining its views of the right of asylum.

Dining that day by the side of the chief of the department of justice and police, he asked me if we had had any recurrence of the riots and communistic strikes of the summer of 1877, and whether the communist party had made any headway with us. I said that while we had not been free from strikes, we had, however, no repetition of the riots and disorders of August, 1877, and that in my opinion communism was not to be feared with us; that it had lost rather than gained ground since then. His answer was significant: “And that without the enactment of laws or repressive police measures.” He seemed to envy us our freedom” from the scourge, and our position of strength compared with other nations. * * * The Bund announces Switzerland’s position as to the right of asylum as follows: Switzerland should maintain in all circumstances, and defend with all her strength her right of asylum, in whatever concerns the protection that she should accord to the proscribed and persecuted. On the other hand, she should act with energy against the agitators without conscience, and the professed honorable gut-throats, who under the mantle of the asylum practice their nefarious and shameless industry with energy. She will maintain the right of asylum, but will know how to take care that the same shall not be abused; whoever is guilty of an abuse forfeits, as far as he is concerned, the protection of the asylum. So long as Switzerland holds strictly in theory and in practice to this notion of her duties and her rights she may put aside the exaggerated suggestions of diplomacy, with the declaration that she has the will and the power to obtain and preserve order in her own house without foreign meddling.

Although the Federal Council deny that as yet any representations from the other nations have been made on this subject, I believe that they have received an intimation from their agents that such representations are in contemplation, and that the article in the Bund, which has been since reproduced in the Journal de Genève, is more than a declaration of principle; it is intended to foil any joint representation on the part of other powers

* * * * * * *

Certainly the publication of socialistic inflammatory articles, and the accordance of banquets to the republican leaders of monarchical countries, are sufficient, in the present excited state of most of the governments of Europe, to call forth some remonstrance; and the article of the Bund appears to recognize this fact. It says: “There are individuals—one might perhaps designate them by name—who try with premeditation to make our country a base for political agitation, and whose disturbing action is paid for by certain parties. It is to them quite indifferent that the most regrettable consequences should result for Switzerland. What is to them her prosperity or her misfortune, provided that they may here, from our land, work all the wires of their contrivings in every direction with impunity? Should any catastrophe occur they are quick in shaking the dust from their shoes and leaving Switzerland to get out of the scrape that they have enjoyed placing her in.

* * * * * * *

“There is another class of foreigners who, in our opinion, should always be closely watched, notwithstanding the right of asylum. We refer to those “vandals of the press” who have recently inroaded our country, and who regularly poison certain papers with their shameless and dishonorable essays, This tone of basest vulgarity which has lately run through a portion of our press was first started by foreigners, namely, by Germans, to whom their native soil had become too hot, and who hoped to find a market for their essays among those poor Swiss whom they considered sufficiently stupid to accept them as serious. Refugees of this sort who repay our hospitality in seeking to excite the worst passions among our people, and in compromising the internal peace of the country, certainly merit no regard, and we hope, should the case arise, none will be shown them.”

The right of asylum has been an embarrassing and difficult question for Switzerland since the earliest days of the constitution of 1848, but in the past she has not flinched from her sacred duty of hospitality to the oppressed. The influx of political fugitives from the despotic countries of Europe, seeking shelter from their pursuers, involved her in many a bitter discussion with her powerful neighbors; the events of Mazzeni’s and Orsini’s time, those resulting in the changes in the political divisions of Europe in 1859, 1866, and 1870–’71, all caused her much trouble, aroused bitter animosities against her, and even threatened her with annihilation from powerful nations only too glad for a pretext to destroy her.

A perusal of the history of those discussions shows how nobly she stood alone in the heart of Europe, maintaining the sanctity of her principles in spite of the overwhelming force and domineering spirit of her more powerful neighbors.

Unfortunately, as is always the case, she has received many who have not been worthy of her protection, many who have abused her generous protection, and some no doubt who were implicated in crimes exceeding the limits of proper political contest.

The records of this legation show that unscrupulous persons of this class have even sought to abuse Switzerland’s hospitality under cloak of fraudulently obtained passports from us. Even since my connection with the legation, General Cluseret, a notorious member of the Paris Commune, has applied for a passport, and is, I believe, in possession of one issued to him by the Department of State many years ago.

It is in the abuses of this nature that Switzerland’s danger lies. No one can reproach her for affording shelter to political refugees or exiles. There is hardly a government in Europe to-day that has not among its leading men those who within the past thirty years have been exiled or have lied from their native lands to return with honor. How many of them in their exile sought refuge in Switzeland?

* * * * * * *

Articles 70 of the federal constitution places in the hands of the Confederation the right to expel foreigners who may compromise the internal or external safety of Switzerland. It will, therefore, be for the federal government to decide whether it will permit the abuses of the right of asylum to continue, which, according to the Bund, now exist. The publication of the article just at this time may have had in view the approaching session of the federal assembly, as well as the probable intentions of other powers.

Judging from her past, we can safely infer that Switzerland will make every sacrifice to preserve intact her right of asylum, and it is fair to suppose that she intends at the same time to get rid of those who, under the shelter of that right, are carrying on clandestine warfare against her neighbors or society at large, and thus reviving this, to her, ever troublesome question.

I have, &c.,

NICHOLAS FISH.

No. 459. Mr. Fish to Mr. Evarts. [Document 491]

No. 459.
Mr. Fish to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Berne, March 13, 1879. (Received March 28.) No. 161.]

Sir: I have the honor to inclose herewith copies of a correspondence between this legation and the consul at Zurich, relative to the passport application of William Dietze, a native of Germany, who has been residing in Zurich under the protection of an American passport for more than twenty years, who has not been in the United States for twenty-four years, where he was naturalized March 19, 1855, and, obtaining a passport two days later, left the United States and has never returned. Inasmuch as Mr. Dietze does not claim ever to have contributed toward the support of the government whose protection he has enjoyed for nearly a quarter of a century, I can but congratulate the latter on his decision to acquire another nationality.

I regret to say that my experience here leads me to believe that at Basle and Zurich, both in the proximity of Germany, there are large numbers of natives of that country whose claims to our nationality are similar to that of Mr. Dietze, and the merits of whose claims are in all probability but little if any better than his.

I invite your attention to my letter to the consul, and hope that the measures I have taken to thwart this attempt at prostitution of our citizenship will meet with your approval.

I have, &c.,

NICHOLAS FISH.

[Inclosure 2 in No. 161.]

Mr. Fish to Mr. Byers.

Legation of the United States,
Berne, March 3, 1879.

Sir: I have received the passport application of William Dietze, under date of March 1, from your office. It is accompanied by the certificate of his naturalization from the court of common pleas for the city and county of New York, of March 19, 1855, and by a passport issued to him by the Secretary of State on the 21st of of March, 1855.

An examination of the latter document shows that it was presented at the legation in London on the 9th of April, 1855, where it was visaed for France, Belgium, Prussia, Austria, and the continent. It bears the visé of the diplomatic or consular agents of each of those countries above named. On the 16th March, 1856, the passport was visaed at Aix-la-Chapelle “for Cologne” by the Prussian authorities. In 1860 the passport was visaed by the consul of the United States at Munich, and by the Bavarian officials. On the same day, October 18, 1860, it was visaed by the Austrian legation in that city. On the 23d April, 1861, it was presented to your predecessor, Mr. Goundie, and received his visé, “seen at this consulate.”

Inclosed with the application is a discharge from Prussian nationality, dated at Dusseldorf, 23d November, 1848.

It appears from applicant’s sworn statement that he resided in the United States from 1849 to 1855; he gives the month of his last leaving America as April, 1856, which is probably an error of memory, as he appears to have been in London as early as the 9th of April 1855, and at Cologne in March, 1856.

In any event, he appears to have left the United States as soon after his naturalization as he could, and in a period of nearly twenty-four years never to have resided there; for twenty years and upwards he has been residing at Zurich, and for nearly eighteen years he has not, from the papers before the legation, in any manner made known to either the consulate at Zurich, or to this legation, the fact that he claimed our protection until the present application, wherein he swears that he is “temporarily residing at Zurich,” and that he “desires the passport for the purpose of stopping longer in Zurich.”

I have no hesitancy in saying, under the circumstances of the present case, coupled with the fact that he has never resided in the United States as a citizen thereof, that the legation declines to regard his residence in Zurich as temporary in its character, nor could it accept it as such in the face of the applicant’s statement of his reason for desiring a passport.

Under these circumstances, I invite your attention to §§ 110, 111, of the Consular Regulations, coupled with the instruction of the Secretary of Slate to Mr. Mac Veagh, of December 13, 1870, in the case of Mathieu Orlich (published in Foreign Relations for 1871, page 887), a copy of which was transmitted to you as In closure No. 1 of my letter of February 26, 1878. If Mr. Dietze can show wherein his case differs from that of Orlich, and advances good reasons why an exception to the rules of the Department of State concerning the issue of passports should be made, I shall be happy to entertain his statement. Until he does so, I cannot, under my instructions, issue a passport to him.

I return herewith his expired passport and certificate of naturalization, together with his discharge from Prussian nationality.

I am, &c.,

NICHOLAS FISH.

[Inclosure 3 in No. 161.]

Mr. Byers to Mr. Fish.

United States Consulate,
Zurich, March 10, 1879.

Sir: I am in receipt of yours of the 3d instant concerning the application of William Dietze, of this city, for a passport.

I explained to him the doubtful character of his citizenship, as set forth in your letter, when he concluded to abandon his application for an American passport, and to buy the rights of Swiss citizenship in this canton.

This case is one of very many in this city of persons who have for years been registered on the books of the police as American citizens, and who have studiously kept all knowledge of their claim to citizenship from the consulate until forced to make them known by some unexpected action of the police.

Of course, as is well known, they escape by this course all burdens of citizenship that may be due either to Switzerland or to the United States.

I asked Mr. Dietze if he served in our late war. He answered, “No.” “Did you furnish a substitute?” I inquired. “No,” he replied. “Did you contribute money?” “None at all.” “Did you submit to the draft in the State of which you claim to be a citizen?” “Certainly not,” was his prompt answer.

The same sort of answers could truthfully be made by a majority of persons in this city who have been claiming to be American citizens for the last twenty years.

I am, &c.,

S. H. M. BYERS.

[Inclosure 4 in No. 161.]

Mr. Fish to Mr. Byers.

Legation of the United States,
Berne, March 11, 1879.

Sir: Your letter of the 10th instant, in regard to William Dietze’s renunciation of naturalization in the United States, is received.

You state that he intends to buy the rights of Swiss citizenship in the canton of Zurich. I wish you would procure for me a copy of the cantonal laws and regulations under which he is able to make such a purchase.

I will thank you to ascertain whether he actually does procure Swiss nationality. Should he do so, you will please to suggest to him the propriety of surrendering to you the certificate of his naturalization and passport as a citizen of the United States.

Would the cantonal government be willing to furnish a list of such American citizens as have acquired Swiss nationality in Zurich?

I am, &c.,

NICHOLAS FISH.

No. 460. Mr. Fish to Mr. Evarts. [Document 492]

No. 460.
Mr. Fish to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Berne, March 31, 1879. (Received April 16.) No. 168.]

Sir: Referring to my No. 158, I have the honor to inclose herewith a copy of my note to the Swiss Government requesting the information desired in your instruction No. 83, respecting railway taxation in this country, and also of their note in reply, together with a translation of the latter.

I have, &c.,

NICHOLAS FISH.

[Inclosure 1 in No. 168.]

Mr. Fish to Mr. Hammer.

Legation of the United States,
Berne, March 10, 1879.

The undersigned, chargé d’affaires of the United States of America, has the honor? under instructions from his government, to inform his excellency Mr. Hammer, President of the Swiss Confederation, that at a recent convention of boards of railroad commissioners, held at Columbus, Ohio, a committee was appointed to examine and report upon the methods of taxation as respects railroads and railroad securities now in force in the various States as well as in foreign countries, and that the object in view being deemed by his government one of general interest, he has been instructed to obtain, if possible, such statements in detail as may be necessary for a correct understanding of the systems of railroad taxation in use in Switzerland.

The undersigned has, therefore, the honor respectfully to request his excellency Mr. Hammer to kindly enable him to furnish his government with the desired information, well knowing the interest and willingness which characterizes the high federal government in complying with requests of this nature when made by friendly governments.

It is particularly desired that the information should specially cover the following points: 1. On what general recognized principle, if any, is the railway taxation of Switzerland based?

2. In how far are the railroad companies taxed as holders of realty?

3. In how far as holders of personalty?

4. In how far are they subject to a franchise tax?

5. In how far is their stock taxed as personalty to its owner?

6. What taxes are levied on the receipts of the company, whether net or gross?

The undersigned, while hoping that the high federal council will be willing to furnish him with such information as is obtainable on this matter, avails himself of this occasion to renew to his excellency Mr. Hammer, and to the high federal conncil, the assurances of his most distinguished consideration.

NICHOLAS FISH.

[Inclosure 2 in No. 168.—Translation.]

Mr. Hammer to Mr. Fish.

Berne, March 25, 1879.

In answer to the note of the chargé d’affaires of the United States, of the 10th instant, the federal council has the honor to furnish him with the following information: 1. The Swiss Confederation does not impose direct taxes; consequently the railway companies pay no contribution to the federal treasury. On the other hand, the companies are bound as regards the Confederation, by virtue of article 19 of the law of December 23, 1872, concerning railways— a. To carry, free of charge, the letters and parcels concerning which the prerogative of the State has reserved the right of transportation to the postal administration.

For the other parcels (de messagerie) expressed, the postal administration pays to the railroad company a compensation calculated on the basis of the general express tariff (tarif général de grande Vitesse) by calculating the total weight of the parcels for one month, and also taking into account the diminution of the (prestations) contributions occasioned the companies by such transportation. If the Confederation and the companies cannot agree, the federal tribunal decides. The conducteur attached to this service is carried free.

b. To carry, free of charge, the postal cars as well as their employés, and the persons charged with inspection.

c. To pay an annual tax of concession of 50 francs for each section of one kilometer in operation, when the revenue of the operating attains 4 per cent, after deducting the amount for loss by wear and tear, or that assigned to the reserve fund. In the event of this revenue thus calculated attaining 5 per cent., the tax of concession may be raised to 100 francs, and to 200 francs if this revenue is 6 per cent, or over.

2. Moreover, the cantons have the right to tax the railway companies in conformity with their legislation respecting taxation. Nevertheless, according to the circumstances, not only have certain companies obtained from the cantons a complete exemption from taxation, while other railway enterprises have been called on to pay contributions to the cantons, or to the communes, there exists such a variety of provisions that it is not possible to fix a general principle applicable to the collection of these taxes.

The federal council regrets that consequently it is impossible to reply categorically to the questions specially presented by the chargé d’affaires of the United States, and it avails itself of the occasion to renew to him the assurances of its high consideration.

In the name of the federal council—

The President of the Confederation, HAMMER.
The chancellor of the Confederation, SCHIESS.

No. 461. Mr. Fish to Mr. Evarts. [Document 493]

No. 461.
Mr. Fish to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Berne, May 19, 1879. (Received June 2.) No. 178.]

Sir: The returns thus far received, in regard to the voting which took place yesterday on the amendment to article 65 of the federal constitution concerning the death penalty, though incomplete, leave no doubt that the proposed amendment has been accepted by the people by about 15,000 majority. The total vote appears to be about 370,000, and the largest majority was that of the canton of Zurich, which amounted to 17,000 against its adoption, while the neighboring canton of St. Galle gave the second largest majority (on either side) in favor of the amendment, amounting to about 10,000.

In the canton of Berne a very light vote was cast, and had it not been for the newspapers it would have been difficult yesterday to realize that an election was taking place. So little interest did the question invoke in this canton, that with a population exceeding that of the canton of Zurich by over 220,000, the vote cast was about 5,000 less here than there.

The cantons voting in favor of the amendment, if the returns are correct, are Lucerne, Uri, Schwytz, Unterwalden (Upper and Lower), Glarns, Zug, Freiburg, Soleure, Schaffhonsen, Appenzell, (Inner and Outer Rhoden), St. Galle, Orisons, Argovie, Vaucl, and Valais.

Those voting in the negative are Zurich, Berne, Basle (Villa and Campagne), Thurgovie, Neuehatel, Geneva, and probably Tessin.

As previously reported to you in my No. 172, the present decision has been quite as much one of a purely political character as a test of popular opinion of the merits and demerits of capital punishment.

The question of the introduction of the death penalty is now restored to the competence of the respective cantons from whom the hitherto existing article 65 of the constitution of 1874 took it, subject only to the limitation of the amendment that it shall not be imposed for a political offense, and that corporal punishments are abolished.

To obtain a true verdict of the people respecting capital punishment, it would be necessary for the different cantons now to submit the question of its re-establishment to the popular vote within their respective jurisdictions.

I have, &c.,

NICHOLAS FISH.

No. 462. Mr. Fish to Mr. Evarts. [Document 494]

No. 462.
Mr. Fish to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Berne, June 9, 1879. (Received June 23.) No. 183.]

Sir: The Intelligentz Blatt of this morning contains a notice respecting the shipment of a pauper family by the communal authorities of Graben near Herzogenbuchsee, taken from the Zollinger Tagblatt, as follows: Once more we are informed of a sweet shipment to America. The communal authorities of Graben near Herzogenbuchsee last week sent off a family, Brugger, in the most irresponsible manner to America. The man is unfit to work, and the family had to be assisted very recently by the commune. The woman is moreover half blind. A better indication of this barbarism is needless.

I have only this moment noticed this article and hasten to bring it to your notice. I regret that I have no means to verify the statement, and that I fear the individuals in question may have already landed.

I have, &c.,

NICHOLAS FISH.

No. 463. Mr. Fish to Mr. Evarts. [Document 495]

No. 463.
Mr. Fish to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Berne, October 18, 1879. (Received November 3.) No. 218.]

Sir: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your instruction No. 115, respecting the detention of the property claimed by Mr. Franz Fassbind, of San Francisco.

The action of the communal authorities in withholding the property of natives of Switzerland naturalized in the United States, on various pretexts, has been, from the early days of this mission, a frequent source of complaint, and of much correspondence between my predecessors and the local authorities. Frequently the sums involved are too small to pay for the trouble and expense of their collection in the face of the objections raised. The recent case of Jacob Zimmermann, of Ebikon, with which you are familiar, shows, one of the most frequent pretexts for with holding the property of our citizens of Swiss birth, viz, declining to recognize him as a citizen of the United States because he had not been released from his native allegiance. This refusal was made in his case although the man presented a certificate of his naturalization in the United States, and a formal renunciation of his Swiss citizenship, both duly authenticated by the Swiss consul at New York, where he was residing, on the ground that the documents had not been authenticated by the Swiss Federal Government, and because Zimmermann was formerly under guardianship, and no certificate of his being able, notwithstanding such guardianship, to acquire citizenship in the United States, or of his being able validly to renounce his previous citizenship, had been presented.

This refusal of the communal authorities was supported by the cantonal government, and appears even to have had the sanction of the federal government, inasmuch as the latter transmitted it to the legation. It was not until the diplomatic representations of the legation had been brought to bear upon these objections that the unreasonable requirements of the commune and canton were allayed.

That such annoyances and others of a like nature are of but too frequent occurrence, the inclosed letter from Mr. Byers, the consul at Zurich, clearly demonstrates. The government of that canton holds that— A Swiss citizen acquiring the right of American citizenship without first handing in to, and having accepted by, the proper authorities here, a legal renunciation of Swiss citizenship, will still be considered as a citizen of Switzerland at any time he may return to this country.

While the right of the Swiss authorities to hold these views might possibly, under Swiss law, be maintained in the case of such naturalized citizens of the United States as return to Switzerland and establish themselves here, it is, I believe, in conflict with the Constitution and laws of the United States, as being a denial of the unalienable right of expatriation. More especially is this the case where, as in Ziinmermann’s case, the naturalized citizen, while residing in the United States, has sought to comply with the requirements of Swiss law respecting renunciation of Swiss nationality, but is hindered in so doing by the non-acceptance of his request for release from his native allegiance, and thus the doctrine of perpetual allegiance is sought to be maintained.

These annoyances will continue until some one of our naturalized citizens shall appeal to the tribunal federal or supreme court of Switzerland, when, I have no doubt, the enlightened justice of that body would render its decision in favor of the appellant. A decision in favor of the principle recognized by us, of the unalienable right of man to expatriate himself, would be of immense benefit to thousands of our naturalized citizens of Swiss birth, and to their heirs who are now deprived of the enjoyment of their property by the vexatious opposition of local officials, sometimes actuated by motives of personal interest, and who are likewise deterred from combatting such opposition on account of the trouble and expense involved therein.

Mr. Byers, whose long and great experience in cases of collecting property for this class of our citizens entitles his judgment to great-consideration, estimates the amount of property within the jurisdition of his consulate alone, belonging to such citizens of the United States, and withheld by the local authorities by reason of the claim of native allegiance, at 1,000,000 francs, or nearly $200,000.

In the absence of an adverse decision by the tribunal fédéral, I cannot fully share Consul Byers’s opinion that the higher courts will not remedy the evil, nor do I share his opinion that Congress should seek to prevent the naturalization of natives of this country who could not prove that they had never been under guardianship in Switzerland.

I believe that the remedy would be best attained were every Swiss, immediately upon his naturalization in the United States, to comply, so far as within him lies, with the provisions of the Swiss federal law of July 3, 1876, respecting the renunciation of Swiss nationality (see Foreign Relations for 1876, page 567), and that in every case where such compliance was thwarted by the action of the communal or cantonal authorities, the legation should be instructed to intervene diplomatically, and, failing to succeed, it should be empowered, after reference to the Department of State, to carry the appeal to the tribunal fédéral.

The decision of a test case by the latter in our favor would be the most effective barrier to similar future annoyances, and were it adverse to us, it would then be for us to consider the expediency of diplomatic negotiations for a remedy of the evil.

I particularly invite your attention to Mr. Byers’s letter, and I respectfully ask your instructions on this important question involving the nationality and the pecuniary interests of a large number of our naturalized citizens, a large majority of whom are proud of their acquired citizenship, and can ill afford to sacrifice their property for the sake of the exploded notion of a perpetual allegiance.

Should you adopt my views of the question, it might be advisable to intimate through the public press to our citizens of Swiss birth that it is to their own interest for them to formally renounce their allegiance to Switzerland.

In Mr. Fassbind’s case, I have, in compliance with your instructions, instituted inquiries concerning the facts, and shall be guided in my action by the result of such inquiries.

I have, &c.,

NICHOLAS FISH.

[Inclosure.]

Mr. Byers to Mr. Fish.

United States Consulate,
Zurich, October 11, 1879.

Sir: I would respectfully call your attention to the peculiar views taken by the government of this canton as to the status of Swiss persons who have become citizens of the United States. It is maintained, first, that no Swiss can become a United States citizen, or will he so considered by the authorities of this canton, unless he had first handed in to the authorities here a renunciation of his Swiss citizenship; second, this renunciation must have been accepted by the authorities here.

I may here note that great discretion seems to be allowed the local authorities as to whether this renunciation shall be accepted. Usually, if the applicant has had a guardian in Switzerland, the application will not be accepted at all, and the number of adults residing in America and still having guardians in this country, is something remarkable.

The law permits the appointment of a guardian for adults by the local authorities in various cases, and especially in cases where the person has given signs of extravagance. I may add that the going to America is one of these extravagances. This constant guardianship of other people’s interest is manifestly for the sole purpose of giving the township control, and finally possession, of other people’s property. In many cases not even the interest will be sent him, the ward, and as to a collection of an inheritance left him, it becomes, under the ruling of the authorities, simply impossible, unless the guardian and local authorities see fit, of their own free will, to permit it. I may add, that after years of experience in collection cases here, the guardian and the local authorities nine cases out of ten, do not see fit to permit it, and the cantonal authorities justify them in their action.

In short, under past rulings, a naturalized Swiss in America, who has inherited property in his native land, might almost give up all hopes of ever securing it, so many are the obstacles put in the way, principal of which are the informalities of his renunciation of citizenship, or rather the impossibility of obtaining acceptance of the renunciation in case the applicant is one of the hundreds and thousands who happen to have had a guardian.

As a case in point, I inclose an extract from a letter written to me by the cantonal government, in the case of Jacob Strehler, in which the doctrine is repeated that any Swiss naturalized in America without his renunciation of citizenship being accepted will be, should he happen to return here, treated as a Swiss.

In Strehler’s case, as in almost hundreds of others of which I know personally, the injustice is simply outrageous. Strehler had been many years an American citizen, and had been allowed and encouraged by his guardian to go to the United States. But when his father died and left him a large property, the collection of it was interfered with and prevented by the guardian and local authorities, on the ground that he was possibly not capable of doing business in America, being still inflicted with a guardian at home, and on the further ground that the local authorities, quite naturally, had never granted his renunciation of citizenship. I petitioned for Strehler myself, that this renunciation, properly offered, should be accepted. I was (of course) refused, and the cantonal authorities to whom I appealed justified the refusal to turn the property of Strehler over to me, though I was properly empowered to receive it for him.

Strehler’s case, however, is only one of hundreds of the kind, where the principle is maintained that once a Swiss, always a Swiss, unless the guardian and authorities here see fit to accept renunciation, and I have pointed out that usually they will not accept it.

The result of this action on the part of the local authorities of this canton, and of the cantonal government which upholds them in it, is— 1st. A virtual confiscation of estates inherited here by Swiss naturalized in the United States, especially if they have once been under guardianship here.

2d. A deprivation for such persons of the rights of American citizenship. They cannot collect their property, and should they happen to come here, on a visit even, they are liable to be seized upon and treated as Swiss, not as American citizens.

To my mind there seems to be no remedy for this state of affairs (the higher courts will not remedy it) except through a new treaty with Switzerland, by which it shall be declared once and forever that the naturalization of Swiss in the United States is not a mere farce, and it would seem just that an act of Congress should prevent our courts from naturalizing a single Swiss citizen who could not prove that he had never been under guardianship in his native country.

I believe there are to-day in this consular district a million francs belonging to citizens of the United States, not one penny of which can be collected, for the reason that the claimants, though supposing themselves to be American citizens, are here declared to be still Swiss citizens, and under guardianship at that.

I am, &c.,

S. H. M. BYERS.

[Inclosure in Mr. Byers’note.—Translation.]

Cantonal government of Zurich to Mr. Byers.

Zurich, October 11, 1879.

Mr. S. H. M. Byers, United States consul at Zurich, having asked us in his letter of the 18th of March to furnish him with a list of all persons registered as former American citizens in Zurich, and who have acquired Swiss citizenship here, we reply:

The cantonal government, after examining a proposition of the interior court of Zurich, concludes as follows:

1st. A Swiss citizen acquiring the right of American citizenship without first handing in to and having accepted by the proper authorities here a legal renunciation of Swiss citizenship, will still be considered as a citizen of Switzerland, at any time he may return to this country.

According to article 44 of the federal constitution, no canton has the right to deprive any of its citizens of the rights of citizenship here.

There is no limitation or prescription (Verjährung) of Swiss citizenship.

There are great numbers of persons living in this canton who have returned here after having acquired American citizenship. A separate controle of these persons is not kept, and therefore it is impossible to prepare a list.

2d. Communication of the above to the department of the interior.

W. STUSSI,
For the Government of Canton Zurich.

Turkish Empire.Turkish Empire.

Contents

Turkey.Turkey.

[496] . Mr. Maynard to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Constantinople, November 20, 1878. (Received December 23.)

[497] . Mr. Maynard to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States. Constantinople, December 25, 1878. (Received January 20.)

[498] . Mr. Heap to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Constantinople, February 11, 1879. (Received March 3.)

[499] . Mr. Maynard to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Constantinople, June 28, 1879. (Received July 21.)

[500] . Mr. Maynard to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Constantinople, July 10, 1879. (Received August 4.)

[501] . Mr. Maynard to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Constantinople, July 11, 1879. (Received August 14.)

[502] . Mr. Maynard to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Constantinople, July 12, 1879. (Received August 19.)

[503] . Mr. Maynard to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Constantinople, August 29, 1879. (Received October 2.)

[504] . Mr. Evarts to Mr. Maynard.

Department of State, Washington, October 9, 1879.

[505] . Mr. Maynard to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Constantinople, October 13, 1879. (Received November 8.)

[506] . Mr. Maynard to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Constantinople, October 15, 1879. (Received November 10.)

[507] . Mr. Farman to Mr. Evarts.

Agency and Consulate-General of the United States in Egypt, Cairo, February 3, 1879. (Received March 1.)

[508] suez canal

Cairo, January 27, 1879.

[509] . Mr. Farman to Mr. Evarts.

Agency and Consulate-General of the United States in Egypt, Cairo, March 18, 1879. (Received April 10.)

[510] . Mr. Farman to Mr. Evarts.

Agency and Consulate-General of the United States in Egypt, Cairo, May 22, 1879. (Received June 11.)

[511] . Mr. Farman to Mr. Evarts.

Agency and Consulate-General of the United States in Egypt, Cairo, June 27, 1879. (Received July 19.)

[512] . Mr. Comanos to Mr. Evarts.

Agency and Consulate-General of the United States in Egypt, Cairo, July 16, 1879. (Received August 21.)

[513] . Mr. Evarts to Mr. Comanos.

Department of State, Washington, July 22, 1879.

[514] . Mr. Comanos to Mr. Evarts.

Agency and Consulate-General of the United States in Egypt, Cairo, July 30, 1879.

[515] . Mr. Comanos to Mr. Evarts.

Agency and Consulate-General of the United States in Egypt, Cairo, August 8, 1879. (Received September 8.)

[516] . Mr. Comanos to Mr. Evarts.

Agency and Consulate-General of the United States in Egypt, Cairo, August 19, 1879. (Received September 12.)

[517] . Mr. Comanos to Mr. Evarts.

Agency and Consulate-General of the United States in Egypt, Cairo, September 1, 1879. (Received September 27.)

[518] . Mr. Comanos to Mr. Evarts.

Agency and Consulate-General of the United States in Egypt, Cairo, September 2, 1879. (Received September 27.)

[519] . Mr. Comanos to Mr. Evarts.

Agency and Consulate-General of the United States in Egypt, Cairo, September 6, 1879. (Received October 4.)

[520] . Mr. Van Dyck to Mr. Hunter.

Cairo, October 17, 1879. (Received November 12.)

[521] . Mr. Van Dyck to Mr. Hunter.

Cairo, October 23, 1879. (Received November 22.)

No. 464. Mr. Maynard to Mr. Evarts. [Document 496]

No. 464.
Mr. Maynard to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Constantinople, November 20, 1878. (Received December 23.) No. 289.]

Sir: A notable event, albeit little noted, Las just occurred—the coming and going of the Japanese corvette the Seiki, built, fitted, and armed in Japan, and officered and manned by natives of that country. She came about three weeks ago and left yesterday. A paragraph in one of the evening papers illustrates the interest taken in her. She was admired as a beautiful model of naval architecture, equipped and provided with all the matchless taste and finish peculiar to the handiwork of that strange people.

Our naval officers exchanged courtesies with the officers of the Seiki, and some of them found acquaintances made some years ago at the Naval Academy.

This unfamiliar flag has visited the chief maritime countries of Europe, and is now returning to the East. The cruise, I understand, is purely nautical and professional in its intention, with no objects either political or commercial.

The commander with his officers was received by His Imperial Majesty the Sultan, and was decorated by him with one of the imperial orders.

I well remember the Japanese embassy to our country hardly twenty years ago. The difference observable between that diplomatic body and this corps of navigators would, in the ordinary progress of human affairs, imply the lapse of centuries rather than of decades.

I have, &c.,

HORACE MAYNARD.

[Inclosure 1 in No. 289.]

Press account of the Japanese corvette Seiki.

The commander and officers of the Japanese corvette Seiki, on a visit to the Bosphorus, had an audience yesterday of the Sultan at the imperial villa of Yeldiz Kiosk. His Majesty received the Japanese officers with warm cordiality, and, at the close of the audience, decorated Captain Inoniyé with the Order of the Medjidié of the second class. After the audience the Seiki took her departure for Port Said, on her way back to Japan, via the Suez Canal and India.

No. 465. Mr. Maynard to Mr. Evarts. [Document 497]

No. 465.
Mr. Maynard to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States.
Constantinople, December 25, 1878. (Received January 20.) No. 296.]

Sir: I have the honor of recurring to the topic discussed in my dispatch No. 274, of September 19, 1878, and your reply, No. 179, of November 1, 1878.

A question has been submitted involving principles similar to those we then considered.

A young gentleman residing in this capital, an American citizen and a Protestant Christian, called at this legation for advice in a matter which he regarded as of great personal importance. Being about to marry in Persia a lady who resides in that country, herself an American citizen and a Protestant Christian, he wished to know in what form the marriage would be valid and effective as a matrimonial contract.

I gave him my opinion, which at his request I reduced to writing. A copy is inclosed.

Though I never had occasion, professionally, to study the subject, it certainly cannot be a new one in Christendom, and especially in England. Besides your dispatch of November last, the only authorities I find in the legation are the opinion of Supreme Court of the United States in Hallett vs. Collins (10 Howard, 174); the opinion of the Attorney-General, November 4, 1854; and the brief notices in Kent and Wheaton, with the notes of Messrs. Lawrence and Dana.

Would it not be well to ask Congress to revise and enlarge the marriage act of June 22, 1860 (Revised Statutes, section 4082), so as to make valid marriages in the presence of diplomatic as well as consular officers of the United States, and to provide for cases like the present, where the government is not represented either by a consular or diplomatic officer, and where there is no local law available?

I am, &c.,

HORACE MAYNARD.

[Inclosure 1 in No. 296.]

Mr. Maynard to Mr Bliss.

Legation of the United States,
Constantinople, December 25, 1878. No. 249, M. C.]

Dear Sir: In reply to your inquiry this morning, how a marriage can he so solemnized in Persia between American Protestant Christians as to be valid and legally oh ligatory elsewhere, I remark: 1. Persia is a Mohammedan country, with which the United States has a treaty, hut within which we have no diplomatic or consular agents. The act of Congress making valid marriages contracted in the presence of any consular officer of the United States In a foreign country cannot therefore be applied.

2. The general rule that the contract of marriage is to be governed by the law of the place where it is celebrated does not apply in those countries, barbaric or other, in which there is in fact no local law, or in Mohammedan or Pagan countries, in which, though a local law exists, Americans are not subject to it.

It follows, then, in the case you submit that the natural law of marriage must be observed, which requires no more than the declared mutual consent of parties competent to contract, and which is the common law of marriage as now received in all, or nearly all, the States of the American Union. To give the contract authenticity, it is usually required to be made in the presence of a clergyman or of a civil magistrate, and some form of license and of registration is also enjoined. But the latter regulations are directory only, not essential.

In the present case, if the marriage take place in the presence of a regularly-ordained clergyman of the Protestant church, according to the observance in use by that church, it will undoubtedly be valid. Let the clergyman give under his hand a written certificate reciting the contract and signed by the parties and such witnesses as they may choose, and let the certificate be recorded in the chancery of the legation and in the consulate-general of the United States at Constantinople.

The presence also of a diplomatic or consular officer of one of the Protestant or other Christian powers would be well. For, while it would add nothing to the validity of the contract, it would give it higher authenticity.

I am, &c.,

HORACE MAYNARD.

No. 466. Mr. Heap to Mr. Evarts. [Document 498]

No. 466.
Mr. Heap to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Constantinople, February 11, 1879. (Received March 3.) No. 10.]

Sir: A convention between Turkey and Russia was signed on Saturday last, the 8th instant.

I have not yet obtained a copy of the text of the treaty, but inclose an abstract of its provisions.

As will be noticed, the questions of the guarantees and mode of payment of the indemnity have been left for ulterior agreement, and it is apprehended that they may become a source of future trouble.

The convention does not as a whole inspire confidence in the permanent friendly relations between the two powers; but, even as a temporary measure, the signature of the treaty, and the approaching departure of the Russians, will give immense relief to the government, and permit it to give its serious attention to other pressing matters which have been too long neglected.

The stipulations regarding the evacuation of Turkish territory by the Russians are stated in a proctocol. They agree to commence withdrawing their troops in fifteen days after the treaty has been ratified by the Czar, but I have been informed at the Russian embassy that General Totleben has received orders to commence the evacuation forthwith, and that the troops were put in motion yesterday.

I am, &c.,

G. H. HEAP,
Chargé d’Affaires, ad interim.

Abstract of treaty between Turkey and Russia, signed at Constantinople the 8th of February, 1879, N. S.

Art. 1. Declares peace to be established between the two empires.

Art. 2. The stipulations of the treaty of San Stefano that have not been modified by the treaty of Berlin, to be carried out.

Art. 3. The contracting parties agree to execute in the manner following the prescriptions of the treaty of San Stefano.

Art. 4. The war indemnity to he paid by Turkey is fixed, after deducting the value of the territories ceded to Russia, at the sum of 802,500,000 francs, payable in gold. The terms of the payment of this indemnity, as well as the question of guarantee, to be settled later by the Sultan and the Emperor.

Art. 5. Agreement as to settlement of indemnity for damage suffered hy Russian subjects, which are not to exceed the sum of 26,750,000 francs in gold. These claims will be presented at the Russian embassy within one year from the signature of the treaty.

Art. 6. Joint commission to be appointed to fix the amount to be paid to Russia for the maintenance of prisoners of war taken from Turkey. The sum agreed upon by this commission shall be paid in seven years, and in twenty-one payments, at the end of each four months.

Art. 7. The inhabitants of territories ceded to Russia shall have the right to select subjection to Russia or Turkey. Those who decide for the Ottoman Empire shall be allowed to emigrate and to sell their lands, &c., within three years, after which those who have not sold their real estate shall be considered as Russian subjects.

Art. 8. Amnesty to Russian and Turkish subjects who assisted the enemy during the war, liberty to families to follow the Russian troops when they evacuate the territory they now occupy.

Art. 9. All persons in prison or under arrest in consequence of recent events in Roumelia to be set at liberty.

Art 10. The treaties and conventions between Russia and Turkey before the war to be restored to vigor.

Art. 11. Suits between Russians and Ottoman subjects to be concluded, and sentences of tribunals already given to be executed.

Art. 12. Ratification of the convention to be executed in two weeks from the date of its signature.

No. 467. Mr. Maynard to Mr. Evarts. [Document 499]

No. 467.
Mr. Maynard to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Constantinople, June 28, 1879. (Received July 21.) No. 316.]

Sir: For several days past Egyptian affairs have been the topic of chief interest in diplomatic circles.

By orders from the direction of the press, the newspapers have been allowed to publish nothing on the subject until yesterday.

It now transpires that Ismail Pasha, the Khedive of Egypt, was deposed by imperial irade of the Sultan, June 26, 1879, and his eldest son, Prince Mehemet Tewfik Pasha, nominated his successor.

Copies are inclosed of the several instruments by which this change has been effected.

I shall leave to the agent and consul-general of the United States at Cairo to furnish the local proceedings, as well as the causes and probable consequences of this grave proceeding. He must know the character of the new viceroy and be able to predict the effect of his administration both upon the producers and tax-payers of Egypt and upon her foreign creditors. These points are discussed at this capital and elsewhere, I suppose, but generally with limited means of information.

The late Khedive is expected to come here. He has a very handsome palace on the Bosphorus, and other valuable property in this part of the empire.

I have, &c.,

HORACE MAYNARD.

[Inclosure 1 in No. 316.—Translation.]

Papers relating to the deposition of the Khedive.

Ismail Pasha replied to the announcement of his deposition by the following telegram, addressed to the Mabeiu, the imperial palace at Yeldiz-Kiosk, Constantinople? and also dated Thursday, June 26:

“I have received the telegram of his highness the Grand Vizier apprising me of the imperial iradé, in virtue of which I am enjoined to withdraw from the conduct of the public affairs of Egypt.

“On every occasion, and in all things, I have had no other desire than to satisfy my sovereign.

“I therefore humbly obey the imperial iradé with which I have been visited, and I transfer the direction of affairs to my son, Mehemet Tewfik Pasha.

“Wherever I may be, I recall what I owe to His Majesty the Sultan, and I desire to come to Constantinople to prostrate myself at the foot of the imperial throne, and live under the protecting ægis of the Sultan.

“I venture to hope that His Majesty will deign to accede to my humble request, and I throw myself upon his high magnanimity.”

The deposition of Ismail Pasha.

We complete to-day the translation in English of the state documents relating to the deposition of Ismail Pasha by the Sultan from the dignity of Khedive of Egypt, and the nomination of his highness’ eldest son, Prince Mehemet Tewfik, as his successor.

The following is the telegraphic dispatch of the grand vizier, dated the 6th Redjeb (Thursday, June 26), addressed to Ismail Pasha, and apprising him of his deposition:

“The difficulties, both internal and external, which have manifested themselves for some time past in Egypt, have reached such a pitch of gravity that the continuation of such a state of things cannot but be attended by a series of embarrassments and dangers for Egypt and the Ottoman Empire. The duty of protecting order and tranquillity, and of considering the best means of insuring the welfare of the people has always devolved upon the Imperial Government.

“Seeing, therefore, that the imperial firmans which have been issued concerning the administration of Egypt had solely this object in view; seeing that it has been clearly established that the maintenance of your highness in the dignity of Khedive could henceforward only result in increasing and aggravating existing difficulties, the council of ministers have decided to nominate to the dignity of Khedive His Highness Tewfik Pasha. An imperial iradé having sanctioned this decision, Tewfik Pasha has been informed of his nomination by another telegraphic dispatch.

“On receipt of the present telegram, you will have to withdraw from the conduct of affairs, in conformity with the order and firman of His Majesty.

“We enjoin upon you the necessity of this.”

The grand vizier’s telegram to Mehemet Tewfik Pasha, of the same date, says:

“His Majesty the Sultan, in his high solicitude for insuring in every way the prosperity and development of Egypt, an integral part of the Ottoman Empire, has granted to that province special administrative provisions and privileges.

“Nevertheless, the internal and external difficulties which prevail for some time past in the administration of Egypt have acquired such a degree of gravity that they have necessitated the dismissal of your illustrious father, Ismail Pasha.

“Your qualities, your uprightness, and your wisdom being a pledge that your highness will administer the country to the satisfaction of His Majesty the Sultan, and realize the security and tranquillity of the population, His Majesty, relying upon your capacity, confers upon you the dignity of Khedive of Egypt; such being the imperial iradé, the imperial firman of your investiture will be remitted to you with the customary ceremonial.

“Ismail Pasha, being relieved of his functions, has been called upon by telegraph to withdraw from the affairs of government. Consequently, upon the receipt of this dispatch, you will promulgate this imperial iradé, and communicate it to all the ulemas, generals, functionaries, and notables, as also to the whole population, and you will assume the conduct of governmental business.

“Your highness justly deserves to be raised to this dignity, and your nomination is regarded as the harbinger of a new era of good administration, order, and progress for Egypt. We reiterate our hopes and prayers for your success, and we beg of you to accept our congratulations.”

The events which have been occurring for some time past in Egypt have attracted the attention of His Majesty the Sultan and his government.

The Sublime Porte, by the firman which it delivered to His Highness Ismail Pasha, on the 13th Rebiul-ewel, 1290, showed to what a degree it desired the material and moral progress of Egypt.

Nevertheless, in consideration of the turn which affairs have taken in that province, His Majesty the Sultan finds himself compelled to take measures with regard to this question. Wherefore, upon the report presented to His Majesty by his council of ministers, and unanimously approved of by them, His Majesty has decided to dismiss Ismail Pasha, and to replace him by his son, Mehemet Tewfik Pasha. This important decision of the Imperial Government is communicated to Egypt. I beg of you to communicate it to the government to which you are accredited.

In doing so, you will add that His Imperial Majesty the Sultan has no intention of turning-existing difficulties to the purpose of depriving Egypt of an administration of which the advantages have been recognized for the last forty years. The privileges which have been granted to Egypt, and to the family of Mehemet Mi Pasha, by the imperial firman of 1257, will remain in force as hitherto. If the Imperial Government suppresses the provisions of the firman of 1290, which has been the cause of so many evils, we are justified in believing that the great powers will regard this fact as a further proof of the good intentions which His Majesty the Sultan entertains for that province. The Imperial Government has no intention of annulling the conventions which Ismail Pasha has concluded, within the limits of his rights; but it has simply decided upon restoring an equilibrium to that privileged province, upon using its influence to put an end to abuses which have attained considerable proportions, and by the exercise of its rights to stay the present crisis before it becomes more intense.

The government to which you are accredited will, we believe, be of the same opinion as the Sublime Porte, and we hope that this imperial decision which is promulgated with the object of securing peace and tranquillity in so important a province as Egypt, will be everywhere well received.—[From the daily Levant Herald of the 27–28 June, 1879.

No. 468. Mr. Maynard to Mr. Evarts. [Document 500]

No. 468.
Mr. Maynard to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Constantinople, July 10, 1879. (Received August 4.) No. 325.]

Sir: I have received from the Sublime Porte a note informing me that a small increase in customs dues for the support of schools, in the Island of Crete, is proposed, and asking me to invite the consent of the Government of the United States to the measure.

I therefore inclose a copy of the note with a translation, and await such instruction as the President may think proper to transmit.

I have, &c.,

HORACE MAYNARD.

[Inclosure in No. 325.]

Caratheodori Pasha to Mr. Maynard.

Sublime Porte, Ministry of Foreign Affairs,
July 9, 1879.

increase of customs duties to be established in crete.

Sir: By a vote just submitted for the sanction of the Sublime Porte, the Cretan national assembly has decided to assess for the maintenance of the schools of the island, a tax in addition to the customs dues of 1½ per thousand, to be collected on all imports and exports.

Although this extra assessment is contrary to the stipulations of the treaties of commerce, the imperial government not unreasonably hopes that, both on account of its moderate rate and of the end for which it is designed, the Government of the United States of America will not oppose the collection of this tax.

I consequently beg you to kindly invoke the consent of your government to the extra assessment in question.

Accept, sir, the assurance of my very distinguished consideration.

AL CARATHEODORI.

No. 469. Mr. Maynard to Mr. Evarts. [Document 501]

No. 469.
Mr. Maynard to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Constantinople, July 11, 1879. (Received August 14.) No. 326.]

Sir: I had the honor in my dispatch No. 316, of June 28, 1879, to announce the recent action of His Imperial Majesty the Sultan deposing the Khedive, Ismail Pasha, and appointing his son Mohammed Tewfik Pasha in his stead.

Ismail Pasha was evidently a favorite with the late Sultan Abd-ul Aziz. They were nearly the same age, both born in 1830, and came into power, the Sultan in 1861 and his protégé in 1863) young men, it will be observed, little more than thirty years old. Ismail Pasha was the fourth Viceroy of Egypt. The first was Mohammed Ali Pasha, a native of European Turkey, appointed Pasha of Egypt in 1805 by the Sultan Selim III. After a stormy controversy of thirty years or more with the great Sultan Mahmoud II, and after the death of that potentate, his successor, the Sultan Midjid, brought the strife to a close by a firman, dated February 13, 1842, granting the Government of Egypt as a hereditary right to the family of the unruly Pasha. (See Commodore Porter’s dispatches from Smyrna of July 13, 1839, July 22, 1839, and July 25, 1839, and No. 79 of February 16, 1841.) He continued to rule until his death in 1849, and was succeeded by his grandson, Abbas Pasha, the second viceroy, who died in 1853. The third viceroy was Mohammed Said Pasha, the third son of Mohammed Ali Pasha, and the uncle of his predecessor, though younger. At his death, January 18, 1863, he was succeeded, as has been stated, by Ismail Pasha, the son of his eldest brother, Ibrahim Pasha. To this time, I may observe, the succession had been regular according to the canon of Mussulman law, which grants it to the oldest living male member of the reigning family, irrespective of his relation to the immediate predecessor. The first viceroy had been succeeded by his grandson, the second by his uncle, and the third by his nephew. The next, according to this law of succession, was Prince Halim Pasha, the fourth son of Mohammed Ali Pasha, now fifty-seven years old, who was a claimant with considerable support. But in 1866 the Sultan gave Ismail Pasha a firman establishing-the right of succession in his branch of the vice royal family, in the male line direct, according to the usages of Western Europe, a rule which has excluded the prince hereditary by Mussulman law, in favor of one fully twenty years younger. How far this action will be accepted by the Moslems does not yet appear. This action of Sultan Abd-ul Aziz gave color to the charge referred to in my dispatch No. 66, of May 12, 1876, that he intended to establish this rule of succession in his own family, in disregard of the traditional practice.

The late Sultan’s favors to Ismail Pasha did not stop here. By a firman of 1867 he conferred upon the Viceroy the title of Khedive or sovereign; by another of 1872, the right to increase at pleasure his army and navy, and to contract loans; and finally, in 1873, the right to conclude treaties of commerce, with complete autonomy in the administration of his country.

The policy of the two rulers was much the same, to embellish their capitals and increase the military strength of their governments, and generally to adopt the methods of the West, especially those of France until the fall of Napoleon III, more influential both in Constantinople and Cairo than any other power. They may certainly be excused for having been dazzled into the belief, shared by many others, that the second empire was the highest expression of the world’s civilization. To carry out their various projects of reform they borrowed largely, and with fatal effect. The high rate of interest offered attracted lenders of a certain class, and the expenditure of the loans a multitude of greedy adventurers, whose noisy admiration of the imperial and vice-regal intelligence and enlightened magnanimity, was very naturally mistaken for the approving judgment of mankind. Nobody thought of the oppressed and overburdened tax-payers, whose unrequited toil was at last to be the sole dependence for this costly pageantry. Their stripes were unfelt, their groans unheard.

As long as the interest on the debts was regularly paid, all went swimmingly. But there is a limit to human endurance. What were euphemistically called the resources of the country were doubtless very great, and yet they were exhausted at last, and the end came. In October, 1875, the Grand Vizier published a rescript suspending payment on the Turkish debt. Before twelve months he was in exile and his master in the tomb. (Dispatches No. 36, of November 15, 1875; No. 69, of June 5, 1876; No. 322, of July 7, 1879). The Khedive bore up awhile longer, struggling vainly to compass the demands of his usurers with the sweat of his taxpayers. The hungry pack spurned and tore the empty hand. He succumbed, and in his fall generously gave to the Sublime Porte an opportunity dexterously seized.

He refused to abdicate and appealed to the Sultan, who thereby could exercise a long dormant authority of deposing him. By hesitating whether to appoint in his stead Halim Pasha, according to Mussulman usage, or Mohammed Tewfik Pasha, according to the firman of 1866, the Sultan showed that, in his opinion, the latter has no obligatory force. In a word, the precedent is made by the Sublime Porte of removing a Khedive whenever the public good may seem to require it, and of appointing to succeed him any lineal male descendant of Mohammed Ali Pasha.

Had nothing more been done, the parties in pursuit of the Khedive would have cared very little. Their object had been accomplished, and no matter how. The experienced ruler was down, and a pliant, easygoing young man was in his place. But much more was done. The firman of 1873 was revoked, and administrative autonomy, and the right to conclude treaties of commerce withdrawn. Thus the tributary state is relegated, almost with the stroke of the pen, and without the firing of a gun or the payment of a piastre, into the category of provinces, or sandjaks of the empire. It is, perhaps, needless to add that the throne of the Sultan is strengthened amazingly, and his authority in Africa practically restored, as it was at the beginning of the century. There has been no finer display of those peculiar powers in which, above all others, Ottoman statesmen are gifted.

Already it is beginning to dawn upon those who were urgent in demanding the recent change, that they have gotten more, a great deal, than they wanted, and they are understood to be equally urgent in seeking a reconsideration, a matter about which the Turks may be expected long, if not seriously, to reflect.

I have, &c.

HORACE MAYNARD.

No. 470. Mr. Maynard to Mr. Evarts. [Document 502]

No. 470.
Mr. Maynard to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Constantinople, July 12, 1879. (Received August 19.) No. 327.]

Sir: The affairs of the two Bulgarian provinces have received little consideration of late in these dispatches, partly because exact information has been difficult to obtain, and partly because, when obtained, it was not specially important.

That part of Bulgaria south of the Balkans, organized by the Treaty of Berlin into the dependent province of Eastern Roumelia, has been the scene of most of the events which during the last three years, have attracted so much attention and sympathy in Europe and America. It was here that Mr. Schuyler made observations in July, 1876, with such startling effect.

By Article XVII of the Treaty of Berlin, the governor-general of Eastern Roumelia is to be nominated by the Sublime Porte, with assent of the signatory powers, for a term of live years, and by Article XVIII a scheme of government was to be arranged by a European commission, in concert with the Ottoman Porte. This organic law or constitution, as we should call it, has, I understand, been completed, but I have not seen it. The first nomination for governor-general was of His Excellency Rustem Pasha, for several years past the governor-general of the Lebanon, in Syria. This not being acceptable to the Bulgarians, it was recalled and given to His Excellency Aleko Pasha Vogorides, or Prince Vogorides, as he is now designated. He is, in part at least, of Bulgarian descent, and appears to have been very well received by the Bulgarian portion of his subjects. He has been criticised a good deal for wearing the Bulgarian cap rather than the Turkish fez, and for displaying the Bulgarian and not the Turkish flag, when the constitution was publicly read. These and similar criticisms demonstrated on the one hand a readiness to find fault, and on the other that in the weightier matters there is little to censure.

An English nobleman, the Marquis of Bath, has recently spent some time at Philippopolis, the capital of this newly-erected province, and was most favorably impressed. An article ascribed to his pen was reproduced in the city last evening, and it is inclosed, being at once instructive and authentic, more than anything I have met with.

The first article of the Berlin Treaty constituted the territory between the Balkans and the Danube an autonomous and tributary principality under the suzerainty of his imperial majesty the Sultan, and gave it the name of Bulgaria, providing for it a Christian government and a national militia.

The third article provides that the Prince of Bulgaria shall be freely elected by the population, and confirmed by the Sublime Porte, with the assent of the powers, the only restriction upon the unlimited power of choice being that the prince chosen should not be a member of the reigning dynasties of the great European powers. The assembly of notables of Bulgaria, also convoked by virtue of that treaty, elected a young German prince, Alexander of Battenberg, a favorite if not a protégé of the Czar, and provided for him a salary of 600,000 francs (say, $120,000) a year.

Before assuming authority the prince visited the courts of the several great powers. * * * A Russian imperial yacht met the prince at Brindisi, and a week ago anchored off Seraglio Point. This was early in the afternoon. The prince immediately waited upon the Sultan at the palace of Yeldez, and, after a very brief call, returned on board and proceeded up the Bosphorus to the Russian embassy. The entire stoppage did not exceed two hours. For want of time, it was alleged, the imperial firman had not been prepared, and could not therefore be delivered in person, but would be forwarded as soon as completed. The prince dined at the Russian embassy, and the same night continued his voyage for Varna, the chief port of the principality.

The resident Bulgarians had prepared a demonstration, but this was promptly suppressed by the Ottoman authorities. A deputation of Bulgarian students approached the prince while at the Russian embassy, with a floral tribute and an address of welcome, to which he replied in very gratifying terms. Both the address and the reply, I may remark, were in the English language, with which the prince is familiar, though he does not speak either the Bulgarian or the Russian. He assumes an arduous and unenviable task.

I have, &c.,

HORACE MAYNARD.

[Inclosure in dispatch No. 327.]

Report on the administration of Prince Vogorides, ascribed to the Marquis of Bath.

prince vogorides and the porte.

[From the Spectator.]

Considerable excitement was caused the other day in Philippopolis by news, which spread like wild-fire, that the Porte had addressed representations to the great powers demanding the recall of Prince Vogorides, on account of his action anent the wearing of the kalpak instead of the fez, and his refusal to hoist the Ottoman flag. The rumor was eagerly believed by the Turks, who saw in it the possibility of their immediate return to power; and also by the Greeks, whose ideas were that a new governor-general might do more favor to their cause and ambitious designs, than Prince Vogorides was inclined to do. No class has been more woefully disappointed at the turn affairs have taken than the Turks, who have of late weeks flocked into and around Philippopolis. They evidently believed that with the departure of the Russians and the arrival Of Aleko Pasha, the ancient régime would be at once restored, and they have therefore been furious that not only are the Christians still in the ascendant, but that the Sultan’s supreme authority has been quietly ignored for the present. An incident has just happened which shows the temper in which the Turks are at this moment. A friend of mine paid a visit to Tatar-Bazardjik, and when desirous of returning he missed his coachman, a Turk. Another servant was dispatched to hunt up the coachman. This servant is a Wallachian, long resident in Turkey, and he found the coachman in a mosque. Now, the mosque contained about sixty Turks, but, strange to say, they were utterly neglectful of worship. Indeed, they were holding a private discussion, the burden of which was that in a few months the Turkish troops would enter Eastern Roumelia, and that there would be a general rising against the Christians, not one of whom, it was determined, should be spared. All were to be exterminated. This is simply confirmative of what I have heard in the cafés and bazaars of Philippopolis, and while there can be no immediate danger, it is well that the existence of this feeling should not be ignored.

To return, however, to the governor-general and the rumors of his recall. I thought it well to wait upon his excellency, and hear what he himself had got to say upon the matter. Accordingly, I sought an interview, which was readily granted. The prince received me in his bureau, and the numerous papers scattered about showed that he was not a man of indolent ease. He was dressed very simply, almost negligently; tweed pantaloons and vest, and a blue-cloth loose jacket. His manner was frank and easy, his speech open, and his sentiments always directed straight to the point. After apologizing for the disorder in which everything was, he told me that he was having the konak thoroughly overhauled, indeed the internal arrangements almost reconstructed, so as to make it a comfortable residence according to western ideas. He was busy, he continued, perfecting and completing the administrative changes necessary from the departure of the Russians. He had a good set of men around him, and while there was much to do and think about, he anticipated no difficulty in not only establishing, but maintaining, perfect order and good government. There was no truth in the absurd tales that had been told about the reasons for the princess’s departure for Constantinople. It was said, among other things, that she had gone away previous to his departure; that he was disgusted with his post, and wished to resign. It was also said that the princess had gone to plead with the Sultan in favor of her husband, who had incurred the Porte’s displeasure by the manner in which he had taken possession of his government. As he had said, all these were absurd fabrications. The princess had gone to Constantinople simply to be out of the way while the alterations were being made in the konak, for while the house was occupied by masons, and plasterers and painters, there could be no comfort for a lady. “Then,” said I, “there is no truth in the statement that your excellency is about to leave Eastern Roumelia, and throw up the post of governor-general?” “None, whatever,” he replied. “I don’t intend to leave and I don’t want to leave. The Porte can’t dismiss me, for I am appointed for five years; and as for asking the powers to recall me, they can’t do that. I might be tried, if I was stepping beyond the law laid down in the statute organique; but then there is no provision for a tribunal to try me. I did not,” he went on, “at first desire the appointment of governor-general of Eastern Roumelia. I was living very quietly in Paris, for I did not do well with the Sultan [sic] for a long time. I did not visit Constantinople, although the Sultan asked me to go many times. When Rustein Pasha was proposed as governor-general of Eastern Roumelia, he was objected to very strongly by Russia, who desired that a governor-general of Bulgarian origin should be appointed. I suppose they wanted to establish a precedent from the first holder of the high office. I was then pressed to accept the office, and I did so, in the hope that I might contribute something to the peace of my country and of Europe. When I went to Vienna and saw Count Andrassy, the count said to me, ‘Above all things, we desire that the Russians should go away from Eastern Roumelia and Bulgaria; and you must do everything that will expedite that, and so secure the peace of Europe.’ ‘We want peace,’ added Count Andrassy, ‘and not the outbreak of another war which would spread all over Europe.’ Well, when I came to Constantinople, the Sultan gave me instructions that I was to wear the fez and to hoist the Ottoman flag, as a sign of his sovereign authority; and that if I did not choose to wear the fez, I was to return to Constantinople. When I got to the frontier of Eastern Roumelia, up to which point I had worn the fez, I heard that powder and shot had been prepared for me, if I came wearing the fez. I had to decide, if I wished to continue to wear the fez, either to go on and be shot, or return to Constantinople. On the one hand, if I returned to Constantinople because of such a trivial thing as the wearing of a fez, the whole tranquillity of Europe might have been disturbed. Certainly all that has been accomplished by the Berlin Treaty might have been jeopardized. A new governor-general would need to have been appointed; delays would have taken place. No matter who was proposed, there were certain to have been objections made by one or other of the great powers, and God knows when a governor-general acceptable to all would have been found. In the meantime, the Russian occupation of Eastern Roumelia would have been indefinitely prolonged. Now, it was the wish of all the powers of Europe that the Russians should go away, and therefore it came practically to be a question with me whether I should obey the voice of Europe or the instructions of the Sultan, and, by doing the latter, in all likelihood meeting my own death and letting slip the dogs of war. In Europe they do not reason as they do at Constantinople, and I should have been very much blamed if I had run the risk of disturbing peace, and destroying all that had been done by the Treaty of Berlin, because of a childish dispute about a head-dress. I therefore put on the kalpak and came on to Philippopolis, where I was very well received indeed. I have no penchant for the kalpak, because I have worn the fez since I was a boy, but it was best that I should put on the Bulgarian head-dress. In the same way, I knew that the Bulgarians were not prepared to see the Ottoman flag, the symbol of the sovereignty of the Porte. I heard that they were prepared to tear it down, and there might have been disturbances which would have spread into a revolution, for in the then condition of the country one does not know where such a disturbance, once begun, would have ended.

“I consulted with the European commission as to what should be done about hoisting the Turkish flag. They said to me, undoubtedly, as a symbol of the sovereign authority of the Porte, it ought to be hoisted, but at the opportune moment. ‘It was, however,’ the commission further told me, ‘a matter lying wholly between the Sultan and the governor-general.’ I began to think, and I saw that if I hoisted the flag when the Sultan’s firman was read, and if disturbances took place, the commission would turn round and say, ‘We only advised that the flag should be hoisted at the opportune moment, and certainly that was not the opportune moment.’ Again, the municipality and the heads of the religious bodies and the best representative men told me that if the flag was to be hoisted on the occasion, they would not appear at the ceremony. Therefore, I determined not to hoist the flag, and everything passed off agreeably and tranquilly. If we must have peace, and must have the Russians out of the country, I must so act that both shall be secured, irrespective of childish questions about drapery or bonnets. I know that they are angry with me at Constantinople because of what I have done, or, rather, because of what I have not done; but I cannot risk: peace and good government for such childish matters. When the opportune moment arrives, I shall hoist the Ottoman flag.”

“When does your excellency think the opportune moment will come?” I inquired. The prince replied, with an expressive shrug of the shoulders, “I don’t know; it may be some time. If the Porte wished to place so much stress on its sovereign authority, it ought not to have given up the right of garrisoning the Balkans.” But, I said, I thought the Porte had acted very wisely in its own interests, and also for the sake of European peace and humanity, in waiving its right of sending Turkish garrisons to the Balkans. From what I had seen all over the country in the way of preparation and from what I knew of the sentiments of the people, I did not believe that the Turkish troops would have been allowed to take up a position in the Balkans without a long, severe, and bloody fight, in which the Bulgarians on both sides of the Balkans would have taken part against the Turkish troops. And I added that I could scarcely blame them, after I had seen what they had formerly suffered from the presence of Turkish troops. Prince Vogorides did not seem to attach much importance to the resistance which the Bulgarians would have made. What he dreaded was outside interference. “The Russians,” said he, “would have stepped in, and prevented Turkish garrisons going to the Balkans. Then that would have involved Turkey in a new war with Russia and Austria, and England would certainly also have joined in the war.” I said I did not think the people of England would permit their government to go to war in order that the Bulgarians should be oppressed by an army of Turkish soldiers, or have their dearly bought liberties made a dead letter; to which Prince Vogorides said nothing, except, “The government is supreme, and the people can’t help themselves.” Courteously turning the conversation, his excellency began to talk in terms, of high praise of the industry, thrift, and natural gifts of the Bulgarians. They were, from the effects of the war and the devastating raids of bashi-bazouks and Circassians very poor just now, but he hoped that, with peace and good government, they would soon recover their prosperity. They were especially poor near the Balkans, where they had lost nearly all their cattle, and where, even in the spring, they had no seed-corn to sow to raise crops. I told him of the generosity of the Russian administration in giving away so many horses and selling others at a low price to the peasants, and he admitted that this good action would help the people considerably. The land was as fertile as a garden, and in a few years it would bloom as the Garden of Eden. He looked forward with hope to the future, and expressed his determination to apply the laws of the statute organique honorably and honestly. He praised the statute as a compendium of laws as liberal as was to be found in the world, and the nation was bound to prosper under it, if wisely governed and directed. As to the union of Eastern Roumelia with the principality of Bulgaria, he did not look forward to that being accomplished soon. “And,” he said, “if it does not come soon, there will be the less likelihood of its ever coming.” “Why so? “I asked. “Well,” he answered, “the Bulgarians of Eastern Roumelia are much more intelligent than those north of the Balkans; their country is much richer, and by and by they will see that it will be more to their advantage to remain an autonomous province than to be united with the principality. For they would, if united to the principality, be more heavily taxed, and be bound up with the fortunes of a less civilized and less progressive people.” There was some plausibility in this reasoning, and as one of his secretaries appeared in the room at this moment, I took the opportunity of closing the interview, by thanking his excellency tor his frank and free expression of his views.—[From the Daily-Levant Herald of July 11, 1879.]

No. 471. Mr. Maynard to Mr. Evarts. [Document 503]

No. 471.
Mr. Maynard to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Constantinople, August 29, 1879. (Received October 2.) No. 339.]

Sir: A dispatch from the agency and consulate-general at Cairo mentions a recent homicide by an American citizen at Alexandria, and propounds certain questions relative to the trial of the offender. The vice-consul-general at Constantinople, who chanced in Alexandria at the time, corroborates the statement with additional particulars. I have made answer to the propositions, and both dispatch and answer are submitted to your careful attention.

The most important inquiry is that which seeks the construction and legal effect of the proviso to section 4109, Revised Statutes, in these words, “Provided, That in cases where a consular officer is interested, either as party or witness, such minister shall have original jurisdiction.” Now, in the present case, should the consular agent at Alexandria be a witness, and should his appointment as consular agent be found legal, does the jurisdiction of the minister thereby become exclusive or only concurrent with that of the consul? The same question in one form or another has previously occurred, and it has seemed to me, after examination, that the jurisdiction given to the minister by the proviso is concurrent only, the legislative intent conforming to the actual requirement.

For a trial of such gravity I desire the best advice possible, and therefore beg you to examine the question. Should you differ with me in opinion, and hold the jurisdiction of the minister to be exclusive, please intimate whether the cause—parties and witnesses—should be brought for trial to the legation in the capital, or should the minister go to the district of the cause, after the manner of an American circuit judge, or an English judge at nisi prius. Either course would be extremely inconvenient.

I have, &c.

HORACE MAYNARD.

[Inclosure 1 in No. 339.]

Mr. Comanos to Mr. Maynard.

Agency and Consulate-General of the United States in Egypt,
Cairo, July 30, 1879.

Sir: At about half past two o’clock on the afternoon of Thursday, the 17th instant, Etienne (i. e. Stephen) Polycarpe Mirzan, a citizen of the United States, naturalized in Boston, Mass., and Dr. Alexander Dahan, lawyer and Egyptian subject, met on the street in the city of Alexandria, conversed together about certain money matters, quarreled, and came to blows. The scuffle ended by Dahan’s running through a corner bookstore, in at one door and out of the other, closely followed by Mirzan, who then shot him with a good sized revolver. The ball struck the back part of the head and pierced through to the forehead, causing instantaneous death.

Mirzan then went straight to the United States consular agency at Alexandria, gave up the revolver and surrendered himself to acting consular agent Zograffo, saying that lie had just shot a man. Being at the time in Alexandria, I was immediately sent for. At first Mirzan refused to go to prison, and asked to be kept under arrest in his own house. But when his lawyer, Mr. Kirby, came and told him that he must go to prison, he went without resistance to the Egyptian prison called “Moharram Bey,” to which all French and English prisoners are now sent, and where he still remains, subject to my orders. Under these circumstances I have not issued a formal warrant for arrest, as Mirzan, by his own free act, has accomplished all the purposes of such a warrant.

Mr. Agent and Consnl-General Farman is absent on leave of sixty days with permission to go to the United States. I am acting in this matter under Title XLVII of the second edition of the Revised Statutes, 1878, and under the rules for the consular courts of the United States in Turkey, published by the minister resident at Constantinople March 31, 1863.

I beg you, sir, to inform and instruct me on the following points:

1. Have the above-mentioned rules been modified in any way, and are they binding on United States consular courts in Egypt?

2. Must the list of associates sent to you by Mr. Farman on the 16th of October, 1876, remain intact, or can it be increased or supplemented by submitting to you another list?

The reason for this question is that the list as it now stands contains only nine names, and if the parties make free use of the right to challenge (article 104 of the rules), and if several of the gentlemen whose names are on the list object or refuse to act (and it is highly probable that some of them will), the panel will soon be run through. Besides, the list was, I suppose, as complete as it could be made at that time, but during the past three years the number of eligible and respectable citizens residing in Egypt has greatly increased. A list of about fifteen names could be easily made out.

3. How am I to interpret the proviso in section 4109 of Title XLVII? Does the term “consular officer” therein used mean only the “consul” as defined in section 4130 of the same title, or does it include all other classes of such officers? See Title XVIII, chapter I, section 1674, paragraph “fourth,” and chapter II, section 1689, and many other sections of the same chapter. Throughout the whole of Title XLVII this term consular officer, so far as I am aware, occurs only in the proviso above mentioned.

The reason for this question is that in all probability one of the parties will ask that the testimony be taken of Mr. Zograffo, United States acting consular agent at Alexandria. In order to fully define this gentleman’s position, I herewith inclose a copy of the commission by virtue of which Mr. Zograffo is acting. In this commission, Mr. Farman says, “by the authority vested in me.” He has been authorized by an instruction from the State Department to appoint, with the consent of the Egyptian Government, persons to temporarily perform the duties of consular agent, and in the case of Mr. Zograffo the consent of the Egyptian Government has been obtained. If he be a “consular officer,” and if his testimony is required, the case in hand falls immediately under your original jurisdiction.

I beg you, sir, to give me also any other observations or instructions you may think proper and likely to be of assistance to me in the course of this affair. I am at present inclined to go only so far as is necessary to secure the trial of the delinquent, and leave the trial itself to be conducted by the consul-general some time next fall. Please send one or two copies of the rules of March 31, 1863.

I have, &c.,

N. D. COMANOS.

[Inclosure with dispatch of Mr. Comanos to Mr. Maynard.]

agency and consulate general of the united states of america for egypt and dependencies.

Greeting:

Know ye that I, Elbert E. Farman, agent and consul-general of the United States of America at Cairo, Egypt, by the authority vested in me, and by and with the consent of the government of His Highness the Khedive, have appointed, and by these presents do appoint, O. A. Zograffo, resident of Alexandria, to temporarily perform the duties of the office of consular agent of the United States at that place, until the return of C. M. Salvago, the consular agent, to his post of duty, or until his place shall be otherwise filled.

Given under my hand and the impression of the seal of the agency and consulate-general of the United States at Cairo, July 8, A. D. 1879, and in the 104th of the Independence of the United States.
[l. s.] E. E. FARMAN.

[Inclosure 2 in No. 389.]

Mr. Maynard to Mr. Comanos.

Legation of the United States,
Constantinople, August 27, 1879.

Sir: Your dispatch, No. 766, dated July 30, 1879, has been received, respecting the distressing homicide at Alexandria, and seeking instruction on certain points: 1. You ask if the rules for consular courts promulgated by my predecessor, March 31, 1863, have been modified, and if they are binding on the consular courts of Egypt. I reply, they have not been modified, and they are obligatory on all the consular courts in the Ottoman Empire, Egypt included. At your request, I inclose two copies.

2. You inquire if the list of associates provided for by section 4106 Revised Statutes may be increased by submitting for approval an additional list. By referring to section 443, consular regulations, 1874, you will see that it not only can be, but, under the circumstances detailed by you, ought to be.

3. You seek an interpretation of the phrase “consular officer” in the proviso to section 4109, Revised Statutes. The words consular officer are to be interpreted by section 1674, clause fourth, and section 4130. But for the object you have in mind, it is unimportant. What you wish to know evidently is whether, if the consular agent at Alexandria should be a witness, and, if his appointment be legal, the consul-general at Cairo has jurisdiction; or must the case be submitted to the minister. Section 4109 gives the minister appellate jurisdiction only, except in cases of murder, treason, and felony, where his jurisdiction is original. It is also original when a consular officer is interested. But in none of these exceptional cases is his jurisdiction exclusive, as is evident from sections 4102 and 4106, both of which contemplate the trial of capital cases by the consul and his associates. There is no reason why a consul might not try a case, simply because a consular agent might happen to be a witness or even a party. It would be otherwise were he himself a party or even a witness. Then the minister has original jurisdiction to prevent what else might happen—a denial of justice.

The provisions of law for the trial of murder are few and simple. They are to be found in sections 4102, 4103, and 4106. As the result of a trial may have serious consequences, you do well, doubtless, to leave it to be conducted before the consul-general himself.

I am, &c.,

HORACE MAYNARD.

No. 472. Mr. Evarts to Mr. Maynard. [Document 504]

No. 472.
Mr. Evarts to Mr. Maynard.

Department of State,
Washington, October 9, 1879. No. 225.]

Sir: Your dispatch No. 339, of the 29th of August last, in relation to the late homicide at Alexandria, has been received.

Your views as to the true construction of the statutes, as contained in your reply to Mr. N. D. Comanos of the 27th August, are in complete accord with those of the Department and are approved.

Particular instructions in regard to the conduct of the trial in the case of Mirzan have been given to Mr. Farman, the consul-general, who is now here and about to return to his post, so that it is hoped that you will be relieved from further trouble and responsibility in regard to that unfortunate occurrence.

I am, &c.,

W. HUNTER,
Acting Secretary.

No. 473. Mr. Maynard to Mr. Evarts. [Document 505]

No. 473.
Mr. Maynard to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Constantinople, October 13, 1879. (Received November 8.) No. 348.]

Sir: I had the honor in my dispatch No. 341, of September 12, 1879, to mention the absence of Her Britannic Majesty’s ambassador on a trip to Syria and the Holy Land.

After an absence of a month he returned early this morning, stopping at the summer palace of the embassy on the Upper Bosphorous. I have not yet seen him, but I understand he and his suite came back in robust health.

Reports of the journey have been published in the city papers, of which I inclose a selection.

The United States consuls at Beirut and Jerusalem have addressed communications to the consul-general on the same topic, the substance of which is transcribed for inclosure. The impression made upon these officials will appear to be dissimilar.

I have, &c.,

HORACE MAYNARD.

[Inclosure 1 in No. 348.]

Press accounts of Her Britannic Majesty’s ambassador’s movements.

Damascus, September 28.

sir henry layard at damascus.

It was on Tuesday morning, the 23d of September, that Sir Henry Layard, accompanied by Lady Layard, Miss Dueane, Sir Alfred Sandison, and Mr. Nicholson, landed at Beirut from the Antelope. The weather was fortunately moderate, and the travelers escaped those discomforts which attend the process of embarking and disembarking at the ports of the Syrian coast, when a fresh breeze drives the sea shorewards in heavy rollers weighted with the sweep of the whole Mediterranean. On the arrival of the Antelope in port, Mr. Consul-General Eldridge, with the civil and military governors of Beirut, and to represent Midhat Pasha, Wasif Effendi, political agent of the vilayet, and several notables of the town, went on board to welcome the ambassador. At the landing-place there was a great demonstration; all the population, native and European, turned out to show honor to the distinguished visitors, and the clergy of all denominations, in their robes of varied tints and texture, made an imposing show, as, drawn up along the quay with their train of acolytes, they hymned Sir Henry with highly satisfactory enthusiasm. Carriages were in waiting to convey the party to the magnificent house which had been prepared for their reception, and as soon as the ambassador had slightly rested, his excellency held a levee, receiving the members of the British colony, the consular body, the leading members of foreign society, the civil and military authorities, and the heads of the native communities supported by their clergy, who, as you are no doubt aware, are not only more numerous, but also play a more prominent part in Syria than in almost any other place in the world.

The journey to Damascus was accomplished under the most favorable conditions, and after having been received by the civil governor of Damascus, Ibrahim Pasha, at the half-way halt of Stora, he, in the afternoon, shook hands with His Highness Midhat Pasha, who met his excellency in the house at Dumar, which was once upon a time the summer abode of Abdel Kader. Mr. Jago, our most worthy consul, was there too, and of course representatives of all creeds and nationalities, with their bishops, priests, and deacons. The entry into Damascus was one of the grandest spectacles that that ancient city has beheld for many a long year. The troops lined the streets, the gendarmerie served as a guard of honor, bands of music played everywhere, banners waved majestically over arches of ever-greens, and the whole population thronged out in its best attire to show its sympathy with the coming guests.

* * * * * * *

At dinner Sir Henry Layard proposed the health of the Sultan in the following terms:

“I beg to propose a toast to the health of His Imperial Majesty the Sultan. As His Majesty has deigned to honor me with his friendship, I have had frequent opportunities of appreciating his intelligence, his feeling of sympathy for his subjects, without distinction of race or creed, his earnest desire for the welfare, prosperity, and happiness of his empire, and his true patriotism. His Majesty takes a lively interest in all that concerns his country, and I can say that no ruler is more fully penetrated with a sense of his duty, or devotes himself with greater assiduity to public affairs.

“I shall have an opportunity on my return, and I shall not fail to take advantage of it, to express to His Majesty the satisfaction I have felt in witnessing the progress which Syria is now making. The friendship of England for Turkey is well known; a friendship which has lasted for more than two centuries. We can attribute the interest and the sympathy which the English people feel in the prosperity of this great empire to several reasons. To a certain extent England herself is a Mahommedan power. Among the subjects of the Queen, my august sovereign, are many millions of Mussulmans. I can assure you that they enjoy the most perfect liberty, and are on a footing of perfect equality with their fellow-subjects. We do all that lies in our power to promote their welfare; we respect, as is but right, their religion, and they fill some of the highest posts in our administration. These privileges we ask for the subjects of His Imperial Majesty the Sultan. We wish that all his subjects, Mussulmans and Christians, should be equal in the eye of the law, and that they should be governed with justice.

“This great principle has been constantly maintained by the eminent statesman to whom His Majesty has confided the government of Syria. I congratulate you on the fortunate and happy selection which His Majesty made, and I feel convinced that Midhat Pasha, by his untiring energy, by his spirit of justice, and by his conciliatory disposition, will raise this beautiful province to the rank of one of the most flourishing and the most important in the Ottoman Empire.

“I must convey my warmest thanks to his highness as well as to the town of Damascus, to her notables, and to her whole population, for the cordial and hospitable welcome they have been kind enough to give me. I shall forever retain a most pleasing recollection of my visit, and I shall deem myself fortunate if I am able to show my gratitude in furthering, in however slight a degree, the interests of this noble and ancient city.”

The speech was received with loud and enthusiastic cheers, which were prolonged and taken up by the crowd outside as soon as the motive was understood. The whole town was ablaze with illuminations, and the population felt that they were welcoming the representative of the one power that disinterestedly seeks to promote the welfare indiscriminately of all the races and creeds that were represented in that joyful and enthusiastic throng. Saturday was spent in leave-taking, and on Sunday morning the illustrious party took their departure, leaving upon the popular mind a most pleasant, and, let it be hoped, not unprofitable, impression.

[Inclosure 2 in No. 348.]

Mr. Edgar to Mr. Heap.

United States Consulate,
Beirût, September 30, 1879.

Sir:

* * * * * * *

I have had no reason to suspect that the visit of Sir A. H. Layard to Syria had any other object than relaxation, &c. The English residents in Beirut, particularly the English consul-general, affirm that his visit is one of pleasure only. He arrived at Beirut from Jerusalem Tuesday, September 23, and was officially received and escorted to a residence specially prepared for him by the British consul-general, and representatives of the governors-general of Syria and the Lebanon, the governor of Beirut, and the municipality. The British consul-general on Monday, September 22, in an official circular informed his colleagues of the expected arrival, and on Tuesday in another circular indicated the hour at which the ambassador would be pleased to receive those consuls who would do him the honor to call upon him. In my interview with him he spoke very pleasantly of those Americans with whom he became acquainted when here in 1839, mentioning all by name, and said that he had never in his life met with more energetic, disinterested, and self-sacrificing men. After the reception of the consuls he received the resident British merchants, headed by James Black, whom he had known in 1839.

* * * * * * *

The municipality provided an extensive dinner for the ambassador and his suite Tuesday evening, to which no foreigners except the British consul-general and the vice-consul and their wives were invited. The ambassador and suite left at four o’clock Wednesday morning for Damascus. He was met half way by an escort sent from Damascus. He displayed the English flag while traveling. He remained three days in Damascus, went to Baalbec, and will arrive in Aleih, a village in the Lebanon, the summer residence of the British consul-general and many Europeans and Americans, to-day at 4 p.m. He will to-morrow visit the governor-general of the Lebanon at Beited-din, returning to Beriut the last of this week. From Beriut he will go to Tripoli, thence to Constantinople. His visit has caused much excitement and a great deal of absurd speculation about British occupation, interference, supervision of reforms, &c. In my interview with him he spoke very highly of our minister, and inquired of me about his visit to the Black Sea. * * *

I am, &c.,

JOHN T. EDGAR, Consul.

[Inclosure 3 in No. 348.]

Mr. Willson to Mr. Heap.

United States Consulate,
Jerusalem, Palestine, October 1, 1879.

Sir: * * * * * * *

The ambassador returned the official call of the consul, dined with the governor, Raouf Pacha, and heard the complaints and statements of grievance of various parties—patriarchs, bishops, superiors of convents—and the representation of the late Bishop Gobat, and all of them, so far as I can learn, were gratified with the results of their visits; but outside of Turkish official circles nothing is known definitely of the special object of his visit.

That it was a pleasure trip for relaxation is an idea not to be entertained for a moment. He appeared to be in perfect health, and he worked very hard, journeying rapidly and dispatching business of ceremony promptly. My own impression is that the visit had some reference to proposed reforms—some reference, perhaps, to English influence in Syria and Palestine, of which the French and Russian consuls are jealous, not to say also the German consul.

If I were asked my private opinion, I should say that the Beaconsfield administration, in view of approaching elections, seeing the restlessness of the English people on account of the delay of proposed reforms in Turkey, have sent Sir Henry Layard abroad on a jaunting expedition to have means to show on the hustings and in the papers that something is doing, or is going to be done, sooner or later, and that the ambassador and the premier and the secretary for foreign affairs are wide awake on the subject.

In other words, it was a grand “spectacular demonstration.” Should any further light break from the “dark cloud,” it will be reported to you promptly.

I have, &c.,

J. G. WILLSON, Consul.

No. 474. Mr. Maynard to Mr. Evarts. [Document 506]

No. 474.
Mr. Maynard to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Constantinople, October 15, 1879. (Received November 10.) No. 349.]

Sir: Some of our countrymen, who have a strong personal interest in observing the signs of the times and watching the temper of the people, detect, as they suppose, an unusual activity in the religious zeal of the leading Mussulmans.

From Syria and other parts of the empire are received items of intelligence, more or less important, indicating an unwonted degree of impatience, amounting at times to intolerance, and quite sufficient to render the Christian population very uneasy.

Within the last few days an occurrence at the capital has occasioned remark. It seems that a missionary of the Church Missionary Society, an English organization, has been engaged in translating into the Turkish language certain religious books, the book of common prayer of the number, employing a khodja (learned man), a Turk and a Mussulman, to assist him. This coming to knowledge of other parties, he and his assistant were denounced to the police, by whom the missionary was arrested on his way in the street, and taken to the police station, where he was detained several hours, and some manuscript translations which he chanced to have with him were forcibly seized and kept. His assistant was also arrested and condemned to fifteen years’ imprisonment.

I do not apprehend anything very serious, much less that the Sublime Porte will sanction a policy so momentous as to challenge Christendom, yet these outcroppings of latent sentiment are significant, showing how little can be expected in the matter of reforms, as that term is understood in Western Europe and America. I have already had occasion in these dispatches to explain that reform from the Mussulman point of view is something quite different from the reforms demanded by the Christian subjects of the Sultan.

I have, &c.,

HORACE MAYNARD.

No. 475. Mr. Farman to Mr. Evarts. [Document 507]

No. 475.
Mr. Farman to Mr. Evarts.

Agency and Consulate-General of the United States in Egypt,
Cairo, February 3, 1879. (Received March 1.) No. 277.]

Sir: I have the honor to transmit herewith a short article upon the Suez Canal, for such use as you may deem proper.

I am, sir, &c.,

E. E. FARMAN.

suez canal [Document 508]

suez canal

Cairo, January 27, 1879.

There has been a continued increase in the receipts of the Suez Canal Company each year since its canal was opened to commerce, without any increase of expenses, and it may now he considered as fully demonstrated that this great enterprise is a complete financial success for the stockholders of the company, as well as the most important work yet accomplished for the promotion of the commerce of the Eastern hemisphere.

The completion of this canal effected a great geographical change, that of uniting two seas, and marked the commencement of a new era in the commerce of the east. But it was not until some time after it was finished that its great maritime importance was universally recognized,

At one time during the progress of the work shares of the canal stock of 500 francs sold at from 100 to 150 francs each; and at about the time of the opening of the canal fears of drifting sands, and the effects of currents, and the want of confidence in its practicability were so general that the stock was worth only from 200 to 300 francs a share. It is now quoted at 717 francs, and a close examination of the official statements of the receipts and expenses of the company, and its present financial condition, shows that this is not above its real value.

The company has always paid to its stockholders, even during the long period that its work was in progress, interest at the rate of 5 per cent, per annum on their stock. This interest was, however, from the 1st of July, 1871, to the 1st of July, 1874, paid in the company’s bonds, which now form a part of its indebtedness.

The whole cost of the canal, including expenses of enlargements and other improvements, exclusive of cleaning and repairs, to the end of the year 1877 was 472,921,799 francs ($92,273,907). Of this amount 114,000,000 francs were received from the Egyptian Government during the progress of the work in payment for certain concessions taken back, which had been originally gratuitously granted to the company by Said Pasha, the immediate predecessor of the Khedive. The items composing this sum were as follows: 38,000,000 francs were paid as damages on account of the refusal of the Egyptian Government to furnish laborers in accordance with (as was claimed by the company) the original acts of concession; 10,000,000 francs on account of the expenditure of the company in constructing a fresh-water canal from Ouady to Ismailia and Suez for its use in furnishing water along the line of the Suez Canal, the company ceding this canal with the exclusive right of its navigation to Egypt, but reserving for its use a perpetual daily supply of 70,000 cubic meters of water, an amount more than sufficient for all its needs; 30,000,000 francs on account of the retrocession of 150,000 acres of uncultivated lands given to the company and which it was expected would be rendered capable of cultivation by means of the fresh water obtained from this canal, and the canal from Cairo to Ouady; 6,000,000 francs on account of the retrocession of the exclusive right of the navigation of these two canals; 20,000 000 francs on account of certain other retrocessions and in satisfaction of all other claims; and 10,000,000 francs on account of the retrocession of other lands and property. The first four items were paid in accordance with an award made in 1864 by the Emperor Napoleon as sole arbiter between the company and the Egyptian Government, and the last two in fulfillment of a contract.

At the time of the award by Napoleon, about one-half of the labor necessary for the construction of the canal had been completed. If we take as a basis this award, the labor that had been already furnished by the Egyptian Government was worth about 38,000,000 francs more than it had cost the company; so that, had the company constructed the canal wholly by laborers hired in the ordinary way, and not had any grants from the Egyptian Government, except the right of way and the necessary lands for its stations along the line of the canal, it would have cost 510,921,799 francs. There would have been necessarily added to this amount the expense of the construction of the fresh-water canal from Cairo to Ouady, which was constructed by the Egyptian Government at a cost of over 50,000,000 francs, to intersect and supply the fresh-water canal constructed by the company. This would have made the total cost of the maritime canal, 99 miles in length, and its accessories, in a country where ordinary labor was worth less than ten cents a day, the laborer boarding himself, a little more than 560,000,000 francs ($108,080,000). The actual cost to the company, exclusive of the aid from Egypt as above stated, was 358,921,799 francs ($69,271,907).

The stock of the company consists of 400,000 shares of 500 francs each, of which the British Government purchased of the Egyptian Government, in November, 1875, 176,602 shares for £ sterling 3,972,624, being about 568 francs a share. The interest coupons of these shares up to the year 1894 had been detached in 1869 and surrendered to the company in payment of the last item of 30,000,000 francs above mentioned. As the coupons were taken on the basis of allowing ten per cent, for the use of the money, it required for the payment of this sum the coupons of twenty-five years, amounting to 110,376,250 francs. The Egyptian Government at the same time surrendered with these coupons, without any further consideration, its right to the net revenues of the canal that might accrue on these shares during this period of twenty-five years. The net revenues up to 1877 were very small, hut if they continue to equal the amount of that year—and they may very much exceed that sum—they will amount on these shares, up to 1894, to about 25,000,000 francs. All that was obtained by this sacrifice of coupons and revenues was of little or no value to Egypt, and they might properly be considered as a gift to the company.

By its contract, the Egyptian Government is to pay to England the interest, at the rate of 5 per cent, per annum on the purchase-money of its canal shares during the time represented by the detached coupons, that is, up to and including the year 1894.

Suez Canal stock is now worth in the market about 150 francs a share more than was paid by England, and, though the English shares are not worth quite as much as the others, because of their present non-participation in the net revenues, yet as the Egyptian Government pay 5 per cent, on the whole purchase-money instead of on the par value of the shares, this want of participation is partly made good, and England’s shares, taken with the contract of the Egyptian Government relating to the payment of interest, may be considered as of nearly the same value as the other shares, so that Lord Beaconsfield’s purchase, aside from its political and commercial importance, and the constant receipt of five per cent, upon the money invested, has a value to-day of nearly or quite £1,000,000 above what it cost, and the prospects are that this value will increase with the continual increase of the business of the canal, and the steady diminution of the company’s debts.

The balance of the company’s stock is in the hands of a large number of holders, principally in France.

The total debt of the company is now about 116,000,000 francs. This is being reduced at the rate of 2,500,000 francs per annum, and the company also appropriates 1,000,000 francs a year to permanent improvements, such as enlarging the canal in certain places, the enlargement of the old and the creation of new stations, basins, &c.

The revenue of the canal from the passage of vessels and passengers has increased from $995,752 in 1870, $1,735,790 in 1871, and $3, 176,665 in 1872, to $5,575,056 in 1875, $5,785, 174 in 1876 and $6,325,448 in 1877.

There are other revenues of the company from various sources amounting to about 1,000,000 francs a year.

The expenses, including interest on debt, sinking fund and management of lands, have been a little over 17,000,000 francs a year for each of the last five years, so that with the rapid and continued increase of revenues there is no increase of expenses. Over 11,000,000 of these 17,000,000 of francs are expended on account of interest and sinking funds.

The expenses of the various administrations of the company in France and Egypt, including the pay of its officers and its expenses on account of agencies, publications, and the health department, were for the year 1877, 1,135,009 francs; those of the service of transit and navigation 1,619,869 francs, and those of maintaining, cleaning, and repairing the canal and its accessories, including the annual appropriation for material, 2,283,388 francs.

It will be seen that the total expenses of the canal company, aside from interest and other sums applied in payment of its debts, are very small, being only about 5,000,000 francs per annum, while the total revenues for the year 1877 were 33,958,314 francs.

The entire annual expense of cleaning the canal, its basins, and the channel at the entrance of Port Saïd, and for repairs of the canal and its accessories, is only about 2,000,000 francs.

In the cleaning of the canal during the year 1877 there were removed with dredges from the channel at the entrance of Port Saïd 220,696 cubic meters of earth, and from the basin at Port Said 133,934 cubic meters, and from the canal between Port Said and Suez 721,830 cubic meters. This amount of dredging was sufficient to keep the canal at its established depth and width.

The small comparative cost of maintaining the canal arises from the fact that there are no locks and no lateral embankments to be broken. If any part of the canal were on a higher level than the sea, so as to require locks, lateral embankments would also be required, which would be liable, as is the case with canals generally, to be broken, and with a canal like that of Suez, which has sufficient depth and width to permit the safe passage of ships drawing 25 feet of water, such breaks would cause great damage. Except the ordinary cleaning of the canal, and the channel at the entrance of Port Saïd, which is gradually filled by the sediment which comes from the mouths of the Nile, and is drifted eastward along the coast, there is little to be done.

It does not seem that the canal is liable to any of those extraordinary expenses to which navigable canals are generally subject.

In a conversation last winter with the venerable projector of the Suez canal, Monsieur Ferdinand de Lesseps, on the subject of the proposed Panama Canal, he stated to the writer that of all the proposed routes, in his opinion, that only on which it was proposed to construct a canal on a level with the sea was worthy of serious consideration, and that he did not believe that a canal across the isthmus, running on different levels and with locks large enough for ocean steamers, would ever he made practicable, and much less remunerative.

It is worthy of remark that Monsieur de Lesseps, who was in his fiftieth year at the time of the first concession by the Viceroy Saïd Pasha in 1854, has from that day to the present time been at the head of this great enterprise. He encountered difficulties, political, financial, and material, that few men could have overcome. The completion of the canal seemed to depend upon the talent and energy of a single man, whose work was considered as the “futile attempt of a clever enthusiast.”

At the end of fifteen years of constant struggle he saw his efforts crowned with success. On the 17th day of November, 1869, the canal was opened to commerce, and the English Government, which had been the greatest obstacle in the way of the accomplishment of this great work, immediately found its sailing distance to Bombay shortened by 4,840 nautical miles, and from that day British commerce has been the principal recipient of the benefits of this new maritime route, two-thirds of all the vessels, passing through the canal being those sailing under the English flag.

M. de Lesseps not only saw his work finished, but has lived to enjoy the rewards of his well-earned success and to see the bitterest enemies of his project become its principal supporters; and so far as physical appearance indicates, he may still remain for many years at the head of the company he has created, enjoying, as he always has, the perfect confidence of its stockholders.

E. E. FARMAN.

No. 476. Mr. Farman to Mr. Evarts. [Document 509]

No. 476.
Mr. Farman to Mr. Evarts.

Agency and Consulate-General of the United States in Egypt,
Cairo, March 18, 1879. (Received April 10.) No. 283.]

Sir: Referring to my dispatch No. 281, of the 22d of February last, I have the honor to inform you that no new ministry has yet been formed, and that since the resignation of Nubar Pasha, on the 19th ultimo, we have had neither minister of foreign affairs nor minister of justice. There has been during this time much public agitation, but nothing that has resulted in any acts of violence, though it must be admitted that there has been and still is danger of an open revolt. The public sentiment is strongly against what is termed the inundation of the country by foreigners, principally English, who have taken possession of a large number of the most important official positions at high salaries, which are regularly paid, while other employes and creditors, in great numbers, and of all nationalities, are reduced to a state of destitution by the nonpayment of their claims.

The Khedive is much stronger personally with his own people, and also with resident foreigners, than he was six months ago, but there is much feeling against him on account of his having, as is claimed, permitted those who have not heretofore resided in Egypt, and who have no knowledge of the country, its people, or their language, to so completely take possession of his government.

The inclosed translations of the notes that have lately passed between the Khedive and the two powers that have assumed the control of Egypt will sufficiently explain his present position, which, it will be seen, is not one that has depended wholly on his will.

The Khedive’s letter to His Excellency Nubar Pasha, of August 28, 1878, has been heretofore transmitted to the Department. In this letter His Highness expressed his firm determination to establish an administration in harmony with the principles that govern European administrations, instead of that of a personal power, which up to that time had been the principle on which the Government of Egypt had been based, and stated that he wished to govern with and by his council of ministers.

Nubar Pasha was instructed to form the new ministry, and took himself its presidency, and the portfolio of the minister of foreign a flairs and of justice. It is understood here that Mr. Wilson, who had been some time in Egypt as vice-president of the commission appointed by the Khedive to examine into the financial condition of the country, and to determine whether its revenues were sufficient to pay the rate of interest stipulated by the Goschen-Jaubert contract, was, at the voluntary request of the Khedive, and without any official pressure on the part of the English Government, made minister of finance. He was simply appointed as the Khedive’s minister, and had no representative character on the part of England. But immediately on his being appointed, France asked the appointment of one of her citizens as a member of the new cabinet, and, after considerable negotiation, Monsieur de Blignerè was appointed minister of public works, and this department was considerably enlarged, so as to include the railroads, the docks, except those of Alexandria, the post, the museum, and many other departments that had not theretofore belonged to it.

Up to the 18th of February these two Europeans and their colleagues were considered only as the Khedive’s ministers, appointed to assist in the government of Egypt, and to aid in introducing certain reforms, but responsible to His Highness, and liable to be replaced by others at his pleasure.

The above-mentioned notes have, however, very materially changed the situation.

On the resignation of Nubar Pasha the two European ministers demanded that he be reinstated, and asked their governments to sustain them in this demand.

The two powers, by their note of the 2d March, in reply to the Khedive’s of the 28th of February, say that they do not demand that he be reinstated as president of the council, but they consider it as very important that he continue to form a part of the cabinet, and they make no objection to the appointment of Prince Tewfik to be president of the council.

The Khedive, in his reply, says that he is ready, in order to better assure the working of the new system, and the carrying out of the reforms, to add a third European minister, or give such other guaranties as the two governments think they ought to suggest, but he formally declares his opposition to the re-entry of Nubar Pasha into the cabinet.

The suggestion of the Khedive to appoint a third European minister was designed to meet an objection that had been made to the retirement of Nuba Pasha, that in that case the two Europeans would be in the minority, and would not be able to do anything in the council of ministers against a majority that would adopt any policy suggested by His Highness. It was also understood that in case of such appointment the place was to be given to an Italian, the Government of Italy, following the precedent made by France, having already asked that one of its subjects be given a place in the new cabinet.

The English and French Governments seized at once upon the declaration of the Khedive’s willingness to conform to their decision in relation to such guaranties as they should suggest, without giving any answer to the suggestion of the appointment of a third European minister, and proceeded in a very formal manner to name the conditions on which they would consent to the retirement of Nubar Pasha, to wit: 1. That the Khedive could in no case be present during the deliberations of the council of ministers.

2. That the two European ministers should have jointly the power of giving an absolute veto to all measures that they should disapprove.

3. That in consideration of these concessions they would abstain from insisting upon the return to the ministry of Nuba Pasha.

The two governments took, at the same time, occasion to remind the Khedive of the serious responsibility he assumed in calling forth these new arrangements, and the gravity of the consequences to which he exposed himself if he should not be able to insure their entire execution, if difficulties should hinder the working of the government, or if the public order should be troubled a second time. This note was presented on Sunday morning, the 9th instant, with a demand that an answer be given that day. The answer, signed by the Khedive, was as categorical as the note of the powers. In it His Highness submits to all their demands, and adds that he understands the responsibility that he assumes by these new arrangements, and affirms that all his efforts shall tend to insure their entire execution, and that, under all circumstances, he will give the most complete and faithful co-operation to the cabinet for the maintenance of the public safety, and the working of the new order of things.

It was supposed by those who knew the facts in relation to the negotiations that a ministry would be formed on Monday, the 10th instant, but new difficulties arose.

The Khedive proposed to appoint Riaz Pasha, who, since the organization of the Nubar Pasha ministry, has held the portfolio of the minister of interior, to be minister of foreign affairs and of justice, and to supply his place with some one else, proposing at different times several good men. But the European ministers formally protested against the removal of Riaz Pasha from the department of the interior, and again called upon their respective governments to sustain them. It seems they were not satisfied with their power of an absolute veto, but proposed to have a cabinet of their choice. Since then the Khedive has awaited the further answer of the two powers, and no appointments have been made except that the hereditary prince has been appointed president of the council of ministers. It is, however, said to-day that the reply of the powers came last night, to the effect that Riaz Pasha must be retained as minister of the interior.

A telegram was also received two days ago by the English agent and consul-general, the Hon. C. Vivian, ordering him to London to confer on Egyptian matters. It is well known here that his opinion as to the proper policy to pursue in relation to Egypt is directly opposite to that of Mr. Rivers Wilson, and this difference of opinion is such that it does not seem possible for both of these gentlemen to remain in their respective positions. Mr. Vivian is an only son of Lord Vivian, and is understood as belonging to the liberal party, and his being summoned to London at this time, in connection with the decision of the English and French Governments that Riaz Pasha must remain in the department of the interior in accordance with the demand of Mr. Wilson, is construed as a victory for the latter.

It will be seen from what I have said that very little power is left to the Khedive.

* * * * * * *

I have, &c.,

E. E. FARMAN.

[Inclosure 1 in No. 283.—Translation.]

Written declaration of the Khedive, made on the 28th February, 1879, to the two powers, England and France.

The Khedive will appoint the hereditary prince minister, without portfolio, to be president of the council.

The Khedive will write to the prince a letter confirming his firm wish to govern according to the terms of the rescript of August 28, which must continue to be the governmental rule, and again affirming his sincere desire to see the financial engagements entered into by his government strictly executed.

His Highness adds that, the powers holding him responsible for the public safety and the regular working of the new administration, it is indispensable, in order that he be able to assume a responsibility, that he be in a position to follow the general action of the government, and he consequently asks— 1. That all measures needing his sanction be submitted to him by the competent minister, and be thereafter discussed and definitely decided upon in a meeting of the council presided over by him.

2. The right of convoking the council in order to bring before it the measures that he believes to be of use for insuring the public safety and the advancement of the prosperity of the country, the Khedive being always obliged, according to the terms of the rescript of August 28, to conform to the opinion of the majority of the council.

In a word, the Khedive desires to be heard on all questions of general interest; it is on this condition that he can accept the responsibility of the execution of the measures decided upon by the council; otherwise this responsibility will fall back upon the powers.

II.

Declaration of the two powers to the Khedivs, the 2d of March, 1879.

[Translation.]

The French and English Governments, considering that the recent events raise a very serious difficulty, think that the two European ministers ought to have by them (or by their side) a native colleague of recognized capacity, in order that the system inaugurated by the rescript of August 28 may be maintained; moreover, it is to this system, and the benefits that Egypt ought to derive from its administration, that England and France attach a capital importance. The two governments see, outside of Nubar Pasha, no Egyptian personage who at the same time personifies the reform, and is capable of giving to his European colleagues the support and the information they need. They do not demand that Nubar Pasha remain president of the council, but they consider it as very important that he continue to form a part of the cabinet, and instruct us to declare this to His Highness, adding that in their view the experiment which is hardly commenced ought to be continued under the same conditions in which it was inaugurated and accepted by them.

The incident which occurred within the last few days is doubtless vexatious, but the two governments are of the opinion that it depends upon the Viceroy to efface the traces and remembrance thereof, by reconciling himself with a minister who is in a position to render great services to Egypt.

The two governments make no objection to the presidency of the hereditary prince, and, without entering into a discussion of the other propositions made by the Khedive, they willingly admit that the nature of the relations between His Highness and the council of ministers can be modified and bettered conformably to the usages of constitutional governments, i. e., in the sense of the propositions that have been made by the European ministers.

III.

The Khedive’s reply to the preceding declaration.

[Translation.]

[undated].

In reply to the note which was transmitted to him by the representatives of England and France, in the name of their governments, the Khedive hastens to confirm his firm wish to maintain intact the rescript of the 28th August, 1878, and further, by his full co-operation, the new order of things which, in his view as in the view of the two governments, is to bring about great good to the country. The Khedive declares that he is also ready, for better assuring the working of this system and strengthening it, to admit of the appointment of a third European minister, or any other guaranty that the two governments think they ought to suggest.

The Khedive, moreover, considers that, for the new system to yield the results which one has a right to expect, it is indispensable that the cabinet include only such native elements as will give to the European ministers experience and authority, whilst insuring to them the respect and sympathy of the country. The Khedive can give the assurance to the two governments that men fitted for the fulfillment of this purpose are to be found in the land. Of this he will take the responsibility.

It is for these reasons that the Khedive finds himself obliged to declare very frankly and openly that the return of Nubar Pasha into the cabinet would be an obstacle in the way of the purpose proposed.

This return, which would be a humiliation for the Khedive in the eyes of his people, would produce in all the native elements, without exception, very serious discontent; it would be a defiance thrown against their most susceptible sentiments, and one which might have the most unhappy consequences. The Khedive cannot have the idea of opposing himself even to a desire of the English and French Governments; he yields in advance if France and England persist in their wish to see Nubar Pasha return to the cabinet, but he considers it a duty to forewarn them, so that, if the new administration should hereafter through this step encounter difficulties in its working, or if the public safety should be again jeopardized, the governments will not be able to hold him responsible therefor and reproach him for not having apprised them.

The Khedive thanks the two governments for having given their adhesion to the appointment of the hereditary prince as president of the council of ministers. He admits that the relations between the chief of the state and the council of ministers cannot be modified except in conformity with the usages of constitutional government, i. e., by insuring the entire independence of the deliberations of the council of ministers.

IV.

Declaration of England and France to the Khedive of March 9, 1879.

The undersigned, agents and consuls-general of Great Britain and France, have been directed by their governments to make to His Highness the Khedive the following declarations: 1. The English and French Governments accept the expression of the Khedive’s willingness to conform to the decisions of France and England, and take note of the same.

2. It is understood that the Khedive can in no case be present at the deliberations of the council of ministers.

3. Prince Tewfik shall be appointed president of the council.

4. The two European ministers of the cabinet shall have jointly the right of opposing an absolute veto to every measure they shall disapprove.

5. In: consideration of these concessions the two governments will abstain from insisting upon the return to the ministry of Nubar Pasha, who himself declares that without the Khedive’s invitation he wishes no longer to form a part of the cabinet.

6. His Highness will comprehend the serious responsibility that he assumes by calling forth these new arrangements, and the gravity of the consequences to which he exposes himself, if he should be unable to insure their entire execution, if difficulties should hinder the working of the government, or if the public order should be troubled a second time.

V.
The Khedive’s reply of the 9th of March to the declarations of Great Britain and France communicated to him on the same day.

[Translation.]

The Khedive acknowledges, to Messrs. the agents and consuls-general of Great Britain and France, the receipt of the declarations that they were directed to transmit to him in the name of their governments, and to which he gives his entire adhesion.

1. The Khedive renews the expression of his firm will to conform to the decisions of the English and French Governments, and keep intact the rescript of the 28th of August, 1878, excepting the modifications upon which an agreement has been effected.

2. It is understood that the Khedive shall not be present, in any case, at the deliberations of the council of ministers; he only reserves to himself the right of summoning to him the ministers, either separately or together, to make known to them his ideas about the measures submitted for his sanction, or those which he may judge it useful to have brought before the cabinet.

3. The two European members of the cabinet shall have the right of opposing an absolute veto to every measure they may disapprove. This right cannot be exercised by the two European ministers except conjointly.

4. Prince Tewfik Pasha shall be appointed minister of the council.

5. The Khedive thanks the two governments for having taken his observations into consideration, and for not having insisted upon the return of Nubar Pasha to the cabinet.

6. The Khedive understands the responsibility that he assumes by these new arrangements; he affirms to the Governments of Great Britain and France that all his efforts shall tend to insure their entire execution, and that under all circumstances he will give the most complete and faithful co-operation to the cabinet for the maintenance of the public safety and the working of the new order of things.

The Khedive seizes this occasion for renewing to Messrs. the agents and consuls-general of Great Britain and France the assurance of his high consideration.

Cairo, March 9, 1879.
ISMAÏL.

[Inclosure 2 in No. 283.]

(House of Commons, March 12.)

[From the London Mail of March 14, 1879.]

egyptian finance.

Sir G. Campbell, who had given notice that he would move “That it is not desirable that Her Majesty’s Government should do anything to facilitate the raising of new loans by Oriental governments which have failed to meet the old ones,” said that, although he was precluded by the rules of the house from making his motion, lie wished to draw attention to the subject to which it referred.

He was in hopes that the proposal that Her Majesty’s Government should intervene in the raising of a loan for Turkey had gone off, and would not come up again. But in regard to Egyptian transactions of that kind, he was afraid that our government were venturing upon dangerous and slippery ground. Various missions had been sent out to improve Egypt, and, among other things, to enable her to pay her debts honestly. After the missions of the Right Honorable members for Shoreham and for the city of London came that of Mr. Rivers Wilson. Mr. Wilson had in one respect been much more successful than his predecessors, because his proceedings had had the effect of largely raising the price of Egyptian stock. It was a question, however, whether that result had been produced by fair means, and he confessed that he himself had grave doubts on that point. In his opinion, the present attempt ostensibly to introduce good government into Egypt was nothing less than a great stock-jobbing operation to raise the price of Egyptian funds, and enable those interested in those loans to unload them on the general public. He was given to understand great financial bodies in Paris and also bodies having political influence, had very much burnt their fingers by meddling with Egyptian loans, of which they held enormous amounts, and that unless they could put their bonds on the public they were likely to lose millions.

He understood that some arrangement had been made, he would not say a conspiracy, because that was an ugly word, by which those great financial bodies undertook that they would not throw their stock on the market, and so depress the stock for a certain time, and that, on the other hand, the Egyptian Government undertook that they would pay the interest for a certain period, and in the mean time those financial bodies would be enabled to unload their stock on the public, who would be duped by the transaction. There was a general belief abroad, although it might be unfounded, that the policy pursued by the present Government of Egypt, and which had to some extent, apparently, the support of Her Majesty’s ministers, was distinctly opposed to the views of Mr. Consul Vivian. The newspapers told them that the present Government of Egypt looked not to the interest of the bondholders only, but sought to reform the administration in order to benefit the people. That he believed to be a mere sham. The proof of the pudding was in the eating. Had the people of Egypt been treated more fairly and kindly by the present than by the former administrations of that country? They were now, he believed, quite as much, and probably more, ground down than they ever were before.

If the English public presisted in supposing that the administration had lately been carried on in Egypt with a pure and simple regard for the welfare of the people, they were not without the means of knowing better in the shape of the information given by able correspondents of the Times. Some very striking communications on that subject had appeared very lately in that journal. One letter in the Times of that day de-y scribed the state of things in Upper Egypt. The writer said:

“We rode on donkeys 200 miles through the more remote districts. Everywhere the most heart-rending state of poverty was revealed. Taxation having taken from the Arab every reserve he may have saved in years of comparative prosperity, the failure of the dourra corps through the excessive inundation of this year deprived him of any possible means of subsistence. Near the sugar factories the famine was proportionately greater, as the drain upon, the resources of the people is of course heavier, where a large area of land has been seized for a crop which returns nothing to the actual cultivator, and where forced labor in the fields and factory deprives the peasant of his most valuable time. It was sad, in the midst of so much want, to see men driven with whips to labor for the English bondholder while the fields were lying unfilled.”

He was afraid there was too much truth in that.

With respect to the late proceedings at Cairo another correspondent of the Times, on Monday last, stated that, notwithstanding an authoritative declaration made last May that all the arrears of pay were to be paid, the claims of the army were neglected; that that most dangerous element was brought to a state of almost excusable disaffection; that in vain Mr. Vivian had remonstrated against the dangerous folly of disbanding an unpaid army, and that an outbreak would result. He would ask, was it true that the present finance minister of Egypt refused to pay the just dues of those officials, and that Mr. Vivian remonstrated against such refusal? Another correspondent said that all those men were in arrears of pay, some of them for a few months, some for a year, some even for two years; that severe hardship and privation resulted to them and their families in consequence; that they had petitioned again and again peacefully for what was owing to them and were told that there was nothing for them, because all the taxation was mortgaged to pay the public debt. Were Her Majesty’s ministers supporting a government which, while it paid the bondholders in full, treated its own officials in that way? He feared the allegation was true that during the last two years Egypt had been administered for the benefit of the foreign bondholders and not for the benefit of the inhabitants of the country. He was aware that Her Majesty’s Government had become involved in their present policy because they felt it necessary to stand well with France, but he hoped they would not persevere in the course they had adopted. The chancellor of the exchequer would, he hoped, inform the house whether he thought it was proper for Her Majesty’s Government to support the plans which had succeeded in raising the price of Egyptian bonds. For some time longer we might hear of these successful plans and of the good government of Egypt, but as soon as the great financiers of Paris had induced the people to take the bonds they would throw up the cards altogether.

He hoped the government would say something which would relieve the public from that apprehension. He should like to ask Her Majesty’s Government on what general grounds they had thought it desirable, to a certain extent in the case of Turkey, and in a decided degree in the case of Egypt, to assist, by the appointment of commissioners, those governments which had not been able to pay off their old loans, to raise new ones. Clever as Mr. Rivers Wilson undoubtedly was, he had raised the price of the bonds not by any action of his own, but because it was generally believed that he had the support not only of Her Majesty’s Government but also of the Government of France. Her Majesty’s Government were undertaking a very heavy responsibility if they misled a credulous public into believing that the Government of Egypt was solvent. A statement had been made in The Times which would lead the public to suppose that Mr. Rivers Wilson was, to a certain extent, a representative of the British Government. He maintained that statements of that kind had a considerable effect in misleading the public, and he hoped Her Majesty’s Government would inform the house that they did not countenance them. He trusted that the first object of Her Majesty’s Government was the decent government and fair treatment of the unhappy people of Egypt, and that they regarded, as a matter of only secondary importance, the claims of the French and other foreign bondholders.

Colonel Alexander said, having only just returned from Egypt, he could confirm everything that had fallen from the honorable member from Kirkcaldy. While in Egypt he met the gentleman whose letter appeared in The Times of to-day, and that gentleman stated to him then exactly what had appeared in The Times. The honorable member for Kirkendbright (Mr. Maitland) accompanied him, and were he in the house could confirm what had been stated by the honorable member from Kirkcaldy. One of the gentlemen who had been sent to inquire into the condition of the people, and who, from his knowledge of Arabic, was admirably qualified to do so, was unfortunately taken ill of small-pox soon after leaving Cairo. But if any one on the spot were to say the distress was exaggerated he could not have made use of his eyes. (Hear.)

Coming down the Nile he had seen sights which proved that the statements of the gentlemen in The Times were not in any way exaggerated. The people were in some places living skeletons, and almost resembled the condition of the natives of India during a time of famine. (Hear.) He was also on the spot when the outbreak-of the officers occurred. Arrears of pay for two years were due to them, and that the government acknowledged the justice of their claims was plain, when, after the outbreak, three months’ arrears were paid. Mr. Rivers Wilson and M. de Blignièrs were members of the administration of Nubar Pasha, and, therefore, parties to his conduct. It was useless to look for improvement in the country as long as such things were done.

No. 477. Mr. Farman to Mr. Evarts. [Document 510]

No. 477.
Mr. Farman to Mr. Evarts.

Agency and Consulate-General of the United States in Egypt,
Cairo, May 22, 1879. (Received June 11.) No. 301.]

Sir: I have the honor to inform you that the negotiations entered into to procure an Egyptian obelisk for the city of New York have been successful.

The government of His Highness the Khedive has generously given to that city the obelisk at Alexandria, known as “Cleopatra’s Needle.”

I inclose copies of the original notes, in French, that were exchanged between His Excellency Chéréf Pasha and myself on this subject, after a verbal understanding had been arrived at, and also their translations into English.

The gift of this ancient and well-known monument cannot be regarded as other than a very great mark of favor on the part of the Government of Egypt towards that of the United States, and a proof of its high appreciation of the friendship that has ever existed between these countries.

The two obelisks that have been removed to Europe in modern times were obtained under circumstances entirely different from those now existing, and they were themselves objects which, in consequence of their situation and condition, were much less appreciated than Cleopatra’s Needle. They were both presented many years ago by Mohammed Ali, one to the English, and the other to the French Government. The latter, now at Paris, was taken nearly a half a century since from Luxor, in the vicinity of which are three other obelisks and many colossal ruins, which were at that time seldom visited by Europeans. The one lately taken to London had long been lying on the shore of the sea at Alexandria, nearly or wholly buried in the sand. That, however, which is given to the city of New York is still standing, and is the veritable Cleopatra’s Needle, and the only obelisk properly known by that name. It constitutes, with Pompey’s Pillar, the only relics of the ancient city of Alexandria that are of any interest. It is known by every school-boy in the United States, and its removal to New York will long remain one of the marked events of history.

From the inscriptions upon it it is supposed to have been erected at Heliopolis (On of the Scriptures) in the reign of Thothmes III, about 1,590 years before the commencement of the Christain era, according to the chronology of Mariette Bay, or about 150 years later, according to that of Wilkinson.

The site of Heliopolis, which is about five miles east of Cairo, is now marked by a single monolith, though that ancient city was reputed to have been “full of obelisks.”

The one, however, which remains is the oldest of all the large Egyptian monuments of this character, having been erected in the Teign of Usortesen I, nearly 3,000 years before Christ. Heliopolis, or, as the word imports, the city of the sun, was known by the ancient Egyptians as the dwelling of Ea (Helios). The sun temple of this city was of a very remote origin, and having been destroyed or neglected was restored by Amenemhal I, the immediate predecessor of Usortesen I.

The obelisks at Heliopolis were undoubtedly placed in pairs at the entrance of the sun temple, perhaps on each of its four sides. They were emblems of the sun’s rays and were therefore frequently dedicated to this god and to his temple. The characters engraven in the granite were originally filled with gold or gilded bronze, and were spoken of as “illuminating the world with their rays.”

Heliopolis was also the seat of one of the most famous schools of antiquity, but the city had lost its importance and fallen into decay, some time before the commencement of the Christian era.

Cleopatra’s Needle was taken to Alexandria previous to or during the reign of Tiberius (A. D. 14–37) and was placed, with its companion now in London, on the shore of the sea in front of the temple of Caesar.

Why it bears the name of Cleopatra’s Needle is not known. She died about sixty years before the completion of this temple, but it may have been commenced by her.

The central row of hieroglyphical inscriptions on the obelisk refer to Thothmes III, who is here called the child of the sun” and said to be “endowed with power, life, and stability.” Other inscriptions were afterward added by Rameses II and by another Pharaoh.

I hope to be able to send you hereafter a full translation of all its hieroglyphics.

I have, &c.,

E. E. FARMAN.

[Inclosure 1 in No. 301.—Translation.]

Mr. Farman to Chéréf Pasha.

Cairo, May 17, 1879.

Excellency: Referring to the different conversations that I have had the honor to have with your excellency, in which yon have informed me that the government of His Highness the Khedive is disposed to present to the city of New York, to be transported and erected there, the obelisk of Alexandria, I should be pleased if your excellency would have the kindness to definitely confirm in writing the gift of this monument.

It is understood that its transportation is to be effected at the expense of certain citizens of the said city of New York.

I beg to assure your excellency in advance of the warm thanks of my government for having thus favorably responded to the representations I have made to the government of his Highness the Khedive, in accordance with the instructions that I had received on this subject.

I have every reason to hope that the monument, which is thus soon to be transported and set up in the city of New York, will always be a souvenir and a pledge of the friendship that has ever existed between the Government of the United States and that of His Highness the Khedive.

I beg your excellency to accept the renewed assurance of my high consideration.

E. E. FARMAN.

[Inclosure 2 in No. 301.—Translation.]

Chéréf Pasha to Mr. Farman.

Ministry of Foreign Affairs,
Cairo, May 18, 1879. No. 343.]

Mr. Agent and Consul-General: I have taken cognizance of the dispatch which you did me the honor of writing me on the 17th of the current month of May.

In reply I hasten to transmit you the assurance, Mr. Agent and Consul-General, that the government of the Khedive, having taken into consideration your representations and the desire which you have expressed in the name of the Government of the United States of America, consents, in fact, to make a gift to the city of New York of the obelisk known as Cleopatra’s Needle, which is at Alexandria on the seashore. The local authorities shall therefore be directed to deliver this obelisk to the representative of the American Government, and also to facilitate, in everything that shall depend upon them, the removal of this monument, which, according to the terms of your dispatch, is to be done at the exclusive cost and expense of the city of New York.

I am happy, Mr. Agent and Consul-General, to have to announce to you this decision, which, while giving to the great city an Egyptian monument, to which is attached, as you know, a real archaeological interest will also be, I am as yourself convinced, another souvenir and another pledge of the friendship that has constantly existed between the Government of the United States and that of the Khedive.

Be pleased to accept, Mr. Agent and Consul-General, the expression of my high consideration.

CHÉRÉF,
Minister of Foreign Affairs, and President of the Council of Ministers.

No. 478. Mr. Farman to Mr. Evarts. [Document 511]

No. 478.
Mr. Farman to Mr. Evarts.

Agency and Consulate-General of the United States in Egypt,
Cairo, June 27, 1879. (Received July 19.) No. 307.]

Sir: I had the honor to send you yesterday the following telegram Secretary Evarts, Washington:

Khedive, accordance orders from Sultan, has abdicated in favor of his son Tewfik, who will be proclaimed Khedive at citadel 6 o’clock to-day. All quiet.

FARMAN.

On the evening of the 21st instant, the Khedive gave to the French and English consuls-general his reply to their demand for his abdication. His Highness had been given forty-eight hours for his reply, instead of the time mentioned in my dispatch No. 303 of the 20th instant.

His answer was in substance that he had telegraphed to Constantinople for instructions, and had not yet received a reply; that when it came he would have to trouble them to come and receive his answer. He added that he could not relieve himself of the responsibilities of the Government of Egypt without the orders of the Sultan.

The French consul-general, much irritated by this unexpected response of the Khedive, said to him: “How long has Your Highness been the humble servant of the Porte?” “Since my birth, monsieur,” was the quick reply of the Khedive.

Other conversations took place which, on the part of the French consul-general, were at least animated. Two days after the German consul-general and the acting Austro-Hungarian consul-general also advised the Khedive to abdicate, and the following day the Italian consul-general did the same.

All possible pressure was brought to bear upon the Khedive to obtain his abdication without awaiting the decision of the Sultan. He was promised in that case a civil list, certain private property, and the succession of his son, and threatened, in case he did not yield, with having his uncle, Halim Pasha, as his successor, and being sent away without anything.

On the 24th, the French and German consuls-general went to the palace at three o’clock in the morning and had him called, causing great terror in the harem by the fear of an assassination, to inform him that they had come to give him the last chance to abdicate in favor of his son, and that in a few hours Halim Pasha would be appointed, and it would be too late. The Khedive told them he thought there would be time enough yet to abdicate; said he would see them the next day, and bade them good night, and went back to his rooms.

During the day other attempts of the same character were made, based on information claimed to have been received from Constantinople, that the Sultan was about to appoint Halim, and offers of written guarantees of what had been promised. But the Khedive firmly said he would only resign his power into the hands of the Sultan or by his orders.

The next day (yesterday) in the morning, a telegram came to the palace from the Sultan, directed to the Crown Prince, Tewfik Pasha, informing him that he had been appointed Khedive of Egypt, and directing him to proclaim the fact himself. At the same time another telegram came directed to the Khedive, and ordering him to surrender his powers into the hands of his son Tewfik, who has been appointed Khedive.

His Highness immediately sent for his ministers and the prince, who resides at the palace Ismailia, half a mile distant, and on his arrival informed him that he was Khedive of Egypt, and at the same time expressed to him his wish that his reign might be successful, adding that he hoped he would not forget that he was his father. The prince is a very kind-hearted, sympathetic person and devoted to his father, and the scene that followed is said to have been very affecting. The Khedive, however, acted manfully, and soon afterwards, in the presence of his ministers, abdicated in favor of his son.

At five o’clock the consuls-general in uniform, such judges as there were in Cairo, and a large number of prominent persons, met at the palace Ismailia to accompany the prince to the citadel, about three miles distant, to attend the ceremony of proclaiming him Khedive.

The prince left his palace accompanied in the same calash by his two brothers, Hussein and Hassan Pashas and Chéréf Pasha, and followed by a long train of carriages. Cavalry were drawn up on either side of the street leading from the palace, and for a considerable distance before arriving at the citadel were found soldiers arranged in the same manner.

The news of the change in the government, which was not generally known until after two o’clock, was quickly spread through the city, and the crowd became so great near the end of our route that we could not have reached the place of the ceremony had not the way been guarded by the soldiers.

While we were ascending the high hill on which the citadel is situated one hundred and one guns were fired, which announced the entering upon his reign of the new Khedive.

Within the fortification of the citadel is the old palace of Mohammed Ali, lately used as offices for the department of war, the mosque of Mohammed Ali, and a small palace used on occasions of ceremonies of state.

On their arrival the Crown Prince, his brothers, and the ministers, all in full uniform, were seated in a large room in this palace. The diplomatic and consular corps were first presented. As they entered the prince arose and came forward to meet them. The doyen of the diplomatic body made a short complimentary speech in French, to which the prince responded in the same language. We were then seated, smoked the chibouk, drank coffee, and soon afterwards took our leave.

After our departure various civil, religious, and military bodies were received, and the ceremony of the inauguration of Prince Mohammed Tewfik Pasha as Khedive of Egypt was ended.

The same hour marked the termination of the reign of Ismail Pasha, who had remained almost alone in his palace Abdin.

This termination was for him as sad as it was sudden and unexpected. It is said that even up to that morning His Highness did not believe that the Sultan would depose him, and there was scarcely a person at Cairo who two weeks before anticipated any such result.

There will be very different opinions not only as to the merits and demerits of the reign of Ismail Pasha, but also as to the arbitrary act of the powers in procuring his deposition or abdication without any request of his own people, and against the wish of all the leading personages of the state, civil, religous, and military.

However much may be said against him, one thing is beyond dispute: Egypt, during the sixteen years of his reign, has advanced more in all that pertains to modern civilization than in the hundred, or perhaps five hundred, years next preceding, and more than it will be likely to for a long time to come; and for this advancement the country is almost wholly indebted to him.

Unfortunately for His Highness personally and perhaps for his country, he had seen too much of Europe, and conceived the idea that a great African state, perhaps empire, could be established on the European model on the banks of the Nile, and extending from the Mediterranean to the equator.

He learned too late that the engrafting of European civilization upon the old Oriental system is expensive and ruinous. It is easy, as the world’s history shows, to successfully plant new colonies; but to create new and vigorous states by engrafting modern civilization on the stocks of old ones, is an experiment the possible success of which remains to be demonstrated. No one has tried more faithfully and persistently this process than the Khedive, and he has attained a certain measure of success, but in so doing he has incurred an immense debt and ruined himself.

Among the improvements made are 1,200 miles of railway, built at a cost, including interest, of $65,000,000; over nine thousand miles of telegraphic lines; the ports of Alexandria and Suez, which have cost over $20,000,000; canals of navigation and irrigation, that have cost over $25,000,000; and the reclamation of several hundred thousand acres of desert land.

These are some of the greater improvements. There are smaller ones in greater numbers, all of which have been very expensive.

The Suez Canal has cost Egypt, including interest to date, over £16,000,000; and if we take into consideration the rate at which bonds have been sold to procure money for this object, this sum represents in the presentindebtednessofEgyptnotlessthan£25,000,000 ($125,000,000).

Where else in the Ottoman Empire have any such improvements been made? Asia Minor has a few miles of railroad built by an English company; Syria has not a mile nor a port, except the poor ones nature has given her; she can only boast of a wagon road built twenty years ago, from Beirut to Damascus, by a French company.

And yet the Ottoman Empire has contracted a debt that no one expects to be paid.

It is not, however, my purpose to enter at this time into any details concerning the Egyptian debt, or the causes that have led to the fall of the Khedive.

I will add that the newspaper war that has been carried on in Europe against him for the last two years, principally through the influence of groups of large stock speculators, and by means of their money, has created an erroneous public opinion and very unjust prejudices. Enough can be truthfully said against the reign of any Oriental prince; but the overthrow of the Khedive is not at all, or only in a small measure, due to the causes that have served as the texts of the principal newspaper articles that have been published on Egypt, since the commencement of its financial crisis.

It is true that the Khedive while in Europe saw many costly palaces and beautiful gardens, and theaters and operas, and learned to like this part of modern civilization. As every little city in Europe had its theater, and all the large ones many, and an opera house, why should not the great city of Cairo also have its amusements? Thus with the useful improvements of Europe came also its luxuries; and this has undoubtedly added to the indebtedness of Egypt, but the amounts expended in this manner have been greatly exaggerated, and have only exceeded the like expenditure of European cities because of the greater expense of sustaining such institutions in this country.

No objection is made by any one to the new Khedive. Like crown princes generally he may be said to be popular. But princes usually develope into the sovereign very soon after coming to the throne, and in the difficult position in which he is placed, it cannot be expected that he will govern long without serious opposition on financial questions.

Personally he is agreeable. He is of fair complexion, a little under the medium height, but stout and robust. He speaks French well, though, perhaps, fortunately for him, he has never seen Europe. He is kind, quiet, modest, and naturally very diffident, but of more than ordinary capacity and intelligence. He has had considerable experience in governmental affairs, though he is but twenty-six years old. He is of a much more serious character than his father, and a devout Musselman, though he has, like his brothers, but one wife, and lives, so far as regards his family, as nearly like a European as the customs of the country will permit.

Judging from his character we should naturally expect a successful reign, but between the Sultan and the powers of Europe, the Khedive of Egypt is placed in a situation, the difficulties of which can only be understood by one who has resided for a considerable time in the country, and had an opportunity to become acquainted with its governmental affairs.

Immediately after the arrival of the telegram announcing the appointment of the new Khedive, the old ministers all offered their resignations, which were not accepted, and they were requested to continue in their respective positions.

It is expected that Cherif Pasha will remain at the head of the ministry.

I have, &c.,

E. E. FARMAN.

No. 479. Mr. Comanos to Mr. Evarts. [Document 512]

No. 479.
Mr. Comanos to Mr. Evarts.

Agency and Consulate-General of the United States in Egypt,
Cairo, July 16, 1879. (Received August 21.) No. 324.]

Sir: In his dispatch No 307, of the 27th of June last, concerning the forced abdication of Ismail Pasha, Mr. Farman mentions two telegrams that were received on the subject by Tewfik Pasha and his father from Constantinople.

I now have the honor to inclose herewith translations of those telegrams, and of the note sent by the Ottoman Government to its diplomatic representatives, in which the dismissal (destitution) of Ismail Pasha is officially communicated to the various governments.

The French text from which these translations are made appeared in the Cairo weekly paper called “La Reforme,” in its issue of Monday, the 14th of this month, No. 164. The note above mentioned refers to the firman of 1873; this will be found with Mr. Beardsley’s dispatch No. 150, of the 10th of November, 1873, on page 1178 of the volume on Foreign Relations for 1874. It also makes mention of provisions of a general and of a specific character; some of these will be found with Mr. Beardsley’s dispatch No. 32, of November 15, 1872, on pp. 1122 and 1123 of the volume on Foreign Relations for 1873, part 2.

I have, &c.,

N. D. COMANOS,
Vice-Consul-General in Charge.

[Inclosure 1 in No. 324.]

Telegram of the Grand Vizier of Turkey to Tewfik Pasha.

The Sultan warmly desires the prosperity of Egypt, as he has shown by granting to that country numerous privileges. But the internal and external difficulties that have recently arisen in that country have rendered your father’s abdication, and your appointment, necessary. You will doubtless govern for the good of the people. It is for this purpose that you have been designated to succeed your father. The firman of investiture shall be surely sent to you. A telegram has been addressed to your father informing him that he has been deprived of his functions. When you receive this telegram, convoke the functionaries and the people and communicate to them its contents. You will doubtless devote yourself to the prosperity of the land. Receive my congratulations.

[Inclosure 2 in No. 324.]

Telegram of the Grand Vizier of Turkey to Ismail Pasha, ex-Khedive of Egypt.

The difficulties of Egypt, both internal and external, have assumed great importance, and the prolongation of the present state of things would be dangerous both for Egypt and for the Ottoman Government. The latter has always desired to maintain the tranquillity and prosperity of the Egyptian people; and it is for this reason that it granted you the firman that you now possess.

But if you were to remain any longer Khedive there would inevitably result herefrom an aggravation of the difficulties. Consequently, the council of ministers has decided, with the sanction of the Sultan, to give the Khedivate to Tewfik Pasha, and a telegram to this effect has been sent him. You are requested to give, over your powers to your son, following the indications contained in the firman.

[Inclosure 3 in No. 324.]

Note sent by the Sublime Porte to its diplomatic representatives abroad on the occasion of the deposition of the Khedive.

The events which have been for some time past unfolding themselves in Egypt attract the most serious attention of His Imperial Majesty the Sultan and of his government.

By voluntarily granting to Ismail Pasha the firman of the 13th of Rabi-el-akkir, 1290 (June 9 or 10, 1873), this imperial government gave a clear proof of its desire to contribute towards the moral and material regeneration of Egypt. Unfortunately the reality has not corresponded with the expectations of the government of His Majesty the Sultan, and matters have come to such a pass that there remains for His Majesty and his government no other alternative but to undertake, by an act of sovereign justice, the extrication of Egypt from a situation, the gravity of which is a mystery to no one.

Consequently His Imperial Majesty the Sultan, our sublime master, has just announced, by an “iradé” based upon the unanimous report of his council of ministers, the discharge of Ismail Pasha, and has transmitted to his son Tewfik Pasha the high dignity wherewith he was clothed.

This important decision of the imperial government has been already made known in Egypt, and I desire you to bring it officially to the knowledge of the government near which you are accredited. Your excellency will not fail to add that nothing is farther from the thoughts of His Majesty the Sultan and’his government, than the project of taking advantage of the complications of the moment to deprive Egypt of the benefits of its institutions, which have been the object of general solicitude, and which an experience of fourteen years has strengthened.

The sovereign provisions which insured to that province and to the family of Mohommed Ali the privileged position of the firman of 1257 (1842) remain in full vigor.

If the imperial government annuls the provisions of the firman of 1290 (1873), which have exerted such a baneful influence upon the working of the Egyptian administration, the friendly governments will, we feel sure, see therein nothing but another proof of the solicitude of the sovereign for the welfare of Egypt.

Nor does the imperial government think of touching the conventions, concluded by Ismail Pasha with foreign countries, within the limits of the powers conferred upon him. To make use of the sovereign power for protecting the independent administration of Egypt against its own excesses, and take into account all acquired rights, such is the aim and such will be the effect of the measure by which His Majesty the Sultan puts an end to a crisis which might have assumed still greater proportions.

We do not doubt that such also will be the sentiment of the government near which you are accredited

We believe we are warranted in counting upon the well disposed reception that this act of sovereignty will everywhere find, which is destined to insure order and peace in so important a province as Egypt, whose future was so seriously threatened.

No. 480. Mr. Evarts to Mr. Comanos. [Document 513]

No. 480.
Mr. Evarts to Mr. Comanos.

Department of State,
Washington, July 22, 1879. No. 135.]

Sir: I have received your message by cable (July 19), stating that an Egyptian lawyer had been assassinated by a naturalized citizen of the United States; that the man who committed the act had voluntarily surrendered himself, and was now at your instance confined in the Egyptian prison for Europeans; that the consul-general was absent; that the mixed tribunals possessed no jurisdiction of the case; and that you conceived yourself prohibited from acting, in pursuance of Mr. Fish’s instruction to Mr. Beardsley of the 29th of June, 1875.

I have transmitted the following, under date of to-day, to Alexandria: Vice-consuls-general, by act February 1, ’76, have the power of consul. Exercise the jurisdiction as Farman would if present. Further instruction by mail.

The instruction of the 29th of June, 1875, to Mr. Beardsley, was rendered necessary by the fact that, in the original compilation of the Revised Statutes, the terra “vice-consul-general” was inadvertently omitted, and the error not having been discovered until after the publication of the first edition, an act of Congress became essential to its correction. It was accordingly so corrected by the act of Congress of the 1st of February, 1876, and that correction has been embodied in the second edition of the Revised Statutes, published in 1878. I inclose herewith a copy of section 4130, as it now stands, and I also transmit a copy of the second or revised edition of the Revised Statutes for the use of the consulate-general.

You are correct in stating that the mixed tribunals are not invested with jurisdiction in criminal matters. By article 9 of section 1, “Reglement d’Qrganisation Judiciaire,” that jurisdiction is prescribed and limited as follows: These tribunals shall have sole cognizance of all suits in civil and commercial matters between natives and foreigners, and between foreigners of different nationalities not comprised in the personal statute.

They shall also have cognizance of all actions concerning real estate between all persons, even when they belong to the same nationality.

The President’s proclamation of the 27th of March, 1876, suspended the United States consular courts within the dominions of the Khedive, so far as the jurisdiction of said [mixed] tribunals may embrace matters now cognizable by the ministers, consuls, and other functionaries of the United States in said dominions.”

Consequently the United States consular courts in Egypt retain jurisdiction to try and punish citizens of the United States for offenses (crimes) which they may have committed in the dominions of the Khedive, as conferred by the fourth article of the treaty of 1830 between the United States and the Ottoman Empire, and prescribed by the act of Congress of the 22d of June, 1860. The provisions of this act of Congress are now embodied in the Revised Statutes, sections 4084 to 4130, inclusive.

Your attention is invited, however, to articles 6 and 7 of section 2 of the “Réglement d’Organisation,” which appear to provide for the trial and punishment by the mixed tribunals of persons accused of certain offenses in the nature of contempt of court. If the homicide was committed while the deceased (whom you state to be a lawyer) was in the presence of the mixed tribunal, or in the discharge of functions or duties in connection with the business of that tribunal, it may be that these circumstances would bring the case within the jurisdiction of the mixed tribunal. Of this, of course, the tribunal itself, with all the facts before it, would be the competent judge. Not having these facts before me, I refrain from the expression of any opinion on that question.

Should the case not come within the category of offenses enumerated in article 7, section 2, of the “Réglement d’Organisation,” it will become your duty to proceed in the matter as prescribed by the provisions of the Revised Statutes already referred to as sections 4084 to 4130, inclusive. In doing so, you will carefully observe every requirement, both of form and substance, prescribed by those provisions, and you will omit no proper measure or act within the scope of your judicial powers to secure to the accused a fair and impartial trial.

You will see that he is allowed to have counsel for his defense, and, if necessary, compulsory process to secure the attendance of such witnesses as he may deem essential to that defense. In case the trial of the accused shall result in a conviction, you will transmit, with as little delay as may be, a copy of the record of the proceedings, including the evidence adduced for and against the prisoner, to the Department; this in addition to the copy you are required to transmit to the United States minister at Constantinople; and you are further instructed to stay the execution of any sentence that may be pronounced by the consular court until you shall have received instructions from the Department, after the Secretary of State shall have examined the record.

With only the facts briefly stated in your telegram, I cannot now give you more precise instructions, but your judgment and discretion will at once dictate the necessity of prudence and care in the discharge of the duties devolving upon you in a matter of such serious importance.

I am, &c.,

WM. M. EVARTS.

No. 481. Mr. Comanos to Mr. Evarts. [Document 514]

No. 481.
Mr. Comanos to Mr. Evarts.

Agency and Consulate-General of the United States in Egypt,
Cairo, July 30, 1879. No. 325.]

Sir: On the 19th instant I sent from Alexandria a telegram as follows: State Department, Washington:

American naturalized citizen assassinated Egyptian lawyer, freely surrendered himself and is at my request detained in Egyptian prison for Europeans. Farman gone. Reform tribunals possess no jurisdiction. Fish to Beardsley, June twenty-nine, eighteen hundred seventy-five, forbids my exercising judicial functions; shall I set assassin free, or commit him formally till arrival of consul-general, next winter? Answer to Alexandria.

COMANOS, Vice-Consul-General.

In the evening of the 23d instant, I received your reply, worded as as follows: Vice consuls-general, by act of February first, seventy-six, have the powers of consuls. Exercise the jurisdiction as Farman would if present. Further instruction by mail.

I have since found the act of February 1, 1876, at the consulate-general here; but I did not have it at Alexandria, nor did Judges Barringer and Morgan possess it.

At about 2½ o’clock on the afternoon of Thursday, the 17th instant, Etienne (i. e., Stephen) Polycarpe Mirzan, a citizen of the United States, naturalized in Boston, Mass., and Dr. Alexander Dahan, lawyer and Egyptian subject, met on the street in the city of Alexandria, conversed together about certain money matters, quarreled, and came to blows. The scuffle ended by Dahan’s running through a corner book-store, in at one door and out of the other, closely followed by Mirzan, who then shot him with a good-sized revolver. The ball struck the back part of the head and pierced through to the forehead, causing instantaneous death. Mirzan then went straight to the United States consular agency at Alexandria, gave up the revolver, and surrendered himself to Acting Consular Agent Zograffo, saying that he had just shot a man. Being at the time in Alexandria, I was immediately sent for; I sent for Judges Barringer and Morgan; and the crowd that gathered around the building in which the office of the agency is found, was immense, and the rush of people upon the doors and windows beyond description. I sent for policemen and for the governor of Alexandria. They all came.

At first Mizan refused to go to prison, wishing to be kept under arrest in his own house. But when his lawyer, Mr. Kirby, came and explained to him that he must go to prison, he went without resistance to the Egyptian prison called “Moharram Bey,” to which all French and English prisoners are now sent, and where he still remains, subject to my orders.

This affair has greatly attracted public attention at Cairo and Alexandria, it being the first case in which a so-called gentleman has, in a respectable part of the town, shot another dead; and both Dahan and Mirzan are well-known persons in Egypt.

I inclose herewith copy of my letter on this subject to the honorable minister resident at Constantinople, and a copy of Mr. Farman’s commission to Acting Consular Agent Nograffo.

I have, &c.

A. D. COMANOS,
Vice-Consul-General in Charge.

Note.—See dispatch No. 339, dated Constantinople, August 29, 1879, from Mr. Minister Maynard, for the inclosuress referred to.

No. 482. Mr. Comanos to Mr. Evarts. [Document 515]

No. 482.
Mr. Comanos to Mr. Evarts.

Agency and Consulate-General of the United States in Egypt,
Cairo, August 8, 1879. (Received September 8.) No. 327.]

Sir: Referring to my dispatch No. 324, of the 16th of July last, I have the honor to inclose herewith translation of the telegram sent by Tewfik Pasha in reply to the one received from the Grand Vizier of Turkey.

The firman for the new Khedive is expected to arrive at Alexandria next Sunday, and will be publicly read at the Cairo citadel.

I have, &c.,

N. D. COMANOS.

[Inclosure in No. 327.—Translation.]

Tewfik Pasha to the Grand Vizier of Turkey.

I have had the honor of receiving your vizierial telegram concerning the imperial “iradé,” which orders the withdrawal of my august father, and my appointment by the grace of His Majesty the Sultan. The favor which His Majesty the Sultan has shown me by thus confiding to me the Khediviate of Egypt so overwhelms me that I cannot even express the smallest part of my gratitude toward His Majesty our august master. All I can do is to pray the Almighty for the preservation and prosperity of His Majesty. We have also prayed for the success of your highness.

In obedience to the imperial “iradé” I to-day at ten o’clock, Turkish time (i. e. two hours before sunset), went officially to the citadel of Cairo, and communicated to the doctors of law (ulemas), the notables, the chiefs of sects, the ministers, and the representatives of foreign powers the imperial order. The firing of cannon announced the news to the people. Immediately afterward I took in hand the reins of the Khe-divial Government of Egypt.

Having the firm conviction that the prosperity and good of Egypt as well as my own success depend upon the souzerainty of His Imperial Majesty the Sultan, and upon my fidelity and sincerity toward His Majesty, I shall continue to walk in this salutary track, and shall apply all my efforts for the prosperity, tranquillity, and well-being of the people of Egypt.

I beg you to bring these sentiments to the knowledge of His Majesty the Sultan, and accept on this occasion, &c., &c., &c.

No. 483. Mr. Comanos to Mr. Evarts. [Document 516]

No. 483.
Mr. Comanos to Mr. Evarts.

Agency and Consulate-General of the United States in Egypt,
Cairo, August 19, 1879. (Received September 12.) No. 329.]

Sir: Referring in particular to the last two sentences of my dispatch No. 324, of the 16th of July last, I have the honor to inclose herewith translation of the Sultan’s firman to the new Khedive of Egypt. A few minutes after the formal reading of the firman, the doyen of the consular and diplomatic body, M. de Martini, agent and consul-general for Italy, read to His Highness a congratulatory address, to which His Highness replied. Translations of the address and reply are herewith inclosed.

On Thursday, August 14, at about 9 o’clock a.m., the doctors of Moslem law (ulema), the high clergy of the various Christian sects, the Jewish chief rabbi, the diplomatic and consular body, the higher officers of the state, the members of the mixed tribunals, and a number of prominent persons, assembled in the throne hall at the Cairo citadel. Soon His Highness the Khedive entered at a side door, followed by several ministers of state, and took his stand on the floor in front of the vice-regal throne. When the arrival of the firman bearer was announced His Highness advanced to meet him to the platform outside the main entrance to the hall. Ali Fuad Bey kissed the firman, touched it to his forehead, and then handed it to the Khedive, who in his turn went through the same formality, and then gave it to Tala’at Pasha, chief secretary of Turkish correspondence, who also rendered to it the same homage. The Khedive with Ali Bey at his side returned to his former position, and Tala’at Pasha took his stand in the very center of the grand hall facing the Khedive, and having on his right the diplomatic body, and all the Europeans who were present, and on his left the doctors of law, chiefs of sects, &c. Just behind Tala’at Pasha was a large square throne-like seat which he did not use. Without one exception every person present stood on the level floor of the hall while Tala’at Pasha read through in an inaudible voice, in the Turkish language the whole of the firman; 101 guns were fired from the fortress. No sooner had the reading ended than a Moslem doctor stepped forward and recited a “Du’aah,” i. e., a “calling” upon God to bless the Sultan and Khedive. The Khedive then passed out to another saloon followed by the entire assemblage, which, however, did not at once enter the saloon, but waited in various ante-chambers. The first who were admitted to congratulate His Highness were the firman bearer, the highest state functionaries, and the ulemas. After about a quarter of an hour the diplomatic body, and the personnel of the consulates were received—about 40 persons in all. M. de Martino read the address to His Highness to which His Highness replied (inclosure 2). The Khedive then seated himself in one corner of the long sofa; and the whole company sat down on the same sofa in a line around two sides of the saloon, which began with M. de Martino next to the Khedive and on his right, and ended with the consular clerks at the farthest end of the sofa. Pipes and coffee were served to all by about 20 servants. After about 10 minutes the company rose, the Khedive walked to the middle of the saloon and there shook hands with one and all of those present. Cherif Pasha went as far as the door of the saloon.

For three successive evenings the thoroughfares of the city and many palaces were illuminated. Wherever His Highness drove past he was cheered. The public seems pleased with the change of Khedive, although many of the strict old Moslem party would have preferred Halim Pasha, the eldest member of the Muhammed Ali family.

Remarks upon the firman:

1. The Khedive’s full name is Muhammed Tewfik; his age, about twenty-eight years.

2. Sirdar means field-marshal.

3. The Osmanieh with diamonds, is the highest Ottoman decoration 5 the diamond Medjidieh is the next highest.

4. Egypt proper (Upper and Lower) extends from the Mediterranean to the cataract just above Assouan, and from the Libyan Desert to the Suez Canal and Bed Sea. But it has for some time past included also the peninsula of Sinai, and the desert southwest of a conventional line drawn from Arish, on the Mediterranean, to the head of the Gulf of Akabah, at Elah.

5. The territories that have been united with Egypt are: (a) The Soudan, i. e., all those districts under Egyptian rule that lie south of the cataracts at Assonan, west of the Red Sea and east of the Libyan Desert, and extends even south of the equator. These districts are: Dongola, Berber, Khartoum, with the city of Khartoum (the capital of all the Soudan), Senaar, Feiz-oghln, White Nile or Afashoodah, Takah, Kordofan, Darfoor (divided recently into four districts).

(b) Zailaá, from the straits of Bab el-Mandab to Cape Guardafui, united with Egypt in 1875.

(c) Sonakin, on the Red Sea.

(d) Mussawwah, on the Red Sea, between the 13° and 18° north latitude.

(e) The oases of the Libyan Desert.

6. The population of the Khediviate of Egypt: In Muhammed Ali’s time the population of Egypt proper was about 3, 000, 000, now it is estimated at 5,330,000

Khartoum 750 000

Afashoodah 250,000

Senaar 500,000

Feiz-oghln 500,000

Kordofân 1,000,000

Berber 250,000

Dongola 250,000

Tâkah 1,000,000

Sonakin 250,000

Mussawwah 250,000

Zailaá (unknown)

Sinai Peninsula and Arish Masr 6,000

Total, at least 10,336,000

The foregoing geographical and statistical remarks are taken from the Arabic Geography of Egypt, by M. Amûn Fikri, published early this year, a large volume containing the most recent and authentic details concerning Egypt.

* * * * * *

7. * * * In this connection I respectfully call your attention to the fact that the present Khedive is very unfavorable to the system of harem, and himself has but one wife. * * *

8. The creditors of the Egyptian Government have been well cared for in the new firman.

I will here remark that the entire floating debt of Egypt is to-day estimated at between five and six million pounds Egyptian. The Khedive expects to appoint a commission of liquidation, the European members of which will probably arrive sometime next November. After this is done Messrs. Rothschild will probably pay over the balance still due of the domainial loan (three and a half million pounds), which will enable the Khedive, with economy, to pay the most pressing part of the floating debt.

In 1840 Muhammed Ali had a standing army of 148,000 men, beside the irregulars, and a navy consisting of 60 war-ships and 20,000 seamen. According to the agreement of 1841 he was to reduce his standing army to 18,000 men.

10. Ali Fuad Effendi, the bearer of the firman, is the son of the great Ali Pasha, who for so many years stood at the head of the Turkish ministry during the reigns of the Sultans Abdul Medjid and Abdul Aziz.

CHANGE OF MINISTRY.

Yesterday the Khedive changed the Cherif Pasha ministry, and the new ministry is composed as follows: Presidency of the council of ministers, the Khedive himself; Zulfiear Pasha, minister of justice and ad interim minister of interior; Mustafa Pasha Fehmi, minister of foreign affairs; Haidar Pasha, minister of finance; Osman Pasha Rofki, minister of war and marine? Muhammed Marashli Pasha, minister of public works; Mahmoud Pasha Sami, minister of wakf; Ali Ibrahim (just created pasha), minister of public instruction.

It is said that Riaz Pasha, formerly a member of the late Nubar-Wilson ministry, is expected soon from Europe, and is to be appointed minister of interior.

As for the address of the doyen of the consular and diplomatic body (inclosure 2), I beg to call your attention to the commanding terms in which it is couched. According to it the Khedive is to walk henceforth in the track marked out for him. This I understand to mean that Prance and England, with the consent of the other European powers, are to have the chief direction of Egyptian affairs.

I have, &c.,

N. D. COMANOS.

[Inclosure 1 in No. 329.—Translation.]

Sultan’s firman of 19 Shdbân, 1296, August 8, 1879, to Tewfik, Khedive of Egypt.

To my illustrious vizier (adjutant), [1] Tewfik Pasha, &c., &c., &c., called to the Khediviate of Egypt with the title of eminent and real sirdar (commander), [2] and decorated with my imperial orders of the Osmanieh, [3] and Medjidieh in diamonds. May the Almighty grant him everlasting glory, &c.

Whereas Ismael Pasha, Khedive of Egypt, was relieved of his functions on the 6th of Radjeb, 1296 (June 26, 1879); whereas, Considering thy services, thine uprightness, thy loyalty both toward my person and toward my empire, thine experience in the affairs of Egypt, and thy fitness for bettering the unhappy situation from which that country has for some time past suffered; whereas, finally, in conformity with the order established by the firman of the 12th Muharram, 1283 (May 27, 1866), for the transmission of the Khediviate after the order of primogeniture from eldest son to eldest son, we have bestowed upon the, the eldest son of Ismail Pasha, the Khediviate of Egypt [4], such as it is by its ancient limits, along with the territories [5] that have been thereto united [6].

Inasmuch as the development of the prosperity of Egypt, and the establishment of the security and quiet of its inhabitants form the object of our most lively solicitude, we did some time past execute a firman which confirmed the ancient privileges of that land; but as some of the provisions of the aforesaid firman have given rise to the present difficulties, in order to confirm those of these privileges that are to remain intact, and in order to correct and improve those that appear to have need of some changes, we have caused to be inserted the following stipulations:

All the revenues of this province are collected in my imperial name. As the inhabitants of Egypt count among the number of my subjects, and as they in this character are never to suffer the lightest oppression, the Khedive of Egypt, to whom is confided the civil, financial, and judicial administration of the land, shall have the right, under the condition above mentioned, to elaborate and introduce all internal laws and regulations necessary for the object in question conformably with justice.

The Khedive shall have the right, without that thereby the political treaties signed by my government be infringed, nor my rights of sovereignty over his country, to conclude and renew all conventions agreed upon with the agents of foreign powers concerning customs duties and commerce, and in general to carry on all negotiations with foreign countries relative to internal affairs, with a view to developing commerce, industry, and agriculture, and to regulating the exercise of the right of police towards foreigners in all their dealings with the government and the people. These conventions [7], before promulgation by the Khedive, shall be communicated to my Sublime Porte. The Khedive shall have the full and entire direction of the financial affairs of the country, but he shall not have the right to contract loans, unless it be such as are solely in the interest of regulating the present financial situation, and such as shall be concluded in perfect agreement [8] with the present creditors or the delegates officially empowered to represent their interests.

The Khedive shall not under any pretext, or for any motive soever, cede to others In whole or in part the privileges or territories accorded to Egypt, which have been confided to him and which are an emanation of the prerogative inherent in the sovereign power. The Epyptian administration shall take care and see to it that the yearly tribute, fixed at 750,000 Turkish pounds, be regularly paid. Coin shall be struck in Egypt in my imperial name.

[9] In time of peace 18,000 soldiers suffice for the internal defense of Egypt; this number shall not be exceeded. Still, as the land and sea forces of Egypt are destined also for the service of my government, in case my Sublime Porte should be engaged in war, this number can then be increased in such proportions as shall be deemed proper. The banners of the land and sea forces, and the insignia of the different grades, shall be the same as in my armies. The Khedive shall have the right to appoint to positions of officers of the land and sea forces up to the rank of colonel, inclusive, and to civil functions up to the second rank, inclusive. The Khedive shall no longer be able, as heretofore, to cause to be constructed iron-clad ships without being authorized by my government.

Thou shalt take care to watch over the strict application of the conditions that I have just enumerated, which, after having been sanctioned by my imperial iradé, sealed in my presence, and headed with my sovereign signature, shall be taken to thee by the most honorable Aali Effendi Fuad [10], my first secretary. Given the 19th Shabân 1296 anno Hegirse (August 8, 1879).

Note.—The numbers [1] [2] [3], &c., up to [10] refer to the “remarks upon the firman” in the body of the dispatch with which this is inclosed.

[Inclosure 2 in No. 329.—Translation.]

The doyen of the consular and diplamatic body, Hons, de Martino, agent and consul-general of Italy, to the Khedive.

My Lord: The diplomatic and consular body congratulates Your Highness upon the solemn act that has just been accomplished.

Called by the magnanimity of His Majesty the Sultan, and the goodwill of the powers to the Government of Egypt, Your Highness has a difficult task to fulfill—that of giving to the country a good administration, which can insure to the same a lasting prosperity. Your faighness has pronounced reassuring words—morality and justice.

The moment has now come to apply the principles that are the fundamental basis of all good administration. Set yourself to this work with courage and without delay, my lord. This is no longer the hour for unrealizable promises and ephemeral institutions. Facts are with pleasure counted upon; and our governments, who take an interest in the prosperity of the country, and success of the work which is confided to you, do not doubt that you will prove yourself worthy of their confidence, and of the confidence of the country that has authorized your coming to the power.

Walking steadfastly in the track marked out for you, Your Highness can be sure of the co-operation, the help, and the sympathy of all the powers.

The Khedives reply to the foregoing.

Gentlemen: I thank the diplomatic body for the words that have just been spoken. I am resolved to insure the application of the principles which I set forth the day I was called to the government of Egypt by the good will of His Majesty the Sultan, and that of the powers. The task is difficult. You yourselves recognize this. I shall devote myself wholly thereto, now that my action is more free; and I entertain the hope that, with your efficacious co-operation, I shall achieve its fulfillment.

No. 484. Mr. Comanos to Mr. Evarts. [Document 517]

No. 484.
Mr. Comanos to Mr. Evarts.

Agency and Consulate-General of the United States in Egypt,
Cairo, September 1, 1879. (Received September 27.) No. 332.]

Sir: Saturday evening last I had an interview with His Highness the Khedive, and told him the substance of your telegram of last Thursday, concerning the wish of the Government of the United States to be represented in the proposed commission of liquidation.

Tewfik Pacha expressed his pleasure at receiving such an application, and said that he hoped the United States would take a more active interest in Egyptian affairs than heretofore. He said, however, that as yet he had received no definite reply from the leading European governments concerning his proposal to establish a commission of liquidation, and that consequently he did not yet know what would be done in the matter, but that just as soon as the time should arrive for him to fix upon something positive, he would let me know. He desired me to do what I can to encourage the United States to take part in the solution of the difficulties which surround the Egyptian Government, with reference to the claims of the European creditors, and the action of the governments of Europe, for he considers that the influence of the Government of the United States, it being free from motives of self-interest, and unbiased by prejudice, cannot but result in advantage and gain to Egypt.

Hitherto the questions connected with the appointment of Mons. de Blignieres and Mr. Baring as controllers-general, and the definitition of their powers and function, have so occupied the attention of the governments of Europe, and that of the government of the Khedive, that the subject of a commission of liquidation has not yet been brought up for discussion.

His Highness is opposed to the appointment of controllers. He says the control was established as a check upon his father, but that now there is no reason for it, because there is nothing to control, for he has nothing to hide, no large harem or other expensive oriental luxuries to keep up at the expense of the public welfare, and that, moreover, the powers in contributing so largely toward the bestowal of the government of Egypt upon him must have done this because of their confidence in him, and that, therefore, they should now show that confidence by leaving him free to act according to his best judgment and ability.

* * * * * * *

He wishes them to let him govern Egypt after his manner, and one of the first things he desires to be established is a committee for the regulation of the debt, and the proposing of a plan whereby the interest thereon shall be reduced to a rate which the revenues of the country will be able to meet, without the constant recurrence of a deficit.

* * * * * * *

I have, &c.,

N. D. COMANOS.

No. 485. Mr. Comanos to Mr. Evarts. [Document 518]

No. 485.
Mr. Comanos to Mr. Evarts.

Agency and Consulate-General of the United States in Egypt,
Cairo, September 2, 1879. (Received September 27.) No. 333.]

Sir: Mr. Van Dyck has arranged for the use of the Department, the most important and interesting documents exchanged during the years 1840 and 1841, between four of the European courts and the Sublime Ottoman Porte, for the “Pacification of the Levant.”

These papers have such a direct historical bearing upon the grounds of the recent action of the great European powers in causing the deposition of the Khedive, Ismail Pasha, and the appointment of his son, that an acquaintance with them is essential to a thorough understanding of the position in which Egypt is placed toward Europe and the Sublime Porte. I am not aware that they have ever been put before the department in an English form, and now that its interest in Egypt is to be still further increased by the appointment of an American member in the proposed commission of liquidation, I gladly inclose this translation for the use of the Department.

The following short statement will serve as an introduction to those documents:

In 1839, Muhammed Ali, Pasha of Egypt, had at his command an army of at least 140,000 men. His son and General Ibrahim Pasha had conquered all Syria, in the battle of Nizzib, near Aleppo. Hafiz Pasha, general of the only remaining Turkish army, had been completely routed. The Turkish admiral had given up to Muhammed Ali the entire Turkish fleet, and it lay idle in the harbor of Alexandria. The Sultan Mahmoud appealed to Europe; France kept entirely aloof; Prussia and Russia, Austria and England made themselves the allies of Turkey; England and Austria sent their fleets, and bombarded Beyrout and Acre on the Syrian coast. The further details of the united action of those four courts will be found in the accompanying fifteen documents.

I have, &c.,

N. D. COMANOS.

[Inclosure 1 in No. 333.]

I.

Convention of the 15th July, 1840, concluded between the courts of Great Britain, Austria, Prussia, and Russia on the one side, and that of the Sublime Ottoman Porte on the other, for the Pacification of the Levant, signed at London on the 15th July, 1840.

[Note.—This convention is that diplomatic act which must be considered as the basis of the Egyptian hereditary Pashalic (since called Khediviate) which was created in favor of Muhammed Ali and his family, and was placed under the guaranty of the European powers. It granted to Muhammed Ali, during his natural life, the government of Southern Syria, or Palestine, also; but as he did not, within the ten days delay therein afforded to him, accept the conditions laid down in it, he forfeited that government, and Egypt only was given to him, as will appear in the documents following.]

In the name of the most merciful God:

His Highness the Sultan (of Turkey) having applied to their Majesties the Queen of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland, the Emperor of Austria, King of Hungary and Bohemia, the King of Prussia, and the Emperor of all the Russias to invoke their support and assistance in the midst of the difficulties in which he finds himself placed by reason of the hostile conduct of Muhammed Ali, Pasha of Egypt, which difficulties threaten to bring in jeopardy the integrity of the Ottoman Empire, and the independence of the Sultan’s throne, their said Majesties, united by the sentiment of friendship that exists between them and the Sultan, animated by the desire to watch over the maintenance of the integrity and independence of the Ottoman Empire in the interest of the strengthening of the peace of Europe, true to the engagements that they have contracted by the note delivered to the Porte by their representatives at Constantinople on the 27th of July, 1839, and desiring furthermore to prevent the effusion of blood that would be caused by the continuation of the hostilities that have recently broken out in Syria, between the authorities of the Pasha and the subjects of His Highness (the Sultan), their said Majesties and His Highness the Sultan have resolved, for the purpose aforesaid, to conclude between themselves a convention, and have appointed, for this object^ as their plenipotentiaries, the following, to wit, &c., &c:

Who, having reciprocally exchanged their full powers, found in good and due form, have agreed upon and signed the following articles: I. His Highness the Sultan having come to an understanding with their Majesties the Queen of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland, and the Emperor of Austria, King of Hungary and Bohemia, the King of Prussia, and the Emperor of all the Russias, upon the conditions of the arrangement, that it is the intention of His Highness to accord to M. Ali, which conditions are found specified in the separate act hereto annexed, their Majesties engage to act in perfect accord, and to unite their efforts to induce M. Ali to comply with that arrangement, each one of the high contracting parties reserving to itself to co-operate for this end, according to the means of action that each of them may dispose of.

II. Should the Pasha of Egypt refuse to adhere to the above-named arrangement, which shall be communicated to him by the Sultan with the co-operation of their said Majesties, the latter engaged to take, upon the requisition of the Sultan, measures, concerted and fixed upon among themselves, in order to carry this arrangement into execution during the interval. Their Majesties the Queen of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland, and the Emperor of Austria, King of Hungary and Bohemia, the Sultan having invited his allies to join themselves to him and help him to interrupt communication by sea between Egypt and Syria, and stop the sending of troops, horses, arms, ammunition and provisions of war of every kind from one of these provinces to the other, engage to give immediately, for this purpose, the necessary orders to the commanders of their naval forces in the Mediterranean. Their said Majesties promise, furthermore, that the commanders of their squadrons shall give according to the means at their disposal, in the name of the alliance, all the support, and help in their power to those of the subjects of the Sultan that shall manifest their fidelity and obedience to their sovereign.

III. Should M. Ali, after having refused to submit himself to the conditions of the arrangement hereabove, direct his land and sea forces toward Constantinople the high contracting parties, upon the requisition that may be made touching this by the Sultan to their representatives at Constantinople, have agreed among themselves, should the case so require, to accept the invitation of that sovereign, and provide for the defense of his throne, by means of an operation concerted in common, for the purpose of placing the two straits of the Bosphorus and the Dardanelles, as well as the capital of the Ottoman Empire, under protection from all aggression. It is furthermore agreed that all the forces to which, by reason of such an attack, shall be given the destination hereabove indicated, shall there remain employed so long as their presence shall be thus required by the Sultan, and when His Highness shall judge that their presence has ceased to be necessary, the said forces shall withdraw simultaneously, and shall return respectively to the Black Sea and Mediterranean.

IV. It is, moreover, expressly understood that the co-operation mentioned in the preceding article, and intended to place the Straits of the Dardanelles and Bosphorus and the Ottoman capital temporarily under the safeguard of the high contracting parties against every aggression of M. Ali, shall not be considered but as an exceptional measure, adopted at the express request of the Sultan, and solely for his defense in the case alone indicated hereabove. But it is agreed that this measure shall in nothing derogate from the ancient rule of the Ottoman Empire, in virtue of which rule it has been from all time prohibited to the vessels of war of the foreign powers to enter into the Straits of the Dardanelles and Bosphorus, and the Sultan, on the one hand, declares, by these presents, that, with the exception of the eventuality here-above mentioned, he has the firm intention to maintain in future this principle, with invariable fixedness, as an ancient rule of his Empire, and, so long as the Porte is at peace, not to admit any foreign vessel of war into the Straits of the Bosphorus and Dardanelles. On the other hand, their Majesties the Queen of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland, the Emperor of Austria, King of Hungary and Bohemia, the King of Prussia, and the Emperor of all the Russias, engage to respect this determination of the Sultan, and to comply with the principle hereabove stated.

V. The present convention shall be ratified, and the ratifications thereof shall be Exchanged at London within two months, or sooner, if possible. In faith of which the plenipotentiaries have signed it, and have thereto affixed their seals.

PALMERSTON.

NIEUMAN.

BÜLOW.

BRUNOW.

CHÉKIB.

II.

Separate act annexed to the convention concluded at London, July 15, 1840, between the courts of Great Britain, Austria, Prussia, and Russia, on the one part, and the Sublime Ottoman Porte, on the other.

His Highness the Sultan has the intention to grant and to cause to be notified to Muhammed Ali the conditions of the arrangement here below:

I. His Highness promises to grant to M. Ali, for himself and his descendants in direct line, the administration of the Pashalic of Egypt, and His Highness promises, furthermore, to grant to M. Ali, during his life, with the title of Pasha of Acre, and with the command of the fortress of St. John of Acre, the administration of the southern part of Syria, the limits of which shall be determined by the following demarcation:

This line, starting from the Cape of Ras-el-Nâkûrah upon the Mediterranean coast, shall extend thence directly to the mouth of the rivulet Seisabân, the northern extremity of Lake Tiberias, shall extend along the western coast of the said lake, shall follow the right bank of the River Jordan and western coast of the Dead Sea, shall extend thence straight to the Red Sea, touching the northern extremity of the Gulf of Akabah, and shall follow the west coast of the Gulf of Akabah and the east coast of the Gulf of Suez to Suez.

Nevertheless, the Sultan, in making these offers, attaches thereto the condition that M. Ali accept them within ten days after they shall have been communicated to him at Alexandria, by an agent of His Highness, and that M. Ali at the same time deliver into the hands of such agent the necessary instructions to the commanders of his land and sea forces to withdraw immediately from Arabia, and from all the holy cities therein situated, from the island of Candia, from the district of Adana, and from all the other parts of the Ottoman Empire that are not included in the limits of Egypt, and in those of the Pashalic of Acre, such as it has been hereabove defined.

II. If within the delay of ten days hereabove fixed, M. Ali does not accept the aforesaid arrangement, the Sultan will then withdraw his offer of his life-long administration of the Pashalic of Acre, but His Highness will still consent to accord to M. Ali, for him and his descendants in direct line, the administration of the Pashalic of Egypt, provided that this offer be accepted within the ten days following, that is to say, within a delay of twenty days, to be counted from the day when the communication shall have been made to him, provided that he likewise deliver into the hands of the agent of the Sultan, the necessary instructions for his sea and land commanders to withdraw immediately within the limits and within the ports of the Pashalic of Egypt.

III. The annual tribute to be paid by M. Ali to the Sultan shall be proportionate to the greater or less territory the administration of which M. Ali shall obtain, according as he shall accept the first or the second ultimatum.

IV. It is further expressly understood that, in the first as well as in the second alternative, M. Ali (before the expiration of the fixed term of ten or twenty days) shall be bound to deliver the Turkish fleet, with all its crews and armaments, into the hands of the Turkish leading personage who shall be authorized to receive it. The commanders of the allied squadrons shall be present at such delivery.

It is understood that M. Ali shall in no case be able to bring into account, nor deduct from the tribute to be paid to the Sultan, the expenses for the maintenance of the Ottoman fleet during the whole time that it remained in the port of Egypt.

V. All the treaties and all the laws of the Ottoman Empire shall be applied to Egypt and to the Pashalic of Acre, such as it has been hereabove designated, the same as to every other part of the Ottoman Empire. But the Sultan consents that, upon the condition of the regular payment of the above-named tribute, M. Ali and his descendants do gather [all the revenues] in the name of the Sultan, and as delegates of His Highness throughout the provinces whose administration shall be to them intrusted. It is furthermore understood that, through the means of the gathering of the taxes and imposts above said, M. Ali and his descendants shall provide for all the exposes the civil and military administration of said provinces.

VI. The land and sea forces that the Pasha of Egypt and Acre shall be able to maintain, forming a part of the forces of the Ottoman Empire, shall always be considered as maintained for the service of the state.

VII. The present separate act shall have the same force and value as though it had been inserted word for word in the convention of this day; it shall be ratified, and the ratifications thereof shall be exchanged at London at the same time as that of the said convention.

In faith whereof the respective plenipotentiaries have signed it and thereto affixed their seals.

Done at London the 15th of July, in the year of grace 1840.
PALMERSTON.

BRUNOW.

NIEUMAN.

CHÉKIB.

BULOW.

III.

Convention between Commodore Napier, commanding the naval forces of Her Britannic Majesty off Alexandria, on the one part, and His Excellency Boghos Yusef Bey, minister of foreign affairs of His Highness the Viceroy of Egypt, thereto specially authorized by His Highness, on the other part, done and signed at Alexandria on the 27th November, 1840.

[Note.—After the convention of the 15th July, the Sublime Porte sent Rifaat Bey to Alexandria, who, with the consuls of England, Russia, Austria, and Prussia, presented himself to M. Ali, to propose to him the hereditary rule of Egypt and the Acre Pashalic, upon the conditions indicated in said convention, and a communication to him in writing to this effect was made on the 19th of August, 1840. On the 28th August M. Ali rejected the conditions proposed to him. The consuls gave him to understand that after such a refusal he had, according to the convention, still ten days’ time, hut only to obtain the hereditary government of Egypt. This term having also expired, the consuls presented themselves at the Pasha’s palace, and drew up a proces verbal, which set forth his renewed refusal to submit himself to the London treaty. At Constantinople the forfeiture of M. Ali of all government and administration was declared on the 11th September, and for Egypt Isset Pasha was appointed his successor, and at the same time it was decided by the Porte and the signatory powers of the treaty to execute this decision by force. From near Beyrout and St. John of Acre, the British admiral, Stopford, sent Commodore Napier with a part of the fleet to Alexandria, who, without any instruction on the part of his government, notified M. Ali that he must accept the ultimatum of the powers; and then, on the 27th of November, signed with Boghos Bey a convention, by which M. Ali bound himself to evacuate Syria and to restore the Ottoman fleet as soon as the Porte should concede to him, under the guaranty of the powers, the hereditary government of Egypt. Admiral Stopford disapproved the convention; the Porte was indignant and persisted in the declaration of forfeiture; but as Admiral Napier’s convention was approved by the powers, the Sultan was, on the 12th January, 1841, constrained to accord to M. Ali the Pashalic of Egypt, but under certain, to be thereafter determined, conditions.]

I. Commodore Napier having, in his aforesaid character, made known to His Highness Muhammed Ali that the powers had recommended the Subiime Porte to reinstate him in the hereditary government of Egypt, and His Highness seeing in this communication an opportunity favorable for putting an end to the calamities of war, His Highness engages to order his son, Ibrahim Pasha, to immediately begin to evacuate Syria. His Highness engages furthermore to restore the Ottoman fleet as soon as he shall have received the official notification that the Sublime Porte has granted to him the hereditary government of Egypt, which concession is and remains guarantied by the powers.

II. Commodore Napier will place at the disposal of the Egyptian Government a steamship to convey to Syria the officer designated by His Highness to order the general-in-chief of the Egyptian army to evacuate Syria. The commander-in-chief of the British forces, Sir B. Stopford, will appoint, on his part, an officer to watch over the execution of this measure.

III. In consideration of that which precedes, Commodore Napier engages to suspend, on the part of the British forces, hostilities against Alexandria and every other part of the Egyptian territory. He will at the same time authorize the free navigation of the vessels destined for the transport of the sick and wounded, and of every other portion of the Egyptian army that the Government of Egypt may wish to bring into that country by sea.

IV. It is well understood that the Egyptian army shall have the right to withdraw from Syria with its artillery, its arms) its horses, ammunition, baggage, and in general all that which constitutes the material of the army.

Done in duplicate original.

CH. NAPIER,

BOGHOS YOUSSEF BEY.

IV.
Letter of Admiral Stopford to Muhammed Ali.

On Board the Princess Charlotte,
In the Bay of St. George, Beyrout, December 2, 1840.

I find myself forced to disapprove the action of Commodore Napier in the convention that he has made with Your Highness, concerning the evacuation of Syria by the Egyptian troops. He was in nowise authorized to make such a convention, which, moreover, ought to have been approved and certified by me. The envoy of Your Highness, Emîn-Bey, has consulted the general commander of the troops as to the best means he could employ in order to rejoin Ibrahîm. The general had good reasons for supposing that Ibrahim Pasha had gone to Damascus, seeing that a large portion of the troops had, a few days previous, left that city, going southward toward the Mecca road. Not having been able to guaranty to your envoy a safe-conduct to be able to pass through to Damascus, he returned to Alexandria, having done his utmost to execute the orders of Your Highness.

I hope this letter will reach in time for Your Highness to countermand the order to the transports, which, according to what Commodore Napier writes me, were soon to start for the Syrian coast to take on board Egyptian troops. Should any of them arrive, I shall order them to return to Alexandria.

I hope that this convention, which has been made in haste and without authorization, will occasion Your Highness no embarrassment.

There is no doubt that this convention was made in friendship, though the commodore did not know what was going on in Syria, but this will in no way diminish the ardent desire that I have of promptly adopting measures tending to renew that friendship, and those good feelings, that I hope to be able to re-establish between England and Your Highness.

I learn with pleasure that the allied powers accept the conditions of England.

I have, &c.,

STOPFORD, Admiral.

V.

The 30th of January, 1841.

Memorandum of the conference of London, addressed to the Ottoman ambassador, by which the Porte is invited to grant to Muhammed Ali the hereditary rule of Egypt.

[Note.—The Porte had revoked the decree of forfeiture, and had bound itself to confer upon M. Ali the hereditary Pashalic of Egypt, but it had made this concession subject to certain conditions. As, however, it stowed a certain reluctance in proceeding to execute that promise, the signatory powers of the London convention addressed to the Porte the present memorandum, inviting it therein to accord to M. Ali the hereditary government of Egypt.]

The undersigned, plenipotentiaries of the courts of Austria, of Great Britain, of Prussia, and of Russia, have taken into serious consideration the dispatch of Rashid Pasha, dated from Constantinople on the 8th of December, which his excellency Chékib Effendi, ambassador of the Sublime Porte, has received the order to communicate to his highness Lord Palmerston, in order that it be brought to the knowledge of the representatives of the courts who signed the convention of the 15th July.

This communication announces that His Highness the Sultan hesitates to accord to M. Ali the hereditary government of the Pashalic of Egypt. The undersigned, after having examined the affair with untiring attention, have unanimously resolved to invite Chékib Effendi to present in this respect to the Sublime Porte the following considerations:

They regard it as a duty to observe at first that, under the date of the above-mentioned dispatch of Rashid Pasha, the representatives of four courts had not yet made in common, near the Sublime Porte, the motion (“demarche”) resolved upon at London on the 15th of October, and it appears from the most recent reports from Constantinople, under date of December 27, that even at this epoch the representatives of the four courts had not thought it their duty to give to the Ottoman minister the counsel that they had been directed to offer him.

In the mean time the intentions of the allied courts have not changed. Separated by great distances, and having no need of again agreeing among themselves, they sent to their representatives at Constantinople orders which bear the stamp of unanimity. Such being the case, the British Government addressed, on the 17th December, to its ambassador at Constantinople, instructions which expressly confirm those of October 15. On the 29th December the court of Vienna addressed positive orders to the same effect to the Austrian internuncio. The court of Berlin acceded to the instructions fixed upon at London in common on the 15th October and 14th November. On the 25th December the court of Russia addressed to its chargé d’affaires at Constantinople orders conceived in the same spirit.

In mentioning these facts the undersigned confidently believe that the counsel thus given by the representatives of four courts has exercised an efficacious influence upon the views expressed by Raschîd Pasha on the 8th of December, and have put an end to the uncertainty that that minister had expressed concerning the course which the Ottoman Porte would hereafter follow but in order to do away with this uncertainty, and stop all farther loss of time, the undersigned have judged fit not to wait for any later reports from Constantinople, and without hesitating any longer in replying to the communication of Chékib Effendi, they have thought it their duty to express once again to Monsieur, the Ottoman ambassador, the views of their respective courts, and to set them forth in writing, even as they have already had the honor of explaining them to him verbally. The powers invite the Sultan not only to show himself generous towards M. Ali, by revoking the decree of forfeiture, but by promising him also that his direct lineal descendants shall be successively appointed pashas of Egypt whenever that post shall become vacant by the death of the preceding pasha. The four courts, in counseling the Porte to grant this favor to M. Ali, express no new idea, but only recall to the Sultan the views that he himself expressed at the commencement of the crisis in the affairs of the Orient, which views served as a basis for the convention of the 15th July. The four courts, in giving to the Porte the counsels that the present communication reproduces, had the conviction of not having counseled it, neither to a transaction contrary to the rights of sovereignty and legal authority of the Sultan, nor to a measure contrary to the duties incumbent upon the pasha of Egypt as the Sultan’s subject, whom His Highness has called to administer, in his name, a province of the Ottoman Empire. The fact is confirmed not only by Articles 3, 5, and 6 of the separate act, annex to the treaty of July 15, but also by the instructions given by the four courts to their representatives at Constantinople in consequence of the deliberation of the 15th October.

Paragraph 5 of that act has established that all the treaties and all the laws, present and future, of the Ottoman Empire should receive their application to the Pashalic of Egypt just as well as to every other province of the Ottoman Empire. This condition, which the four courts consider indispensable, forms, in their eyes, one of the most solid ties for attaching Egypt to Turkey as an integral part of the Ottoman Empire.

Paragraph 6 of this act, says that the land and sea forces that may be maintained in Egypt, and which form a part of the Mahommedan army, are to be considered as available for the general service of the State.

Finally, the instruction drawn up at London on the 15th of October, and confirmed by the memorandum of November 14, formally decided that if M. Ali, or one of his successors, should infringe the conditions upon which the hereditary government of Egypt had been accorded to him, this title should be subject to be revoked.

The undersigned believe that the complete execution of the conditions mentioned above would answer perfectly the Sultan’s purpose, would realize all the wishes of the four allied courts, and would lead to a happy consummation of the object aimed at by the reciprocal engagements in the treaty of the 15th of July, to wit, the work of pacification. The objects of the solicitude and forethought of the high contracting parties would be attained by the fulfillment of these conditions.

The Sultan would thenceforth be sure of the obedience and submission of his pasha, the governor of Egypt. The population of that province would be protected against the oppression from which it has for the last few years suffered by the abuse of the local administration. Finally, Muhammed Ali would acquire for himself and his family a position that would insure his future without interfering with his duties of subject of the Sultan.

The undersigned beg Chékib Effendi to submit these observations to his court, and to recommend them to the serious attention of the Government of the Sultan.

The undersigned have the honor, &c.

London, January 30, 1841.
ESTERHAZY.

BULOW.

PALMERSTON.

BRUNOW.

VI.
Proclamation of the Sublime Porte relating to the conclusion of the Egyptian affair.

12 Zilka adeh, 1256. (February 4, 1841.)

[Note.—In this proclamation the Sublime Porte promises to confer the Pashalic of Egypt upon M. Ali. The protocol of London of the 5th of March, 1841, relating thereto, takes note of this promise, and considers the Egyptian question as being definitely settled.]

It was announced in No. 216 of the Official Gazette that M. Ali had offered his submission to the Sultan. * * *

[Here follow the details concerning the sending of Mosloum Bey and Yavir Pasha and the conditions fulfilled by the viceroy at Alexandria.]

These facts having been brought to the knowledge of His Highness the Sultan, on the return of Mosloum Bey, and Muhammed Ali Pasha having again, in his reply to the Grand Vizier, repeated, in the strongest and most solemn manner, the assurance of his submission and obedience, the moment for the fulfillment of the promises of His Highness has thus arrived. His prompt compliance with the orders of his sovereign, according to previous arrangement, has been agreeable to His Highness, who takes pleasure in giving proof of his kindly feelings by treating all his servants with perfect consideration, and who, considering the past events as having never existed, has deigned to grant a generous pardon to Muhammed Ali Pasha, as, also, to all his family, servants, and adherents, and wishing that the effects of his clemency should extend unto his children. His Majesty the Saltan has deigned to confer upon the said pasha the Government of Egypt after the hereditary manner.

Nevertheless, as the concession of this hereditary rule must naturally be subjected to certain indispensable conditions, and as, besides, the government, as well as the inhabitants, of Egypt, are always subjects of the Sublime Porte, and His Majesty the Sultan must watch over the tranquillity and well-being of such government, he has thought it his duty to adopt to this end just and fit provisions. These essential conditions, and all the dispositions that shall arise out of them, will be fixed afterward and, by the help of the Most High, within a few days, an envoy of the Sublime Porte will be intrusted to go and put into execution the resolutions that have been adopted in this respect.

The Egyptian affair being happily ended, the imperial fleet is now in the bay of Marmarice, fulfilling its quarantine, which is almost ended, and with the first favorable wind it will come to Constantinople.

This matter having been to a certain degree during the past a source of uneasiness, the present proclamation has been made for the purpose of making known to the public that this affair has been fitly arranged.

VII.
Protocol of the London Conference.

The plenipotentiaries of the courts of Austria, Great Britain, Prussia, Russia, and the Sublime Porte, have met together to deliberate upon the reports received from Constantinople up to the date of February 4, and upon the communications exchanged between the representatives of the four allied courts and the ministry of the Porte. It appears from the “ensemble” of those communications: 1st. That M. Ali has submitted without conditions to his sovereign, and that he has asked his pardon. 2d. That in testimony of his submission, he has restored the Ottoman fleet, which after having been given over to the commissioners appointed by His Highness the Sultan, has already left the port of Alexandria, and has entered the Bay of Marmarice. 3d. That all Syria has been evacuated by the Egyptian troops. 4th. That the Sultan’s authority has been legally re-established in Syria, and in the island of Candia. 5th. That His Highness the Sultan has deigned to accept the submission of M. Ali, by according to him, to his children, and to his family, an absolute pardon. 6th. That His Highness, yielding to the advice of his allies, has at the same time deigned to make known his intention to reinstate M. Ali in his functions as Pasha of Egypt, with the hereditary rule for his descendants. The conditions which the instructions bearing date the 15th October, and the memorandum of the 14th November, had set down, are consequently fulfilled; the Pasha of Egypt has submitted himself; he has given up the fleet, evacuated the district of Adana, Syria, and the island of Candia, given the necessary orders for the giving back of the holy cities. Finally, a pardon has been granted him after his return to duty and obedience.

At the same time, the hope expressed by the collective note, addressed on the 30th January to Chékib Effendi has been realized. The counsel which the representatives of the four powers have given have been received by the Sultan with that full friendly confidence with which the efficacious co-operation of his allies had inspired him. In consequence of those counsels, His Highness has expressed his resolution to publish a firman, by which is to be granted to M. Ali the hereditary investiture of the Pashalic of Egypt, based upon the conditions indicated in the separate act of the convention of the 15th July. This firman was to be communicated to the Ottoman embassador at London, and brought to the knowledge of the representatives of the four courts, after having received the sanction of His Highness.

Such being the condition of things, the plenipotentiaries of the allied courts, considering the circumstances that brought about the departure of the consuls of the tour powers from Alexandria, have deemed the moment an opportune one to cause the return of those agents to their post. The representatives of the four powers at Constantinople will to this end agree between themselves and the Sublime Porte concerning the fixing of the time when these agents shall simultaneously betake themselves to Alexandria.

London, March 5, 1841.
(Signed) ESTERHAZY.

NIEUMAN.

PALMERSTON.

BULOW.

BRUNOW.

CHÉKIB.

VIII.
Hatt-Sherif of the Sultan, which confers upon M. Ali the hereditary Government of Egypt, whilst subjecting it to certain conditions.

Constantinople, February 18, 1841.

[Note.—This first firman of investiture contained such hard conditions for M. Ali that the London conference, although it had in its note of the 5th of March (see No. VII above) congratulated the Sultan on having terminated the Egyptian question by admitting the principle of hereditary rule, yet, in its following note of March 13, 1841 (see note XI below), replied to the firman of investiture with certain reservations couched in the form of counsel, and thus the Porte, in its memorandum of April 19, 1841 (No. XII), announced to the powers its readiness to revise and correct the said firman of investiture, to which the powers replied in the note of May 10, 1841 (No. XIII), with a: view to justify some of M. All’s demands and to solicit a new firman of investiture.]

My Vizier: I have viewed with satisfaction the proof of submission that you have just given as well as your assurances of devotion toward my august person, and for the interests of my Sublime Porte. Your long experience, and the knowledge you possess of the affairs of the country so long placed under your administration, leave no room for me to doubt that you will be able, by the zeal and prudence that you will bring into play in that same government to acquire new claims upon my good-will and my confidence in you, and that, recognizing at the same time the worth of my goodness to you, you will seek to transmit these qualities which so distinguished you to your descendants. In consideration hereof, I have decided to confirm you in the government of Egypt, according to the limits marked out upon the map which is sent you by my grand vizier, and to confer upon you furthermore the prerogative of the hereditary tenure of that government under the following conditions:

When the government of Egypt shall become vacant, it shall be confided to that one of your male children whom I shall choose, and the same mode of succession shall be applied to the male children of the latter, &c. In case your male line should become extinct, the male children issue of the women of your family can have no right to succession.

He who, of your sons, shall be chosen to succeed you in the government of Egypt, must betake himself to Constantinople, there to receive his investiture.

The prerogative of the hereditary tenure conferred upon the governor of Egypt will give him no rank nor title superior to that of the other viziers (governors-general of provinces), nor any right of preference, “préséance” and he shall be treated on a footing of exactly the same equality with his colleagues.

The provisions of my Hatt-Sherif of Gul Haneh, as also the administrative laws in force or to be enacted in my Empire, and all treaties concluded or that shall be hereafter entered into with the friendly powers, shall be likewise carried out in Egypt.

All the imposts with which the province shall be burdened shall be collected in my name, and in order that the inhabitants of Egypt who form a part of my Sublime Porte be not exposed to humiliations and to irregular taxes, the tithes, duties, and other imposts shall be regulated after the same system as that followed throughout the rest of the Empire.

The fourth part of the revenues from the customs, duties, tithes, and other imposts in Egypt shall be set apart without any deduction, and paid into the treasury of my Sublime Porte; the three remaining fourths shall serve to cover the expenses of collection of civil and military administration, and of the maintenance of the governor, as well as to pay for the wheat that Egypt has to send every year to the holy cities of Mecca and Medina.

The above tribute, due by the governor of Egypt, and the mode of payment shall continue five years, to commence with the year 1257 (February 13, 1841). They can thereafter be regulated in another manner more adapted to the future condition of Egypt and to the nature of new circumstances.

As it is the duty of my Sublime Porte to know the annual amount of the revenues, and the manner of collecting the tithes and other imposts, and as such an object requires a commission of superintendence and control in that province, an understanding will hereafter be come to thereon according to my imperial will.

As so important a matter as the fixing of moneys must be regulated by my Sublime Porte in such a way as to admit of no variation, neither of name nor of value, gold and silver coins, which he shall continue to be permitted to coin in my name in Egypt, must be like those which are issued by the imperial mint of Constantinople, both in name, form, and pattern.

In time of peace 18,000 men of troops suffice for the internal guard of Egypt. This number cannot be exceeded; nevertheless, as the Egyptian forces are destined for the service of the Sublime Porte no less than the other forces of the empire, they can be augmented in time of war in such proportion as shall be deemed fit.

According to the new system of military service that has been adopted for all my empire, soldiers after having served for five years must be replaced by new ones. This same system shall also be followed in Egypt. Thus, out of the last recruits of the Egyptian troops who are to-day serving, there shall be chosen 20,000 men to commence the new service, of whom 18,000 shall be kept for Egypt and 2,000 sent here to serve their time.

As the fifth part of these 20,000 men is to be replaced every year, there shall be taken annually in Egypt 4,000 recruits, according to the method prescribed by the military regulations by means of drawings by lot, proceeding therein with all humanity, impartiality, and diligence.

Of these recruits, 3,500 men shall remain in the country and 400 shall be sent here. The soldiers who shall have finished their time of service, whether in Egypt or here, shall return to their homes, and cannot he again required. Although the climate of Egypt may require a difference in the stuff of military clothing, the uniform of the Egyptian troops shall nevertheless not differ from those of the other troops of the empire. The same shall be the case with the distinctive insignia and banners, as also with the distinctive insignia of the officers, sailors, and soldiers of the Egyptian navy, as also the flags of war-vessels.

The appointment of land and sea officers up to the rank of lieutenant inclusive, shall belong to the Egyptian Government; that of superior officers shall depend upon my imperial will.

Hereafter the governor of Egypt shall not be able to construct war-vessels without my express permission.

The concession of the hereditary tenure to the Government of Egypt being subject to the conditions above enumerated, the non-execution of one of them will carry with it the immediate withdrawal of this concession.

The present hatt-sherif is therefore addressed to you, in order that you, as well as your descendants, recognizing the imperial favor that I have just granted to you, shall see to it that you fulfill with care the conditions herein established, protect the people of Egypt against all violence by providing for their safety and welfare, and by taking care to in nowise transgress my orders, and, finally; that you have to make known to my Sublime Porte the important affairs of the country intrusted to your government.

Zilkadeh, 12, 1256 (February 13, 1841).

IX.
Sultan’s firman.

To my vizier Muhammed Ali Pasha, governor of Egypt, to whom has been furthermore newly conferred the government of the provinces of Nubia, Darfour, Kordofan, and Sennaar:

As is contained in another imperial firman, I have confirmed you in the government of Egypt, with a hereditary tenure thereof, under some conditions and certain limitations. More than that, I have granted to you, without hereditary tenure, the government of the provinces of Nubia, Darfour, Kordofan, and Sennaar, with ail their dependencies—that is to say, with all their adjoining regions outside of the limits of Egypt. Guided by the experience and wisdom that distinguish you, you will apply yourself to administer and organize these provinces according to my equitable views, and to provide for the welfare of the inhabitants.

Each year you will transmit to my Sublime Porte the exact list of all the yearly revenues.

From time to time the troops attack the villages of the aforenamed provinces, and the young of both sexes that are taken remain in the hands of the soldiers in payment of their wages.

Not only does the ruin and depopulation of the country result therefrom, but moreover such a state of things is contrary to the holy law of right. This abuse, and that other no less baneful abuse of mutilating men for the guarding of concubine houses, being wholly reprobated by my equitable will, and in complete opposition to the principles of justice and humanity proclaimed since my coming to the throne, you will carefully deliberate as to the means for hindering and repressing in the future acts so culpable.

You will not forget that, with the exception of a few known individuals who went to Egypt with my imperial fleet, I have pardoned without distinction all the officers, soldiers, and other employés that are to be found there.

Although according to my other firman the appointment of your officers above the rank of adjutant must be submitted to my decision, you will send to my Sublime Porte a list of such officers in order that their firmans of confirmation be sent to them. Such is my sovereign will, with which you will hasten to comply.

The 21st Zilkadeh, 1256 (February 13, 1841).

X.
Vizierial letter addressed to His Excellency Muhammed All Pasha.

His Highness the Sultan, having viewed with satisfaction your promptness in giving effective proofs of submission and in fulfilling the duties of obedience, has confirmed you in the hereditary tenure of the government of Egypt. A hatt-sharif containing some conditions in this respect, a decoration of vizier, a cap enriched with precious stones, are sent to you with his excellency the present minister of justice, said Muhîb Effendi, by His Highness the Sultan.

Your wisdom and prudence will never permit you to overstep the line of submission and fidelity, which are a source of happiness in both worlds.

The Sublime Porte has full confidence in you, and the insertion of the clauses in question does not arise from any mental reservation toward your excellency.

Such a signal favor as the continuation of the hereditary tenure must be made subject to certain conditions, and the Sultan does not cause these clauses to be inserted save to forestall all contestations that might arise in an unknown and uncertain future, and to insure forever the welfare of the inhabitants of Egypt. There remains no longer any cause that might form the grounds of doubt on the part of the Sublime Porte or of uneasiness in your excellency concerning yourself or your family. The differences that have lasted for so long a time have (thank God) entirely disappeared.

I doubt not that in your wisdom your excellency will appreciate the full worth of the goodness of the Sultan, and that you will put forth your efforts to prove to him your gratitude. Please God, we shall ever hereafter form but one single body, nothing shall separate us, and we shall work under the auspices of His Highness to serve religion, state, paternal country, and the nation. I do herein sincerely congratulate myself and all the ministers of the Sublime Porte.

21 Zilkadeh, 1256 (February 13, 1841).

XI.
Note of the London conference addressed to the Turkish ambassador, Chékib Effendi, in reply to the firman of investiture which had been communicated by the ambassador to it.

The undersigned have had the honor to receive the note dated the 11th of this month, in which His Excellency Cliékib Effendi has been pleased to announce to them that, in consequence of the proofs that M. Ali had given of his submission, His Highness the Sultan had graciously fulfilled his promise, and had reinstated him under certain conditions in his post of hereditory governor of Egypt. In announcing this resolution to the plenipotentiaries of the four allied courts, the Ottoman ambassador had the goodness to communicate to them the firman given on the 13th February, 1841, and the note addressed to the representatives of the four powers at Constantinople, by Reshid Pasha, to announce to them that the Egyptian question was settled.

The undersigned deem it their duty to manifest to the Ottoman ambassador, in the name of their courts, the great joy that this event causes them, which, while bringing about a final solution of the Oriental crisis, completely realizes the intentions that have governed the policy of the four powers signing the treaty of July 15. Under this state of things, the four courts responded in advance to the wish expressed by the Porte to see the return of the consuls to Alexandria, and the protocol signed on the 5th instant invited the representatives of the four powers to come to an understanding with the Ottoman Porte as to the time when the said agents should simultaneously be take themselves to Egypt. As for the details concerning the internal administration of that province, to which the firmans of the 13th of February refer, the undersigned have received from Alexandria, under date of the 24th of that month, information that the greater number of those details had been regulated.

In point of fact, M. Ali has acknowledged, without making any reserve, that all the treaties and all the laws of the Ottoman Empire should receive their application in Egypt as in every other province of that empire.

He has submitted himself to the orders of the Sublime Porte concerning the regulation or system of moneys, of recruiting, of service and of uniform of troops, and of the construction of vessels of war. He has replaced, under the orders of His Highness the Sultan, the land and sea forces of Egypt, whose numbers have been prescribed for him by the Sublime Porte; in a word, he is legally, as towards the Sublime Forte, in the condition of a subject, of a delegated governor of a province which forms an integral part of the Ottoman Empire.

Starting with this principle, which the treaty of the 15th of July was intended to re-establish, it now depends solely upon the authority of the Sultan to settle all questions concerning the internal administration that are still to be arranged, and to take into consideration the wishes which M. Ali has in this respect submitted to the supreme arbitrament of the Sultan. To the authority of the Sultan alone does it now appertain to settle the questions of internal administration that still remain to be arranged, and to take into consideration the wishes that M. Ali has in this respect submitted to the decision of His Highness.

Without entering here into an examination that would not be within their sphere the undersigned will limit themselves to recalling to mind the principles that they laid down in the collective note which they had the honor to address, on the 30th of Jan nary last, to the Ottoman ambassador. These principles, which rest upon the conditions of the separate act of the treaty of the 15th of July, will serve as a guide to the friendly explanations which the representatives of the four nations may think it their duty to address to the Sublime Porte. The undersigned are firmly convinced that observations made in a spirit of sincere reconciliation, will be received by the Sultan with the same good will that he has not ceased to accord to the advice which the powers have hitherto given him. His Highness has known how to appreciate rightly this sincere and disinterested advice by accomplishing by an act of clemency a work of pacification, in the guarantee of which his allies have loyally assisted him.

The undersigned have the honor, &c.

London, March 13, 1841.
ESTERHAZY.

NIEUMAN.

PALM ERSTON.

BULOW.

BRUNOW.

XII.
Memorandum of the Sublime Porte to the powers.

April 19, 1841.

His Highness the Sultan, in consideration of the well-wishing counsels that have again this time reached him from the high allied courts, has been pleased to grant a new favor to M. Ali, by deigning to make to him, according to his last request, the concessions that are about to be indicated, with the condition, however, that the Pasha shall religiously observe all conventions and treaties concluded, or that shall hereafter be concluded, between the Sublime Porte and the allied powers.

Thus the hereditary tenure of the Government of Egypt shall pass to the sons and to the male descendants of the Pasha, in such manner, however, that the oldest among them shall be always called to succeed to the post of governor, the investiture of which he shall receive from the Sublime Porte each time that post shall have become vacant.

The setting apart of one-fourth out of the revenues of Egypt is given up, and the tribute to be paid by its governor shall be afterwards fixed and regulated, whether as regards the aliquot part or as regards collection, according to the actual state of the receipts of that province.

Concerning the appointments to the different ranks in the army in Egypt, M. Ali Pasha is authorized to confer them of himself up to the grade of colonel only; as for appointments to the other higher ranks he must beforehand refer to the Sablime Porte.

As for that which concerns the system of internal administration that must be in force in Egypt, the same as in the other parts of the Ottoman Empire, inasmuch as M. Ali Pasha did not appear, in his request aforementioned, disposed to enter into the same frankly, and inasmuch as, furthermore, this point has already been fixed in the separate act which follows upon the treaty of alliance; therefore, in order to leave no room for any grievance on the part of the allied powers against the Sublime Porte in case that M. Ali should hereafter betake himself to acts contrary to an essential point founded upon the treaty aforesaid, the ministers of the Sublime Porte have deemed it very important, in this state of things, to ask, before all, precise explanations and declarations on this subject; and it is in order to beg your excellency to be so kind on your part as to give them in writing that the present memorandum is addressed to you.

XIII.
Note of the London Conference.

London, May 10, 1841.

The undersigned have had the honor to receive the note of the 19–27 April, in which his excellency Chélkib Effendi, ambassador of the Sublime Port, has asked the co-operation of the allied powers to do away with the difficulties concerning the interpretation of certain articles that are found in the firman of the 13th of February last, issued for the purpose of finally terminating the affairs of the Orient.

These provisions concern the three following points: 1st, the question of hereditary tenure; 2d, the fixing of the tribute: 3d, military promotion.

These three questions have been decided according to the treaty of the 15th July, 1841, concluded between the Ottoman Porte, Austria, Great Britain, Prussia, and Russia. The undersigned invoked that treaty in the notes of January 30 and March 13, addressed to his excellency the Ottoman ambassador. It is according to that same treaty that the powers hasten to give to his excellency Chékib Effendi the following explanations:

1. Question of hereditary tenure.—In conformity with the intentions by him set forth at the beginning of the crisis relating to the affairs of the Orient, the Sultan declared that he would leave the Pashalic of Egypt to the family of M. Ali, so long as he and his successors should merit this favor by faithfully fulfilling the conditions under which the same should be granted to them. This principle having been once set down, there remained nothing further to be dealt with but the fixing of the manner in which the Government of Egypt should be transmitted from one member of M. Ali’s family to the other. It was decided that the Saltan would give the investiture to each new titulary of the Pashalik. It is according to this principle that the firman of February 13 was given. The Sultan has besides excused the Pasha from going to Constantinople to receive the investiture. He has added that Ibrahim Pasha would obtain the same dispensation if he should be called to succeed his father, and that the firman of investiture would be sent him to Egypt. The Ottoman Porte has itself informed the allied powers of the mode chosen by the Sultan for the administration of the Pashalic of Egypt, made hereditary in the family of M. Ali.

According to this resolution, and in conformity with the usages introduced into the Ottoman Empire, it is Ibrahim Pasha who, as being the eldest son, shall be called to succeed M. Ali. Following the same rule, the oldest of the family, after Ibrahim Pasha, is to be considered as entitled to succeed him. This is the general rule which the allied courts consider as the most advantageous for the interests of the Sublime Porte, and as the most in conformity with the traditions of the Ottoman Empire. In replying to the question that the Ottoman ambassador addressed to them in behalf of his government, they have thought it their duty to state that the appointment to the functions of governor of Egypt belonged exclusively to His Highness the Sultan; that this right should be exercised and manifested at each new investiture; and that, finally, this investiture, having emanated from the sovereign authority, should form the right by virtue of which each new governor of Egypt shall be called to administer in the name of His Highness, a province which is an integral part of the Ottoman Empire.

2. Fixing of the tribute.—The separate act annexed to the convention of July 15 has made no provision regarding the amount of the tribute; it has only established in principle that the tribute shall be paid to the Porte annually; that it must be in proportion to the extent of the territory whose administration is intrusted to M. Ali; that the pasha, upon condition of the regular payment of the tribute, and in the name of the Sultan, as the delegate of His Highness, should collect the imposts and duties; and that, finally, the Pasha of Egypt should take upon himself all civil and military administration in the Pashalic. The plenipotentiaries of the courts who signed the convention of July 15, while indicating the principle of the provisions that are therein established, believe that they would overstep the bounds of their rights if they should give an opinion as to the amount of the tribute, because this is a financial question relating to the administration of the Ottoman Empire, and which, as they have already said in their note of March 13, is not within their sphere, they, moreover, not possessing the necessary statistical data that could serve as the basis of a sure judgment upon the financial resources of Egypt, can give no opinion as to the amount of the annual tribute that the treasury of the Sublime Porte can draw from this province. Nevertheless, to satisfy, in so far as depends upon them, the wishes expressed by his excellency Chékib Effendi in the name of the Sublime Porte, they think that instead of the tribute which the Pasha shall pay by fixing a proportionate part of the gross revenue of Egypt, it would be preferable, in the real interest of the Porte, to determine the tribute by a fixed sum, thereby insuring to the treasury of His Highness a certain revenue. Still, as the bases upon which this sum would be fixed might change in the course of time, it would perhaps be as well to subject the nominal amount of the said sum to a revision after the lapse of certain epochs.

3. Military promotion.—The sixth paragraph of the separate act of the convention of July 15 provides that the land and sea forces that the Pasha of Egypt shall be able to maintain as belonging to the forces of the Ottoman Empire, must always be considered as maintained for the service of the state. As, according to this principle, the military force employed in Egypt is that of the Sultan, the officers will not have their promotion, but in conformity with the sole authority of His Highness, to whom the Ottoman army and navy belong. Starting with this principle, which ought to have a general application, the undersigned can only give a secondary importance to the difficulties that have come up in connection with military promotions. It belongs to the Sultan to give in this respect the powers that he shall deem necessary to be conferred upon the governor of Egypt, reserving it to himself to enlarge or limit these powers according as experience and the needs of the service shall render necessary.

If the undersigned have thought it their duty to limit their observations to the three above-mentioned points, it is because they have already expressed their opinion in their collective notes of January 30 and March 13, and in the protocol of March 5, upon other conditions that are contained in the separate act annexed to the convention of July, 1840.

The undersigned, keeping to the views and opinions set forth in the said acts, think it their duty to refer to the same. They cannot consider the submission that M. Ali has formally made as other than absolute, and they consequently regard the Turco-Egyptian question as terminated. The undersigned cannot, therefore, suppose that the Pasha, instead of showing himself thankful for the pardon that the Sultan deigns to grant him, and for the favor that His Highness has graciously shown to him as well as to his family, would overstep the hounds of obedience and submission which are the conditions of this pardon and of these favors.

The plenipotentiaries of the allied courts, in communicating these observations to his excellency Chékib Effendi, beg him to bring them to the knowledge of his court, because they are the complement of their collective note of March 18.

They seize this occasson to renew, &c.

London, May 10, 1841.
PALMERSTON.

ESTERHAZY.

NIEUMAN.

BÜLOW.

BRUNGW.

XIV.
Official copy of the firman sent by the Sublime Porte to Muhammed Ali.

The 1st of June, 1841.

[Note.—This is the final firman which bestowed the hereditary government of Egypt upon M. Ali and his family; it was published at Constantinople on the 1st of June, 1841, and proclaimed at Alexandria on the 10th of the same month. The preceding documents serve to explain and account for the various clauses it contains; by it the preceding firman was modified by conceding the hereditary tenure of the Pashalic of Egypt to the male issue of M. Ali in a direct line, with preference to the eldest born, by giving to the Pasha the power to appoint army officers up to the rank of colonel (i. e., “bey”) inclusive, and by setting down the tribute at a fixed sum, and not in proportion to the state revenues, namely, at 40 million piasters (about $1,775,600), which sum was afterward reduced to 60,000 purses of 5£ Turkish per purse ($1,331,700), and is now, in 1879, fixed at £ Turkish 775,000 ($3,320,925). In it were maintained also all the clauses calculated to enhance the sovereignty of the Porte over Egypt, and humiliate M. Ali. He, however, as appears from the last document, No. 15, accepted, in all its parts, the firman of investiture) and that, too, in terms of the profoundest submission.]

Your recent act of submission, the assurances of devotion and fidelity that you have given, the upright and sincere intentions that you have manifested towards me and my government, have come to my sovereign knowledge and have filled me with joy.

By reason of the knowledge and experience that you have acquired in the affairs of Egypt during your long government, I have every ground to believe that you are worthy of the favor and confidence which I grant you.

I do not in the least doubt that you will appreciate my good will, and that, out of thankfulness, you will hand down these praise worthy qualities to your descendants. By these presents I bestow upon you the government of Egypt in its ancient limits, such as they are marked out upon the map, duly sealed, which my grand vizier sends you. I join thereto the hereditary prerogatives upon the following conditions: When the government becomes vacant it shall pass from eldest son to eldest son in the direct male line of your sons and descendants. As for the appointment, it shall always emanate from my Sublime Porte. If it should ever happen that the male line become extinct, my government would necessarily designate another individual for the government. In this case the male children of the daughters of the governor of Egypt shall have no right or legal title of succession.

Although the Pashas of Egypt have the hereditary enjoyment of the government, they shall none the less be ranked, as regards the rank of preference, upon the same line as the other viziers (i. e., governor-generals of provinces); they shall be treated as such by the Sublime Porte, from which they shall receive the same titles as those given to every other governor [general] of a province.

The system of security of persons and goods, of protection of individual honor and character—a principle consecrated by the reformed institutions of my Hatt-Snarîf promulgated at Gul-Haneh—and all treaties existing or to be concluded between the Sublime Porte and the friendly powers, shall likewise receive their execution, in all respects, in the province of Egypt.

All regulations made or to be made by the Sublime Porte shall be likewise executed in Egypt, taking into account the local requirements of justice and equity. All taxes and all revenues raised in Egypt shall be so collected in my imperial name.

The Egyptians, being subjects of my Sublime Porte, in order to protect them against all future vexations, the tithes, duties, and other taxes to be raised shall be levied in conformity with the equitable system followed by my government. As soon as the term of payment shall arrive, care shall be taken that the proportion of the taxes, customs, duties, tithes, and other revenues and receipts of the province of Egypt, the amount of which is stated in the special firman on this subject, be duly collected. As it is customary to send every year from Egypt grain and vegetables to the holy cities of Mecca and Medina, the same “articles shall continue to be sent to those cities respectively.

My government having resolved to improve its monetary system, the soul of all social transactions, and to do this in such a manner that hereafter the alloy and the nominal value of each piece of money shall remain unchangeably fixed, I hereby permit that money be coined in Egypt, but the gold and silver coins that you shall cause to be struck, must bear my name and be, in all respects, similar as to form and value to the coins struck, at the imperial mint of Constantinople. Eighteen thousand men being sufficient for the local administration of the province of Egypt, this number of the effective forces shall under no pretext whatsoever be exceeded; but, as the military and naval forces of Egypt are essentially devoted to the service of the Sublime Porte, this figure can, in time of war, be increased in such proportion as my government may deem fit and proper.

According to the terms of a regulation in force, the soldiers enrolled in other parts of my empire serve for five years. At the expiration of this service they are replaced by new recruits. It becomes necessary that the same regulation be applied in Egypt. As for the duration of service, the habits and customs of the Egyptians shall be consulted, a perfect equality being in all respects observed in their favor. Four hundred men of Egyptian troops shall be annually sent to Constantinople. There shall be no difference between the decorations and colors [flags] of the troops employed in Egypt and those of the other troops of my government. The officers of the Egyptian navy shall wear the same insignia as the Turks; the vessels shall have the same flag as the Turkish vessels. The Pasha of Egypt shall be able to appoint his land and sea, officers up to the rank of colonel [bey]; but as regards the appointment of officers of a higher rank, to wit, emiîr-liwa [general of brigade], and farîk [lieutenant-general], it is strictly necessary that you ask my acceptance, and take my orders on the subject. Hereafter the Pashas of Egypt shall no more build any war vessel without having beforehand obtained the concurrence of the Sublime Porte, and being first furnished with a direct and positive authorization.

All the present conditions are in the strictest manner attached to the privilege of hereditary tenure. If one of these conditions should remain without execution, the prerogative of hereditary rule would be at the same instant abrogated, and it would cease to exist.

Such is my good pleasure upon all the points about which I have just spoken. You and your sons and descendants like you, will not fail to recognize the very special favor that I grant you. You will make every effort to scrupulously execute the stipulations contained in these presents. You will carefully avoid all semblance of opposition, and you will work without relaxation to insure the welfare and tranquillity of the inhabitants of Egypt, protecting them against all injustice and every vexation, and you will have to ask orders on all important questions that shall relate to the interests of the land.

XV.
Reply of Muhammed Ali to the Grand Vizier.

The 7th of Djemâd Auwual, 1257. (June 25, 1841.)

I have had the honor to receive the letter of Your Highness which announced to mo the sending by the Counsellor of State, Mamil Effendi, to the minister of Justice Muhil, Effendi, now on a mission here, and intrusted with delivering the same to me, of an imperial Hatt-Sharif containing the following clauses: [here follows a recapitulation of the conditions enumerated in the firman of June 1, 1841.]

After having offered up a thousand prayers of gratitude for the signal kindness of which I have been the object, I gave myself up to receiving the Hatt-Sharîf with the marks of respect and honor due to the same. A numerous suite was to accompany it from the residence of Muhib Effendi to my palace. As soon as I saw it coming I “advanced to meet it, full of gratitude and veneration. I took it in my hands and brought if respectfully to my lips. The above-named minister having fixed upon my breast the honorable decoration that has been conferred upon me, the Hatt-Sharîf was opened and publicly read before all the law doctors, chiefs of religion and magistracy, and all the servants of the Sublime Porte, who testified their joy and expressed their thankfulness and their wishes for the eternal prosperity of the empire, and the continuation of the reign of His Highness.

In order that all the subjects of the Sultan might share the satisfaction caused by such happy tidings, and in order that the prayers for the perpetuity of the empire should be general, I ordered the firing at Alexandria of repeated salvos of artillery both from the forts and the ships, and that all the ships be dressed. I also caused cannon to be fired at Cairo, and in the other cities in token of rejoicing. Although my efforts of gratitude and thankfulness can never equal the favor granted by His Highness to his weak vassal, I shall none the less he proud and happy to consecrate the rest of my days to his august service, and, certain of fulfilling thereby a sacred duty and of meriting happiness both in this world and in the other, I shall faithfully and honorably carry out the conditions set down in the imperial firman here above named, and after me my descendants will find therein the universal rule of their conduct to become vassals subject to the Sublime Porte; their sole wish, like my own, shall be to try and render themselves worthy at all times and in all places of the good graces of their sovereign. It is with these feelings that this humble letter has been written and sent at the return of Muhib Effendi, who will have the honor to deliver it to your highness. When you receive it I beg you to obtain in my favor, unworthy as I am, the continuation of the accustomed bounty of His Highness and of yourself, and to keep for me your good will, which is to me so dear and precious.

No. 486. Mr. Comanos to Mr. Evarts. [Document 519]

No. 486.
Mr. Comanos to Mr. Evarts.

Agency and Consulate-General of the United States in Egypt,
Cairo, September 6, 1879. (Received October 4.) No. 335.]

Sir: Referring to my dispatch No. 332 of the 1st of this month, I have the honor to inclose herewith translation of the Khedive’s decree, dated the 4th day of September, 1879, which re-establishes the control general of the receipts and expenses of the state, under the provisions of the decree of November 18, 1876, and appoints Mr. Baring (English) as controller-general of receipts, and Mons. de Blignierés (French) as auditor-general of expenses, and controller of the public debt.

The consular authorities of France and Great Britain having by order of their respective governments informed the Khedive that the latter had no other persons to propose, His Highness finally concluded to sign the decree, appointing Messrs. Baring and de Blignieres.

I have as yet received no communication from the Egyptian Government concerning the proposed commission of liquidation.

Some of the unofficial journals persist in affirming that Mr. Rivers Wilson is to come to Egypt about the middle of next October as president of the said commission, and that Mr. George Coulon, a Frencii lawyer, is to come out from Paris at about the same time to occupy some position equivalent to the one for which Mr. Wilson is designated.

I am, &c.,

N. D. COMANOS.

[Inclosure in No. 335.—Translation.]

Decree reappointing controllers-general of the receipts and expenses of the state.

We, Khedive of Egypt:

Whereas by note of the ministry of foreign affairs, dated the 31st of March, 1879, the Egyptian Government consented to re-establish the control general of the receipts and expenses of the state upon the bases of the decree of the 18th November, 1876;

Whereas the English Government has proposed to us Mons. Baring instead of Mons. Romaine, and the French Government has proposed to us Mons. de Blignières instead of Mons. the Baron de Malaret;

Do decree and promulgate: Article. I. The control general of the receipts and expenses of the state is re-established under the conditions stipulated in the decree of the 18th November, 1876.

Art. II. Mons. Baring is appointed controller-general of receipts.

Art. III. Mons. de Blignières is appointed controller-general of the “Comptabilité (i. e., the department that deals with the expenses) and of the public debt.

Art. IV. Our ministers of foreign affairs and of finance are intrusted, each in that which concerns him, with the execution of the present decree.

Done at our palace of Ismailiah, at Cairo, the 4th day of September, 1879.
By the Khedive:
MEHEMET TEWFIK.

The minister of foreign affairs:
Mustafa Fahrin.

The minister of finance:
Haidar.

No. 487. Mr. Van Dyck to Mr. Hunter. [Document 520]

No. 487.
Mr. Van Dyck to Mr. Hunter.

Cairo, October 17, 1879. (Received November 12.)

Sir: The accompanying statements concerning the Suez Canal are short but comprehensive, and may be of use to the department.

I have, &c.,

EDWARD A. VAN DYCK.

[Inclosure 1 in Mr. Van Dyck’s dispatch.]

Receipts and disbursements, net profits, number of vessels, and tonnage.

Years. Transit of vessel. Sundry receipts. Total. Expenses of working. Net profits. Proportion of expenses to receipts. Number of vessels. Tonnage.

Dollars. Dollars. Dollars. Dollars. Dollars. Pr.ct.

1870 1,031,800 353,600 1,385,400 1,291,600 283,800 93.21 486 435,000

1871 1,519,800 1,134,200 2,654,000 1,165,400 1,488,600 43.90 765 761,000

1872 2,867,600 758,400 3,626,000 1,007,800 2,618,200 27.79 1,082 1,439,000

1873 4,165,320 745,000 4,910,320 1,144,000 3,766,320 23.30 1,173 2,085,000

1874 4,530,800 631,400 5,162,200 1,281,800 3,880,400 24.83 1,264 2,424,000

1875 5,286,200 583,800 5,870,000 1,243,200 4,626,800 21.18 1,494 2,941,000

1876 5,526,400 537,200 6,063,600 1,120,000 4,943,600 18.47 1,457 3,072,000

1877 6,035,800 599,400 6,635,200 1,155,200 5,480,000 17.41 1,663 3,419,000

1878 6,219,645 142,530 6,362,175 1,593 3,292,000

Total 37,183,365 5,485,530 42,669,165 9,409,000 27,087,720 10,977 19,868,000

[Inclosure 2 in Mr. Van Dyck’s dispatch.]
[From the Phare d’Alexandria of Thursday, October 16, 1879.]

Number of vessels of each nation.

Nationality. No. of vessels. Remarks.

English 8,007

French 741

Holland 363

Austria-Hungary 482

Italian 445

Spanish 150 If the British interest in the canal of Suez be represented by the figure 8, the interest of all the other nations together falls short of the figure 3.

German 208

Ottoman 146

Egyptian 148

Divers nations 298

No. 488. Mr. Van Dyck to Mr. Hunter. [Document 521]

No. 488.
Mr. Van Dyck to Mr. Hunter.

Cairo, October 23, 1879. (Received November 22.)

Sir: In its issue of Tuesday, the 21st of October, 1879, the newspaper called the Phare d’Alexandrie gives a statement of the revenues of the Egyptian Government that have been collected and paid in to the finance ministry during the half-year ending June 30, 1879. Thinking that it might interest you to see that statement, I herewith inclose an English translation of the same for such use as you may think proper to make of it.

According to that table, the half-year’s revenues are about four and one-fourth millions of pounds Egyptian; and if the second half-year gives the same yield, the revenues of the Egyptian Government for 1879 will be, in round numbers, eight and one-half million pounds Egyptian.

The bonded debt of the government requires for the payment of interest thereon, at the rate hitherto paid, about £4,648,000 every year. But there are other debts besides the bonded debt, which require for the payment of interest thereon about £300,000. So that, in round numbers, the government has to pay about 5,000,000 pounds Egyptian every year interest on its debts. This sum deducted from the eight and one-half millions, would leave only 3,500,000 pounds Egyptian for all expenses of administration during the year 1879, which is far too small; the yearly current expenses being in round numbers, at the very least, 4,500,000 pounds Egyptian, and, in my opinion not less than five millions. So that at the end of this year there will be another deficit of at least £1,000,000, or, possibly, a deficit of at least 1,500,000 pounds Egyptian; and this after having realized the whole of the Rothschild domanial loan of 1878.

The finances of Egypt are in a very bad state, and will, I think, grow much worse, unless the rate of interest on all debts be so reduced as to leave of the revenues for the current expenses of administration, about five million pounds yearly, instead of the three and one-half millions given above.

I have, &c.,

EDWARD A. VAN DYCK.

Moneys collected by the finance ministry during half-year ending June 30, 1879.

Piasters.

Monkabala (commutation of land tax) 58,067,996 01

Tax on real property 226,282,980 37

Personal tax 13,490,508 32

Revenue stamps and registration of documents 3,815,542 09

Customs duties 28,380,226 12

Salt tax and natron 2,184,533 39

The mint 986,018 84

The post-office 2,869,422 10

Justice, courts and tribunals of 10,484,932 21

Canals and sluices 2,827,172 16

Canals called Ibraimiah 22,024 24

Matariah (a special farming of certain government lands) 1,566,813 21

Alexandria water-works 440,116 34

The tax on the fish markets 537,121 26

City taxes, octroi, &c 18,576,597 27

Divers receipts 1,775,760 21

Debts of the villagers 94,173 28

Maraine 80,283 18

Ports and harbors 175,731 02

Light-houses 1,984,282 11

Public works 29 363 05

Railway and telegraps 43,667,028 15

Port of Alexandria 1,216,571 00

Towing (tugboats) 1,057,967 27

Khedival postal steamers 4,273,587 14

Public instruction 11,558 03

Total piasters Egyptian 425,469,615 77

Total pounds Egyptian 4,254,696 15

United States gold $21,273,480 75

Tunis.Tunis.

[522] . Mr. Fish to Mr. Hunter.

United States Consulate at Tunis, November 26, 1878. (Received, December 13.)

[523] Mr. Fish to the Minister for Foreign Affairs.

United States Consulate at Tunis, Tunis, November 16, 1878.

[524] . Mr. Fish to Mr. Hunter.

United States Consulate, Tunis, April 16, 1879. (Received May 5.)

No. 489. Mr. Fish to Mr. Hunter. [Document 522]

No. 489.
Mr. Fish to Mr. Hunter.

United States Consulate at Tunis,
November 26, 1878. (Received, December 13.) No. 15.]

Sir: I inclose to the State Department copy of a communication to his excellency the prime minister and minister of foreign affairs, embracing the views of the State and Treasury Departments of the United States Government on the subject of a tax proposed to be levied by this government for the maintenance (in part) of light-houses on the coast. The communication embraces the views of the Secretary of State, based on a letter from Rear-Admiral John Rodgers, chairman of Light-House Board, and Hon. John B. Hawley, Acting Secretary of the Treasury, all referred to in letter of the Hon. William M. Evarts, dated October 23, 1878.

I have, &c.,

GEO. W. FISH,
United States Consul, Tunis.

Mr. Fish to the Minister for Foreign Affairs. [Document 523]

Mr. Fish to the Minister for Foreign Affairs.

United States Consulate at Tunis,
Tunis, November 16, 1878.

Sir: I have the honor to inform your excellency, that I am in receipt of communications from the Government of the United States, upon the subject of a tax which the Tunisian Government proposes levying on foreign shipping, to provide in part for the payment of the expense in maintaining light-houses on the coast of the regency. The proceedings of a meeting of the consuls representing the governments interested, which was held in the British consulate in this city on the 8th of August last, together with a communication from the late consul, Mr. G. H. Heap, have been submitted to the proper government officers for their consideration and decision. The United States Government levies no tax on shipping for this purpose although its light-house service embraces about 1,200 lights. The policy of the United States Government is, that all light-house expenses should be paid by the general government of a country rather than by a special tax on shipping. But inasmuch as the United States acquiesces in the levying of such a tax by the Government of Great Britain, and as it recognizes the right of the Bey to levy such a tax, I am authorized to inform your excellency that the Government of the United States will not object to the levying of a reasonable tax on her vessels for the purpose indicated, provided that the other governments interested consent to the same.

With assurances of great respect, I remain, yours, &c.,

GEO. W. FISH,
United States Consul.

To His Excellency General Sidi Mustafa ben-Semain,
Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs of His Highness the Bey.

No. 490. Mr. Fish to Mr. Hunter. [Document 524]

No. 490.
Mr. Fish to Mr. Hunter.

United States Consulate,
Tunis, April 16, 1879. (Received May 5.) No. 35.]

Sir: I have tile honor to inform the Department that on Monday, the 14th instant, I was present by invitation of the Bey at the formal opening of the Tunisian section of the French railway (Bone and Gonelma line). The Bey, accompanied by his ministers and officers, was received at the station in Tunis by the foreign consuls at 7½ a.m., and conducted through the shops by the officers of the company, after which the party’ passed over the line in a special train provided for the purpose.

At Mendjes-el-bab a collation was served, and the party returned to Tunis at 3 p.m. In the evening there was a display of lire works, and the city was illuminated in honor of the event. The road is a very fine one, is well built, with good station-houses, engines, and cars. The’ stations are Tunis, Manouha, Djideida-Tebourba, Mendjez-el-Bab, and L’Oued Largua. The distance from Tunis to L’Oued Largua is 86 kilometers. The line follows the valley of the Medjirda River nearly the whole distance. The grade is easy, and the country capable of great agricultural improvement. The line is being rapidly pushed forward toward Algeria, where it will connect with a French railway already in operation. The opening of this road, connecting Tunis with French Algeria, has an important political significance just at this time. Thousands of people, Arabs from the mountains and from the plains beyond the mountains, were collected at the stations to witness the opening ceremonies.

I hope in a short time to be able to furnish some facts and figures, which will be of historic interest as connected with this great enterprise, its cost, present status, and bearing upon French interests, which I have been for some time collecting.

I have, &c.,

GEO. W. FISH,
United States Consul.

Uruguay.Uruguay.

[525] . Mr. Caldwell to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Montevideo, March 10, 1879. (Received May 10).

No. 491. Mr. Caldwell to Mr. Evarts. [Document 525]

No. 491.
Mr. Caldwell to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Montevideo, March 10, 1879. (Received May 10). No. 41.]

Sir: I have the honor to report that this government has returned to a constitutional form by the action of Colonel Latorre. A legislature, duly chosen, assembled on the 15th of February. Dr. Vidal was chosen president of the Senate, and Señor Bustamente president of the House of Representatives. Colonel Latorre resigned his power into the hands of the president of the Senate, who remained in charge of the executive power until the 1st of March, on which day the legislature in general assembly unanimously elected Col. Lorenzo Latorre constitutional president for the term of four years.

President Latorre nominated the following cabinet: Don José M. Montero, jr., minister of interior; Dr. Albert Mendez, minister of foreign relations; Col. Edward Vasquez, minister of war and marine; Don Aurelio Berro, minister of finance.

The three first-named gentlemen occupied the same positions under the dictatorship.

I have, &c.,

JOHN C. CALDWELL.

Venezuela.Venezuela.

[526] . Mr. Baker to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Caracas, January 24, 1879. (Received February 20.)

[527] . Mr. Evarts to Mr. Baker.

Department of State, Washington, February 24, 1879.

[528] . Mr. Baker to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Caracas, February 26, 1879. (Received March 24.)

[529] . Mr. Baker to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Caracas, February 27, 1879. (Received March 24.)

[530] . Mr. Baker to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Caracas, March 17, 1879. (Received April 8.)

[531] . Mr. Baker to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Caracas, April 14, 1879. (Received May 13.)

[532] . Mr. Baker to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Caracas, May 14, 1879. (Received June 2.)

[533] . Mr. Baker to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Caracas, June 10, 1879. (Received July 19.)

[534] . Mr. Baker to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Caraeos, August 25, 1879. (Received October 2.)

[535] . Mr. Baker to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Caracas, October 28, 1879. (Received November 28.)

No. 492. Mr. Baker to Mr. Evarts. [Document 526]

No. 492.
Mr. Baker to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Caracas, January 24, 1879. (Received February 20.) No. 85.]

Sir: I send herewith a copy and translation of a communication from the minister of exterior relations, of date 15th instant, announcing a resolution of the national executive the preceding day, requiring cargoes destined for Puerto Cabello to discharge at La Guayra. I also send a copy of my reply, of date 22d instant, objecting to this proceeding. Both documents are connected with a question of sufficient gravity to demand your serious attention. The only practical effect of this action, so far as I am yet advised, is the prohibition of vessels arriving at La Guyara, or I presume any other port under the control of the government, with destination to Puerto Cabello, from proceeding to the latter port. This is a feature of the case to which I invite your special attention.

The dispatch quoted from in my reply you will find to be No. 11 to Mr. Partridge.

I have, &c.,

JEHU BAKER.

[Inclosure 1 in No. 85.—Translation.]

Mr. Rójas to Mr. Baker.

Caracas, January 15, 1879.

Sir: I have the honor to bring to the knowledge of your excellency that, according to provision No. 2 of article 75, law XVI of the Code de Hacienda, cargoes destined for a port where the public order is found to be altered must proceed by the same vessel in which they arrive, to the nearest qualified port; and that the national executive resolved yesterday that this case having occured at Puerto Cabello, the maritime custom-house of La Guayra, as the nearest, will discharge, in the provided respect, the cargoes destined for the first.

I renew to your excellency the protestations of my high consideration.

P. EZEGNIEL RÓJAS.

[Inclosure 2 in No. 85.]

Mr. Baker to Mr. Rójas.

Legation of the United Seates,
Caracas, January 22, 1879.

Sir: The undersigned, minister resident Of the United States to Venezuela, has the honor to acknowledge the receipt of the communication of the minister of exterior relations of date 15th instant, bringing to his knowledge that, according to provision No. 2 of article 75, law XVI, of the Code de Hacienda, cargoes destined for a port where the public order is found to be altered, must proceed by the same vessel in which they arrive to the nearest qualified port, and that the national executive had, on the previous day, resolved that this case having occurred at Puerto Cabello, the maritime custom-house at La Guayra, as the nearest, would discharge, in the provided respect, the cargoes sent to the first.

In answer to this communication the undersigned has to say that he does not acquiesce in this order; that he is advised that the port of Puerto Cabello was, at the date of the order, under the control of a hostile force; that whatever may be the measure of the legitimate power of a government to close a port which is under its control, the only legal method of closing a port which is in possession of a force hostile to it is, a regularly declared instituted and maintained blockade,” of which there is no intimation in said communication.

In this connection the undersigned adds an extract from a dispatch from the Department of State of his government to his predecessor, Mr. Partridge, and which, as appears by the record thereof in the legation, was brought to the knowledge of the Government of Venezuela in a communication of Mr. Partridge of date September 18, 1869. The extract in question is as follows, viz:

“In regard to the attempt of the Government of Venezuela to interfere with the commerce at Maracaibo, I have to say that, while that port is in the possession of a force hostile to the Government of Venezuela, the President recognizes a regularly declared instituted and maintained blockade as the only way of closing the port authorized by the law of nations. The mere posting of a revenue cutter off that port, without the institution of a blocknde, will not be acquiesced in by the President.”

The principle here announced is, as the undersigned understands it, that while a port of a government is in possession of a force hostile to it, the only way of closing it authorized by the law of nations is by “a regularly declared instituted and maintained blockade,” from which it results that, in the absence of such a blockade, the port of Puerto Cabello, while in possession of a force hostile to the Government of Venezuela, is not in the view of the law of nations closed by said order.

Said order, then, being in contravention of the law of nations, it cannot be upheld by a law of Venezuela; and Venezuela must be justly responsible for any legal damages occasioned by it to-citizens of the United States or their property.

The undersigned renews to Mr. Rójas the assurances of his distinguished consideration.

JEHU BAKER.

No. 493. Mr. Evarts to Mr. Baker. [Document 527]

No. 493.
Mr. Evarts to Mr. Baker.

Department of State,
Washington, February 24, 1879. No. 35.]

Sir: Your dispatch No. 85, of the 24th ultimo, with a copy of the correspondence between yourself and the minister of foreign affairs of Venezuela, in relation to the resolution of the executive that cargoes destined for Puerto Cabello be discharged at La Guayra, has been received.

In reply I have to state that your non-acquiescence in the order referred to is approved on the ground that Puerto Cabello was in possession of a force hostile to the government, and consequently was not by such order closed to commerce. Such cases are numerous in the relations of this government with the Spanish-American States.

I am, &c.,

WILLIAM M. EVARTS.

No. 494. Mr. Baker to Mr. Evarts. [Document 528]

No. 494.
Mr. Baker to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Caracas, February 26, 1879. (Received March 24.) No. 96.]

Sir: Referring to my No. 95, in which I state, among other things, that on the 13th instant Cedéno entered Caracas at the head of his army, I now send herewith a copy and translation of a note to myself of date 14th instant, from the secretary-general of the general-in-chief of the army, together with a copy of my note of date 15th instant, in reply thereto.

I have, &c.,

JEHU BAKER.

[Inclosure 1 in No. 96.—Translation.]

united states of venezuela.—secretaryship general of the chief of the grand army of liberation.—number 588.

Caracas, February 14, 1879.

Sir: I have the honor to communicate to the minister resident of the United States of the North, that the Citizen-General Gregorio Cedeño, general-in-chief of the array of liberation, took possession yesterday of the capital of the republic at the head of his numerous army, after having vanquished the armed resistance which the government, emanating from the convention, opposed to him. As consequence of this occupation and of the national will, expressed almost unanimously in public documents, the triumphant revolution constitutes now the government of the republic, at whose head is the general-in-chief of the army, while the illustrious American, General Antonio Guzman Blanco, proclaimed by the people as supreme director, returns to the country.

I have also the honor to bring to the knowledge of the minister that I have been named by the general-in-chief of the army his secretary-general, and that it is in this character that I address myself to your excellency.

I also in like manner communicate to your excellency that Dr. Nicanor Bórjis has been named, and discharges the functions of, civil and military chief of the federal district.

In making to the minister the preceding communications, I am pleased to assure him of my distinguished consideration.

CANUTO GARCIA.

[Inclosure 2 in No. 96.]

Mr. Baker to Mr. Garcia.

Legation of the United States,
Caracas, February 15, 1879.

Sir: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your polite note in character of secretary-general of the general-in-chief of the army of date yesterday, in which you communicate to me the statement that the Citizen-General Gregorio Cedeño, general-in-chief of the army of liberation took possession of the capital of the republic the day preceding at the head of his numerous army, after having vanquished the armed resistance which the government, emanating from the convention, opposed to it, &c.

I shall, at the earliest opportunity, bring to the knowledge of my government the state of affairs which is the subject of your note.

Meantime, I am, &c.,

JEHU BAKER.

No. 495. Mr. Baker to Mr. Evarts. [Document 529]

No. 495.
Mr. Baker to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Caracas, February 27, 1879. (Received March 24.) No. 98.]

Sir: At about 4 p.m. on the 25th instant General Guzman Blanco arrived in Caracas. The town was duly decorated and embannered for the occasion, and the entrée was accompanied by a movement of the people, discharges of cannon, and explosion of rockets.

I have, &c.,

JEHU BAKER.

No. 496. Mr. Baker to Mr. Evarts. [Document 530]

No. 496.
Mr. Baker to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Caracas, March 17, 1879. (Received April 8.) No. 105.]

Sir: I send herewith a copy of a decree by General Guzman Blanco, as the same appears in La Opinion Nacional of the 28th ultimo, together with a translation thereof. This decree calls a congress of plenipotentiaries to meet in the federal district on the 27th of April next, or the most contiguous day, to be composed of the presidents of the States, or of representative substitutes appointed by them; this congress to fix provisional institutions for the country, elect a provisional president, &c. This document, like that transmitted with my No. 104, should be read in full.

I have, &c.,

JEHU BAKER.

[Inclosure in No. 105.—Translation.]

guzman blanco, illustrious american, pacificator and re generator of venezuela, supreme director of the revindication, etc.

In use of the powers which the people have conferred upon me for the political and administrative reorganization of the republic—

I decree: Article 1. On the 27th of April next, or the day most contiguous, a congress of plenipotentiaries will meet in the federal district, composed of the presidents of the States, or of citizens in their places who represent them, whom they may name in case of not being able to be present.

Art. 2. The congress of plenipotentiaries will install itself, and open each session with at least one more than half its members; and in default of this number on the day upon which it should install itself, those present will meet in a preparatory commission, and, previously electing one to preside over them, dictate means for the concurrence of the absentees.

Art. 3. The congress of plenipotentaries will fix the institutions which shall provisionally rule the country until they are reformed according to the legal formulas.

Art. 4. The congress of plenipotentiaries will elect the citizen who may have to discharge provisionally the presidency of the republic until he may be substituted constitutionally.

Art. 5. The congress of plenipotentiaries will occupy itself with resolving the other matters which the supreme director may submit to its consideration in all the branches of the public administration.

Art. 6. The minister of interior relations is charged with the execution of this decree.

Given, signed with my hand, and countersigned by the proper minister (ministro del ramo) in the capitol of Caracas, the 27th of February, 1879.
GUZMAN BLANCO.

Countersigned. The minister of interior relations:

DIEGO B. URBANEJA.

No. 497. Mr. Baker to Mr. Evarts. [Document 531]

No. 497.
Mr. Baker to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Caracas, April 14, 1879. (Received May 13.) No. 115.]

Sir: I inclose here with a copy of a decree of General Guzman Blanco, of date 12th ultimo, as the same appears in La Opinion Nacional of the 17th ultimo, together with a translation thereof, by which decree he declares the department of Maracay, in the State of Guzman Blanco, to be federal territory, and appoints General Joaquin Crespo to govern the same as civil and military chief.

As helping to a proper idea of the scope of power which General Guzman Blanco is exercising, this decree is worthy of notice.

I have, &c.,

JEHU BAKER.

[Inclosure in No. 115.—Translation.]

guzman blanco, illustrious american pacificator and regenerator of venezuela, and supreme director of the revindication, etc.

[From La Opinion Nacional of March 17, 1879.]

In exercise of the powers which the people have conferred upon me for the political and administrative organization of the republic—

I decree: Article 1. I declare the department of Maracay, in the State of Guzman Blanco, to be federal territory.

Art. 2. This territory will be governed by a civil and military chief, and I appoint the Citizen-General Joaquin Crespo for the discharge of this employ.

Art. 3. The minister of interior relations is charged with the execution of this decree.

Given, signed with my hand, and countersigned by the proper minister (ministro del ramo) in the capitol at Caracas, on the twelfth of March, one thousand eight hundred and seventy-nine.
GUZMAN BLANCO.

Countersigned. The minister of interior relations:

DIEGO B. URBANEJA.

No. 498. Mr. Baker to Mr. Evarts. [Document 532]

No. 498.
Mr. Baker to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Caracas, May 14, 1879. (Received June 2.) No. 125.]

Sir: Referring to my dispatches numbered 105, 120, and 124, I have to say that I hear that the congress of plenipotentiaries, which met on the 27th ultimo, adjourned on the 13th instant, although I have not been able to learn positively that this is so. Its full proceedings have not yet been published. I am advised that it has, among other things, reduced the twenty States of Venezuela to seven, revived the constitution of 1874, and elected General Guzman Blanco provisional president, with a view to his continuing in this character, as I hear, until February, 1882, which statement as to time of tenure, I hold subject to correction should it prove erroneous.

He was, as I am advised, diplomatically recognized, on the 12th instant, by the representatives of Spain, England, Germany, France, Brazil, and Italy; and I hear that he purposes leaving on Monday, the 19th instant, for France, by the way of the United States, with the view of bringing his wife, or family to Venezuela. So it maybe he will visit Washington. If so, I bespeak for him the due courtesy which our country knows so well how to extend in such case.

To give some idea of the manner in which the present form of the power of General Guzman Blanco (that of provisional president) has been evolved out of the successful revolution, it is only necessary to make a single remark: In view of the composition and warrant of this “congress of plenipotentiaries,” made up of one man from each of the twenty States, the president thereof or his substitute, and several of the presidents themselves having been appointed, as I understand, by Guzman since his return; called together, as it has been, simply by a decree of Guzman, with no formal delegated representative power whatever, that I am advised of, from the States or the people thereof, and yet invited to employ and actually employing the greatest political powers, even to the extinction of the very States which near two-thirds of the members purported to stand for; it is certainly moderate to say that the proceeding presents a singularly curious and instructive phase of abnormal politics.

I am, &c.,

JEHU BAKER.

No. 499. Mr. Baker to Mr. Evarts. [Document 533]

No. 499.
Mr. Baker to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Caracas, June 10, 1879. (Received July 19.) No. 140.]

Sir: Referring to my Nos. 97, 126, and 137, I inclose herewith the opening part of a communication from General Guzman, as the same appears in the evening number of the Gaceta Oficial of the 2d instant, with a translation thereof.

The communication is addressed to the five chiefs of the five military districts into which the country was divided by a decree of General Guzman. (See my dispatch No. 119 and its inclosures.)

In the part of the communication which I inclose, he says: Yesterday I separated myself from the presidency, using the permission which the congress of plenipotentiaries accorded me, to go to Europe in quest of my family; to initiate an adjustment which may reduce our exterior debt to a third part; to negotiate treaties by which our natural products may be free from duties of importation in those markets, in exchange for the reciprocity which we will accord to their natural products in ours, and to formalize the purchase of Curacoa, &c.

In connection with General Guzman’s indication of purpose to purchase Curacoa, I refer to my No. 50, inclosing a map and description of that island.

I have, &c.,

JEHU BAKER.

No. 500. Mr. Baker to Mr. Evarts. [Document 534]

No. 500.
Mr. Baker to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Caraeos, August 25, 1879. (Received October 2.) No. 160.]

Sir: Referring to my number 142 and its inclosure, from which it appears that the ports of Venezuela are visited by a considerable number of French, English, and German steamers, and that no steamer with the registry and flag of the United States is seen in any of them, certain very striking considerations present themselves upon this state of the case.

Venezuela is separated from the United States by the Little Caribbean Sea and the Gulf of Mexico; from Europe by the broad Atlantic Ocean, taken semi-lengthwise. As compared with Europe, the United States is a near neighbor of Venezuela.

Having some time since met in this city with Capt. Charles Scandella, of Ciudad Bolivar, I requested him to prepare for me a table showing the nautical distances from various ports of the United States and Europe, to the principal ports of this country. He very obligingly consented to do so, and sent me a table showing the distances in nautical miles from New York and other of our cities, and from Hamburg and other European cities, to the principal ports of Venezuela.

I give in the following table the distances thus kindly furnished me by Captain Scandella:

Ports of Venezuela.

Maracaibo. Porto Cabello. La Guayra. Barceloma. Carupano. Ciudad Bolivar.

ports of the united states.

New York * 1,495 1,838 1,831 1,895 1,900 2,172

Philadelphia 1,781 1,765 1,761 1,829 1,841 2,172

Baltimore 1,840 1,830 1,830 1,880 1,893 2,212

New Orleans 1,755 1,855 1,922 2,042 2,108 2,353

ports of europe.

Hamburg 4,882 4,840 4,790 4,683 4,502 4,500

Liverpool 4,340 4,358 4,248 4,141 3,960 3,958

Bordeaux 4,148 4,106 4,056 3,949 3,768 3,766

Marseilles 5,220 5,040 4,980 4,920 4,860 4,800

Barcelona 5,400 5,240 4,860 4,800 4,710 4,560

Havre 4,231 4,189 4,139 4,032 3,851 3,849

According to this table, communication and trade between the several-named ports of the United States and those of Venezuela, being by lines of transit which are, on the average, less than half the length of those between the stated ports of Europe and the latter country, the following consequences would seem to follow: First, the time of transit between the United State and Venezuela under equal conditions, is not more than half the time between Venezuela and Europe; second, the consumption of coal per trip would not be more than half so great; third, the amount of ship-wear per trip would not exceed one-half; fourth, the interest per trip on the capital invested in the ship and its equipment should not be more than half; fifth, the expense for officers and crew per trip would seemingly be much less; sixth, it would also appear that the sea-risk and insurance per trip would be much less.

I itemize the foregoing particulars of advantage in favor of the United States, in order to show how clear it is that, so far as the matter of transportation is concerned, any given amount of merchandise may be conveyed from the United States to Venezuela, and vice versa, in half the time that is required to do the like between Venezuela and Europe, and at much less cost.

Two general conclusions seem clearly to follow from the foregoing: 1. In view of the immense extent and variety of the natural and artificial resources and productions of our country, quite adequate to supply the countries to the south of it with well nigh, if not quite, everything they want from the North, taken in connection with those natural and permanent advantages of proximity which I have pointed out, there can be no manner of question that it is the real interest of Venezuela, as of the rest of these countries which are similarly situated, to look mainly to the United States as the most advantageous field for the extension of their foreign commerce.

2. Whatever may be the causes which have heretofore limited communication and commerce between our country and Venezuela, in common, with the other Spanish American states which are similarly situated in reference to us, these causes must be temporary in their operation; and with manufactures of equal quality, and as cheap in their home cost as those of Europe, the United States must necessarily draw to itself a very complete ascendency in the foreign trade of this and other Spanish American countries of analogous geographical relation to our own.

I am, &c.,

JEHU BAKER.

* This is obvious error. I supposititiously suggest 1,895 instead of 1,495.—J. B.

No. 501. Mr. Baker to Mr. Evarts. [Document 535]

No. 501.
Mr. Baker to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Caracas, October 28, 1879. (Received November 28.) No. 167.]

Sir: I herewith inclose a copy and translation of the preliminary (Pereire) contract referred to in my number 164.

* * * * * * *

The commissioners of the grantee, appionted to examine the situation on the ground, arrived in Caracas some time since. * * *

I have, &c.,

JEHU BAKER.

[Inclosure in 167.—Translation.]

Caracas, September 27, 1879.

The illustrious American, Regenerator and Provisional President of the republic, General Guzman Blanco, animated by the desire of giving a fruitful impulse to the different elements of national wealth, and making use of the faculties conferred upon him by the congress of plenipotentiaries, in representation of the people, who unanimously acclaimed him for the reorganization and direction of the country, authorized the minister plenipotentiary of the republic in France to hold conferences with Mr. E. Pereire, a respectable capitalist of Paris, with the object of forming the bases which would give for result the patriotic end proposed to himself by the illustrious American. Messrs. Rójas and Pereire laid down the aforesaid bases in the document inserted below.

In consequence, Mr. Pereire has named commissioners to proceed to examine on the ground the convenience and possibility of the points comprehended in the expressed bases, and the report which they may give him being obtained, he will proceed to establish the conditions under which he will propose the partial contracts to which they may give place, which, as also the bases, will be opportunely submitted to the consideration of the national legislature, according to what is enjoined in the eighth paragraph of the seventy-second article of the federal constitution; and in virtue of which, the national executive, through its respective ministries, will move the citizens’ military delegates, presidents of the states, governors of territories, and other civil and military authorities of the republic, to lend their assistance to the exploring commission in order thus to facilitate the result of their charge.

Let it be communicated to whom it concerns and be published.

DIEGO B. URBANEJA.
The minister of interior relations: JOSÉ I. PAZ CASTILLO.
The minister of exterior relations: A. F. BARBERÜ.
The minister of finance: I. RIERA AGUINAGALDA.
The minister of war and marine: I. M. ARISTE GUIETA.
The minister of public credit: NICHOLAS D. DELGADO.
The minister de fomento: B. MILÁ DE LA ROCA.
The minister of public works: J. C. CASTRO.
The governor of the federal district: JULIO F. SARRIA.

Legation of the United States of Venezuela at Paris,
Paris, August 19, 1879, 15 Place of the Madeleine.

Mr. Minister: I have the honor to inclose a copy of the protocol which I signed yesterday, in the name and representation of the government of the republic, with Mr. Eugenio Pereire, for the formation of the Agricultural and Industrial Society of Venezuela. This negotiation, initiated when the illustrious American, President of the republic, arrived in France, reached yesterday its first period. What is wanting is the work of time, and the fulfilment of the promises made is the name of the Government of Venezuela.

I cordially congratulate you upon the realization of this grand thought. It is the first time since we existed as a nation that foreign capital will touch our ports in order to enter generously into fertilizing our soil without demanding in return the money of our slender treasury. It is the first time that is offered to the republic, in a manner truly positive, the means of developing its marvelous riches, until now operated in a disheartening manner.

I judge it unnecessary to say to you that this negotiation has been brought to a close under the inspiration of the illustrious American, President of the republic, and that I have had no share in this great march of Venezuelan civilization, except the honor of signing the document in which it is consecrated.

The President desires that the greatest publicity may be given in the republic to this negotiation, so that all the interests represented by the national industry, under its double phase, agricultural and commercial, may at once hear the words of encouragement and efficient protection offered them from now by this great enterprise.

I do not need to tell you that the Messrs. Pereire occupy in the financial world of France a position so elevated that the capital of ten millions of francs, with which the Agricultural and Industrial Society of Venezuela is to begin its works, is subscribed beforehand. If the results correspond to their desires, the country will have all the millions required for the development of its internal wealth.

I have the honor to subscribe myself, Mr. Minister, your most attentive, obedient servant,

J. M. DE RÓJAS.

His Excellency the Minister of Exterior Relations.

protocol for the formation of the agricultural and industrial society of venezuela.

Between the undersigned, José Maria Rójas, minister plenipotentiary of the United States of Venezuela at Paris, residing in the Place of the Madeliene, No. 15: In the name and in representation of his government, on the one part, and Eugenio Rodriques Pereire, president of the General Transatlantic Company, domiciled in Paris, Street Faubourg St. Honoré, No. 45, on the other part, the following protocol has been agreed upon, the government of Venezuela being inspired by its ardent wish to give a fruitful impulse to the different branches of the national wealth. With this object the government will accord to Mr. Eugenio Pereire the concessions whose enumeration follows, and which will be definitively made in Caracas by the competent ministries to the agents who for this purpose Mr. Eugenio Pereire will name.

In these writings of concession all the conditions of execution will be stated, be they of a gratuitous character or of a retributive character, in favor of the nation. The concessions which will have to be regulated are the following: 1. The gratuitous concession and incomplete proprietorship of the unappropriated lands which the grantee may elect, according as they may be needed, for the purpose of introducing foreign colonization in Venezuela.

2. The concession of all the beds of coal discovered or to be discovered in Venezuela belonging to the nation, subject to a duty which will be paid to the state upon the net product of the working, after deducting the interest and amortization of the capital employed. The said duty will be determined in the writing of concession.

3. The concession of all the guanos and phosphates which the government can dispose of on the continent or on the islands of Venezuela, subject to a duty which will be paid to the state upon the net product of the working, and according as will be indicated in the writing of concession.

4. The sole, exclusive, and gratuitous authorization to found at Ciudad Bolivar, at Caracas, or at any other point which may be designated in accordance with the government, a mint, in which will be converted into money of the country all the gold and silver of the Venezuelan mines; to this effect the government will guarantee the prohibition of the exportation of gold and silver, be it in ingots or be it in minerals.

5. The concession of the laying of a submarine cable between the coasts of Venezuela and the point of the neighboring Antilles which may be most convenient, in case the concession actually in force shall not have been put in execution within the stipulated time.

The new concession will be made under the same conditions as the preceding one, and with a reduction of 50 per cent, on the prices of the established tariffs for the dispatches of the government.

6. The concession by preference of all the mining wealth belonging to the nation, as mines of gold, silver, copper, lead, kaolin, asphaltum, subject to a duty to the state, which will be determined in the writings of concession, after receiving the interest and the amortization according to the usages of the country.

7. The sole and gratuitous concession of a service of steamers on the rivers Orinoco, Apure, Portuguesa, Aranca, Uribante, and other navigable ways, as well as on the lakes of Valenica, of Maracaibo, and their affluents, as also on the most suitable points of the coasts of Venezuela, and the canalization of the River Tuy.

The post transports of the state, personal and material, will be made by means of the projected services under conditions which will be determined ulteriorly.

8. The authorization by preference to establish railroads, wide and narrow tramways, and ordinary highroads, to which effect, as remuneration, the government compromises itself to give the necessary lands for their location, and besides to concede gratis a certain number of kilometers of land on both sides of the roads which shall be established.

9. The sole and exclusive concession to work the forests of the territory Amazonas and other workable ones of Venezuela, subject to a duty to the state, which will be ulteriorly fixed, and which will be paid in cash or in new materials, at the election of the grantee, and on the conditions above indicated.

10. The concession of the exclusive working of Peruvian bark in the states of Venezuela, subject to a duty which will be discussed as above said.

11. The concession of the exclusive right to emit obligations with chance (obligaciones con lotes), as is practiced in France by the city of Paris and the Crédit Foneier.

12. The exclusive and gratuitous authorization to create all the depositories, public markets, sale-rooms, with power to emit negotiable bills.

13. The exclusive authorization to manufacture dynamite and other analogous explosive products in all the states of Venezuela, for which the government compromises itself to prohibit the entrance of said products, the manipulation of which might occasion serious dangers.

14. The exclusive and gratuitous concession of the colonization of the islands of the territory Colon, on the condition of establishing on said islands, and after twenty years leaving them to the government, a wharf, a municipal house, a church, a penitentiary, and a population sufficient to uphold the existing cultivations, the colonization of which the government will engage itself to regulate.

15. The exclusive and gratuitous concession to establish in Venezuela a central depository of emigration, destined to receive emigrants from all countries on their arrival and to distrbute them according to the necessities of the proprietories.

The grantee will have the right to employ his emigrants in the cultivation of the lands of his central depository until the reimbursement of what they owe shall be verified. The proprietaries who contract them will pay the expenses of passage and maintenance as well as the commission agreed on.

16. The machines, instruments, and accessories proper for the working of all the concessions accorded to Mr. Eugenio Pereire will be exempt from all duty of entrance or departure.

17. The recompense of the concessions which have said character will be agreed upon between the government and the grantee or his agents, taking for base the recompenses which have been previously stipulated in analogous cases.

18. Mr. Eugenio Pereire will always have the right to cede all or any of the preceding concessions, provided the grantee offers the necessary guarantees of morality and solvency.

Mr. Eugenio Pereire accepts the above-mentioned concessions, and after he shall have caused to be examined on the ground itself its importance and value, and should said examination result favorably, he compromises, himself to constitute in Paris a French anonymous society, the pricipal objects of which will be— 1st. The working of all the concessions made by the Venezuelan Government to Mr. Eugenio Pereire.

2d. The establishment and working of large machines for the manufacture of sugar, cigars, and other products.

3d. The creation of steam saw-mills, manufactories of bricks, and other industries.

4th. Mortgage loans on crops, merchandise, titles, and values.

5th. The exchange and operations of a hank of commission.

6th. Agricultural, industrial, and commercial undertakings.

The said society will be constituted with a capital of 10,000,000 of francs, represented by 20,000 shares of 500 francs each.

These 20,000 shares will be subscribed in cash, and on subscription a fourth part of the value of each one, that is, 125 francs per share, will be collected.

Besides the 20,000 shares equivalent to the capital brought, 20,000 shares will be created, called shares of grace, which will be attributed to the grantee in representation of the cession he will make to the society of the privileges above indicated.

After having deducted all the general expenses, there will be set apart from the net products of the enterprise— 1st. Five per cent., to form the reserve fund prescribed by the French law.

2d. The necessary sum to pay an interest of six per cent, on the capital actually disbursed for the shares.

To this effect, in case the products should be insufficient during the first operations, the unpaid interest shall be deferred and paid in the following operations:

3d. Upon the sums which remain free after having set apart the above mentioned, there will be set apart— A. Ten per cent., which will be destined to the amortization of the shares of the capital, which will in this case be replaced (after the reimbursement of the sums delivered) by shares of grace equal to the 20,000 which will have been delivered to the grantee.

B. Ten per cent. will be destined to the council of administration for division among its members as it judges proper.

C. Eighty per cent., which will be equally distributed among the 40,000 shares of capital and of grace without distinction between them.

The council of administration of the society will be composed of from five to nine members, who will be designated in the statutes.

In case of the associated capital increasing, a number of shares of grace will be created equal to that of the new shares emitted, so that those shall always be equal to the number of the shares of the capital.

The new shares of grace thus created will be gratuitously delivered to the grantee, or to those who have a right to said shares, as a supplement to that paid in.

On the dissolution of the society, the duration of which will be fifty years, or in case of an anticipated dissolution, the necessary sum to reimburse the snares of the capital in principal and interest of six per cent, shall be taken out of its net active capital, and the excess shall be equally divided among 40,000 shares of capital and of grace without any distinction.

The government of Venezuela promises all its support to the grantee for the examination he at once proposes to make of the concessions it is disposed to accord him.

Done in triplicate at Paris, the 18th of August, 1879.
For the government of the United States of Venezuela.
The minister plenipotentiary:
J. M. de RÓJAS.

The writing approved.

The grantee:

EUG. PEREIRE.

Alphabetical Index. Alphabetical Index.

Note.—The page number refers to the page upon which the dispatch or paper begins in which the subject referred to is discussed.

A.

Acapulco: firing upon Consul Sutter’s flag May, 1877; officer in command of fort at time, sentenced by court-martial to lose commission 802 [Pg. 802 includes portions of Doc. 378 and Doc. 379]

A’Court, commander of Her Britannic Majesty’s ship “Osprey:” thanks of the United States tendered in recognition of services in protecting Sitka from hostile Indians 490 [Pg. 490 includes portions of Doc. 240 and Doc. 241] report upon condition of affairs at Sitka; town saved from destruction by Indians by presence of the “Osprey” 492 [Pg. 492 includes portions of Doc. 242 and Doc. 243]

Adams, Charles Francis, jr.: Series of questions as to railroad taxation in Europe; dispatch to Mr. Welsh; identic dispatches to other ministers. 413 [Pg. 413 includes portions of Doc. 210 and Doc. 211] Reports from ministers to Austria-Hungary, Belgium, France, Germany, Great Britain, The Netherlands, Russia, and Switzerland upon railroad taxation 52 [Pg. 52 includes portions of Doc. 41 and Doc. 42], 54 [Pg. 54 includes portions of Doc. 42 and Doc. 43], 63 [Pg. 63 includes portions of Doc. 47 and Doc. 48], 92 [Pg. 92 includes portions of Doc. 60 and Doc. 61], 345 [Pg. 345 is part of Doc. 182], 379 [Pg. 379 includes portions of Doc. 194 and Doc. 195], 413 [Pg. 413 includes portions of Doc. 210 and Doc. 211], 429 [Pg. 429 includes portions of Doc. 217 and Doc. 218], 846 [Pg. 846 includes portions of Doc. 403 and Doc. 404], 847 [Pg. 847 includes portions of Doc. 404 and Doc. 405], 910 [Pg. 910 includes portions of Doc. 446 and Doc. 447], 970 [Pg. 970 includes portions of Doc. 491 and Doc. 492]

reports upon railroad system of Sweden and Norway 959 [Pg. 959 includes portions of Doc. 486 and Doc. 487], 960 [Pg. 960 includes portions of Doc. 487 and Doc. 488]

Admeasurement of vessels: Belgium: regulations of the Government of, touching. 112 [Pg. 112 is part of Doc. 64] views of the Secretary of the Treasury as to admeasurement of Belgian vessels 114 [Pg. 114 is part of Doc. 65], 116 [Pg. 116 is part of Doc. 67], 119 [Pg. 119 includes portions of Doc. 68 and Doc. 69]

American rule does not recognize net tonnage; system explained 116 [Pg. 116 is part of Doc. 67]

Germany: commercial treaty with Austria-Hungary of December 16, 1878, article 11; admeasurement of vessels to be mutually accepted 44 [Pg. 44 includes portions of Doc. 36 and Doc. 37]

Great Britain: same rule of admeasurement of British vessels in Suez Canal trade to extend to vessels of other nations 487 [Pg. 487 includes portions of Doc. 236 and Doc. 237]

Admiral, tug: case of, vs. frigate Constitution; claim for salvage; judgment given by Sir R. Phillimore against tug 407 [Pg. 407 includes portions of Doc. 208, Doc. 209, and Doc. 210]

Africa: Mr. Noyes instructed to study trade relations with countries of North Africa, with reference to extension of American commerce 342 [Pg. 342 includes portions of Doc. 180 and Doc. 181] Central: population said to be upward of one hundred millions; French projects to develop commercial relations with; project of a railway from Algeria 722 [Pg. 722 includes portions of Doc. 354 and Doc. 355]

report upon the project of a railway from Algeria to the Soudan; European enterprises 723 [Pg. 723 includes portions of Doc. 355 and Doc. 356]

Liberia: agricultural and commercial interests, resources, and possibilities 699 [Pg. 699 is part of Doc. 347], 701 [Pg. 701 includes portions of Doc. 347 and Doc. 348], 712 [Pg. 712 is part of Doc. 349], 722 [Pg. 722 includes portions of Doc. 354 and Doc. 355], 723 [Pg. 723 includes portions of Doc. 355 and Doc. 356] the rumor of a French protectorate false; hostility of people and government to the idea; interest of the United States in Liberia 341 [Pg. 341 includes portions of Doc. 179 and Doc. 180], 718 [Pg. 718 includes portions of Doc. 351, Doc. 352, and Doc. 353], 727 [Pg. 727 includes portions of Doc. 356, Doc. 357, and Doc. 358]

Agriculture: Belgium: condition of agriculture; implements in use 87 [Pg. 87 is part of Doc. 57]

Colombia: agricultural productions in their relationship to commerce with the United States 254 [Pg. 254 includes portions of Doc. 142 and Doc. 143], 256 [Pg. 256 is part of Doc. 144], 278 [Pg. 278 is part of Doc. 152]

Great Britain: agricultural and commercial depression; speeches of Lords Beaconsfield, Derby, and Salisbury 453 [Pg. 453 includes portions of Doc. 226 and Doc. 227], 468 [Pg. 468 is part of Doc. 231] editorial from The Times and letter from Mr. Andrews upon American agriculture and land 466 [Pg. 466 is part of Doc. 230], 478 [Pg. 478 includes portions of Doc. 231 and Doc. 232]

report from Mr. Hoppin upon the effect of the agricultural depression upon emigration 463 [Pg. 463 includes portions of Doc. 227 and Doc. 228]

the growth of the American cattle trade; its bearing upon English agriculture 423 [Pg. 423 includes portions of Doc. 214 and Doc. 215]

Hawaiian Islands: sugar and rice production 529 [Pg. 529 includes portions of Doc. 261 and Doc. 262]

Hayti: industrial condition discussed; deplorable condition of her agriculture 560 [Pg. 560 includes portions of Doc. 273 and Doc. 274]

Liberia: report upon Liberian coffee; quality unsurpassed; large shipment of plants to Brazil 699 [Pg. 699 is part of Doc. 347] report of proceedings of meeting of Liberian planters and farmers; agricultural possibilities 712 [Pg. 712 is part of Doc. 349]

Mexico: visit to hacienda of Chualta; condition of agriculture discussed 804 [Pg. 804 includes portions of Doc. 380 and Doc. 381]

Russia: grasshopper and locust ravages in Southern Russia; report upon, by Mr. Portschinsky 920 [Pg. 920 includes portions of Doc. 457 and Doc. 458], 925 [Pg. 925 includes portions of Doc. 462 and Doc. 463]

Spain: need of improved methods; importation of American wheat 938 [Pg. 938 includes portions of Doc. 474 and Doc. 475], 939 [Pg. 939 is part of Doc. 476]

Alaska: visit of Her Britannic Majesty’s ship “Osprey,” Commander A’Court; report upon condition of affairs 490 [Pg. 490 includes portions of Doc. 240 and Doc. 241], 492 [Pg. 492 includes portions of Doc. 242 and Doc. 243] withdrawal of troops from Alaska, exposes inhabitants to the mercy of the Indians 492 [Pg. 492 includes portions of Doc. 242 and Doc. 243]

Ali Pasha, Muhammed, of Egypt: documents relating to the pacification of the Levant in 1840, 1841 1018 [Pg. 1018 includes portions of Doc. 517 and Doc. 518]

Allegiance: Germany: naturalization cases brought to attention of Legation 359 [Pg. 359 includes portions of Doc. 187 and Doc. 188], 367 [Pg. 367 includes portions of Doc. 191 and Doc. 192]

Italy: inalienable: case of Largomarsino 600 [Pg. 600 is part of Doc. 298] (See Foreign Relations, 1878, same case.)

Mexico: effect of service in Mexican army upon citizenship 815 [Pg. 815 includes portions of Doc. 386 and Doc. 387], 824 [Pg. 824 includes portions of Doc. 390 and Doc. 391]

Switzerland: difficulties attending expatriation 973 [Pg. 973 is part of Doc. 495] (For Swiss law sanctioning expatriation, see Foreign Relations, 1876, page 567.)

United States: right of expatriation fully recognized 824 [Pg. 824 includes portions of Doc. 390 and Doc. 391] status of minors, children of citizens of the United States 814 [Pg. 814 includes portions of Doc. 385 and Doc. 386], 815 [Pg. 815 includes portions of Doc. 386 and Doc. 387], 824 [Pg. 824 includes portions of Doc. 390 and Doc. 391]

American citizenship: Central America: abuses; case of Anton Joseph Maassen 143 [Pg. 143 is part of Doc. 95] suggestion that government shall establish conditions of forfeiture of citizenship; and criteria for determination of citizenship of citizens abroad 143 [Pg. 143 is part of Doc. 95]

Germany: naturalization cases; report upon cases requiring intervention of legation. 359 [Pg. 359 includes portions of Doc. 187 and Doc. 188], 367 [Pg. 367 includes portions of Doc. 191 and Doc. 192]

Mexico: query as to effect of entry into Mexican army, such act being an act of citizenship under Mexican law, upon United States citizenship 815 [Pg. 815 includes portions of Doc. 386 and Doc. 387] right of expatriation recognized by the United States; citizenship determined by local law 824 [Pg. 824 includes portions of Doc. 390 and Doc. 391]

status of minor children born while their father was yet an American citizen; case of James W. Smith 814 [Pg. 814 includes portions of Doc. 385 and Doc. 386], 815 [Pg. 815 includes portions of Doc. 386 and Doc. 387], 824 [Pg. 824 includes portions of Doc. 390 and Doc. 391]

matriculation of Americans upon production of State Department passports conceded 741 [Pg. 741 includes portions of Doc. 361 and Doc. 362], 819 [Pg. 819 includes portions of Doc. 388 and Doc. 389]

Switzerland: abuses; case of Dietze; a naturalized citizen; absentee for 24 years 968 [Pg. 968 includes portions of Doc. 490 and Doc. 491]

Turkey: consular jurisdiction in criminal cases in which Americans are offenders; case of the naturalized citizen Mirzan 987 [Pg. 987 includes portions of Doc. 502 and Doc. 503], 990 [Pg. 990 includes portions of Doc. 503, Doc. 504, and Doc. 505], 1010 [Pg. 1010 includes portions of Doc. 512 and Doc. 513], 1012 [Pg. 1012 is part of Doc. 514]

(Right of American citizens to purchase foreign-built ships and to sail them. See Chili: Peru: foreign-built ships: American flag.)

Until coming of age, a child born of American parents although continuing abroad is an American citizen 814 [Pg. 814 includes portions of Doc. 385 and Doc. 386]

American flag: Acapulco: redress accorded by Mexico for the firing upon the consul’s flag at, in 1877 802 [Pg. 802 includes portions of Doc. 378 and Doc. 379]

Question discussed as to right of foreign-built vessels owned by American citizens to the protection of, and to fly the same 150 [Pg. 150 includes portions of Doc. 98 and Doc. 99], 174 [Pg. 174 includes portions of Doc. 104 and Doc. 105], 177 [Pg. 177 is part of Doc. 109], 180 [Pg. 180 includes portions of Doc. 110, Doc. 111, and Doc. 112], 861 [Pg. 861 is part of Doc. 413], 865 [Pg. 865 includes portions of Doc. 413, Doc. 414, and Doc. 415], 867 [Pg. 867 includes portions of Doc. 416, Doc. 417, and Doc. 418], 874 [Pg. 874 includes portions of Doc. 419, Doc. 420, and Doc. 421], 877 [Pg. 877 includes portions of Doc. 421 and Doc. 422], 881 [Pg. 881 includes portions of Doc. 423, Doc. 424, and Doc. 425], 882 [Pg. 882 includes portions of Doc. 426 and Doc. 427], 884 [Pg. 884 includes portions of Doc. 428 and Doc. 429], 894 [Pg. 894 includes portions of Doc. 435, Doc. 436, and Doc. 437]

case of the “Itata,” a foreign-built vessel said to have been bought by an American citizen; required by Mr. Minister Gibbs to haul down the flag at Callao, Peru 150 [Pg. 150 includes portions of Doc. 98 and Doc. 99], 861 [Pg. 861 is part of Doc. 413]

notes from Mr. Gibbs and Mr. Christiancy to Peruvian minister for foreign affairs as to right of foreign-built ships owned by American citizens to the use of the American flag 865 [Pg. 865 includes portions of Doc. 413, Doc. 414, and Doc. 415], 874 [Pg. 874 includes portions of Doc. 419, Doc. 420, and Doc. 421], 881 [Pg. 881 includes portions of Doc. 423, Doc. 424, and Doc. 425]

the flag allowed by custom to foreign-built vessels owned by American citizens as an indication of their ownership and as an emblem of their owners’ nationality 177 [Pg. 177 is part of Doc. 109], 874 [Pg. 874 includes portions of Doc. 419, Doc. 420, and Doc. 421], 884 [Pg. 884 includes portions of Doc. 428 and Doc. 429], 894 [Pg. 894 includes portions of Doc. 435, Doc. 436, and Doc. 437]

Mr. Evarts to Mr. Christiancy: foreign-built vessels owned by American citizens may fly the flag as an indication of ownership 884 [Pg. 884 includes portions of Doc. 428 and Doc. 429], 894 [Pg. 894 includes portions of Doc. 435, Doc. 436, and Doc. 437]

American fishermen: article from the London Daily News upon the Fortune Bay fishery claims 451 [Pg. 451 includes portions of Doc. 225 and Doc. 226] (See Foreign Relations, 1878, same title.)

Ammen, Admiral: appointed with Mr. Menocal to represent the United States at the Paris interoceanic canal conference 339 [Pg. 339 includes portions of Doc. 176 and Doc. 177] report of the proceedings of the conference 380 [Pg. 380 is part of Doc. 195]

Anderson, John: seaman on American bark “C. O. Whitmore” murdered first mate of vessel on voyage from New York to Calcutta; usurpation of jurisdiction of case by the high court of Calcutta 435 [Pg. 435 includes portions of Doc. 220 and Doc. 221] report of the proceedings; material witnesses not called; insufficiency of the sentence 446 [Pg. 446 is part of Doc. 223]

Andrassy, Count: opposition to his foreign policy, and to Bosnian occupation 35 [Pg. 35 includes portions of Doc. 27 and Doc. 28]

Andrews, C. C., late minister to Sweden: letter from, published in London Times of October 24, 1879, upon land and agriculture in the United States 478 [Pg. 478 includes portions of Doc. 231 and Doc. 232]

Angel, Charles W., extradited criminal: arrested in Portugal, permission granted by Spain to transport him across Spanish territory en route to the United States 936 [Pg. 936 includes portions of Doc. 473 and Doc. 474]

Antofogasta, and portion of territory in dispute between Chili and Bolivia occupied by Chilian troops 148 [Pg. 148 includes portions of Doc. 97 and Doc. 98]

Antwerp: conversion of port dues, collected under stipulations for redemption of the Scheldt dues. 112 [Pg. 112 is part of Doc. 64] views of the Secretary of the Treasury as to conversion of Antwerp port dues, and as to admeasurement of vessels 114 [Pg. 114 is part of Doc. 65], 116 [Pg. 116 is part of Doc. 67], 119 [Pg. 119 includes portions of Doc. 68 and Doc. 69]

further discussion of subject by Mr. Van den Bossche 115 [Pg. 115 is part of Doc. 66]

admeasurement of vessels under Belgian law, port dues question 117 [Pg. 117 includes portions of Doc. 67 and Doc. 68], 119 [Pg. 119 includes portions of Doc. 68 and Doc. 69]

Areola, leader of Mexican raiders across the Rio Grande; correspondence between Mr. Foster and Mr. Avila concerning his operations 730 [Pg. 730 includes portions of Doc. 358 and Doc. 359], 754 [Pg. 754 includes portions of Doc. 364 and Doc. 365] his arrest reported by the Mexican Government 771 [Pg. 771 includes portions of Doc. 367 and Doc. 368]

Argentine Republic: boundary question with Chili, its status; case of the American bark “Devonshire” 13 [Pg. [13] is part of Doc. 12], 14 [Pg. 14 includes portions of Doc. 12 and Doc. 13], 147 [Pg. 147 includes portions of Doc. 96 and Doc. 97] solicitude of the United States that boundary question with Chili should be amicably settled 15 [Pg. 15 includes portions of Doc. 13 and Doc. 14], 147 [Pg. 147 includes portions of Doc. 96 and Doc. 97]

boundary question with Chili to be submitted to arbitration 14 [Pg. 14 includes portions of Doc. 12 and Doc. 13]

agreement for submission to arbitration suspended 20 [Pg. 20 includes portions of Doc. 17 and Doc. 18]

boundary question: treaty signed establishing the status quo for a period of ten years; Straits of Magellan neutralized and opened to all flags 23 [Pg. 23 includes portions of Doc. 20 and Doc. 21]

Senate rejects the status quo treaty with Chili; new propositions looking to arbitration 25 [Pg. 25 includes portions of Doc. 23 and Doc. 24]

popular sympathy in favor of Bolivia and Peru, and against Chili 20 [Pg. 20 includes portions of Doc. 17 and Doc. 18]

Congress assembles; message read; financial statement satisfactory; debt reduced; peace assured; immigration increasing 21 [Pg. 21 includes portions of Doc. 18 and Doc. 19]

attempted assassination of General Roca; cabinet crisis; Ex-President Sarmiento appointed minister of the interior and chief of cabinet 25 [Pg. 25 includes portions of Doc. 23 and Doc. 24]

conflict between the national government and that of the state or province of Buenos Ayres apprehended 27 [Pg. 27 is part of Doc. 25], 28 [Pg. 28 includes portions of Doc. 25 and Doc. 26]

Congress enacts law prohibiting mobilization of national guard within eight months preceding a Presidential election 34 [Pg. 34 includes portions of Doc. 26 and Doc. 27]

Arizona: depredations committed in, by Mexican outlaws; refuge afterward sought in Sonora 734 [Pg. 734 includes portions of Doc. 360 and Doc. 361]

Armies of Europe: strength of 82 [Pg. 82 includes portions of Doc. 54 and Doc. 55]

Arosemena, Pablo, minister for foreign affairs of Colombia, signed protocol January 7, 1879, with Mr. Dichman, regulating deposit of ships’ papers with consuls of the United States in Colombian ports 266 [Pg. 266 includes portions of Doc. 146 and Doc. 147] signed protocol February 22, 1879, with Mr. Dichman as to right of transit of troops and prisoners of the United States across the Isthmus of Panama 273 [Pg. 273 includes portions of Doc. 150 and Doc. 151]

Asta Buruaga, Señor: appointed Chilian minister at Washington 160 [Pg. 160 includes portions of Doc. 101 and Doc. 102]

Asylum: so-called right of, in consulates and legations; gravity of the question; the practice an inducement to revolution 570 [Pg. 570 includes portions of Doc. 277 and Doc. 278] correspondence respecting the so-called right of asylum; protest of Haytian minister for foreign affairs 576 [Pg. 576 includes portions of Doc. 280 and Doc. 281]

the United States not tenacious to maintain the so-called right of asylum; refugees received in legation must refrain from communicating with insurgents while in refuge 582 [Pg. 582 includes portions of Doc. 285 and Doc. 286]

attitude of Switzerland in respect thereto; utterances of the Swiss press. 965 [Pg. 965 includes portions of Doc. 489 and Doc. 490]

Atacama, desert of, description of its resources: its possession one of the causes of the war between Chili and Bolivia 160 [Pg. 160 includes portions of Doc. 101 and Doc. 102]

Attachés: military and naval at our legations: report of Lieut. F. V. Green upon military and naval attachés, their duties, &c 906 [Pg. 906 includes portions of Doc. 445 and Doc. 446]

Austria: influence of dualism of government of empire upon the functions of the Austrian ministry 35 [Pg. 35 includes portions of Doc. 27 and Doc. 28] precautions against the Russian plague 43 [Pg. 43 includes portions of Doc. 35 and Doc. 36]

report upon the system of railway taxation and management in Austria (see Mr. Adams’s queries, page 413 [Pg. 413 includes portions of Doc. 210 and Doc. 211]) 52 [Pg. 52 includes portions of Doc. 41 and Doc. 42], 63 [Pg. 63 includes portions of Doc. 47 and Doc. 48]

regulations concerning construction of railways; government guarantee of interest; acquisition by government of railways through operation of sinking fund at the end of ninety years 63 [Pg. 63 includes portions of Doc. 47 and Doc. 48]

report upon the system of railway taxation and management in Hungary 54 [Pg. 54 includes portions of Doc. 42 and Doc. 43]

Austria-Hungary: customs duties payable after January 1, 1879, in gold; business conducted on paper basis; no gold or silver in circulation; both treated as merchandise 36 [Pg. 36 includes portions of Doc. 28 and Doc. 29] trade treaty with Germany; transportation of goods in bond in sealed cars; railways leading to frontiers of both countries to he connected; liberal application of “most favored nation” principle; text of treaty 44 [Pg. 44 includes portions of Doc. 36 and Doc. 37]

(For analysis of treaty see list of papers, page xxxii [Pg. XXXII is part of List of papers, with their subjects.].)

looking to a customs union with Servia 59 [Pg. 59 includes portions of Doc. 45 and Doc. 46]

growth of protectionist ideas; new tariff protectionist in character;

treaties with Germany and Italy based upon equivalent concessions 40 [Pg. 40 includes portions of Doc. 32 and Doc. 33]

trade returns for 1878; imports, 579, 547, 828 florins, equal to $278, 000, 000; exports, 698, 362, 513 florins, equal to $335, 000, 000; balance in favor of Austria-Hungary about $57,000,000 52 [Pg. 52 includes portions of Doc. 41 and Doc. 42]

statistics of production and consumption of beer in Austria-Hungary, and of the revenue derived there from 81 [Pg. 81 includes portions of Doc. 52 and Doc. 53]

estimate of expense of Bosnian occupation submitted to the delegation;

amount, $67, 000, 000; loss in killed, wounded, and missing, 5,000 men 38 [Pg. 38 includes portions of Doc. 30 and Doc. 31]

objection to Count Andrassy’s foreign policy, and to Bosnian occupation 35 [Pg. 35 includes portions of Doc. 27 and Doc. 28], 38 [Pg. 38 includes portions of Doc. 30 and Doc. 31]

military statistics of the empire; strength of European armies 82 [Pg. 82 includes portions of Doc. 54 and Doc. 55]

railway management in Austria and Hungary 52 [Pg. 52 includes portions of Doc. 41 and Doc. 42], 54 [Pg. 54 includes portions of Doc. 42 and Doc. 43], 63 [Pg. 63 includes portions of Doc. 47 and Doc. 48]

precautions taken by government respecting correspondence, to exclude the plague 50 [Pg. 50 includes portions of Doc. 39 and Doc. 40]

influence of dualism in the government of the empire upon local interests and questions 35 [Pg. 35 includes portions of Doc. 27 and Doc. 28]

Austro-Hungarian Bank: accumulation of silver in its vaults; effort to get it into circulation; government comes to the aid of the bank 50 [Pg. 50 includes portions of Doc. 39 and Doc. 40]

Avellaneda: President of Argentine Republic; message to Congress respecting the mobilization of the national guard in view of apprehended conflict between national government and that of Buenos Ayres 28 [Pg. 28 includes portions of Doc. 25 and Doc. 26] government measure as to mobilization of the national guard defeated 34 [Pg. 34 includes portions of Doc. 26 and Doc. 27]

averse to a war with Chili 25 [Pg. 25 includes portions of Doc. 23 and Doc. 24]

B.

Bailey, David H., consul-general at Shanghai: report upon form of procedure in mixed cases between Americans and Chinese (see Mr. Seward’s circular calling for reports upon this subject, p. 220 [Pg. 220 is part of Doc. 131]) 229 [Pg. 229 is part of Doc. 133] memorandum upon organization and procedure of international tribunal of Egypt 229 [Pg. 229 is part of Doc. 133]

Balatshano, Mr., Roumanian envoy at Vienna: communicates to Mr. Kasson the wish of his government to enter into diplomatic relations with the United States 49 [Pg. 49 includes portions of Doc. 37 and Doc. 38]

Balmaceda, Mr., Chilian minister to Buenos Ayres: empowered to carry out agreement with Argentine Republic as to boundary question 20 [Pg. 20 includes portions of Doc. 17 and Doc. 18] signs with Dr. Montes de Oca, Argentine minister, status quo convention; Straits of Magellan neutralized 23 [Pg. 23 includes portions of Doc. 20 and Doc. 21]

Banda Oriental light-dues: statement of question; attempt to collect Uruguayan taxes in Buenos Ayres; protest of Mr. Osborn 16 [Pg. 16 includes portions of Doc. 14 and Doc. 15] adjustment of question; no objection to American vessels paying East Point and English bank light-dues 19 [Pg. 19 includes portions of Doc. 15, Doc. 16, and Doc. 17]

approval of action of minister and consul at Buenos Ayres respecting the light-dues question 20 [Pg. 20 includes portions of Doc. 17 and Doc. 18]

Bandinel, F., vice-consul at New Chwang: report upon procedure in mixed cases between Americans and Chinese 233 [Pg. 233 is part of Doc. 133]

‘Barbara Taylor,” British vessel, wrecked upon island of Quelpart; aid rendered by Coreans to the crew 612 [Pg. 612 includes portions of Doc. 306 and Doc. 307]

Baring: Messrs. de Blignierès and Baring appointed controllers-general of receipts and expenses of Egypt 1033 [Pg. 1033 includes portions of Doc. 518 and Doc. 519]

Barrios, President of Guatemala: reception accorded Mr. Minister Logan: a reciprocity treaty with the United States suggested by President Barrios 142 [Pg. 142 includes portions of Doc. 93 and Doc. 94] calls constitutional convention; his dictatorship to terminate upon establishment of new government 140 [Pg. 140 includes portions of Doc. 89, Doc. 90, and Doc. 91]

Barron, William: contractor for construction of the railway from Mexico to Leon; forfeiture of contract by the Diaz Government 774 [Pg. 774 includes portions of Doc. 370 and Doc. 371]

Bath, Marquis of: article from the Spectator upon the condition of affairs in Eastern Roumelia attributed to 984 [Pg. 984 is part of Doc. 502]

Battenberg, Prince Alexander, of: elected Prince of Bulgaria; visits Constantinople en route to his principality 984 [Pg. 984 is part of Doc. 502]

Baumer, Julius, naturalized citizen: case of, brought to attention of legation at Berlin (see for full account of case, Foreign Relations, 1878, pages 210 [Pg. 210 is part of Doc. 124] and 228 [Pg. 228 is part of Doc. 132]) 367 [Pg. 367 includes portions of Doc. 191 and Doc. 192]

Bazelais, Boyer, and Edmond Paul: leaders of the revolution at Port-au-Prince 564 [Pg. 564 includes portions of Doc. 275 and Doc. 276] weakness of government action after the suppression of their revolution 569 [Pg. 569 includes portions of Doc. 276 and Doc. 277]

Beaeonsfield, Earl of: speech at Aylesbury upon the prevalent agricultural and commercial distress in Great Britain 453 [Pg. 453 includes portions of Doc. 226 and Doc. 227]

Beaumont, Commodore, United States Navy: system of international fogsignals; transmitted for submission to foreign governments for consideration and adoption 4 [Pg. 4 is part of Doc. 6]

Becker, Benjamin, naturalized citizen: case of, brought to attention of legation at Berlin 367 [Pg. 367 includes portions of Doc. 191 and Doc. 192]

Bee, F. A., Chinese consul at San Francisco: correspondence as to internal-revenue tax upon Chinese tobacco manufacturers 237 [Pg. 237 is part of Doc. 137]

Beer: statistics of production and consumption of, in Austria-Hungary 81 [Pg. 81 includes portions of Doc. 52 and Doc. 53] suggestion by Mr. Dichman looking to admission of American beer into Colombia free of duty 25 [Pg. 25 includes portions of Doc. 23 and Doc. 24]

Belgium: kind expressions of the King respecting the United States 86 [Pg. 86 includes portions of Doc. 55 and Doc. 56] suggestions looking to the extension of our trade with; necessity of studying the conditions of Belgian trade in Belgium 87 [Pg. 87 is part of Doc. 57]

resumption of diplomatic relations with Mexico; appointment of a minister 89 [Pg. 89 includes portions of Doc. 57 and Doc. 58]

national exhibition to be held in Brussels, and to open June 15, 1880 92 [Pg. 92 includes portions of Doc. 60 and Doc. 61]

report upon the system of railway taxation 92 [Pg. 92 includes portions of Doc. 60 and Doc. 61]

relations with the Vatican discussed; liberal party proposes a separation of church and state; political excitement; attitude of the clergy. 90 [Pg. 90 includes portions of Doc. 58 and Doc. 59]

debate in the Chamber of Deputies upon bill to secularize education; digest of speeches; bill passed by vote of 67 to 60 97 [Pg. 97 includes portions of Doc. 61 and Doc. 62]

report upon the gold and silver coin and bullion and currency in Belgium 109 [Pg. 109 includes portions of Doc. 62 and Doc. 63]

conversion of Antwerp port dues, and of admeasurement of vessels in Belgian ports; views of Belgian Government 112 [Pg. 112 is part of Doc. 64], 115 [Pg. 115 is part of Doc. 66]

views of the Secretary of the Treasury upon the subject 114–116 [Pgs. 114–116 include portions of Doc. 65, Doc. 66, and Doc. 67]

reply of Mr. Van den Bossche to the views of the Secretary of the Treasury 117 [Pg. 117 includes portions of Doc. 67 and Doc. 68]

answer of the Secretary of the Treasury embodied in note from Mr. Evarts 119 [Pg. 119 includes portions of Doc. 68 and Doc. 69]

Belligerent rights: case of Mr. John Calvocoressi, whose property in Turkey was occupied by the Russian army during the late Russo-Turkish war; question as to Russia’s liability discussed 913 [Pg. 913 includes portions of Doc. 449 and Doc. 450] neutrals domiciled in the country of one of two belligerents become liable to suffer the chances of war with other inhabitants of the country 883 [Pg. 883 is part of Doc. 428], 924 [Pg. 924 includes portions of Doc. 460 and Doc. 461]

note from Baron Jomini rejecting the Calvocoressi claim; no liability recognized by Russian Government on account of damage to private property in an enemy’s country 926 [Pg. 926 includes portions of Doc. 463 and Doc. 464]

Berlin: exposition of products and utensils of sea and inland fisheries to be held at Berlin in 1880; programme of exposition 354 [Pg. 354 includes portions of Doc. 184 and Doc. 185] treaty of: abstract of treaty signed at Constantinople February 8, 1879, between Russia and Turkey, supplemental to treaties of San Stefano and Berlin 978 [Pg. 978 includes portions of Doc. 497 and Doc. 498]

(For text of treaties of San Stefano and Berlin see Foreign Relations, 1878, pp. 865, 894 [Pg. 894 includes portions of Doc. 435, Doc. 436, and Doc. 437].)

Berude, John Gottfried, naturalized citizen: case brought to attention of legation at Berlin 367 [Pg. 367 includes portions of Doc. 191 and Doc. 192]

Bi-metallism: two papers upon the subject of, by Mr. George McHenry, of London 441 [Pg. 441 is part of Doc. 222]

Births, marriages, and age at which males and females attain majority in the United States: circulars of February 16, 1872, from Department of State 121 [Pg. 121 includes portions of Doc. 71, Doc. 72, and Doc. 73]

Bismarck, Prince: protectionist views attacked in parliament 365 [Pg. 365 includes portions of Doc. 190 and Doc. 191] his views sustained 360 [Pg. 360 includes portions of Doc. 188 and Doc. 189], 392 [Pg. 392 includes portions of Doc. 199 and Doc. 200], 394 [Pg. 394 includes portions of Doc. 200, Doc. 201, and Doc. 202]

speech in the Reichstag upon suspension of sale of government silver, and change in basis of coinage 385 [Pg. 385 includes portions of Doc. 197 and Doc. 198]

powerful influence with the people; government success at the elections to the Prussian Landtag 402 [Pg. 402 includes portions of Doc. 203 and Doc. 204]

de Blignières: Messrs. Baring and de Blignières appointed controllers-general of receipts and expenses by Egyptian Government 1033 [Pg. 1033 includes portions of Doc. 518 and Doc. 519]

Bloeh, Eli, naturalized citizen: case brought to attention of legation at Berlin 367 [Pg. 367 includes portions of Doc. 191 and Doc. 192]

Blockade: effectiveness of Chilian blockade of Iquique; effect upon blockade of withdrawal at night of blockading squadron to a distance of four miles from the shore 886 [Pg. 886 includes portions of Doc. 430 and Doc. 431] views of Minister Christiancy upon the blockade of Iquique approved 893 [Pg. 893 includes portions of Doc. 433, Doc. 434, and Doc. 435]

ports in hands of hostile forces, can only be closed to neutral nations by the government of the country in which they are located, by blockade:

attempt of Venezuela to close Puerto Cabello by decree 1038 [Pg. 1038 includes portions of Doc. 525 and Doc. 526], 1040 [Pg. 1040 includes portions of Doc. 527 and Doc. 528]

Blumenkron, Mr.: Mexican forced loan case; carried to the courts; decision in his favor; decision valueless; judgments cannot be collected against the Treasury, 746 [Pg. 746 includes portions of Doc. 362 and Doc. 363]

Blyden, Dr., Liberian minister to Great Britain: speech of, as to resources and possibilities of Liberia 712 [Pg. 712 is part of Doc. 349]

Boig, Emilio: an American citizen; impressed into the Mexican army; protest of Mr. Minister Foster; release of Boig 741 [Pg. 741 includes portions of Doc. 361 and Doc. 362]

Bolivia: origin of war with Chili; boundary question; movements of Chilian military and naval forces 148 [Pg. 148 includes portions of Doc. 97 and Doc. 98] war declared against Chili; Peru to join Bolivia; secret alliance between Bolivia and Peru; movement of Chilian forces 160 [Pg. 160 includes portions of Doc. 101 and Doc. 102]

text of secret treaty between Bolivia and Peru; Peruvian statement of the causes of war with Chili 867 [Pg. 867 includes portions of Doc. 416, Doc. 417, and Doc. 418]

no Bolivian privateer to be allowed to fit out in the ports of the United States 125 [Pg. 125 includes portions of Doc. 73 and Doc. 74]

Treasury circular of June 21, 1879, prohibiting the fitting out of Bolivian privateers in the United States 126 [Pg. 126 includes portions of Doc. 74, Doc. 75, Doc. 76, and Doc. 77]

Treasury circular and views of the United States communicated to the Government of Bolivia 127 [Pg. 127 includes portions of Doc. 77 and Doc. 78], 128 [Pg. 128 includes portions of Doc. 78, Doc. 79, and Doc. 80]

Bombardment: question as to necessity of preceding notice discussed 889 [Pg. 889 includes portions of Doc. 432 and Doc. 433]

Bosnian occupation: Austrian estimates; expenses, $67,000,000; loss in killed, wounded, and missing, 5,000 men 38 [Pg. 38 includes portions of Doc. 30 and Doc. 31]

Boundary question between Argentine Republic and Chili; case of the American bark “Devonshire” 13 [Pg. [13] is part of Doc. 12], 14 [Pg. 14 includes portions of Doc. 12 and Doc. 13], 15 [Pg. 15 includes portions of Doc. 13 and Doc. 14], 147 [Pg. 147 includes portions of Doc. 96 and Doc. 97] course of negotiations 21 [Pg. 21 includes portions of Doc. 18 and Doc. 19], 23 [Pg. 23 includes portions of Doc. 20 and Doc. 21], 25 [Pg. 25 includes portions of Doc. 23 and Doc. 24]

Boundary relations of the United States with Canada and Mexico. (See Frontier relations: Great Britain: Mexico.) Mr. Kasson suggests consideration of Austro-German commercial treaty in connection with our frontier relations with Canada and Mexico 44 [Pg. 44 includes portions of Doc. 36 and Doc. 37]

Boundary relations of Austria-Hungary and Germany: as illustrated by commercial treaty 44 [Pg. 44 includes portions of Doc. 36 and Doc. 37]

Boxer, British man-of-war: receives refugees from Haytien revolution on board 569 [Pg. 569 includes portions of Doc. 276 and Doc. 277]

Brassey, Mr. Thomas; M. P.: letter upon the organization of a naval reserve of ships for Great Britain; remarks upon the United States steamer Trenton 429 [Pg. 429 includes portions of Doc. 217 and Doc. 218]

Brazil: condition of trade in Brazil; need of capital to insure success to Americans engaging in business in Brazil; strength of British in fluence; 133 [Pg. 133 includes portions of Doc. 83 and Doc. 84] no opening for Americans as clerks; acquaintance with the language necessary to success in business 132 [Pg. 132 includes portions of Doc. 82 and Doc. 83]

need of the establishment of solid American business houses in Brazil 134 [Pg. 134 includes portions of Doc. 84 and Doc. 85]

public sentiment favorable to the United States 130 [Pg. 130 is part of Doc. 81]

trade-mark convention between the United States and Brazil concluded. 129 [Pg. 129 is part of Doc. 80]

cabinet crises; changes in the electoral system proposed; political emancipation of non-Catholics discussed 132 [Pg. 132 includes portions of Doc. 82 and Doc. 83]

changes in the electoral laws; limitation of suffrage, with direct voting for members of Parliament 135 [Pg. 135 includes portions of Doc. 85 and Doc. 86]

probable passage of the electoral bill; account of the debate 136 [Pg. 136 includes portions of Doc. 86 and Doc. 87]

large importation of Liberian coffee-plants 699 [Pg. 699 is part of Doc. 347]

request of Brazilian minister that the United States laws against counterfeiting may be extended to embrace issues of foreign governments 138 [Pg. 138 includes portions of Doc. 87 and Doc. 88]

disagreement in Judiciary Committee of the United States Senate as to constitutional power to enact laws punishing the counterfeiting of the notes of foreign powers by persons in the United States 140 [Pg. 140 includes portions of Doc. 89, Doc. 90, and Doc. 91]

subject to be again brought to the attention of Congress by the Secretary of State 141 [Pg. 141 includes portions of Doc. 91, Doc. 92, and Doc. 93]

regulations of the empire as to manifests of cargo of vessels touching at more than one port prior to sailing for Brazil. (See F. R., 1878, p. 71) 139 [Pg. 139 includes portions of Doc. 88 and Doc. 89]

Brugger: Pauper family sent to the United States by the communal authorities of Graben, Switzerland 972 [Pg. 972 includes portions of Doc. 493 and Doc. 494]

Brussels: Belgian National Exposition to be opened June 15, 1880 92 [Pg. 92 includes portions of Doc. 60 and Doc. 61]

Buenos Ayres: payment of Uruguayan light dues or taxes demanded of American vessels in the port of; protest of Mr. Minister Oshorn; statement of the Banda Oriental light dues question 16 [Pg. 16 includes portions of Doc. 14 and Doc. 15], 19 [Pg. 19 includes portions of Doc. 15, Doc. 16, and Doc. 17] conflict between the national and provincial governments apprehended. 27 [Pg. 27 is part of Doc. 25], 28 [Pg. 28 includes portions of Doc. 25 and Doc. 26]

legislature of, passes law reserving to itself the right to order out the national guard 34 [Pg. 34 includes portions of Doc. 26 and Doc. 27]

Bulgaria: affairs of, discussed; Prince Alexander, of Battenberg, chosen sovereign; article from the Spectator upon affairs south of the Balkans 984 [Pg. 984 is part of Doc. 502] visit of the Prince of Battenberg to Constantinople en route to Bulgaria 984 [Pg. 984 is part of Doc. 502]

Burnell and Criswick, of England: project to build railroad in Liberia from Monrovia interior ward 701 [Pg. 701 includes portions of Doc. 347 and Doc. 348]

Byers, S. H. M., consul at Zurich: letter from, respecting collection of property in Switzerland belonging to naturalized citizens of the United States of Swiss birth 973 [Pg. 973 is part of Doc. 495] letter from, respecting abuses of American citizenship; case of William Dietze 968 [Pg. 968 includes portions of Doc. 490 and Doc. 491]

C.

Cairoli, Mr.: assumes ministry of foreign affairs upon resignation of Count Corti 596 [Pg. 596 includes portions of Doc. 293 and Doc. 294] gallant conduct at the time of the attempt upon the life of the King 597 [Pg. 597 is part of Doc. 295]

forms new ministry 601 [Pg. 601 includes portions of Doc. 299 and Doc. 300]

Calcutta: usurpation of jurisdiction by high court of in the case of John Anderson, seaman on American bark “C. O. Whitmore,” charged with the murder of the first mate of the vessel during the voyage from New York to Calcutta 435 [Pg. 435 includes portions of Doc. 220 and Doc. 221] report of proceedings and sentence of Anderson 446 [Pg. 446 is part of Doc. 223]

Calvocoressi, case of Mr. John: An American citizen, domiciled in Turkey during the late war; claim for damages resulting from Russian occupation of his property 913 [Pg. 913 includes portions of Doc. 449 and Doc. 450] question of liability for damage to property of neutral subject domiciled in belligerent’s territory discussed 883 [Pg. 883 is part of Doc. 428], 913 [Pg. 913 includes portions of Doc. 449 and Doc. 450], 924 [Pg. 924 includes portions of Doc. 460 and Doc. 461], 926 [Pg. 926 includes portions of Doc. 463 and Doc. 464]

the Calvocoressi claim not to be pressed as of right; to be commended to the consideration of the Russian Government 924 [Pg. 924 includes portions of Doc. 460 and Doc. 461]

rejection of claim by Russian Government 926 [Pg. 926 includes portions of Doc. 463 and Doc. 464]

the equities of the case urged upon the Russian Government by Mr. Hoffman 927 [Pg. 927 includes portions of Doc. 464 and Doc. 465]

Camacho: Dr. Salvador Camacho Roldan; submits project for reciprocity treaty between the United States and Colombia; statistics of Colombian trade; direct trade with New Orleans advocated 254 [Pg. 254 includes portions of Doc. 142 and Doc. 143], 256 [Pg. 256 is part of Doc. 144], 258 [Pg. 258 includes portions of Doc. 144 and Doc. 145]

Campbell: Sir G., speech in the House of Commons upon Egyptian affairs 1001 [Pg. 1001 is part of Doc. 509]

Campos: General Martinez Campos, report upon the pacification of Cuba 943 [Pg. 943 includes portions of Doc. 478 and Doc. 479]

Canada: cases of the tugs “Champion,” “Winston,” “J. H. Martin,” and schooner “Augustus Ford,” fined for aiding wrecked American vessels in Canadian waters. (See F. R., 1878, pp. 351, 352) 481 [Pg. 481 includes portions of Doc. 232 and Doc. 233] loss and injury to American commerce upon the lakes by refusal of Canadian Government to allow American vessels to aid wrecked or disabled vessels in Canadian waters; action in direction of reciprocity urged upon Canada 481 [Pg. 481 includes portions of Doc. 232 and Doc. 233]

necessity for agreement between Canada and the United States as to right of vessels of either nationality to aid wrecked and disabled vessels in the waters of the other 498 [Pg. 498 includes portions of Doc. 245 and Doc. 246]

views of Canadian Government respecting assistance to be rendered to wrecked and disabled vessels in Canadian waters 498 [Pg. 498 includes portions of Doc. 245 and Doc. 246]

Canada responsible for delay in accordance, reciprocally, of right to vessels of either nationality, to aid wrecked or disabled vessels in the waters of the other 505 [Pg. 505 includes portions of Doc. 252 and Doc. 253]

act of Congress of June 19, 1878, entitled “An act to aid vessels wrecked or disabled in the waters coterminous to the United States and the Dominion of Canada” 505 [Pg. 505 includes portions of Doc. 252 and Doc. 253]

Indian movements upon the frontier; Sitting Bull and Canadian Indians upon American territory; Government of Canada notified 488 [Pg. 488 includes portions of Doc. 237, Doc. 238, Doc. 239, and Doc. 240]

Indian question discussed: Memorandum of Canadian minister of the interior; concentration of Indians in Bear Paw Mountains 488 [Pg. 488 includes portions of Doc. 237, Doc. 238, Doc. 239, and Doc. 240]

invasion of territory of the United States by British Indians and half-breeds 500 [Pg. 500 includes portions of Doc. 246 and Doc. 247]

memorandum of Dominion Government respecting the Sioux Indians; request of, that the United States will take steps to secure their return to American territory 508 [Pg. 508 includes portions of Doc. 256 and Doc. 257]

Canadian fisheries: Fortune Bay outrage; editorial from daily News upon the question. (See F. R., 1878, pp. 284, 308, 314, 323, 346, 349.) 451 [Pg. 451 includes portions of Doc. 225 and Doc. 226] visit of the Kearsarge to the fishing grounds to examine pending questions 504 [Pg. 504 includes portions of Doc. 250, Doc. 251, and Doc. 252]

Canal: Boisrond, president of Hayti; speech upon opening of assembly 556 [Pg. 556 includes portions of Doc. 270 and Doc. 271] resignation; he proposes to go into exile; result of the revolution 569 [Pg. 569 includes portions of Doc. 276 and Doc. 277]

his embarkation; respect shown him by the people of Port au Prince 572 [Pg. 572 includes portions of Doc. 279 and Doc. 280]

Canal, interoceanic: Panama; text of the Wyse-de Lesseps concession from Colombia 243 [Pg. 243 includes portions of Doc. 139, Doc. 140, and Doc. 141] Mr. Minister Dichman’s correspondence upon the subject of the interoceanic canal 243 [Pg. 243 includes portions of Doc. 139, Doc. 140, and Doc. 141], 290 [Pg. 290 includes portions of Doc. 159 and Doc. 160], 295 [Pg. 295 includes portions of Doc. 160 and Doc. 161], 297 [Pg. 297 includes portions of Doc. 161 and Doc. 162]

(For copy of the de Gorgoza interoceanic canal contract, see F. R. 1876, pp. 87, 88.)

instructions to Admiral Ammen and Mr. Menocal, representatives of the United States at the Paris interoceanic canal conference 339 [Pg. 339 includes portions of Doc. 176 and Doc. 177]

report of proceedings of the Paris convention 340 [Pg. 340 includes portions of Doc. 177 and Doc. 178]

Suez; report by Mr. Farman upon the construction and operation; expenses and receipts of the canal of Suez 993 [Pg. 993 includes portions of Doc. 505, Doc. 506, and Doc. 507] summary of transit of vessels; tonnage of vessels; receipts; working expenses; net profits, &c., since construction 1034 [Pg. 1034 includes portions of Doc. 519 and Doc. 520]

rules as to admeasurement of vessels to be common to all flags 487 [Pg. 487 includes portions of Doc. 236 and Doc. 237]

Cape Haytien, Hayti: insurrection of June 20, 1879; success of the government forces 559 [Pg. 559 includes portions of Doc. 272 and Doc. 273] Cape Haytien, Gonaïves, and St. Marc in hands of the revolutionary army 569 [Pg. 569 includes portions of Doc. 276 and Doc. 277]

Cape Verde Islands: American whaling ships charged with shipping crews in violation of local laws; protest of Portuguese Government 899 [Pg. 899 is part of Doc. 439] precautions taken by consul of the United States to cause American vessels to observe local laws 903 [Pg. 903 includes portions of Doc. 443 and Doc. 444]

Saint Vincent naval cemetery; preparations to transfer dead from old to mew cemetery; Portuguese Government to build wall around grounds; need of an annual appropriation to keep the cemetery in repair (see F. R., 1878, p. 737) 902 [Pg. 902 includes portions of Doc. 441, Doc. 442, and Doc. 443]

satisfaction of the United States at proposed action of Portuguese Government 902 [Pg. 902 includes portions of Doc. 441, Doc. 442, and Doc. 443]

Capital punishment: the right to resort to, except in political cases, restored to the cantons in Switzerland: corporal punishment abolished 971 [Pg. 971 includes portions of Doc. 492 and Doc. 493]

Caracas: Venezuela; entry of revolutionary army under General Cedeño 1040 [Pg. 1040 includes portions of Doc. 527 and Doc. 528]

arrival of General Guzman Blanco 1041 [Pg. 1041 includes portions of Doc. 528, Doc. 529, and Doc. 530]

Carbajal-Corlis bonds: neither interest nor principal paid by Mexico; a few bonds bought at 18¾ cents on the dollar 733 [Pg. 733 includes portions of Doc. 359 and Doc. 360] (See for report on status of these bonds F. R., 1878, p. 624.)

Catholic question: in Belgium: relations with the Vatican discussed; liberal party proposes a separation of Church and State; attitude of the clergy; political excitement 90 [Pg. 90 includes portions of Doc. 58 and Doc. 59]

debate in the chamber of deputies upon bill to secularize education; digest of speeches; bill passed by vote of 67 [Pg. 67 is part of Doc. 49] to 60 [Pg. 60 is part of Doc. 46] 97 [Pg. 97 includes portions of Doc. 61 and Doc. 62]

in Brazil: political emancipation of non-Catholics discussed 132 [Pg. 132 includes portions of Doc. 82 and Doc. 83]

Cattle trade: American export trade in cattle; particulars of its growth; precautions taken to insure health of cattle 423 [Pg. 423 includes portions of Doc. 214 and Doc. 215]

Central America: President Barrios, of Guatemala, calls a constitutional convention 141 [Pg. 141 includes portions of Doc. 91, Doc. 92, and Doc. 93] reception of Mr. Minister Logan; friendly expressions of President Barrios upon the occasion 142 [Pg. 142 includes portions of Doc. 93 and Doc. 94]

need of some regulation, by which the fact of renunciation or loss of American citizenship may be determined; many persons in Central America claim American citizenship without proper authority 143 [Pg. 143 is part of Doc. 95]

Certificates: form of, required to make up a landing certificate to cancel export bonds covering merchandise exported under internal-revenue laws 7 [Pg. 7 is part of Doc. 8]

Champion, tug: case of, fined for aiding wrecked American vessels in Canadian waters 481 [Pg. 481 includes portions of Doc. 232 and Doc. 233]

Charges of all kinds upon merchandise to be exported to the United States must be entered upon the invoice before its authentication 1 [Pg. 1 includes portions of Doc. 1 and Doc. 2], 10 [Pg. 10 includes portions of Doc. 8, Doc. 9, and Doc. 10]

Chéréf Pasha: correspondence relative to transfer of Cleopatra’s Needle to New York 1003 [Pg. 1003 is part of Doc. 510] participation in the investiture of Tewfik Pasha as khedive 1005 [Pg. 1005 includes portions of Doc. 510 and Doc. 511]

Chicago excursionists to Mexico: gratification expressed at their reception; but little may be accomplished, however, by such excursions 799 [Pg. 799 includes portions of Doc. 375 and Doc. 376]

Chihuahua: forced loans; case of Walter Henry; futility of reference to courts for redress (see F. R., 1878, p. 527) 727 [Pg. 727 includes portions of Doc. 356, Doc. 357, and Doc. 358]

Chili: American bark “Devonshire;” released by orders of the Chilian Government 13 [Pg. [13] is part of Doc. 12], 14 [Pg. 14 includes portions of Doc. 12 and Doc. 13], 147 [Pg. 147 includes portions of Doc. 96 and Doc. 97] gratification of the United States at prospect of settlement of boundary question between Chili and the Argentine Republic, 15 [Pg. 15 includes portions of Doc. 13 and Doc. 14], 147 [Pg. 147 includes portions of Doc. 96 and Doc. 97]

war with Bolivia and Peru complicates settlement of boundary question between Chili and the Argentine Republic 20 [Pg. 20 includes portions of Doc. 17 and Doc. 18]

origin of the difficulty between Chili and Bolivia; disputed boundary; movement of military and naval forces of Chili, and occupation of Anto-fogasta 148 [Pg. 148 includes portions of Doc. 97 and Doc. 98]

proclamation of war by the president of Bolivia; Peru to aid Bolivia; description of the desert of Atacama 160 [Pg. 160 includes portions of Doc. 101 and Doc. 102]

war declared by Chili against Peru; Iquique blockaded; Chilian army increased 167 [Pg. 167 includes portions of Doc. 102 and Doc. 103]

government manifesto in support of its declaration of war against Peru 168 [Pg. 168 includes portions of Doc. 103 and Doc. 104]

conflict between the Chilian wooden vessels, the Esmeralda and Covadonga, and the Peruvian iron-clads Huascar and Independencia 176 [Pg. 176 is part of Doc. 108]

Bolivia and Peru propose arbitration based upon status quo ante belium; especial envoy from Ecuador in the interest of peace 178 [Pg. 178 includes portions of Doc. 109 and Doc. 110]

Peruvian statement of the causes of the war; secret treaty between Bolivia and Peru 867 [Pg. 867 includes portions of Doc. 416, Doc. 417, and Doc. 418]

Chilian successes at sea; difficult country for military operations; Peruvian finances deranged; losses to neutral shipping 874 [Pg. 874 includes portions of Doc. 419, Doc. 420, and Doc. 421]

regret of the United States at breaking out of war between Chili and Bolivia and Peru 175 [Pg. 175 includes portions of Doc. 106 and Doc. 107]

Bolivia not to be allowed to fit out privateers in the United States 125 [Pg. 125 includes portions of Doc. 73 and Doc. 74]

circular of the Treasury Department to customs officers cautioning against Bolivian privateers 126 [Pg. 126 includes portions of Doc. 74, Doc. 75, Doc. 76, and Doc. 77]

increase of the British squadron in the Pacific 894 [Pg. 894 includes portions of Doc. 435, Doc. 436, and Doc. 437]

Chilian press opposes European intervention in the contest between Chili and Bolivia and Peru 178 [Pg. 178 includes portions of Doc. 109 and Doc. 110]

China: transit pass question; refusal of Hankow intendant to recognize passes issued in favor of Szchuen produce; correspondence between the legation and Chinese foreign office 181 [Pg. 181 is part of Doc. 113], 200 [Pg. 200 includes portions of Doc. 117 and Doc. 118], 208 [Pg. 208 includes portions of Doc. 123 and Doc. 124], 211 [Pg. 211 includes portions of Doc. 124 and Doc. 125], 215 [Pg. 215 includes portions of Doc. 126 and Doc. 127], 219 [Pg. 219 includes portions of Doc. 128, Doc. 129, and Doc. 130] destruction of English missionary buildings at Foochow by Chinese mob 183 [Pg. 183 includes portions of Doc. 113 and Doc. 114]

local authorities dealing fairly with missionary cases at Foochow 234 [Pg. 234 includes portions of Doc. 134 and Doc. 135]

changes in the Chinese foreign office; the yameu numbers eleven members 207 [Pg. 207 includes portions of Doc. 121 and Doc. 122]

the Marquis Tseng appointed minister to Great Britain 208 [Pg. 208 includes portions of Doc. 123 and Doc. 124]

note from Mr. Evarts as to request that American consular officers in Cuba should render protection to Chinese subjects 219 [Pg. 219 includes portions of Doc. 128, Doc. 129, and Doc. 130]

Chin Kiaug harbor: question as to right of Chinese Government to protect same by ordering the removal of a hulk owned by British subjects 189 [Pg. 189 includes portions of Doc. 114 and Doc. 115]

Shanghai harbor conservation rules: correspondence touching interpretation of the same. (See F. R. 1878, pp. 103, 105, 107.) 192 [Pg. 192 includes portions of Doc. 116 and Doc. 117]

concession of the right to order removal made by the British diplomatic representative in China 189 [Pg. 189 includes portions of Doc. 114 and Doc. 115]

memorial of Chinese ministers in Japan touching the affairs of the Lew Chew Islands: the good offices of the United States requested 606 [Pg. 606 includes portions of Doc. 301 and Doc. 302]

mixed courts: circular from Mr. Seward to consuls, asking information as to form of procedure in civil cases between Americans and Chinese 220 [Pg. 220 is part of Doc. 131]

answers from consuls to circular as to mixed courts and form of procedure in civil cases between Americans and Chinese 221 [Pg. 221 is part of Doc. 132], 229 [Pg. 229 is part of Doc. 133]

consulates: interpreters should be Americans; bad effect of employing native Chinese as interpreters. 203 [Pg. 203 includes portions of Doc. 120 and Doc. 121]

Mr. Consul Knight’s views as to interpreters at Chinese consulates; should be Americans and well paid; their influence in commercial affairs 234 [Pg. 234 includes portions of Doc. 134 and Doc. 135]

Chinese professorship at Harvard University: good influence upon the consular service that a trained body of American interpreters, graduates of Harvard, could exercise 234 [Pg. 234 includes portions of Doc. 134 and Doc. 135]

Chinese tobacco manufacturers of San Francisco: protest of Chinese minister against ruling of collector of internal revenue requiring bondsmen to be owners of real estate 237 [Pg. 237 is part of Doc. 137] reference of protest to the Secretary of the Treasury 241 [Pg. 241 includes portions of Doc. 137, Doc. 138, and Doc. 139]

bondsmen may be accepted if solvent, whether owners of realty or not 241 [Pg. 241 includes portions of Doc. 137, Doc. 138, and Doc. 139]

Chinkiang: question as to right of Chinese Government to protect harbor by ordering removal of a hulk from its moorings 189 [Pg. 189 includes portions of Doc. 114 and Doc. 115] right of removal conceded to Chinese Government 189 [Pg. 189 includes portions of Doc. 114 and Doc. 115]

Cholera: Japan: an account of the origin of the cholera in Japan 668 [Pg. 668 includes portions of Doc. 326 and Doc. 327] theory of the origin of the cholera epidemic 680 [Pg. 680 includes portions of Doc. 332 and Doc. 333]

statistics of the cholera; death rate 663 [Pg. 663 includes portions of Doc. 322 and Doc. 323], 665 [Pg. 665 includes portions of Doc. 324 and Doc. 325], 667 [Pg. 667 includes portions of Doc. 325 and Doc. 326], 681 [Pg. 681 includes portions of Doc. 333 and Doc. 334], 695 [Pg. 695 includes portions of Doc. 341, Doc. 342, and Doc. 343]

correspondence touching the right of the Japanese Government to establish quarantine regulations for port of Yokohama-Kanagawa, to guard against the introduction of cholera: concession of the right by the United States; its denial by Germany and Great Britain 604 [Pg. 604 includes portions of Doc. 300 and Doc. 301], 608 [Pg. 608 includes portions of Doc. 302 and Doc. 303], 647 [Pg. 647 includes portions of Doc. 318 and Doc. 319], 657 [Pg. 657 includes portions of Doc. 321 and Doc. 322], 665 [Pg. 665 includes portions of Doc. 324 and Doc. 325], 670 [Pg. 670 includes portions of Doc. 327 and Doc. 328]

Morocco: the cholera of last year followed by malignant typhus; great suffering and loss of life 840 [Pg. 840 includes portions of Doc. 398 and Doc. 399]

Chotteau tariff movement in direction of special commercial treaty between the United States and France; views of Mr. Minister Kasson as to its impracticability 61 [Pg. 61 includes portions of Doc. 46 and Doc. 47]

Christianey, Mr. J. P., minister to Peru: correspondence with Minister Osborn as to right of foreign-built vessels owned by American citizens to fly the American flag 877 [Pg. 877 includes portions of Doc. 421 and Doc. 422], 882 [Pg. 882 includes portions of Doc. 426 and Doc. 427]

Ciare, island of, in Gulf of California: Americans prohibited from settling upon 798 [Pg. 798 includes portions of Doc. 373 and Doc. 374]

Circulating medium: reports upon the gold and silver coin and bullion and paper currency in the several commercial countries 36 [Pg. 36 includes portions of Doc. 28 and Doc. 29], 41 [Pg. 41 includes portions of Doc. 33 and Doc. 34], 50 [Pg. 50 includes portions of Doc. 39 and Doc. 40], 109 [Pg. 109 includes portions of Doc. 62 and Doc. 63], 385 [Pg. 385 includes portions of Doc. 197 and Doc. 198], 398 [Pg. 398 includes portions of Doc. 202 and Doc. 203], 432 [Pg. 432 includes portions of Doc. 219 and Doc. 220], 441 [Pg. 441 is part of Doc. 222], 449 [Pg. 449 is part of Doc. 224], 543 [Pg. 543 includes portions of Doc. 263 and Doc. 264], 616 [Pg. 616 is part of Doc. 308], 687 [Pg. 687 includes portions of Doc. 336 and Doc. 337], 695 [Pg. 695 includes portions of Doc. 341, Doc. 342, and Doc. 343], 822 [Pg. 822 includes portions of Doc. 389 and Doc. 390], 842 [Pg. 842 includes portions of Doc. 399, Doc. 400, and Doc. 401], 851 [Pg. 851 is part of Doc. 408], 923 [Pg. 923 includes portions of Doc. 459 and Doc. 460]

Citizenship, American: improper applications for protection under claim of, frequently made in Central America; case of Anton Joseph Maassen 143 [Pg. 143 is part of Doc. 95] suggestions from Mr. Minister Logan that the government should establish conditions under which American citizens should be held to have expatriated themselves, and by which their citizenship, when abroad, might be more surely determined than at present 143 [Pg. 143 is part of Doc. 95]

query as to whether the Mexican law, which makes all those who serve in the Mexican army citizens of Mexico, works a forfeiture of American citizenship 815 [Pg. 815 includes portions of Doc. 386 and Doc. 387]

the right of expatriation recognized by the United States: by serving in the Mexican army an American may, under Mexican law, acquire citizenship 824 [Pg. 824 includes portions of Doc. 390 and Doc. 391]

abuses of, in Switzerland: case of William Dietze; naturalized in 1855; twenty-four years away from the United States with no intention of returning; twenty years in Switzerland 968 [Pg. 968 includes portions of Doc. 490 and Doc. 491]

cases of naturalized citizens in Germany 359 [Pg. 359 includes portions of Doc. 187 and Doc. 188], 367 [Pg. 367 includes portions of Doc. 191 and Doc. 192]

City government: reports by Mr. Kasson and Mr. Delaplaine upon the municipality of Vienna 64 [Pg. 64 includes portions of Doc. 48 and Doc. 49], 74 [Pg. 74 includes portions of Doc. 49 and Doc. 50]

Cleopatra’s Needle: negotiations respecting its transfer to New York 1003 [Pg. 1003 is part of Doc. 510]

Coffee duties: their imposition suggested by Mr. Dichman to enable the government to negotiate reciprocity treaties with coffee-producing countries by making concessions in their favor 278 [Pg. 278 is part of Doc. 152]

Coffee of Liberia: report upon; its commercial value; extent of good coffee territory; large export of plants to Brazil 699 [Pg. 699 is part of Doc. 347]

Collisions at sea: fog signals of Commodore Beaumont proposed to prevent 4 [Pg. 4 is part of Doc. 6]

Colombia: commercial and reciprocity treaty with the United States proposed; statistics of Colombian trade 254 [Pg. 254 includes portions of Doc. 142 and Doc. 143], 256 [Pg. 256 is part of Doc. 144], 258 [Pg. 258 includes portions of Doc. 144 and Doc. 145], 278 [Pg. 278 is part of Doc. 152] steam communication with New Orleans discussed 258 [Pg. 258 includes portions of Doc. 144 and Doc. 145]

statistics of population, revenue, imports and exports; tariff; tobacco exports to the United States 256 [Pg. 256 is part of Doc. 144]

foreign debt of Colombia: aggregate between nine and ten million dollars; interest, payments, &c 289 [Pg. 289 includes portions of Doc. 158 and Doc. 159]

deposit of ship’s papers with consul of ship’s nation 260 [Pg. 260 includes portions of Doc. 145 and Doc. 146], 266 [Pg. 266 includes portions of Doc. 146 and Doc. 147], 270 [Pg. 270 includes portions of Doc. 147 and Doc. 148], 273 [Pg. 273 includes portions of Doc. 150 and Doc. 151], 280 [Pg. 280 includes portions of Doc. 152 and Doc. 153], 289 [Pg. 289 includes portions of Doc. 158 and Doc. 159]

protocol of January 7, 1879, regulating deposit of ship’s papers 266 [Pg. 266 includes portions of Doc. 146 and Doc. 147]

law of Colombia upon the subject in accord with that of the United States. 289 [Pg. 289 includes portions of Doc. 158 and Doc. 159]

expression of the friendly sentiments of the United States toward Colombia 285 [Pg. 285 includes portions of Doc. 155 and Doc. 156]

forced loans: question of; citizens of the United States exempt from, under most favored nation clause of the treaty of 1846 287 [Pg. 287 is part of Doc. 157]

interoceanic canal: correspondence in relation to 243 [Pg. 243 includes portions of Doc. 139, Doc. 140, and Doc. 141], 290 [Pg. 290 includes portions of Doc. 159 and Doc. 160], 295 [Pg. 295 includes portions of Doc. 160 and Doc. 161], 297 [Pg. 297 includes portions of Doc. 161 and Doc. 162]

text of the Wyse-de Lesseps interoceanic canal contract 243 [Pg. 243 includes portions of Doc. 139, Doc. 140, and Doc. 141]

right of transit across the Isthmus of Panama for criminals in custody of officers of the United States 251 [Pg. 251 includes portions of Doc. 141 and Doc. 142], 271 [Pg. 271 is part of Doc. 149], 273 [Pg. 273 includes portions of Doc. 150 and Doc. 151], 284 [Pg. 284 includes portions of Doc. 153, Doc. 154, and Doc. 155]

(For statement of the case of C. G. Scafford see F. R, 1878, p. 151.)

protocol of February 22, 1879, as to right of transit of United States troops, and of criminals in custody of United States officers, across the isthmus 273 [Pg. 273 includes portions of Doc. 150 and Doc. 151], 284 [Pg. 284 includes portions of Doc. 153, Doc. 154, and Doc. 155]

Commerce: Africa: extension of our commerce with countries of North Africa to be reported upon by Mr. Noyes: Central Africa; railway project to connect Algeria with the Soudan; European enterprise 718 [Pg. 718 includes portions of Doc. 351, Doc. 352, and Doc. 353], 722 [Pg. 722 includes portions of Doc. 354 and Doc. 355], 723 [Pg. 723 includes portions of Doc. 355 and Doc. 356] report of M. de Freycinet upon the railway from Algeria to the Soudan 723 [Pg. 723 includes portions of Doc. 355 and Doc. 356]

Austria Hungary: trade returns for 1878; imports and exports; balance in favor of empire $57,000,000 52 [Pg. 52 includes portions of Doc. 41 and Doc. 42] empire looking to customs union with Servia; trade with Roumania 58 [Pg. 58 includes portions of Doc. 44 and Doc. 45], 59 [Pg. 59 includes portions of Doc. 45 and Doc. 46]

currency questions; business on paper basis; customs payable in gold; new tariff protective 36 [Pg. 36 includes portions of Doc. 28 and Doc. 29], 40 [Pg. 40 includes portions of Doc. 32 and Doc. 33], 44 [Pg. 44 includes portions of Doc. 36 and Doc. 37], 52 [Pg. 52 includes portions of Doc. 41 and Doc. 42], 59 [Pg. 59 includes portions of Doc. 45 and Doc. 46]

Belgium: report upon trade relations with the United States and currency report 87 [Pg. 87 is part of Doc. 57], 109 [Pg. 109 includes portions of Doc. 62 and Doc. 63]

Brazil: foreign commerce largely in hands of Great Britain; need of establishment of solid American houses 132 [Pg. 132 includes portions of Doc. 82 and Doc. 83], 133 [Pg. 133 includes portions of Doc. 83 and Doc. 84], 134 [Pg. 134 includes portions of Doc. 84 and Doc. 85]

Colombia: statistics of trade; reciprocity and direct steam communication with the United States suggested 254 [Pg. 254 includes portions of Doc. 142 and Doc. 143], 256 [Pg. 256 is part of Doc. 144], 258 [Pg. 258 includes portions of Doc. 144 and Doc. 145], 278 [Pg. 278 is part of Doc. 152]

Denmark: state of trade; general depression; imports and exports from and to the United States; tariff league against the United States proposed 303 [Pg. 303 includes portions of Doc. 162 and Doc. 163], 307 [Pg. 307 includes portions of Doc. 165, Doc. 166, and Doc. 167]

Germany: tariff policy protective; see treaties with Austria-Hungary, and Samoa 44 [Pg. 44 includes portions of Doc. 36 and Doc. 37], 360 [Pg. 360 includes portions of Doc. 188 and Doc. 189], 365 [Pg. 365 includes portions of Doc. 190 and Doc. 191], 388 [Pg. 388 includes portions of Doc. 198 and Doc. 199], 392 [Pg. 392 includes portions of Doc. 199 and Doc. 200], 396 [Pg. 396 is part of Doc. 202]

Great Britain: speeches of Lords Beaconsfield, Derby, Salisbury, and others upon commercial and industrial depression 453 [Pg. 453 includes portions of Doc. 226 and Doc. 227], 465 [Pg. 465 includes portions of Doc. 228 and Doc. 229] cattle trade with Great Britain 423 [Pg. 423 includes portions of Doc. 214 and Doc. 215]

effect of commercial depression upon emigration; report by Mr. Hoppin 463 [Pg. 463 includes portions of Doc. 227 and Doc. 228]

Hawaiian Islands: import trade in hands of European merchants 542 [Pg. 542 includes portions of Doc. 262 and Doc. 263]

Hayti: industrial condition discussed 560 [Pg. 560 includes portions of Doc. 273 and Doc. 274]

Japan: imports and exports; tariff policy 620 [Pg. 620 includes portions of Doc. 311, Doc. 312, and Doc. 313], 638 [Pg. 638 includes portions of Doc. 315 and Doc. 316], 639 [Pg. 639 includes portions of Doc. 316 and Doc. 317], 694 [Pg. 694 includes portions of Doc. 339, Doc. 340, and Doc. 341]

Liberia: report upon coffee production and export; industrial resources and possibilities 699 [Pg. 699 is part of Doc. 347], 701 [Pg. 701 includes portions of Doc. 347 and Doc. 348], 712 [Pg. 712 is part of Doc. 349]

Mexico: exports, statistics of population, area, &c.; agriculture 804 [Pg. 804 includes portions of Doc. 380 and Doc. 381], 808 [Pg. 808 includes portions of Doc. 381 and Doc. 382], 834 [Pg. 834 includes portions of Doc. 394 and Doc. 395]

Portugal: tobacco duties advanced 900 [Pg. 900 includes portions of Doc. 439 and Doc. 440]

Roumania: imports and exports; trade chiefly with Austria 58 [Pg. 58 includes portions of Doc. 44 and Doc. 45]

Servia: imports and exports; character of agriculture; finances 59 [Pg. 59 includes portions of Doc. 45 and Doc. 46], 82 [Pg. 82 includes portions of Doc. 54 and Doc. 55]

Siam: trade relations discussed 929 [Pg. 929 includes portions of Doc. 467 and Doc. 468]

Spain: importation of American wheat; reciprocity discussed 938 [Pg. 938 includes portions of Doc. 474 and Doc. 475], 939 [Pg. 939 is part of Doc. 476]

Sweden and Norway: railway system in its bearing upon commercial exchanges 959 [Pg. 959 includes portions of Doc. 486 and Doc. 487], 960 [Pg. 960 includes portions of Doc. 487 and Doc. 488]

Egypt: Suez canal business 993 [Pg. 993 includes portions of Doc. 505, Doc. 506, and Doc. 507], 1034 [Pg. 1034 includes portions of Doc. 519 and Doc. 520]

Venezuela: details of Pereiré contract for opening mines, building railways, roads, harbors, mills, establishing banks, &c 1045 [Pg. 1045 includes portions of Doc. 534 and Doc. 535]

Commercial policy: Austria-Hungary to develop trade with the Danubian countries 38 [Pg. 38 includes portions of Doc. 30 and Doc. 31], 58 [Pg. 58 includes portions of Doc. 44 and Doc. 45], 59 [Pg. 59 includes portions of Doc. 45 and Doc. 46]

protective policy; commercial treaties 44 [Pg. 44 includes portions of Doc. 36 and Doc. 37], 42 [Pg. 42 includes portions of Doc. 34 and Doc. 35], 59 [Pg. 59 includes portions of Doc. 45 and Doc. 46]

Colombia: reciprocity treaty with the United States, and direct steam communication suggested 254 [Pg. 254 includes portions of Doc. 142 and Doc. 143], 258 [Pg. 258 includes portions of Doc. 144 and Doc. 145], 278 [Pg. 278 is part of Doc. 152]

Denmark: protective 307 [Pg. 307 includes portions of Doc. 165, Doc. 166, and Doc. 167]

France: retaliatory tariff policy 42 [Pg. 42 includes portions of Doc. 34 and Doc. 35], 61 [Pg. 61 includes portions of Doc. 46 and Doc. 47]

Germany: protective; special commercial treaties 44 [Pg. 44 includes portions of Doc. 36 and Doc. 37], 360 [Pg. 360 includes portions of Doc. 188 and Doc. 189], 365 [Pg. 365 includes portions of Doc. 190 and Doc. 191], 381 [Pg. 381 includes portions of Doc. 195 and Doc. 196], 388 [Pg. 388 includes portions of Doc. 198 and Doc. 199], 392 [Pg. 392 includes portions of Doc. 199 and Doc. 200], 394 [Pg. 394 includes portions of Doc. 200, Doc. 201, and Doc. 202]

Hawaiian Islands: reciprocity with the United States 512 [Pg. 512 is part of Doc. 259], 529 [Pg. 529 includes portions of Doc. 261 and Doc. 262]

Japan: tariff revision: encouragement of export trade 638 [Pg. 638 includes portions of Doc. 315 and Doc. 316]

Liberia: development; aid to build railways sought; relationship to the United States 701 [Pg. 701 includes portions of Doc. 347 and Doc. 348], 712 [Pg. 712 is part of Doc. 349], 718 [Pg. 718 includes portions of Doc. 351, Doc. 352, and Doc. 353], 722 [Pg. 722 includes portions of Doc. 354 and Doc. 355]

Mexico: high protective 811 [Pg. 811 includes portions of Doc. 383 and Doc. 384], 812 [Pg. 812 includes portions of Doc. 384 and Doc. 385]

Netherlands: free trade 849 [Pg. 849 includes portions of Doc. 406 and Doc. 407]

Portugal: higher duties 900 [Pg. 900 includes portions of Doc. 439 and Doc. 440]

Roumania: regulation by commercial treaties 58 [Pg. 58 includes portions of Doc. 44 and Doc. 45]

Servia: regulation by commercial treaties 59 [Pg. 59 includes portions of Doc. 45 and Doc. 46], 82 [Pg. 82 includes portions of Doc. 54 and Doc. 55]

Siam: development 928 [Pg. 928 includes portions of Doc. 465, Doc. 466, and Doc. 467], 929 [Pg. 929 includes portions of Doc. 467 and Doc. 468]

Spain: reciprocity policy discussed 938 [Pg. 938 includes portions of Doc. 474 and Doc. 475], 939 [Pg. 939 is part of Doc. 476]

Venezuela: development; dependence upon European capital 1045 [Pg. 1045 includes portions of Doc. 534 and Doc. 535]

Commercial treaties. (See treaty.)

Constantinople: treaty of, between Russia and Turkey, signed February 8, 1879, supplemental to treaties of San Stefano and Berlin 978 [Pg. 978 includes portions of Doc. 497 and Doc. 498]

Constitution: frigate; proceedings before Sir R. Phillimore in the case of the steam tug Admiral vs. the frigate Constitution for salvage; case decided against the tug 407 [Pg. 407 includes portions of Doc. 208, Doc. 209, and Doc. 210] assistance rendered by Portuguese Government to the Constitution at the royal navy yard at Lisbon 901 [Pg. 901 includes portions of Doc. 440 and Doc. 441], 905 [Pg. 905 includes portions of Doc. 444 and Doc. 445]

Consuls: directed to require specification in invoices of all charges upon goods to be exported to the United States 1 [Pg. 1 includes portions of Doc. 1 and Doc. 2], 10 [Pg. 10 includes portions of Doc. 8, Doc. 9, and Doc. 10] directed to note upon invoices true market value of goods when undervaluation is suspected 6 [Pg. 6 includes portions of Doc. 6 and Doc. 7]

required to send to customs officers at ports of entry prices current of merchandise exported to the United States 2 [Pg. 2 includes portions of Doc. 2 and Doc. 3]

required to make regular sanitary reports to the National Board of Health 10 [Pg. 10 includes portions of Doc. 8, Doc. 9, and Doc. 10]

need of United States consuls in Roumania to study trade relations with the United States; recommendations of Mr. Kasson 58 [Pg. 58 includes portions of Doc. 44 and Doc. 45]

need of United States consuls in Servia pointed out by Mr. Kasson 82 [Pg. 82 includes portions of Doc. 54 and Doc. 55]

desirability of selecting Chinese-speaking Americans for consulates in China; suggestions as to employing only Chinese-speaking Americans as interpreters at our Chinese consulates 203 [Pg. 203 includes portions of Doc. 120 and Doc. 121], 234 [Pg. 234 includes portions of Doc. 134 and Doc. 135]

consular annual report required to contain a table showing humidity of atmosphere in consular districts 3 [Pg. 3 includes portions of Doc. 4 and Doc. 5]

Consular authentication of bill of sale of foreign-built vessels sold to citizens of the United States, prima facie evidence of genuineness of transaction 894 [Pg. 894 includes portions of Doc. 435, Doc. 436, and Doc. 437] authentication tax of Hayti; position of the United States defined for information of British Government 501 [Pg. 501 includes portions of Doc. 247 and Doc. 248]

correspondence between Mr. Langston and Mr. Ethéart; removal of discussion by Hayti to Washington 546 [Pg. 546 includes portions of Doc. 266 and Doc. 267]

discussion of subject by Mr. Preston and the Secretary of State; notes from Mr. Preston 583 [Pg. 583 includes portions of Doc. 286 and Doc. 287], 587 [Pg. 587 includes portions of Doc. 288 and Doc. 289], 594 [Pg. 594 includes portions of Doc. 291 and Doc. 292]

notes from the Secretary of State 586 [Pg. 586 includes portions of Doc. 287 and Doc. 288], 595 [Pg. 595 includes portions of Doc. 292 and Doc. 293]

consular certificate to clearance papers: Brazilian regulations as to manifests of cargo of vessels touching at more than one port prior to sailing for Brazil 139 [Pg. 139 includes portions of Doc. 88 and Doc. 89]

consular jurisdiction in criminal cases in Egypt; case of Mirzan, charged with the murder of Dr. Dahan 987 [Pg. 987 includes portions of Doc. 502 and Doc. 503], 990 [Pg. 990 includes portions of Doc. 503, Doc. 504, and Doc. 505], 1010 [Pg. 1010 includes portions of Doc. 512 and Doc. 513], 1012 [Pg. 1012 is part of Doc. 514]

jurisdiction in civil cases in China between citizens of the United States and Chinese; reports from consuls as to mixed courts 220 [Pg. 220 is part of Doc. 131], 221 [Pg. 221 is part of Doc. 132], 229 [Pg. 229 is part of Doc. 133]

Contraband of war: question as to right of the Chilian fleet to prevent the shipment of nitrates from Pisagua as contraband of war without establishing a blockade 888 [Pg. 888 includes portions of Doc. 431 and Doc. 432]

Corea: wreck of the “Barbara Taylor,” a British vessel, upon the island of Quelpart the crew rescued by the Coreans 612 [Pg. 612 includes portions of Doc. 306 and Doc. 307] visit of Mr. E. M. Satow, Japanese secretary of the British legation, to Corea; its object 612 [Pg. 612 includes portions of Doc. 306 and Doc. 307]

restrictions of Corea upon Japanese trade with the open port of Fusan; violation of treaty with Japan; visit of Mr. Hanabusa 612 [Pg. 612 includes portions of Doc. 306 and Doc. 307]

Japanese difficulty with Corea to be settled by diplomacy; Japanese press on the so-called designs of Russia upon Corea 612 [Pg. 612 includes portions of Doc. 306 and Doc. 307]

settlement of difficulty; treaty between Japan and Corea; port of Gensan to be opened by Corea to Japanese trade 619 [Pg. 619 includes portions of Doc. 309 and Doc. 310], 696 [Pg. 696 includes portions of Doc. 343, Doc. 344, and Doc. 345]

the satisfaction of the United States at the settlement of the difficulty between Japan and Corea expressed by the Secretary of State 620 [Pg. 620 includes portions of Doc. 311, Doc. 312, and Doc. 313]

the Japanese press upon the so-called designs of Russia upon Corea 612 [Pg. 612 includes portions of Doc. 306 and Doc. 307]

Corlis-Carbajal bonds: neither interest nor principal paid by Mexico; a few bonds bought at 18¾ cents on the dollar 733 [Pg. 733 includes portions of Doc. 359 and Doc. 360] (See, for report upon status of these bonds, Foreign Relations, 1878, p. 624.)

Corti, Count: retirement of, from the ministry 596 [Pg. 596 includes portions of Doc. 293 and Doc. 294]

Cotton goods: adulterated cotton goods of British make sold in Denmark as American goods 307 [Pg. 307 includes portions of Doc. 165, Doc. 166, and Doc. 167]

Counterfeiting: the laws of the United States against, do not extend to issues of foreign governments; representations of Brazilian minister as to the desirability of their amendment to include such issues 138 [Pg. 138 includes portions of Doc. 87 and Doc. 88] subject to be brought to the attention of Congress 141 [Pg. 141 includes portions of Doc. 91, Doc. 92, and Doc. 93]

notes from Brazilian minister 138 [Pg. 138 includes portions of Doc. 87 and Doc. 88], 140 [Pg. 140 includes portions of Doc. 89, Doc. 90, and Doc. 91]

notes from the Secretary of State 140 [Pg. 140 includes portions of Doc. 89, Doc. 90, and Doc. 91], 141 [Pg. 141 includes portions of Doc. 91, Doc. 92, and Doc. 93]

note from Senator Edmunds 141 [Pg. 141 includes portions of Doc. 91, Doc. 92, and Doc. 93]

United States money; punishable under German law by imprisonment at hard labor 364 [Pg. 364 is part of Doc. 190]

United States postage-stamps; question unsettled as to whether punishable under German law 364 [Pg. 364 is part of Doc. 190]

Courts, mixed, in China: question discussed by our consuls in China 220 [Pg. 220 is part of Doc. 131], 221 [Pg. 221 is part of Doc. 132], 229 [Pg. 229 is part of Doc. 133]

Cowdin, Hon. Elliot C, or some representative American merchant, should visit Brazil to study question of extension of American trade with that country 134 [Pg. 134 includes portions of Doc. 84 and Doc. 85]

“C. O. Whitmore,” the American bark: case of Joseph Anderson, seaman, tried at Calcutta for murder of first mate while on voyage from New York to India 435 [Pg. 435 includes portions of Doc. 220 and Doc. 221] report of trial; usurpation of jurisdiction by the high court of Calcutta 435 [Pg. 435 includes portions of Doc. 220 and Doc. 221], 446 [Pg. 446 is part of Doc. 223]

Crete, island of: sanction of the United States requested to the increase of the customs duties to raise funds for support of schools 981 [Pg. 981 includes portions of Doc. 499 and Doc. 500]

Cross, Eight Hon. R. A., home secretary: speech at South port 462 [Pg. 462 is part of Doc. 227]

Criswick and Burnell, of England: railway project in Liberia of 701 [Pg. 701 includes portions of Doc. 347 and Doc. 348]

Crusader, case of the tug: amicably arranged by American and Canadian officials of Detroit and Port Sarnia 485 [Pg. 485 is part of Doc. 235]

Cuba: reply and request of China that American consuls in Cuba should extend protection to Chinese in that island 219 [Pg. 219 includes portions of Doc. 128, Doc. 129, and Doc. 130]

Cuban questions discussed in King’s speech at opening of Cortes; reforms; extinction of slavery; Cuban representation in Cortes; system of administration in the island and in the peninsula to be assimilated 941 [Pg. 941 includes portions of Doc. 476, Doc. 477, and Doc. 478] report of General Martinez Campos upon the pacification of Cuba 943 [Pg. 943 includes portions of Doc. 478 and Doc. 479]

report of the ministry of Ultramar upon Cuban reforms; royal decree appointing a Commission upon reforms 952 [Pg. 952 is part of Doc. 480]

extraordinary taxes imposed upon Americans in Cuba; subject referred to the governor-general 954 [Pg. 954 includes portions of Doc. 480 and Doc. 481]

Curaçoa: island of, project of Gen. Guzman Blanco to purchase Curacoa for Venezuela 1043 [Pg. 1043 includes portions of Doc. 532 and Doc. 533] no likelihood of the sale of the island by the Netherlands; King’s speech at opening of the Staats-General 849 [Pg. 849 includes portions of Doc. 406 and Doc. 407]

Currency: See reports upon gold and silver coin and bullion and paper money; circulating medium; gold; silver.

Customs tariff: see tariff.

D.

Danube: countries in valley of; in easy diplomatic relations with legation at Vienna 38 [Pg. 38 includes portions of Doc. 30 and Doc. 31] Austrian policy to engross trade of valley of the Danube 58 [Pg. 58 includes portions of Doc. 44 and Doc. 45], 59 [Pg. 59 includes portions of Doc. 45 and Doc. 46], 82 [Pg. 82 includes portions of Doc. 54 and Doc. 55]

David, Emil: naturalized citizen; case brought to attention of legation at Berlin 367 [Pg. 367 includes portions of Doc. 191 and Doc. 192]

Debt: Argentine-Republic; statement of foreign and domestic debt, reduction during current year 21 [Pg. 21 includes portions of Doc. 18 and Doc. 19]

Austria-Hungary: gold duties exacted to provide fund to meet interest 36 [Pg. 36 includes portions of Doc. 28 and Doc. 29]

Colombia: statement of foreign debt 256 [Pg. 256 is part of Doc. 144], 289 [Pg. 289 includes portions of Doc. 158 and Doc. 159]

Japan: statement of foreign and domestic debt; debt reduced 656 [Pg. 656 includes portions of Doc. 320 and Doc. 321]

Liberia: debt to the United States 701 [Pg. 701 includes portions of Doc. 347 and Doc. 348]

Mexico: foreign debt; bondholder’s movement to organize railway development company 764 [Pg. 764 includes portions of Doc. 365 and Doc. 366], 774 [Pg. 774 includes portions of Doc. 370 and Doc. 371], 795 [Pg. 795 is part of Doc. 371], 799 [Pg. 799 includes portions of Doc. 375 and Doc. 376] receipts, expenses, and general statistics, as indicating debt-paying capacity 770 [Pg. 770 includes portions of Doc. 366 and Doc. 367], 808 [Pg. 808 includes portions of Doc. 381 and Doc. 382], 834 [Pg. 834 includes portions of Doc. 394 and Doc. 395], 836 [Pg. 836 includes portions of Doc. 395 and Doc. 396]

Corlis-Carbajal bonds 733 [Pg. 733 includes portions of Doc. 359 and Doc. 360]

Roumania: statement of debt and resources; debt aggregates 500,000,000 francs 58 [Pg. 58 includes portions of Doc. 44 and Doc. 45]

Servia: financial condition, and statement of debt 59 [Pg. 59 includes portions of Doc. 45 and Doc. 46], 82 [Pg. 82 includes portions of Doc. 54 and Doc. 55]

Sweden and Norway: railway debts 959 [Pg. 959 includes portions of Doc. 486 and Doc. 487], 960 [Pg. 960 includes portions of Doc. 487 and Doc. 488]

Turkish Empire: Egypt; interest charge upon foreign debt 1035 [Pg. 1035 is part of Doc. 521]. (See Debt, index Foreign Relations, 1878.)

De Lano, M. M., consul at Foochow; report upon form of procedure in mixed cases between Americans and Chinese 223 [Pg. 223 is part of Doc. 132]

Delaplaine, W. J. F., secretary of legation at Vienna; report upon the police system of Vienna 74 [Pg. 74 includes portions of Doc. 49 and Doc. 50]

Denmark: trade statistics; imports and exports; suggestions for the increase of trade with the United States 303 [Pg. 303 includes portions of Doc. 162 and Doc. 163] extradition treaty proposed; negotiations entered upon; instructions from the department 306 [Pg. 306 includes portions of Doc. 164 and Doc. 165], 309 [Pg. 309 includes portions of Doc. 168 and Doc. 169]

rumored sale of St. Thomas untrue 308 [Pg. 308 includes portions of Doc. 167 and Doc. 168]

sale of St. Thomas discussed; Great Britain indicated as the power willing to consider its purchase 310 [Pg. 310 includes portions of Doc. 169 and Doc. 170]

Deposit of ships’ papers: correspondence between Mr. Dichman and the Department of State upon the subject 260 [Pg. 260 includes portions of Doc. 145 and Doc. 146], 266 [Pg. 266 includes portions of Doc. 146 and Doc. 147], 270 [Pg. 270 includes portions of Doc. 147 and Doc. 148], 273 [Pg. 273 includes portions of Doc. 150 and Doc. 151], 280 [Pg. 280 includes portions of Doc. 152 and Doc. 153], 289 [Pg. 289 includes portions of Doc. 158 and Doc. 159] position of the British Government upon the question; correspondence between Mr. Dichman and the British Minister at Bogota 270 [Pg. 270 includes portions of Doc. 147 and Doc. 148], 280 [Pg. 280 includes portions of Doc. 152 and Doc. 153], 486 [Pg. 486 includes portions of Doc. 235 and Doc. 236]

protocol of January 7, 1879, regulating deposit of ship’s papers in Colombian ports 266 [Pg. 266 includes portions of Doc. 146 and Doc. 147]

Colombian law now substantially the same as that of the United States upon the subject 289 [Pg. 289 includes portions of Doc. 158 and Doc. 159]

Derby, Earl of: speech at Southport upon the prevalent agricultural and commercial distress in Great Britain 453 [Pg. 453 includes portions of Doc. 226 and Doc. 227]

“Devonshire:” American hark, surrendered by Chilian authorities; boundary question between Argentine Republic and Chili involved in decision of case 13 [Pg. [13] is part of Doc. 12], 14 [Pg. 14 includes portions of Doc. 12 and Doc. 13], 147 [Pg. 147 includes portions of Doc. 96 and Doc. 97] surrender of vessel gratifying, but apprehension expressed that, unless boundary dispute between the Argentine Republic and Chili be settled, similar occurrences to the seizure of the vessel may happen 15 [Pg. 15 includes portions of Doc. 13 and Doc. 14]

Diaz, Porfirio, President of Mexico: favorable comments upon his message; the success of his administration largely due to his personal character 837 [Pg. 837 includes portions of Doc. 396 and Doc. 397] revolutionary plan of General Diaz, dated Palo Blanco, March 21, 1876; decree given at Oaxaca, September 26, 1876, nullifying contracts of the Lerdo government 774 [Pg. 774 includes portions of Doc. 370 and Doc. 371]

attitude of the Diaz government upon the railway question 774 [Pg. 774 includes portions of Doc. 370 and Doc. 371]

Dietz, William: naturalized citizen; abuse of citizenship; naturalized in 1855, away from the United States without intention of returning twenty-four years; correspondence between Mr. Fish and the consul at Zurich 968 [Pg. 968 includes portions of Doc. 490 and Doc. 491]

Diplomatic officers of the United States to submit for consideration of the governments to which they are accredited Commodore Beaumont’s code of fog signals 4 [Pg. 4 is part of Doc. 6] to report upon the amount of gold and silver coin and bullion and paper currency in the treasury, the banks, and in circulation in the countries to which they are accredited; also, upon production of gold and silver 3 [Pg. 3 includes portions of Doc. 4 and Doc. 5]

For reports see pages 109 [Pg. 109 includes portions of Doc. 62 and Doc. 63], 398 [Pg. 398 includes portions of Doc. 202 and Doc. 203], 432 [Pg. 432 includes portions of Doc. 219 and Doc. 220], 441 [Pg. 441 is part of Doc. 222], 449 [Pg. 449 is part of Doc. 224], 543 [Pg. 543 includes portions of Doc. 263 and Doc. 264], 822 [Pg. 822 includes portions of Doc. 389 and Doc. 390], 842 [Pg. 842 includes portions of Doc. 399, Doc. 400, and Doc. 401], 851 [Pg. 851 is part of Doc. 408], 923 [Pg. 923 includes portions of Doc. 459 and Doc. 460].

Disseminating taxes: Haytien consular authentication tax, and license tax, 546 [Pg. 546 includes portions of Doc. 266 and Doc. 267], 550 [Pg. 550 includes portions of Doc. 267 and Doc. 268], 553 [Pg. 553 includes portions of Doc. 268 and Doc. 269], 554 [Pg. 554 includes portions of Doc. 269 and Doc. 270], 583 [Pg. 583 includes portions of Doc. 286 and Doc. 287], 586 [Pg. 586 includes portions of Doc. 287 and Doc. 288], 587 [Pg. 587 includes portions of Doc. 288 and Doc. 289], 591 [Pg. 591 includes portions of Doc. 289 and Doc. 290], 593 [Pg. 593 includes portions of Doc. 290 and Doc. 291], 594 [Pg. 594 includes portions of Doc. 291 and Doc. 292], 595 [Pg. 595 includes portions of Doc. 292 and Doc. 293] Cuban taxes against American citizens 954 [Pg. 954 includes portions of Doc. 480 and Doc. 481]

Dombrovine, Second Lieutenant: Russian Nihilist; trial and execution 918 [Pg. 918 includes portions of Doc. 454 and Doc. 455] attempted assassination of the Emperor of Russia: police and passport regulations; nihilistic movements 913 [Pg. 913 includes portions of Doc. 449 and Doc. 450], 917 [Pg. 917 includes portions of Doc. 453 and Doc. 454], 918 [Pg. 918 includes portions of Doc. 454 and Doc. 455], 920 [Pg. 920 includes portions of Doc. 457 and Doc. 458]

Drawbacks upon duties: German minister asks if drawbacks are allowed upon goods imported and then exported from the United States 403 [Pg. 403 includes portions of Doc. 204 and Doc. 205] answer: they are allowed on merchandise provided the same has remained in the hands of the customs officers of the United States 404 [Pg. 404 includes portions of Doc. 205, Doc. 206, and Doc. 207]

Dufaure, M., retirement from the ministry: resignation of President MacMahon; election of M. Jules Grévy as President of France 334 [Pg. 334 is part of Doc. 174]

Dutiable value of importations: circular requiring packing and other charges to be specified in invoice 1 [Pg. 1 includes portions of Doc. 1 and Doc. 2], 10 [Pg. 10 includes portions of Doc. 8, Doc. 9, and Doc. 10]

Duties in Austria-Hungary, after January 1, 1879, payable in gold 36 [Pg. 36 includes portions of Doc. 28 and Doc. 29]

Duties: see tariff.

Von Decker, Herr: speech in the Reichstag upon suspension of sale of German government silver; total net loss on sales already made 72,000,000 marks 385 [Pg. 385 includes portions of Doc. 197 and Doc. 198]

E.

Earl, Captain Hamilton, H. B. M.’s chief naval officer east coast of Africa: unwarranted search of the American bark “Laconia,” in the harbor of Zanzibar, ordered by 415 [Pg. 415 includes portions of Doc. 213 and Doc. 214] regret expressed by British Government at unwarranted search of the “Laconia.” 431 [Pg. 431 includes portions of Doc. 218 and Doc. 219]

Eastern question: Digest of treaty of Constantinople, supplementary to treaties of San Stefano and Berlin, signed 8th February, 1879 978 [Pg. 978 includes portions of Doc. 497 and Doc. 498] (For treaties of San Stefano and Berlin, see F. R. 1878, pp. 865, 894.)

Eastern Roumelia: condition of affairs in; administration of Aleko Pasha Vogorides; article from the London Spectator, attributed to the Marquis of Bath 984 [Pg. 984 is part of Doc. 502]

Edmunds, Senator, George F.: note of February 26, 1879, as to disagreement in the Judiciary Committee of the Senate as to constitutional power of the United States to pass laws for the punishment of the counterfeiting of notes of foreign governments by persons in the United States 141 [Pg. 141 includes portions of Doc. 91, Doc. 92, and Doc. 93]

Education: Belgium; bill to secularize education passed by the chambers; synopsis of the debate 97 [Pg. 97 includes portions of Doc. 61 and Doc. 62]

Crete, Island of: proposed increase of duties to raise fund for purposes of 981 [Pg. 981 includes portions of Doc. 499 and Doc. 500]

Germany: labors of Dr. Falk in behalf of education; extension of school system under his administration 394 [Pg. 394 includes portions of Doc. 200, Doc. 201, and Doc. 202] secularization of education: opposition to 394 [Pg. 394 includes portions of Doc. 200, Doc. 201, and Doc. 202]

Eggers, Ernst: naturalized citizen; case brought to attention of legation at Berlin 367 [Pg. 367 includes portions of Doc. 191 and Doc. 192]

Egypt: report by Mr. Farman upon the cost, revenue, expenses, and profits of the Suez Canal 993 [Pg. 993 includes portions of Doc. 505, Doc. 506, and Doc. 507] statistics as to the business of the canal 1034 [Pg. 1034 includes portions of Doc. 519 and Doc. 520]

international tribunal: memorandum by Mr. Bailey upon the organization and working of 229 [Pg. 229 is part of Doc. 133]

case of Etienne P. Mirzan: a naturalized citizen, charged with the mur of Dr. Alexander Dahan, in Alexandria 987 [Pg. 987 includes portions of Doc. 502 and Doc. 503], 1012 [Pg. 1012 is part of Doc. 514]

question as to jurisdiction of the court of the consul-general to try Mirzan 987 [Pg. 987 includes portions of Doc. 502 and Doc. 503]

vice consul-general, in absence of consul-general, has cognizance of the case 990 [Pg. 990 includes portions of Doc. 503, Doc. 504, and Doc. 505], 1010 [Pg. 1010 includes portions of Doc. 512 and Doc. 513]

finances: receipts, £8, 500, 000 (Egyptian); interest on debt, £5, 000, 000; balance for expenses, £3,500,000; estimated deficit, £1,000,000 1035 [Pg. 1035 is part of Doc. 521]

Cleopatra’s Needle: negotiations respecting its transfer from Egypt to New York 1003 [Pg. 1003 is part of Doc. 510]

pacification of the Levant in 1840, 1841; collection of documents relating to the alliance between Great Britain, Russia, Prussia, and Austria against Muhammed Ali, pasha of Egypt, and in support of Turkey 1018 [Pg. 1018 includes portions of Doc. 517 and Doc. 518]

growth of the influence of France and Great Britain in the affairs of Egypt; demands of the powers upon the khedive 996 [Pg. 996 includes portions of Doc. 508 and Doc. 509]

speech of Sir G. Campbell in the House of Commons upon Egyptian affairs 1001 [Pg. 1001 is part of Doc. 509]

effect of the resignation of Nubar Pasha: 996 [Pg. 996 includes portions of Doc. 508 and Doc. 509]

khedivate of Egypt: its establishment under Ismail Pasha; the reason of his downfall; review of his reign by Mr. Maynard 982 [Pg. 982 is part of Doc. 501]

review of the reign of Ismail Pasha by Mr. Farman 1005 [Pg. 1005 includes portions of Doc. 510 and Doc. 511]

deposition of Ismail Pasha and appointment of his son Tewfik 979 [Pg. 979 includes portions of Doc. 498 and Doc. 499], 1005 [Pg. 1005 includes portions of Doc. 510 and Doc. 511], 1008 [Pg. 1008 includes portions of Doc. 511 and Doc. 512], 1013 [Pg. 1013 includes portions of Doc. 515 and Doc. 516]

ceremonies upon the reception of the firman appointing Tewfik Pasha khedive 1013 [Pg. 1013 includes portions of Doc. 515 and Doc. 516]

the khedive willing to appoint an American member upon the commission of liquidation 1017 [Pg. 1017 includes portions of Doc. 516 and Doc. 517]

foreign intervention in government affairs 1017 [Pg. 1017 includes portions of Doc. 516 and Doc. 517]

re-establishment of the controller-generalship of receipts and expenses, and the appointment of Messrs. Baring and de Blignieres as controllers-general 1033 [Pg. 1033 includes portions of Doc. 518 and Doc. 519]

description of the several divisions of Egypt 1013 [Pg. 1013 includes portions of Doc. 515 and Doc. 516]

von Eisendecher: Mr. Minister, correspondence touching the right of Japan to issue quarantine regulations 665 [Pg. 665 includes portions of Doc. 324 and Doc. 325], 670 [Pg. 670 includes portions of Doc. 327 and Doc. 328]

“Ellen Rizpah” and “Rising Sun”: indemnity in cases of, paid by Spain 956 [Pg. 956 includes portions of Doc. 483, Doc. 484, and Doc. 485]

Elliot, President Charles W.: correspondence with Mr. Consul Knight, of New Chwang, respecting the establishment of a Chinese professorship at Harvard University 234 [Pg. 234 includes portions of Doc. 134 and Doc. 135]

Emigration of Mormons to the United States: circular from the Secretary of State; foreign governments to be requested to take steps to prevent 11 [Pg. 11 includes portions of Doc. 10 and Doc. 11] reports in reply to the circular from the ministers to— France 349 [Pg. 349 includes portions of Doc. 182 and Doc. 183]

Great Britain 450 [Pg. 450 includes portions of Doc. 224 and Doc. 225], 465 [Pg. 465 includes portions of Doc. 228 and Doc. 229]

Italy 601 [Pg. 601 includes portions of Doc. 299 and Doc. 300]

Netherlands 852 [Pg. 852 includes portions of Doc. 408 and Doc. 409], 854 [Pg. 854 is part of Doc. 410]

Sweden and Norway 964 [Pg. 964 includes portions of Doc. 488 and Doc. 489]

Emigration of English farmers to the United States, probability of, incident upon agricultural distress in Great Britain 463 [Pg. 463 includes portions of Doc. 227 and Doc. 228]

English bank and East point light (Uruguay) dues, to be paid by American vessels 16 [Pg. 16 includes portions of Doc. 14 and Doc. 15], 19 [Pg. 19 includes portions of Doc. 15, Doc. 16, and Doc. 17]

Entomology: Russian society of; report by Mr. Portchinsky, secretary of, upon the locust in Southern Russia 925 [Pg. 925 includes portions of Doc. 462 and Doc. 463]

Esmeralda, Chilian steam corvette: combat with the Peruvian iron-clad Huascar (see page 176 [Pg. 176 is part of Doc. 108]) 879 [Pg. 879 includes portions of Doc. 422 and Doc. 423]

Evarts, Mr., expresses the hope that the unhappy struggle now convulsing the South American people may be restrained within its original bounds 23 [Pg. 23 includes portions of Doc. 20 and Doc. 21]

Expatriation: Italy; case of Largomarsino; right of expatriation not recognized 600 [Pg. 600 is part of Doc. 298]

Germany; naturalization cases submitted to legation at Berlin 359 [Pg. 359 includes portions of Doc. 187 and Doc. 188], 367 [Pg. 367 includes portions of Doc. 191 and Doc. 192]

Mexico: effect of service in Mexican army upon citizenship. 815 [Pg. 815 includes portions of Doc. 386 and Doc. 387], 824 [Pg. 824 includes portions of Doc. 390 and Doc. 391]

Switzerland: difficulties attending Swiss expatriation: action of communal and cantonal authorities respecting property of Swiss naturalized in the United States. (Forlaw regulating expatriation see F. R., 1876, page 567) 973 [Pg. 973 is part of Doc. 495]

United States: right of, fully recognized by; compliance with law of a person’s domicil respecting citizenship, held to have changed character of his citizenship 815 [Pg. 815 includes portions of Doc. 386 and Doc. 387], 824 [Pg. 824 includes portions of Doc. 390 and Doc. 391]

Exposition: Berlin; international; of products and utensils of sea and inland fisheries 354 [Pg. 354 includes portions of Doc. 184 and Doc. 185] Brussels; national; of the industries of Belgium 92 [Pg. 92 includes portions of Doc. 60 and Doc. 61]

Export bonds: regulations for the cancellation of, pertaining to merchandise exported under internal revenue laws 7 [Pg. 7 is part of Doc. 8]

Exterritoriality of legations: question raised by case of William Knoth, a German subject summoned for military duty, messenger to legation at Berlin 374 [Pg. 374 includes portions of Doc. 192 and Doc. 193], 375 [Pg. 375 includes portions of Doc. 193 and Doc. 194] citations from international law bearing upon the case 375 [Pg. 375 includes portions of Doc. 193 and Doc. 194]

German law restricts enjoyment of right to non-Germans 384 [Pg. 384 is part of Doc. 197]

Exterritoriality of consular court in Egypt in case of American citizen charged with criminal offence 987 [Pg. 987 includes portions of Doc. 502 and Doc. 503], 990 [Pg. 990 includes portions of Doc. 503, Doc. 504, and Doc. 505], 1010 [Pg. 1010 includes portions of Doc. 512 and Doc. 513], 1012 [Pg. 1012 is part of Doc. 514]

Extradition: Denmark; outline of negotiations for extradition treaty with 306 [Pg. 306 includes portions of Doc. 164 and Doc. 165], 309 [Pg. 309 includes portions of Doc. 168 and Doc. 169]

Colombia: question discussed by Mr. Dichman 251 [Pg. 251 includes portions of Doc. 141 and Doc. 142], 271 [Pg. 271 is part of Doc. 149] its bearing upon right of transit across the Isthmus of Panama of extradited prisoners of the United States 271 [Pg. 271 is part of Doc. 149]

(For case of C. G. Scrafford, extradited prisoner in transit, released by order of Colombian government, at Panama, see F. R. 1878, page 151.)

right of transit of extradited prisoners in custody of United States officers across the Isthmus of Panama secured 251 [Pg. 251 includes portions of Doc. 141 and Doc. 142], 271 [Pg. 271 is part of Doc. 149], 273 [Pg. 273 includes portions of Doc. 150 and Doc. 151], 284 [Pg. 284 includes portions of Doc. 153, Doc. 154, and Doc. 155]

Spain: case of Chas. W. Angell, arrested in Portugal; permission granted by Spanish Government to transport the prisoner across Spanish territory 936 [Pg. 936 includes portions of Doc. 473 and Doc. 474] the right of transit of an extradited criminal in custody, across the territory of a foreign state, now attracting the attention of the Department of State 941 [Pg. 941 includes portions of Doc. 476, Doc. 477, and Doc. 478]

F.

Falk, Dr., German minister of education: causes of his resignation; his career 394 [Pg. 394 includes portions of Doc. 200, Doc. 201, and Doc. 202]

Farm machinery needed in Mexico: report of trial of American machines 804 [Pg. 804 includes portions of Doc. 380 and Doc. 381]

Finances: Argentine Republic: satisfactory condition; debt reduced $2,760,000 during current year 21 [Pg. 21 includes portions of Doc. 18 and Doc. 19] Austria-Hungary; business conducted on paper basis; no coin in circulation; gold merchandise; customs duties payable in gold 36 [Pg. 36 includes portions of Doc. 28 and Doc. 29], 39 [Pg. 39 includes portions of Doc. 31 and Doc. 32], 41 [Pg. 41 includes portions of Doc. 33 and Doc. 34], 50 [Pg. 50 includes portions of Doc. 39 and Doc. 40], 52 [Pg. 52 includes portions of Doc. 41 and Doc. 42]

Belgium: report upon the gold and silver coin and currency in the kingdom 109 [Pg. 109 includes portions of Doc. 62 and Doc. 63]

Chili: business at a stand-still on account of the war; issue of six millions in paper notes 178 [Pg. 178 includes portions of Doc. 109 and Doc. 110]

Colombia: revenue; debt and interest charge; imports and exports 256 [Pg. 256 is part of Doc. 144], 289 [Pg. 289 includes portions of Doc. 158 and Doc. 159]

Denmark: influence of general business depression upon; falling off in imports and exports 303 [Pg. 303 includes portions of Doc. 162 and Doc. 163]

Egypt: revenue; expenses; interest charge upon debt 1035 [Pg. 1035 is part of Doc. 521]

Germany: influence of the silver sales upon the finances; net loss to government on sales already made 72,000,000 marks; report upon the gold and silver coin and currency in circulation 385 [Pg. 385 includes portions of Doc. 197 and Doc. 198], 394 [Pg. 394 includes portions of Doc. 200, Doc. 201, and Doc. 202], 398 [Pg. 398 includes portions of Doc. 202 and Doc. 203]

Great Britain: report upon the gold and silver coin and currency in circulation 432 [Pg. 432 includes portions of Doc. 219 and Doc. 220], 441 [Pg. 441 is part of Doc. 222], 449 [Pg. 449 is part of Doc. 224]

Japan: receipts and expenditures for the current year; decrease in paper circulation and in debt; coinage record 616 [Pg. 616 is part of Doc. 308], 656 [Pg. 656 includes portions of Doc. 320 and Doc. 321]

Liberia; annual message of the president; statement of receipts and expenses 701 [Pg. 701 includes portions of Doc. 347 and Doc. 348]

Mexico: estimated receipts and expenses; deficit $4, 378, 000; table of exports; report upon gold and silver coin, and paper currency 770 [Pg. 770 includes portions of Doc. 366 and Doc. 367], 774 [Pg. 774 includes portions of Doc. 370 and Doc. 371], 808 [Pg. 808 includes portions of Doc. 381 and Doc. 382], 822 [Pg. 822 includes portions of Doc. 389 and Doc. 390], 836 [Pg. 836 includes portions of Doc. 395 and Doc. 396]

Morocco: report upon the Currency 842 [Pg. 842 includes portions of Doc. 399, Doc. 400, and Doc. 401]

Netherlands: report upon gold and silver coin and paper currency 851 [Pg. 851 is part of Doc. 408]

Peru: effect of the war upon the finances; proposed increase of paper circulation by issue of 8,000,000 soles 874 [Pg. 874 includes portions of Doc. 419, Doc. 420, and Doc. 421]

firing upon the flag of Consul Sutter at Acapulco in 1877. Reparation 802 [Pg. 802 includes portions of Doc. 378 and Doc. 379]

Russia: report upon gold and silver coin and bullion and paper currency 923 [Pg. 923 includes portions of Doc. 459 and Doc. 460]

Firing upon the flag of Consul Sutter at Acapulco in 1877. Reparation 802 [Pg. 802 includes portions of Doc. 378 and Doc. 379]

Fish, Mr. Hamilton: copy of his note of December 1, 1871, to Mr. Palacio 730 [Pg. 730 includes portions of Doc. 358 and Doc. 359]

Fisheries question: Canadian, editorial from London Daily News upon the Fortune Bay outrage claims 451 [Pg. 451 includes portions of Doc. 225 and Doc. 226] cruise of the Kearsarge to the fishing banks to examine pending questions 504 [Pg. 504 includes portions of Doc. 250, Doc. 251, and Doc. 252]

(See F. R., 1878, Halifax award and Fortune Bay outrage questions.)

Fisheries exposition: to be held at Berlin in 1880; programme of exposition 354 [Pg. 354 includes portions of Doc. 184 and Doc. 185]

Flatar Philip: naturalized citizen; case brought to attention of legation at Berlin 367 [Pg. 367 includes portions of Doc. 191 and Doc. 192]

Flag. American: question of transfer of foreign built vessels to 150 [Pg. 150 includes portions of Doc. 98 and Doc. 99], 174 [Pg. 174 includes portions of Doc. 104 and Doc. 105], 177 [Pg. 177 is part of Doc. 109], 180 [Pg. 180 includes portions of Doc. 110, Doc. 111, and Doc. 112], 861 [Pg. 861 is part of Doc. 413], 835 [Pg. 835 is part of Doc. 395], 867 [Pg. 867 includes portions of Doc. 416, Doc. 417, and Doc. 418], 874 [Pg. 874 includes portions of Doc. 419, Doc. 420, and Doc. 421], 877 [Pg. 877 includes portions of Doc. 421 and Doc. 422], 881 [Pg. 881 includes portions of Doc. 423, Doc. 424, and Doc. 425], 882 [Pg. 882 includes portions of Doc. 426 and Doc. 427], 884 [Pg. 884 includes portions of Doc. 428 and Doc. 429], 894 [Pg. 894 includes portions of Doc. 435, Doc. 436, and Doc. 437]

Fog signals: Commodore Beaumont’s international system to be presented for the consideration of foreign governments 4 [Pg. 4 is part of Doc. 6]

Folte Gustave: naturalized citizen; case of, brought to attention of legation at Berlin 367 [Pg. 367 includes portions of Doc. 191 and Doc. 192]

Foochow: destruction by Chinese mob, of English missionary premises at Foochow 183 [Pg. 183 includes portions of Doc. 113 and Doc. 114] an American man of war sent to Foochow 183 [Pg. 183 includes portions of Doc. 113 and Doc. 114]

local authorities are dealing more satisfactorily with missionary cases 234 [Pg. 234 includes portions of Doc. 134 and Doc. 135]

Forced loans: Colombia: Americans exempt from, under operation of “most favored nation” clause of treaty 287 [Pg. 287 is part of Doc. 157]

Mexico: Chihuahua cases: case of Walter Henry; Mexico holds that such cases must be referred to the courts 727 [Pg. 727 includes portions of Doc. 356, Doc. 357, and Doc. 358] cases in State of Jalisco and in San Luis Potosi; case of Mr. F. A. Newton; Mr. Foster advises resort to the courts 746 [Pg. 746 includes portions of Doc. 362 and Doc. 363]

broad grounds taken by Mexico as to right to enforce same 750 [Pg. 750 is part of Doc. 364]

utter futility of appeals to the courts shown by Mr. Foster 727 [Pg. 727 includes portions of Doc. 356, Doc. 357, and Doc. 358], 746 [Pg. 746 includes portions of Doc. 362 and Doc. 363]

Mr. Foster’s position approved by the Secretary of State 772 [Pg. 772 includes portions of Doc. 368 and Doc. 369]

Foreign built vessels owned by American citizens: question of their right to fly the American flag, and to the protection of the United States: dispatches from Mr. T. A. Osborn 150 [Pg. 150 includes portions of Doc. 98 and Doc. 99], 174 [Pg. 174 includes portions of Doc. 104 and Doc. 105]

“ “ Mr. Gibbs 861 [Pg. 861 is part of Doc. 413], 865 [Pg. 865 includes portions of Doc. 413, Doc. 414, and Doc. 415]

“ “ Christianey 877 [Pg. 877 includes portions of Doc. 421 and Doc. 422], 881 [Pg. 881 includes portions of Doc. 423, Doc. 424, and Doc. 425], 882 [Pg. 882 includes portions of Doc. 426 and Doc. 427]

instructions from Mr. Evarts to Ministers Osborn and Christiancy 177 [Pg. 177 is part of Doc. 109], 867 [Pg. 867 includes portions of Doc. 416, Doc. 417, and Doc. 418]. 874 [Pg. 874 includes portions of Doc. 419, Doc. 420, and Doc. 421], 884 [Pg. 884 includes portions of Doc. 428 and Doc. 429], 894 [Pg. 894 includes portions of Doc. 435, Doc. 436, and Doc. 437]

instructions from Mr. Hunter to Messrs McKellar and Foote 180 [Pg. 180 includes portions of Doc. 110, Doc. 111, and Doc. 112]

(See Chili: Peru.)

Fortune Bay fisheries question discussed by the London Daily News 451 [Pg. 451 includes portions of Doc. 225 and Doc. 226]

France: resignation of President McMahon; election of Mr. Jules Grévy as President; details of election 332 [Pg. 332 includes portions of Doc. 172 and Doc. 173] message of President McMahon upon tendering his resignation 332 [Pg. 332 includes portions of Doc. 172 and Doc. 173]

ministry formed by Mr. Wacldington; retirement of M. Dufaure 334 [Pg. 334 is part of Doc. 174]

rumored attempt on the part of France to establish a protectorate over Liberia 341 [Pg. 341 includes portions of Doc. 179 and Doc. 180], 718 [Pg. 718 includes portions of Doc. 351, Doc. 352, and Doc. 353]

deep interest of the United States in Liberia expressed 341 [Pg. 341 includes portions of Doc. 179 and Doc. 180]

the idea of a French protectorate over Liberia not entertained; suggested by irresponsible persons 341 [Pg. 341 includes portions of Doc. 179 and Doc. 180], 727 [Pg. 727 includes portions of Doc. 356, Doc. 357, and Doc. 358]

projected trans Saharian railway from Algeria to the Soudan; French efforts in Africa 722 [Pg. 722 includes portions of Doc. 354 and Doc. 355], 723 [Pg. 723 includes portions of Doc. 355 and Doc. 356]

tariff policy of France retaliatory; tariff arranged to compel other nations to accord favorable commercial treaties 40 [Pg. 40 includes portions of Doc. 32 and Doc. 33], 42 [Pg. 42 includes portions of Doc. 34 and Doc. 35], 61 [Pg. 61 includes portions of Doc. 46 and Doc. 47]

conversation between Mr. Kasson and M. Teisserence de Bort, French ambassador at Vienna, as to the commercial policy of the United States 61 [Pg. 61 includes portions of Doc. 46 and Doc. 47]

report upon the system of railway taxation in France; notes from ministry of finance 345 [Pg. 345 is part of Doc. 182]

Mormon proselyting practically unknown in: polygamy a crime under French law; arrest will follow its advocacy 349 [Pg. 349 includes portions of Doc. 182 and Doc. 183]

Admiral Ammen and Mr. Menocal appointed to attend Paris interoceanic canal conference 339 [Pg. 339 includes portions of Doc. 176 and Doc. 177], 340 [Pg. 340 includes portions of Doc. 177 and Doc. 178]

proposed impeachment of the de Broglie and Rocheboüet ministries 334 [Pg. 334 is part of Doc. 174]

Free trade: the Netherlands: royal speech at opening of Staats General: ministry not to depart from free-trade policy 849 [Pg. 849 includes portions of Doc. 406 and Doc. 407]

growth of protectionist views in Europe 40 [Pg. 40 includes portions of Doc. 32 and Doc. 33], 42 [Pg. 42 includes portions of Doc. 34 and Doc. 35], 307 [Pg. 307 includes portions of Doc. 165, Doc. 166, and Doc. 167]

Austria-Hungary: protective tariff and treaty policy 40 [Pg. 40 includes portions of Doc. 32 and Doc. 33], 42 [Pg. 42 includes portions of Doc. 34 and Doc. 35]

Germany: protectionist views of Prince Bismarck; new tariff protective 307 [Pg. 307 includes portions of Doc. 165, Doc. 166, and Doc. 167], 360 [Pg. 360 includes portions of Doc. 188 and Doc. 189], 365 [Pg. 365 includes portions of Doc. 190 and Doc. 191], 392 [Pg. 392 includes portions of Doc. 199 and Doc. 200]

United States: protective tariff policy explained by Mr. Kasson 61 [Pg. 61 includes portions of Doc. 46 and Doc. 47]

Freycinet, M. de: report upon project of railway from Algeria to the Soudan; views as to Central African trade 722 [Pg. 722 includes portions of Doc. 354 and Doc. 355], 723 [Pg. 723 includes portions of Doc. 355 and Doc. 356]

Friedenthal, Dr.: resignation from the German ministry 394 [Pg. 394 includes portions of Doc. 200, Doc. 201, and Doc. 202]

Frontier Relations: Canada: Fortune Bay fisheries claims: editorial from London Daily News respecting 451 [Pg. 451 includes portions of Doc. 225 and Doc. 226] visit of the Kearsarge to the fishing grounds off British North American provinces 504 [Pg. 504 includes portions of Doc. 250, Doc. 251, and Doc. 252]

cases of the tugs “Champion,” “Winston,” “J. H. Martin,” and of the schooner Augustus Ford” 481 [Pg. 481 includes portions of Doc. 232 and Doc. 233]

aid to disabled vessels in waters of either by vessels of other country; notes from the Secretary of State to Sir Edward Thornton 481 [Pg. 481 includes portions of Doc. 232 and Doc. 233], 498 [Pg. 498 includes portions of Doc. 245 and Doc. 246], 505 [Pg. 505 includes portions of Doc. 252 and Doc. 253]

note from Sir Edward Thornton to the Secretary of State 498 [Pg. 498 includes portions of Doc. 245 and Doc. 246]

Sitting Bull and other Indians: crossings of the frontier; views of the Canadian Government; notes from the Secretary of State to Sir Edward Thornton 488 [Pg. 488 includes portions of Doc. 237, Doc. 238, Doc. 239, and Doc. 240], 496 [Pg. 496 is part of Doc. 244], 500 [Pg. 500 includes portions of Doc. 246 and Doc. 247], 504 [Pg. 504 includes portions of Doc. 250, Doc. 251, and Doc. 252]

notes from Sir Edward Thornton to the Secretary of State 488 [Pg. 488 includes portions of Doc. 237, Doc. 238, Doc. 239, and Doc. 240], 508 [Pg. 508 includes portions of Doc. 256 and Doc. 257], 510 [Pg. 510 includes portions of Doc. 257 and Doc. 258]

Sitting Bull and his band regarded as British Indians; Great Britain responsible for the peace of the frontier respecting their movements 496 [Pg. 496 is part of Doc. 244]

shipment of ammunition to Manitoba; danger of its reaching the hostile Indians 491 [Pg. 491 includes portions of Doc. 241 and Doc. 242], 502 [Pg. 502 includes portions of Doc. 248 and Doc. 249]

navigation of the Red River of the North; restrictions upon, in conflict with Article XXX, Treaty of Washington 503 [Pg. 503 includes portions of Doc. 249 and Doc. 250], 506 [Pg. 506 includes portions of Doc. 253 and Doc. 254], 507 [Pg. 507 includes portions of Doc. 254 and Doc. 255]

Mexico: forced loans in Chihuahua; case of Walter Henry 727 [Pg. 727 includes portions of Doc. 356, Doc. 357, and Doc. 358], 750 [Pg. 750 is part of Doc. 364], 772 [Pg. 772 includes portions of Doc. 368 and Doc. 369] operations of Areola: his arrest 730 [Pg. 730 includes portions of Doc. 358 and Doc. 359], 754 [Pg. 754 includes portions of Doc. 364 and Doc. 365], 771 [Pg. 771 includes portions of Doc. 367 and Doc. 368]

depredations in Arizona: refuge sought in Sonora 734 [Pg. 734 includes portions of Doc. 360 and Doc. 361]

Lower California: administration of affairs in 825 [Pg. 825 includes portions of Doc. 391 and Doc. 392]

Rio Grande frontier: question of depredations from Mexican side 730 [Pg. 730 includes portions of Doc. 358 and Doc. 359], 754 [Pg. 754 includes portions of Doc. 364 and Doc. 365] depredators from Mexico: when apprehended in Mexico should be punished by Mexican law; Mr. Foster’s position on frontier question approved 773 [Pg. 773 includes portions of Doc. 369 and Doc. 370]

Indian raids: campaign against the Lipans; report of General Ord 801 [Pg. 801 is part of Doc. 378], 816 [Pg. 816 includes portions of Doc. 387 and Doc. 388]

railroads to the frontier: public sentiment respecting; hostility to connection with American railway system 774 [Pg. 774 includes portions of Doc. 370 and Doc. 371], 811 [Pg. 811 includes portions of Doc. 383 and Doc. 384], 826 [Pg. 826 includes portions of Doc. 392 and Doc. 393]

frontier states of Mexico: restrictions upon American ownership in realtyin 798 [Pg. 798 includes portions of Doc. 373 and Doc. 374], 809 [Pg. 809 includes portions of Doc. 382 and Doc. 383], 833 [Pg. 833 includes portions of Doc. 393 and Doc. 394]

G.

Gambetta, M.: speech upon election to the presidency of the Chamber of Deputies 334 [Pg. 334 is part of Doc. 174]

Ganzenmuller, Karl: naturalized citizen; intervention of legation at Berlin in his behalf. (See for case in full F. R., 1878, pages 216, 229.) 367 [Pg. 367 includes portions of Doc. 191 and Doc. 192]

Gardner, A. W., president of Liberia: message to Congress; a review of Liberian affairs 701 [Pg. 701 includes portions of Doc. 347 and Doc. 348]

Germany: Berlin: international fisheries exposition to be held in 1880 in 354 [Pg. 354 includes portions of Doc. 184 and Doc. 185]

death of Minister Bayard Taylor 357 [Pg. 357 includes portions of Doc. 185 and Doc. 186], 358 [Pg. 358 includes portions of Doc. 186 and Doc. 187], 484 [Pg. 484 includes portions of Doc. 233 and Doc. 234]

Reichstag opened by the Emperor in person: his speech 360 [Pg. 360 includes portions of Doc. 188 and Doc. 189]

commercial treaty with Austria-Hungary: debate in Parliament upon 365 [Pg. 365 includes portions of Doc. 190 and Doc. 191]

text of treaty. (See Mr. Kasson’s dispatch of February 10, 1879.) 44 [Pg. 44 includes portions of Doc. 36 and Doc. 37]

law for suppression of social democratic movement passed 351 [Pg. 351 is part of Doc. 184]

debate and decision upon the Parliament discipline bill 365 [Pg. 365 includes portions of Doc. 190 and Doc. 191], 394 [Pg. 394 includes portions of Doc. 200, Doc. 201, and Doc. 202]

treaty with Samoa favorably discussed in the Reichstag 388 [Pg. 388 includes portions of Doc. 198 and Doc. 199], 394 [Pg. 394 includes portions of Doc. 200, Doc. 201, and Doc. 202]

text of the treaty with Samoa signed January 24, 1879 381 [Pg. 381 includes portions of Doc. 195 and Doc. 196]

attack in debate upon the protectionist views of Prince Bismarck 365 [Pg. 365 includes portions of Doc. 190 and Doc. 191]

debate upon the new tariff law: strong tendency in the direction of protection developed, 392 [Pg. 392 includes portions of Doc. 199 and Doc. 200], 394 [Pg. 394 includes portions of Doc. 200, Doc. 201, and Doc. 202]

augmentation of duty upon American lard 392 [Pg. 392 includes portions of Doc. 199 and Doc. 200]

debate upon the silver question: upon the restoration of the double standard, and the suspension of the sale of silver 385 [Pg. 385 includes portions of Doc. 197 and Doc. 198]

losses already sustained by the government by the sale of silver 385 [Pg. 385 includes portions of Doc. 197 and Doc. 198]

government not likely to sell more silver: prospects of reissue 394 [Pg. 394 includes portions of Doc. 200, Doc. 201, and Doc. 202]

stock of government silver on hand unknown: 41 [Pg. 41 includes portions of Doc. 33 and Doc. 34]

resumé of the work of the session of the Reichstag 394 [Pg. 394 includes portions of Doc. 200, Doc. 201, and Doc. 202]

resignation of Dr. Falk and Dr. Friedenthal and Herr Hobrecht 394 [Pg. 394 includes portions of Doc. 200, Doc. 201, and Doc. 202]

career of Dr. Falk 394 [Pg. 394 includes portions of Doc. 200, Doc. 201, and Doc. 202]

coalition between the ultramontane and the imperial and conservative parties in the Reichstag 394 [Pg. 394 includes portions of Doc. 200, Doc. 201, and Doc. 202]

constitution of Alsace-Lorraine: created a state of the empire, with a parliament 394 [Pg. 394 includes portions of Doc. 200, Doc. 201, and Doc. 202]

statistics of gold and silver coin and bullion and paper currency 398 [Pg. 398 includes portions of Doc. 202 and Doc. 203]

cases of naturalized citizens arrested for alleged offenses against the military laws of the empire 359 [Pg. 359 includes portions of Doc. 187 and Doc. 188]

cases of naturalized citizens which have required the intervention of the legation 367 [Pg. 367 includes portions of Doc. 191 and Doc. 192]

question of exterritoriality of legations 374 [Pg. 374 includes portions of Doc. 192 and Doc. 193], 375 [Pg. 375 includes portions of Doc. 193 and Doc. 194]

under German law benefits of exterritoriality only to extend to non-Germans 384 [Pg. 384 is part of Doc. 197]

railway taxation: no uniform system adopted for the empire; report of Prussian system 379 [Pg. 379 includes portions of Doc. 194 and Doc. 195]

election to the Prussian Landtag a conservative victory; strength of Prince Bismarck with the people 402 [Pg. 402 includes portions of Doc. 203 and Doc. 204]

position of Germany upon question of the right of Japan to issue quarantine regulations for the port of Kanagawa 604 [Pg. 604 includes portions of Doc. 300 and Doc. 301], 647 [Pg. 647 includes portions of Doc. 318 and Doc. 319], 665 [Pg. 665 includes portions of Doc. 324 and Doc. 325], 670 [Pg. 670 includes portions of Doc. 327 and Doc. 328]

Gibert. Mr. Felix: comments of Hon. J. M. Vigil upon his report upon Lower California 825 [Pg. 825 includes portions of Doc. 391 and Doc. 392]

Glass, Thomas: sentence of deportation of Consul-General Van Buren against, not approved. (See F. R. 1878, page 518.) 697 [Pg. 697 includes portions of Doc. 345 and Doc. 346]

Gold: Austria-Hungary; not in circulation; treated as merchandise 36 [Pg. 36 includes portions of Doc. 28 and Doc. 29] duties payable in gold 36 [Pg. 36 includes portions of Doc. 28 and Doc. 29]

Mexico: gold exported 808 [Pg. 808 includes portions of Doc. 381 and Doc. 382]

Gold and silver coin and bullion and paper currency in the Treasury, in the banks, and in circulation; amount of gold and silver annually produced and coined; circular 3 [Pg. 3 includes portions of Doc. 4 and Doc. 5] Reports from ministers in the following countries: Austria-Hungary: gold not in circulation; business conducted on paper basis 36 [Pg. 36 includes portions of Doc. 28 and Doc. 29], 39 [Pg. 39 includes portions of Doc. 31 and Doc. 32], 41 [Pg. 41 includes portions of Doc. 33 and Doc. 34], 50 [Pg. 50 includes portions of Doc. 39 and Doc. 40]

Belgium 109 [Pg. 109 includes portions of Doc. 62 and Doc. 63]

Germany: government sales of silver discussed 385 [Pg. 385 includes portions of Doc. 197 and Doc. 198], 394 [Pg. 394 includes portions of Doc. 200, Doc. 201, and Doc. 202], 398 [Pg. 398 includes portions of Doc. 202 and Doc. 203]

Great Britain: letters from Mr. George McHenry and note from Lord Salisbury 432 [Pg. 432 includes portions of Doc. 219 and Doc. 220], 441 [Pg. 441 is part of Doc. 222], 449 [Pg. 449 is part of Doc. 224]

Hawaiian Islands 543 [Pg. 543 includes portions of Doc. 263 and Doc. 264]

Japan: report of the imperial mint; decrease in paper circulation 616 [Pg. 616 is part of Doc. 308], 656 [Pg. 656 includes portions of Doc. 320 and Doc. 321]

Mexico: amount of gold and silver exported 808 [Pg. 808 includes portions of Doc. 381 and Doc. 382], 822 [Pg. 822 includes portions of Doc. 389 and Doc. 390]

Morocco 842 [Pg. 842 includes portions of Doc. 399, Doc. 400, and Doc. 401]

Netherlands: memorandum of the minister of finance 851 [Pg. 851 is part of Doc. 408]

Russia 923 [Pg. 923 includes portions of Doc. 459 and Doc. 460]

Gonaive, Hayti: revolution extends to 564 [Pg. 564 includes portions of Doc. 275 and Doc. 276], 569 [Pg. 569 includes portions of Doc. 276 and Doc. 277]

Gorgoza, A. de: first negotiation of the de Gorgoza-Türr-Wyse-de Lesseps canal concession; history of negotiation 297 [Pg. 297 includes portions of Doc. 161 and Doc. 162] (See Mr. Scruggs’ dispatches 163 of May 7, and 170 of June 5, 1876.)

Goribar forced loan case: decision of supreme court of Mexico that forced loans are unconstitutional 746 [Pg. 746 includes portions of Doc. 362 and Doc. 363]

Government vessels: not men-of-war, nor yachts of sovereigns, when engaged in mail and package service, subject to arrest at suit of private persons: opinion of Sir R. Phillimore 415 [Pg. 415 includes portions of Doc. 213 and Doc. 214]

Grain: American wheat imported into Spain 938 [Pg. 938 includes portions of Doc. 474 and Doc. 475]

Grant, General: account of his reception by the King and Government of Spain 935 [Pg. 935 includes portions of Doc. 472 and Doc. 473] invited to visit Siam 928 [Pg. 928 includes portions of Doc. 465, Doc. 466, and Doc. 467]

account of his reception in Japan by the Emperor, his government and people 636 [Pg. 636 includes portions of Doc. 313 and Doc. 314], 643 [Pg. 643 includes portions of Doc. 317 and Doc. 318], 685 [Pg. 685 includes portions of Doc. 335 and Doc. 336], 694 [Pg. 694 includes portions of Doc. 339, Doc. 340, and Doc. 341]

Great Britain: American cattle trade with Great Britain: its growth; precautions taken to insure the health of the cattle 423 [Pg. 423 includes portions of Doc. 214 and Doc. 215]

British officers prohibited from acting as consuls for foreign governments 407 [Pg. 407 includes portions of Doc. 208, Doc. 209, and Doc. 210]

terms of admission of private students to Royal Naval College at Greenwich 427 [Pg. 427 includes portions of Doc. 215 and Doc. 216]

search of the American bark “Laconia” in the harbor of Zanzibar by order of Captain Earl, of the royal navy 415 [Pg. 415 includes portions of Doc. 213 and Doc. 214]

the search a violation of Article 1 of the treaty of 1862 415 [Pg. 415 includes portions of Doc. 213 and Doc. 214]

regret expressed by Great Britain at unauthorized action of Captain Earl. 431 [Pg. 431 includes portions of Doc. 218 and Doc. 219]

speeches of Lords Beaconsfield and Derby and Mr. Cross upon agricultural and commercial distress in Great Britain 453 [Pg. 453 includes portions of Doc. 226 and Doc. 227]

speech of Lord Salisbury upon the government policy 468 [Pg. 468 is part of Doc. 231]

emigration: prospect of large emigration to the United States of members of the farmer class 463 [Pg. 463 includes portions of Doc. 227 and Doc. 228]

Mormon emigration to the United States: government powerless to do anything 450 [Pg. 450 includes portions of Doc. 224 and Doc. 225], 465 [Pg. 465 includes portions of Doc. 228 and Doc. 229]

report upon system of railroad taxation 413 [Pg. 413 includes portions of Doc. 210 and Doc. 211], 429 [Pg. 429 includes portions of Doc. 217 and Doc. 218]

reports upon the gold and silver coin and bullion and paper currency; letters from Mr. George McHenry and note from Lord Salisbury 432 [Pg. 432 includes portions of Doc. 219 and Doc. 220], 441 [Pg. 441 is part of Doc. 222], 449 [Pg. 449 is part of Doc. 224]

conclusion of a commercial treaty with Servia 59 [Pg. 59 includes portions of Doc. 45 and Doc. 46]

position of Great Britain upon question of the right of Japan to issue quarantine regulations for the port of Kanagawa 604 [Pg. 604 includes portions of Doc. 300 and Doc. 301], 647 [Pg. 647 includes portions of Doc. 318 and Doc. 319], 657 [Pg. 657 includes portions of Doc. 321 and Doc. 322], 665 [Pg. 665 includes portions of Doc. 324 and Doc. 325], 670 [Pg. 670 includes portions of Doc. 327 and Doc. 328]

gold medal of the Royal Astronomical Society conferred upon Prof. Asaph Hall, of the National Observatory 414 [Pg. 414 includes portions of Doc. 211 and Doc. 212]

letter from Mr. Brassey upon the constitution of a naval reserve 429 [Pg. 429 includes portions of Doc. 217 and Doc. 218]

visit of the “Osprey” to Sitka, Alaska: thanks of the United States extended to Captain A’Court; defenseless condition of Sitka 490 [Pg. 490 includes portions of Doc. 240 and Doc. 241], 492 [Pg. 492 includes portions of Doc. 242 and Doc. 243]

frontier relations with Canada: disabled vessels in Canadian waters; need of agreement as to reciprocal aid to 481 [Pg. 481 includes portions of Doc. 232 and Doc. 233], 498 [Pg. 498 includes portions of Doc. 245 and Doc. 246], 505 [Pg. 505 includes portions of Doc. 252 and Doc. 253]

cases of the tugs “Champion,” “Winston,” “J. H. Martin,” and of the schooner “Augustus Ford” 481 [Pg. 481 includes portions of Doc. 232 and Doc. 233]

Fortune Bay fisheries claims: editorial from the Daily News respecting 451 [Pg. 451 includes portions of Doc. 225 and Doc. 226]

(See F. R., 1878, pages 284, 308, 314, 323, 348, 349.)

visit of the United States steamer Kearsarge to the fishing-grounds 504 [Pg. 504 includes portions of Doc. 250, Doc. 251, and Doc. 252]

Indian question: Sitting Bull and band regarded by the United States as British Indians; Great Britain responsible for the peace of the frontier in respect of their movements 496 [Pg. 496 is part of Doc. 244]

British Indians upon, and crossing the frontier: views of Canadian Government 488 [Pg. 488 includes portions of Doc. 237, Doc. 238, Doc. 239, and Doc. 240], 496 [Pg. 496 is part of Doc. 244], 500 [Pg. 500 includes portions of Doc. 246 and Doc. 247], 504 [Pg. 504 includes portions of Doc. 250, Doc. 251, and Doc. 252]

shipment of ammunition to Manitoba; danger of its reaching the hostile Indians 491 [Pg. 491 includes portions of Doc. 241 and Doc. 242], 502 [Pg. 502 includes portions of Doc. 248 and Doc. 249]

navigation of the Red River of the North; Canadian restrictions upon in violation of Article XXX, Treaty of Washington 503 [Pg. 503 includes portions of Doc. 249 and Doc. 250], 506 [Pg. 506 includes portions of Doc. 253 and Doc. 254], 507 [Pg. 507 includes portions of Doc. 254 and Doc. 255]

Green, Lieut. F. V.: report concerning position and duties of military attachés to legations of European powers 906 [Pg. 906 includes portions of Doc. 445 and Doc. 446]

Grévy, M. Jules: elected President of France to succeed President McMahon 332 [Pg. 332 includes portions of Doc. 172 and Doc. 173] message of President Grévy 334 [Pg. 334 is part of Doc. 174]

constitution of his cabinet; Mr. Waddington appointed premier 334 [Pg. 334 is part of Doc. 174]

Guatemala: constitutional convention called by President Barrios 140 [Pg. 140 includes portions of Doc. 89, Doc. 90, and Doc. 91] his dictatorship to terminate upon establishment of constitutional government: 140 [Pg. 140 includes portions of Doc. 89, Doc. 90, and Doc. 91]

the negotiation of a reciprocity treaty with the United States suggested by President Barrios 142 [Pg. 142 includes portions of Doc. 93 and Doc. 94]

Guzman, Blanco, General, head of the revolution, arrives in Caracas, and assumes the government of Venezuela 1041 [Pg. 1041 includes portions of Doc. 528, Doc. 529, and Doc. 530], 1043 [Pg. 1043 includes portions of Doc. 532 and Doc. 533] his visit to Europe and negotiation of the Pereire contract for the development of the resources of Venezuela 1043 [Pg. 1043 includes portions of Doc. 532 and Doc. 533], 1045 [Pg. 1045 includes portions of Doc. 534 and Doc. 535]

H.

Hall, Prof. Asaph: the gold medal of the Royal Astronomical Society of England conferred upon 414 [Pg. 414 includes portions of Doc. 211 and Doc. 212]

Hall, H. H.: contractor for the Tehuantepec Railway; contract approved by Congress 774 [Pg. 774 includes portions of Doc. 370 and Doc. 371], 811 [Pg. 811 includes portions of Doc. 383 and Doc. 384]

Harbor conservation: Shanghai Harbor protection rules; proposed extension of harbor rules to river to Woosung 192 [Pg. 192 includes portions of Doc. 116 and Doc. 117] (See F. R., 1878, pages 103, 105, 107.)

correspondence with Chinese foreign office respecting the rules 213 [Pg. 213 is part of Doc. 126]

Chinkiang Harbor: correspondence as to right of Chinese Government to order removal of hulk anchored in 189 [Pg. 189 includes portions of Doc. 114 and Doc. 115]

Harris, Mr. Townsend: minister of the United States to Japan in 1857; Japanese account of his reception by the Taikun 621 [Pg. 621 is part of Doc. 313]

Harvard University: correspondence touching the establishment of a Chinese professorship at 234 [Pg. 234 includes portions of Doc. 134 and Doc. 135]

Hastings, F. P., vice-consul at Honolulu: report upon alleged sugar frauds under reciprocity treaty with Hawaiian Islands 529 [Pg. 529 includes portions of Doc. 261 and Doc. 262] interest of the Hawaiian Government to prevent frauds shown 529 [Pg. 529 includes portions of Doc. 261 and Doc. 262]

Hathorne, William H, consul at Zanzibar: report in case of American bark “Laconia,” searched by order of Captain Earl, of the British Navy 415 [Pg. 415 includes portions of Doc. 213 and Doc. 214]

regret expressed by British Government on account of the search 431 [Pg. 431 includes portions of Doc. 218 and Doc. 219]

Hawaiian Islands: reciprocity treaty: report of special committee of Hawaiian assembly upon 512 [Pg. 512 is part of Doc. 259]

international relations of Hawaii in consequence thereof discussed 512 [Pg. 512 is part of Doc. 259]

foreign policy of the Hawaiian Islands 512 [Pg. 512 is part of Doc. 259]

question as to whether Hawaiian tariff upon American cotton goods made up into clothing is not in contravention of Article II of the treaty 527 [Pg. 527 is part of Doc. 261]

the Secretary of the Treasury deems the tariff in this respect in contravention of the treaty 544 [Pg. 544 includes portions of Doc. 264 and Doc. 265]

failure of American merchants and manufacturers to avail themselves of the benefits of the treaty 542 [Pg. 542 includes portions of Doc. 262 and Doc. 263]

British manufacturers supply the Hawaiian market 542 [Pg. 542 includes portions of Doc. 262 and Doc. 263]

Hawaiian products sold in the United States and purchases made in Europe 542 [Pg. 542 includes portions of Doc. 262 and Doc. 263]

report upon alleged sugar frauds under treaty 529 [Pg. 529 includes portions of Doc. 261 and Doc. 262]

interest of Hawaiian Government to detect and punish such frauds 529 [Pg. 529 includes portions of Doc. 261 and Doc. 262]

description of the harbors and landing places of the islands 529 [Pg. 529 includes portions of Doc. 261 and Doc. 262]

amount of gold and silver coin and paper currency in circulation 543 [Pg. 543 includes portions of Doc. 263 and Doc. 264]

Hayti: consular authentication tax: note from Mr. Ethéart; question to be removed to Washington 546 [Pg. 546 includes portions of Doc. 266 and Doc. 267] identic note from Great Britain, France, and Germany, protesting against the tax 553 [Pg. 553 includes portions of Doc. 268 and Doc. 269]

reply of the Haytian Government 554 [Pg. 554 includes portions of Doc. 269 and Doc. 270]

note from Mr. Evarts to Sir Edward Thornton, stating position of the United States respecting the tax 501 [Pg. 501 includes portions of Doc. 247 and Doc. 248]

notes from Mr. Preston to Mr. Evarts upon the tax question 583 [Pg. 583 includes portions of Doc. 286 and Doc. 287], 587 [Pg. 587 includes portions of Doc. 288 and Doc. 289], 594 [Pg. 594 includes portions of Doc. 291 and Doc. 292]

notes from Mr. Evarts to Mr. Preston upon the same subject 586 [Pg. 586 includes portions of Doc. 287 and Doc. 288], 595 [Pg. 595 includes portions of Doc. 292 and Doc. 293] (See F. R., 1878, pages 411, 415, 416, 427, 428, 445.)

discriminating license-tax; tax injurious to foreign interests; in contravention of our treaty with Hayti 550 [Pg. 550 includes portions of Doc. 267 and Doc. 268]

notes from Mr. Preston to Mr. Evarts, stating position of Hayti upon license-tax question 591 [Pg. 591 includes portions of Doc. 289 and Doc. 290], 594 [Pg. 594 includes portions of Doc. 291 and Doc. 292]

note from Mr. Evarts to Mr. Preston, stating the position of the United States; license-tax in violation of Article 5 of the treaty of 1864 593 [Pg. 593 includes portions of Doc. 290 and Doc. 291]

national assembly opened; speeches of the President of the Republic and of the president of the senate 556 [Pg. 556 includes portions of Doc. 270 and Doc. 271]

unsatisfactory relationship of parties 556 [Pg. 556 includes portions of Doc. 270 and Doc. 271], 558 [Pg. 558 includes portions of Doc. 271 and Doc. 272]

insurrection at Cape Haytien 559 [Pg. 559 includes portions of Doc. 272 and Doc. 273]

constitution of assembly; dead lock between chambers; danger of revolution 562 [Pg. 562 includes portions of Doc. 274 and Doc. 275]

revolution at Port-au-Prince; its progress throughout the country 564 [Pg. 564 includes portions of Doc. 275 and Doc. 276], 569 [Pg. 569 includes portions of Doc. 276 and Doc. 277], 570 [Pg. 570 includes portions of Doc. 277 and Doc. 278], 572 [Pg. 572 includes portions of Doc. 279 and Doc. 280], 578 [Pg. 578 includes portions of Doc. 281 and Doc. 282]

resignation and withdrawal of President Canal 569 [Pg. 569 includes portions of Doc. 276 and Doc. 277], 572 [Pg. 572 includes portions of Doc. 279 and Doc. 280]

leaders of revolution seek asylum in legations and consulates, and some embark upon British man-of-war “Boxer.” 569 [Pg. 569 includes portions of Doc. 276 and Doc. 277], 570 [Pg. 570 includes portions of Doc. 277 and Doc. 278]

question of asylum discussed; its allowance a breeder of revolutions 570 [Pg. 570 includes portions of Doc. 277 and Doc. 278], 576 [Pg. 576 includes portions of Doc. 280 and Doc. 281]

the United States not tenacious of maintaining the so-called right of asylum; refugees in asylum must be rendered harmless as the condition of protection 582 [Pg. 582 includes portions of Doc. 285 and Doc. 286]

constitution of the provisional government under General Hérrissé 579 [Pg. 579 includes portions of Doc. 282 and Doc. 283], 581 [Pg. 581 is part of Doc. 284]

General L. Salomon, President of the Republic 582 [Pg. 582 includes portions of Doc. 285 and Doc. 286]

industrial condition of Hayti; absence of capital; deplorable condition of her agriculture 560 [Pg. 560 includes portions of Doc. 273 and Doc. 274]

disposition of the people to serve in the army rather than engage in productive industry 560 [Pg. 560 includes portions of Doc. 273 and Doc. 274]

question of allowance of whites to own land in Hayti discussed in the press 560 [Pg. 560 includes portions of Doc. 273 and Doc. 274]

Health, National Board of: consuls to make regular reports as to the sanitary condition of their districts 10 [Pg. 10 includes portions of Doc. 8, Doc. 9, and Doc. 10]

Heeckeren van Kell, Mr.: note from, upon railway taxation in the Netherlands 847 [Pg. 847 includes portions of Doc. 404 and Doc. 405]

Henkes, Christian: naturalized citizen; case of, brought to attention of legation at Berlin 367 [Pg. 367 includes portions of Doc. 191 and Doc. 192]

Hennessy, governor of Hong-Kong: visit to Tokei and speech before the chamber of commerce 639 [Pg. 639 includes portions of Doc. 316 and Doc. 317]

Henry, Walter: forced loans exacted from, in Chihuahua; discussion of hist case (See F. R. 1878, pages 527, 603, 606.) 727 [Pg. 727 includes portions of Doc. 356, Doc. 357, and Doc. 358], 750 [Pg. 750 is part of Doc. 364]

Hérrissé, General: commanding revolutionary army in Hayti; establishes provisional government 578 [Pg. 578 includes portions of Doc. 281 and Doc. 282], 579 [Pg. 579 includes portions of Doc. 282 and Doc. 283], 581 [Pg. 581 is part of Doc. 284]

“Hesperia”: a German merchant vessel taken out of quarantine at Kanagawa by the German consul, aided by a man-of-war. 647 [Pg. 647 includes portions of Doc. 318 and Doc. 319]

Holy See: relations of Belgium to the; question as to the maintenance of the Belgian legation to the Vatican 90 [Pg. 90 includes portions of Doc. 58 and Doc. 59] secularization of education in Belgium; opposition by the church party 97 [Pg. 97 includes portions of Doc. 61 and Doc. 62]

Hungary: system of railway taxation 54 [Pg. 54 includes portions of Doc. 42 and Doc. 43] disastrous flood at Szegedin: loss, $3,000,000 57 [Pg. 57 is part of Doc. 44]

Huascar: Peruvian iron-clad; ineffectual attempt to raise the blockade of Iquique 886 [Pg. 886 includes portions of Doc. 430 and Doc. 431]

I.

Immigration of Mormons into the United States: diplomatic officers instructed to ask intervention of foreign governments to prevent or restrict same 11 [Pg. 11 includes portions of Doc. 10 and Doc. 11] reports from ministers to France. Great Britain, Italy, Netherlands, Sweden, and Norway 349 [Pg. 349 includes portions of Doc. 182 and Doc. 183], 450 [Pg. 450 includes portions of Doc. 224 and Doc. 225], 465 [Pg. 465 includes portions of Doc. 228 and Doc. 229], 601 [Pg. 601 includes portions of Doc. 299 and Doc. 300], 852 [Pg. 852 includes portions of Doc. 408 and Doc. 409], 854 [Pg. 854 is part of Doc. 410], 964 [Pg. 964 includes portions of Doc. 488 and Doc. 489]

prospects of a large immigration of small proprietors and skilled laborers from England into the United States 463 [Pg. 463 includes portions of Doc. 227 and Doc. 228]

Imports and exports: Argentine Republic, value, $77,658,278 21 [Pg. 21 includes portions of Doc. 18 and Doc. 19] Austria-Hungary: imports, 579, 547, 828 florins; exports, 698, 302, 513 florins 52 [Pg. 52 includes portions of Doc. 41 and Doc. 42], 81 [Pg. 81 includes portions of Doc. 52 and Doc. 53]

Colombia: imports, $10, 000, 000; exports, $12, 000, 000 254 [Pg. 254 includes portions of Doc. 142 and Doc. 143], 256 [Pg. 256 is part of Doc. 144], 258 [Pg. 258 includes portions of Doc. 144 and Doc. 145]

Denmark: falling, off in aggregate, bulk of business with Germany and Great Britain 303 [Pg. 303 includes portions of Doc. 162 and Doc. 163]

Great Britain: extent and growth of the American cattle trade; statistics of imports 423 [Pg. 423 includes portions of Doc. 214 and Doc. 215]

Hawaiian Islands: exports to the United States; purchases made in and imports received from Europe 542 [Pg. 542 includes portions of Doc. 262 and Doc. 263]

Japan: statement of imports and exports for ten years 620 [Pg. 620 includes portions of Doc. 311, Doc. 312, and Doc. 313], 694 [Pg. 694 includes portions of Doc. 339, Doc. 340, and Doc. 341]

Mexico: official report of exports; aggregate, $28,777,508; silver, $20,493,129; gold, $1,265,199; total of other exports does not reach $7,000,000 808 [Pg. 808 includes portions of Doc. 381 and Doc. 382]

Spain: successful importation of wheat from the United States 938 [Pg. 938 includes portions of Doc. 474 and Doc. 475], 939 [Pg. 939 is part of Doc. 476]

Independencia: Peruvian iron-clad; loss of reported by Mr. Christiancy 879 [Pg. 879 includes portions of Doc. 422 and Doc. 423]

Indians: Canada: hostiles from Sitting Bull’s camp cross the frontier; Canada informed 488 [Pg. 488 includes portions of Doc. 237, Doc. 238, Doc. 239, and Doc. 240]

memorandum of Canadian Government upon Indian question 488 [Pg. 488 includes portions of Doc. 237, Doc. 238, Doc. 239, and Doc. 240]

territory of the United States invaded by British Indians and half-breeds; Canada informed 500 [Pg. 500 includes portions of Doc. 246 and Doc. 247]

depredations in Montana; ranchmen killed 504 [Pg. 504 includes portions of Doc. 250, Doc. 251, and Doc. 252]

statement of Canadian Government that British Indians have crossed the frontier in pursuit of Buffalo 508 [Pg. 508 includes portions of Doc. 256 and Doc. 257]

request of Canadian Government that the United States wall take steps to cause the return of Sitting Bull and his band to the United States 508 [Pg. 508 includes portions of Doc. 256 and Doc. 257], 510 [Pg. 510 includes portions of Doc. 257 and Doc. 258]

Sitting Bull and his band regarded by the United States as British Indians; the British Government responsible for the peace of the frontier in respect to their movements 496 [Pg. 496 is part of Doc. 244]

Mexico: campaign against the Lipans; removal of Indians from the frontier by Mexican Government 801 [Pg. 801 is part of Doc. 378]

report of General Ord as to improbability of American Indians crossing into Mexico 816 [Pg. 816 includes portions of Doc. 387 and Doc. 388]

Interest: new Russian law regulating rate upon loans 917 [Pg. 917 includes portions of Doc. 453 and Doc. 454]

Internal-revenue laws: certificate of purser or other landing officer to landing certificate of merchandise exported under, may be substituted for that of mate of export vessel 7 [Pg. 7 is part of Doc. 8] remonstrance of Chinese minister to requirement of real estate owners as bondsmen of tobacco manufacturers by collector in San Francisco 237 [Pg. 237 is part of Doc. 137]

order revoked; solvent bondsmen to be accepted whether owners of realty or not 241 [Pg. 241 includes portions of Doc. 137, Doc. 138, and Doc. 139]

International bureau of weights and measures: report for the year 1878 312 [Pg. 312 includes portions of Doc. 171 and Doc. 172]

bureau ready to make comparison of old with new standards 311 [Pg. 311 includes portions of Doc. 170 and Doc. 171]

International postal union: ruling of bureau at Berne to effect that duties may not be collected upon dutiable articles sent by mail within limits of union, but that such articles must be returned to sending country 932 [Pg. 932 includes portions of Doc. 470 and Doc. 471]

circulars of the Treasury and the Post-Office Departments 932 [Pg. 932 includes portions of Doc. 470 and Doc. 471] (See Foreign Relations 1878, page 798.)

International Fisheries Exposition of 1880, to be held in Berlin 354 [Pg. 354 includes portions of Doc. 184 and Doc. 185]

Internationalism, socialism, and nihilism: Germany: passage of law for suppression of social democratic movement 351 [Pg. 351 is part of Doc. 184], 394 [Pg. 394 includes portions of Doc. 200, Doc. 201, and Doc. 202]

Italy: influence of, becoming felt; attempt upon the life of the King; socialistic movements 597 [Pg. 597 is part of Doc. 295], 598 [Pg. 598 is part of Doc. 296]

Russia: attempt upon the life of the Emperor 913 [Pg. 913 includes portions of Doc. 449 and Doc. 450]

condition of affairs; incendiary fires 917 [Pg. 917 includes portions of Doc. 453 and Doc. 454], 920 [Pg. 920 includes portions of Doc. 457 and Doc. 458]

Switzerland: a place of refuge; views of government as exhibited in the press 965 [Pg. 965 includes portions of Doc. 489 and Doc. 490]

Interoceanic Canal: Panama: Wyse-De Lesseps contract 243 [Pg. 243 includes portions of Doc. 139, Doc. 140, and Doc. 141] canal congress, of Paris 339 [Pg. 339 includes portions of Doc. 176 and Doc. 177], 340 [Pg. 340 includes portions of Doc. 177 and Doc. 178]

the history of the project given, and its international relations discussed, by Mr. Minister Dichman 290 [Pg. 290 includes portions of Doc. 159 and Doc. 160], 295 [Pg. 295 includes portions of Doc. 160 and Doc. 161], 297 [Pg. 297 includes portions of Doc. 161 and Doc. 162]

Suez: history and cost of its construction; resources 993 [Pg. 993 includes portions of Doc. 505, Doc. 506, and Doc. 507] record of business; receipts, expenses, and profits; number of vessels using the canal 1034 [Pg. 1034 includes portions of Doc. 519 and Doc. 520]

Interpreters at Chinese consulates: should be Americans; untrustworthiness of Chinese interpreters. 203 [Pg. 203 includes portions of Doc. 120 and Doc. 121] views of Mr. Consul Knight in accord with those of Mr. Holcombe 203 [Pg. 203 includes portions of Doc. 120 and Doc. 121], 234 [Pg. 234 includes portions of Doc. 134 and Doc. 135]

insufficiency of salaries: American interpreters in private employ can earn upward of $3, 000 per annum 203 [Pg. 203 includes portions of Doc. 120 and Doc. 121]

establishment of a Chinese professorship at Harvard to fit graduates for interpretation 234 [Pg. 234 includes portions of Doc. 134 and Doc. 135]

Invoices: packing and other charges upon merchandise exported to the United States to be noted on invoices 1 [Pg. 1 includes portions of Doc. 1 and Doc. 2], 10 [Pg. 10 includes portions of Doc. 8, Doc. 9, and Doc. 10] eight-florin gold piece adopted by Treasury as standard of value for authentication of invoices in Austria-Hungary 39 [Pg. 39 includes portions of Doc. 31 and Doc. 32]

Iquique: blockaded by Chilian forces 167 [Pg. 167 includes portions of Doc. 102 and Doc. 103] effectiveness of the blockade; effect of withdrawal of blockading squadron at night to a distance of four miles 886 [Pg. 886 includes portions of Doc. 430 and Doc. 431]

bombardment of Iquique; protest of consuls; question of necessity of notice of bombardment discussed by Mr. Christiancy 889 [Pg. 889 includes portions of Doc. 432 and Doc. 433]

views of Mr. Christiancy as to blockade of Iquique approved 893 [Pg. 893 includes portions of Doc. 433, Doc. 434, and Doc. 435]

telegram from President Prado reporting raising of blockade 893 [Pg. 893 includes portions of Doc. 433, Doc. 434, and Doc. 435]

Ismail Pasha, Khedive of Egypt: his deposition in favor of his son Tewfik; report from Mr. Maynard 979 [Pg. 979 includes portions of Doc. 498 and Doc. 499] review of his reign by Mr. Maynard 982 [Pg. 982 is part of Doc. 501]

review of his reign by Mr. Farman. 1005 [Pg. 1005 includes portions of Doc. 510 and Doc. 511]

attitude of France and Great Britain 1005 [Pg. 1005 includes portions of Doc. 510 and Doc. 511]

reports from Mr. Comanos upon the deposition of Ismail Pasha and the succession of Tewfik 1008 [Pg. 1008 includes portions of Doc. 511 and Doc. 512], 1013 [Pg. 1013 includes portions of Doc. 515 and Doc. 516]

Italy: retirement of Count Corti from the ministry 596 [Pg. 596 includes portions of Doc. 293 and Doc. 294] questions of the extension of the elective franchise and the abolition of the grist tax to be brought before Parliament 596 [Pg. 596 includes portions of Doc. 293 and Doc. 294]

congratulations upon the escape of the King from assassination 597 [Pg. 597 is part of Doc. 295]

his return with the Queen to Rome; enthusiastic reception 598 [Pg. 598 is part of Doc. 296]

internationalism making itself felt in Italy; aided by the lay and ecclesiastical enemies of the house of Savoy 598 [Pg. 598 is part of Doc. 296]

defeat of the ministry; questions which have consolidated the opposition 599 [Pg. 599 includes portions of Doc. 296 and Doc. 297]

M. Cairoli forms new ministry 601 [Pg. 601 includes portions of Doc. 299 and Doc. 300]

Mormonism; no prospect of its getting a foothold in Italy 601 [Pg. 601 includes portions of Doc. 299 and Doc. 300]

religious movements of David Lazzaretti; his devotion, and afterward his hostility to the church; attempt to found a new religion; his death 601 [Pg. 601 includes portions of Doc. 299 and Doc. 300]

“Itata” steamship: a foreign-built vessel, said to have been bought by an American citizen; question of her status and right to the flag 150 [Pg. 150 includes portions of Doc. 98 and Doc. 99], 177 [Pg. 177 is part of Doc. 109], 861 [Pg. 861 is part of Doc. 413], 865 [Pg. 865 includes portions of Doc. 413, Doc. 414, and Doc. 415], 867 [Pg. 867 includes portions of Doc. 416, Doc. 417, and Doc. 418] case of the “Loa,” sister ship of the “Itata” 865 [Pg. 865 includes portions of Doc. 413, Doc. 414, and Doc. 415]

J.

Jalisco; Mexico: governor of, imposes forced loan upon American citizens; care of F. A. Newton 746 [Pg. 746 includes portions of Doc. 362 and Doc. 363]

Japan: Cholera; theory of the origin of the epidemic 680 [Pg. 680 includes portions of Doc. 332 and Doc. 333]

history of cholera in Japan; from the Osaka Nippo 668 [Pg. 668 includes portions of Doc. 326 and Doc. 327]

cholera statistics; death record; total number of cases up to September 30, 1879, 148,038; deaths, 83,012 663 [Pg. 663 includes portions of Doc. 322 and Doc. 323], 665 [Pg. 665 includes portions of Doc. 324 and Doc. 325], 667 [Pg. 667 includes portions of Doc. 325 and Doc. 326], 681 [Pg. 681 includes portions of Doc. 333 and Doc. 334], 695 [Pg. 695 includes portions of Doc. 341, Doc. 342, and Doc. 343]

Quarantine regulations; necessity for establishment of; objection of consuls to observance of Japanese regulations 604 [Pg. 604 includes portions of Doc. 300 and Doc. 301]

Mr. Bingham concedes right of Japan to make such regulations 604 [Pg. 604 includes portions of Doc. 300 and Doc. 301]

Japanese quarantine regulations for port of Kanagawa; approval of Mr. Bingham 608 [Pg. 608 includes portions of Doc. 302 and Doc. 303], 647 [Pg. 647 includes portions of Doc. 318 and Doc. 319], 657 [Pg. 657 includes portions of Doc. 321 and Doc. 322]

special regulations promulgated by the British minister 647 [Pg. 647 includes portions of Doc. 318 and Doc. 319], 657 [Pg. 657 includes portions of Doc. 321 and Doc. 322]

position of British and German ministers upon question of the right of Japan to issue quarantine regulations 647 [Pg. 647 includes portions of Doc. 318 and Doc. 319], 657 [Pg. 657 includes portions of Doc. 321 and Doc. 322], 665 [Pg. 665 includes portions of Doc. 324 and Doc. 325], 670 [Pg. 670 includes portions of Doc. 327 and Doc. 328]

the “Hesperia,” a German merchant-vessel, taken out of quarantine by the German consul, aided by a man-of-war 647 [Pg. 647 includes portions of Doc. 318 and Doc. 319]

Japanese pilot regulations; American consuls to aid in their enforcement 617 [Pg. 617 includes portions of Doc. 308 and Doc. 309]

financial statement; receipts and expenses 656 [Pg. 656 includes portions of Doc. 320 and Doc. 321]

statement of imports and exports for fen years 620 [Pg. 620 includes portions of Doc. 311, Doc. 312, and Doc. 313], 694 [Pg. 694 includes portions of Doc. 339, Doc. 340, and Doc. 341]

report of the director-general of telegraphs; record of the operations of the service 688 [Pg. 688 includes portions of Doc. 337, Doc. 338, and Doc. 339]

export duties upon certain articles suspended; text of notification 638 [Pg. 638 includes portions of Doc. 315 and Doc. 316]

silver yen of 416 [Pg. 416 is part of Doc. 214] grains to he received in payment of duties 687 [Pg. 687 includes portions of Doc. 336 and Doc. 337]

record of coinage of silver yen; the Mexican dollar being driven out of circulation 695 [Pg. 695 includes portions of Doc. 341, Doc. 342, and Doc. 343]

report of the imperial Osaka mint; aggregate of coinage 616 [Pg. 616 is part of Doc. 308]

government regulations for the suppression of the sale of opium opposed by foreign press 609 [Pg. 609 includes portions of Doc. 303 and Doc. 304]

trial by torture abolished 696 [Pg. 696 includes portions of Doc. 343, Doc. 344, and Doc. 345]

progress of the Emperor through the country; its political significance;

his reception by the people 610 [Pg. 610 includes portions of Doc. 304 and Doc. 305]

public fête given by the people to the Emperor; a striking event in the history of Japan 682 [Pg. 682 includes portions of Doc. 334 and Doc. 335]

General Grant: invited by Japanese Government to visit Japan 636 [Pg. 636 includes portions of Doc. 313 and Doc. 314]

his reception by the Emperor, the people of Japan, and by the foreign residents 643 [Pg. 643 includes portions of Doc. 317 and Doc. 318], 682 [Pg. 682 includes portions of Doc. 334 and Doc. 335], 685 [Pg. 685 includes portions of Doc. 335 and Doc. 336], 694 [Pg. 694 includes portions of Doc. 339, Doc. 340, and Doc. 341]

memorial of Chinese ministers in the matter of the Lew Chew Islands, in contest between China and Japan. 606 [Pg. 606 includes portions of Doc. 301 and Doc. 302]

arrival of Prince of Lew Chew in Japan; reorganization of the administration of the islands 637 [Pg. 637 includes portions of Doc. 314 and Doc. 315]

Arrangement of difficulty between Corea and Japan 619 [Pg. 619 includes portions of Doc. 309 and Doc. 310], 620 [Pg. 620 includes portions of Doc. 311, Doc. 312, and Doc. 313]

trade treaty between Corea and Japan; new port opened to Japanese trade 696 [Pg. 696 includes portions of Doc. 343, Doc. 344, and Doc. 345]

Japanese account of the reception of Mr. Townsend Harris by the Taikun; Mr. Harris the first foreign minister received at the court of Japan 621 [Pg. 621 is part of Doc. 313]

letter from Mr. E. J. Reed, M. P., in London Times, upon Japanese affairs 652 [Pg. 652 includes portions of Doc. 319 and Doc. 320]

speech of Governor Hennessy, of Hong Kong, before the Tokei chamber of commerce 639 [Pg. 639 includes portions of Doc. 316 and Doc. 317]

visit of the Japanese corvette “Seiki” to Constantinople 976 [Pg. 976 includes portions of Doc. 495 and Doc. 496]

sentence of deportation of consul-general in case of Thomas Glass not approved (See F. R., 1878, page 518.) 697 [Pg. 697 includes portions of Doc. 345 and Doc. 346]

Jews: Roumania; their number, 600, 000; their position discussed 49 [Pg. 49 includes portions of Doc. 37 and Doc. 38]

Russia: their status; restrictions upon their settlement and ownership of realty 921 [Pg. 921 includes portions of Doc. 458 and Doc. 459]

case of H. Rosenstraus 921 [Pg. 921 includes portions of Doc. 458 and Doc. 459]

Servia: Jewishquestion discussed 59 [Pg. 59 includes portions of Doc. 45 and Doc. 46]

Jomini, Baron: of Russian foreign office; note rejecting claim of Mr. Calvocoressi; no liability recognized by Russia on account of damage to private property in an enemy’s country 926 [Pg. 926 includes portions of Doc. 463 and Doc. 464]

Jurisdiction: China: in civil cases between Americans and Chinese; tribunal, the court of the defendant 220 [Pg. 220 is part of Doc. 131], 221 [Pg. 221 is part of Doc. 132], 229 [Pg. 229 is part of Doc. 133]

Egypt: jurisdiction of internation tribunal; memorandum as to organization 229 [Pg. 229 is part of Doc. 133]

consular jurisdiction in criminal cases where Americans are concerned 987 [Pg. 987 includes portions of Doc. 502 and Doc. 503], 990 [Pg. 990 includes portions of Doc. 503, Doc. 504, and Doc. 505], 1010 [Pg. 1010 includes portions of Doc. 512 and Doc. 513], 1012 [Pg. 1012 is part of Doc. 514]

Great Britain: jurisdiction in courts of, respecting foreign government vessel not a vessel of war, or the yacht of a sovereign, engaged in the mail or package service 415 [Pg. 415 includes portions of Doc. 213 and Doc. 214]

case of the Parlement Beige; Opinion by Sir R. Phillimore 415 [Pg. 415 includes portions of Doc. 213 and Doc. 214] (See ease of the frigate Constitution.)

K.

Kanagawa: (Yokohama); position of foreign consuls respecting Japan’s right to issue quarantine regulations for the port of Kanagawa 604 [Pg. 604 includes portions of Doc. 300 and Doc. 301] Japanese quarantine regulations for port promulgated by Mr. Bingham 608 [Pg. 608 includes portions of Doc. 302 and Doc. 303], 647 [Pg. 647 includes portions of Doc. 318 and Doc. 319], 657 [Pg. 657 includes portions of Doc. 321 and Doc. 322]

special regulations issued by the British minister 647 [Pg. 647 includes portions of Doc. 318 and Doc. 319], 657 [Pg. 657 includes portions of Doc. 321 and Doc. 322]

position of British and German ministers upon the right of Japan to issue such regulations 647 [Pg. 647 includes portions of Doc. 318 and Doc. 319], 657 [Pg. 657 includes portions of Doc. 321 and Doc. 322], 665 [Pg. 665 includes portions of Doc. 324 and Doc. 325], 670 [Pg. 670 includes portions of Doc. 327 and Doc. 328]

reception of General Grant at Yakohama, Kanagawa 643 [Pg. 643 includes portions of Doc. 317 and Doc. 318], 694 [Pg. 694 includes portions of Doc. 339, Doc. 340, and Doc. 341]

Japanese pilot regulations for open ports 617 [Pg. 617 includes portions of Doc. 308 and Doc. 309]

Kasson, Mr., Minister: conversation with the French ambassador, at Vienna, M. Teisserence de Bort, upon the commercial and tariff policy of the United States 61 [Pg. 61 includes portions of Doc. 46 and Doc. 47] the principles upon which that policy rests illustrated 61 [Pg. 61 includes portions of Doc. 46 and Doc. 47]

retaliatory commercial policy of France indicated by French ambassador. 61 [Pg. 61 includes portions of Doc. 46 and Doc. 47]

report upon the municipal government of Vienna, 64 [Pg. 64 includes portions of Doc. 48 and Doc. 49]

directed to negotiate treaties with Roumania and Servia 79 [Pg. 79 includes portions of Doc. 50 and Doc. 51], 81 [Pg. 81 includes portions of Doc. 52 and Doc. 53]

Kearsarge, cruise of the: off the British North American provinces to examine pending fisheries questions 504 [Pg. 504 includes portions of Doc. 250, Doc. 251, and Doc. 252]

Kehr, Johannes, naturalized citizen: case of, brought to attention of legation at Berlin 367 [Pg. 367 includes portions of Doc. 191 and Doc. 192]

Klagges, Frank, naturalized citizen: case of, brought to attention of legation at Berlin 367 [Pg. 367 includes portions of Doc. 191 and Doc. 192]

Klein, F. E. O., naturalized citizen: case of, brought to attention of legation at Berlin 367 [Pg. 367 includes portions of Doc. 191 and Doc. 192]

Knoth: messenger of legation at Berlin; summoned for military duty; question of exterritoriality of legations involved 374 [Pg. 374 includes portions of Doc. 192 and Doc. 193], 375 [Pg. 375 includes portions of Doc. 193 and Doc. 194], 384 [Pg. 384 is part of Doc. 197]

Kokott, Albert, naturalized citizen: case of, brought to attention of legation at Berlin 367 [Pg. 367 includes portions of Doc. 191 and Doc. 192]

Kowalski, Jacob, naturalized citizen: case of, brought to attention of legation at Berlin 367 [Pg. 367 includes portions of Doc. 191 and Doc. 192]

Krotz, William, naturalized citizen: case of, brought to attention of legation at Berlin 367 [Pg. 367 includes portions of Doc. 191 and Doc. 192]

L.

Labischinsky, Herman, naturalized citizen: case of, brought to attention of legation at Berlin 367 [Pg. 367 includes portions of Doc. 191 and Doc. 192]

“Laconia,” American bark: improperly searched by order of Captain Earl, British Navy, in the harbor of Zanzibar 415 [Pg. 415 includes portions of Doc. 213 and Doc. 214] violation of article 1, treaty of 1862, with Great Britain 415 [Pg. 415 includes portions of Doc. 213 and Doc. 214]

regret expressed by British Government at occurrence 431 [Pg. 431 includes portions of Doc. 218 and Doc. 219]

Land in the United States: letter from Mr. C. C. Andrews, published in the London Times 478 [Pg. 478 includes portions of Doc. 231 and Doc. 232]

Landing certificates: Treasury circular respecting 4 [Pg. 4 is part of Doc. 6] regulations as to presentation and acceptance of, by collectors of customs, covering merchandise exported under internal-revenue laws 4 [Pg. 4 is part of Doc. 6]

Lard: augmentation of duties upon, imported into Germany, debate in the Reichstag 392 [Pg. 392 includes portions of Doc. 199 and Doc. 200]

Largomarsino: soon to be discharged from Italian army 600 [Pg. 600 is part of Doc. 298] (See F. R., 1878, pages 458, 459, 460, 461, 464.)

Latorre, Colonel Lorenzo, elected President of Uruguay; constitution of the ministry 1038 [Pg. 1038 includes portions of Doc. 525 and Doc. 526]

Law of allegiance: Germany: as illustrated by cases of naturalized citizens brought to attention of legation at Berlin 359 [Pg. 359 includes portions of Doc. 187 and Doc. 188], 367 [Pg. 367 includes portions of Doc. 191 and Doc. 192]

Italy: inalienable; case of Largomarsino 600 [Pg. 600 is part of Doc. 298] (See F. R., 1878, pages 458, 459, 460, 461, 464.)

Mexico: effect of service in Mexican army upon prior allegiance 815 [Pg. 815 includes portions of Doc. 386 and Doc. 387], 824 [Pg. 824 includes portions of Doc. 390 and Doc. 391]

Switzerland: difficulties attending expatriation 973 [Pg. 973 is part of Doc. 495] (for Swiss law sanctioning change of allegiance, see Foreign Relations, 1876, page 567.)

United States: right of expatriation fully recognized 824 [Pg. 824 includes portions of Doc. 390 and Doc. 391] status of minors, children of citizens of the United States 814 [Pg. 814 includes portions of Doc. 385 and Doc. 386], 815 [Pg. 815 includes portions of Doc. 386 and Doc. 387], 824 [Pg. 824 includes portions of Doc. 390 and Doc. 391]

Law of extradition: See Colombia and Spain.

Law regulating marriages before consuls: amendment suggested by Mr. Minister Maynard 977 [Pg. 977 includes portions of Doc. 496 and Doc. 497]

Law of ships: vessels of war, or yachts of sovereigns, free from arrest at private suit; case of the frigate “Constitution;” opinion by Sir R. Phillimore 407 [Pg. 407 includes portions of Doc. 208, Doc. 209, and Doc. 210], 415 [Pg. 415 includes portions of Doc. 213 and Doc. 214]

government vessels, not vessels of war nor yachts of sovereigns, when engaged in mail and package service may be arrested at private suit; opinion by Sir R. Phillimore 415 [Pg. 415 includes portions of Doc. 213 and Doc. 214]

Law of war: blockade: necessity of, to close port to commerce held by insurgents. 1038 [Pg. 1038 includes portions of Doc. 525 and Doc. 526], 1040 [Pg. 1040 includes portions of Doc. 527 and Doc. 528]

question as to sufficiency; to raising of blockade; notice to neutrals 886 [Pg. 886 includes portions of Doc. 430 and Doc. 431], 888 [Pg. 888 includes portions of Doc. 431 and Doc. 432], 893 [Pg. 893 includes portions of Doc. 433, Doc. 434, and Doc. 435]

bombardment of towns held by enemy; question of notice of bombardment 872 [Pg. 872 includes portions of Doc. 418 and Doc. 419], 883 [Pg. 883 is part of Doc. 428], 889 [Pg. 889 includes portions of Doc. 432 and Doc. 433]

contraband of war 888 [Pg. 888 includes portions of Doc. 431 and Doc. 432]

indemnity; no liability recognized on account of damage to private property during occupancy of enemies’ country 883 [Pg. 883 is part of Doc. 428], 913 [Pg. 913 includes portions of Doc. 449 and Doc. 450], 924 [Pg. 924 includes portions of Doc. 460 and Doc. 461], 926 [Pg. 926 includes portions of Doc. 463 and Doc. 464]

neutrals; status of, when domiciled in country of belligerent; must share with subject the fortune of war 883 [Pg. 883 is part of Doc. 428], 913 [Pg. 913 includes portions of Doc. 449 and Doc. 450], 924 [Pg. 924 includes portions of Doc. 460 and Doc. 461], 926 [Pg. 926 includes portions of Doc. 463 and Doc. 464]

right of neutrals to buy ships from belligerents (see opinion of Attorney-General Gushing, vol. VI, page 638; opinions of the Attorney-General) 150 [Pg. 150 includes portions of Doc. 98 and Doc. 99]

Layard, Sir Henry: account of his visit to Syria 990 [Pg. 990 includes portions of Doc. 503, Doc. 504, and Doc. 505]

Lazzaretti, David: early devotion and later hostility to the church; attempt to found a new religion; death 601 [Pg. 601 includes portions of Doc. 299 and Doc. 300] religious movements in Italy 601 [Pg. 601 includes portions of Doc. 299 and Doc. 300]

de Lesseps: translation of the Wyse-de Lesseps Panama interoceanic canal contract 243 [Pg. 243 includes portions of Doc. 139, Doc. 140, and Doc. 141] history of the de Gorgoza-Türr-Wyse-de Lesseps contract 297 [Pg. 297 includes portions of Doc. 161 and Doc. 162]

promoter’s share of capital of Panama Canal Company to be 10, 000, 000

francs, one-half cash, the balance fall-paid stock of the company 297 [Pg. 297 includes portions of Doc. 161 and Doc. 162]

Panama interoceanic canal project discussed by Mr. Minister Dichman 290 [Pg. 290 includes portions of Doc. 159 and Doc. 160], 295 [Pg. 295 includes portions of Doc. 160 and Doc. 161], 297 [Pg. 297 includes portions of Doc. 161 and Doc. 162]

Suez Canal; account of its construction; cost; value; receipts and expenses, and number of vessels using canal 993 [Pg. 993 includes portions of Doc. 505, Doc. 506, and Doc. 507], 1034 [Pg. 1034 includes portions of Doc. 519 and Doc. 520]

Levant: pacification of, in 1840–1841; fifteen documents referring to the action of Great Britain, Russia, Prussia, and Austria, in co-operation with Turkey 1018 [Pg. 1018 includes portions of Doc. 517 and Doc. 518] restoration of Turkish dominion; curtailment of power of Muhammed Ali. Pasha of Egypt 1018 [Pg. 1018 includes portions of Doc. 517 and Doc. 518]

Lew Chew Islands: memorial of Chinese ministry concerning their controversy with Japan 606 [Pg. 606 includes portions of Doc. 301 and Doc. 302] reorganization of administration of islands by Japanese Government 637 [Pg. 637 includes portions of Doc. 314 and Doc. 315]

the Prince of Lew Chew to remain in Tokei. 637 [Pg. 637 includes portions of Doc. 314 and Doc. 315]

Liberia: the British-Liberian boundary commission adjourns without agreement 717 [Pg. 717 includes portions of Doc. 350 and Doc. 351] revolt of the Greaboes and Kroos; manifesto of rebellious chiefs 717 [Pg. 717 includes portions of Doc. 350 and Doc. 351], 718 [Pg. 718 includes portions of Doc. 351, Doc. 352, and Doc. 353]

letter from the government to the rebellious chiefs 719 [Pg. 719 includes portions of Doc. 353 and Doc. 354]

the title of Liberia to their territory and allegiance clearly shown 719 [Pg. 719 includes portions of Doc. 353 and Doc. 354]

the relations of the government to the aborigines; the influence of color in the government of Liberia 713 [Pg. 713 includes portions of Doc. 349 and Doc. 350]

message of President Gardner at opening of legislature; statement of the condition of the republic 701 [Pg. 701 includes portions of Doc. 347 and Doc. 348]

railway project of Messrs. Criswick and Burnell, of England, to build a road from Monrovia to the interior 701 [Pg. 701 includes portions of Doc. 347 and Doc. 348]

report upon Liberian coffee; its commercial value; extent of coffee territory; plants exported to Brazil 699 [Pg. 699 is part of Doc. 347]

resources of Liberia 712 [Pg. 712 is part of Doc. 349]

her position affords opportunity for establishing American trade relations with the Soudan 722 [Pg. 722 includes portions of Doc. 354 and Doc. 355]

meeting of farmers; speeches by Dr. Blyden and others; the aid of the United States for the development of the country besought 712 [Pg. 712 is part of Doc. 349]

France said to contemplate establishing a protectorate over Liberia; hostility of the government and people to the idea 718 [Pg. 718 includes portions of Doc. 351, Doc. 352, and Doc. 353]

Minister Noyes directed to make inquiry as to French designs upon the independence of Liberia 341 [Pg. 341 includes portions of Doc. 179 and Doc. 180]

deep interest of the United States in Liberia expressed 341 [Pg. 341 includes portions of Doc. 179 and Doc. 180]

the French government does not entertain views hostile to the independence of Liberia 341 [Pg. 341 includes portions of Doc. 179 and Doc. 180], 727 [Pg. 727 includes portions of Doc. 356, Doc. 357, and Doc. 358]

Light dues: Uruguayan: subject discussed by Mr. Minister Osborn 16 [Pg. 16 includes portions of Doc. 14 and Doc. 15], 19 [Pg. 19 includes portions of Doc. 15, Doc. 16, and Doc. 17]

Light-houses on coast of Tunis: the United States consents to moderate tax upon shipping to meet expenses 1036 [Pg. 1036 includes portions of Doc. 521, Doc. 522, and Doc. 523]

Lincoln, C. P., consul at Canton: report upon form of procedure in mixed cases between Americans and Chinese 221 [Pg. 221 is part of Doc. 132]

Lip an Indians of the frontier: campaign of Mexican troops against 801 [Pg. 801 is part of Doc. 378]

Litchfield, A. C., consul at Calcutta: report of proceedings respecting the trial at Calcutta of John Anderson, for the murder of the first mate of the American bark “C. O. Whitinore” 435 [Pg. 435 includes portions of Doc. 220 and Doc. 221], 446 [Pg. 446 is part of Doc. 223]

“Loa” steamer, sister ship to the “Itata” (see Chili, Peru, “Itata”) 865 [Pg. 865 includes portions of Doc. 413, Doc. 414, and Doc. 415]

Locust: report upon, by Mr. Portchinsky, secretary of Russian society of entomology 925 [Pg. 925 includes portions of Doc. 462 and Doc. 463]

Lord, E. C., consul at Ningpo: report upon form of procedure in mixed cases between Americans and Chinese 226 [Pg. 226 is part of Doc. 132]

Lower California.: comments of Hon. J. M. Vigil upon report of Mr. Felix Gibert upon administration of affairs in 825 [Pg. 825 includes portions of Doc. 391 and Doc. 392]

van Lynden van Sandenburg, Baron, appointed minister for foreign affairs of the Netherlands 848 [Pg. 848 includes portions of Doc. 405 and Doc. 406]

M.

Maassen, Anton Joseph, case of: illustrating irregularities in respect of the claim for protection on the part of naturalized citizens 143 [Pg. 143 is part of Doc. 95]

MacMahon, President: resignation of the Presidency of France 332 [Pg. 332 includes portions of Doc. 172 and Doc. 173] election of M. Jules Grévy to the Presidency constitution of the cabinet. 332 [Pg. 332 includes portions of Doc. 172 and Doc. 173], 334 [Pg. 334 is part of Doc. 174]

Mails: Spanish papers stopped in, under regulations of postal union: Treasury and Post-Office circulars 932 [Pg. 932 includes portions of Doc. 470 and Doc. 471] (See F. R., 1878, page 798.)

Magellan, Straits of, under convention between Chili and Argentine Republic of June 3, 1879, neutral, and free to flags of all nations 23 [Pg. 23 includes portions of Doc. 20 and Doc. 21]

Majority: age at which males and females attain same in the United States 121 [Pg. 121 includes portions of Doc. 71, Doc. 72, and Doc. 73]

Manifests of cargo: requirements of Brazilian customs regulations respecting 139 [Pg. 139 includes portions of Doc. 88 and Doc. 89]

Manchester: speech of Lord Salisbury at, in defense of the policy of the government 468 [Pg. 468 is part of Doc. 231]

Manitoba: large shipment of ammunition to; fear that same may be sold to hostile Sioux 491 [Pg. 491 includes portions of Doc. 241 and Doc. 242] shipment of arms not thought to be excessive 502 [Pg. 502 includes portions of Doc. 248 and Doc. 249]

navigation of the Red River of the North restricted by Canadian regulations; restriction in violation of Article XXX, Treaty of Washington 503 [Pg. 503 includes portions of Doc. 249 and Doc. 250]

Manilla: excessive tonnage dues exacted from American vessels at, returned 955 [Pg. 955 includes portions of Doc. 481 and Doc. 482]

Market value of goods to be noted upon invoices by consuls when undervaluation is suspected 6 [Pg. 6 includes portions of Doc. 6 and Doc. 7]

Marriage laws in the United States: information concerning, requested for use of Belgian Government 120 [Pg. 120 includes portions of Doc. 70 and Doc. 71], 121 [Pg. 121 includes portions of Doc. 71, Doc. 72, and Doc. 73] such laws under jurisdiction of individual States 120 [Pg. 120 includes portions of Doc. 70 and Doc. 71]

digest of laws of several States and Territories: State Department circulars of February 16, 1872 121 [Pg. 121 includes portions of Doc. 71, Doc. 72, and Doc. 73]

Marriage in Mohammedan countries between Americans: necessary requirements 977 [Pg. 977 includes portions of Doc. 496 and Doc. 497] Mr. Maynard recommends revision and extension of provision of law regulating marriages before consular officers of the United States 977 [Pg. 977 includes portions of Doc. 496 and Doc. 497]

Martinez Campos, General: report upon the pacification of Cuba 943 [Pg. 943 includes portions of Doc. 478 and Doc. 479] his position at the head of the ministry 943 [Pg. 943 includes portions of Doc. 478 and Doc. 479]

Matriculation of Americans in Mexico: restrictions upon 741 [Pg. 741 includes portions of Doc. 361 and Doc. 362] matriculation resumed by Mexican Government: case of Gustave Sommer 819 [Pg. 819 includes portions of Doc. 388 and Doc. 389]

matriculation granted upon request of legation based upon State Department passport 819 [Pg. 819 includes portions of Doc. 388 and Doc. 389] (See F. R., 1878, page 613.)

McHenry, Mr. George: letter as to amount of gold and silver coin and bullion and paper currency in England 432 [Pg. 432 includes portions of Doc. 219 and Doc. 220] two articles by, upon bi-metallism 441 [Pg. 441 is part of Doc. 222]

McKellar, P. A., vice-consul at Valparaiso: report as to sale of steamships of South American Steamship Company to Mr. H. L. Stevens 150 [Pg. 150 includes portions of Doc. 98 and Doc. 99], 180 [Pg. 180 includes portions of Doc. 110, Doc. 111, and Doc. 112] a new vice-consul to be appointed at Valparaiso to succeed Mr. McKellar. 180 [Pg. 180 includes portions of Doc. 110, Doc. 111, and Doc. 112] (See foreign-built ships, Chili, Peru, “Itata.”)

Menocal, Mr. A. J.: delegate to the inter-oceanic canal conference at Paris 339 [Pg. 339 includes portions of Doc. 176 and Doc. 177]

Mexico: Acapulco: firing upon Consul Sutter’s flag in 1877; officer in command of fort at time to lose his commission 802 [Pg. 802 includes portions of Doc. 378 and Doc. 379] Belgium resumes diplomatic relations with Mexico; appointment of a minister 89 [Pg. 89 includes portions of Doc. 57 and Doc. 58]

debt; Corlis-Carbajal bonds; small purchases made by Mexico at 18¾ cents on the dollar 733 [Pg. 733 includes portions of Doc. 359 and Doc. 360]

neither interest nor principal of bonds paid 733 [Pg. 733 includes portions of Doc. 359 and Doc. 360]

Perry-del-Valle, contract for the funding of; and the organization of a bondholders’ construction company to build a system of railroads 764 [Pg. 764 includes portions of Doc. 365 and Doc. 366]

contract rejected by English bondholders 799 [Pg. 799 includes portions of Doc. 375 and Doc. 376]

aggregate of debt: receipts pledged in payment of interest 774 [Pg. 774 includes portions of Doc. 370 and Doc. 371]

finances: receipts and expenses 770 [Pg. 770 includes portions of Doc. 366 and Doc. 367], 811 [Pg. 811 includes portions of Doc. 383 and Doc. 384], 836 [Pg. 836 includes portions of Doc. 395 and Doc. 396]

financial measures of Congress; new taxes imposed; expenses cut down; smuggling made a penal offense 811 [Pg. 811 includes portions of Doc. 383 and Doc. 384], 812 [Pg. 812 includes portions of Doc. 384 and Doc. 385]

report upon gold and silver coin and bullion and paper currency in Mexico 822 [Pg. 822 includes portions of Doc. 389 and Doc. 390]

official table of exports: total value, $28,777,508; all but about $7,000,000

gold and silver 805 [Pg. 805 is part of Doc. 381]

statistical data as to area, population, Congressional representation, taxable property, State revenues, schools, State military expenses, &c. 834 [Pg. 834 includes portions of Doc. 394 and Doc. 395]

rate of increased taxation on internal products added to tariff duties upon similar imported products 811 [Pg. 811 includes portions of Doc. 383 and Doc. 384], 812 [Pg. 812 includes portions of Doc. 384 and Doc. 385]

grain production of Mexico: need of improved American farm machinery 804 [Pg. 804 includes portions of Doc. 380 and Doc. 381]

report of visit to Hacienda of Chualta; Mexican agriculture described 804 [Pg. 804 includes portions of Doc. 380 and Doc. 381]

Forced loans: exactions in Chihuahua; case of Walter Henry 727 [Pg. 727 includes portions of Doc. 356, Doc. 357, and Doc. 358], 750 [Pg. 750 is part of Doc. 364]

right to impose same broadly taken by Mexico 750 [Pg. 750 is part of Doc. 364]

denial by Mexico of right of diplomatic intervention 750 [Pg. 750 is part of Doc. 364]

reference to the courts: the futility of such reference shown by Mr. Foster 727 [Pg. 727 includes portions of Doc. 356, Doc. 357, and Doc. 358], 746 [Pg. 746 includes portions of Doc. 362 and Doc. 363], 750 [Pg. 750 is part of Doc. 364]

San Louis Potosi and Jalisco forced loan cases: the tax unconstitutional 746 [Pg. 746 includes portions of Doc. 362 and Doc. 363]

disregard by Mexican Government of claims for reimbursement on account of forced loans 746 [Pg. 746 includes portions of Doc. 362 and Doc. 363]

reference to the Goribar case; cases of F. A. Newton and Blumenkron 746 [Pg. 746 includes portions of Doc. 362 and Doc. 363]

Mr. Foster’s position as to forced loans approved 772 [Pg. 772 includes portions of Doc. 368 and Doc. 369]

Frontier relations: depredations in Arizona; refuge sought by depredators in Sonora; report from Mr. Consul Willard 734 [Pg. 734 includes portions of Doc. 360 and Doc. 361]

Mexican plan to stop border outrages; reciprocal extradition of offenders; reciprocal enactment of laws’ punishing offenses 734 [Pg. 734 includes portions of Doc. 360 and Doc. 361]

correspondence concerning Areola and his band; his final arrest; depredations upon the frontier 730 [Pg. 730 includes portions of Doc. 358 and Doc. 359], 754 [Pg. 754 includes portions of Doc. 364 and Doc. 365], 771 [Pg. 771 includes portions of Doc. 367 and Doc. 368]

influence of forced loans upon border disturbances 727 [Pg. 727 includes portions of Doc. 356, Doc. 357, and Doc. 358], 750 [Pg. 750 is part of Doc. 364], 772 [Pg. 772 includes portions of Doc. 368 and Doc. 369]

note from Mr. Avila, of November 11, 1878, to show that Mexico is not the base of operations against the American frontier 754 [Pg. 754 includes portions of Doc. 364 and Doc. 365]

reply of Mr. Foster to Mr. Avila’s note of November 11, 1878. 754 [Pg. 754 includes portions of Doc. 364 and Doc. 365], 760 [Pg. 760 is part of Doc. 365]

Mr. Foster’s answer to Mr. Avila approved 773 [Pg. 773 includes portions of Doc. 369 and Doc. 370]

Indian affairs upon frontier: campaign against the Lipans; removal of Indians; report of General Ord 801 [Pg. 801 is part of Doc. 378], 816 [Pg. 816 includes portions of Doc. 387 and Doc. 388]

prohibition against ownership of realty by citizens of the United States in frontier States of Mexico: note from Senor Ruelas 798 [Pg. 798 includes portions of Doc. 373 and Doc. 374], 809 [Pg. 809 includes portions of Doc. 382 and Doc. 383], 833 [Pg. 833 includes portions of Doc. 393 and Doc. 394]

mines of Sonora: no title in fee can be acquired 833 [Pg. 833 includes portions of Doc. 393 and Doc. 394]

railway to the frontier; public sentiment respecting 774 [Pg. 774 includes portions of Doc. 370 and Doc. 371], 811 [Pg. 811 includes portions of Doc. 383 and Doc. 384], 826 [Pg. 826 includes portions of Doc. 392 and Doc. 393]

the Guaymas and Frontier Road; report against; letter from Hon. Antonio Moreno, upon railway development of frontier States 826 [Pg. 826 includes portions of Doc. 392 and Doc. 393]

Congress unfriendly to railroad connection with the United States, and to American ownership of railroads in Mexico; speech of Mr. Chevaro 774 [Pg. 774 includes portions of Doc. 370 and Doc. 371], 811 [Pg. 811 includes portions of Doc. 383 and Doc. 384], 826 [Pg. 826 includes portions of Doc. 392 and Doc. 393]

railway question: decree of General Diaz, declaring null the contracts made by preceding government 774 [Pg. 774 includes portions of Doc. 370 and Doc. 371]

history of railway concessions 774 [Pg. 774 includes portions of Doc. 370 and Doc. 371]

revolutionary plan of General Diaz 774 [Pg. 774 includes portions of Doc. 370 and Doc. 371]

reception accorded Chicago excursion party 796 [Pg. 796 includes portions of Doc. 372 and Doc. 373]

foreigners experience diffiulty in securing employment in Mexico 800 [Pg. 800 includes portions of Doc. 376 and Doc. 377]

resignation of the secretary of the treasury, J. H. Ramirez 803 [Pg. 803 includes portions of Doc. 379 and Doc. 380]

administration of affairs in Lower California 825 [Pg. 825 includes portions of Doc. 391 and Doc. 392]

matriculation: discussion of question; final allowance upon State Department passport 741 [Pg. 741 includes portions of Doc. 361 and Doc. 362], 819 [Pg. 819 includes portions of Doc. 388 and Doc. 389]

impressment into the Mexican army: case of Einitio Boig 741 [Pg. 741 includes portions of Doc. 361 and Doc. 362]

General Diaz: attitude toward the contracts of the Lerdo government; revolutionary plan 774 [Pg. 774 includes portions of Doc. 370 and Doc. 371]

the success of his administration due to his personal character 837 [Pg. 837 includes portions of Doc. 396 and Doc. 397]

favorable comments upon his administration by Mr. Foster 837 [Pg. 837 includes portions of Doc. 396 and Doc. 397]

Consul-General Strother’s report upon political affairs in Mexico 838 [Pg. 838 includes portions of Doc. 397 and Doc. 398]

questions of citizenship; effect of service in the Mexican army 815 [Pg. 815 includes portions of Doc. 386 and Doc. 387], 816 [Pg. 816 includes portions of Doc. 387 and Doc. 388], 824 [Pg. 824 includes portions of Doc. 390 and Doc. 391]

Military attachés: report of Lieut. F. V. Green, United States Army, upon duties and position; appointment of, at several legations recommended 906 [Pg. 906 includes portions of Doc. 445 and Doc. 446]

Military statistics of Austria-Hungary: strength of European armies 82 [Pg. 82 includes portions of Doc. 54 and Doc. 55]

Mines of Sonara; no title in fee can be acquired: Americans cannot buy realty in frontier States of Mexico 833 [Pg. 833 includes portions of Doc. 393 and Doc. 394]

Mint: report of coinage of Imperial Japanese mint 616 [Pg. 616 is part of Doc. 308], 695 [Pg. 695 includes portions of Doc. 341, Doc. 342, and Doc. 343]

Mirzan, Etienne P.: naturalized citizen; charged with murder of Dr. Dahan at Alexandria, Egypt; jurisdiction of court of consul-general 987 [Pg. 987 includes portions of Doc. 502 and Doc. 503], 1010 [Pg. 1010 includes portions of Doc. 512 and Doc. 513], 1012 [Pg. 1012 is part of Doc. 514]

Missionary buildings, English, at Foochow, China, destroyed by Chinese mob 183 [Pg. 183 includes portions of Doc. 113 and Doc. 114] American man-of-war ordered to Foochow 183 [Pg. 183 includes portions of Doc. 113 and Doc. 114]

cases in China: local authorities at Foochow are dealing fairly with them 234 [Pg. 234 includes portions of Doc. 134 and Doc. 135]

Mixed cases between Americans and Chinese: circular from Minister Seward to consuls calling for reports as to procedure 220 [Pg. 220 is part of Doc. 131] reports from Consuls Lincoln, Scruggs, De Lano, Shepard, and Lord; usual tribunal court of defendant 221 [Pg. 221 is part of Doc. 132]

reports of Consul-General Bailey and Vice-Consul Bandinel 229 [Pg. 229 is part of Doc. 133]

establishment of mixed courts advocated by Mr. Bailey 229 [Pg. 229 is part of Doc. 133]

Mollendo and Pisagua: bombardment of by Chilian fleet; protest of ministers of the United States, France, Great Britain, Italy, and Germany resident in Peru 872 [Pg. 872 includes portions of Doc. 418 and Doc. 419] approval of Mr. Christiaiicy’s course respecting 883 [Pg. 883 is part of Doc. 428]

Money: Austria-Hungary: specie payments suspended in 1848; business conducted on paper basis; duties payable in gold; value of Austrian coins 36 [Pg. 36 includes portions of Doc. 28 and Doc. 29], 39 [Pg. 39 includes portions of Doc. 31 and Doc. 32], 41 [Pg. 41 includes portions of Doc. 33 and Doc. 34], 50 [Pg. 50 includes portions of Doc. 39 and Doc. 40] Japan: record of coinage; report of the imperial mint 616 [Pg. 616 is part of Doc. 308]

substitution of silver yen for Mexican dollar 687 [Pg. 687 includes portions of Doc. 336 and Doc. 337], 695 [Pg. 695 includes portions of Doc. 341, Doc. 342, and Doc. 343]

decrease in paper circulation, 7, 499, 217 yen 656 [Pg. 656 includes portions of Doc. 320 and Doc. 321]

Mexico: silver unlimited legal tender; no gold and but little paper in circulation 822 [Pg. 822 includes portions of Doc. 389 and Doc. 390]

(See reports upon gold and silver coin and bullion, and paper currency) 109 [Pg. 109 includes portions of Doc. 62 and Doc. 63], 385 [Pg. 385 includes portions of Doc. 197 and Doc. 198], 394 [Pg. 394 includes portions of Doc. 200, Doc. 201, and Doc. 202], 398 [Pg. 398 includes portions of Doc. 202 and Doc. 203], 432 [Pg. 432 includes portions of Doc. 219 and Doc. 220], 441 [Pg. 441 is part of Doc. 222], 449 [Pg. 449 is part of Doc. 224], 543 [Pg. 543 includes portions of Doc. 263 and Doc. 264], 616 [Pg. 616 is part of Doc. 308], 656 [Pg. 656 includes portions of Doc. 320 and Doc. 321], 808 [Pg. 808 includes portions of Doc. 381 and Doc. 382], 822 [Pg. 822 includes portions of Doc. 389 and Doc. 390], 842 [Pg. 842 includes portions of Doc. 399, Doc. 400, and Doc. 401], 851 [Pg. 851 is part of Doc. 408], 923 [Pg. 923 includes portions of Doc. 459 and Doc. 460]

adoption of a common unit of value and account recommended 39 [Pg. 39 includes portions of Doc. 31 and Doc. 32]

Moorsom system of admeasurement: the method of ascertaining the cubic capacities of ships 116 [Pg. 116 is part of Doc. 67] correspondence respecting its adoption by Belgium 112 [Pg. 112 is part of Doc. 64], 114 [Pg. 114 is part of Doc. 65], 115 [Pg. 115 is part of Doc. 66], 116 [Pg. 116 is part of Doc. 67], 117 [Pg. 117 includes portions of Doc. 67 and Doc. 68], 119 [Pg. 119 includes portions of Doc. 68 and Doc. 69]

Moreno, Hon. Antonio: criticisms upon adverse report upon Guaymas and Frontier Railroad 826 [Pg. 826 includes portions of Doc. 392 and Doc. 393] he favors railway development in frontier States 826 [Pg. 826 includes portions of Doc. 392 and Doc. 393]

Mormon emigration to the United States: law against, to be brought to attention of foreign governments; their co-operation to prevent, to be requested 11 [Pg. 11 includes portions of Doc. 10 and Doc. 11] Reports from ministers to following countries: France; proselyting unknown; polygamy a crime under French law; arrest will follow its advocacy 349 [Pg. 349 includes portions of Doc. 182 and Doc. 183]

Great Britain: correspondence between Mr. Hoppin and Lord Salisbury; Great Britain can do nothing 450 [Pg. 450 includes portions of Doc. 224 and Doc. 225], 465 [Pg. 465 includes portions of Doc. 228 and Doc. 229]

Italy: no emigrants go from Italy 601 [Pg. 601 includes portions of Doc. 299 and Doc. 300]

Netherlands: aid of government promised; but few emigrants go from the Netherlands 852 [Pg. 852 includes portions of Doc. 408 and Doc. 409], 854 [Pg. 854 is part of Doc. 410]

Sweden and Norway: the aid of the government promised 964 [Pg. 964 includes portions of Doc. 488 and Doc. 489]

Morocco: malignant typhus fever raging; Europeans suffering in common with natives 840 [Pg. 840 includes portions of Doc. 398 and Doc. 399] suppression of rebellion of Berber tribes 842 [Pg. 842 includes portions of Doc. 399, Doc. 400, and Doc. 401]

the Kabyle of Benimteer reduced to subjection; sickness in the Sultan’s army 843 [Pg. 843 includes portions of Doc. 401 and Doc. 402]

report upon the prison system, and upon the punishment of crime and care of criminals 844 [Pg. 844 includes portions of Doc. 402 and Doc. 403]

report upon gold and silver coin and bullion, and paper currency in Morocco 842 [Pg. 842 includes portions of Doc. 399, Doc. 400, and Doc. 401]

Mosel, German steamship: question as to whether the arrest of Carl Weinrebe on board was in accordance with treaty stipulations 404 [Pg. 404 includes portions of Doc. 205, Doc. 206, and Doc. 207]

his arrest believed not to be in contravention of treaty 406 [Pg. 406 is part of Doc. 208]

Municipal government of Vienna: report upon, by Mr. Minister Kasson 64 [Pg. 64 includes portions of Doc. 48 and Doc. 49] report upon the police system of Vienna by Mr. Delaplaine 74 [Pg. 74 includes portions of Doc. 49 and Doc. 50]

Muhammed Ali Pasha of Egypt: 15 [Pg. 15 includes portions of Doc. 13 and Doc. 14] documents concerning the proceedings in 1840–’41 of Great Britain, Russia, Prussia, Austria, and Turkey for the pacification of the Levant 1018 [Pg. 1018 includes portions of Doc. 517 and Doc. 518]

N.

National Board of Health: consuls to make regular reports to, as to the sanitary condition of their districts 10 [Pg. 10 includes portions of Doc. 8, Doc. 9, and Doc. 10]

Naturalized citizens: Germany: cases of arrest of, on account of alleged violation of military law of empire 359 [Pg. 359 includes portions of Doc. 187 and Doc. 188] report of cases brought to attention of legation and requiring intervention from October 3, 1877, to December 3, 1878. 367 [Pg. 367 includes portions of Doc. 191 and Doc. 192]

(See Foreign Relations, 1878, pages 210, 216, 225, 228, 229, 232, 233.)

Italy: Largomarsino case 600 [Pg. 600 is part of Doc. 298]

Mexico: Matriculation; demand for other evidence of nationality than State Department passport from naturalized citizens; final matriculation upon such evidence 741 [Pg. 741 includes portions of Doc. 361 and Doc. 362], 819 [Pg. 819 includes portions of Doc. 388 and Doc. 389]

Switzerland: abuses of American citizenship by naturalized citizens; case of William Dietze 988 [Pg. 988 is part of Doc. 503] difficulties attending Swiss expatriation 973 [Pg. 973 is part of Doc. 495]

action of communal and cantonal authorities in withholding property belonging to naturalized citizens 973 [Pg. 973 is part of Doc. 495]

Naval attachés: recommendation for appointment of, at our legations abroad; report of Lt. F. V. Greene upon naval and military attaches 906 [Pg. 906 includes portions of Doc. 445 and Doc. 446]

Naval cemetery in Cape Verde Islands: action of Portuguese authorities; need of annual appropriation to maintain the cemetery 902 [Pg. 902 includes portions of Doc. 441, Doc. 442, and Doc. 443]

Naval college at Greenwich, England: terms of admission of private students 427 [Pg. 427 includes portions of Doc. 215 and Doc. 216]

Naval reserve of ships for Great Britain: letter from Mr. Thomas Brassey, M. P., upon the constitution of 429 [Pg. 429 includes portions of Doc. 217 and Doc. 218]

Netherlands: opening of the Staats General by the King 849 [Pg. 849 includes portions of Doc. 406 and Doc. 407] points in the royal speech; ministry to maintain free-trade policy; secularization of education law to be enforced; Curacoa not to be sold 849 [Pg. 849 includes portions of Doc. 406 and Doc. 407]

change of ministry: Baron van Lynden van Sandenburg minister for foreign affairs 848 [Pg. 848 includes portions of Doc. 405 and Doc. 406]

report upon railroad taxation; state and private ownership of railways; tax laws general, not specific; tax upon earnings, not upon property 846 [Pg. 846 includes portions of Doc. 403 and Doc. 404]

railroad taxation; note from M. Heeckeren van Kell 847 [Pg. 847 includes portions of Doc. 404 and Doc. 405]

government will aid to discourage emigration of Mormons to the United States 852 [Pg. 852 includes portions of Doc. 408 and Doc. 409], 854 [Pg. 854 is part of Doc. 410]

note from Mr. van Lynden van Sandenburg; but few Mormons go from the Netherlands; commissioners at Rotterdam to aid in discouraging such emigration 854 [Pg. 854 is part of Doc. 410]

report upon gold and silver coin and bullion, and paper currency 851 [Pg. 851 is part of Doc. 408]

Neutral rights, as illustrated by joint note of ministers of the United States, France, Great Britain, Italy, and Germany, upon the bombardment of open towns by Chilian fleets 872 [Pg. 872 includes portions of Doc. 418 and Doc. 419] question of necessity of notice before bombardment of towns held by an enemy, discussed by Mr. Christiancy 889 [Pg. 889 includes portions of Doc. 432 and Doc. 433]

question as to effectiveness of blockade 886 [Pg. 886 includes portions of Doc. 430 and Doc. 431]

question as to necessity of blockade to close ports held by insurgent forces, or those of an enemy 1038 [Pg. 1038 includes portions of Doc. 525 and Doc. 526], 1040 [Pg. 1040 includes portions of Doc. 527 and Doc. 528]

approval of Mr. Christiancy’s position as to blockade and bombardment of open towns 883 [Pg. 883 is part of Doc. 428]

opinion of Attorney-General Stanbery, of August 31, 1866, respecting the bombardment of Valparaiso by the Spanish 883 [Pg. 883 is part of Doc. 428]

neutrals in country of a belligerent must share the fortunes of war with the citizens thereof 883 [Pg. 883 is part of Doc. 428], 913 [Pg. 913 includes portions of Doc. 449 and Doc. 450], 924 [Pg. 924 includes portions of Doc. 460 and Doc. 461], 926 [Pg. 926 includes portions of Doc. 463 and Doc. 464], 927 [Pg. 927 includes portions of Doc. 464 and Doc. 465]

neutrals may purchase ships in good faith from belligerents; reference to Mr. Attorney-General Cushing’s opinion of August 7, 1854. (Vol. vi, page 638, Opinions of the Attorney General) 150 [Pg. 150 includes portions of Doc. 98 and Doc. 99]

prize court of belligerent may inquire into such sale or transfer 894 [Pg. 894 includes portions of Doc. 435, Doc. 436, and Doc. 437]

consular certificate only prima facie evidence of good faith of transaction 894 [Pg. 894 includes portions of Doc. 435, Doc. 436, and Doc. 437]

New Orleans: steam communication with ports of Colombia discussed; trade statistics of Colombia 258 [Pg. 258 includes portions of Doc. 144 and Doc. 145]

News, London Daily: editorial from, upon Fortune Bay fisheries claims 451 [Pg. 451 includes portions of Doc. 225 and Doc. 226]

Norway, railway system of: miles in operation, 656; in construction, 362; total cost, $30,000,000; paid by government, $22,500,000 964 [Pg. 964 includes portions of Doc. 488 and Doc. 489] (See Sweden and Norway.)

Noyes, Mr. Minister: instructed to report upon rumored designs of France upon the independence of Liberia 341 [Pg. 341 includes portions of Doc. 179 and Doc. 180] the French Government does not entertain the idea 341 [Pg. 341 includes portions of Doc. 179 and Doc. 180]

instructed to visit countries of North Africa, and study question of extension of American commerce 342 [Pg. 342 includes portions of Doc. 180 and Doc. 181]

Nubar Pasha: forced to retire from the Egyptian ministry; protest of France and Great Britain; conditions imposed upon the Khedive 996 [Pg. 996 includes portions of Doc. 508 and Doc. 509]

O.

Observatory: Prof. Asaph Hall, of the National Observatory, is awarded the gold medal of the Royal Astronomical Society of England 414 [Pg. 414 includes portions of Doc. 211 and Doc. 212]

Ochoa, General G. Sanchez, chief of engineers of Mexico: report upon Mexican railway routes and connections; opposed to connection with American railway system 826 [Pg. 826 includes portions of Doc. 392 and Doc. 393]

Opium: regulations of Japanese Government for suppression of sale of 609 [Pg. 609 includes portions of Doc. 303 and Doc. 304] hostility of foreign press 609 [Pg. 609 includes portions of Doc. 303 and Doc. 304]

Ord, General: report upon Indian operations upon the Mexican frontier 816 [Pg. 816 includes portions of Doc. 387 and Doc. 388]

Osborn, Mr. Minister T. A.: correspondence with Admiral Rodgers and Vice-Consul McKellar, concerning transfer of foreign-built ships to American flag 150 [Pg. 150 includes portions of Doc. 98 and Doc. 99] correspondence with Mr. Christiancy as to status of such vessels 174 [Pg. 174 includes portions of Doc. 104 and Doc. 105], 877 [Pg. 877 includes portions of Doc. 421 and Doc. 422], 882 [Pg. 882 includes portions of Doc. 426 and Doc. 427]

(See Chili; Peru; foreign-built vessels.)

P.

Palmer, W. J. & Co.: Mexican railway contract of, not approved by Congress 774 [Pg. 774 includes portions of Doc. 370 and Doc. 371]

Panama inter-oceanic canal; copy of the Wyse-de Lesseps canal contract 243 [Pg. 243 includes portions of Doc. 139, Doc. 140, and Doc. 141] history of the several canal concessions; account of the organization of the de Gorgoza-Türr-Wyse-de Lesseps enterprise 297 [Pg. 297 includes portions of Doc. 161 and Doc. 162]

discussion of the relationship of the Wyse-de Lesseps project 290 [Pg. 290 includes portions of Doc. 159 and Doc. 160], 295 [Pg. 295 includes portions of Doc. 160 and Doc. 161], 297 [Pg. 297 includes portions of Doc. 161 and Doc. 162]

for history of Suez Canal, see 993 [Pg. 993 includes portions of Doc. 505, Doc. 506, and Doc. 507], 1034 [Pg. 1034 includes portions of Doc. 519 and Doc. 520]

right of transit of United States troops, and of criminals in custody of United States officers, discussed 251 [Pg. 251 includes portions of Doc. 141 and Doc. 142], 271 [Pg. 271 is part of Doc. 149]

right conceded by Colombia; protocol of February 22, 1879 273 [Pg. 273 includes portions of Doc. 150 and Doc. 151], 284 [Pg. 284 includes portions of Doc. 153, Doc. 154, and Doc. 155] (case of C. G. Scrafford, extradited prisoner, released from custody by authorities at Panama. See Foreign Relations, 1878, page 151.)

Paper currency: circular requiring reports as to gold and silver coin and bullion and paper currency 3 [Pg. 3 includes portions of Doc. 4 and Doc. 5] reports from ministers to Austria-Hungary; Belgium; Germany; Great Britain; Hawaiian Islands; Japan; Mexico: Morocco; Netherlands; Russia 109 [Pg. 109 includes portions of Doc. 62 and Doc. 63], 385 [Pg. 385 includes portions of Doc. 197 and Doc. 198], 394 [Pg. 394 includes portions of Doc. 200, Doc. 201, and Doc. 202], 398 [Pg. 398 includes portions of Doc. 202 and Doc. 203], 432 [Pg. 432 includes portions of Doc. 219 and Doc. 220], 441 [Pg. 441 is part of Doc. 222], 449 [Pg. 449 is part of Doc. 224], 543 [Pg. 543 includes portions of Doc. 263 and Doc. 264], 616 [Pg. 616 is part of Doc. 308], 656 [Pg. 656 includes portions of Doc. 320 and Doc. 321], 808 [Pg. 808 includes portions of Doc. 381 and Doc. 382], 822 [Pg. 822 includes portions of Doc. 389 and Doc. 390], 842 [Pg. 842 includes portions of Doc. 399, Doc. 400, and Doc. 401], 851 [Pg. 851 is part of Doc. 408], 923 [Pg. 923 includes portions of Doc. 459 and Doc. 460]

Austria-Hungary: specie payments suspended; gold an article of merchandise; business on paper basis; effort to substitute 10,000,000 silver

florins for one-florin notes in circulation 36 [Pg. 36 includes portions of Doc. 28 and Doc. 29], 39 [Pg. 39 includes portions of Doc. 31 and Doc. 32], 41 [Pg. 41 includes portions of Doc. 33 and Doc. 34], 50 [Pg. 50 includes portions of Doc. 39 and Doc. 40]

Chili: issue of 6,000,000 in paper notes to meet war expenses 178 [Pg. 178 includes portions of Doc. 109 and Doc. 110]

Japan: decrease in paper circulation, 7,499,217 yen 656 [Pg. 656 includes portions of Doc. 320 and Doc. 321]

Mexico: silver unlimited legal tender; no gold and but little paper money in circulation 822 [Pg. 822 includes portions of Doc. 389 and Doc. 390]

Peru: increase of duties to create fund to pay off treasury notes 859 [Pg. 859 includes portions of Doc. 411 and Doc. 412] disastrous effect of the war upon the finances; depreciation of paper money; large issue of notes proposed 874 [Pg. 874 includes portions of Doc. 419, Doc. 420, and Doc. 421], 879 [Pg. 879 includes portions of Doc. 422 and Doc. 423]

Pardo, Don Manuel, president of the senate of Peru: assassinated at the entrance of the Senate 855 [Pg. 855 is part of Doc. 411]

Partes, Sir Harry, British minister to Japan: quarantine regulations issued by 647 [Pg. 647 includes portions of Doc. 318 and Doc. 319], 657 [Pg. 657 includes portions of Doc. 321 and Doc. 322] position of Great Britain and Germany as to right of Japan to issue quarantine regulations 604 [Pg. 604 includes portions of Doc. 300 and Doc. 301], 647 [Pg. 647 includes portions of Doc. 318 and Doc. 319], 657 [Pg. 657 includes portions of Doc. 321 and Doc. 322], 665 [Pg. 665 includes portions of Doc. 324 and Doc. 325], 670 [Pg. 670 includes portions of Doc. 327 and Doc. 328]

Parlement Beige: Belgian Government mail-vessel: liable to arrest at suit of a British subject; judgment by Sir R. Phillimore 415 [Pg. 415 includes portions of Doc. 213 and Doc. 214]

Passport may be issued to minor of discreet age unaccompanied by his parents 814 [Pg. 814 includes portions of Doc. 385 and Doc. 386]

stringent passport regulations in Russia 917 [Pg. 917 includes portions of Doc. 453 and Doc. 454]

Pauper emigration from Switzerland to the United States: case of the family Brugger, sent by communal authorities of Graben 972 [Pg. 972 includes portions of Doc. 493 and Doc. 494]

Pereire, M. Eugenio, of Paris: translation of contract of, with Venezuela to organize commercial companies to develop her resources 1045 [Pg. 1045 includes portions of Doc. 534 and Doc. 535]

Perry, Edward J., and Pedro del Valle: contract with Mexican Government for railway system and funding debt 764 [Pg. 764 includes portions of Doc. 365 and Doc. 366] contract rejected by English bondholders 799 [Pg. 799 includes portions of Doc. 375 and Doc. 376]

Peru: declaration of war against Chili; Iquique blockaded by Chilian forces 167 [Pg. 167 includes portions of Doc. 102 and Doc. 103] manifestoes of Chili and Peru as to the causes of the war; treaty between Peru and Bolivia 168 [Pg. 168 includes portions of Doc. 103 and Doc. 104], 867 [Pg. 867 includes portions of Doc. 416, Doc. 417, and Doc. 418], 874 [Pg. 874 includes portions of Doc. 419, Doc. 420, and Doc. 421]

Peru and Bolivia propose arbitration based upon status quo ante bellu 178 [Pg. 178 includes portions of Doc. 109 and Doc. 110]

regret expressed by the United States at breaking out of war 175 [Pg. 175 includes portions of Doc. 106 and Doc. 107], 867 [Pg. 867 includes portions of Doc. 416, Doc. 417, and Doc. 418]

reports of naval combat between the ships of war of Peru and Chili 176 [Pg. 176 is part of Doc. 108], 874 [Pg. 874 includes portions of Doc. 419, Doc. 420, and Doc. 421], 879 [Pg. 879 includes portions of Doc. 422 and Doc. 423]

disastrous effect of the war upon the finances of Peru, and upon neutral shipping 874 [Pg. 874 includes portions of Doc. 419, Doc. 420, and Doc. 421]

increased duties on exports and imports 859 [Pg. 859 includes portions of Doc. 411 and Doc. 412]

questions as to effectiveness of Chilian blockade and as to need of notice of bombardment 883 [Pg. 883 is part of Doc. 428], 886 [Pg. 886 includes portions of Doc. 430 and Doc. 431], 889 [Pg. 889 includes portions of Doc. 432 and Doc. 433]

note of ministers from the United States, Great Britain, France, Germany, and Italy upon the bombardment of open towns; the bombardment of Mollendo and Pisagua 872 [Pg. 872 includes portions of Doc. 418 and Doc. 419]

correspondence respecting the right of Chilian fleet to prevent shipping of nitrates as contraband of war from Pisagua 888 [Pg. 888 includes portions of Doc. 431 and Doc. 432]

question of the right of sale by belligerents of vessels to neutrals 150 [Pg. 150 includes portions of Doc. 98 and Doc. 99]

right of foreign-built vessels sold to American citizens to the flag and protection of the United States 150 [Pg. 150 includes portions of Doc. 98 and Doc. 99], 174 [Pg. 174 includes portions of Doc. 104 and Doc. 105], 177 [Pg. 177 is part of Doc. 109], 180 [Pg. 180 includes portions of Doc. 110, Doc. 111, and Doc. 112], 861 [Pg. 861 is part of Doc. 413], 865 [Pg. 865 includes portions of Doc. 413, Doc. 414, and Doc. 415], 867 [Pg. 867 includes portions of Doc. 416, Doc. 417, and Doc. 418], 874 [Pg. 874 includes portions of Doc. 419, Doc. 420, and Doc. 421], 877 [Pg. 877 includes portions of Doc. 421 and Doc. 422], 881 [Pg. 881 includes portions of Doc. 423, Doc. 424, and Doc. 425], 882 [Pg. 882 includes portions of Doc. 426 and Doc. 427], 884 [Pg. 884 includes portions of Doc. 428 and Doc. 429], 894 [Pg. 894 includes portions of Doc. 435, Doc. 436, and Doc. 437]

increase of the British squadron in the Pacific 894 [Pg. 894 includes portions of Doc. 435, Doc. 436, and Doc. 437]

assassination of Don Manuel Pardo, president of the senate; profound sensation 855 [Pg. 855 is part of Doc. 411]

Philliniore, Sir R.: judgment in the ease of the tag Admiral against the frigate Constitution 407 [Pg. 407 includes portions of Doc. 208, Doc. 209, and Doc. 210] judgment that government vessels, not vessels of war nor yachts of sovereigns, engaged in mail and package service, may he arrested at suit of British subject; case of the Parlement Beige 415 [Pg. 415 includes portions of Doc. 213 and Doc. 214]

Pilot regulations issued by the Japanese Government 617 [Pg. 617 includes portions of Doc. 308 and Doc. 309]

Pisagua and Mollendo: bombardment of, by Chilian fleet 872 [Pg. 872 includes portions of Doc. 418 and Doc. 419] correspondence respecting the bombardment of open, purely commercial towns 872 [Pg. 872 includes portions of Doc. 418 and Doc. 419], 883 [Pg. 883 is part of Doc. 428]

respecting the right of the Chilian fleet to prevent the shipping of nitrate from Pisagua 888 [Pg. 888 includes portions of Doc. 431 and Doc. 432]

Plague, Russian, so called: precautions taken against, by Russia and adjoining nations 43 [Pg. 43 includes portions of Doc. 35 and Doc. 36], 50 [Pg. 50 includes portions of Doc. 39 and Doc. 40] exaggerated accounts; not thought to be the plague, but rather a virulent form of typhus 912 [Pg. 912 includes portions of Doc. 447 and Doc. 448]

Russian regulations against the cattle plague 920 [Pg. 920 includes portions of Doc. 457 and Doc. 458]

Police system of Vienna: report upon, by Mr. Delaplaine 74 [Pg. 74 includes portions of Doc. 49 and Doc. 50] activity of the Russian police 913 [Pg. 913 includes portions of Doc. 449 and Doc. 450], 917 [Pg. 917 includes portions of Doc. 453 and Doc. 454]

Port an Prince: revolution in; loss of property; many buildings destroyed; loss of life; progress of affairs; establishment of provisional government 564 [Pg. 564 includes portions of Doc. 275 and Doc. 276], 569 [Pg. 569 includes portions of Doc. 276 and Doc. 277], 572 [Pg. 572 includes portions of Doc. 279 and Doc. 280], 578 [Pg. 578 includes portions of Doc. 281 and Doc. 282], 579 [Pg. 579 includes portions of Doc. 282 and Doc. 283]

Portugal: Cortes opened by the King: speech from the throne; foreign and domestic affairs 897 [Pg. 897 includes portions of Doc. 437 and Doc. 438] Cape Verde Islands: naval cemetery; action of Portuguese Government respecting; need of fund to keep it in repair 902 [Pg. 902 includes portions of Doc. 441, Doc. 442, and Doc. 443]

respecting shipment of men subject to military duty by American whalers 899 [Pg. 899 is part of Doc. 439], 903 [Pg. 903 includes portions of Doc. 443 and Doc. 444]

courtesies extended by Portuguese Government in behalf of frigate Constitution 901 [Pg. 901 includes portions of Doc. 440 and Doc. 441], 905 [Pg. 905 includes portions of Doc. 444 and Doc. 445]

tobacco duties advanced; details of the measure 900 [Pg. 900 includes portions of Doc. 439 and Doc. 440]

Postal union: Spanish papers mailed to the United States returned as dutiable; action in accordance with ruling of international bureau at Berne 932 [Pg. 932 includes portions of Doc. 470 and Doc. 471] treasury and post-office circulars regulating procedure in such cases 932 [Pg. 932 includes portions of Doc. 470 and Doc. 471]

Prado, President of Peru: announces raising of blockade of Iquique 893 [Pg. 893 includes portions of Doc. 433, Doc. 434, and Doc. 435]

Prague: treaty of 1866; reasons for abrogation of fifth clause 360 [Pg. 360 includes portions of Doc. 188 and Doc. 189]

Preston, Mr. Stephen: restates position of Hayti on consular authentication tax 583 [Pg. 583 includes portions of Doc. 286 and Doc. 287], 587 [Pg. 587 includes portions of Doc. 288 and Doc. 289], 594 [Pg. 594 includes portions of Doc. 291 and Doc. 292] restates position of Hayti on discriminating license tax 591 [Pg. 591 includes portions of Doc. 289 and Doc. 290]

Prices current of merchandise shipped to the United States to be sent by consuls to customs officers at ports of destination 2 [Pg. 2 includes portions of Doc. 2 and Doc. 3]

Privateers: treasury circular of June 21, 1879, to collectors of customs not to allow the fitting out of Bolivian privateers 125 [Pg. 125 includes portions of Doc. 73 and Doc. 74], 126 [Pg. 126 includes portions of Doc. 74, Doc. 75, Doc. 76, and Doc. 77], 127 [Pg. 127 includes portions of Doc. 77 and Doc. 78], 128 [Pg. 128 includes portions of Doc. 78, Doc. 79, and Doc. 80]

Prize-court of one belligerent may inquire into sale of ships by subjects of other belligerent to citizens of the United States; good faith the essence of the transaction 894 [Pg. 894 includes portions of Doc. 435, Doc. 436, and Doc. 437] consular certificate to bill of sale only prima facie evidence of good faith of transaction 894 [Pg. 894 includes portions of Doc. 435, Doc. 436, and Doc. 437]

Propheté, General: refusal of senate of Hayti to confirm his election to that body 558 [Pg. 558 includes portions of Doc. 271 and Doc. 272]

Protection: general tendency toward, in Europe 42 [Pg. 42 includes portions of Doc. 34 and Doc. 35] Austria-Hungary: new tariff protective; all commercial treaties denounced; growth of protectionist ideas 40 [Pg. 40 includes portions of Doc. 32 and Doc. 33]

new treaties with Germany and Italy upon basis of equivalent concessions 40 [Pg. 40 includes portions of Doc. 32 and Doc. 33]

Denmark: general tariff league against the United States proposed in the Rigsdag; growth of protectionist ideas in Europe 307 [Pg. 307 includes portions of Doc. 165, Doc. 166, and Doc. 167]

France: tariff policy protective; effort to force reciprocity treaty 61 [Pg. 61 includes portions of Doc. 46 and Doc. 47]

Germany: opening of the Reichstag; speech of the Emperor; growing sentiment in favor of a protectionist policy in Germany 307 [Pg. 307 includes portions of Doc. 165, Doc. 166, and Doc. 167], 360 [Pg. 360 includes portions of Doc. 188 and Doc. 189]

protectionist views of Prince Bismarck; debate upon new tariff law 365 [Pg. 365 includes portions of Doc. 190 and Doc. 191], 392 [Pg. 392 includes portions of Doc. 199 and Doc. 200]

Mexico: increased taxes imposed on certain articles of domestic manufacture added to import duties of same kind of articles; Mexican tariff protective 812 [Pg. 812 includes portions of Doc. 384 and Doc. 385]

Spain: protectionist tendencies 938 [Pg. 938 includes portions of Doc. 474 and Doc. 475], 939 [Pg. 939 is part of Doc. 476]

United States: tariff policy of, explained in interview of Mr. Kasson with the French ambassador at Vienna 61 [Pg. 61 includes portions of Doc. 46 and Doc. 47]

Protectorate: designs of establishing protectorate over Liberia attributed to France 341 [Pg. 341 includes portions of Doc. 179 and Doc. 180], 718 [Pg. 718 includes portions of Doc. 351, Doc. 352, and Doc. 353], 727 [Pg. 727 includes portions of Doc. 356, Doc. 357, and Doc. 358]

Prussia: memorial as to system of railway taxation in 379 [Pg. 379 includes portions of Doc. 194 and Doc. 195] result of the elections of the Landtag; the great influence of Prince Bismarck illustrated 402 [Pg. 402 includes portions of Doc. 203 and Doc. 204]

Q.

Quarantine: regulations for port of Kanagawa (Yokakama) to be instituted by Japanese Government; opposition of consuls 604 [Pg. 604 includes portions of Doc. 300 and Doc. 301] acceptance of regulations by Mr. Bingliam for the United States; copies of his orders 604 [Pg. 604 includes portions of Doc. 300 and Doc. 301], 608 [Pg. 608 includes portions of Doc. 302 and Doc. 303], 647 [Pg. 647 includes portions of Doc. 318 and Doc. 319], 657 [Pg. 657 includes portions of Doc. 321 and Doc. 322]

position of the British minister; issuance of regulations 647 [Pg. 647 includes portions of Doc. 318 and Doc. 319], 657 [Pg. 657 includes portions of Doc. 321 and Doc. 322], 670 [Pg. 670 includes portions of Doc. 327 and Doc. 328]

position of the German minister; German vessel taken out of quarantine; case of the “Hesperia.” 647 [Pg. 647 includes portions of Doc. 318 and Doc. 319], 665 [Pg. 665 includes portions of Doc. 324 and Doc. 325], 670 [Pg. 670 includes portions of Doc. 327 and Doc. 328]

Quelpart: island of: wreck of the “Barbara Taylor” a British vessel; aid rendered by Coreans 612 [Pg. 612 includes portions of Doc. 306 and Doc. 307] visit of Mr. Satow, Japanese secretary to British legation, to the island 612 [Pg. 612 includes portions of Doc. 306 and Doc. 307]

R.

Railroad taxation; instructions to ministers to Austria-Hungary, Belgium, France, Germany, Great Britain, Italy, The Netherlands, Russia, and Switzerland to report upon systems of railroad taxation; see instruction to Great Britain 413 [Pg. 413 includes portions of Doc. 210 and Doc. 211] Reports from ministers in: Austria: taxation; concessions; management 52 [Pg. 52 includes portions of Doc. 41 and Doc. 42], 63 [Pg. 63 includes portions of Doc. 47 and Doc. 48]

Hungary: principle of taxation, transportation to pay taxes; ultimate state ownership 54 [Pg. 54 includes portions of Doc. 42 and Doc. 43]

Belgium: state and private ownership; land ownership; tariff; taxation 92 [Pg. 92 includes portions of Doc. 60 and Doc. 61]

France: notes from the ministry of finance 345 [Pg. 345 is part of Doc. 182]

Germany: no uniform system 379 [Pg. 379 includes portions of Doc. 194 and Doc. 195]

contemplated purchase of railroads by the state 394 [Pg. 394 includes portions of Doc. 200, Doc. 201, and Doc. 202]

Prussia: memorial as to Prussian system 379 [Pg. 379 includes portions of Doc. 194 and Doc. 195]

Great Britain: instruction to the different minister 413 [Pg. 413 includes portions of Doc. 210 and Doc. 211]

system of taxation 429 [Pg. 429 includes portions of Doc. 217 and Doc. 218]

The Netherlands: laws general; license or income tax; ownership, state and private; stamp tax 846 [Pg. 846 includes portions of Doc. 403 and Doc. 404]

Russia: plan of organization; concessions; taxation; roads under government supervision; interest guaranteed 910 [Pg. 910 includes portions of Doc. 446 and Doc. 447]

Switzerland: no direct tax; annual concession tax; cantonal taxation 970 [Pg. 970 includes portions of Doc. 491 and Doc. 492]

Railroad system: Mexico: debt-funding railroad project; Perry-del Valle contract 764 [Pg. 764 includes portions of Doc. 365 and Doc. 366], 799 [Pg. 799 includes portions of Doc. 375 and Doc. 376]

the Lerdo contracts delared null by General Diaz; Plumb and Barron contracts; Mexican Railroad Company; N. J. Palmer contract; Guaymas and Frontier Railroad; Tehuantepec Railway 774 [Pg. 774 includes portions of Doc. 370 and Doc. 371]

hostility to connection with American system 774 [Pg. 774 includes portions of Doc. 370 and Doc. 371], 828 [Pg. 828 is part of Doc. 393]

revolutionary plan of General Diaz; its effects upon railways 774 [Pg. 774 includes portions of Doc. 370 and Doc. 371]

Sweden and Norway: Sweden: state railways, 1,005 miles, cost $41,000,000; private railways, 1, 240 miles, cost $61,000,000 980 [Pg. 980 is part of Doc. 499] state advances to railways; recent loans 959 [Pg. 959 includes portions of Doc. 486 and Doc. 487]

Norway: miles in operation, 858 [Pg. 858 is part of Doc. 411]; in construction, 362 [Pg. 362 is part of Doc. 189]; cost, $30,000,000; relations of state to railways 980 [Pg. 980 is part of Doc. 499]

Rainfall: consular officers in Europe required to report humidity of atmosphere in consular districts 3 [Pg. 3 includes portions of Doc. 4 and Doc. 5]

Ramirez, Señor J. H., secretary of Mexican treasury, resigns 803 [Pg. 803 includes portions of Doc. 379 and Doc. 380]

Realty: ownership of, in frontier States of Mexico; Americans not allowed to hold 798 [Pg. 798 includes portions of Doc. 373 and Doc. 374], 809 [Pg. 809 includes portions of Doc. 382 and Doc. 383], 833 [Pg. 833 includes portions of Doc. 393 and Doc. 394]

Reciprocity treaties with the United States: Colombia: project of reciprocity treaty discussed; trade statistics 254 [Pg. 254 includes portions of Doc. 142 and Doc. 143], 256 [Pg. 256 is part of Doc. 144], 258 [Pg. 258 includes portions of Doc. 144 and Doc. 145], 278 [Pg. 278 is part of Doc. 152]

France: the Chotteau scheme; policy of France to force negotiation of such treaties 61 [Pg. 61 includes portions of Doc. 46 and Doc. 47]

Guatemala: reciprocity treaty proposed by President Barrios 142 [Pg. 142 includes portions of Doc. 93 and Doc. 94]

Hawaiian Islands: report of committee of Hawaiian assembly upon reciprocity treaty with the United States 512 [Pg. 512 is part of Doc. 259] operation of treaty 529 [Pg. 529 includes portions of Doc. 261 and Doc. 262], 542 [Pg. 542 includes portions of Doc. 262 and Doc. 263]

interpretation of clause of treaty 527 [Pg. 527 is part of Doc. 261], 544 [Pg. 544 includes portions of Doc. 264 and Doc. 265]

Reciprocity: policy of Austin-German commercial treaty of December 16, 1878 44 [Pg. 44 includes portions of Doc. 36 and Doc. 37], 365 [Pg. 365 includes portions of Doc. 190 and Doc. 191] text of treaty; its study suggested by Mr. Kasson respecting our relations with Canada and Mexico 44 [Pg. 44 includes portions of Doc. 36 and Doc. 37]

Red River of the North: restriction upon navigation within Canadian boundary; Canadian regulations in conflict with Article XXX of Treaty of Washington 503 [Pg. 503 includes portions of Doc. 249 and Doc. 250] attitude of Canadian government upon question 506 [Pg. 506 includes portions of Doc. 253 and Doc. 254], 507 [Pg. 507 includes portions of Doc. 254 and Doc. 255]

Reed, Mr. E. J.: letter upon Japan from the London Times 652 [Pg. 652 includes portions of Doc. 319 and Doc. 320]

Reichstag, Germany: debate upon the social democratic suppression law 351 [Pg. 351 is part of Doc. 184] Emperor’s speech at opening of 360 [Pg. 360 includes portions of Doc. 188 and Doc. 189]

debates upon the commercial treaty with Austria-Hungary 365 [Pg. 365 includes portions of Doc. 190 and Doc. 191]

debate upon the treaty with Samoa 388 [Pg. 388 includes portions of Doc. 198 and Doc. 199]

silver debate 385 [Pg. 385 includes portions of Doc. 197 and Doc. 198], 394 [Pg. 394 includes portions of Doc. 200, Doc. 201, and Doc. 202]

tariff debate 392 [Pg. 392 includes portions of Doc. 199 and Doc. 200]

résumé of the work of the session 394 [Pg. 394 includes portions of Doc. 200, Doc. 201, and Doc. 202]

Revolutionary movements in Argentine Republic 25 [Pg. 25 includes portions of Doc. 23 and Doc. 24], 27 [Pg. 27 is part of Doc. 25], 28 [Pg. 28 includes portions of Doc. 25 and Doc. 26], 34 [Pg. 34 includes portions of Doc. 26 and Doc. 27] (See Internationalism, Socialism, and Nihilism.)

Right of search. (See next entry.)

Rising Sun and Ellen Rizpah: American vessels stopped by Spanish cruisers; Spanish Government pays $10,000 indemnity 956 [Pg. 956 includes portions of Doc. 483, Doc. 484, and Doc. 485] (See Foreign Relations 1878, pages 769, 775, 777, 784, 786.)

Roca, General, and Dr. Tejedor announced as presidential candidates in the Argentine Republic; probable candidature of ex-President Sarmiento 24 [Pg. 24 includes portions of Doc. 21 and Doc. 22] attempted assassination of General Roca by political opponents in Buenos Ayres 25 [Pg. 25 includes portions of Doc. 23 and Doc. 24]

Rogers, Admiral C. R. P.: correspondence with Mr. Osborn respecting protection to be accorded to foreign-built vessels owned by citizens of the United States 150 [Pg. 150 includes portions of Doc. 98 and Doc. 99] (See Chili; Peru: foreign-built vessels) 150 [Pg. 150 includes portions of Doc. 98 and Doc. 99], 174 [Pg. 174 includes portions of Doc. 104 and Doc. 105], 177 [Pg. 177 is part of Doc. 109], 180 [Pg. 180 includes portions of Doc. 110, Doc. 111, and Doc. 112], 861 [Pg. 861 is part of Doc. 413], 865 [Pg. 865 includes portions of Doc. 413, Doc. 414, and Doc. 415], 867 [Pg. 867 includes portions of Doc. 416, Doc. 417, and Doc. 418], 874 [Pg. 874 includes portions of Doc. 419, Doc. 420, and Doc. 421], 877 [Pg. 877 includes portions of Doc. 421 and Doc. 422], 881 [Pg. 881 includes portions of Doc. 423, Doc. 424, and Doc. 425], 882 [Pg. 882 includes portions of Doc. 426 and Doc. 427], 834 [Pg. 834 includes portions of Doc. 394 and Doc. 395], 894 [Pg. 894 includes portions of Doc. 435, Doc. 436, and Doc. 437]

Rome: enthusiastic reception of King and Queen upon return to Rome after attempt upon the King’s life 598 [Pg. 598 is part of Doc. 296]

Rosenstraus, H.: case of; status of Jews in Russia 921 [Pg. 921 includes portions of Doc. 458 and Doc. 459]

Roumania: Austria, Germany, Russia, and other governments accredit ministers to 38 [Pg. 38 includes portions of Doc. 30 and Doc. 31] desire expressed to enter into diplomatic relations with the United States 49 [Pg. 49 includes portions of Doc. 37 and Doc. 38]

position of the Jews discussed 49 [Pg. 49 includes portions of Doc. 37 and Doc. 38]

statistics of trade; receipts and expenses; debt; commercial possibilities; army,. &c. 58 [Pg. 58 includes portions of Doc. 44 and Doc. 45], 81 [Pg. 81 includes portions of Doc. 52 and Doc. 53]

instructions respecting the negotiation of a commercial treaty with 79 [Pg. 79 includes portions of Doc. 50 and Doc. 51], 81 [Pg. 81 includes portions of Doc. 52 and Doc. 53]

East Roumelia: account of affairs in 984 [Pg. 984 is part of Doc. 502]

Russell, Lord Odo: copy of dispatch upon death of Mr. Bayard Taylor 484 [Pg. 484 includes portions of Doc. 233 and Doc. 234]

Russia: attempted assassination of the Emperor of Russia 913 [Pg. 913 includes portions of Doc. 449 and Doc. 450] the assassin arrested; St. Petersburg greatly agitated; the Emperor enthusiastically received by the people 913 [Pg. 913 includes portions of Doc. 449 and Doc. 450]

the congratulations of the President and people of the United States upon the providential escape of the Emperor 915 [Pg. 915 includes portions of Doc. 450 and Doc. 451], 916 [Pg. 916 includes portions of Doc. 451 and Doc. 452], 917 [Pg. 917 includes portions of Doc. 453 and Doc. 454], 919 [Pg. 919 includes portions of Doc. 455 and Doc. 456]

socialistic and nihilistic movements in Russia; incendiary fires; passport and police regulations; executions 913 [Pg. 913 includes portions of Doc. 449 and Doc. 450], 917 [Pg. 917 includes portions of Doc. 453 and Doc. 454], 918 [Pg. 918 includes portions of Doc. 454 and Doc. 455], 920 [Pg. 920 includes portions of Doc. 457 and Doc. 458]

execution of the Nihilist Dombro vine 918 [Pg. 918 includes portions of Doc. 454 and Doc. 455]

restrictions upon the migration of people from one section of Russia to another 920 [Pg. 920 includes portions of Doc. 457 and Doc. 458]

grasshoppers and locust in Southern Russia; report by Mr. Portchinsky, secretary of Russian Society of Entomology 925 [Pg. 925 includes portions of Doc. 462 and Doc. 463]

regulations against the cattle plague 920 [Pg. 920 includes portions of Doc. 457 and Doc. 458]

so-called Russian plague; not the plague; but a virulent form of typhus; accounts exaggerated 912 [Pg. 912 includes portions of Doc. 447 and Doc. 448]

precautions taken by Austria-Hungary, Germany, Servia, Roumania, and Russia against the plague 43 [Pg. 43 includes portions of Doc. 35 and Doc. 36], 50 [Pg. 50 includes portions of Doc. 39 and Doc. 40]

law regulating rate of interest in Russia 917 [Pg. 917 includes portions of Doc. 453 and Doc. 454]

status of the Jews in Russia; restrictions upon ownership of realty and upon settlement; laws as to taxation 921 [Pg. 921 includes portions of Doc. 458 and Doc. 459]

case of Mr. H. Rosenstraus 921 [Pg. 921 includes portions of Doc. 458 and Doc. 459]

visit of Mr. Hoffman to vessels built in Philadelphia for the Russian navy 925 [Pg. 925 includes portions of Doc. 462 and Doc. 463]

the government and officers satisfied with the vessels 925 [Pg. 925 includes portions of Doc. 462 and Doc. 463]

system of railway taxation; roads under government supervision; government guarantee of interest; concessions 910 [Pg. 910 includes portions of Doc. 446 and Doc. 447]

case of Mr. John Calvocoressi, an American citizen resident in Turkey during Russo-Turkish war; claim for damages to property by Russian troops 913 [Pg. 913 includes portions of Doc. 449 and Doc. 450], 924 [Pg. 924 includes portions of Doc. 460 and Doc. 461], 926 [Pg. 926 includes portions of Doc. 463 and Doc. 464]

no liability recognized by Russian Government 926 [Pg. 926 includes portions of Doc. 463 and Doc. 464]

foreigners domiciled in country of belligerent share with subjects of that country the chances of war 924 [Pg. 924 includes portions of Doc. 460 and Doc. 461]

abstract of treaty of final peace with Turkey, signed February 8, 1879, at Constantinople 978 [Pg. 978 includes portions of Doc. 497 and Doc. 498]

(For treaties of San Stefano and Berlin, see pages 865 and 894, Foreign Relations, 1878.)

S.

Saint Thomas: rumored sale of island by Denmark untrue 308 [Pg. 308 includes portions of Doc. 167 and Doc. 168]

sale of, discussed; possibility of Great Britain acquiring it 310 [Pg. 310 includes portions of Doc. 169 and Doc. 170]

Salaries of interpreters at China consulates inadequate: reports from Mr. Holcombe and Mr. Knight 203 [Pg. 203 includes portions of Doc. 120 and Doc. 121], 234 [Pg. 234 includes portions of Doc. 134 and Doc. 135]

Salisbury, Lord: speeches of, at Manchester, in defense of government policy 468 [Pg. 468 is part of Doc. 231]

Salomon, General S.: elected president of Hayti 582 [Pg. 582 includes portions of Doc. 285 and Doc. 286]

Samoa: text of German treaty with, signed January 24, 1879 381 [Pg. 381 includes portions of Doc. 195 and Doc. 196] debate in the Reichstag upon the treaty 388 [Pg. 388 includes portions of Doc. 198 and Doc. 199], 394 [Pg. 394 includes portions of Doc. 200, Doc. 201, and Doc. 202]

Sanitary reports required from consular officers for National Board of Health 10 [Pg. 10 includes portions of Doc. 8, Doc. 9, and Doc. 10]

Santa Cruz: report upon riot in island of; sufferers aided by Danish Government 307 [Pg. 307 includes portions of Doc. 165, Doc. 166, and Doc. 167] (See Foreign Relations, 1878, page 160.)

San Stefano: abstract of final treaty of peace between Russia and Turkey, signed at Constantinople February 8, 1879 978 [Pg. 978 includes portions of Doc. 497 and Doc. 498] so much of treaty of San Stefano not annulled by treaty of Berlin to be carried into effect 978 [Pg. 978 includes portions of Doc. 497 and Doc. 498]

(For treaties of San Stefano and Berlin, see Foreign Relations for 1878, pages 865 [Pg. 865 includes portions of Doc. 413, Doc. 414, and Doc. 415] and 894 [Pg. 894 includes portions of Doc. 435, Doc. 436, and Doc. 437].)

Sarmiento, ex-President, of Argentine Republic: called to cabinet as minister of interior, and premier 25 [Pg. 25 includes portions of Doc. 23 and Doc. 24] note to Governor Tejedor: acquiescence in result of presidential election enjoined 27 [Pg. 27 is part of Doc. 25]

note to governor Tejedor denying his right to call out State troops 28 [Pg. 28 includes portions of Doc. 25 and Doc. 26]

possibility of his becoming candidate for election to presidency 24 [Pg. 24 includes portions of Doc. 21 and Doc. 22]

Schlözer, Mr., German minister: correspondence touching arrest, onboard the German vessel Mosel, of Carl Weinrebe, for smuggling 404 [Pg. 404 includes portions of Doc. 205, Doc. 206, and Doc. 207], 406 [Pg. 406 is part of Doc. 208] question of interpretation of Article XII, consular convention with Germany 404 [Pg. 404 includes portions of Doc. 205, Doc. 206, and Doc. 207], 408 [Pg. 408 is part of Doc. 210]

School law of Belgium: proposition to secularize education; synopsis of debate upon bill 97 [Pg. 97 includes portions of Doc. 61 and Doc. 62]

School system of Germany: influence and labor of Dr. Falk; extension of system; attempt at secularization 394 [Pg. 394 includes portions of Doc. 200, Doc. 201, and Doc. 202]

Scrafford, C. G., reference to case of: extradited prisoner in custody of United States officers released by authorities at Panama while in transit across isthmus 271 [Pg. 271 is part of Doc. 149] discussion of question of transit of extradited prisoners, Colombia 251 [Pg. 251 includes portions of Doc. 141 and Doc. 142], 271 [Pg. 271 is part of Doc. 149], 273 [Pg. 273 includes portions of Doc. 150 and Doc. 151], 284 [Pg. 284 includes portions of Doc. 153, Doc. 154, and Doc. 155]

Spain 936 [Pg. 936 includes portions of Doc. 473 and Doc. 474], 941 [Pg. 941 includes portions of Doc. 476, Doc. 477, and Doc. 478] (See Foreign Relations, 1878, pages 151, 268.)

Scruggs, W. L., Consul at Chinkiang: report upon form of procedure in mixed cases between Americans and Chinese 222 [Pg. 222 is part of Doc. 132]

“Seiki,” Japanese corvette: visit of to Constantinople; reception ceremonies 976 [Pg. 976 includes portions of Doc. 495 and Doc. 496]

Servia: Austria sends minister to Servia; commercial treaty concluded by Great Britain; chargé d’affaires appointed at Belgrade 38 [Pg. 38 includes portions of Doc. 30 and Doc. 31], 59 [Pg. 59 includes portions of Doc. 45 and Doc. 46] the Jewish question in Servia 59 [Pg. 59 includes portions of Doc. 45 and Doc. 46]

Austria attempting to establish a customs union with Servia; France to negotiate a commercial treaty 59 [Pg. 59 includes portions of Doc. 45 and Doc. 46]

report: exports and imports; finances; debt; military organization and strength 59 [Pg. 59 includes portions of Doc. 45 and Doc. 46]

instructions directing Mr. Kasson to proceed to the negotiation of a commercial treaty with 79 [Pg. 79 includes portions of Doc. 50 and Doc. 51], 81 [Pg. 81 includes portions of Doc. 52 and Doc. 53]

full report upon the condition; organization of government and resources of Servia 82 [Pg. 82 includes portions of Doc. 54 and Doc. 55]

Shanghai harbor protection rules: correspondence with Chinese foreign office; right of China to amend rules advanced 213 [Pg. 213 is part of Doc. 126] their execution under consular authority; their retention opposed by Chinese authorities 192 [Pg. 192 includes portions of Doc. 116 and Doc. 117]

Shepard, J. F., consul at Hankow: report upon form of procedure in mixed cases between Americans and Chinese 224 [Pg. 224 is part of Doc. 132]

Ship’s papers: their custody of by consul of ship’s nation in Colombian ports; principle maintained by great powers 260 [Pg. 260 includes portions of Doc. 145 and Doc. 146] subject discussed in correspondence with Mr. Dichman, and in note to Sir Edward Thornton 260 [Pg. 260 includes portions of Doc. 145 and Doc. 146], 266 [Pg. 266 includes portions of Doc. 146 and Doc. 147], 270 [Pg. 270 includes portions of Doc. 147 and Doc. 148], 273 [Pg. 273 includes portions of Doc. 150 and Doc. 151], 280 [Pg. 280 includes portions of Doc. 152 and Doc. 153], 289 [Pg. 289 includes portions of Doc. 158 and Doc. 159], 488 [Pg. 488 includes portions of Doc. 237, Doc. 238, Doc. 239, and Doc. 240]

protocol of January 7, 1879, concerning form of procedure 266 [Pg. 266 includes portions of Doc. 146 and Doc. 147]

law of Colombian Congress respecting the deposit of ship’s papers; the protocol of January 7, 1879, confirmed 289 [Pg. 289 includes portions of Doc. 158 and Doc. 159]

Siam: General Grant invited by the King to visit Siam 928 [Pg. 928 includes portions of Doc. 465, Doc. 466, and Doc. 467] the Government of Siam ready to send an embassy to Washington whenever officially informed that the United States will receive the embassy 928 [Pg. 928 includes portions of Doc. 465, Doc. 466, and Doc. 467]

the embassy to study American industry; its visit will afford an opportunity of extending trade relations with Siam 929 [Pg. 929 includes portions of Doc. 467 and Doc. 468]

the Secretary of State expresses satisfaction at the prospect of the visit of the embassy to the United States 930 [Pg. 930 includes portions of Doc. 468 and Doc. 469]

the attention of Congress will be called to the subject in order that suitable arrangements to receive the embassy may be made 930 [Pg. 930 includes portions of Doc. 468 and Doc. 469]

the Government of the King to be so informed 930 [Pg. 930 includes portions of Doc. 468 and Doc. 469]

congratulatory address of Americans to the King upon the occasion of his birthday 931 [Pg. 931 includes portions of Doc. 469 and Doc. 470]

Silver and gold coin and bullion, and paper currency: circular calling for reports upon. (See Gold, Circulating medium, Paper currency) 3 [Pg. 3 includes portions of Doc. 4 and Doc. 5] reports from ministers to Austria-Hungary, Belgium, Germany, Great Britain, Hawaiian Islands, Japan, Mexico, Morocco, Netherlands, Russia 36 [Pg. 36 includes portions of Doc. 28 and Doc. 29], 39 [Pg. 39 includes portions of Doc. 31 and Doc. 32], 41 [Pg. 41 includes portions of Doc. 33 and Doc. 34], 50 [Pg. 50 includes portions of Doc. 39 and Doc. 40], 109 [Pg. 109 includes portions of Doc. 62 and Doc. 63], 385 [Pg. 385 includes portions of Doc. 197 and Doc. 198], 394 [Pg. 394 includes portions of Doc. 200, Doc. 201, and Doc. 202], 398 [Pg. 398 includes portions of Doc. 202 and Doc. 203], 432 [Pg. 432 includes portions of Doc. 219 and Doc. 220], 441 [Pg. 441 is part of Doc. 222], 449 [Pg. 449 is part of Doc. 224], 543 [Pg. 543 includes portions of Doc. 263 and Doc. 264], 616 [Pg. 616 is part of Doc. 308], 656 [Pg. 656 includes portions of Doc. 320 and Doc. 321], 808 [Pg. 808 includes portions of Doc. 381 and Doc. 382], 822 [Pg. 822 includes portions of Doc. 389 and Doc. 390], 842 [Pg. 842 includes portions of Doc. 399, Doc. 400, and Doc. 401], 851 [Pg. 851 is part of Doc. 408], 923 [Pg. 923 includes portions of Doc. 459 and Doc. 460]

Silver: Austria-Hungary: specie payments suspended in 1818; paper florin not redeemable; silver florin not in circulation 36 [Pg. 36 includes portions of Doc. 28 and Doc. 29]

fluctuating values of silver and paper 39 [Pg. 39 includes portions of Doc. 31 and Doc. 32], 41 [Pg. 41 includes portions of Doc. 33 and Doc. 34]

suspension of purchase of silver by Austro-Hungarian bank 41 [Pg. 41 includes portions of Doc. 33 and Doc. 34]

silver accumulating in bank; effort to put out 10,000,000 silver florins in exchange for 1-florin paper notes 50 [Pg. 50 includes portions of Doc. 39 and Doc. 40]

Germany: debate in Reichstag upon suspension of government silver sales and restoration of double standard; speech of Prince Bismarck 385 [Pg. 385 includes portions of Doc. 197 and Doc. 198], 391 [Pg. 391 is part of Doc. 199] statistics of silver sales; losses sustained by government; market price of silver 385 [Pg. 385 includes portions of Doc. 197 and Doc. 198]

Germany not likely to sell more silver 394 [Pg. 394 includes portions of Doc. 200, Doc. 201, and Doc. 202]

Great Britain: letters from Mr. George McHenry on bi-metallism; and gold, silver, and paper circulation and coinage 432 [Pg. 432 includes portions of Doc. 219 and Doc. 220], 441 [Pg. 441 is part of Doc. 222]

Japan: coinage report of Japanese mint 616 [Pg. 616 is part of Doc. 308], 695 [Pg. 695 includes portions of Doc. 341, Doc. 342, and Doc. 343] silver yen to be received in payment of customs dues; the silver yen to take the place of the Mexican dollar in circulation 687 [Pg. 687 includes portions of Doc. 336 and Doc. 337]

Mexico: silver coined and in bullion, exports for 1878, $20, 493, 129 808 [Pg. 808 includes portions of Doc. 381 and Doc. 382] silver unlimited legal tender; gold out of circulation; small issue of paper money 822 [Pg. 822 includes portions of Doc. 389 and Doc. 390]

Sitka: Commander A’Conrt’s report of affairs at Sitka 492 [Pg. 492 includes portions of Doc. 242 and Doc. 243] Visit of the “Osprey” British navy, to Sitka; protection afforded against attack of Indians 490 [Pg. 490 includes portions of Doc. 240 and Doc. 241], 492 [Pg. 492 includes portions of Doc. 242 and Doc. 243]

defenseless condition of Sitka; open to Indian attack 492 [Pg. 492 includes portions of Doc. 242 and Doc. 243]

necessity of sending force to Sitka to protect citizens shown 492 [Pg. 492 includes portions of Doc. 242 and Doc. 243]

thanks of the United States extended to Commander A’Court of the “Osprey” for his service in protecting the inhabitants of Sitka 490 [Pg. 490 includes portions of Doc. 240 and Doc. 241]

Sitting Bull: bands of hostile Indians from Sitting Bull’s force cross the frontier 488 [Pg. 488 includes portions of Doc. 237, Doc. 238, Doc. 239, and Doc. 240] Sitting Bull and band looked upon by the United States as British Indians 496 [Pg. 496 is part of Doc. 244]

correspondence upon Indian question with Sir Edward Thornton 488 [Pg. 488 includes portions of Doc. 237, Doc. 238, Doc. 239, and Doc. 240], 491 [Pg. 491 includes portions of Doc. 241 and Doc. 242], 496 [Pg. 496 is part of Doc. 244], 500 [Pg. 500 includes portions of Doc. 246 and Doc. 247], 502 [Pg. 502 includes portions of Doc. 248 and Doc. 249], 504 [Pg. 504 includes portions of Doc. 250, Doc. 251, and Doc. 252], 508 [Pg. 508 includes portions of Doc. 256 and Doc. 257], 510 [Pg. 510 includes portions of Doc. 257 and Doc. 258]

Smith, James W., an American citizen; took service in Mexican army; and under Mexican law became a Mexican citizen 815 [Pg. 815 includes portions of Doc. 386 and Doc. 387] status of his minor children born before his entry into the Mexican army 815 [Pg. 815 includes portions of Doc. 386 and Doc. 387], 824 [Pg. 824 includes portions of Doc. 390 and Doc. 391]

Smuggling: Mexico: made a penal offense; copy of law 811 [Pg. 811 includes portions of Doc. 383 and Doc. 384], 815 [Pg. 815 includes portions of Doc. 386 and Doc. 387]

Socialism, Internationalism, and Nihilism: Germany: passage of law for suppression of social democratic movement 351 [Pg. 351 is part of Doc. 184], 394 [Pg. 394 includes portions of Doc. 200, Doc. 201, and Doc. 202]

Italy: influence of, becoming felt in Italy; attempt upon the life of the King; socialistic movements 597 [Pg. 597 is part of Doc. 295], 598 [Pg. 598 is part of Doc. 296], 965 [Pg. 965 includes portions of Doc. 489 and Doc. 490]

Russia: attempt upon the life of the Emperor 913 [Pg. 913 includes portions of Doc. 449 and Doc. 450]

condition of affairs; incendiary fires, &c 917 [Pg. 917 includes portions of Doc. 453 and Doc. 454], 920 [Pg. 920 includes portions of Doc. 457 and Doc. 458]

Switzerland: socialistic movements; attitude upon question of asylum; Switzerland thought to be a refuge for Socialists 965 [Pg. 965 includes portions of Doc. 489 and Doc. 490]

Sommer, Gustave: case of; matriculation resumed by Mexican Government; action taken on State Department passport 819 [Pg. 819 includes portions of Doc. 388 and Doc. 389] (See Foreign Relations, 1878, page 613.)

Sonora: Attack upon mail route in Arizona; refuge sought in Sonora; report of Mr. Consul Willard at Guayra as 734 [Pg. 734 includes portions of Doc. 360 and Doc. 361] railway charter; opposition to its confirmation in Mexican Congress 774 [Pg. 774 includes portions of Doc. 370 and Doc. 371]

hostility manifested toward, because it is designed to connect with the American system of roads 826 [Pg. 826 includes portions of Doc. 392 and Doc. 393]

Soudan: Central Africa: population of 100,000,000; French project to construct railway from Algeria to the Soudan, French, British and Belgian enterprises 722 [Pg. 722 includes portions of Doc. 354 and Doc. 355] report of M. de Freycinet upon project of a railway from Algeria to the Soudan 723 [Pg. 723 includes portions of Doc. 355 and Doc. 356]

railway thought to be practicable 723 [Pg. 723 includes portions of Doc. 355 and Doc. 356]

South American Steamship Company: attempted sale of steamers of said company to Mr. H. L. Stevens, an American citizen 150 [Pg. 150 includes portions of Doc. 98 and Doc. 99], 177 [Pg. 177 is part of Doc. 109] (See Chili, Peru, foreign-built ships.)

Spain: papers returned from the United States because dutiable, under ruling of international postal union bureau at Berne 932 [Pg. 932 includes portions of Doc. 470 and Doc. 471] (See Foreign Relations, 1878, page 798.)

permission granted by Spanish Government to transport Charles W. Angell, extradited in Portugal, across Spanish territory 936 [Pg. 936 includes portions of Doc. 473 and Doc. 474]

question of right of transit of extradited prisoner across neighboring territory receiving the consideration of the United States 941 [Pg. 941 includes portions of Doc. 476, Doc. 477, and Doc. 478]

for discussion of extradition and transit questions, see Foreign Relations, 1878, pages 151, 288, and current volume, pages 251 [Pg. 251 includes portions of Doc. 141 and Doc. 142], 271 [Pg. 271 is part of Doc. 149], 273 [Pg. 273 includes portions of Doc. 150 and Doc. 151], 284 [Pg. 284 includes portions of Doc. 153, Doc. 154, and Doc. 155], 936 [Pg. 936 includes portions of Doc. 473 and Doc. 474], 941 [Pg. 941 includes portions of Doc. 476, Doc. 477, and Doc. 478]

excessive tonnage dues exacted from American vessels at Manila returned. 955 [Pg. 955 includes portions of Doc. 481 and Doc. 482]

opening of the Cortes by the King in person; judicial reforms proposed 941 [Pg. 941 includes portions of Doc. 476, Doc. 477, and Doc. 478]

Cuban question discussed; the reformation of taxes; emancipation of the slaves; assimilation of systems of administration in the Antilles and in the Peninsula; Cuban representatives in the Cortez 941 [Pg. 941 includes portions of Doc. 476, Doc. 477, and Doc. 478]

report of the minister of ultramar upon Cuban reforms; royal decree appointing a commission to formulate measures of reform 952 [Pg. 952 is part of Doc. 480]

report of General Martinez Campos upon the pacification of Cuba 943 [Pg. 943 includes portions of Doc. 478 and Doc. 479]

character and position of General Martinez Campos 943 [Pg. 943 includes portions of Doc. 478 and Doc. 479]

extraordinary taxes in Cuba imposed upon citizens of the United States; the subject to be considered by the Governor-General 954 [Pg. 954 includes portions of Doc. 480 and Doc. 481]

American wheat imported into Spain; sold at a profit; question of a commercial treaty with the United States discussed 938 [Pg. 938 includes portions of Doc. 474 and Doc. 475]

protectionist influences making themselves felt 938 [Pg. 938 includes portions of Doc. 474 and Doc. 475]

question of commercial treaty with the United States discussed by the press of Madrid 939 [Pg. 939 is part of Doc. 476]

Spanish agriculture: need of improved agricultural machinery; the question of steam communication with foreign countries discussed 939 [Pg. 939 is part of Doc. 476]

Standard of value for authenticating invoices in Austria-Hungary: 8-florin piece adopted by Treasury 39 [Pg. 39 includes portions of Doc. 31 and Doc. 32]

Steam communication between the United States and Colombia, and Venezuela; statistics of business to be secured; table of distances 258 [Pg. 258 includes portions of Doc. 144 and Doc. 145], 278 [Pg. 278 is part of Doc. 152], 1044 [Pg. 1044 includes portions of Doc. 533 and Doc. 534]

Steffan, William: naturalized citizen; case brought to attention of legation at Berlin 359 [Pg. 359 includes portions of Doc. 187 and Doc. 188], 367 [Pg. 367 includes portions of Doc. 191 and Doc. 192]

Stevens, H. L.: an American citizen domiciled; attempted purchase and transfer to American flag of the vessels of the South American Steamship Company 150 [Pg. 150 includes portions of Doc. 98 and Doc. 99] views of the Department touching the purchase 177 [Pg. 177 is part of Doc. 109]

(See Chili; Peru; “Ttata”; foreign-built ships.)

Strother, David H., consul-general: report upon political affairs in Mexico based upon consular correspondence 838 [Pg. 838 includes portions of Doc. 397 and Doc. 398]

Suez Canal: report by Mr. Consul-General Farman upon the cost, revenue, expenses, and profits of the canal 993 [Pg. 993 includes portions of Doc. 505, Doc. 506, and Doc. 507] report by Mr. Van Dyck upon the transit of vessels; tonnage; nationality of vessels; receipts, expenses, and profits 1034 [Pg. 1034 includes portions of Doc. 519 and Doc. 520]

canal company to extend to vessels of all flags the rules as to tonnage measurement recently determined upon respecting British vessels 487 [Pg. 487 includes portions of Doc. 236 and Doc. 237]

Sugar: Colombia: reciprocity treaty with the United States discussed by Mr. Dichman 254 [Pg. 254 includes portions of Doc. 142 and Doc. 143], 256 [Pg. 256 is part of Doc. 144], 278 [Pg. 278 is part of Doc. 152]

Hawaiian Islands: report upon the sugar production of the islands; extent of land capable of profitable cultivation 529 [Pg. 529 includes portions of Doc. 261 and Doc. 262]

sugar frauds under reciprocity, treaty: reports of Messrs. Comly and Hastings; frauds unlikely 529 [Pg. 529 includes portions of Doc. 261 and Doc. 262]

Sutter, consul at Acapulco, Mexico: flag fired upon in 1877; commandant of fort at time to lose his commission 802 [Pg. 802 includes portions of Doc. 378 and Doc. 379]

Sweden: Parliament opened by the King; text of speech; an increase of duties recommended; business relations discussed 956 [Pg. 956 includes portions of Doc. 483, Doc. 484, and Doc. 485] new tariff law in force; duties increased; rate of duties 958 [Pg. 958 includes portions of Doc. 485 and Doc. 486]

railway system of; State railways, 1,005 miles; cost, $41,000,000; private railways, 1,210 miles; cost, $61,000,000 960 [Pg. 960 includes portions of Doc. 487 and Doc. 488]

loan of twenty-three million crowns in aid of railways and banks recently authorized; the government to take as security mortgages upon completed railway property 959 [Pg. 959 includes portions of Doc. 486 and Doc. 487]

total government advances since 1855, one hundred and ninety million crowns 959 [Pg. 959 includes portions of Doc. 486 and Doc. 487]

Norway: miles of railway in operation, 656; in construction, 362; cost, $30,000,000; relations of railways to the state 960 [Pg. 960 includes portions of Doc. 487 and Doc. 488]

Mormon question: aid to discourage emigration to be afforded by the Swedish Government 964 [Pg. 964 includes portions of Doc. 488 and Doc. 489]

Switzerland: attitude upon question of political asylum; rumored dissatisfaction of neighboring nations; utterances of Swiss press 965 [Pg. 965 includes portions of Doc. 489 and Doc. 490] socialistic movements; Switzerland thought to be a refuge for socialists 965 [Pg. 965 includes portions of Doc. 489 and Doc. 490]

capital punishment restored; corporal punishment abolished 971 [Pg. 971 includes portions of Doc. 492 and Doc. 493]

system of railroad taxation; no direct taxes by national government;

free transportation of mails; cantons have right of taxation 970 [Pg. 970 includes portions of Doc. 491 and Doc. 492]

pauper emigration to the United States; case of the family Brugger sent by communal authorities of Graben 972 [Pg. 972 includes portions of Doc. 493 and Doc. 494]

difffculties attending expatriation; communal and cantonal action respecting property of Swiss naturalized in the United States 973 [Pg. 973 is part of Doc. 495]

(For Swiss law of expatriation, see Foreign Relations 1876, page 567.)

Szegedin, Hungary: disaster by flood at; details; loss, $3,000,000 57 [Pg. 57 is part of Doc. 44]

T.

Tariff: Austria-Hungary: all duties payable in gold 36 [Pg. 36 includes portions of Doc. 28 and Doc. 29] new tariff protective; special tariff treaties denounced; commercial treaties negotiated with Germany and Italy upon basis of equivalent concessions 40 [Pg. 40 includes portions of Doc. 32 and Doc. 33], 44 [Pg. 44 includes portions of Doc. 36 and Doc. 37]

chaotic condition of public sentiment in Europe respecting tariffs and commercial treaties 42 [Pg. 42 includes portions of Doc. 34 and Doc. 35]

Colombia: reciprocity treaty with the United States suggested; a reduction of 25 per cent, in duties on American dry goods and free admission of beer offered in exchange for a reduction of tariff on tobacco 254 [Pg. 254 includes portions of Doc. 142 and Doc. 143], 256 [Pg. 256 is part of Doc. 144], 278 [Pg. 278 is part of Doc. 152]

Denmark: policy protective; a generaly tariff league against the United States proposed in the Rigs dag 307 [Pg. 307 includes portions of Doc. 165, Doc. 166, and Doc. 167]

France: policy protective and retaliatory; policy illustrated by interview between Mr. Kasson and Mr. Teisserence de Bort 42 [Pg. 42 includes portions of Doc. 34 and Doc. 35], 61 [Pg. 61 includes portions of Doc. 46 and Doc. 47]

Germany: new tariff protective; views of Prince Bismarck; debates in the Reichstag 360 [Pg. 360 includes portions of Doc. 188 and Doc. 189], 365 [Pg. 365 includes portions of Doc. 190 and Doc. 191], 392 [Pg. 392 includes portions of Doc. 199 and Doc. 200], 394 [Pg. 394 includes portions of Doc. 200, Doc. 201, and Doc. 202]

Great Britain: Canadian tariff regulations restrictive of the navigation of the Red River of the North; in conflict with Article XXX, Treaty of Washington 503 [Pg. 503 includes portions of Doc. 249 and Doc. 250], 506 [Pg. 506 includes portions of Doc. 253 and Doc. 254], 507 [Pg. 507 includes portions of Doc. 254 and Doc. 255]

Hawaiian Islands: tariff on cotton goods made up, in violation of Article II, reciprocity treaty with the United States; tariff policy discussed 512 [Pg. 512 is part of Doc. 259], 527 [Pg. 527 is part of Doc. 261], 544 [Pg. 544 includes portions of Doc. 264 and Doc. 265]

Hayti: consular invoice tax in the nature of an increased import duty 546 [Pg. 546 includes portions of Doc. 266 and Doc. 267]

Japan: export duties on certain articles removed; query as to effect upon receipts 638 [Pg. 638 includes portions of Doc. 315 and Doc. 316]

Liberia: policy explained in President’s message 701 [Pg. 701 includes portions of Doc. 347 and Doc. 348]

Mexico: internal taxes increased; increase added to tariff on similar articles 811 [Pg. 811 includes portions of Doc. 383 and Doc. 384], 812 [Pg. 812 includes portions of Doc. 384 and Doc. 385]

Peru: increase of duties on exports and imports 859 [Pg. 859 includes portions of Doc. 411 and Doc. 412]

Portugal: tobacco duties advanced 900 [Pg. 900 includes portions of Doc. 439 and Doc. 440]

Spain: policy of reciprocity treaties discussed; desire of certain interests for protection being felt 938 [Pg. 938 includes portions of Doc. 474 and Doc. 475], 939 [Pg. 939 is part of Doc. 476]

Sweden and Norway: new tariff law in force; duties increased 958 [Pg. 958 includes portions of Doc. 485 and Doc. 486]

United States: tariff policy explained by Mr. Kasson in his interview with the French ambassador at Vienna 61 [Pg. 61 includes portions of Doc. 46 and Doc. 47] recommendation by Mr. Dichman that the government change its policy of a general tariff to that of a conventional or treaty tariff 278 [Pg. 278 is part of Doc. 152]

Tariff commission under presidency of the Secretary of the Treasury, to consider effect of present policy of European nations upon our interests, suggested by Mr. Kasson 42 [Pg. 42 includes portions of Doc. 34 and Doc. 35]

Taxation: Argentine Republic: Banda Oriental light-dues; tax upon American shipping imposed in port of Buenos Ayres 16 [Pg. 16 includes portions of Doc. 14 and Doc. 15], 19 [Pg. 19 includes portions of Doc. 15, Doc. 16, and Doc. 17] national revenue from tariff and internal taxation, $18, 451, 897 21 [Pg. 21 includes portions of Doc. 18 and Doc. 19]

Austria-Hungary: reports upon railway taxation in Austria and Hungary 52 [Pg. 52 includes portions of Doc. 41 and Doc. 42], 54 [Pg. 54 includes portions of Doc. 42 and Doc. 43], 63 [Pg. 63 includes portions of Doc. 47 and Doc. 48]

Belgium: report upon railway taxation 92 [Pg. 92 includes portions of Doc. 60 and Doc. 61]

Colombia: customs and internal taxation 256 [Pg. 256 is part of Doc. 144]

France: influence of tariff policy on revenue 42 [Pg. 42 includes portions of Doc. 34 and Doc. 35], 61 [Pg. 61 includes portions of Doc. 46 and Doc. 47]

Germany: increased taxation; debates in the Reichstag 360 [Pg. 360 includes portions of Doc. 188 and Doc. 189], 365 [Pg. 365 includes portions of Doc. 190 and Doc. 191], 392 [Pg. 392 includes portions of Doc. 199 and Doc. 200], 394 [Pg. 394 includes portions of Doc. 200, Doc. 201, and Doc. 202]

report upon railway taxation 379 [Pg. 379 includes portions of Doc. 194 and Doc. 195]

Great Britain: report upon railway taxation 429 [Pg. 429 includes portions of Doc. 217 and Doc. 218]

Hayti: consular authentication tax; and commercial license tax 546 [Pg. 546 includes portions of Doc. 266 and Doc. 267], 550 [Pg. 550 includes portions of Doc. 267 and Doc. 268]

Italy: proposed abolition of the grist tax 596 [Pg. 596 includes portions of Doc. 293 and Doc. 294], 599 [Pg. 599 includes portions of Doc. 296 and Doc. 297]

Japan: revenue from land tax 656 [Pg. 656 includes portions of Doc. 320 and Doc. 321] export duties removed 638 [Pg. 638 includes portions of Doc. 315 and Doc. 316]

Libera: for extent of taxation, see President’s message 701 [Pg. 701 includes portions of Doc. 347 and Doc. 348]

Mexico: increase of domestic taxation; sum equal to increase added to duties upon similar articles of foreign production 811 [Pg. 811 includes portions of Doc. 383 and Doc. 384], 812 [Pg. 812 includes portions of Doc. 384 and Doc. 385]

Netherlands: system of railway taxation 846 [Pg. 846 includes portions of Doc. 403 and Doc. 404], 847 [Pg. 847 includes portions of Doc. 404 and Doc. 405]

Peru: increase of duties on imports and exports 859 [Pg. 859 includes portions of Doc. 411 and Doc. 412]

Portugal: tobacco duties advanced 900 [Pg. 900 includes portions of Doc. 439 and Doc. 440]

Russia: system of railway taxation 910 [Pg. 910 includes portions of Doc. 446 and Doc. 447]

Spain: question of extraordinary taxes imposed by Government of Cuba upon Americans 955 [Pg. 955 includes portions of Doc. 481 and Doc. 482]

Switzerland: system of railway taxation 970 [Pg. 970 includes portions of Doc. 491 and Doc. 492] Turkish Empire: Egypt: measure of taxation as indicated by revenue 1035 [Pg. 1035 is part of Doc. 521]

Tunis: light-house tax. 1036 [Pg. 1036 includes portions of Doc. 521, Doc. 522, and Doc. 523]

Taylor, Bayard: report of his death; sentiments of regret of German Government 357 [Pg. 357 includes portions of Doc. 185 and Doc. 186] report of meeting of Americans in Berlin in memory of 358 [Pg. 358 includes portions of Doc. 186 and Doc. 187]

copy of Lord Odo Russell’s dispatch upon the death of Mr. Taylor 484 [Pg. 484 includes portions of Doc. 233 and Doc. 234]

Teisserence de Bort, M., French ambassador at Berlin: conversation with Mr. Kasson as to commercial and tariff policy of the United States 61 [Pg. 61 includes portions of Doc. 46 and Doc. 47] the retaliatory tariff policy of France illustrated 61 [Pg. 61 includes portions of Doc. 46 and Doc. 47]

Tejedor, Dr., governor of Buenos Ayres, and General Roca, Presidential candidates in Argentine Republic 24 [Pg. 24 includes portions of Doc. 21 and Doc. 22] calls out the national guard of Buenos Ayres; conflict with national government apprehended. 27 [Pg. 27 is part of Doc. 25]

reply to note from Señor Sarmiento denying his right to call out national guard 28 [Pg. 28 includes portions of Doc. 25 and Doc. 26]

the mobilization of the national guard may lead to secession 34 [Pg. 34 includes portions of Doc. 26 and Doc. 27]

Telegraph: report of director-general of Japanese service 688 [Pg. 688 includes portions of Doc. 337, Doc. 338, and Doc. 339]

Terashima, Mr., Japanese minister for foreign affairs: correspondence with Mr. Bingham concerning quarantine regulations 608 [Pg. 608 includes portions of Doc. 302 and Doc. 303], 647 [Pg. 647 includes portions of Doc. 318 and Doc. 319], 657 [Pg. 657 includes portions of Doc. 321 and Doc. 322] correspondence with ministers of Great Britain and Germany concerning quarantine regulations 665 [Pg. 665 includes portions of Doc. 324 and Doc. 325], 670 [Pg. 670 includes portions of Doc. 327 and Doc. 328]

Tewfik Pasha, Khedive of Egypt: deposition of Ismail Pasha and succession of Tewfik 979 [Pg. 979 includes portions of Doc. 498 and Doc. 499], 1005 [Pg. 1005 includes portions of Doc. 510 and Doc. 511], 1013 [Pg. 1013 includes portions of Doc. 515 and Doc. 516] the Khedive willing to appoint an American member upon the commission of liquidation 1017 [Pg. 1017 includes portions of Doc. 516 and Doc. 517]

Thornton, Sir Edward: notes from 485 [Pg. 485 is part of Doc. 235], 487 [Pg. 487 includes portions of Doc. 236 and Doc. 237], 488 [Pg. 488 includes portions of Doc. 237, Doc. 238, Doc. 239, and Doc. 240], 492 [Pg. 492 includes portions of Doc. 242 and Doc. 243], 498 [Pg. 498 includes portions of Doc. 245 and Doc. 246], 502 [Pg. 502 includes portions of Doc. 248 and Doc. 249], 506 [Pg. 506 includes portions of Doc. 253 and Doc. 254], 508 [Pg. 508 includes portions of Doc. 256 and Doc. 257], 510 [Pg. 510 includes portions of Doc. 257 and Doc. 258]

Times, The London: editorial and letter from, upon American agriculture 486 [Pg. 486 includes portions of Doc. 235 and Doc. 236], 478 [Pg. 478 includes portions of Doc. 231 and Doc. 232]

Tobacco: tariff concession in favor of Colombian tobacco recommended 254 [Pg. 254 includes portions of Doc. 142 and Doc. 143], 256 [Pg. 256 is part of Doc. 144], 278 [Pg. 278 is part of Doc. 152] duties upon, in Portugal increased; details of measure 900 [Pg. 900 includes portions of Doc. 439 and Doc. 440]

Tobacco manufacturers’ bondsmen: protest of Chinese ministers against requirement of real-estate owners as bondsmen for Chinese manufacturers in San Francisco 237 [Pg. 237 is part of Doc. 137] if solvent men, to be accepted whether owners of real estate or not 241 [Pg. 241 includes portions of Doc. 137, Doc. 138, and Doc. 139]

Tonnage tax: Belgian regulations as to admeasurement of vessels: views of the Secretary of the Treasury 112 [Pg. 112 is part of Doc. 64], 114 [Pg. 114 is part of Doc. 65], 115 [Pg. 115 is part of Doc. 66], 116 [Pg. 116 is part of Doc. 67], 117 [Pg. 117 includes portions of Doc. 67 and Doc. 68], 119 [Pg. 119 includes portions of Doc. 68 and Doc. 69] the Moorsom system explained by Secretary of Treasury to be method of ascertaining cubic capacities 116 [Pg. 116 is part of Doc. 67]

the United States rules of admeasurement include in tonnage capacity all permanently closed in spaces available for cargo, stores, passengers, or crew 116 [Pg. 116 is part of Doc. 67]

certificates of admeasurement to be mutually accepted by Austria-Hungary and Germany (Article 11 of treaty of January 1, 1879) 44 [Pg. 44 includes portions of Doc. 36 and Doc. 37]

the Suez Canal Company to extend to all flags rules of admeasurement agreed upon with British Government 487 [Pg. 487 includes portions of Doc. 236 and Doc. 237]

Trade: Prices current of goods exported to the United States to be sent by consuls to appraising officers at ports of destination 2 [Pg. 2 includes portions of Doc. 2 and Doc. 3]

Argentine Republic: threatened conflict between state and national governments; depressing effect upon trade 27 [Pg. 27 is part of Doc. 25]

Austria-Hungary: trade report for 1878; balance in favor of empire about $57,000,000; increase of imports and exports 52 [Pg. 52 includes portions of Doc. 41 and Doc. 42] finances and tariff policy 36 [Pg. 36 includes portions of Doc. 28 and Doc. 29], 39 [Pg. 39 includes portions of Doc. 31 and Doc. 32], 40 [Pg. 40 includes portions of Doc. 32 and Doc. 33], 41 [Pg. 41 includes portions of Doc. 33 and Doc. 34]

trade and traffic treaty with Germany 44 [Pg. 44 includes portions of Doc. 36 and Doc. 37]

trade with Servia and Roumania 58 [Pg. 58 includes portions of Doc. 44 and Doc. 45], 59 [Pg. 59 includes portions of Doc. 45 and Doc. 46]

Belgium: report upon enlargement of trade relation with the United States; gold, silver, and paper currency report 87 [Pg. 87 is part of Doc. 57], 109 [Pg. 109 includes portions of Doc. 62 and Doc. 63]

Brazil: trade in the hands of Great Britain; need of strong American houses in Brazil 132 [Pg. 132 includes portions of Doc. 82 and Doc. 83], 133 [Pg. 133 includes portions of Doc. 83 and Doc. 84], 134 [Pg. 134 includes portions of Doc. 84 and Doc. 85]

Colombia: trade statistics; direct steam communication with the United States advocated; tariff concessions and reciprocity treaty suggested 254 [Pg. 254 includes portions of Doc. 142 and Doc. 143], 256 [Pg. 256 is part of Doc. 144], 258 [Pg. 258 includes portions of Doc. 144 and Doc. 145], 278 [Pg. 278 is part of Doc. 152]

Denmark: commercial depression; bulk of the trade with Germany and Great Britain; exports and imports to and from the United States 303 [Pg. 303 includes portions of Doc. 162 and Doc. 163], 307 [Pg. 307 includes portions of Doc. 165, Doc. 166, and Doc. 167]

France: tariff policy to compel negotiation of reciprocity treaties 42 [Pg. 42 includes portions of Doc. 34 and Doc. 35], 61 [Pg. 61 includes portions of Doc. 46 and Doc. 47]

Germany: trade policy indicated by treaties with Austria-Hungary and Samoa, and by recent protective tariff 44 [Pg. 44 includes portions of Doc. 36 and Doc. 37], 360 [Pg. 360 includes portions of Doc. 188 and Doc. 189], 365 [Pg. 365 includes portions of Doc. 190 and Doc. 191], 388 [Pg. 388 includes portions of Doc. 198 and Doc. 199], 392 [Pg. 392 includes portions of Doc. 199 and Doc. 200], 394 [Pg. 394 includes portions of Doc. 200, Doc. 201, and Doc. 202]

Great Britain: speeches of Lords Beaconsfield, Salisbury, and Derby upon the commercial depression 453 [Pg. 453 includes portions of Doc. 226 and Doc. 227], 465 [Pg. 465 includes portions of Doc. 228 and Doc. 229] report from Mr. Hoppin upon emigration 463 [Pg. 463 includes portions of Doc. 227 and Doc. 228]

statistics of the growth of the cattle trade from the United States 423 [Pg. 423 includes portions of Doc. 214 and Doc. 215]

Hawaiian Islands: notwithstanding reciprocity treaty, import trade in hands of European merchants 542 [Pg. 542 includes portions of Doc. 262 and Doc. 263]

Hayti: need of capital; industrial condition discussed (see Consular authentication-tax and License-tax questions) 560 [Pg. 560 includes portions of Doc. 273 and Doc. 274]

Japan: statement of imports and exports; tariff policy in its effect upon trade 620 [Pg. 620 includes portions of Doc. 311, Doc. 312, and Doc. 313], 638 [Pg. 638 includes portions of Doc. 315 and Doc. 316], 639 [Pg. 639 includes portions of Doc. 316 and Doc. 317], 694 [Pg. 694 includes portions of Doc. 339, Doc. 340, and Doc. 341]

Liberia: report upon coffee production and export; industrial resources considered 699 [Pg. 699 is part of Doc. 347], 701 [Pg. 701 includes portions of Doc. 347 and Doc. 348], 712 [Pg. 712 is part of Doc. 349]

Mexico: the railway question 764 [Pg. 764 includes portions of Doc. 365 and Doc. 366], 774 [Pg. 774 includes portions of Doc. 370 and Doc. 371], 799 [Pg. 799 includes portions of Doc. 375 and Doc. 376], 811 [Pg. 811 includes portions of Doc. 383 and Doc. 384], 826 [Pg. 826 includes portions of Doc. 392 and Doc. 393] the financial question; debt 733 [Pg. 733 includes portions of Doc. 359 and Doc. 360], 764 [Pg. 764 includes portions of Doc. 365 and Doc. 366], 770 [Pg. 770 includes portions of Doc. 366 and Doc. 367], 774 [Pg. 774 includes portions of Doc. 370 and Doc. 371], 822 [Pg. 822 includes portions of Doc. 389 and Doc. 390], 836 [Pg. 836 includes portions of Doc. 395 and Doc. 396]

the tariff question 811 [Pg. 811 includes portions of Doc. 383 and Doc. 384], 812 [Pg. 812 includes portions of Doc. 384 and Doc. 385]

the forced loan question 727 [Pg. 727 includes portions of Doc. 356, Doc. 357, and Doc. 358], 746 [Pg. 746 includes portions of Doc. 362 and Doc. 363], 750 [Pg. 750 is part of Doc. 364], 772 [Pg. 772 includes portions of Doc. 368 and Doc. 369]

table of exports 808 [Pg. 808 includes portions of Doc. 381 and Doc. 382]

statistics as to area, population, taxable property, revenues, &c 834 [Pg. 834 includes portions of Doc. 394 and Doc. 395]

Mexican agricuture discussed 804 [Pg. 804 includes portions of Doc. 380 and Doc. 381]

Portugal: tobacco duties advanced 900 [Pg. 900 includes portions of Doc. 439 and Doc. 440]

Roumania: imports and exports; income; debt; trade chiefly with Austria. 58 [Pg. 58 includes portions of Doc. 44 and Doc. 45] extension of trade with the United States should be studied by consular officers 58 [Pg. 58 includes portions of Doc. 44 and Doc. 45]

Servia: imports and exports; character of agriculture; finances 59 [Pg. 59 includes portions of Doc. 45 and Doc. 46], 82 [Pg. 82 includes portions of Doc. 54 and Doc. 55]

Siam: trade relations discussed 929 [Pg. 929 includes portions of Doc. 467 and Doc. 468]

Spain: importation of American wheat; reciprocity policy advocated 938 [Pg. 938 includes portions of Doc. 474 and Doc. 475], 939 [Pg. 939 is part of Doc. 476]

Sweden and Norway: the transportation system, 959 [Pg. 959 includes portions of Doc. 486 and Doc. 487], 960 [Pg. 960 includes portions of Doc. 487 and Doc. 488]

Egypt: business of the Suez Canal 993 [Pg. 993 includes portions of Doc. 505, Doc. 506, and Doc. 507], 1034 [Pg. 1034 includes portions of Doc. 519 and Doc. 520]

Tunis: opening of railway connection with Algeria 1037 [Pg. 1037 includes portions of Doc. 523 and Doc. 524]

Venezuela: report upon trade relations with the United States 1044 [Pg. 1044 includes portions of Doc. 533 and Doc. 534] contract of Venezuela with M. Eugenio Pereire to develop resources of country 1045 [Pg. 1045 includes portions of Doc. 534 and Doc. 535]

Trade-mark convention concluded with Brazil 129 [Pg. 129 is part of Doc. 80] necessity for trade-mark convention with Denmark suggested 307 [Pg. 307 includes portions of Doc. 165, Doc. 166, and Doc. 167]

reciprocal agreement as to trade-marks between Austria-Hungary and Germany; Article 20 commercial treaty 44 [Pg. 44 includes portions of Doc. 36 and Doc. 37]

Transit passes: subject discussed by Mr. Holcomb with the Chinese foreign office 181 [Pg. 181 is part of Doc. 113], 200 [Pg. 200 includes portions of Doc. 117 and Doc. 118], 208 [Pg. 208 includes portions of Doc. 123 and Doc. 124], 211 [Pg. 211 includes portions of Doc. 124 and Doc. 125], 215 [Pg. 215 includes portions of Doc. 126 and Doc. 127], 219 [Pg. 219 includes portions of Doc. 128, Doc. 129, and Doc. 130]

Transit: right of, across the isthmus of Panama for the troops and extradited prisoners of the United States 251 [Pg. 251 includes portions of Doc. 141 and Doc. 142], 271 [Pg. 271 is part of Doc. 149], 273 [Pg. 273 includes portions of Doc. 150 and Doc. 151], 284 [Pg. 284 includes portions of Doc. 153, Doc. 154, and Doc. 155] protocol signed February 22, 1879, regulating transit (see case of C. G. Scrafford, Foreign Relations, 1878, page 151) 273 [Pg. 273 includes portions of Doc. 150 and Doc. 151]

permission to transport extradited prisoner Angell across Spanish territory accorded by Spanish Governmont 936 [Pg. 936 includes portions of Doc. 473 and Doc. 474], 941 [Pg. 941 includes portions of Doc. 476, Doc. 477, and Doc. 478]

Treasury: requirement that shipping, packing, and other charges upon goods to be shipped to the United States shall be expressed in invoice 1 [Pg. 1 includes portions of Doc. 1 and Doc. 2], 6 [Pg. 6 includes portions of Doc. 6 and Doc. 7], 10 [Pg. 10 includes portions of Doc. 8, Doc. 9, and Doc. 10] requirement that prices current of goods exported to the United States shall be sent by consuls to appraising officers at port of destination 2 [Pg. 2 includes portions of Doc. 2 and Doc. 3] requesting report upon gold and silver coin and bullion and paper currency from diplomatic officers 3 [Pg. 3 includes portions of Doc. 4 and Doc. 5]

Treasury circular as to landing certificates 7 [Pg. 7 is part of Doc. 8]

uling respecting admeasurement of vessels; correspondence with Belgian minister 114 [Pg. 114 is part of Doc. 65], 116 [Pg. 116 is part of Doc. 67], 119 [Pg. 119 includes portions of Doc. 68 and Doc. 69]

circular to collectors of customs respecting Bolivian privateers 125 [Pg. 125 includes portions of Doc. 73 and Doc. 74], 126 [Pg. 126 includes portions of Doc. 74, Doc. 75, Doc. 76, and Doc. 77]

decision respecting tobacco manufacturers’ bondsmen; correspondence with Chinese minister 237 [Pg. 237 is part of Doc. 137], 241 [Pg. 241 includes portions of Doc. 137, Doc. 138, and Doc. 139]

decision respecting Article II of the reciprocity treaty with Hawaiian Islands 527 [Pg. 527 is part of Doc. 261], 544 [Pg. 544 includes portions of Doc. 264 and Doc. 265]

decision respecting printed matter subject to customs duties instead of mail charges 932 [Pg. 932 includes portions of Doc. 470 and Doc. 471]

Treaty: Argentine Republic; boundary convention with Chili 23 [Pg. 23 includes portions of Doc. 20 and Doc. 21], 25 [Pg. 25 includes portions of Doc. 23 and Doc. 24]

Austria-Hungary: text of commercial treaty with Germany 44 [Pg. 44 includes portions of Doc. 36 and Doc. 37] old commercial treaties quite generally denounced; new treaties with Germany and Italy based upon equivalent concessions 40 [Pg. 40 includes portions of Doc. 32 and Doc. 33]

Brazil: trade-mark convention concluded 129 [Pg. 129 is part of Doc. 80]

Chili: secret treaty between Bolivia and Peru 160 [Pg. 160 includes portions of Doc. 101 and Doc. 102], 867 [Pg. 867 includes portions of Doc. 416, Doc. 417, and Doc. 418]

Colombia: reciprocity treaty suggested 254 [Pg. 254 includes portions of Doc. 142 and Doc. 143], 278 [Pg. 278 is part of Doc. 152]

Denmark: extradition treaty under negotiation 306 [Pg. 306 includes portions of Doc. 164 and Doc. 165], 309 [Pg. 309 includes portions of Doc. 168 and Doc. 169]

France: treaty policy of 42 [Pg. 42 includes portions of Doc. 34 and Doc. 35], 61 [Pg. 61 includes portions of Doc. 46 and Doc. 47] Mr. Noyes to visit powers of North Africa; authorized to negotiate treaties of commerce with them 342 [Pg. 342 includes portions of Doc. 180 and Doc. 181]

Germany: text of commercial treaty with Austria-Hungary and debate thereon 44 [Pg. 44 includes portions of Doc. 36 and Doc. 37], 365 [Pg. 365 includes portions of Doc. 190 and Doc. 191] text of treaty with Samoa and debate thereon 381 [Pg. 381 includes portions of Doc. 195 and Doc. 196], 388 [Pg. 388 includes portions of Doc. 198 and Doc. 199]

question as to interpretation of Article XII of commercial convention between the United States and Germany; case of Weinrebe, arrested for smuggling on board the “Mosel” 404 [Pg. 404 includes portions of Doc. 205, Doc. 206, and Doc. 207], 406 [Pg. 406 is part of Doc. 208]

Great Britain: Canadian customs regulations respecting navigation of Red River of the North in conflict with Article XXX, treaty of Washington 503 [Pg. 503 includes portions of Doc. 249 and Doc. 250], 506 [Pg. 506 includes portions of Doc. 253 and Doc. 254], 507 [Pg. 507 includes portions of Doc. 254 and Doc. 255] search of the American bark “Laconia” by British naval officers in the harbor of Zanzibar; violation of Article I, treaty of , 1862 415 [Pg. 415 includes portions of Doc. 213 and Doc. 214], 431 [Pg. 431 includes portions of Doc. 218 and Doc. 219]

Guatemala: reciprocity treaty suggested by President Barrios 142 [Pg. 142 includes portions of Doc. 93 and Doc. 94]

Hawaiian Islands: interpretation of Article II of reciprocity treaty 527 [Pg. 527 is part of Doc. 261], 544 [Pg. 544 includes portions of Doc. 264 and Doc. 265] report upon alleged sugar frauds under reciprocity treaty 529 [Pg. 529 includes portions of Doc. 261 and Doc. 262]

failure of American merchants and manufacturers to avail themselves of benefits of reciprocity treaty 542 [Pg. 542 includes portions of Doc. 262 and Doc. 263]

Hayti: license tax in violation of treaty of 1864 550 [Pg. 550 includes portions of Doc. 267 and Doc. 268], 593 [Pg. 593 includes portions of Doc. 290 and Doc. 291]

Japan: quarantine regulations of Japanese Government held by Germany and Great Britain to be in contravention of treaty rights 647 [Pg. 647 includes portions of Doc. 318 and Doc. 319], 665 [Pg. 665 includes portions of Doc. 324 and Doc. 325], 670 [Pg. 670 includes portions of Doc. 327 and Doc. 328] the United States holds to a different interpretation 604 [Pg. 604 includes portions of Doc. 300 and Doc. 301], 608 [Pg. 608 includes portions of Doc. 302 and Doc. 303], 647 [Pg. 647 includes portions of Doc. 318 and Doc. 319], 657 [Pg. 657 includes portions of Doc. 321 and Doc. 322]

text of treaty between Japan and Corea 696 [Pg. 696 includes portions of Doc. 343, Doc. 344, and Doc. 345]

Liberia: adjournment of boundary commission without agreement as to limits 717 [Pg. 717 includes portions of Doc. 350 and Doc. 351]

Mexico: Yucatan export bounty upon hemp shipped to Europe in contravention of treaty; expiration of law 796 [Pg. 796 includes portions of Doc. 372 and Doc. 373]

Peru: text of secret treaty of alliance with Bolivia 867 [Pg. 867 includes portions of Doc. 416, Doc. 417, and Doc. 418]

Roumania and Servia: Mr. Kasson instructed to negotiate commercial treaties with 49 [Pg. 49 includes portions of Doc. 37 and Doc. 38], 79 [Pg. 79 includes portions of Doc. 50 and Doc. 51], 81 [Pg. 81 includes portions of Doc. 52 and Doc. 53] treaty relations of 59 [Pg. 59 includes portions of Doc. 45 and Doc. 46]

Russia: summary of treaty of peace with Turkey signed at Constantinople February 8, 1879 978 [Pg. 978 includes portions of Doc. 497 and Doc. 498]

Spain: subject of a commercial treaty with the United States discussed by the press of Madrid 939 [Pg. 939 is part of Doc. 476]

Turkey; summary of treaty of peace with Russia 978 [Pg. 978 includes portions of Doc. 497 and Doc. 498] judicial jurisdiction of consul-general at Cairo in criminal cases under treaty reservation 987 [Pg. 987 includes portions of Doc. 502 and Doc. 503], 990 [Pg. 990 includes portions of Doc. 503, Doc. 504, and Doc. 505], 1010 [Pg. 1010 includes portions of Doc. 512 and Doc. 513], 1012 [Pg. 1012 is part of Doc. 514]

Trenton, United States steamer: model of, commended by Mr. Thomas Brassey, M. P. 429 [Pg. 429 includes portions of Doc. 217 and Doc. 218]

Tseng, Marquis: appointed Chinese minister to England 208 [Pg. 208 includes portions of Doc. 123 and Doc. 124]

Tugs “Champion,” “Winston,” “J. H. Martin”: their right to aid disabled American vessels in Canadian waters denied by Canada 481 [Pg. 481 includes portions of Doc. 232 and Doc. 233] tug “Owen” and her tow, case of; necessity of agreement as to reciprocal right to aid disabled vessels on the lakes 498 [Pg. 498 includes portions of Doc. 245 and Doc. 246]

Tukish Empire Turkey: abstract of treaty of peace with Russia signed at Constantinople, February 8, 1879 (for treaties of San Stefano and Berlin, to which this treaty is supplementary, see Foreign Relations, 1878, pages 865, 894) 978 [Pg. 978 includes portions of Doc. 497 and Doc. 498] visit of British ambassador to Syria 990 [Pg. 990 includes portions of Doc. 503, Doc. 504, and Doc. 505]

reawakening of religious zeal among Mohammedans; an illustration 993 [Pg. 993 includes portions of Doc. 505, Doc. 506, and Doc. 507]

deposition of Ismail Pasha, Khedive of Egypt, and review of his reign by Mr. Maynard 979 [Pg. 979 includes portions of Doc. 498 and Doc. 499], 982 [Pg. 982 is part of Doc. 501]

review of his reign by Mr. Farman 1005 [Pg. 1005 includes portions of Doc. 510 and Doc. 511]

affairs in Eastern Roumelia: administration of Aleko Pasha Vogorides; letter from the Spectator 984 [Pg. 984 is part of Doc. 502]

Egypt: proceedings of Great Britain and France which led to the deposition of Ismail Pasha 996 [Pg. 996 includes portions of Doc. 508 and Doc. 509] deposition of Ismail Pasha and investiture of Tewfik Pasha as Khedive of Egypt 1005 [Pg. 1005 includes portions of Doc. 510 and Doc. 511], 1008 [Pg. 1008 includes portions of Doc. 511 and Doc. 512], 1013 [Pg. 1013 includes portions of Doc. 515 and Doc. 516]

reports upon the Suez Canal: its cost; receipts; expenses; profits; capital stock’; dividends; number of vessels using canal 993 [Pg. 993 includes portions of Doc. 505, Doc. 506, and Doc. 507], 1034 [Pg. 1034 includes portions of Doc. 519 and Doc. 520]

revenue and expenses of Egyptian Government; debt charge 1035 [Pg. 1035 is part of Doc. 521]

re-establishment of the comptrollership; appointment of Messrs. Baring and de Blignieres 1033 [Pg. 1033 includes portions of Doc. 518 and Doc. 519]

documents relating to the pacification of the Levant in 1840–1841 1018 [Pg. 1018 includes portions of Doc. 517 and Doc. 518]

Tunis: the United States consents to light-house tax on shipping 1036 [Pg. 1036 includes portions of Doc. 521, Doc. 522, and Doc. 523]

opening of Tunis section of Algerian railway 1037 [Pg. 1037 includes portions of Doc. 523 and Doc. 524]

Türr: General Stephen Türr; one of the original parties interested in the de Gorgoza-Türr-Wyse-de Lesseps Panama Canal contract 297 [Pg. 297 includes portions of Doc. 161 and Doc. 162]

Typhus fever raging in Morocco; great loss of life; Europeans as well as natives sufferers 840 [Pg. 840 includes portions of Doc. 398 and Doc. 399] so-called Russian plague; not the plague, but malignant typhus 912 [Pg. 912 includes portions of Doc. 447 and Doc. 448]

U.

Undervaluation: consul to note market-price upon invoice when undervaluation is suspected 6 [Pg. 6 includes portions of Doc. 6 and Doc. 7]

Unit of value and account: international; adoption recommended by Mr. Kasson 39 [Pg. 39 includes portions of Doc. 31 and Doc. 32]

United States: Interest felt in Liberia; development of relations between the two countries discussed 341 [Pg. 341 includes portions of Doc. 179 and Doc. 180], 712 [Pg. 712 is part of Doc. 349], 718 [Pg. 718 includes portions of Doc. 351, Doc. 352, and Doc. 353], 722 [Pg. 722 includes portions of Doc. 354 and Doc. 355], 727 [Pg. 727 includes portions of Doc. 356, Doc. 357, and Doc. 358]

Expatriation: full recognition of the right, by the United States 814 [Pg. 814 includes portions of Doc. 385 and Doc. 386], 815 [Pg. 815 includes portions of Doc. 386 and Doc. 387], 824 [Pg. 824 includes portions of Doc. 390 and Doc. 391] status of minors abroad whose parents were American citizens 815 [Pg. 815 includes portions of Doc. 386 and Doc. 387]

passports maybe issued to minors of discreet age, unaccompanied by their parents 814 [Pg. 814 includes portions of Doc. 385 and Doc. 386]

Uruguay: constitutional form of government restored; Colonel Latorre elected president 1038 [Pg. 1038 includes portions of Doc. 525 and Doc. 526]

V.

Venezuela: attempt of Venezuela to close Puerto Cabello by decree while in hands of insurgents 1038 [Pg. 1038 includes portions of Doc. 525 and Doc. 526] approval of protest of Mr. Minister Baker 1040 [Pg. 1040 includes portions of Doc. 527 and Doc. 528]

entry of General Guzman Blanco and revolutionary army into Caracas 1040 [Pg. 1040 includes portions of Doc. 527 and Doc. 528], 1041 [Pg. 1041 includes portions of Doc. 528, Doc. 529, and Doc. 530]

action of congress of plenipotentiaries assembled by decree of General Guzman Blanco 1041 [Pg. 1041 includes portions of Doc. 528, Doc. 529, and Doc. 530], 1043 [Pg. 1043 includes portions of Doc. 532 and Doc. 533]

programme of General Guzman Blanco’s visit to Europe 1043 [Pg. 1043 includes portions of Doc. 532 and Doc. 533]

translation of the Pereire contract; grants for railways, roads, harbors, canals, mines, banks, &c 1045 [Pg. 1045 includes portions of Doc. 534 and Doc. 535]

commercial relationship of Venezuela; trade possibilities; trade with the United States 1044 [Pg. 1044 includes portions of Doc. 533 and Doc. 534]

Vessels of belligerents sold to citizens of the United States: a prize court of either belligerent may inquire into good faith of sale 894 [Pg. 894 includes portions of Doc. 435, Doc. 436, and Doc. 437] consul’s certificate to bill of sale only prima facie evidence 894 [Pg. 894 includes portions of Doc. 435, Doc. 436, and Doc. 437] (See Chili; Peru; foreign-built vessels.) necessity for reciprocal agreement between Canada and the United States respecting aid to wrecked or disabled vessels in waters of either country 481 [Pg. 481 includes portions of Doc. 232 and Doc. 233], 498 [Pg. 498 includes portions of Doc. 245 and Doc. 246]

copy of act of Congress authorizing such reciprocal agreement 505 [Pg. 505 includes portions of Doc. 252 and Doc. 253]

views of the Government of Canada upon the subject 498 [Pg. 498 includes portions of Doc. 245 and Doc. 246] (See Admeasurement of vessels; Tonnage tax; Frontier relations.)

Vienna: report upon the municipal government of, by Mr. Kasson 64 [Pg. 64 includes portions of Doc. 48 and Doc. 49] report upon the police system of, by Mr. Delaplaine 74 [Pg. 74 includes portions of Doc. 49 and Doc. 50]

Vigil, Hon. J. M.: comments upon report of Mr. Giberts upon administration of affairs in Lower California 825 [Pg. 825 includes portions of Doc. 391 and Doc. 392]

Vogorides, Aleko Pasha, governor-general of East Roumelia: article from the London Spectator upon his administration 984 [Pg. 984 is part of Doc. 502]

W.

Wackerman, Joseph, naturalized citizen: case brought to attention of the legation at Berlin 367 [Pg. 367 includes portions of Doc. 191 and Doc. 192]

Waddington, M.: secretary of state for foreign affairs of France, and premier of the Grévy cabinet 334 [Pg. 334 is part of Doc. 174]

Wallner, Alex. F., naturalized citizen: case brought to attention of legation at Berlin 367 [Pg. 367 includes portions of Doc. 191 and Doc. 192]

Washington: treaty of; Canadian regulations restricting navigation of Red River of the North in conflict with Article XXX of treaty 503 [Pg. 503 includes portions of Doc. 249 and Doc. 250], 506 [Pg. 506 includes portions of Doc. 253 and Doc. 254], 507 [Pg. 507 includes portions of Doc. 254 and Doc. 255] discussion of Fortune Bay fishery claims by London Daily News 451 [Pg. 451 includes portions of Doc. 225 and Doc. 226]

Wehrung, George, naturalized citizen: case brought to attention of legation at Berlin 367 [Pg. 367 includes portions of Doc. 191 and Doc. 192]

Weibezahl, C. A. F., naturalized citizen: case brought to attention of legation at Berlin 367 [Pg. 367 includes portions of Doc. 191 and Doc. 192]

Weights and measures: international bureau of, ready to make comparison of old with new standards 311 [Pg. 311 includes portions of Doc. 170 and Doc. 171] second annual report of bureau; report for 1878 312 [Pg. 312 includes portions of Doc. 171 and Doc. 172]

Weil, Gustave, naturalized citizen: case of brought to attention of legation at Berlin (see Foreign Relations, 1878, page 216.) 367 [Pg. 367 includes portions of Doc. 191 and Doc. 192]

Weinrebe, Carl, cook on German vessel “Mose”: question as to whether his arrest for smuggling was in violation of Article XII, consular convention with Germany 404 [Pg. 404 includes portions of Doc. 205, Doc. 206, and Doc. 207] his arrest not in contravention of treaty 406 [Pg. 406 is part of Doc. 208]

Wells, Fargo & Co.: attack of Mexican depredators upon their stages in Arizona 734 [Pg. 734 includes portions of Doc. 360 and Doc. 361]

Willard, Mr. A., consul at Guaymas: correspondence with Mr. Foster upon Wilson, Mr. Rivers: attitude toward the government of the Khedive 990 [Pg. 990 includes portions of Doc. 503, Doc. 504, and Doc. 505]

Mexican depredations in Arizona 734 [Pg. 734 includes portions of Doc. 360 and Doc. 361]

Wrecked and disabled vessels in American and Canadian waters: Canada urged to agree to principle of reciprocal aid 481 [Pg. 481 includes portions of Doc. 232 and Doc. 233] necessity for agreement shown; cases of wrecked American vessels to whom American aid was prohibited 481 [Pg. 481 includes portions of Doc. 232 and Doc. 233], 498 [Pg. 498 includes portions of Doc. 245 and Doc. 246]

views of Canadian Government 498 [Pg. 498 includes portions of Doc. 245 and Doc. 246]

act of Congress of June 19, 1878; Canada responsible for delay in carrying principle of reciprocal aid into effect 505 [Pg. 505 includes portions of Doc. 252 and Doc. 253]

Wyse-de Lesseps Panama Canal concession: copy of contract 243 [Pg. 243 includes portions of Doc. 139, Doc. 140, and Doc. 141] project discussed by Mr. Minister Dichman in its national and international relationships 290 [Pg. 290 includes portions of Doc. 159 and Doc. 160], 295 [Pg. 295 includes portions of Doc. 160 and Doc. 161], 297 [Pg. 297 includes portions of Doc. 161 and Doc. 162]

history of the De Gorgoza-Türr-Wyse-de Lesseps contract 297 [Pg. 297 includes portions of Doc. 161 and Doc. 162]

Y.

Yokohama (see Kanagawa and Japan.)

Yucatan: discriminating duty in favor of hemp exported to Europe; expiration of law (see Foreign Relations 1878, page 661) 796 [Pg. 796 includes portions of Doc. 372 and Doc. 373]

Z.

Zanzibar: search of the American bark “Laconia” in the harbor of Zanzibar in contravention of Article I, treaty of 1862, by Captain Earl, of the British Navy 415 [Pg. 415 includes portions of Doc. 213 and Doc. 214] regret expressed by the British Government 431 [Pg. 431 includes portions of Doc. 218 and Doc. 219]

Zimmer, Martin, naturalized citizen: case of, brought to attention of legation at Berlin 367 [Pg. 367 includes portions of Doc. 191 and Doc. 192]
