Foreign Relations of the United States, 1969–1976, Volume E–12, Documents on East and Southeast Asia, 1973–1976 (U.S. Department of State, Office of the Historian, 2011)
Public domain. Sourced from the U.S. Department of State, Office of the Historian: Foreign Relations of the United States (https://history.state.gov/historicaldocuments/frus1969-76ve12).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

================================================================================

Documents on East and Southeast Asia, 1973–1976 (Foreign Relations of the United States, 1969–1976, Volume E–12)

Title pageForeign Relations of the United States, 1969–1976

Volume E–12

Documents on East and Southeast Asia, 1973–1976

United States Government Printing Office
Washington

U.S. Department of State
Office of the Historian
Bureau of Public Affairs

This ebook was generated on June 1, 2018.
Please visit the Office of the Historian ebooks web page to access updates.

About the Electronic Edition About the Electronic Edition

The Office of the Historian at the U.S. Department of State has embarked on a program to release an ebook edition of the Foreign Relations of the United States (FRUS) series, which was established in 1861. Far lighter and more portable than printed editions of FRUS, the ebook edition offers the full content of each volume and makes use of the full-text search and other reading features of most ebook devices and applications, including bookmarking and note-taking. Unlike the web-based edition of FRUS, the ebook edition, once downloaded, can be accessed even without internet connectivity.

In creating the FRUS ebook edition, we endeavored to maintain fidelity with the original printed edition. One challenge in this respect is representing original page numbers from printed editions in ebooks. For readers who need to cite material in this ebook, we recommend citing document numbers instead of page numbers, since document numbers are persistent, media-neutral identifiers. In older FRUS volumes (before the subseries covering the Johnson administration), where cross references use page numbers rather than document numbers, we append to each page number a bracketed list of the document numbers that correspond to it.

The Office of the Historian has worked to ensure that this ebook is error-free and works on a broad range of devices. Please email history_ebooks@state.gov with any feedback.

To learn about updates to this ebook, other ebooks, and the ebook initiative in general, visit our ebooks homepage, and follow us on Twitter at @HistoryAtState and Tumblr at HistoryAtState.

Office of the Historian
Bureau of Public Affairs
U.S. Department of State
June 2018

Documents on East and Southeast Asia, 1973–1976 (Foreign Relations of the United States, 1969–1976, Volume E–12)Contents

Preface

Sources

List of Terms & Abbreviations

List of Persons

Note on U.S. Covert Action Programs

Documents on East and Southeast AsiaChapter I: East Asia and Pacific Regional, SEATO, ASEAN (Documents 1-25)

Chapter II: Australia, New Zealand, ANZUS, Papua New Guinea (Documents 26-63)

Chapter III: Indochina (Documents 64-95)

Chapter IV: Indonesia and the East Timor Crisis (Documents 96-164)

Chapter V: Japan (Documents 165-229)

Chapter VI: Korean Peninsula (Documents 230-290)

Chapter VII: Malaysia and Singapore (Documents 291-302)

Chapter VIII: Pacific Islands (Documents 303-313)

Chapter IX: Philippines (Documents 314-362)

Chapter X: Thailand and Burma (Documents 363-425)

Errata

Preface Preface

The Foreign Relations of the United States series presents the official documentary historical record of major foreign policy decisions and significant diplomatic activity of the United States Government. The Historian of the Department of State is charged with the responsibility for the preparation of the Foreign Relations series. The staff of the Office of the Historian, Bureau of Public Affairs, under the direction of the General Editor of the Foreign Relations series, plans, researches, compiles, and edits the volumes in the series. Secretary of State Frank B. Kellogg first promulgated official regulations codifying specific standards for the selection and editing of documents for the series on March 26, 1925. These regulations, with minor modifications, guided the series through 1991.

Public Law 102–138, the Foreign Relations Authorization Act, established a new statutory charter for the preparation of the series which was signed by President George H.W. Bush on October 28, 1991. Section 198 of P.L. 102–138 added a new Title IV to the Department of State’s Basic Authorities Act of 1956 (22 U.S.C. 4351, et seq.).

The statute requires that the Foreign Relations series be a thorough, accurate, and reliable record of major United States foreign policy decisions and significant United States diplomatic activity. The volumes of the series should include all records needed to provide comprehensive documentation of major foreign policy decisions and actions of the United States Government. The statute also confirms the editing principles established by Secretary Kellogg: The Foreign Relations series is guided by the principles of historical objectivity and accuracy; records should not be altered or deletions made without indicating in the published text that a deletion has been made; the published record should omit no facts that were of major importance in reaching a decision; and nothing should be omitted for the purposes of concealing a defect in policy. The statute also requires that the Foreign Relations series be published not more than 30 years after the events recorded.

Structure and Scope of the Foreign Relations Series

This volume is part of a subseries of volumes of the Foreign Relations series that document the most important issues in the foreign policy of the administrations of Richard M. Nixon and Gerald R. Ford. The subseries presents a documentary record of major foreign policy decisions and actions of both administrations. This specific volume documents the U.S. policy towards East and Southeast Asia, 1973–1976. Although this volume is meant to stand on its own, it is best read in conjunction with two other volumes: Foreign Relations, 1969–1976, Vol. XVIII, China, 1973–1976; Vol. X, Vietnam, January 1973–May 1975.

Focus of Research and Principles of Selection for Foreign Relations, 1973–1976, Volume E–12

This volume includes documentation on U.S. relations with Japan, North and South Korea, Indonesia, Malaysia, Singapore, Australia, New Zealand, ANZUS, Papua New Guinea, the Pacific Islands, the Philippines, SEATO, and ASEAN from 1973 through 1976. The chapter on Vietnam, Cambodia, and Laos covers the period from May 1975 through 1976. A chapter on Thailand and Burma will be added once it has been fully cleared for publication.

U.S. policy toward East and Southeast Asia during these years sought to rebalance U.S. policy following the subordination of other concerns to the waging of the Vietnam War. The policies of the Nixon and Ford administrations were also affected by the evolving Sino-American relationship, the Nixon doctrine, and the challenge of pursuing economic growth within a fluctuating international monetary system. During 1975 and 1976, the United States spent a great deal of time reassuring its Asian allies of its commitment to remain engaged in the region, many of whom expressed alarm following the collapse of pro-American governments in South Vietnam, Cambodia, and Laos.

In regard to Japan, U.S. and Japanese diplomats remained preoccupied with economic issues, particularly trade disputes, monetary instability, and concern over the international supply of oil, although newer issues, such as environmental policy and space cooperation, assumed a more prominent place within the bilateral relationship. In Korea, the United States sought to modernize the ROK military and regularize its presence on the peninsula, which still rested upon institutions from the era of the Korean War.

Indonesia, Malaysia, and Singapore posed a variety of challenges to American diplomacy. U.S. aid to Indonesia became a topic of debate within the U.S. government, due to budgetary pressures and congressional questions about the Indonesian occupation of East Timor. U.S. relations with Malaysia focused mainly upon expediting military and development aid to that country. Malaysia’s stability received attention in discussions between the United States and Singapore, especially following the collapse of South Vietnam. Singaporean Prime Minister Lee Kuan Yew met repeatedly with U.S. officials, mainly because they found him a good sounding board for American policies toward East Asia.

Disagreements with Australia and New Zealand put strains upon the ANZUS alliance. Australian criticism of U.S. bases and the election of Jim Cairn as Australia’s Deputy Prime Minister produced concern within the U.S. foreign policy establishment. Meanwhile, the governments of the United States and New Zealand clashed over the latter’s desire for a South Pacific nuclear free zone.

U.S.-Philippine relations became increasingly difficult. At the beginning of 1973, U.S. policy-makers were watchful of the challenges posed by the Philippine insurgency, the growing authoritarianism of President Ferdinand Marcos, the capricious behavior of Imelda Marcos, and border disputes involving the Philippines and its neighbors.

Events in Indochina greatly affected U.S. relations with the rest of East Asia. This volume chronicles U.S. interactions with Cambodia, Laos, and Vietnam, from the evacuation of Saigon and Phnom Penh until the end of 1976. Meanwhile, the United States’ declining presence in Indochina contributed to a modification of its defense posture and alliances with Asian countries. Among the most important of the changes during this period were the dissolution of SEATO and the establishment of ASEAN.

Editorial Methodology

The documents are presented chronologically according to Washington time. Memoranda of conversation are placed according to the time and date of the conversation, rather than the date the memorandum was drafted.

Editorial treatment of the documents published in the Foreign Relations series follows Office style guidelines, supplemented by guidance from the General Editor and the chief technical editor. The original document is reproduced as exactly as possible, including marginalia or other notations, which are described in the footnotes. Texts are transcribed and printed according to accepted conventions for the publication of historical documents in the limitations of modern typography. A heading has been supplied by the editors for each document included in the volume. Spelling, capitalization, and punctuation are retained as found in the original text, except that obvious typographical errors are silently corrected. Other mistakes and omissions in the documents are corrected by bracketed insertions: a correction is set in italic type; an addition in roman type. Words or phrases underlined in the source text are printed in italics. Abbreviations and contractions are preserved as found in the original text, and a list of abbreviations is included in the front matter of each volume.

Bracketed insertions are also used to indicate omitted text that deals with an unrelated subject (in roman type) or that remains classified after declassification review (in italic type). The amount and, where possible, the nature of the material not declassified has been noted by indicating the number of lines of pages of text that were omitted. Entire documents withheld for declassification purposes have been accounted for and are listed by headings, source notes, and number of pages not declassified in their chronological place. All brackets that appear in the original document are so identified by footnotes. All ellipses are in the original documents.

The first footnote to each document indicates the source of the document, original classification, distribution, and drafting information. This note also provides the background of important documents and policies and indicates whether the President or his major policy advisers read the document.

Editorial notes and additional annotation summarize pertinent material not printed in the volume, indicate the location of additional documentary sources, provide references to important related documents printed in other volumes, describe key events, and provide summaries of and citations to public statements that supplement and elucidate the printed documents. Information derived from memoirs and other first hand accounts has been used when appropriate to supplement or explicate the official record.

The numbers in the index refer to document numbers rather than to page numbers.

Advisory Committee on Historical Diplomatic Documentation

The Advisory Committee on Historical Diplomatic Documentation, established under the Foreign Relations statute, reviews records, advises, and makes recommendations concerning the Foreign Relations series. The Advisory Committee monitors the overall compilation and editorial process of the series and advises on all aspects of the preparation and declassification of the series. The Advisory Committee does not necessarily review the contents of individual volumes in the series, but it makes recommendations on issues that come to its attention and reviews volumes, as it deems necessary to fulfill its advisory and statutory obligations.

Presidential Records and Materials Preservation Act Review

Under the terms of the Presidential Records and Materials Preservation Act (PMRPA) of 1974 (44 U.S.C. 2111 note), the National Archives and Records Administration (NARA) has custody of the Nixon Presidential historical materials. The PRMPA and implementing public access regulations require NARA to review for additional restrictions in order to ensure the protection of the privacy rights of former Nixon White House officials, since these officials were not given the opportunity to separate their personal materials from public papers. Thus, the PRMPA and implementing public access regulations require NARA formally to notify the Nixon Estate and former Nixon White House staff members that the agency is scheduling for public release Nixon White House historical materials. The Nixon Estate and former White House staff members have 30 days to contest the release of Nixon historical materials in which they were a participant or are mentioned. Further, the MRMPA and implementing regulations require NARA to segregate and return to the creator of files private and personal materials. All Foreign Relations volumes that include materials from NARA’s Nixon Presidential Materials Project are processed and released in accordance with the PRMPA.

Nixon White House Tapes

Access to the Nixon White House tape recordings is governed by the terms of the PRMPA and an access agreement with the Office of Presidential Libraries of the National Archives and Records Administration and the Nixon Estate. In February 1971, President Nixon initiated a voice activated taping system in the Oval Office of the White House and, subsequently, in the President’s Office in the Executive Office Building, Camp David, the Cabinet Room, and White House and Camp David telephones. The audiotapes include conversations of President Nixon with his Assistant for National Security Affairs, Henry Kissinger, other White House aides, Secretary of State Rogers, other Cabinet officers, members of Congress, and key foreign officials. The clarity of the voices on the tape recordings is often very poor, but the editor has made every effort to verify the accuracy of the transcripts produced here. Readers are advised that the tape recording is the official document; the transcript represents an interpretation of that document. Through the use of digital audio and other advances in technology, the Office of the Historian has been able to enhance the tape recordings and over time produce more accurate transcripts. The result is that some transcripts printed here may differ from transcripts of the same conversations printed in previous Foreign Relations volumes. The most accurate transcripts possible, however, cannot substitute for listening to the recordings. Readers are urged to consult the recordings themselves for a full appreciation of those aspects of the conversations that cannot be captured in a transcript, such as the speakers’ inflections and emphases that may convey nuances of meaning, as well as the larger context of the discussion.

Declassification Review

The Office of Information Programs and Services, Bureau of Administration, conducted the declassification review for the Department of State of the documents published in this volume. The review was conducted in accordance with the standards set forth in Executive Order 12958, as amended, on Classified National Security Information and applicable laws.

The principle guiding declassification review is to release all information, subject only to the current requirements of national security as embodied in law and regulation. Declassification decisions entailed concurrence of the appropriate geographic and functional bureaus in the Department of State, other concerned agencies of the U.S. Government, and the appropriate foreign governments regarding specific documents of those governments. The declassification review of this volume, which began in 2007 and was completed in 2010, resulted in the decision to withhold 4 documents in full, excise a paragraph or more in 11 documents, and make minor excisions of less than a paragraph in 23 documents.

The Office of the Historian is confident, on the basis of the research conducted in preparing this volume, and as a result of the declassification review process described above, that the documentation and editorial notes presented here provide an accurate and comprehensive account of the Nixon and Ford administrations' policy toward East and Southeast Asia from 1973 until 1976.

Acknowledgments

The editors wish to acknowledge the assistance of officials at the Nixon Presidential Materials Project of the National Archives and Records Administration (Archives II), at College Park, Maryland. The editors wish to express gratitude to the Richard Nixon Estate for allowing access to the Nixon Presidential recordings and the Richard Nixon Library & Birthplace for facilitating that access. Thanks are due to the Historical Staff of the Central Intelligence Agency, who were helpful in arranging full access to the files of the Central Intelligence Agency. John Haynes of the Library of Congress was responsible for expediting access to the Kissinger Papers. The editors were able to use the Kissinger Papers, including the transcripts of telephone conversations, with the kind permission of Henry Kissinger. The editors would like to also thank Sandy Meagher for her valuable assistance in expediting the use of files of the Department of Defense.

Bradley Coleman, David Goldman, and David Nickles collected documentation for the volume. David Nickles selected documentation and edited the volume under the supervision of Edward C. Keefer, former General Editor of the Foreign Relations series. Dean Weatherhead coordinated the declassification review, under the supervision of Susan C. Weetman, Chief of the Declassification and Publishing Division. Chris Tudda and Mandy A. Chalou scanned the documents. Joseph Wicentowski devised the internet format. Mandy A. Chalou did the technical editing and prepared the documents for electronic publication.

Ambassador Edward Brynn
Acting Historian
Bureau of Public Affairs
March 3, 2011

Sources Sources

Unpublished Sources

Department of State

Central Files. See National Archives and Records Administration below.

Secretary of State Henry Kissinger Telephone Conversations (Telcons), Electronic Reading Room, Kissinger telephone conversations.

National Archives and Records Administration, College Park, Maryland

RG 59, General Records of the Department of State Central Foreign Policy Files

Entry 5027, Lot 77 D 114, Policy Planning Staff (S/P), Director’s Files (Winston Lord) 1969-1977

Entry 5177, Lot 78D433, Secretary of State Kissinger’s Staff Meetings

Entry 5403, Records of Secretary of State Kissinger

Entry 5413, Bureau of East Asian and Pacific Affairs, Office of Japanese Affairs, 1960-1975

Subject-Number Indexed Central Files Top Secret Subject-Numeric Files, 1970-73

Record Group 218, Records of the Joint Chiefs of Staff General George S. Brown Papers

East Asia Bureau Files

Transcripts of Secretary of State Kissinger’s Staff Meetings

Kissinger Telephone Conversations

Ford Library

National Security Adviser Agency Files

Backchannel Messages

Brent Scowcroft Daily Work Files

Country Files

Kissinger Reports

Kissinger-Scowcroft West Wing Office Files

Memoranda of Conversations

National Security Adviser Memcons

National Security Decision Memoranda and Study Memoranda

NSC Institutional Files (H-Files)

NSC Meetings Files

NSC Staff for East Asia and Pacific Affairs: Convenience Files (also known as “NSC East Asian and Pacific Affairs Staff: Files”)

NSSMs and NSDMs

Presidential Agency File

Presidential Briefing Material for VIP Visits

Presidential Correspondence with Foreign Leaders

Presidential Country Files for East Asian and Pacific Affairs (also known as “Presidential Country Files for East Asia and the Pacific”)

Presidential Handwriting File

Presidential Subject File

Scowcroft Daily Work Files

SRG Meeting Minutes

Trip Briefing Books and Cables for President Ford

Trip Briefing Books and Cables for HAK

President’s Daily Diary

White House Central Files Presidential Name File

Presidential Subject File

Personal and Staff Papers John O. Marsh Files

Philip Buchen Files

Nixon Presidential Materials Project

Henry Kissinger Telephone Conversation Transcripts

National Security Council Files

Agency Files

Backchannel Messages

Country Files

Files for the President

Henry A. Kissinger Office Files

Institutional Files (H-Files)

Institutional Materials (NSC Institutional Papers)

Presidential Correspondence

Presidential/HAK Memoranda of Conversation

Subject Files

Unfiled Material

VIP Visits

White House Central Files

President’s Daily Diary

White House Special Files

Subject Files

White House Tapes

Central Intelligence Agency

Executive Registry Subject Files

Job 79M00467A

Job 80M01048A

National Intelligence Council Job 79R01012A

Job 79R01099A

Job 91R00884R

Job 79R01142A

Office of Current Intelligence Job 79R01142A

Job 79T00863A

Job 80T00039A

Library of Congress, Manuscript Division

Papers of Henry A. Kissinger

Papers of James Schlesinger

Washington National Records Center

Record Group 330, Records of the Department of Defense

OSD/ISA Files: FRC 330-76-0078 Top Secret Files of the Office of the Assistance Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs, 1972-1975

OSD/ISA Files: FRC 330-76-0079 Secret Files of the Office of the Assistance Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs, 1972-1975

OASD/ISA Files: FRC 330-76-117 Secret Records of the Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs, 1973

OASD/ISA Files: FRC 330-77-0054 Secret Records of the Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs, 1974

OASD/ISA Files: FRC 330-77-0063 Top Secret Records of the Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs, 1974

OSD Files: FRC 330-78-0001 Secret Records of the Secretary of Defense, the Deputy Secretary of Defense, and the Special Assistant to the Secretary and Deputy Secretary of Defense, 1973

OSD Files: FRC 330-78-0011 Secret Records of the Secretary of Defense, the Deputy Secretary of Defense, and the Special Assistant to the Secretary and Deputy Secretary of Defense, 1974

OSD Files: FRC 330-78-0058 Decimal Files of the Office of the Secretary of Defense, 1975

OSD Files: FRC 330-78-0059 Top Secret Decimal Files of the Office of the Secretary of Defense, 1975

OSD Files: FRC 330-78-0010 Top Secret Records of the Secretary of Defense, the Deputy Secretary of Defense, and the Special Assistant to the Secretary and Deputy Secretary of Defense, 1974

OASD/ISA Files: FRC 330-78-0038 Secret Records of the Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs, 1975

OSD Files: FRC 330-78-0058 Secret Records of the Secretary of Defense, the Deputy Secretary of Defense, and the Special Assistant to the Secretary and Deputy Secretary of Defense, 1975

OSD Files: FRC 330-78-0059 Top Secret Records of the Secretary of Defense, the Deputy Secretary of Defense, and the Special Assistant to the Secretary and Deputy Secretary of Defense, 1975

OASD/ISA Files: FRC 330-79-0037 Secret Records of the Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs, 1976

OSD Files: FRC 330-79-0049 Secret Records of the Secretary of Defense, the Deputy Secretary of Defense, and the Special Assistant to the Secretary and Deputy Secretary of Defense, 1976

OSD; POW/MIA Affairs: FRC 330-83-0150 Files of the Office for POW/MIA Affairs, 1967-1982

Published Sources

Haldeman, H.R. The Haldeman Diaries: Inside the White House. New York: G.P. Putnam Sons, 1994.

_____. The Haldeman Diaries: Inside the Nixon White House, the Complete Multimedia Edition. Santa Monica, CA: Sony Electronic Publishing, 1994.

Kissinger, Henry. Years of Upheaval. Boston: Little, Brown and Company, 1982.

_____. Years of Renewal. New York: Simon & Schuster, 1999.

Nixon, Richard M. RN: The Memoirs of Richard Nixon. New York: Grosset & Dunlap, 1978.

United States. Department of State. Bulletin. Washington, DC: 1973–1975.

_____. National Archives and Records Administration. Public Papers of the Presidents, Richard Nixon, 1969-1974. Washington, DC: Government Printing Office, 1969–1975.

_____. Public Papers of the Presidents, Gerald R. Ford, 1974-1977. Washington, DC: Government Printing Office, 1969–1975.

List of Terms & Abbreviations List of Terms & Abbreviations

ACDA, Arms Control and Disarmament Agency

ADB, Asian Development Bank

AEC, Atomic Energy Commission

AF, Bureau of African Affairs, Department of State

AID, Agency for International Development

AID/AA/Asia, Bureau for Asia, Agency for International Development

AID/PPC, Bureau for Program and Policy Coordination, Agency for International Development

AK–47, Soviet-built assault rifle

ALP, Australian Labor Party

AMB, Ambassador

ANZUS, Australia, New Zealand, United States Security Treaty

AP, Associated Press

APC, Armored Personnel Carrier

AR, Albanian Resolution (United Nations)

ARA, Bureau of Inter-American Affairs, Department of State

ARVN, Army of the Republic of Vietnam

ASEAN, Association of Southeast Asian Nations

BOP, balance of payments

BS, Brent Scowcroft

C, Confidential

CEA, Council of Economic Advisers

CIA, Central Intelligence Agency

CIEP, Council on International Economic Policy (United States)

CINCPAC, Commander in Chief, Pacific

CINCUNC, Commander in Chief, United Nations Command

COMNAVFORJAPAN, Commander, Naval Forces, Japan

COMSEVENTHFLT, Commander, Seventh Fleet

COMUS, Commander U.S. Forces

CONGEN, Consulate General

CONUS, Continental United States

CPM, Communist Party of Malaysia

CRA, Continuing Resolution Authority

CSCE, Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe

DAS, Deputy Assistant Secretary

DASD, Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense (Department of Defense)

DCI, Director of Central Intelligence

DCM, Deputy Chief of Mission, United States Embassy

DE, Destroyer Escort

DEPTEL, Department of State telegram

DIA, Defense Intelligence Agency

DIS or DISS., dissemination

DMZ, Demilitarized Zone

DOD, Department of Defense

DOD/ISA, Department of Defense, Office of the Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs

DOJ, Department of Justice

DOS, Department of State

DPRK, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

DR, Dual Representation (United Nations)

DRV, Democratic Republic of Vietnam (North Vietnam)

DSAA, Defense Security Assistance Agency (Department of Defense)

DSP, Democratic Socialist Party (Japan)

E, Bureau of Economic Affairs, Department of State

EA, Bureau of East Asian and Pacific Affairs, Department of State

EA/ANP, Office of Australia, New Zealand, Papua New Guinea, and Pacific Island Affairs, Department of State

EA/IMS, Office of Indonesia, Malaysia, and Singapore, Department of State

EA/J, Office of Japanese Affairs, Department of State

EA/K, Office of Korean Affairs, Department of State

EA/P, Public Affairs Advisor, Bureau of East Asian and Pacific Affairs, Department of State

EA/PHL, Office of Philippines Affairs, Department of State

EA/RA, Office of Regional Affairs at the Bureau of East Asian and Pacific Affairs, Department of State

EA/TB, Office of Thailand and Burma, Department of State

Eagle Pull, a U.S. military operation for evacuating personnel from Phnom Penh during an emergency

EAP, Bureau of East Asian and Pacific Affairs, Department of State

EAPA, East Asia and Pacific Affairs, International Security Affairs, Department of Defense

EAPR, East Asia and Pacific Region, Department of Defense

EB, Bureau of Economic and Business Affairs, Department of State

ECONCOM, Joint U.S.-Japan Economic Committee Meeting at the cabinet level

EMBTEL, embassy telegram

ERDA, Energy Research and Development Administration

EUR/IB, Office of Iberian Affairs, Department of State

EXDIS, exclusive distribution (indicates extremely limited dissemination)

EUR, Bureau of European Affairs, Department of State

F–4, (U.S. fighter-bomber aircraft)

F–5E, (U.S. fighter aircraft)

FAC, Foreign Assets Control

FANK, Cambodian Armed Forces

FBI, Federal Bureau of Investigation

FBIS, Foreign Broadcast Information Service

FCN, Friendship, Commerce, and Navigation (Treaty)

FMS, Foreign Military Sales

FONMIN, foreign minister

FONSEC, Foreign Secretary

FRC, Federal Records Center (U.S.)

FRD, formerly restricted data

FSO, Foreign Service Officer

FT, foreign trade

FY, fiscal year

FYI, for your information

GA, General Assembly (United Nations)

GATT, General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade

GIMO, Generalissimo Chiang Kai-shek (Jiang Jieshi)

GKR, Government of Khmer Republic

GNP, gross national product

GOA, Government of Australia

GOI , Government of Indonesia

GOJ, Government of Japan

GOP, Government of the Philippines

GOVT, Government

GPO, Government Printing Office (U.S.)

GRC, Government of the Republic of China.

GSP, Generalized System of Preferences

GVN, government of Vietnam (South)

H, Bureau of Congressional Relations, Department of State

HAK, Henry A. Kissinger

HICOM/HICOMRY, High Commissioner of the Ryukyu Islands

HK, Hong Kong; initials for Henry Kissinger

HQ, headquarters

IAEA, International Atomic Energy Agency

IBRD, International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (World Bank)

ICCS, International Commission of Control and Supervision

IG, Interdepartmental Group

IGGI, Inter-Governmental Group on Indonesia

IMF, International Monetary Fund

INFO, information

INR, Bureau of Intelligence and Research, Department of State

INR/EAP, Bureau of Intelligence and Research, East Asia and the Pacific

INR/REA, Office of Research and Analysis for East Asia and Pacific

INTEL, intelligence

IO, Bureau of International Organization Affairs, Department of State

IO/UNP, Bureau of International Organization Affairs, Office of United Nations Political Affairs

IPS, Office of Information Programs and Services (Department of State)

IQ, important question (United Nations)

IRBM, intermediate range ballistic missile

ISA, Bureau of International Security Affairs, Department of Defense

ITAC, Interagency Textile Administrative Committee

JAEC, Japanese Atomic Energy Commission

JCRC, Joint Casualty Resolution Center

JCS, Joint Chiefs of Staff

JCSM, Joint Chiefs of Staff memorandum

JDA, Japanese Defense Agency

JFY, Japanese fiscal year

JGLO, Japanese Government Liaison Office, Ryukyu Islands

JHH, John Herbert Holdridge

JSA, Joint Security Area (Korea)

JSDF, Japanese Self-Defense Forces

JSP, Japanese Socialist Party

JUSMAGTHAI, Joint United States Military Advisory Group Thailand

KC, Khmer (Cambodian) Communists

KCP, Khmer (Cambodian) Communist Party

Khmer Rouge, Khmer (Cambodian) Communists

KMT, Kuomintang (Nationalist Party, ROC), also called the Guomindang (GMD)

KPA, Korean People’s Army

L, Office of the Legal Adviser, Department of State

L/EA, Assistant Legal Adviser for East Asian and Pacific Affairs, Office of the Legal Adviser, Department of State

LC, Laos-Cambodia

LDP, Liberal Democratic Party (Japan)

LIMDIS, limited distribution (see also EXDIS)

LSD, Landing Ship, Dock

M, Office of the Deputy Under Secretary of State for Management

M16, U.S.-manufactured assault rifle

MAC, Military Armistice Commission (Korea)

MACTHAI, Military Assistance Command, Thailand

MAP, Military Assistance/Aid Program

MASF, military assistance service-funded

MBA, Military Base Agreement

MDAA, Mutual Defense Assistance Agreement

MDT, Mutual Defense Treaty

MEMCON, memorandum of conversation

MFA, Multifiber Agreement

MIA, Missing-in-Action

MITI, Ministry of International Trade and Industry (Japan)

mm, millimeter

MND, Minister or Ministry of National Defense; Mission Need Determination (Department of Defense)

MNLF, Moro National Liberation Front (Philippines)

MOD, Minister/Ministry of Defense

MSP, Minimum Safeguard Price

MST, Mutual Security Treaty (United States-Japan)

MTN, Multilateral Trade Negotiations

NATO, North Atlantic Treaty Organization

NEA, Bureau of Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs, Department of State

NF, no foreign dissemination

NIACT, night action (indicator of precedence level in a telegraphed message)

NIE, National Intelligence Estimate

NIO, National Intelligence Officer

NODIS, no distribution

NOFORN, no foreign dissemination

NOTAL, not all (telegram A, referenced in telegram B, was not sent to all the recipients of telegram B)

NPT, Nonproliferation Treaty

NPW, Nuclear Powered Warship

NSA, National Security Agency

NSC, National Security Council

NSDM, National Security Decision Memorandum

NSSM, National Security Study Memorandum

NVA, North Vietnamese Army

NZ, New Zealand

O&M, operation and maintenance (Department of Defense)

OASD/ISA, Office of the Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs

OBE, overtaken by events

OCI, Office of Current Intelligence (Central Intelligence Agency)

ODDPA&E/ISA, Office of the Director of Defense Program Analysis and Evaluation/International Security Affairs

OECD, Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development

OEO, Office of Economic Opportunity

OMB, Office of Management and Budget

OMSN, Office of Micronesian Status Negotiations

ONE, Office of National Estimates (Central Intelligence Agency)

OPCON, Operational Control (Department of Defense)

OPEC, Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries OPIC, Overseas Private Investment Corporation

Orcon, dissemination and extraction of information controlled by originator (dissemination control abbreviation)

OSD, Office of the Secretary of Defense

OUSD, Office of the Under Secretary of Defense

P, Under Secretary for Political Affairs, Department of State

PACAF, Pacific Air Force (U.S.)

PACOM, Pacific Command (U.S.)

PARA, paragraph

PDB, President's Daily Brief (Central Intelligence Agency)

PFIAB, President’s Foreign Intelligence Advisory Board

PGET, Provisional Government of East Timor

PHIL, Philippines

PL, Public Law

PL–480, an assistance program that provides agricultural commodities to foreign countries on behalf of the U.S. public

PM, Prime Minister; also Bureau of Politico-Military Affairs at the Department of State

PNG, Papua New Guinea; Persona non grata

POL, political

POLAD, political adviser (usually Department of State representative assigned to a military commander)

POW, Prisoner of War

PRC, People’s Republic of China

PRES, the President

PRG, Provisional Revolutionary Government of the Republic of South Vietnam

PriMin, Prime Minister

PT, Portuguese Timor

QR, Quota Restriction

QTE, quote

RA, Regional Affairs (DOS/EA)

RADM, Rear Admiral

REFTEL, reference telegram

REP, representative

RES, resolution (United Nations)

RET’D, returned (indicates when President Nixon finished reading a document)

RG, record group (National Archives and Records Administration)

RN, Richard Nixon

RNC, Republican National Committee

ROC, Republic of China (see also GRC)

ROK, Republic of Korea (South Korea)

ROKG, Republic of Korea Government

RP, Republic of the Philippines

RPT, repeat

RTG, Royal Thai Government

RVN, Republic of Vietnam (South Vietnam)

S, Office of the Secretary of State; also Secret

S/P, Policy Planning Council, Department of State

S/PC, Planning and Coordination Staff, Department of State

S/S, Executive Secretariat, Department of State

SA, Studies and Analysis (Department of Defense)

SALT, Strategic Arms Limitation Talks

SC, Security Council (United Nations)

SCA, Bureau of Security and Consular Affairs, Department of State

SCC, United States—Japan Security Consultative Committee

SCI, Bureau of International Scientific and Technological Affairs, Department of State; also sensitive compartmented information

SCM, Security Consultative Meeting

SDR, Special Drawing Rights (International Monetary Fund)

SEA, Southeast Asia

SEATO, Southeast Asia Treaty Organization

SECDEF, Secretary of Defense

SECSTATE, Secretary of State

SECTO, from the Secretary of State (used for telegrams from the Secretary or his party while he is on travel)

SECY GEN, Secretary General (United Nations)

SECY, Secretary of State

SEPTEL, separate telegram

SGU, Special Guerrilla Unit (manned by Thai "volunteers" in Laos and financed by the United States)

SIG, Senior Interdepartmental Group (National Security Council)

S–N, South-North (Korea)

SNIE, Special National Intelligence Estimate

SOF(A), Status of Forces (Agreement)

SPNFZ, South Pacific Nuclear Free Zone

S/PRS, Office of Press Relations, Department of State

SRG, Senior Review Group (National Security Council)

SRV, Socialist Republic of Vietnam

STADIS, Distribution within State Department Only

STR, Special Trade Representative

SVN, South Vietnam

T, Office of the Under Secretary for Security Assistance, Department of State

TOHAK, to Henry A. Kissinger

TOSEC, to the Secretary of State (used for telegrams to the Secretary while he is on travel)

TOSIT, to the White House Situation Room

TS, Top Secret

TTPI, Trust Territory of the Pacific Islands

U, Office of the Under Secretary of State; also Unclassified

UK, United Kingdom

UN, United Nations

UNC, United Nations Command (Korea)

UNCTAD, United Nations Conference on Trade and Development

UNCURK, United Nations Commission for the Unification and Rehabilitation of Korea

UNESCO, United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization

UNGA, United Nations General Assembly

UNHCR, Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees

UNQTE, unquote

UPI, United Press International

U/DM, Under Secretaries Decision Memorandum

U–S/M, Under Secretaries Memorandum

USA, United States Army

USAF, United States Air Force

USC, Under Secretaries Committee

USFY, United States fiscal year

USG, United States Government

USIA, United States Information Agency

USIB, United States Intelligence Board

USIS, United States Information Service

USLO, United States Liaison Office (People’s Republic of China)

USN, United States Navy

USSAG, United States Support Activities Group (Thailand)

USSR, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics

USUN, United States Mission to the United Nations

VADM, Vice Admiral

VN, Vietnam

VOA, Voice of America

VP, Vice President

WESTPAC, Western Pacific

WH, White House

WNRC, Washington National Records Center

WSAG, Washington Special Action Group

Z, Zulu time (Greenwich Mean Time)

List of Persons List of Persons

Abramowitz, Morton I., Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense for East Asia and Pacific Affairs

Agnew, Spiro T., Vice President of the United States from January 20, 1969 until October 10, 1973

Aichi Kiichi, Japanese Finance Minister until November 23, 1973

Aldrich, George H., Deputy Legal Adviser, Department of State, until 1977

Armacost, Michael H., Member of the Policy Planning Staff, Department of State

Barbian, Paul E., staff, Executive Secretariat of the Department of State

Barger, Herman H., Deputy Assistant Secretary for Economic Affairs, Bureau of East Asian and Pacific Affairs, Department of State, until 1973

Barnard, Lance, Australian Deputy Prime Minister from December 5, 1972 until June 12, 1974; Minister for Defense from December 5, 1972 until June 6, 1975

Barnes, Thomas J., Senior Staff Member of the National Security Council for East Asia and the Pacific from August 1975 until September 1976

Bergesen, Alf E., Deputy Director of the Office of Thailand and Burma Affairs

Boun Oum Na Champassak, Prince, Prime Minister of Laos from 1948 until 1950 and again from 1960 until 1962

Bremer, L. Paul, Staff Assistant to the Secretary of State from July 1972; Special Assistant of the Secretary of State from May 1973

Brown, George S., General, USAF, Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff from July 1, 1974

Brown, L. Dean, U.S. Ambassador to Jordon until November 1973; Deputy Under Secretary of State for Management from December 1973 until February 23, 1975

Brown, Winthrop G., Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian and Pacific Affairs until April 1972

Burns, Dr. Arthur F., Chairman, Federal Reserve System Board of Governors

Bush, George H.W., Representative to the United Nations until January 18, 1973; Head of the U.S. Liaison Office in Beijing from October 21, 1974 until December 7, 1975; Director of Central Intelligence from January 30, 1976

Butterfield, Alexander P., Deputy Assistant to the President until 1973

Butz, Earl L., Secretary of Agriculture until 1976

Cairns, Jim, Australian Minister for Overseas Trade until December 11, 1974; Deputy Prime Minister from June 12, 1974 until July 2, 1975; Treasurer from December 11, 1974 until June 6, 1975

Cargo, William I., Director of the Policy Planning Staff, Department of State, until July 30, 1973

Chapin, Dwight, Deputy Assistant to the President until 1973

Chapin, Frank, Staff Secretary to the 303/40 Committee

Chapman, Christian A., Deputy Chief of Mission, U.S. Embassy in Laos

Chartchai Ghunhavan, Thai Deputy Foreign Minister

Chiang Kai-shek (Jiang Jieshi), President of the Republic of China from until April 5, 1975; Chair, Republic of China National Security Council until 1975; Director-General, Kuomintang, until 1975

Chou En-lai, see Zhou Enlai

Chow [also spelled Chou] Shu-kai (Zhou Shukai), Republic of China Ambassador to the United States until May 1971; Minister of Foreign Affairs in 1971 and 1972; Minister without Portfolio from 1972

Chung Il Kwon, Prime Minister of the Republic of Korea until December 19, 1970

Clements, William (Bill) Perry, Deputy Secretary of Defense

Cleveland, Paul M., Special Assistant and Staff Director, National Security Council Interdepartmental Group, Bureau of East Asian and Pacific Affairs, until July 1973

Cline, Ray S., Director, Office of Intelligence and Research, Department of State, from until November 24, 1973

Colby, E. William E., Director of Central Intelligence from September 4, 1973 until January 30, 1976

Collums, Haley D., Special Assistant to the Secretary of State

Cooper, Charles A., Assistant Secretary of the Treasury for International Affairs from 1975

Corner, Frank H., New Zealand Ambassador to the United States until 1972; New Zealand Secretary of Foreign Affairs from 1973

Covey, James P., Special Assistant to the Secretary of State

Cronk, Edwin M., Deputy Assistant Secretary for International Trade Policy, Bureau of Economic Affairs, Department of State, until June 1972; Ambassador to Singapore from June 27, 1972 until June 7, 1975

Crowe, William J., Rear Admiral; Director, East Asia and Pacific Region, Office of the Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs

Curran, Robert Theodore, Deputy Executive Secretary, Executive Secretariat, Department of State, until September 1972; Deputy Director of Personnel for Management from September 1972 until May 1974

Davis, Jeanne W., Staff Secretary, National Security Council Staff Secretariat

De Palma, Samuel, Assistant Secretary of State for International Organization Affairs until June 20, 1973

Dean, Charles, American tourist missing in Laos from September 1974

Deng Xiaoping, People’s Republic of China Vice Premier of State Council from 1973 until 1974

Denney, George C., Jr., Deputy Director, Directorate for Management, Bureau of Intelligence and Research, Department of State, until November 1973

Dexter, John B., Director of the Office of Thailand and Burma Affairs, Department of State

Do Thanh, First Secretary, Socialist Republic of Vietnam Embassy, France

Donelan, Joseph F., Jr., Assistant Secretary of State for Administration until March 31, 1973

Doolin, Dennis J., Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense for East Asia and Pacific Affairs

Douglas-Home, Sir Alexander Frederick, British Foreign Secretary until March 4, 1974

Eagleburger, Lawrence S., Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs during early 1973; member of National Security Council Staff from June 1973; Executive Assistant to the Secretary of State from October 1973; Acting Deputy Under Secretary for Management from February 1975 until May 1975; Under Secretary of Management for Management from May 1975

Eberle, William D., Special Representative for Trade Negotiations until 1975; also Member, Council on International Economic Policy, from 1971

Edmond, Lester E., Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian and Pacific Affairs

Ehrlichman, John D., Counsel Assistant to the President for Domestic Affairs until May 1973

Eliot, Theodore L., Jr., Special Assistant to the Secretary and Executive Secretary of the Department of State until September 26, 1973

Ellerman, Alfred Denny, Staff member for International Economic Affairs of the National Security Council until March 3, 1975

Ellsworth, Robert, Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs

Enrile, Juan Ponce, Philippine Secretary of National Defense from 1970

Ericson, Richard A., Jr., Country Director for Japan until January 1974

Faulkner, Arthur, New Zealand Minister of Defense and then Minister of Labour

Flanigan, Peter, Executive Director of the Council for International Economic Policy from February 1972.

Fleck, Benjamin A., Director of the Office for Philippine Affairs

Ford, Gerald R., House Minority Leader until 1973; Vice President from October 13, 1973 until August 8, 1974; President from August 8, 1974

Fraser, Malcolm, Australian Prime Minister from November 11, 1975

Friedersdorf, Max, Assistance to the President for Legislative Affairs

Froebe, John A., Jr., assigned to the Australia, New Zealand and Pacific Island Desk, Bureau of East Asian Affairs, Department of State, but actually on the National Security Council staff beginning in 1971; formally detailed to the National Security Council in January 1974

Froehlke, Robert F., Secretary of the Army until May 14, 1973

Fukuda Takeo, Japanese Foreign Minister from July 5, 1971 until July 7, 1972; Japanese Prime Minister from December 1976

Fukuda, Manabu, Department of State Interpreter

Fulbright. J. William, Democratic Senator from Arkansas until 1974; Chairman of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee until 1974

Galbraith, Francis J., Ambassador to Indonesia until 1974

Gallagher, William L., Drug Coordinator and Southeast Asia Treaty Organization Officer for the Office of Regional Affairs, Bureau of East Asian and Pacific Affairs, Department of State

Gammon, Samuel R., Deputy Chief of Mission, American Embassy, France

Gandhi, Indira, Indian Prime Minister

Gilman, Benjamin, Republican Representative from New York

Gleysteen, William H, Jr., Deputy Chief of Mission, Taipei, from until 1974; Deputy Assistant Secretary for East Asian and Pacific Affairs from September 1974; Deputy Assistant Secretary for Japan-Korea-Republic of China-People Republic of China from October 1975; National Security Council Staff from August 1976

Godley, George McMurtrie, Ambassador to Laos until April 23, 1973; Assistant Secretary for East Asian and Pacific Affairs, 1973

Granger, Clinton E., member, National Security Council staff until April 1976

Green, Marshall, Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian and Pacific Affairs until May 10, 1973; Ambassador to Australia from March 27, 1973 until July 31, 1975; Non-Resident Ambassador to Nauru from February 28, 1974 until July 31, 1975

Gromyko, Andrei A., Soviet Foreign Minister

Habib, Hasnan, General, Aide to Sumitro

Habib, Philip C., Ambassador to Korea until August 19, 1974; Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian and Pacific Affairs from September 27, 1974 until June 30, 1976; Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs from July 1, 1976

Hahm Pyong Choon, South Korean Ambassador to the United States from 1973

Haig, Alexander Meigs, Jr., Deputy Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs until January 1973; Army Vice Chief of Staff from January until August 1973; Assistant to the President and Chief of Staff from August 1973 until August 1974

Haldeman, H.R., Assistant to the President and Chief of Staff until April 30, 1973

Handley, William J., Ambassador to Turkey until April 19, 1973

Hannah, John A., Administrator, Agency for International Development until October 7, 1973

Harlow, Bryce N., Counselor to the President until 1974

Heath, Edward, British Prime Minister until March 4, 1974

Helms, Richard M., Director of Central Intelligence until February 2, 1973

Henderson, Marion J., Bureau of East Asian and Pacific Affairs

Hill, Robert C., Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs

Hodgson, James D., Secretary of Labor until February 1973

Holdridge, John Herbert, member, National Security Council Operations Staff/East Asia until April 1973

Hormats, Robert, member, National Security Council Operations Staff/International Economic Affairs

Hummel, Arthur W., Jr., Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian and Pacific Affairs from February 1972, Ambassador to Ethiopia from February 1975; Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian and Pacific Affairs from July 1976

Hurwitz, Edward, Counselor for Political Affairs from December 1974; Departmental Special Assistant from November 1975; Director of the Office of Korean Affairs from August 1976

Hyland, William, G., member, National Security Council Operations Staff/Europe until 1974; Director of Bureau of Intelligence and Research, Department of State, from January 1974 until November 1975; Deputy Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs from November 1975

Ingersoll, Robert Stephen, Ambassador to Japan until November 8, 1973; Assistant Secretary for East Asian and Pacific Affairs from January 8, 1974 until July 9, 1974; Deputy Secretary of State from July 10, 1974 until March 31, 1976

Ingraham, Edward C., Deputy Director of the Office for Indonesia, Malaysia, and Singapore from July 1974

Irwin, John N., II, Deputy Secretary of State from July 13, 1972 until February 1, 1973.

Jenkins, Alfred le Sesne, Director, Office of Asian Communist Affairs, Bureau of East Asian and Pacific Affairs, Department of State, until February 1973

Jiang Jieshi, see Chiang Kai-shek

Johnson, Lyndon B., President of the United States from November 22, 1963 until January 20, 1969

Johnson, U. Alexis, Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs until February 1, 1973

Jordan, Amos, Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs, Principle Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense for Bureau of International Security Affairs

Jurich, Anthony J., Special Assistant to the Secretary for National Security Affairs, Department of the Treasury

Karamessines, Thomas H., Central Intelligence Agency Deputy Director for Plans [title changed to Deputy Director for Operations after Karamessines’ tenure] from July 31, 1967 until February 24, 1973

Katz, Julius L., Deputy Assistant Secretary for International Resources and Food Policy, Bureau of Economic Affairs, Department of State, until April 1974

Kendall, Donald M., President and Chief Executive Officer of Pepsi-Cola (renamed Pepsi Co); friend of Richard Nixon; Chairman of the Emergency Committee for American Trade

Kennedy, Richard, member, National Security Council staff until January 23, 1975

Khukrit, see Kukrit Pramoj

Kim Dae-jung, member, South Korean National Assembly; Presidential candidate of New Democratic Party in 1971; leading opposition figure

Kim Dong-Jo, Republic of Korea Ambassador to the United States until 1973; Foreign Minister of Republic of Korea from December 3, 1973 until December 18, 1975

Kim Il-sung (Kim Il Sung), Premier (Chairman of the Council of Ministers) of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea until December 28, 1972; President (Chairman of the Presidium of the Supreme People's Assembly) of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea from December 28, 1972; and General Secretary of the Central Committee of the Workers' Party of Korea

Kim Yong-shik, South Korean Foreign Minister from June 4, 1971 until December 2, 1973

Kintner, Willam R., Ambassador to Thailand from November 29, 1973 until March 14, 1975

Kirk, Norman, Prime Minister and Foreign Minister of New Zealand from December 8, 1972 until August 31, 1974

Kissinger, Henry A., Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs until November 3, 1975; Secretary of State from September 21, 1973

Klein, Herbert G., White House Director of Communications until July 1973

Kleindienst, Richard G., Attorney General from February 1972 until April 1973

Knowles, John F., Office of Australia, New Zealand, Papua New Guinea, and Pacific Island Affairs, Department of State

Kosygin, Alexei N., Chairman of the Council of Ministers (Premier) of the Soviet Union

Kukrit Pramoj, Prime Minister of Thailand from March 14, 1975 until April 20, 1976

Ladd, Bruce C., Jr., Deputy Assistant Secretary for Commercial Affairs and Business Activities, Bureau of Economic Affairs, Department of State, from 1971 until 1973

Laird, Melvin R., Secretary of Defense until January 29, 1973

Le Duc Tho, member of the Politburo of the Democratic Republic of Vietnam (North Vietnam) and leader of the Democratic Republic of Vietnam negotiating team in Paris until 1973

Lee Kuan Yew, Prime Minister of Singapore

Lewis, Samuel W., Assistant Secretary of State for International Organization Affairs from December 1975

Lodal, Jan M., member, National Security Council staff until August 1975

Lon Nol, Cambodian Prime Minister until April 1975

Loomis, Henry, Deputy Director, United States Information Agency until 1973

Lord, Winston, member, National Security Council staff until 1973; Director of the Policy Planning Staff (Policy and Coordination Staff) at the Department of Defense from October 1973

MacDonald, Donald, member, National Security Council staff until June 1976

Malik, Yakov Alexandrovich, Permanent Representative of the Soviet Union to the United Nations until 1976

Mansfield, Michael, Democratic Senator from Montana until 1976; Senate Majority Leader until 1976

Mao Tse-tung, see Mao Zedong

Mao Zedong (Mao Tse-Tung), Chairman of the Central Committee of the Chinese Communist Party

Marcos, Ferdinand, Philippine President

Marcos, Imelda Romualdez, wife of Ferdinand Marcos

Marsh, John, Counselor to President Ford

Masters, Edward S., Chargé d’Affaires in Thailand

Maw, Carlyle E., Under Secretary of State for Security Assistance from July 1974

McClellan, Robert, Assistant Secretary of Commerce for Domestic and International Business

McCloskey, Paul N., Republican Representative from California

McCloskey, Robert J., Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Press Relations, and Special Assistant to the Secretary, until May 1973

McDonald, Angus, Staff Director, House Select Committee on Missing-in-Action persons

McGovern, George, Democratic Senator from South Dakota; Presidential candidate in 1972

McManis, David, member, National Security Council staff in 1970 and 1971; Director of the White House Situation Room in 1971 and 1972

Miki Takeo, Japanese Prime Minister from December 1974 until December 1976

Miller, Robert H., Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian and Pacific Affairs

Miyazawa Kiichi, Japanese Minister of International Trade and Industry from January 14, 1970 until July 5, 1971

Moerdani, Benjamin, see Murdani, Benjamin

Moertopo, Ali, General and Deputy Chief of the State Intelligence Coordinating Body of Indonesia

Montgomery, Gillespie (Sonny) V., Democratic Representative from Mississippi

Moore, John Norton, Counselor on International Law, Office of the Legal Adviser, Department of State; Chairman of the National Security Council Interagency Task Force on the Law of the Sea, Deputy Special Representative of the President for the third United Nations Law of the Sea Conference and Deputy Chief of Delegation, until March 1976

Moorer, Thomas H., Admiral, USN, Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff from July 2, 1970 until July 1, 1974

Moose, Richard, member, National Security Council staff until 1970

Morris, Roger, member, National Security Council staff until 1971

Muldoon, Robert David, New Zealand Prime Minister from December 12, 1975

Murdani, Benjamin, Major general and Chief of Intelligence for the Indonesian Department of Defense and Security

Nakasone Yasuhiro, Japanese politician

Neubert, Joseph W., Acting Deputy Director for Planning, Planning and Coordination Staff, Department of State, until July 1973

Newsom, David D., Ambassador to Indonesia from 1974

Nguyen Van Thieu, President of the Republic of Vietnam (South Vietnam) until April 21, 1975

Nixon, Richard M., President of the United States until August 9, 1974

Noyes, James H., Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense for Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs from 1971

O’Donohue, Daniel A, Special Assistant to the Under Secretary for Political Affairs

Oakley, Robert B., member, National Security Council staff from September 1974

Odeen, Phil, member, National Security Council staff

Ohira Masayoshi, Japanese Foreign Minister from July 7, 1972 until July 12, 1974

Osborn, David Lawrence, Consul General in Hong Kong until March 1974

Ottinger, Richard L., Democratic Representative from New York

Oveson, Richard M., Colonel, U.S. Air Attaché, American Embassy, France

Paik Doo Jin, Prime Minster of the Republic of Korea from December 19, 1970 until June 3, 1971

Park Chung Hee (Pak Chong-hui, Pak Chung-hui, Pak Jung-Hui), President of the Republic of Korea (South Korea)

Park Tong-jin, South Korean Foreign Minister from December 19, 1975

Peacock, Andrew, Australian Minister for Foreign Affairs from December 1975

Pedersen, Richard F., Counselor of the Department of State until July 26, 1973

Peet, Ray, Vice Admiral; Acting Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs from January 6, 1974 until April 1, 1974

Pham Van Dong, Prime Minister, Democratic Republic of Vietnam/Socialist Republic of Vietnam

Phoumi Vongvichit, Laotian Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of Foreign Affairs until December 1975; Second Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of Education from December 1975

Pickering, Thomas R., Executive Secretary of State and Special Assistant to the Secretary of State from August 1973

Platt, Nicholas, Director, Executive Secretariat, from June 1972 until May 1973; political officer in the United States Liaison Office from May 1973 until January 1974; stationed in Japan from July 1974

Plimsoll, James, Australian Ambassador to the United States

Pollack, Herman, Director, Bureau of International Scientific and Technological Affairs, Department of State, until 1974

Pranger, Robert J., Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense for Policy Plans and National Security Council Affairs, 1971

Prentice, Colgate S., Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Congressional Relations from until June 1973

Pursley, Robert E., Brigadier General, Military Assistant to the Secretary of Defense

Quinn, Kennth M., member, National Security Coucil Staff specializing in East Asia and the Pacific

Renner, John C., Deputy Assistant Secretary for International Trade Policy, Bureau of Economic Affairs, from July 1972

Richardson, Elliot L., Secretary of Health, Education, and Welfare until January 1973; Secretary of Defense from January 30 until May 24, 1973; Attorney General from May until October 1973

Rithaudeen, Tengku, Malaysian Foreign Minister

Rives, Lloyd M., Laos/Cambodia Desk Office, Bureau of East Asian and Pacific Affairs

Robinson, Charles W., Under Secretary of State for Economic and Agricultural Affairs from January 3, 1975 until April 9, 1976; Deputy Secretary of State from April 9, 1976

Rodman, Peter W., member, National Security Council staff

Rogers, William P., Secretary of State until September 3, 1973

Ro Jae-hyun (Roh Jae-hyun), Republic of Korea Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff from 1975 until 1977

Romulo, Carlos, Philippine Foreign Secretary

Rowling, Wallace Edward, New Zealand Prime Minister and Foreign Minister from September 6, 1974 until December 12, 1975

Rumsfeld, Donald R., Counselor to the President until January 1973; Ambassador to the North Atlantic Treaty Organization until 1974; Assistant to President Ford from August 1974 until October 1975; Secretary of Defense from October 1975

Rush, Kenneth, Deputy Secretary of Defense from February 23, 1972 until January 29, 1973; Deputy Secretary of State from February 2, 1973 until May 29 1974

Rusmin, Nurjadin, Indonesian Ambassador to the United States from October 1974

Sanya Thammasak, Thai Prime Minister from October 14, 1973 until February 26, 1975

Sato Eisaku, Japanese Prime Minister from November 9, 1964 until July 6, 1972

Scali, John, Chief Diplomatic Correspondent for ABC News until 1971; Special Consultant to the President from 1971 until 1973

Schlesinger, James R., Chairman of the Atomic Energy Commission from August 1971 until February 1973; Director of Central Intelligence from February 2 until July 2, 1973; Secretary of Defense from July 2, 1973 until November 19, 1975

Scott, Hugh, Republican Senator from Pennsylvania; Senate Minority

Scowcroft, Brent, Military Assistant to the President from February 1972 until 1973, Deputy Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs from August 1973 until 1975, Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs from November 3, 1975

Seamans, Robert C., Jr., Secretary of the Air Force until May 14, 1973

Seni Pramoj, Thai Prime Minister from February 26, 1975 until March 14, 1975, and again from April 20, 1976 until October 6

Shakespeare, Frank, Director, U.S. Information Agency until February 7, 1973

Shoesmith, Thomas P., Country Director for the Republic of China, Bureau of East Asian and Pacific Affairs, Department of State, until August 1971; Deputy Chief of Mission in Tokyo from August 1972 until October 1977

Shultz, George P., Director of the Office of Management and Budget until May 1972; Secretary of the Treasury from May 16, 1972 until April 17, 1974

Sihanouk, Norodom, Prince, head of state of Cambodia until 1970; leader of a government-in-exile in Peking from 1970 until 1975

Simon, William E., Secretary of the Treasury

Sisco, Joseph J., Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs until February 18, 1974; Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs from February 19, 1974 until June 30, 1976

Smyser, W. Richard, member, National Security Council Operations Staff/East Asia until 1972; member, National Security Council Staff from September 1973

Sneider, Richard L., Deputy Chief of Mission in Japan until July 1972; Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian and Pacific Affairs from August 1972 until September 1974; Ambassador to Korea from September 1974

Solomon, Richard H., senior staff member, National Security Council until 1976

Sonnenfeldt, Helmut C., member, NSC Staff until 1974; Counselor, Department of State from 1974

Souphanouvong, Lao Prime Minister from December 1975

Souvanna Phouma, Lao Prime Minister until December 1975

Spiers, Ronald I., Director, Bureau of Politico-Military Affairs until August 2, 1973

Springsteen, George S., Executive Secretary, Department of State

Stans, Maurice, Secretary of Commerce until January 27, 1972

Steadman, Richard C., Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense for East Asia and Pacific Affairs, 1969

Stearman, William L., member, National Security Council staff

Stein, Herbert, Chairman of the Council of Economic Advisors until July 1974

Suarez, Pablo, Assistant Secretary of Foreign Affairs for the Philippines

Suharto, Indonesian President

Suh, Jyong-chul (So Chong-ch’ol), Republic of Korea Minister of National Defense

Sullivan, William H., Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian and Pacific Affairs until July 1973; Ambassador to the Philippines from August 6, 1973 until April 26, 1977

Sumitro, Indonesian General

Sunthorn Hongladarom, Thai Ambassador to the U.S. until 1972

Symington, Stuart, Democratic Senator from Missouri

Talboys, Brian, New Zealand Foreign Minister from December 12, 1975

Tanaka Kakeui, Japanese Prime Minister until December 9, 1974

Tarr, Curtis W., Under Secretary of State for International Security Affairs from May 1, 1972 until November 25, 1973

Taylor, John J., member, National Security Council Staff for East Asia and Pacific Affairs from June 1975

Teng Hsiao-p’ing, see Deng Xiaoping

Thajeb, Sjarif, Indonesian Ambassador to the United States until April 1974

Thanom Kittikachorn, Thai Prime Minister until February 26 1973

Thayer, Harry E.T., advisor on political affairs at the United States Mission to the United Nations until September 1973

Togo, Fumihiko, Japanese Deputy Vice Minister of Foreign Affairs; Ambassador to the United States

Tran Hoan, Counselor of Socialist Republic of Vietnam Embassy, France

Unger, Leonard, U.S. Ambassador to Thailand

Ushiba Nobuhiko, Japanese Ambassador to the United States until July 1973

Vega, Wilfredo, Ambassador of the Philippines to the United States

Virata, Cesar, Philippine Minister of Finance

Volcker, Paul A., Under Secretary of the Treasury for Monetary Affairs until June 1974

Walters, Vernon A., Lt. Gen., Deputy Director of Central Intelligence until July 31, 1976

White, Lloyd, New Zealand Ambassador to the United States

Whitehouse, Charles, S., Deputy Ambassador to Vietnam until August 1973; Ambassador to Laos from September 20, 1973 until April 12, 1975; Ambassador to Thailand from May 30, 1975

Whitlam, Gough, Australian Prime Minister from December 5, 1972 until November 11, 1975

Wickel, James J., Political Officer, Department of State from July 1972

Wilenski, Peter, Principal Private Secretary (and principal adviser) to Prime Minister Gough Whitlam

Willesee, Donald, Australian Minister for Foreign Affairs from November 30, 1973 until November 11, 1975

Williams, F. Haydn, President’s Personal Representative for Micronesian Status Negotiations

Wilson, James Harold, British Prime Minister from 1974 until 1976

Wilson, James M., Jr., U.S. Representative for Micronesian status negotiations from November 1972

Wolthus, Bob, Deputy Assistance to the President for Legislative Affairs

Wright, W. Marshall, Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Congressional Relations from April until December 1972; Acting Assistant Secretary from December 1972 until April 1973

Yasukawa Takeshi, Japanese Ambassador to the United States from July 1973

Zhou Enlai, Premier of the People’s Republic of China until January 8, 1976; member, Standing Committee of the Chinese Communist Party’s Political Bureau until 1976

Ziegler, Ronald, White House Press Secretary until 1974

Zumwalt, Elmo R., Jr., Adm., USN, Chief of Naval Operations until July 1, 1974

Zurhellen, J. Owen, Jr., Deputy Assistant Secretary in the Bureau of East Asian and Pacific Affairs

Note on U.S. Covert Action Programs Note on U.S. Covert Action Programs

In compliance with the Foreign Relations of the United States statute that requires inclusion in the Foreign Relations series of comprehensive documentation on major foreign policy decisions and actions, the editors have identified key documents regarding major covert actions and intelligence activities. The following note will provide readers with some organizational context on how covert actions and special intelligence operations in support of U.S. foreign policy were planned and approved within the U.S. Government. It describes, on the basis of declassified documents, the changing and developing procedures during the Truman, Eisenhower, Kennedy, Johnson, Nixon, and Ford Presidencies.

Management of Covert Actions in the Truman Presidency

The Truman administration’s concern over Soviet “psychological warfare” prompted the new National Security Council to authorize, in NSC 4–A of December 1947, the launching of peacetime covert action operations. NSC 4–A made the Director of Central Intelligence responsible for psychological warfare, establishing at the same time the principle that covert action was an exclusively Executive Branch function. The Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) certainly was a natural choice but it was assigned this function at least in part because the Agency controlled unvouchered funds, by which operations could be funded with minimal risk of exposure in Washington.1

The CIA’s early use of its new covert action mandate dissatisfied officials at the Departments of State and Defense. The Department of State, believing this role too important to be left to the CIA alone and concerned that the military might create a new rival covert action office in the Pentagon, pressed to reopen the issue of where responsibility for covert action activities should reside. Consequently, on June 18, 1948, a new NSC directive, NSC 10/2, superseded NSC 4–A.

NSC 10/2 directed the CIA to conduct “covert” rather than merely “psychological” operations, defining them as all activities “which are conducted or sponsored by this Government against hostile foreign states or groups or in support of friendly foreign states or groups but which are so planned and executed that any US Government responsibility for them is not evident to unauthorized persons and that if uncovered the US Government can plausibly disclaim any responsibility for them.”

The type of clandestine activities enumerated under the new directive included: “propaganda; economic warfare; preventive direct action, including sabotage, anti-sabotage, demolition and evacuation measures; subversion against hostile states, including assistance to underground resistance movements, guerrillas and refugee liberation groups, and support of indigenous anti-communist elements in threatened countries of the free world. Such operations shall not include armed conflict by recognized military forces, espionage, counter-espionage, and cover and deception for military operations.”2

The Office of Policy Coordination (OPC), newly established in the CIA on September 1, 1948, in accordance with NSC 10/2, assumed responsibility for organizing and managing covert actions. The OPC, which was to take its guidance from the Department of State in peacetime and from the military in wartime, initially had direct access to the Department of State and to the military without having to proceed through the CIA’s administrative hierarchy, provided the Director of Central Intelligence (DCI) was informed of all important projects and decisions.3 In 1950 this arrangement was modified to ensure that policy guidance came to the OPC through the DCI.

During the Korean conflict the OPC grew quickly. Wartime commitments and other missions soon made covert action the most expensive and bureaucratically prominent of the CIA’s activities. Concerned about this situation, DCI Walter Bedell Smith in early 1951 asked the NSC for enhanced policy guidance and a ruling on the proper “scope and magnitude” of CIA operations. The White House responded with two initiatives. In April 1951 President Truman created the Psychological Strategy Board (PSB) under the NSC to coordinate government-wide psychological warfare strategy. NSC 10/5, issued in October 1951, reaffirmed the covert action mandate given in NSC 10/2 and expanded the CIA’s authority over guerrilla warfare.4 The PSB was soon abolished by the incoming Eisenhower administration, but the expansion of the CIA’s covert action writ in NSC 10/5 helped ensure that covert action would remain a major function of the Agency.

As the Truman administration ended, the CIA was near the peak of its independence and authority in the field of covert action. Although the CIA continued to seek and receive advice on specific projects from the NSC, the PSB, and the departmental representatives originally delegated to advise the OPC, no group or officer outside of the DCI and the President himself had authority to order, approve, manage, or curtail operations.

NSC 5412 Special Group; 5412/2 Special Group; 303 Committee

The Eisenhower administration began narrowing the CIA’s latitude in 1954. In accordance with a series of National Security Council directives, the responsibility of the Director of Central Intelligence for the conduct of covert operations was further clarified. President Eisenhower approved NSC 5412 on March 15, 1954, reaffirming the Central Intelligence Agency’s responsibility for conducting covert actions abroad. A definition of covert actions was set forth; the DCI was made responsible for coordinating with designated representatives of the Secretary of State and the Secretary of Defense to ensure that covert operations were planned and conducted in a manner consistent with U.S. foreign and military policies; and the Operations Coordinating Board was designated the normal channel for coordinating support for covert operations among State, Defense, and the CIA. Representatives of the Secretary of State, the Secretary of Defense, and the President were to be advised in advance of major covert action programs initiated by the CIA under this policy and were to give policy approval for such programs and secure coordination of support among the Departments of State and Defense and the CIA.5

A year later, on March 12, 1955, NSC 5412/1 was issued, identical to NSC 5412 except for designating the Planning Coordination Group as the body responsible for coordinating covert operations. NSC 5412/2 of December 28, 1955, assigned to representatives (of the rank of assistant secretary) of the Secretary of State, the Secretary of Defense, and the President responsibility for coordinating covert actions. By the end of the Eisenhower administration, this group, which became known as the “NSC 5412/2 Special Group” or simply “Special Group,” emerged as the executive body to review and approve covert action programs initiated by the CIA.6 The membership of the Special Group varied depending upon the situation faced. Meetings were infrequent until 1959 when weekly meetings began to be held. Neither the CIA nor the Special Group adopted fixed criteria for bringing projects before the group; initiative remained with the CIA, as members representing other agencies frequently were unable to judge the feasibility of particular projects.7

After the Bay of Pigs failure in April 1961, General Maxwell Taylor reviewed U.S. paramilitary capabilities at President Kennedy’s request and submitted a report in June that recommended strengthening high-level direction of covert operations. As a result of the Taylor Report, the Special Group, chaired by the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs McGeorge Bundy, and including Deputy Under Secretary of State U. Alexis Johnson, Deputy Secretary of Defense Roswell Gilpatric, Director of Central Intelligence Allen Dulles, and Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff General Lyman Lemnitzer, assumed greater responsibility for planning and reviewing covert operations. Until 1963 the DCI determined whether a CIA-originated project was submitted to the Special Group. In 1963 the Special Group developed general but informal criteria, including risk, possibility of success, potential for exposure, political sensitivity, and cost (a threshold of $25,000 was adopted by the CIA), for determining whether covert action projects were submitted to the Special Group.8

From November 1961 to October 1962 a Special Group (Augmented), whose membership was the same as the Special Group plus Attorney General Robert Kennedy and General Taylor (as Chairman), exercised responsibility for Operation Mongoose, a major covert action program aimed at overthrowing the Castro regime in Cuba. When President Kennedy authorized the program in November, he designated Brigadier General Edward G. Lansdale, Assistant for Special Operations to the Secretary of Defense, to act as chief of operations, and Lansdale coordinated the Mongoose activities among the CIA and the Departments of State and Defense. The CIA units in Washington and Miami had primary responsibility for implementing Mongoose operations, which included military, sabotage, and political propaganda programs.9

President Kennedy also established a Special Group (Counter-Insurgency) on January 18, 1962, when he signed NSAM No. 124. The Special Group (CI), set up to coordinate counter-insurgency activities separate from the mechanism for implementing NSC 5412/2, was to confine itself to establishing broad policies aimed at preventing and resisting subversive insurgency and other forms of indirect aggression in friendly countries. In early 1966, in NSAM No. 341, President Johnson assigned responsibility for the direction and coordination of counter-insurgency activities overseas to the Secretary of State, who established a Senior Interdepartmental Group to assist in discharging these responsibilities.10

NSAM No. 303, June 2, 1964, from Bundy to the Secretaries of State and Defense and the DCI, changed the name of “Special Group 5412” to “303 Committee” but did not alter its composition, functions, or responsibility. Bundy was the chairman of the 303 Committee.11

The Special Group and the 303 Committee approved 163 covert actions during the Kennedy administration and 142 during the Johnson administration through February 1967. The 1976 Final Report of the Church Committee, however, estimated that of the several thousand projects undertaken by the CIA since 1961, only 14 percent were considered on a case-by-case basis by the 303 Committee and its predecessors (and successors). Those not reviewed by the 303 Committee were low-risk and low-cost operations. The Final Report also cited a February 1967 CIA memorandum that included a description of the mode of policy arbitration of decisions on covert actions within the 303 Committee system. The CIA presentations were questioned, amended, and even on occasion denied, despite protests from the DCI. Department of State objections modified or nullified proposed operations, and the 303 Committee sometimes decided that some agency other than the CIA should undertake an operation or that CIA actions requested by Ambassadors on the scene should be rejected.12

The effectiveness of covert action has always been difficult for any administration to gauge, given concerns about security and the difficulty of judging the impact of U.S. initiatives on events. In October 1969 the new Nixon administration required annual 303 Committee reviews for all covert actions that the Committee had approved and automatic termination of any operation not reviewed after 12 months. On February 17, 1970, President Nixon signed National Security Decision Memorandum 40,13 which superseded NSC 5412/2 and changed the name of the covert action approval group to the 40 Committee, in part because the 303 Committee had been named in the media. The Attorney General was also added to the membership of the Committee. NSDM 40 reaffirmed the DCI’s responsibility for the coordination, control, and conduct of covert operations and directed him to obtain policy approval from the 40 Committee for all major and “politically sensitive” covert operations. He was also made responsible for ensuring an annual review by the 40 Committee of all approved covert operations.

The 40 Committee met regularly early in the Nixon administration, but over time the number of formal meetings declined and business came to be conducted via couriers and telephone votes. The Committee actually met only for major new proposals. As required, the DCI submitted annual status reports to the 40 Committee for each approved operation. According to the 1976 Church Committee Final Report, the 40 Committee considered only about 25 percent of the CIA’s individual covert action projects, concentrating on major projects that provided broad policy guidelines for all covert actions. Congress received briefings on only a few proposed projects. Not all major operations, moreover, were brought before the 40 Committee: President Nixon in 1970 instructed the DCI to promote a coup d’etat against Chilean President Salvador Allende without Committee coordination or approval.14

Presidential Findings Since 1974 and the Operations Advisory Group

The Hughes-Ryan amendment to the Foreign Assistance Act of 1974 brought about a major change in the way the U.S. Government approved covert actions, requiring explicit approval by the President for each action and expanding Congressional oversight and control of the CIA. The CIA was authorized to spend appropriated funds on covert actions only after the President had signed a “finding” and informed Congress that the proposed operation was important to national security.15

Executive Order 11905, issued by President Ford on February 18, 1976, in the wake of major Congressional investigations of CIA activities by the Church and Pike Committees, replaced the 40 Committee with the Operations Advisory Group, composed of the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs, the Secretaries of State and Defense, the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, and the DCI, who retained responsibility for the planning and implementation of covert operations. The OAG was required to hold formal meetings to develop recommendations for the President regarding a covert action and to conduct periodic reviews of previously-approved operations. EO 11905 also banned all U.S. Government employees from involvement in political assassinations, a prohibition that was retained in succeeding executive orders, and prohibited involvement in domestic intelligence activities.16

1 NSC 4–A, December 17, 1947, is printed in Foreign Relations,1945–1950, Emergence of the Intelligence Establishment, Document 257.

2 NSC 10/2, June 18, 1948, is printed ibid., Document 292.

3 Memorandum of conversation by Frank G. Wisner, “Implementation of NSC–10/2,” August 6, 1948, is printed ibid., Document 298.

4 NSC 10/5, “Scope and Pace of Covert Operations,” October 23, 1951, is printed in Foreign Relations, 1950–1955, The Intelligence Community, Document 90.

5 William M. Leary, editor, The Central Intelligence Agency: History and Documents (University of Alabama Press, 1984), p. 63; for text of NSC 5412, see Foreign Relations, 1950–1955, The Intelligence Community, Document 171.

6 Leary, The Central Intelligence Agency: History and Documents,pp. 63, 147–48; Final Report of the Select Committee To Study Governmental Operations With Respect to Intelligence Activities, United States Senate, Book I, Foreign and Military Intelligence (1976), pp. 50–51. For texts of NSC 5412/1 and NSC 5412/2, see Foreign Relations, 1950–1955, The Intelligence Community, Documents 212 and 250.

7 Leary, The Central Intelligence Agency: History and Documents, p. 63.

8 Ibid., p. 82.

9 See Foreign Relations, 1961–1963, volume X, Cuba, 1961–1962, Documents 270 and 278.

10 For text of NSAM No. 124, see ibid., volume VIII, National Security Policy, Document 68. NSAM No. 341, March 2, 1966, is printed ibid., 1964–1968, volume XXXIII, Organization and Management of U.S. Foreign Policy; United Nations, Document 56.

11 For text of NSAM No. 303, see ibid., Document 204.

12  Final Report of the Select Committee To Study Governmental Operations With Respect to Intelligence Activities, United States Senate, Book I, Foreign and Military Intelligence, pp. 56–57.

13 For text of NSDM 40, see Foreign Relations, 1969–1976, volume II, Organization and Management of U.S. Foreign Policy, 1969–1972, Document 203.

14  Final Report of the Select Committee To Study Governmental Operations With Respect to Intelligence Activities, United States Senate, Book I, Foreign and Military Intelligence, pp. 54–55, 57.

15 Public Law 93–559.

16 Executive Order 11905, “United States Foreign Intelligence Activities,” Weekly Compilation of Presidential Documents, Vol. 12, No. 8, February 23, 1976.

Documents on East and Southeast AsiaDocuments on East and Southeast Asia

Contents

Chapter I: East Asia and Pacific Regional, SEATO, ASEANChapter I: East Asia and Pacific Regional, SEATO, ASEAN

1. Memorandum of Conversation, San Clemente, February 10, 1973, 10:05–11:30 a.m.

San Clemente, February 10, 1973, 10:05–11:30 a.m.

Agnew briefed the President on his recently completed trip to Southeast Asia.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 1026, Presidential/HAK Memcons, January–March 1973. Secret. A transcript version of this conversation is ibid. Nixon’s talking points for the meeting, which he received under a February 9 memorandum from Scowcroft, are ibid., Box 952, VIP Visits, Vice-President’s SEA Visit, 1/28–2/10/73 [3 of 3]. Nixon saw a memorandum, February 9, from Agnew, which is the written report of the trip. (Ibid., [2 of 3])

2. National Security Study Memorandum 171, Washington, February 13, 1973.

Washington, February 13, 1973

On behalf of the President, Kissinger ordered a review of U.S. strategy for Asia.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Institutional Files (H-Files), Box H–196, NSSM 171 [1 of 2]. Secret. The undated paper in response to NSSM 171 was organized in five parts: first, an overview of the study; second, the questions raised for presidential decision; third, the issues involved in U.S. force planning for Asia; fourth, possible U.S. deployment postures in Asia for the FY 74–78 period; fifth, uncertainties in Asian trends and their potential force implications. Six issues were raised for presidential decision: first, the role of theater nuclear forces in support of conventional forces; second, maintaining a counterforce capability to reduce the PRC nuclear threat; third, whether the U.S. should encourage the ROK to seek a more balanced capability between its ground, air, and naval forces; fourth, the deployment of Marines on Okinawa; fifth, the deployment of the U.S. Army division in Korea; sixth, long term deployment planning for Asia. The paper is ibid.

3. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to President Nixon, Washington, August 1, 1973,

Washington, August 1, 1973

Kissinger recommended that Nixon approve the issuance of a NSDM on military strategy for Asia.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Institutional Files (H-Files), Box H–242, NSDMs, NSDM 230, Folder 2. Top Secret. Sent for action. Nixon initialed all four “approve” options, regarding security assistance, strategy guidance for U.S. forces, U.S. deployment planning, and the issuance of Tab A, the attached NSDM, which when signed became NSDM 230.

4. National Security Decision Memorandum 230, Washington, August 9, 1973.

Washington, August 9, 1973

On behalf of the President, Kissinger issued NSDM 230 providing guidance on future U.S. military planning for Asia.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Institutional Files (H-Files), Box H–242, NSDMs, NSDM 230, Folder 2. Top Secret. Copies were sent to the Director of the Arms Control and Disarmament Agency, the Director of Central Intelligence, the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, and the Director of the Office of Management and Budget.

5. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, September 21, 1973, 10:05–11:30 a.m.

Washington, September 21, 1973, 10:05–11:30 a.m.

Nixon met with Sunthorn and discussed SEATO and Thailand.

Source: Ford Library, National Security Adviser, Memoranda of Conversation, Box 2. Secret; Nodis. The meeting was held in the Oval Office. The President’s Daily Diary indicates that it lasted from 11:38 a.m. until noon. (National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, White House Central Files, President’s Daily Diary) Kissinger’s talking points, September 21, for Nixon’s meeting with Sunthorn are in the National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 278, Agency Files, SEATO.

6. Memorandum From Deputy Secretary of Defense Clements to Secretary of Defense Schlesinger, Washington, September 27, 1973.

Washington, September 27, 1973

Clements reported on his trip to East Asia.

Source: Washington National Records Center, OSD Files: FRC 330–78–0001, Korea 337, 27 Sep 73. Secret. The memorandum is stamped “Sec Def has seen. 29 Sep 1973.”

7. Memorandum From W.R. Smyser of the National Security Council Staff to Secretary of State Kissinger, Washington, January 15, 1974.

Washington, January 15, 1974

Smyser warned of the likelihood of domestic dissent in numerous Asian countries and of the Bureau of East Asian and Pacific Affairs’ tendency to meddle in such situations.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 1338, Unfiled Material, 1974, 5 of 9. Secret; Sensitive; Eyes Only. Sent for action. Kissinger did not approve or disapprove any of the recommendations on the last page but, near the top of the first page, Scowcroft wrote, “HAK has seen. Just watch the outgoing traffic carefully.”

8. Letter From President Nixon to Secretary of Agriculture Butz, Washington, June 5, 1974.

Washington, June 5, 1974

Nixon replied to Butz’s report regarding his recent tour of Asia.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 196, Agency Files, Agriculture, 1971–1974, Vol. II (Part 1). No classification marking. Butz’s April 24 letter to Nixon is attached but not published.

9. Minutes of the Acting Secretary of State’s Staff Meeting, Washington, June 17, 1974, 3 p.m.

Washington, June 17, 1974

John Norton Moore discussed Pacific archipelagos and the Law of the Sea.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Transcripts of Secretary of State Kissinger’s Staff Meetings, 1973–1977, E5177, Box 3. Secret.

10. Memorandum From W.R. Smyser of the National Security Council Staff to Secretary of State Kissinger, Washington, July 18, 1974.

Washington, July 18, 1974

Smyser described the situation in Asia.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 1338, Unfiled Material, 1974, 5 of 9. Secret; Sensitive; Eyes Only. Sent for information. Near the top of the first page, Kissinger wrote, “Good job. HK.” A handwritten addition, inserted before the last sentence on the final page, indicates that Smyser, in a telephone conversation, asked for the addition of the following sentence: “Our aid people also continually try to take money from Asian programs for other purposes elsewhere.” The earlier message from Smyser to Kissinger, to which Smyser refers, was not found.

11. Minutes of the Acting Secretary of State’s Staff Meeting, Washington, August 1, 1974, 11:15 a.m.

Washington, August 1, 1974, 11:15 a.m.

Kissinger met with the leadership of the Bureau of East Asian and Pacific Affairs.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Transcripts of Secretary of State Kissinger’s Staff Meetings, 1973–1977, E5177, Box 4. Secret. The papers to which Sneider and Hummel refer were not further identified.

12. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, October 1, 1974, 5 p.m.

Washington, October 1, 1974, 5 p.m.

Scowcroft met with Sunthorn and discussed Thailand and SEATO.

Source: Ford Library, National Security Adviser, Presidential Agency File, Box 17, Southeast Asia Treaty Organization. Confidential. The meeting was held at the White House.

13. Minutes of the Acting Secretary of State’s Staff Meeting, Washington, May 7, 1975, 8 a.m.

Washington, May 7, 1975, 8 a.m.

Kissinger and his staff discussed East Asian reactions to the fall of South Vietnam.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Transcripts of Secretary of State Kissinger’s Staff Meetings, 1973–1977, E5177, Box 7. Secret. The discussion of East Asian perceptions of U.S. foreign policy was not resumed at the next staff meeting, which occurred on May 9, 1975. (Ibid.)

14. Memorandum From W.R. Smyser of the National Security Council Staff to Secretary of State Kissinger, Washington, May 7, 1975.

Washington, May 7, 1975

Smyser provided options for reconsidering policy toward Asia.

Source: Ford Library, NSC Institutional Files (H-Files), Box H–36, NSSM 226, Review of U.S. Policy Toward the Korean Peninsula. Secret; Sensitive. Sent for action. Solomon and MacDonald concurred in the memorandum. Near the top of the first page, Kissinger wrote, “Agree. HK.” Attached but not published is Tab I, the memorandum to the President recommending NSSMs on Thailand and Korea, which Kissinger drew a line through and wrote, “not necessary.” Also attached but not published is Tab II, the memorandum to the President recommending a NSSM on Asia, which Kissinger drew a line through and wrote, “Not required.” As Smyser recommended, Scowcroft, acting on behalf of Kissinger, signed two NSSMs on May 27. NSSM 225, Document 401, requesting a review of U.S. policy toward Thailand and NSSM 226, Document 268, toward the Korean Peninsula.

15. Minutes of the Acting Secretary of State’s Staff Meeting, Washington, June 13, 1975, 8–9:05 a.m.

Washington, June 13, 1975, 8–9:05 a.m.

Habib reported on his trip to Asia.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Transcripts of Secretary of State Kissinger’s Staff Meetings, 1973–1977, E5177, Box 7. Secret.

16. Memorandum From Secretary of State Kissinger to President Ford, Washington, June 13, 1975.

Washington, June 13, 1975

Kissinger gave Ford a report on Habib’s visit to Southeast Asia.

Source:Ford Library, National Security Adviser, Presidential Country Files for East Asia and the Pacific, Box 1, Southeast Asia (3). Confidential; Exdis. Attached and published is Habib’s summary of his trip report. Ford initialed Kissinger’s covering memorandum.

17. Memorandum From W.R. Smyser of the National Security Council Staff to Secretary of State Kissinger, Washington, July 15, 1975.

Washington, July 15, 1975

Smyser wrote a memorandum to Kissinger on the situation in Asia and recommended that the National Security Council staff study a possible Presidential visit to Manila, Jakarta, and Singapore.

Source: Ford Library, National Security Adviser, Presidential Country Files for East Asia and the Pacific, Box 1, Southeast Asia (3). Secret; Sensitive; Eyes Only. Sent for action. Kissinger did not approve the recommendation on the last page, but the correspondence profile indicates that on July 16 Kissinger made a decision in response to Smyser’s recommendation. In December 1975, Ford visited Jakarta and Manila but not Singapore. The memorandum from Smyser to Kissinger, which is also discussed in Document 18, was not found.

18. Memorandum From John A. Froebe of the National Security Council Staff to Secretary of State Kissinger, Washington, July 21, 1975.

Washington, July 21, 1975

Froebe recommended that the United States resist an Australian initiative to terminate SEATO.

Source: Ford Library, National Security Adviser, Presidential Country Files for East Asia and the Pacific, Box 1, Australia (5). Secret. Sent for action. Kissinger did not initial a decision; a handwritten notation on the first page of the memorandum reads, “OBE.” At Kissinger’s staff meeting of July 22, Habib said, “The Australians have pulled away from the recommendations to dissolve SEATO.” Kissinger asked, “Would it be so bad for us if SEATO got dissolved, as long as we don’t do it?” Habib replied, “I think it’s important—what the Thais want—because the Thais are the ones that receive—they’re the only members of SEATO that don’t have a mutual security pact with us. And the Thais have indicated that they want very much for it to continue. There may be a halfway step where you keep the Manila Pact, where you don’t have the SEATO organization itself.” (National Archives, RG 59, Transcripts of Secretary of State Kissinger’s Staff Meetings, 1973–1977, E5177, Box 8)

19. Telegram 196461 From the Department of State to the Embassy in Thailand, August 19, 1975, 1459Z.

Thailand, August 19, 1975

The Department offered its views on the dissolution of SEATO.

Source: National Archives, Record Group 59, Central Foreign Policy Files. Confidential; Niact; Immediate. Repeated to Priority to Canberra, London, Manila, Wellington, and CINCPAC. Drafted by Gallagher; cleared in EA/RA, EA, and S/P; and approved by Sisco. Telegram 4467 from USUN, October 24, stated, “As anticipated, SEATO Council meeting of September 24 resulted in decision to phase out SEATO organization over period of approximately two years. FYI: Philippines made statement for record that both treaty and organization should be phased out together but as result of compromise between Thai and Philippine delegations, Romulo agreed that Philippines would remain silent on the Manila Pact.” (Ibid.)

20. Memorandum From Thomas J. Barnes and Richard Solomon of the National Security Council Staff to Secretary of State Kissinger, Washington, September 11, 1975.

Washington, September 11, 1975

Barnes and Solomon made recommendations on whether Ford should stop in East Asia before or after his trip to China, but Scowcroft responded that there would probably be no other stop.

Source: Ford Library, National Security Adviser, NSC Staff for East Asia and Pacific Affairs, Convenience Files, Box 18, President’s Trip to the Philippines and Indonesia, December 1975 (2). Secret. Sent for action. The Department of State concurred in the memorandum. None of the recommendations on the last page were approved or disapproved, but, in the top right hand corner of the first page, Scowcroft wrote, “Probably will be no other stop.”

21. Memorandum from the Director of the Policy Planning Staff (Lord) to Secretary of State Kissinger, Washington, October 16, 1975.

Washington, October 16, 1975

Lord summarized Armacost’s paper on U.S. Strategy in Asia.

Source:Ford Library, NSC Institutional Files (H-Files), Box H–40, NSSM 235, U.S. Interests and Objectives in the Asian-Pacific Region (2 of 2) (11). Secret. In the top right-hand corner of the first page, an unknown hand wrote, “Mike Armacost gave me this thoughtful document.” On October 3, Armacost drafted the attached paper, which is not published.

22. Editorial Note

23. National Security Study Memorandum 235, Washington, January 15, 1976.

Washington, January 15, 1976

On behalf of the President, Scowcroft directed the CIA and the Departments of State and Defense to review U.S. interests and objectives in the Asia-Pacific region in light of military base negotiations with the Philippines.

Source:Ford Library, NSC Institutional Files (H-Files), Box H–39, NSSM 235, U.S. Interests and Objectives in the Asia-Pacific Region (2 of 2) (1). Secret. A copy was also sent to the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff. On September 2, 1975, Barnes sent a memorandum to Kissinger suggesting a review of U.S. policy toward military bases in the Philippines in anticipation of future negotiations with the Philippine government. On the first page of Barnes’ memorandum, Scowcroft wrote, “HAK wants the review in terms of our entire Pacific posture and interests—not just SEA.” (Ibid., Box H–40, NSSM 235, U.S. Interests and Objectives in the Asia-Pacific Region [2 of 2] [11])

24. Memorandum From Thomas J. Barnes, Richard Solomon, and Clinton Granger of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Scowcroft), Washington, June 1, 1976.

Washington, June 1, 1976

Members of the National Security Council staff prepared a memorandum in anticipation of an Senior Review Group meeting on NSSM 235.

Source:Ford Library, NSC Institutional Files (H-Files), Box H–17, Institutional Files, Meetings (IFM), SRG Meeting, NSSM 235, June 4, 1976 (1). Secret. Sent for action. Attached but not published are Tab A, Scowcroft’s undated talking points, and Tab B, the major judgments of the inter-agency review. Tab C refers to the NSSM 235 paper. Section I of the NSSM 235 paper is attached but not published. Section II is ibid., Box H–39, NSSMs, NSSM 235 (1 of 2). Tab F, the proposed NSDM is ibid., H–91, SRG Mtgs., 6/4/76, NSSM 235, Folder 6.

25. Minutes of Senior Review Group Meeting, Washington, June 4, 1976, 3:10–4:08 p.m.

Washington, June 4, 1976, 3:10–4:08 p.m.

Scowcroft led a discussion of the NSSM 235 study.

Source: Ford Library, NSC Institutional Files (H-Files), Box H–24, Meeting Minutes, SRG, Originals, June 1976. Secret; Sensitive. The meeting was held in the White House Situation Room. The text of Walter’s briefing is ibid., H–91, SRG Meetings, June 4, 1976, NSSM 235, Folder 6. Scowcroft received these minutes under a covering June 28 memorandum from Davis. Michael Hornblow drafted the minutes and showed them to a colleague on the NSC staff (probably Thomas Barnes), who wrote, “My principle reaction is tears at how the meeting went, but I have made only minor adjustments to the disjointed proceedings which I think you caught quite well.” (Ibid.) In lieu of a NSDM, on November 5, Scowcroft sent out a new version of Part I of the NSSM 235 paper to DOS, DOD, and CIA, and noted, “The attached NSSM response as revised is circulated as a useful reference for U.S. interests and objectives in the Asia-Pacific region.” (Ibid., Box H–39, NSSMs, NSSM 235 [1 of 2], Folder 1)

1. Memorandum of Conversation, San Clemente, February 10, 1973, 10:05–11:30 a.m. 1. Memorandum of Conversation, San Clemente, February 10, 1973, 10:05–11:30 a.m. 1

San Clemente, February 10, 1973, 10:05–11:30 a.m.

MEMORANDUM
THE WHITE HOUSE
WASHINGTON

MEMORANDUM OF CONVERSATION

PARTICIPANTS:

President Nixon

Vice President Agnew

Brigadier General Brent Scowcroft, Deputy Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs

Ronald L. Ziegler, Press Secretary

DATE & TIME: February 10, 1973 10:05 - 11:30 a.m.
PLACE: President's Office Western White House
SUBJECT: Vice President Agnew's Return from his Southeast Asian Trip

The President greeted the Vice President at the helicopter pad at 10:00 a.m. and they proceeded together to the President's office. Following a picture taking session, the President spoke briefly to the press. He stated that there would not be a separate press statement because the Vice President's report would have to be assessed by the NSC. The President said that the Vice President's trip served a very important purpose in terms of building a structure of peace in Southeast Asia. The Vice President said that the layout of the trip was especially good because, having gone to the Indo-China countries first, he was able to answer questions for the leaders of the other countries which he visited. At that point, the press departed.

The President said he had decided to make those remarks to the press in order that the Vice President would not be confronted by the press following the meeting. The Vice President observed that he had ignored the press everywhere he went and that consequently, he got very little press coverage of his trip. The President replied that he had received quite a bit of press coverage, especially during the earlier portion of his trip.

The President then suggested that the Vice President give him a quick rundown of the trip. The President said he was under the impression that Prince Souvanna had been mostly worried about himself and his immediate situation, that the Thai were concerned not only about present conditions, but about the future role of the U.S., and that Prime Minister Lee had the most balanced appraisal of the whole situation in Southeast Asia. The President pointed out that Washington right now was very quiet. He said that when he returns to Washington, he proposes to have a Cabinet/NSC meeting and a meeting with the bipartisan leaders which would deal both with the trip of the Vice President and that of Dr. Kissinger to North Vietnam and China.

The Vice President noted that he had written a trip report, but that he would give the President a brief oral report, beginning with South Vietnam. He found President Thieu in the best attitude he had ever seen him. He said he had suggested several things to Thieu which might help him improve his image, for example, that build some sort of memorial to American soldiers in Saigon or lay a wreath at the Tomb of the Unknown Soldier in Washington. Thieu had made a good impression. Thieu said he was interested in holding elections as quickly as possible. He thought that the Communists should be allowed to get a fair shake in the elections. The President interjected that he hoped not too fair a shake. The Vice President quoted Thieu as saying that elections would have to wait until the National Council of National. Reconciliation and Concord was organized in order to ensure that elections would be considered fair by all parties.

[Mr. Ziegler entered at this point.]

The President suggested that Ambassador Bunker, who had done a great job, ought to be relieved now so that he could go out on top. The Vice President suggested that it might be wise to leave him for six more months or so. The President asked General Scowcroft to get Bunkers evaluation of how long he should stay.

The Vice President said that our people in Saigon believed the Communists could not get more than 15% of the vote in an election. He felt that Thieu now had some very good people around him, adequate technocrats who worked closely with their American counterparts and understood what must be done. He observed that governments in all the countries he visited were fearful about the prospects for continued economic aid.

The Vice President felt that things were bad in Cambodia. There was much factionalism, both in the government and within the Communist groups. He thought that Lon Nol was quite feeble physically but appeared to be making efforts to broaden his base and to curb Lon Non.

[At this point, the President called in Mr. Haldeman to tell him to call Secretary Shultz to get any further word regarding the status of monetary discussions.]

The President stated that we could not guarantee any government in Cambodia and that Lon Nol must understand that. Sihanouk would have his manipulations, the Chinese would be involved and so forth. We could not indefinitely keep on providing air support. The Vice President said that Prime Minister Lee felt that the Communists would not try to take over Cambodia because in its present state it constituted such a drain on us to keep the government propped up. He felt that the only way for any consensus in Cambodia to emerge would be to restore Sihanouk as some sort of figurehead.

The Vice President said he had never seen Thai Premier Thanom more nervous. He had openly committed himself as a friend of the United States and was afraid that we may leave him. He was also concerned at movements within his government and needed our support. Thanom was concerned about the degree to which we would draw down our forces in Thailand, and about the longer term of what would happen after the Nixon years, — for example, what if the doves get into control.

In Singapore, Lee told the Vice President that if Thailand went, all of Southeast Asia was gone. Lee was worried about Indonesia. Corruption was rampant and aid dollars in Indonesia eroded about twice as much as in Thailand. Lee felt that Thailand was defensible and the insurgency containable. Thailand was definitely worth our efforts.

The Vice President was impressed with the situation in Malaysia. They seemed to be doing well and had a good land reform program going. There was a big problem between Malaysia and the Philippines involving attempts to stir up Muslims against Marcos and to assassinate him. The Vice President said he had a file on the issue.

According to the Vice President, MAP details were causing substantial problems, stemming from delays in the MAP pipeline. Indonesia he said had received less than half of what had been promised.

The President asked whether Marcos was aware that we had been silent about his moves toward authoritarian rule. The Vice President replied that he was aware of it and did not raise the subject. He said Marcos gave him an extremely warm reception, with people lining the streets all along his travel route. Marcos called in TV cameras and press at lunch and gave a 20-minute very much pro-American toast.

The Vice President observed that our diplomatic representation was good in all the countries he visited except the Philippines. Charge Hamilton was very bad—pompous, self-important, and he talked down to Marcos. The President asked General Scowcroft to look into this and move him out discreetly. He told the Vice President that we were thinking of sending Ambassador Sullivan to the Philippines.

Prime Minister Lee had observed, the Vice President recalled, that President Nixon's courage in resuming the bombing and instituting a blockade last May had saved Southeast Asia.

Next the President asked about the chances of survival in South Vietnam. The Vice President said he had had doubts before but he now thought Thieu was on the right track. He had good people around him, he had sound ideas on the elections, and realized he had a public relations problem. He spoke good English and presented a good personal image, and the Vice President therefore thought he should have a television appearance while he is in the United States. The President asked Mr. Ziegler to begin planning for Thieu's visit now. If Thieu went before the press, we would have to provide questions and answers so that he would not get trapped. He was also concerned about Thieu going to Washington, and felt that if he did so, he would have to go before the Foreign Relations and Foreign Affairs Committees. The Vice President thought that Thieu should go to Washington, and the President said he would consider it. The Vice President felt that Thieu could meet with the President here in San Clemente, then go on his own to Washington for things such as a wreath-laying ceremony and visit to a hospital to see POW's. The President thought that might be a good idea, but that there should be no appearance like Meet the Press. If Thieu was to go on television, it should be prime time only. The President concluded by saying that we needed to think this out in relation to North Vietnam, a ceasefire, etc. For example, should he give Thieu a private dinner at San Clemente? Or should the Vice President give a large banquet for him in Los Angeles?

The Vice President observed that there was very little middle level competence in South Vietnam behind Thieu and a thin layer of technocrats. The President said that that was true of many countries, even the United States. We had poor middle leaders here also. Congressman Ford was good, but Mansfield, Scott and Albert, and so on, were not like their predecessors Rayburn, Taft and Johnson. The Vice President thought there were a number of good people in Malaysia but that Vietnam and Thailand were poor in that respect.

President Suharto had made comments about eventual neutrality in Southeast Asia, to which the Vice President said he had had to give a sharp response. He told Suharto that he realized he had to speak to his democratic audience, but that it was not helpful to take positions such as that. The President agreed. The Vice President felt that Foreign Minister Malik was a nothing as far as the U.S. was concerned. He had reportedly told the Australian Ambassador that the U.S. ought to get out of Asia. The State Department thinks highly of Malik but the Vice President thought that he was an enemy. The President felt that Malik was opposed to Suharto and State likes him because he speaks good English and was a gentleman.

The President pointed out that we should realize that democracy is hard to institute and that ii had taken the British 500 years to develop it. The Philippines, for example, were relatively advanced in democracy in Asia, but if Marcos felt he had to crack down to preserve the country, he should be able to. We had enough problems with democracy in this country but in less sophisticated lands, democracy could destroy them. The President observed that the African countries were all turning toward harsh authoritarianism but since the liberals like Africa, they make no comment about it. The press bitterly criticizes the state of democracy in countries which are friends, like South Vietnam, Brazil, and the Philippines, but not a critical word about Africa, such as in Burundi where 200,000 were killed without a harsh word about it in the New York Times. The President said he was not criticizing the lack of democracy in Africa but the point was that we should not try to force democracy on our friends. It was their foreign policies which we were interested in. We wanted democracy and would encourage democracy, but their attitude toward the U.S. was what was most important. He mentioned Sweden as an example of democracy with whom we had substantial foreign policy differences.

The Vice President said that he had found everywhere the realization that the American presence in Southeast Asia was essential. He said he had pointed out to Prime Minister Razak that if we withdrew from Southeast Asia, it would be very difficult for us to return, and that the Communist overt and covert enemies were much closer than the American ones it withdrew.

The President then said he wanted to make several points. He did not wish the Vice President to make any public speech except for his Lincoln Day speech, but that perhaps something could be done a week from Sunday. He pointed out that getting aid for South Vietnam would be very difficult, and even worse for North Vietnam. Aid would be a principal lever on North Vietnam, and perhaps the Chinese and the USSR would also be of help. He felt that many in Congress were so frustrated that we were able to get a decent peace that they would fight an aid program — ironically even the old Marshall Plan supporters. The President said we must play it tough and fight hard for a reconstruction program for Southeast Asia.

Next, the President turned to amnesty. He pointed out that Lincoln gave amnesty only to the South, whereas he shot and jailed dissenters in the north. The President hoped the opposition would go way out on a limb on the amnesty issue. His policy was that those who deserted or evaded their responsibilities must pay. He could not grant amnesty without accepting the contention of the deserters and evaders that what they did was right and what 2-1/2 million loyal citizens had done was wrong. Nobody wants war but it is everyone's duty to serve when the need arises. The President said he would not change his mind and that individual hardship cases would be treated as would any other ordinary criminal hardship case.

The President then asked for a report on eliminating the Peace Corps. He observed that he had ordered it done away with. He didn't think it serves our foreign policy and he thought it was a poor use of government money. He felt it a useful challenge for American youth, but thought it should be a private and not a government program.

The Vice President thought that due to Marshall Green, we had gone overboard on aid to Indonesia. Indonesia was getting more than it needed, while we were unable to give Thailand and South Vietnam what they required. He felt that we should give military assistance to Suharto but we could cut economic aid if more was required for Thailand and South Vietnam. The President agreed that we should give Indonesia plenty of military assistance but should let others do more in the economic aid field. The Vice President concurred, and said that while the Japanese give the same amount of aid as we do, they get much more credit and were getting a lot of preferential trade deals with Indonesia. The Vice President thought that Indonesia was Marshall Green's "baby," and that if we lost the Indochina Peninsula, we could forget Indonesia. While Suharto had laid out the red carpet for him, the Vice President thought the Japanese were out-maneuvering us in Indonesia and that corruption was rampant. The President agreed with all of these observations and said that it was too bad Lee could not run the whole area. He asked if Marcos was doing all right. He pointed out that he would defend him strongly.

The President then turned to economic aid to higher education. He said he was not satisfied with the way that OMB and HEW were responding to his orders to cut such assistance. He said that within 48 hours he wanted a paper which would do the following: 1. List the total direct and indirect aid to higher education in all departments and agencies in the federal government.

2. List how much aid to higher education was cut in the FY74 budget. He said he had asked for a 50% cut.

3. Describe what was being done, especially in DOD, to cut down all aid to institutions like MIT where those doing the research were opposed to his foreign policy goals. In that regard he wanted a list of the top 20 institutions receiving aid and how much each got. He dated he wanted the facts in the matter and expected Weinberger to be prepared to discuss them when he came out Monday for the swearing-in ceremony.

The Vice President then handed me the file which he had described, which he said contained a description of a plot on Marcos' life in which American citizens were involved. The President said that the file should be given to the CIA for analysis; it should not be circulated to State or the NSC staff in order to ensure against leaks. He said that we should check carefully on the involvement of any American citizens and whether or not they had contacts in our embassy in Manila, etc.

The Vice President observed that this file shows Marcos had a right to be edgy about assassination and that this was the only subject that Marcos had really taken up with him.

The President observed that we must realize that we could not take upon ourselves all the world's problems nor should we be blamed for everything which goes wrong. In the Middle East, for example, any number of unstable characters could start something, and whenever something happened people always asked what the US has done.

The Vice President then remembered that Marcos had mentioned one other issue — the Spratley Islands. He was concerned about the PRC's claim to them and its impact on Southeast Asia. The President agreed that we should look into this matter.

He then suggested that the Vice President reiterate our amnesty position in his Lincoln Day speech. He felt it would be particularly appropriate to do it Lincoln Day since Lincoln had given amnesty only for the South but had shot and jailed deserters in the north. Amnesty for deserters and draft dodgers would seem to vindicate their claim of a higher morality and reduce those who had loyally served our country to a lower morality. When the Vice President pointed out that his speech was closed to the press, the President suggested that he could perhaps put the amnesty matter in his press release, and link it with the POW return. He should point out that our position on amnesty was not because we're not compassionate, but because it would be a betrayal of those who had served. When the Vice President said he did not understand the position of supporters of amnesty, the President said they took their position because they felt this war was immoral and that desertion and draft dodging were therefore a proper and moral course of action to take.

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 1026, Presidential/HAK Memcons, January–March 1973. Secret. A transcript version of this conversation is ibid. Nixon’s talking points for the meeting, which he received under a February 9 memorandum from Scowcroft, are ibid., Box 952, VIP Visits, Vice-President’s SEA Visit, 1/28–2/10/73 [3 of 3]. Nixon saw a memorandum, February 9, from Agnew, which is the written report of the trip. (Ibid., [2 of 3])

2. National Security Study Memorandum 171, Washington, February 13, 1973. 2. National Security Study Memorandum 171, Washington, February 13, 1973.1

Washington, February 13, 1973

NATIONAL SECURITY COUNCIL
WASHINGTON, D.C. 20506

February 13, 1973

National Security Study Memorandum 171
TO: The Secretary of State
The Secretary of Defense
The Director, Central Intelligence

SUBJECT: U.S. Strategy for Asia

The President has directed that in the aftermath of the Vietnamese conflict, current U.S. strategy for Asia should be reviewed.

The study should define current U.S. strategy in Asia and changes that the U.S. could adopt for the future. In developing these policy options the study should consider: —A range of specific defense objectives.

—Alternative goals of U.S. security assistance programs in terms of the size and type of threat allied forces could be structured to meet. Economic and political constraints should be considered.

—Associated U.S. conventional force requirements and the likely impact on overall U.S. force levels. In considering the impact on overall force levels, the study should assume no change in U.S. strategy for defense of NATO.

—The impact of adopting these policy options on relations with our Allies and potential adversaries. This work should consider, among other things, the political factors that are likely to influence relations between Asian nations over the coming five years.

The study should assess our current nuclear doctrines, forces, and employment planning in Asia and develop alternative doctrines which could be used to support our future planning. The focus should be on the use of nuclear weapons in support of conventional forces (Allied and U.S.). The relationship between these alternative doctrines and U.S. nuclear delivery systems and deployments should be considered.

The study should also evaluate alternative U.S. military basing postures for the Asian mainland and Western Pacific islands for the FY74 to FY75 period in terms of: —Capabilities to support alternative military strategies against the current and projected threat. For example, the capability inherent in various deployment postures to move the necessary men and material should be evaluated.

—Allied reactions to alternative basing postures including the phasing from our current deployment posture to the alternative considered. Particular attention should be given to an evaluation of how various deployment postures would impact on Allied perceptions of U.S. capability and willingness to support strategy objectives.

The analysis should be based upon the work done previously for the NSSM-69 study and should be completed by March 30, 1973, for review by the Defense Program Review Committee prior to its consideration by the President. The study will be prepared by a committee composed of the representatives of the addressees and the NSC staff and chaired by a representative of the Department of Defense.

[signed]
Henry A. Kissinger

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Institutional Files (H-Files), Box H–196, NSSM 171 [1 of 2]. Secret. The undated paper in response to NSSM 171 was organized in five parts: first, an overview of the study; second, the questions raised for presidential decision; third, the issues involved in U.S. force planning for Asia; fourth, possible U.S. deployment postures in Asia for the FY 74–78 period; fifth, uncertainties in Asian trends and their potential force implications. Six issues were raised for presidential decision: first, the role of theater nuclear forces in support of conventional forces; second, maintaining a counterforce capability to reduce the PRC nuclear threat; third, whether the U.S. should encourage the ROK to seek a more balanced capability between its ground, air, and naval forces; fourth, the deployment of Marines on Okinawa; fifth, the deployment of the U.S. Army division in Korea; sixth, long term deployment planning for Asia. The paper is ibid.

3. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to President Nixon, Washington, August 1, 1973, 3. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to President Nixon, Washington, August 1, 1973,1

Washington, August 1, 1973

MEMORANDUM
THE WHITE HOUSE
WASHINGTON
ACTION

August 1, 1973

MEMORANDUM FOR: THE PRESIDENT
FROM: HENRY A. KISSINGER
SUBJECT: Military Strategy for Asia

The Defense Program Review Committee has completed a review of our military strategy and planning for Asia in the aftermath of the Vietnam war. The study covered a full range of strategic questions and has recommended that guidance be distributed on several issues. Four issues were considered ready for decision: — the broad objectives of Security Assistance planning for Asia;

— basic strategic guidance for our conventional forces in Asia;

— our tactical nuclear planning;

— long term deployment planning.

Security Assistance

The issue here is to determine the objectives of our Security Assistance program planning for Asia.

The study finds that an economically feasible goal would be to build allied capabilities aimed at defending against local non-PRC threats. Trying to build allied capability against an attack by the PRC would be beyond allied economic capabilities.

Their recommendation is to focus on building sufficient allied capabilities against local threats with an emphasis on providing adequate ground forces. Once self-sufficiency against local threats is attained, additional efforts could be applied to improving ground forces against PRC-type attacks but this would not be set as an explicit goal for our Asian programs.

Approve [RN initialed]
Disapprove

Strategy Guidance for U.S. Forces

The current guidance for Asia, issued in 1969, calls for planning forces adequate to support an allied defense against an attack by the PRC and its ally in either Northeast or Southeast Asia as well as a non-PRC attack in the other Asian theater. Despite the diplomatic changes that have occurred since 1969, the committee believes the strategy guidance remains appropriate. They, therefore, recommend reaffirming the existing guidance. In view of the infeasibility of building allied capabilities to withstand a PRC size attack without U.S. ground forces, they also recommend planning an Asian reinforcement capability that includes the air, sea, and ground forces.

Approve [RN initialed]
Disapprove

U.S. Deployment Planning

The study found that the maintenance of an adequate U.S. Asian military presence to be critical to preserving Asian stability and confidence in a continued U.S. commitment. The committee, therefore, recommends that we plan to maintain essentially constant levels of Asian deployed combat units for the foreseeable future. Only minor changes in support and manning would occur and we would plan on notifying Korea, Japan, and the Philippines of these plans. Deployments on Taiwan and Thailand would be kept under continuous review.

Approve [RN initialed]
Disapprove

If you approve of these recommendations, I will sign the attached NSDM (Tab A).

RECOMMENDATION

That you authorize me to sign the attached NSDM at Tab A.

Approve [RN initialed]
Disapprove

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Institutional Files (H-Files), Box H–242, NSDMs, NSDM 230, Folder 2. Top Secret. Sent for action. Nixon initialed all four “approve” options, regarding security assistance, strategy guidance for U.S. forces, U.S. deployment planning, and the issuance of Tab A, the attached NSDM, which when signed became NSDM 230.

4. National Security Decision Memorandum 230, Washington, August 9, 1973. 4. National Security Decision Memorandum 230, Washington, August 9, 1973.1

Washington, August 9, 1973

August 9, 1973

National Security Decision Memorandum 230

TO: The Secretary of State
The Secretary of Defense

SUBJECT: U.S. Strategy and Forces for Asia

Based on a review of the NSSM 171 study, the President has decided that the following guidance should govern our future military planning for Asia.

Strategic Planning

The basic strategic guidance for Asia as originally defined by NSDM 27 shall remain in force. U.S. forces should be planned so that U.S. and Allied forces would be capable of conducting a combined conventional defense against a joint PRC/Communist ally attack in either Northeast or Southeast Asia as well as a non-PRC attack in the other Asian theater. The U.S. should continue to plan for an adequate capability to reinforce our Allies in support of this strategy, including the full range of land, naval, and tactical air forces.

Tactical nuclear forces should be planned in Asia as a hedge against the failure of a conventional defense. However, this does not preclude early use of tactical nuclear weapons in the event of a major PRC attack.

Security Assistance planning will continue to focus on assisting our Allies to meet indigenous and non-PRC communist nation threats. Planning will not be based on building Allied self-sufficiency in meeting major threats from the PRC. However, improvements in Allied capabilities to enhance a joint U.S. /Allied defense will be planned as a lower priority goal.

U.S. Deployments

U.S. planning for the next five years should include Asian baseline deployments at essentially current levels in Korea, Japan/Okinawa, and the Philippines. Normal minor adjustments in manning and support forces would be made; but, any proposed changes in combat force levels or major changes in manpower levels should be submitted to the President for approval. Deployments on Taiwan and in Thailand will be kept under continuous review. There will be no increases in forces or manpower on Taiwan without prior Presidential approval.

The Department of State should develop a scenario for informing the governments of Korea, Philippines, and Japan and other governments they believe appropriate of our deployment plans for FY 74. This scenario should be submitted to the President for approval by August 15, 1973.

cc: The Director, Arms Control and Disarmament Agency
The Director, Central Intelligence
The Chairman, Joint Chiefs of Staff
The Director, Office of Management and Budget

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Institutional Files (H-Files), Box H–242, NSDMs, NSDM 230, Folder 2. Top Secret. Copies were sent to the Director of the Arms Control and Disarmament Agency, the Director of Central Intelligence, the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, and the Director of the Office of Management and Budget.

5. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, September 21, 1973, 10:05–11:30 a.m. 5. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, September 21, 1973, 10:05–11:30 a.m.1

Washington, September 21, 1973, 10:05–11:30 a.m.

MEMORANDUM
THE WHITE HOUSE
WASHINGTON
MEMORANDUM OF CONVERSATION

PARTICIPANTS:

President Nixon

SEATO Secretary General Sunthorn

Major General Brent Scowcroft, Deputy Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs

DATE: Friday, September 21, 1973
PLACE: The Oval Office

The President: Are you on your way to New York?

Sunthorn : We are having a SEATO meeting on the 28th, but we are having a cultural meeting on the 27th.

The President: How are my friends in Thailand?

Sunthorn : They are all fine.

The President: I have visited there many times.

Sunthorn : I remember meeting you. I flew from London to Bangkok just to meet you. I still remember a fruitful time as Ambassador here. Your talk and reassuring statements.

The President: I wish I could have seen you more often. The Vietnam war, of course, made it difficult. With the war over, and speculation about the U.S. role in the Pacific, I want to assure you the U.S. values SEATO. It is important to our foreign policy and to Southeast Asia and Thailand. This is important to me for a variety of reasons, official and personal.

The organization has my continued support. With the war over and the situation in flux, there must be no indication that we will withdraw. That would leave a vacuum. Congress and many people want us to get out of anywhere. But we are important to peace and stability. There will be no signals that they will have a free hand in the area. I wanted you to hear it first hand.

Sunthorn: That is reassuring to hear. I will pass it on. I am new to the job, but am convinced SEATO can play a useful role.

The President: Tell me about it.

Sunthorn : A lower profile is necessary, but the threat of subversion may be even higher now.

The President: I agree.

Sunthorn : Despite the aid which may have given to Thailand and the Philippines on a bilateral basis, we think SEATO can supplement that. If we did not make efforts on projects, bilateral aid might not be coming.

For example, in Northeast Thailand we need 5,000 tube wells. Your government and my government have been working, but only about 500 have been dug.

When Mr. Faulkner of New Zealand came to see me, he said New Zealand would help us but bilaterally because SEATO aid is not effective. I told him that SEATO aid could be very effective and complementary to the bilateral. Both are necessary and don't duplicate each other.

The President: We will consider that carefully. That can give meaning to the organization. The military is very important, but this is also helpful.

Sunthorn : As Dr. Kissinger said [in his testimony], we have to emphasize humanitarian assistance and downplay the military. Both Thailand and the Philippines need aid.

The President: The Philippines and Thailand are the vital hinges of Southeast Asia. How do the Philippines feel about SEATO?

Sunthorn : That is a good question. I met with President Marcos, but General Romulo doesn't have the same enthusiasm as President Marcos for SEATO. President Marcos assured me that EATO has a useful role and I will support it. Romulo may feel differently.

The President: We are in a difficult period. You must wonder if you are just a caretaker. I talk now to you as a Thai. Thailand is the key — it is a place the Communists would like to get. They must not — the SEATO context is important to protecting Thailand.

We must put up a warning flag that the U.S. is supporting SEATO and the SEATO umbrella is helpful to protect the area. It gives us a reason to say "look here, we have a treaty commitment." It is better than a unilateral commitment. SEATO was a big umbrella before I got here — not that it was wrong. Better than 17 million people now live in freedom. Our opponents have complained — about the Christmas bombing, etc. But Southeast Asia would have suffered irreparable damage if we hadn't stood fast.

Sunthorn : Thailand stood by you.

The President: Your leaders must know they have a strong friend in this office. We won't let them down, despite what our newspapers say.

Sunthorn : I will convey this, Mr. President.

The President: How are things in Thailand? How are you doing meeting inflation?

Sunthorn : As you know, we depend on rice. Prices went very high. We had queues of people, which is unusual for us. Now the situation is much better.

As you know, the former rice exporting countries have no more rice, except the Thais. Everyone wants our rice.

The President: There is right now a world-wide food shortage. There used to be a surplus. Now people are eating better. We have got to figure out ways to produce more.

Sunthorn : Cambodia used to export. Now they import.

The President: I hope Cambodia can survive a while. I am surprised. Congress has imposed a bombing halt. This is important to the Thai border.

Sunthorn : Our economy is generally good. The rubber price is high, also tin. Our price index is up 30% because of the rice. Otherwise we are doing well.

1 Source: Ford Library, National Security Adviser, Memoranda of Conversation, Box 2. Secret; Nodis. The meeting was held in the Oval Office. The President’s Daily Diary indicates that it lasted from 11:38 a.m. until noon. (National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, White House Central Files, President’s Daily Diary) Kissinger’s talking points, September 21, for Nixon’s meeting with Sunthorn are in the National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 278, Agency Files, SEATO.

6. Memorandum From Deputy Secretary of Defense Clements to Secretary of Defense Schlesinger, Washington, September 27, 1973. 6. Memorandum From Deputy Secretary of Defense Clements to Secretary of Defense Schlesinger, Washington, September 27, 1973.1

Washington, September 27, 1973

THE DEPUTY SECRETARY OF DEFENSE
WASHINGTON, D.C. 20301

MEMORANDUM FOR THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE

SUBJECT: Korea/Far East Trip Report, 7-19 September 1973 (U)

INTRODUCTION

At your direction, I led the U.S. delegation to the 6th annual meeting of the U.S.-Korea Security Consultative Meeting (SCM) held at Seoul on 12-13 September, During the four days in Korea, I met privately with President Park, Prime Minister Kim, Minister of Defense Yu, and other key Korean and U.S. civilian and military officials. On our way out to Seoul, we spent a day in Hawaii for detailed discussions at CINCPAC relevant to the SCM and the other countries to be visited. Upon conclusion of the SCM, I directed Bob Hill to proceed to Taiwan for a two-day visit with key Nationalist Chinese officials, inasmuch as ranking DOD visits to Nationalist China have been few and far between of late.

While in Bangkok, I had important, long-range discussions with Prime Minister Thanom, members of the U.S. Mission, General Vogt and his key people in USSAG, and the staff at the Joint Casualty Resolution Center. During my day up country in Thailand, Dennis Doolin visited Cambodia for discussions with U.S. Embassy and GKR/FANK officials. We next visited Okinawa for a helicopter overflight of the facilities on the island, and then proceeded to Tokyo for two days of discussions with U.S. and GOJ officials, and concluded the trip with a wrap-up session at CINCPAC.

I will keep this report short and touch upon only the most important aspects of each stop. I reported to you by cable on 14 September the results of the US/Korea SCM and will not cover that ground again in this memo. My observations and recommendations concerning each of the countries visited are enumerated below.

In brief, I consider the trip to have been timely and worthwhile. In both the SCM in Seoul and my meeting with Prime Minister Thanom in Bangkok, I believe that we raised the dialogue to a new level of candor, in that we clearly told the leaders of both these nations what we can do, what we can't do, and why. I believe that officials at the highest level of both governments have a better appreciation of the realities that we face in the U.S., a better understanding of what the Nixon Doctrine really means, and I came away feeling that relations with our Asian friends are on the way to becoming a partnership in fact as well as in name.

KOREA

In my private meeting with President Park, it was quite clear that he understands the Congressional pressure facing our Security Assistance legislation. He told me he knows that if Congress cuts the funds, there is nothing that can be done about it and that the job then is to look for alternative ways to complete the original plan. However, it was equally clear that this appreciation of U.S. realities was not present (or, at least, not evident) at the ROK General Staff level. For this reason, my remarks at the three formal meetings of the SCM were candid and to the point, and I attempted to leave them with no sense of illusion that somehow the "White Knight" would miraculously ride in to save the situation and complete the Modernization Plan as originally envisioned. They got the message, and I am convinced that by telling it straight, we have assisted both President Park and Minister Yu in dealing with the ROK General Staff. The U.S. MAAG Staffs in Korea and their ROK counterparts are now going to sit down and reassess the MOD Plan on the basis of a realistic hierarchy of priorities vis-a-vis scarce MAP dollars. Minister Yu and I parted on the best of terms, and our Ambassador, Phil Habib, said that the meeting will permit future Embassy and MAAG dealing with the ROKG to be conducted on a much more realistic basis. Phil is an outstanding representative of President Nixon. His obvious rapport with, and access to, President Park is quite evident.

I have prepared detailed Memoranda of Conversation for each of my calls in Korea, Thailand, and Japan. They are available, as well as Bob Hill's and Dennis Doolin's individual reports on Taiwan and Cambodia. You should read the MemCon of my meeting with President Park. He is deeply suspicious of Japan's military intentions.

THAILAND

On September, I met for 90 minutes with Prime Minister Thanom, Air Chief Marshall Dawee, and Deputy Foreign Minister Chartchai. As in Korea, in response to Thanom's attempt to reopen discussion of the military equipment "wish-list" that he gave to the Vice President last February, I replied that I had already seen and studied the list, but that I had no authority to make any commitments until the second quarter FY74 CRA level for military assistance is resolved by the Congress. Several other feeble probes were made, but they were essentially pro forma and indicated that Thanom, like President Park, knows the Congressional score. (Incidentally, I think his understanding has been aided by the excellent reporting of his Ambassador in Washington, Mister Anand.)

Of immediate relevance was the clear statement by the Prime Minister that he is not pressing for additional substantial U.S. redeployments from Thailand in the immediate months ahead. I put the question to him directly, and he replied, "We never put a deadline on this. We discuss it among ourselves with regard to U.S. units that are not being utilized. When real peace comes to this area, the problem will solve itself (i.e., U.S. troops will no longer be needed). It depends on the situation at the time." (See MemCon.) This is not to say that future reductions are not desirable—they are—but the heat that has been portrayed in Ambassador Unger's cables just isn't there, as far as the Prime Minister is concerned. Moreover, it was good that Dawee and Chartchai attended the meeting because they are two of the major proponents of a faster U.S. drawdown in Thailand. Chartchai is presently in New York and scheduled to meet with Dr. Kissinger, and I strongly suggested that he discuss future U.S. reductions in Thailand with Henry.

CAMBODIA

Dennis Doolin talked with our Mission in Phnom Penh (but not the Khmer) about our MAP problems and the second quarter CRA. Doolin reports the unanimous belief on the part of our Mission that the GKR will make it through the rainy season. The Mission also believes that they can make it through the next dry season and beyond, but whether they will or not depends upon a number of moves that must be taken, the most important of which is the conscription of additional manpower. In this regard, the GKR is making a grave mistake in proposing a mobilization decree that will affect only those males in the 25-35 age bracket. This is not a realistic conscription law, especially in a nation that is fighting for its very survival. Conscription should start at 18 years of age, and the Embassy is pressing daily for a revision of the draft legislation. If FANK does not get the necessary personnel, the question of survival is academic. If they do meet the personnel requirements, the GKR can survive. Whether it wi11 or not depends upon the one item that cannot be put into any military assistance program—the desire to prevail over the enemy.

[text not declassified]

While in Southeast Asia, I also reviewed EAGLE PULL. The plan is ready to be implemented on eight hours' notice, and six hours is the scheduled time to withdraw approximately 600 people. Depending on the situation at the time, security forces will be available. The Mission in Phnom Penh has weekly meetings on the subject, and the Charge is fully satisfied with the State of readiness, as is General Vogt, who considers this contingency of the utmost importance.

TAIWAN

I asked Bob Hill to visit the ROC while I continued on to Thailand and that he provide his observations and impressions of the situation there. Bob reports that the general attitude in Taiwan on international security relations in the East Asian and the Pacific area is cautious but confident. GRC officials foresee the continued psychological and political requirement for a visible U.S. military presence throughout the area to be the best deterrence against aggression in the years ahead. In discussions with General Lai Ming-tang, Chief of the General Staff, Bob reaffirmed the U.S. commitment to the Mutual Defense Treaty and our resolve to maintain close relations with the Republic of China (ROC). In reply, General Lai and Premier Chiang Kai-shek stated that the Republic of China was optimistic and that economic trade, and foreign investments projections into the future were very bright. Bob met on two occasions for a total of three hours with Premier Chiang Kai-shek. The Premier said that his country will remain resolutely anti-communist, will never abandon its basic principles and accommodate with Peking. The ROC will remain a faithful ally of the U.S. The Premier also said that his government was considering sending high-level representatives to Washington to discuss security relations, and that he hoped that the GRC would not be excluded from future U.S. policy moves vis-a-vis Peking.

JAPAN

Bob Hill rejoined the party on Okinawa where we stopped for a 90-minute helicopter flight over our various facilities. On that island is the most bewildering and strewn-about hodgepodge of installations imaginable. It is no wonder that the Okinawans, as well as the GOJ, are pressing for meaningful consolidations of our holdings there. Our present posture on the island is indefensible politically as well as cost-wise, and I am convinced that if these conso1idations and relocations are not effected soon, our position on the southern part of the island could become untenable within a few years.

During a brief but intensive stay in Tokyo, I met with Foreign Minister Ohira and his key aides as well as the Director General of the Japan Defense Agency, Mr. Yamanaka. I also had detailed discussions with Ambassador Ingersoll and his staff, as well as Lt. General Pursley and his key component officers. I sensed a stronger sense of confidence on the part of the Tanaka government than was the case four or five months ago. The mood is also prevalent in Japan that the East-West detente is taking hold and will continue to progress. At the same time, however, the Japanese are keenly interested and concerned with regard to future U.S. troop levels in Asia, especially in Korea. I believe that the future of our base structure in the Home Islands over the next few years is good, provided that we rationalize this structure by further effective consolidations and relocations. The Japanese are keenly interested in joint participation with the U.S. in the Siberian oil venture.

Mr. Yamanaka also recounted his recent meeting with South Korean Prime Minister Kim Chong Pil, at which Kim commented negatively on the quality of U.S. material assistance received under the MOD Plan. Yamanaka also evinced concern with regard to U.S. intentions vis-a-vis Taiwan, which he referred to as an "isolated island outpost of the Free World." I steered the conversation back to a discussion of the Japanese Self-Defense Forces. The Japanese also commented on the Kim Dae Jung kidnapping at some length. I told them that, as Deputy Secretary of Defense, the matter was not within my purview and, thus, I had not discussed it with Korean officials

As elsewhere, I stressed the theme of true partnership and mutuality as our relations develop. I made no specific request of the Japanese, other than that it is their specific responsibility to define what they mean by self-defense. The definition of this self-defense planning is of the utmost importance in our developing realistic joint defense planning with the Japanese. For their part, Mr. Yamanaka said that his government was determined that the homeporting of the USS Midway go smoothly and that we have no reason for concern in this regard.

Mr. Yamanaka is a blunt and abrasive fellow and, in attempting to be one of the boys, comes across like a bull in a China shop. He indicated that he wants to travel to Washington, official invitation or no.

CONCLUDING POINTS

Based upon my observations and conversations on this trip, I believe there are certain recommendations and actions that need to be followed up, as follows: 1. Our base posture in Okinawa must be realigned and consolidated as soon as possible. I understand that the consolidation plan prepared by Lt. General Pursley's staff was forwarded to CINCPAC on 14 September. This study will require close review and prompt action.

2. The expertise and capabilities of our forces in Thailand are not being fully utilized. Thus, there should be a gradual step-up in the training of Thai forces on U.S.-used bases, culminating in a fully integrated training program (to include command and control).

3. As in the Korean case, described in my 14 September cable, there should be similar joint business ventures in Thailand related to in-country production of certain items of military equipment.

4. With regard to Cambodia, FANK training must be intensified before the dry season arrives in November and we must work to ensure that adequate manpower is available. Our Mission in Phnom Penh must not relax its pressure on the GKR to lower the draft age to eighteen, instead of twenty-five.

5. You should approve a Thai request for an additional squadron of OV-10's which, subject to your concurrence, would be declared excess to USAF needs. The Thai already have two squadrons of OV-10's, are utilizing them effectively, and have the maintenance skills to keep them operational. This additional squadron is necessary for both the support of ground forces and command and control.

6. In the future, we should be very cautious with regard to any future reduction of U.S. forces on Taiwan. As a contingency against the possible loss of vital base rights in both Okinawa and the Philippines at some future time, and its obvious impact upon the regional security interests of the U.S., the retention of a visible and meaningful U.S. presence on Taiwan should be considered.

In sum, it was a most rewarding trip—both for me and my staff—and, I believe, substantively, as the dialogue with Seoul and with Bangkok has moved to a more realistic plane. The support that I received from Bob Hill, Dennis Doolin, Bill Beecher, and the rest of the staff was truly excellent, and our embassies and military missions extended us every consideration. I strongly recommend that you visit Japan either later this year or early next year to give further evidence of our keen desire to move to this new level of meaningful partnership with our key allies.

Beill [signed]

1 Source: Washington National Records Center, OSD Files: FRC 330–78–0001, Korea 337, 27 Sep 73. Secret. The memorandum is stamped “Sec Def has seen. 29 Sep 1973.”

7. Memorandum From W.R. Smyser of the National Security Council Staff to Secretary of State Kissinger, Washington, January 15, 1974. 7. Memorandum From W.R. Smyser of the National Security Council Staff to Secretary of State Kissinger, Washington, January 15, 1974.1

Washington, January 15, 1974

MEMORANDUM
NATIONAL SECURITY COUNCIL
ACTION

January 15, 1974

MEMORANDUM FOR SECRETARY KISSINGER
FROM: W.R. Smyser [WRS initialed]

SUBJECT: Domestic Dissent in Asia and U.S. Policy

We must recognize that the recent increase in domestic tension that has developed in South Korea will not be the only instance of that kind in Asia during the coming year.

Similar crises can occur at any time in at least four different countries: —In Thailand, where the present centrist caretaker government may be unable to find a path to constitutionalism that will be acceptable to the military on the one hand and to the students and their supporters on the other. If elections are held within the next three months as promised, the resulting government is likely to be more responsive to student and intellectual pressures — which could sharpen its problems with the Thai military leadership and perhaps even lead to a coup.

—In Indonesia, where the small but growing student protest that began late last year against official corruption, government shortcomings in economic development, and foreign investment (particularly Japanese) poses the first significant protest movement that the Suharto Government has had to face.

—In the Philippines, where President Marcos' disorganized opposition has recently begun a more earnest effort to mount effective pressure against his political controls.

—In South Vietnam, where President Thieu is about to ask for a constitutional amendment permitting him to run again. You know what the reaction will be, here and in Vietnam.

We are supplying aid to all these governments, and the opposition is well aware of how to make an impact among sympathetic American journalists as well as on the Hill. We could have some problems this spring, when all the school terms begin again in Asia and when the opposition figures begin granting interviews and staging various forms of protest.

As I noted in my memo of last week regarding Korea, I understand that the President and you believe we must maintain our distance from these domestic disputes, even though we will pay a certain price.

The EA bureaucracy, however, often still wants and tries to instruct its posts, whenever such incidents occur, to go in and give advice to our allies, usually put in terms of western political value judgments — whether or not that advice is sound. They do this partly out of honest sentiment and partly because it enables them to tell our press and our Congress that they are doing their best to promote progress toward democracy. If they do it on any single case, it will be harder to dissuade them on others.

We can try to control these pressures from here, if you wish to do so. We can stop cables and try to get a deeper understanding of your reservations about involvement in other nations' domestic affairs. But it would also be helpful if you could either talk to Mr. Ingersoll about this yourself or ask me to talk to him about it. Our approach would be more consistent if the relevant EA offices know what you want in advance.

Options 1. That you authorize us to continue blocking State messages that lead to our involvement in the domestic problems of our allies in Asia.
Approve
Disapprove

2. That you authorize me to discuss this with Mr. Ingersoll along the above lines.
Approve
Disapprove

3. That you speak to Mr. Ingersoll yourself (we can give you talking points, if you wish).
Approve
Disapprove

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 1338, Unfiled Material, 1974, 5 of 9. Secret; Sensitive; Eyes Only. Sent for action. Kissinger did not approve or disapprove any of the recommendations on the last page but, near the top of the first page, Scowcroft wrote, “HAK has seen. Just watch the outgoing traffic carefully.”

8. Letter From President Nixon to Secretary of Agriculture Butz, Washington, June 5, 1974. 8. Letter From President Nixon to Secretary of Agriculture Butz, Washington, June 5, 1974.1

Washington, June 5, 1974

The White House
Washington

The Honorable Earl Butz
The Secretary of Agriculture
Washington, D.C. 20250

June 5, 1974

Dear Earl:

Thank you for your letter of April 24, 1974, giving me a comprehensive report on your recent Asian tour.

I was struck by your estimate that Asian demand for our agricultural products has risen to the point where Asia will supplant Europe this fiscal year as the number one overseas market for our farm produce. In this regard, I was pleased that you apprised Asian leaders of the value in their countries' becoming more reliable markets for our agricultural products in light of this development.

The development of our trade in agricultural products with Asian countries will assume a growing importance as demand rises and scarcities increase. I would appreciate your keeping me advised as the market and our position arc further developed.

In closing, in your letter to the Thai Minister of Agriculture, would you thank him on my behalf for his very thoughtful gift of the black star sapphire.

Sincerely,
RN [initialed]

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 196, Agency Files, Agriculture, 1971–1974, Vol. II (Part 1). No classification marking. Butz’s April 24 letter to Nixon is attached but not published.

9. Minutes of the Acting Secretary of State’s Staff Meeting, Washington, June 17, 1974, 3 p.m. 9. Minutes of the Acting Secretary of State’s Staff Meeting, Washington, June 17, 1974, 3 p.m.1

Washington, June 17, 1974

THE ACTING SECRETARY'S ANALYTICAL STAFF MEETING
MONDAY, JUNE 17, 1974—3:00 P.M.
SECRETARY'S CONFERENCE ROOM

PRESENT:

THE ACTING SECRETARY—MR. SISCO

Ambassador Brown

Ambassador McCloskey

Ambassador Stevenson

Mr. Aldrich

Mr. Springsteen

Mr. Ingersoll

Mr. Stabler

Mr. Easum

Mr. Sober

Mr. Buffum

Mr. Pollack

Mr. Vest

Mr. King

Governor Holton

Mr. Blake

Mr. Lewis

Mr. Blaney

Mr. Grove

Mr. Moore

Mr. Blow

Mr. McIntyre

Mr. Sober

[Omitted is material unrelated to Moore's discussion of Pacific archipelagos.]

There have been two issues particularly, sub-issues, within the straits negotiation, that if we could resolve would make it a great deal easier to achieve our objectives. One of those is the archipelago problem; the states such as Indonesia, the Philippines and Fiji, which have opposed the notion of transit through straits, largely because they are archipelagos, which itself includes a large number of straits used for international navigation. Indonesia is the best example of that, with Lombok and Sunda, and a number of other straits through the archipelago, as well as Molucca, which of course is outside the archipelago, but also a very vital strait.

We have felt that if we could work out an accommodation within the multilateral setting with the archipelago states, so that we would agree to support a reasonable archipelago principle in return for the kind of transit through the archipelago which we needed, and in return for support on their part for the straits position of the United States, that we would be able to swing one of the major groups in opposition over to support, and it would be a very major boost to achieving our straits objective.

As a result, we have been engaged in active negotiation with Indonesia and the Philippines primarily, but Fiji, because it has some influence within this archipelago group over the others. We have gone to Jakarta with a team about four weeks. We then held a second round of discussions here in Washington about two weeks ago, followed by a visit to Manila and discussions in New York with the representatives of Fiji, all of this being carefully coordinated with the other members of the Group of Five, so that at every stage they knew basically what we were doing and they knew the kind of response we were getting from the other archipelago states.

Basically we have told them that we are willing to accept the archipelago principle and work actively to include a chapter in the convention on this, if they will agree, one, to a definition reasonably limiting the concept to basically five or six states including Indonesia, the Philippines, Fiji; secondly, that they would permit unimpeded transit through archipelago sea lanes, that would be broad sea lanes through the archipelagos, including submerged transit, overflight, and no requirement of notification for the transit through the archipelago.

MR. SISCO: What you are really saying is, when you talk about the principle that is involved here — what you really trying to do is to get them to accept our basic position, really, of unimpeded transfer through and over.

MR. MOORE: Exactly. And it is perfectly consistent—if they accept it through the archipelago, for them to accept it in straits and be willing to work for it there as well.

[Omitted is material unrelated to Moore's discussion of Pacific archipelagos.]

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Transcripts of Secretary of State Kissinger’s Staff Meetings, 1973–1977, E5177, Box 3. Secret.

10. Memorandum From W.R. Smyser of the National Security Council Staff to Secretary of State Kissinger, Washington, July 18, 1974. 10. Memorandum From W.R. Smyser of the National Security Council Staff to Secretary of State Kissinger, Washington, July 18, 1974.1

Washington, July 18, 1974

MEMORANDUM
NATIONAL SECURITY COUNCIL
INFORMATION

July 18, 1974

MEMORANDUM FOR: SECRETARY KISSINGER
FROM: W.R. Smyser [WRS initialed]
SUBJECT: Where do We Stand in Asia?

The situation in Asia has been developing fairly undramatically while you have been concentrating on other things, though we have some upcoming problems that will need your attention. We have been moving forward, trying to evolve policies and options as appropriate.

This paper is intended to give you a general context for dealing with the specific issues we will bring to you separately.

What is Good

I still believe, as I wrote you six months ago, that the Asian countries are generally adjusting well to the shift in American policy represented by the Nixon Doctrine. They understand and tolerate the ambiguity of that doctrine much better than many countries elsewhere or than our own bureaucracy, and I think they will continue to do so as long as we can keep a reasonably steady course and as long as there are no sudden major shifts.

Even the capacity to absorb shock is considerable. Except for Japan, the consuming nations of Asia reacted to the oil crisis much less hysterically than the consuming nations of the West, though the worst of that may yet lie ahead of us as the balance of payments problems hit home. After the "yellow peril" tremor that hit several countries when China took the Paracels, fear of an expansionist China has again subsided.

As we have pulled back, no real power vacuum has yet developed. Some Asian states have started to take up some of the slack of our departure by organizing themselves more closely, as in ASEAN. Others are making political adjustments.

Our withdrawal is gradual enough and is sufficiently well coordinated with other great powers that there seems little to fear at this point. The Russians have stepped up their diplomatic, political and military activity, but they are not yet a real factor. The Chinese have been winning additional recognitions in Asia, with Malaysia announced and Manila soon to follow. But these are not now seen as destabilizing, except on Taiwan.

Indochina has been messy but contained. The North Vietnamese military activity exceeded some expectations, but fell short of others. Fortunately, our press saw the most recent Hanoi offensive largely as a fiction, a propaganda ploy for the South Vietnamese to get more aid; we were not confronted with wholesale allegations that the Paris agreements had collapsed. In Laos, the Pathet Lao have been racing forward to grab power, but they can be prevented from running away with the show if other political elements coalesce, as they have been starting to do, and if our own people begin to understand the problem. Souvana's illness has shown how careful everybody is about upsetting the applecart. The Cambodian war has turned into a pathetic marathon that almost everybody wants to stop but nobody knows how in the absence of unanimity. We will clearly need to negotiate about it at some point, but it is uncertain whom we should talk to, when we should begin, and how we should make our approach. We may need another dry season stalemate. We are trying to come up with some ideas for you on this.

General Problems

Asia has a number of general problems, some of which aggravate each other. We can do little better than to attenuate them. There are also a host of specific issues for us to think about.

The general problems fall into several categories: — Many are simply local manifestations of worldwide difficulties. Asian nations, like others, are being whipped by international economic storms that will only abate over time and may yet have their climactic phase ahead. Asian democracies, like those everywhere, are suffering from divided electorates and weak governments. Our alliances have softened. There is little we can do to solve any of these issues in a purely Asian context, though they form a background to everything else.

— There is also the general problem of adjusting to the trend toward American withdrawal. Some countries, like Korea, try to keep our presence as long and as strong as possible. Others, like Thailand, try to take the initiative to edge or push us out. Paradoxically, we end up resisting both for obvious reasons.

— Related to this is the general problem of sustaining positive alliance relationships at a time when we and the allies feel we need each other less and when many allies are uncertain if we are still reliable. Some, like the Australians, are straining at what they think is a leash. Others, like the Philippines, are trying to adjust their basic relationship through negotiations. No Asian ally has, like France, tried to rally some of our friends against us. So the inevitable tensions have proven manageable.

— There is also a good likelihood of political upheaval or political evolution away from us. It is easy to produce hypothetical scenarios under which virtually every allied Asian government might collapse or turn against us or both, partly because of the world-wide phenomenon of weak governments and partly because political forces are trying to adjust to new surroundings. The leading candidates for early upheaval or for the kind of repressive counteraction that we do not like would have to be Korea, Thailand, the Philippines and Indonesia. But to date they have kept stability and they may be able to continue. Over the longer run, democracies like Japan and Australia or New Zealand will probably produce governments less ready to collaborate with us.

Specific Problem Areas

Japan. Almost all troublesome world trends coincide in working their effects upon Japan and upon its relations with us. Those relations are now good. I think they will remain good if we and the Japanese can avoid lashing out at each other in order to solve our own economic and political problems and if we can give the Japanese a sense of full partnership in our worldwide enterprises. This effort is in train on our side but is meeting bureaucratic difficulty, principally from State which wants to control Japan policy by asserting that we face no problems worthy of outside attention. I am uncertain whether the Japanese will be able to handle their part. Their government is likely to weaken rather than strengthen over the next several years. The traditional power bases of the ruling party are being worn away by demographic and economic factors.

China. Solving the two-China problem between Peking and Washington looked easier when all the governments were strong. Now detente is under fire at home; Chou En-lai is sick in Peking; even CCK is starting to have problems with his military. Before we work out a normalization formula, the politicking may get a lot nastier than we had hoped. We cannot count on either the PRC or the ROC to remain on course with us in the difficult and complex process of normalization, or to be able to tolerate all the upcoming tactical uncertainties. Fortunately, the Russians will probably be too inept to pick up the pieces. Also, many Asian governments are now moving toward Peking, so the shock waves of our normalization may not be too severe. But our initial objective of normalizing relations without substantial adverse impact at home or in Asia will be difficult and perhaps impossible to reach.

Indochina. At some point the North Vietnamese must try to reverse the flow of events in South Vietnam. Nobody can predict for certain when or how they will try, partly because it depends on developments in other areas of Indochina and in several major capitals. I suspect it must be within the next one to three years, and we are kidding ourselves if we think that any "decent" interval will be persuasive to our electorate or others. If Hanoi so chooses, it will probably have to be a fight. In the meantime, we have little choice but to arm our friends for what is coming and hope perhaps to stop it. It could still hurt our dealings with Peking.

Law of the Sea. Much of Asia being water, Asian countries are intensely interested in questions of the Law of the Sea. We have tried to keep in step with our friends on many issues that they regard as vital (such as the archipelago concept), but we have some major differences on straits transit and other thorny matters. Most of our problems are with Indonesia, the Philippines, and Japan. Also, as I have written before, we may still need to deal with crises over some of the islands of uncertain sovereignty, such as the Spratlys, the Senkakus, or several islet groups around Korea.

Indonesia. Indonesia is to date the only country in Asia that will benefit from higher oil prices, but it is still a poor country. There is pressure on the Hill and in AID to cut aid. We are using a NSSM to find means to adjust our aid gradually to better terms, as we once did for Iran, so as to keep our relationship intact without giving too much away. We also want to decide how to move Indonesia toward a regional role. Atmospherics, such as a Suharto visit and your briefings for them, can do a lot for us there.

Australia. We are reviewing our policies and attitudes toward Australia through a NSSM. We need to examine our basic relationship since Marshall Green is uncertain and DOD very skeptical. We also need to review the specifics of our defense and intelligence installations, trying to prolong the life of our most vital assets (like Pine Gap).

The Philippines. We have just finished the first round of talks in Manila to negotiate new economic and basing arrangements now that Laurel-Langley has expired. The main problem is to make trade arrangements for the Philippines that we can validate in our general trade bill, so that we can keep our bases and our investments. We are trying to keep Manila from acting unilaterally even though we cannot yet talk with confidence without a trade bill. With luck, it will work.

Thailand. We are getting papers about our future military presence there. As Bill Colby indicated at yesterday's WSAG, our bureaucracy may have some fairly draconian proposals that we will need to review and adjust. But I get the impression that we have to date marched pretty well down the same track as responsible Thai opinion, and we should be able to continue to do this if we are sensible. The Thai are not being silly.

Micronesia. Our talks are nearing a successful conclusion that will cost us some money—within the President's guidelines—but will give us a sane long-term relationship with Micronesia and a territorial status with basing rights in the Marianas. The Russians in the Trusteeship Council have made some noises which suggest they will create problems, but I should think we can handle that.

Problems in Washington. You are well aware that many congressmen want to cut back our aid to a number of allied countries, particularly to dictators whose opposition has friends here or in our press. Many in the State Department feel the same way, or at least feel inclined to lecture. Moreover, the State Department has never understood the Nixon Doctrine and has always emphasized the pullout aspect. DOD sometimes objects when we try to use its military assets to fine-hone a political message or to supplement aid, as in turnover of equipment in Thailand or Indonesia. Your intervention on some of these problems may be needed.

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 1338, Unfiled Material, 1974, 5 of 9. Secret; Sensitive; Eyes Only. Sent for information. Near the top of the first page, Kissinger wrote, “Good job. HK.” A handwritten addition, inserted before the last sentence on the final page, indicates that Smyser, in a telephone conversation, asked for the addition of the following sentence: “Our aid people also continually try to take money from Asian programs for other purposes elsewhere.” The earlier message from Smyser to Kissinger, to which Smyser refers, was not found.

11. Minutes of the Acting Secretary of State’s Staff Meeting, Washington, August 1, 1974, 11:15 a.m. 11. Minutes of the Acting Secretary of State’s Staff Meeting, Washington, August 1, 1974, 11:15 a.m. 1

Washington, August 1, 1974, 11:15 a.m.

DEPARTMENT OF STATE
SECRETARY KISSINGER'S MEETING with EA

The meeting was convened at 11:15 a.m. on Thursday, August 1, 1974 in Conference Room 6210, Department of State, Washington, D.C. Secretary Kissinger took the chair.

Participants

Secretary Kissinger

Mr. Sneider

Mr. Hummel

Mr. Ingersoll

Carol Laise

Mr. Lord

Mr. Armacost

Mr. Duemling

Mr. Martens

Mr. Armstrong

Mr. Bleha

Mr. Wenzei

Mr. Heavner

Mr. Colantonio

Mr. Cuthell

Mr. Ranard

Mr. Sherman

Mr. Moser

Mr. Dexter

Mr. Rives

Mr. Geber

Mr. Helble

and a reporter

SECRETARY KISSINGER: Who is in charge of this?

MR. HUMMEL: I think I am, for all my sins.

Sir, I can assure you that all of us have the appropriate amount of trepidation about this experience.

As we understand it, and I thought it would be wise, to check you in reference to the purpose of the meeting. Essentially, it's two-fold:

One is to hear from you and to get guidance from you.

And the other is for you to get some impression of us, and our problems, and how we think about the problems.

And we have a couple of pieces of paper that I think —

SECRETARY KISSINGER: Yes, I have that.

MR. HUMMEL: you may have looked at.

Well I don't know how you would like to do this, sir.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: Well, I frankly don't think there is much benefit in my going on about foreign policy. I am not exactly restrained in my public utterances on that. So my views are fairly well known. I think it would be much ore useful for me if I learned what your thinking is, and then let me comment on what your views are — rather than let me go through an exposition which would have to be very general, anyway.

MR. HUMMEL: All right, sir.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: Naturally, I have some talking points here of staggering profundity of what I should say, but if I go through all of these, none of you will have a chance to talk.

MR. HUMMEL: All right, sir, we can go directly to EA issues.

Dick Sneider might say a few brief words about a paper that we have circulated and then we have three issues that I think are in some of your briefing materials, too.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: Yes.

MR. SNEIDER: You have read this paper.

I think the essence of the issue is that as we build a structure of peace in this world, the problems of East Asia are, in a sense, particularly acute because this is an area that we have had two conflicts in and we still have some continuing conflicts in the region.

In years past, the development of a regional strategy to deal with our problems there, was a fairly simple one, because this was a cold war strategy, in other words a sort of a black and white situation. This obviously doesn't pertain at the present time.

We do — and there is a real question whether one can really frame a regional strategy. Some efforts have been made, as you recall, sir — even since in 1927 to 1969 it was a dismal failure, and more and more it would appear that —

SECRETARY KISSINGER: Why do you think this was a dismal failure?

MR. SNEIDER: Well, we didn't come out with a final policy, because more and more the problems of the region cannot be dealt with as strictly regional problems. They tend to be multilateral, and because the powers that are involved in the region are essentially global powers, rather than regional powers, the real powers of the United States and the Soviet Union and China and Japan — really, there is a question, therefore, whether we should continue to pursue an effort that we still have on the books, of trying to develop a regional strategy — or whether we should continue along a course which tends to look at these issues both from the country viewpoint and a multilateral issue viewpoint.

And there are a number of questions that are raised in this paper that relate to this central point.

And I think that with that, I'll — this is the general framework that we are concerned about projecting our policies — not for the next year or so, but over the next decade — where we can develop some sense of stability in this region.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: Well, I have no particular interest in whether it's done on a regional basis or some other framework.

I do have an interest that we have some sense that we know where we are going and what we are trying to achieve, and not handle all issues purely tactically.

One reason why I am going to have these meetings with various bureaus, is that I have been here long enough now, to see that there's an enormous tendency to make policy by cable, and to react constantly to the day-to-day impulses and then to get a cable up to me.

I think it's a bad method of proceeding, because it's in any case bad because it means none of us step back and ask ourselves what our purposes are.

And also, that we talk about institutionalizing foreign policy which, judging from the newspapers, means just doing what everybody wants.

But if we are serious about this, it means that even a nonobsessional expert should be able to become Secretary of State, or even a nonexpert who is not obsessional ought to be able to do it. And if the whole machine keeps itself, simply producing cables — the seventh Floor direction becomes very doubtful.

So it's that which I am trying to stimulate by these meetings, which unfortunately, my schedule happens to be too crowded; but what difference does it make — Supposing I say I don't care whether it's regional or not — then what do we do?

MR. SNEIDER: We still have to deal with the critical issues that do affect our development of some sort of structure stability in the region, and deal with them as issues in and of themselves.

I think it might be useful, Mr. Secretary, for us to focus on a few of these issues rather than all of them.

MR. HUMMEL: We have sort of refined a couple of other topics. I think it's in one of your papers, in Win Lord's formulations, and we thought that these three — or any others — might be discussed a little bit more specifically.

And we have asked Oscar Armstrong to lead off so that you will hear from our —

SECRETARY KISSINGER: Let me ask one question that interests me, in addition to that:

To what extent do you think developments in the region are affected by what happens in Indochina?

Supposing South Viet-Nam collapses, what is the impact of the collapse of South Viet-Nam — if that should happen — on the perceptions of other countries in that area, with respect to the United states? How important is Indochina to us?

MR. INGERSOLL: Thailand, the Philippines and so on?

SECRETARY KISSINGER: Yes — or whatever other countries would it have an impact upon?

MR. HUMMEL: Well I think one might divide this — divide our answers, and I think you probably want to hear from our Country Directors rather than from the people here. But let me just say this:

We might divide our description of the consequences into the perceptions of the Great Powers, the larger players, on the one hand — and the perceptions of the smaller countries on the other.

I think for me, the former, our ability to deal with China and the Soviet Union, and Japan would — perhaps the consequences in our ability to deal would be more important, even, than the direct impact on the smaller countries.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: Supposing Indochina collapses over the next two years — how will that affect our relations with Japan?

MR. HUMMEL: I think that — well, let's get some other people speaking here.

Bill Sherman.

MR. SHERMAN: My impression would be that it would concern Japan.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: It would not?

MR. SHERMAN: It would. It would concern Japan.

But I don't think it would concern it dramatically they would think that as a matter of policy we would allow it to collapse.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: That we "had?"

MR. SHERMAN: Yes, sir.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: Yes, but what conclusion would they draw from that?

MR. SHERMAN: I don't think that they would consider that — they would consider that we believed it to be outside of the maintaining of a stable security situation in the Far East — that had we 'allowed' it to collapse and unified the Peninsula under a North Viet-Namese regime or something like that, that we had justification — we had just changed the immediate balance of power that had not affected our major security of the southeast Asia.

They would not presume to make a judgment on whether we were right or wrong, but they would assume that it had been a direct policy decision on the part of the U.S. Government.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: Yes, but the fact that they consider it a direct policy decision, doesn't necessarily mean that they couldn't draw bad conclusions from that. I mean, the mere fact that it wasn't an accident or an oversight is not necessarily an assurance no reassurance. In fact, it would be quite the opposite.

MR. SHERMAN: Well, bad conclusions — I do not — I believe that they identify themselves so closely with us and our policy that they would not fear that they would be endangered by this kind of decision or policy that they would feel, perhaps, even relieved at the point of tension and the possibility of a hot war again.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: Would somebody else down there like to —

Did you have a point?

MR. RANARD: My understanding is that I think, so far as Korea is concerned, it would probably heighten their perception of monolithic communist threat, which they draw to extremes, anyway. I don't think they would see that in terms of a military aggression or that they would be threatened by what happened. But I think it would heighten this perception.

And I think it would make our problem, in terms of trying to resolve the North/South differences, all the keener. I think we'd reach real difficulties on that assuming that is to say, in the two year time span that you will have the same government in Korea.

MR. HUMMEL: I am, frankly, surprised at these answers, sir.

What would it do to the perceptions of other countries, including Japan and Korea, of the American will and purpose for the future? And what we might acquiesce in later on, that would be to their detriment?

SECRETARY KISSINGER: That's what I would have thought — Yes.

MR. CUTHELL: The Philippines also, here too, for a great many years they have accustomed themselves to the idea that we keep 25,000 armed forces in the Philippines big bases, we are sustaining these big bases —

I think they would worry very much about their own security; the loss of Indochina, itself, would mean nothing to my knowledge. It's a question of the American connection with the Mainland which they worry about—

And I think it's quite possible that at that point they would go more heavily than they have — though they are already starting on this — with the notion that the Philippines should be an independent sanctuary.

MR. SNEIDER: I might say, Mr. Secretary, that I would think that our credibility would be badly damaged and that in almost everyplace in the region, as a result of the collapse of Viet-Nam, that the question, however, is:

Would it be damage to the point that they would decide that they had to cast us aside completely — or would they fall into their normal insular pattern and think:

"Well, the Americans aren't going to give us up, they are going to give the other guys up."

This, I think, is one of the problems in the region from Japan on down — there's a sense of insularity, and a lack of common interest in each other's security. And for that reason, the reaction may be moderated.

MR. HEAVNER: I don't think there would be any insularly in the adjoining countries.

The Asian powers particularly, react very strongly and they already see the North Viet-Nam as becoming a major power in that part of the world, and they feel the need to contest that role, obviously.

If they succeeded in what they are trying to do in China, it would be hard to see them in any other light.

Because in my mind, there is even a sense of desperation, and something approaching panic, in some of the things they are saying now. . . . is clearly worried that something might happen, like this and —

SECRETARY KISSINGER: Do you think something like that might happen?

MR. HEAVNER: Do I think so?

SECRETARY KISSINGER: Yes.

MR. HEAVNER: Yes, I think it might.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: In what time frame?

MR. HEAVNER: Well, that's the important question to us. If it happened quickly, it might be very bad for us and our interests there. If it stretches out over a sufficiently long period of time so that they can digest it and learn to live with the North Vietnamese, it might have a different impact — it might be a different situation. But if it happens in the next couple of years, I think we are in pretty bad shape.

I think the ASEAN neutralization proposals over there are a part of their fears — something like this may happen.

MR. MARTENS: I have been back from East Asia only a week and a half and —

SECRETARY KISSINGER: Where did you come from?

MR. MARTENS: Eastern Europe.

It seems to me that a fundamental question, maybe "the" fundamental question, is how it would affect the Soviet Union and China — and particularly their attitudes toward developments in the world and in Southeast Asia. Would this give a new sort of "revolutionary" impulse which would cause them to move away from the kind of stabilizing or conservative bent that they have been on — if it did influence them to get a new sense of optimism about the revolutionary track — then I think the other powers in the area would perceive this, and they would be very worried about the future.

And I think, in general, what you had in the mid-60s, when Indonesia almost collapsed and where it was threatened and Indonesia almost fell — that you had a tremendous sense of optimism on the part of the Chinese — which caused a revolutionary bent on their part — and I think the Soviets still had remnants of that, hoping that they could push the Chinese out and get back in, and take advantage of —

SECRETARY KISSINGER: They still have this now?

MR. MARTENS: Well, I think they still have it, but it's diminished over time, as far as the optimism goes. They don't think their current prospects are so great.

So it seems to me that it would — you would have to get back to almost that kind of situation again where you have the feeling that the whole tide of history was turning in their favor — and then you would get everybody making the appropriate judgments.

MR. ARMSTRONG: I think this is a point that is particularly true of Peking, because I think their policy is still evolving and you do have the obvious uncertainties of the post-Mao — Chou period — of the question of their orientation of their policies will, to some extent, be up for grabs again — and development such as you posited, I think, would make it more difficult for them — just for internal reasons — it might even make it impossible for them to adopt, say, a range of policies which we would find —

SECRETARY KISSINGER: Would make it more difficult?

MR. ARMSTRONG: Would make it more difficult.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: As long as I'm here, do you attach any importance to Chou's public appearance yesterday the day before, I think it was?

MR. ARMSTRONG: Yes, obviously, he's back on — the obvious importance is that he's back on his feet, and they are trying to show that he's back on his feet.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: Do you think it shows that he is back in control?

MR. ARMSTRONG: I haven't felt that he lost control. I thought that he shared some of his burdens.

MR. WENZEL: I would like to take issue with my colleague, here, who thinks it might happen in a couple of years — over in Viet-Nam.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: Then you do not think it will happen in that —

MR. WENZEL: I have listened to our Ambassador Martin testify for six hours, up on the Hill in the last week.

My own optimism is in the sort of 60/40 range but not much beyond that — there's a damn good chance of staying with it.

What worries me, as I'm sure worries you and all of us, is the resource problem. We are certainly not going to get what we are asking for. Which leaves me to look for other instruments and approaches for achieving our objectives.

It almost has to be dialogue with the Soviets and the Chinese, I think. This has been important in the past and certainly is instrumental in leading to the peaceful agreement.

Things will be more important certainly, in the next three or four years.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: But what, exactly, can we offer either of them? What do we want from them?

MR. WENZEL: I think that we want what they want — I think we all want more or less the same thing — the stabilization of the situation.

We want restraints, certainly, of arms supply.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: But they'll want that only if there's some consequences for not having this.

I mean not for — not because of the theoretical desirability of restraint.

MR. WENZEL: Well I think the consequences of a lack of restraint are certainly something that will affect the super power relationship. I think I am more concerned abut that than the relationship which I had—

SECRETARY KISSINGER: My experience with the Soviets and the Chinese has been that unless there is some sort of a quid pro quo, abstract stability is of no concern to them. This has been my experience.

I think the Chinese would probably prefer no vacuum in Indochina.

But I don't think they are going to pay the price for the effort — unless we can structure a balance which makes it look plausible — and unless we can plausibly threaten that we will escalate whatever we are doing if the North Vietnamese don't restrain themselves — that is an argument which I think they would understand.

MR. HUMMEL: The plausibility of that, sir, is being diminished now, all the time.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: That's right, and that's why I think because we're considering the Soviet-Chinese cooperation —

MR. INGERSOLL: Is it to the Chinese interests not to have North Viet-Nam cover all of Indochina?

SECRETARY KISSINGER: Yes, but they wouldn't know how to bring that about unless we do it.

MR. INGERSOLL: They could restrain the supply, couldn't they?

SECRETARY KISSINGER: I think they need some argument they can sell where the diplomatic is making progress rather than a unilateral decision to restrain supply.

And as long as our Congress is cutting us off anyway we haven't got many—

Up to '72 we could always show them that they could plausibly tell Hanoi that if Hanoi didn't moderate, the consequences would be worse — and we could always carry out our promise we always made it worse for North Viet-Nam. So we made our senior Communist countries look good. Anything your Communist countries would warn the North Vietnamese about the consequences of, was proved right.

But that isn't necessarily true today, as far as I can see.

Let's talk for a bit about your second question here, which is Japan.

MR. SHERMAN: Japan has for, well, for most of the post war period, based its policies on the conception of the United States — on a continuation of the cold war type polarization in the face of continuing rapid economic growth, and on a security relationship with the United States — to the end of — with the beginning of detente and the end of the normal situation of China, and the end of the Viet-Nam war — and a lot of their own economic vulnerabilities demonstrated in a series of crises — a rapid inflation and then a slow down of the growth rate — all of these things came under a certain amount of challenge, except the security relationship, and they are now faced with moving into a multilateral world dealing with multilateran problems and not so much depending upon the bilateral protection of the United States.

As of now there are virtually no serious bilateral issues — the return of Okinawa and the end of the Viet-Nam war have converted what used to be very bothersome security treaty issues involving base problems and things of that nature — these have now converted themselves from disputes between governments, to things involving local mayors and local governors, and not engaging the attention of highest officials on our side or on the Japanese side.

On the other hand, I have been struck by a line from Win Lord's memorandum in our recent planning talks on Japan, pointing out that if the great powers tend to maximize their objectives and the small powers tend to minimize their risks, Japan still has to be considered a small power — the great power role is not an attractive one.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: Yes, where is that memorandum?

I'm trying to find out on what distribution list [Laughter.] But it is very restricted.

MR. INGERSOLL: Must have a good filter.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: That, I certainly would —

MR. SHERMAN: In any case, there is no question that Japan does not yet consider itself a great power. Its lack of any kind of military power, coupled with its sense of economic vulnerability, does not lead it into any kind of conception of its role which would be played on the international stage without great help from its friends.

And as far as its friends are concerned, Japan still considers the United States as its only true friend. Bilateral relationships in the whole post war period have been so close and so intense as to inhibit any opportunity for or any intention of Japan to move outside of the direct bilateral relationship.

I think this is the way they approach the tri-regional concept of dealing with Europe, that they are suspicious about European protection and they have reason for suspicions about European rejection of the meaningful relationship with Japan — and they are looking to us to provide the kind of psychological assist, trailblazing, way-making that they need.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: Yes, you know what you are saying is what people are always saying, and it's true in personal relations.

But where, completely are they tying their policy so closely to us?

MR. SHERMAN: Where?

SECRETARY KISSINGER: Yes. I mean, in practice those areas that interest them — in China they are not tying themselves closely to us.

Indochina they are not tying closely to us.

MR. HERMAN: They consider themselves close in China — in the sense that they have followed our lead, that they have waited until we made the move — and then they made the move (although there was considerable pressure beforehand front their Left.)

SECRETARY KISSINGER: They didn't have any option before we made it.

MR. SHERMAN: I think that probably in that sense they consider themselves still as not having any options outside of —

SECRETARY KISSINGER: I know, but what I mean is they had no real options in China before we made them.

MR. SHERMAN Yes.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: But they were sending their usual advance troops down to Indochina and they weren't received very —

At least, we don't know what the Japanese would have done if the reception had been more favorable in China.

MR. RANARD: Well would you say that there is a similar policy toward Korea?

SECRETARY KISSINGER: Yes, but that is overwhelming in their interest, and we are defending them in Korea. I mean, I just don' t see the enormous correspondence in China and my impression is they are trying to get — we are not competing with them and we are not suffering any pain — but with their perception of this, they think they are getting ahead of us.

MR. HERMAN: I don't really understand that — I don't perceive that that was —

SECRETARY KISSINGER: Well they are certainly not following us.

If they followed us, in time, because our going in their made it possible for them but —

MR. SHERMAN: Seems to me their policies with regard to China are almost all economic and very, very slightly political — that they still are depending on us to carry the lead in the political emergence of China to a non-isolated world, and that certainly they are out to make as much trade with the Mainland as possible, because that was the primary interest anyway.

But they don't have any — they barely were able to conclude the simple aviation agreement and that was under the most intense kind of political consequences — and there is no real progress toward a real treaty.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: Toward a real treaty on what?

MR. SHERMAN: Well, a real peace treaty that would establish other areas, formalizing relationship — as, for instance, with the Soviet Union. But they have not. I think they are almost as far away from China, in concluding a finalized peace treaty, as they are —

SECRETARY KISSINGER: But is this lack of intention on their part? Is it waiting for us? Or is it because the Chinese don't want to get any closer?

MR. SHERMAN: I think it's lack of more - more a lack of intention on their part — lack of a national consensus on their part.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: in Japan?

MR. SNEIDER: I think they are, Mr. Secretary, this is a problem of risk, and the Japanese continually look over their shoulder to count the cost and the risk involved and are very cautious.

If I might just wedge one word about the China relationship — I think it is true the late 60s and 70s that essentially we were in a better position to move ahead with China than the Japanese were — but there is at least with the Japanese context — a myth, or perspective, whatever you might call it — that in the 50s we were the ones that held Japan back from recognizing Communist China — and that they would have preferred to do it then, in that time frame.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: How could they have done it then, given their relationship with Taiwan?

We certainly wouldn't have held them back if they had —

MR. SNEIDER: Well, we did hold them back. We held their feet to the fire at peace treaty time.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: But how would they have managed their relationship with Taiwan?

MR. SNEIDER: I think that at that time they were prepared to cut them off —

[That was pretty shrewd.]

SECRETARY KISSINGER: It's certainly true that —

MR. SNEIDER: Yes, this is why, at least as the myth goes, that Japan feels we were the ones who were the barriers, and that they had to wait for us.

MR. GEBER: Yes, I have the feeling that the Japanese, as far as their entire foreign policy and political relations with the outside world are concerned, they are rather uncertain of themselves.

They would like to have the U.S. friendship umbrella where ever they can have it — both bilaterally and in the multilateral framework — but at the same time they are trying to find ways and means whereby they don't have to seem too closely associated with us — where ever they think that they might be better off bilaterally.

I would like to raise another question in connection with Japan, and that is: I think that the Japanese economy is moving in the direction toward which it is going to be quite different than it has been in the past, and we feel that it would be normal, or more normal, in the sense that it will be more similar to our own and those of the Western European countries that those will be smaller and they will have all sorts of complaints on environmental grounds and balance of payments grounds, constitution infringes —

I would like to raise the question of what this is likely to mean in terms of domestic Japanese political developments.

I think that the stability that we have known is not likely to be the same, that they will literally be competition for the favor of the voters and this may have in turn, all sorts of repercussions.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: Greater competition than before? It seems to be pretty intense now.

MR. GEBER: Well I thought that the DLP was fairly a reflection of the majority

SECRETARY KISSINGER: Oh, I see in that sense —

MR. GEBER: Yes, and that will, in turn, have repercussions on the relationship of Japan with the outside world.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: So what sort of complications?

MR. GEBER: Our dealings with them will be less easy than they have been in the past, more uncertain. They, themselves, will be more uncertain in the duality of their dealing of interdependence with the outside world on going it alone —

And they — one of their main preoccupations will be the security of their raw material and basic material supplies —

And there, again, they will try every avenue and approach that they think over the short range and in the long run, will satisfy their requirements.

It's a little difficult for me to paint exactly how its going to work out, but I think that our relations will be somewhat more difficult and I think that we ought to move toward whatever happens — items we have multilateral particularly — of trying to build a structure where they will gain more self assurance and feel safer.

MR. HERMAN: I would take issue with the questions regarding political stability. I don't think that they have current political problems in Japan — I mean the current political problems in Japan are not problems of conservative vs left opposition.

They are more practical problems within the party and occasioned by the logical political process in Japan which is one of conservative split, rather than the passing or transition of power to the opposition.

That is to say that the popular resonance, or popular sentiment toward conservative support will continue to be the level of 50 percent — and I don't see any short term change in that, brought about by economic pressures or political pressures within Japan.

The discipline of the Japanese people to accept financial, economic control, to go in and go ahead with tight economic policy, or slow down rates of flow or growth, is very well known, we know in the past they have been able to engage in that kind of self-sacrifice of their own personal aims and goals to the national ones.

But in considering the national goals, Mr. Fukada has made it quite clear all the time he was Minister of Finance, that it is necessary to slow down the growth rates to those approximating the average of the Common Market. And I think that is what is going to come out of the current government policy.

The longer range competition of raw materials — this is the problem that will still depend upon the outside world for raw materials of every kind.

But on the other hand, it seems to me that their action with the oil prices, and their continuing desire to talk with us and talk with the OACD about other matters, is their response to our new global agenda topics which dealt with these multilateral problems such as food, the law of the sea etc — in all this kind of thing they tend to respond very well, to take the format of individual cooperation and sharing.

And I think that that's about —

SECRETARY KISSINGER: I must say, I haven't found them all that eager to share things of their own. They are willing to participate in sharing —

MR. SHERMAN: They don't have things of their own.

MR. KISSINGER: Yes, but there's no great test of their ability to cooperate, if they are willing to receive or to share somebody else's —

I didn't find them at the Energy Conference, all that eager to take any risks.

MR. SHERMAN: Well, I think that in the post-Energy Conference period, they have been more and more willing during that particular period they were at the height of their insecurity.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: Would they agree, do you think, to a concerted strategy to bring our prices down — or would they use that as an opportunity to move in from there on?

MR. SHERMAN: I don't think they would use it as an opportunity to move in.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: Would they be willing, do you think, to have a confrontation on oil prices?

MR. SHERMAN: With the producers?

SECRETARY KISSINGER: With the producers — that's the only ones with whom you can have it.

MR. SHERMAN: They would obviously have a tendency, at all costs, to avoid a confrontation. But I think if they saw enough unity among the consuming countries —

MR. SNEIDER: I think — if they get hungry enough they would agree to it.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: To a confrontation?

MR. SNEIDER: Yes, because the energy prices — it would be a very tight decision, but I think they would probably go along, with the balance of payments position so bad. But it wouldn't be for any interest of cooperation —

MR. BLEHA: I am not sure. Seems to me the main point here is the seriousness to Japan.

They look on this in terms of survival — when you're there with a 42-day oil supply, it takes on elements of seriousness well beyond that of this country, or in Europe.

But similarly, with our Security Treaty, it is also a matter of survival with them — vulnerable as they are to nuclear attack.

It's a question they have always had to balance these things and in the case of the oil crisis, they felt compelled to follow their survival interests on the economic side rather than letting the security interest take precedence, it had to take second place.

But it is always going to be a question of their feeling very vulnerable and trying to balance these two things that they think are matters of life and death for them.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: Let me get five minutes on Thailand before I have to go —

MR. DEXTER: I think one aspect of the situation in Thailand is that they have already gone for an adjustment to the proposition that you put in the beginning, i.e. to a change in the situation of Viet-Nam.

They have gone well along to adapting to the withdrawal of U.S. power and will to intervene in the area, which means that they are working very hard to accommodate to China.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: But I can never tell to what extent it is their policy, in various countries, and to what extent we generate it through the Political Science Division of the State Department.

MR. DEXTER: I can see no evidence of that at all, sir. It certainly has been appearing in that pattern for a number of years, and certainly since the change of government in October, we have had a very articulate Political Science Department in Bangkok, in the Foreign Minister, of Foreign Affairs, and I think they are speaking for a fairly authentic deep rooted Thai sense of nationalism, felt by the students, felt by the editors of the country — not so much by the senior military that we have come to know so well over the past years - but these are the voices of the Thai people and the traditional Thai people who, I think accommodate to the outside world in their own way — who are uncomfortable in the kind of dependence the Thai have had over the past several years, on the United states. They are coming out of that, and it's not so much that the State Department is reading things into the Thai scene, or imposing themselves on the Thai scene, as being aware that the Thai, themselves, have changed.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: Where do you think they will be going?

MR. DEXTER: In what time frame?

SECRETARY KISSINGER: In the next three to five years.

MR. DEXTER: I would expect them to continue much the way they are doing now.

How far they can go will depend upon how much, for example, the Chinese or the Vietnamese will allow them to go. The Chinese are being quite hospitable and Hanoi is quite the opposite — but they will, I think, seek their security in good relations with the Communist powers who are able to threaten.

They will try to keep a good tie with the United States, but this is going to be of a different character than in the past. They will try to make relations or create relations with us, which are not antithetical to good relations with the other powers.

I think they will continue perhaps to intensify their efforts to work with these countries in a neutralized framework, trying by the way to develop a sense of regional self-confidence.

But in essence, I think the Thai are, and will continue to strive toward accord and accommodation.

MR. SNEIDER: If I may make a comment, Mr. Secretary, I think in this region we have a number of "spoiled brats" who are used to being taken care of by the United States.

We have made a number of commitments — we've made commitments to every one of these countries and they get very unhappy when we don't live up to our commitments.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: Like who?

MR. SNEIDER: Like Thailand, Indonesia, Korea, Japan, Philippines, — just go right down the roster here.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: Are they wrong in getting annoyed if we don't live up to our commitments?

MR. SNEIDER: They are partially wrong because in a sense that they have the "ledger" psychology in that they count every dollar and they don't look at our commitments in the broader sense, they look at it in the narrow sense of how many dollars we doled out this year, and they are behaving like spoiled brats and are saying, "Well you know, you guys haven't been taking care of us very well, so we'll go someplace else."

This is without any real sense of where they are going, and whether they do have a —

SECRETARY KISSINGER: Do you think that is true of Thailand?

MR. SNEIDER: I'm not an expert on Thailand, but even the Thais don't — they are thinking about some sort of past historic "neutralism" that was great in the 19th Century.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: But they've got a problem. We have had our bases there, they can see what is happening in Congress.

MR. SNEIDER: Yes.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: I don't think it's an unreasonable conclusion for them to come to.

MR. HUMMEL: Dick, I agree with you right up to the point where you said they are threatening us without any clear idea of where they are going to go.

I've got a feeling that — I think the same deep social forces we are talking about in Thailand, also include a very strong measure of caution. They are not going to leap into the arms of the North Vietnamese.

The same is true of the other countries. I don't think this is a question of will, and purpose — we don't have any demagogues left, thank God, in the area and they are going to keep their own national interest very closely in mind — they are not going to be in our national interests arid we are going to have a lot of problems — like if we have in the Law of the Sea, and a lot of other formats.

But I feel there is a pretty good chance that, particularly in Thailand, and with these other soreheads, crybabies, I agree with your description — still and all they will keep their own national interests pretty firmly in mind and there — this is one of the fruits of maturity of the post war era where they can now make their own decisions and look at the world through their own eyes.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: And the problem becomes: how well does their conception of the world square with ours.

MR. SNEIDER: That is right.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: Well, I appreciate this very much, and now that I've found my way down here I shall repeat it.

Thank you very much.

[The proceedings terminated at 12:00 noon]

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Transcripts of Secretary of State Kissinger’s Staff Meetings, 1973–1977, E5177, Box 4. Secret. The papers to which Sneider and Hummel refer were not further identified.

12. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, October 1, 1974, 5 p.m. 12. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, October 1, 1974, 5 p.m. 1

Washington, October 1, 1974, 5 p.m.

THE WHITE HOUSE
WASHINGTON
MEMORANDUM OF CONVERSATION

PARTICIPANTS:

Sunthorn Hongladarom, SEATO Secretary General

William Owen, Special Assistant to the Secretary General

Ivan Campbell, SEATO Information Officer

Brent Scowcroft, Lieutenant General, USAF, Deputy Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs

John A. Froebe, Jr.,

Staff Member

DATE, TIME, AND PLACE: October 1, 1974; 5:00 p.m.
The White House

SUBJECT: Current Thai Political Situation; Thai Economic Situation; SEATO's Current Status; Hopes for U.S. Agricultural Assistance; U.S. Commitment to SEATO and Thailand

General Scowcroft : I apologize for the President's not being able to see you. Mrs. Ford's recent hospitalization has curtailed his schedule in recent days. He asked me to express his regrets for his not being able to see you, and to tell you that he looks forward to meeting with you on another occasion.

Secretary General Sunthorn : I met the President before when I was here as my country's ambassador. He seems not to have changed much in the interim.

General Scowcroft : When was that?

Secretary General Sunthorn : 1969-72.

You haven't changed much either, General, since I last saw you a year ago.

General Scowcroft : This has been quite a year.

Current Thai Political Situation

Secretary General Sunthorn : For the U.S. as well as for Thailand. Some things seem to have changed for the better and some for the worse in Thailand. Our students are getting unruly. I agree that Thai students should have a voice in the affairs of state. But when they won their victory last October, they seemed to have been emboldened to go much further. They are now prone to demonstrate on any excuse. We hope they will become more responsible.

General Scowcroft : Students are notoriously...

Secretary General Sunthorn : American students went through such a period in the late 60's, but have now returned to their studies. Among Thai students, comparatively few are real troublemakers. There is a possibility that they have been instigated. We have our suspicions on that score. They have engaged in activities that are quite similar to those of the extreme left. The police are watching closely. Once the police feel that the students indeed are being inspired by a third party, we will probably have to do something.

General Scowcroft : That could cause problems.

Secretary General Sunthorn : In Thailand, you need to take some firm action now and then.

General Scowcroft : I would say that is true everywhere.

Secretary General Sunthorn : Prime Minister Sanya was a fellow student of mine. He is a devout Buddhist and abhors violence. But we must put our foot down at some point. He is not a man of this type. He was unexpectedly given this job by the King. Lately, however, he has become convinced of the need for firm action.

General Scowcroft : My impression is that he has been stronger in his approach recently.

What are the prospects for your elections?

Secretary General Sunthorn : They should be held in about three months — the first part of February. Our National Assembly is now going through the third reading on the draft constitution, and the constitution should be promulgated on October 5. Then, within 120 days we will have elections. That would bring us to the first part of February — assuming that the students won't bring on a crisis in the meantime.

General Scowcroft : Do you think the situation will be better after the election?

Secretary General Sunthorn : I believe it will be better. The students will not be able to contend that we have no representative government. They now claim that the Prime Minister represents only the King. But after the election, the Prime Minister will be chosen from the Lower House. The students may well find another excuse to demonstrate, but I am a little more optimistic about the prospects following the elections. I have been asked by Mr. Hummel and others in Washington whether Thailand has a clear leader coming up. I have told them "No." In Thailand, the personality of the man counts for much. If you have a popular man, vigorous in his approach, he will go a long way. The former Thai Ambassador to the U.S., Seni Tranot, who was here in Washington during the Second World War, is such a leader, but he is now about 70 and he is getting old. He is the leader of one of our parties. If he were to be Prime Minister, his duties might prove too much for him in view of his age. The leaders of the other parties are not exactly outstanding. This state of affairs perhaps is the result of long military rule.

General Scowcroft : There has been no opportunity for civilian leadership to develop.

Secretary General Sunthorn : I agree. But we must make a start sometime.

General Scowcroft : But leaders arise to meet situations.

Secretary General Sunthorn : We have a few professors who know something of politics, but they don't have any following to speak of.

We are hoping that, if the constitution is adopted in its present form, we would have an Upper House with members appointed by the King. He will appoint well-qualified men. Some members of the Cabinet can come from the Upper House — and we would thus get some experienced people in our Cabinet.

General Scowcroft : I must read your new constitution.

Secretary General Sunthorn : As to the Cabinet, half of the Cabinet can be outsiders — which could include men from either the Senate or even outside Parliament. If the Prime Minister can't find capable men in Parliament, he can draw on qualified persons from outside Parliament.

General Scowcroft : Then it will not be a pure parliamentary system. Will the Prime Minister be in a strong position, or can he be ousted by a no-confidence vote?

Secretary General Sunthorn : He can be voted out in a no-confidence vote. There are a few encouraging signs. The Thai people are now more politically conscious. We hope there will be a large voter turn-out for this election. The Ministry of Interior, which is responsible for conducting election, has already been working to turn out a large vote. I see both encouraging and pessimistic signs for the future.

General Scowcroft : This is a time of transition. It is true in the U.S. as well.

Thai Economic Situation

Secretary General Sunthorn : There are economic problems. As I pointed out to Deputy Secretary Ingersoll, rice is particularly important to Thailand. There have been floods in the Philippines and even some in Thailand. Still, the Thai crop is fairly good this year. But the demand in Southeast Asia is much higher. The price in Malaysia has gone up four times. We can't control the smuggling problem. We have asked here in Washington for help in increasing rice production in Thailand as quickly as possible.

General Scowcroft : The world is in very good shape, particularly as to food and oil.

Secretary General Sunthorn : Thailand must import almost all its consumables.

General Scowcroft : Are you prospecting for oil?

Secretary General Sunthorn : Yes. In particular, there are two American firms which claim to have found some in our area.

General Scowcroft : I hope you will be successful. What about SEATO?

SEATO's Current Status

Secretary General Sunthorn : We hope the U.S. will continue its support for SEATO. You are pursuing detente. But we see a continuing threat of subversion, without any reduction in sight on this problem. We hope SEATO will continue.

General Scowcroft : But with the emphasis now of subversion. Is the organization doing well?

Secretary General Sunthorn : Within the limits of its budget. Pakistan has withdrawn from SEATO, and France has ended its budgetary support. This has resulted in a 20 percent reduction in our budget.

General Scowcroft : We will continue to do as much as possible, but as you are aware we have considerable problems with Congress. I am not sure how much we are going to be able to do.

Secretary General Sunthorn : But the U.S. contribution to SEATO is small. SEATO has a budget of only 1.5 million, of which the U.S. contributes 20 percent — or about $400,000.

General Scowcroft : I was talking rather about bilateral AID support.

Hopes for U.S. Agricultural Assistance

Secretary General Sunthorn : If the U.S. could — through its AID mission in Bangkok or through other channels — increase its AID assistance to agricultural production in Thailand and the Philippines, this would be very helpful.

General Scowcroft : This would seem to carry a big payoff.

Secretary General Sunthorn : The miracle rice developed in the Philippines didn't pan out.

General Scowcroft : I understand it required much fertilizer.

Secretary General Sunthorn : The new strains of rice are very prone to insect damage. Their yield is high, but they are vulnerable to insects. In Thailand, we have tried to cross-breed to develop a strain that will be insect resistant. It seems to be working.

We are also trying to introduce family planning, but this effort will produce a significant impact only over the much longer term.

General Scowcroft : I understand that Thailand has a high birth rate.

Secretary General Sunthorn : Yes, it has one of the highest in the world. But I don't want to belabor all these points.

U.S. Commitment to SEATO and Thailand

General Scowcroft : I can assure you that the U.S. will remain interested both in Thailand and in SEATO. We want you to continue to tell us what we can do in Thailand, particularly during the transition to the new government. We are interested in maintaining very close cooperation with Thailand.

Secretary General Sunthorn : The U.S. has always been very friendly to Thailand. I want to assure you that the remarks of extremist students in Thailand do not represent the views of more knowledgeable Thais.

General Scowcroft : We recognize this and we do not misinterpret the actions of your students.

(At this point, after a final exchange of courtesies, Secretary General Sunthorn took his leave of General Scowcroft.)

1 Source: Ford Library, National Security Adviser, Presidential Agency File, Box 17, Southeast Asia Treaty Organization. Confidential. The meeting was held at the White House.

13. Minutes of the Acting Secretary of State’s Staff Meeting, Washington, May 7, 1975, 8 a.m. 13. Minutes of the Acting Secretary of State’s Staff Meeting, Washington, May 7, 1975, 8 a.m. 1

Washington, May 7, 1975, 8 a.m.

The Secretary's 8:00 a.m. Staff Meeting
Wednesday, May 7, 1975

PRESENT:

THE SECRETARY OF STATE — HENRY A. KISSINGER

D - Mr. Ingersoll

P - Mr. Sisco

D - M - Mr. Eagleburger, Acting

D - Mr. Sonnenfeldt

AF - Ambassador Mulcahy, Acting

ARA - Mr. Rogers

EA - Mr. Habib

EUR - Mr. Lowenstein

NEA - Mr. Atherton

INR - Mr. Hyland

S/P - Mr. Lord

EB - Mr. Enders

S/PRS - Mr. Funseth

PM - Mr. Vest

IO - Ambassador Buffum

H - Ambassador McCloskey

L - Mr. Leigh

IATF - Ambassador Brown

S/S - Mr. Springsteen

S - Mr. Bremer

[Omitted is material unrelated to the East Asian reaction to events in Indochina.]

SECRETARY KISSINGER: The commitment part is the relatively easier part. I wouldn't bet my bottom dollar when Korea gets invaded, whether Congress will pass a war resolution or an evacuation resolution.

MR. LOWENSTEIN: I think the most pointed reactions on points you are making have been in France.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: But there it is public and serves their national purposes.

MR. LOWENSTEIN: In other places, there just hasn't been any reporting.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: I see more intelligence reports that indicate undercurrents of concern than these oral reports indicate, infinitely more. And I am much more concerned with what they think when we tell them we want something done, how they think we will stick to it; quite apart from Indochina. What about it, Joe?

MR. SISCO: The only thing I was going to say is, I just think it is not a question of anybody really basically feeling that our power has diminished in any way. It is a question of will and intent. And here I think there is real doubt in the minds of a number of these countries, and therefore I think there is a danger of miscalculation in a place such as Korea, in terms of what our will might be in those circumstances.

MR. LORD: It goes much further than Vietnam. I think Vietnam has been magnified by what has happened — namely, the legislative paralysis, what has happened in this country in the last twelve years, the general mood. I think we have to separate out Vietnam per se from what has gone just before it in the last few years. This is what makes it more difficult.

MR. SISCO: We are giving the image of people who are ready to wash our hands of the situation. You cannot look at this refugee situation in the context only of the whole history of Vietnam. I think this in part is a manifestation of people kind of throwing up their hands.

MR. LORD: I don't think that is the basic reaction. I don't think that is the America reaction. That is a temporary limited phenomenon. I cannot believe that of the American people.

MR. SISCO: If you are talking about the refugees, I would agree. If you are talking about the broader question, in terms of commitments overseas and doing something about it, I don't know.

MR. HABIB: For twenty years a lot of countries, including Asian countries, have looked up the U.S. shield as impenetrable, behind which they could develop economically and nationally. They now see the shield as full of holes, and they are all concerned that the U.S. shield does not provide the protection that they think is necessary for their own development. They will move in one of two directions. Either they will attempt to adjust their own policies with respect to the other major powers and build up some kind of protection, or they are going to look to themselves. They are going to look to themselves and a reestablishment of some kind of relationship with us which gives them some degree of protection.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: Or both.

MR. HABIB: Or both. But I think so far what is happening is you are getting one or the other. For example, the Thais are looking to some new kind of relationship. The Koreans are looking to a firming up of the relationship with us and a dependence and self-reliance on themselves. The Filipinos are foundering, but in the end I guess the Filipinos will come out, if Marcos has his way, to continued dependency upon us. The Indonesians would like to come out with dependence on us, but they are uncertain. They don't want to make the accommodations.

MR. SISCO: Where do the Chinese and the Soviets fit into this as far as Asia is concerned? Are we going to see a resurgence of diplomatic activity on the part of the Chinese in this area?

SECRETARY KISSINGER: The Chinese don't want us out of Asia right now.

MR. HABIB: I think we are going to see more of a resurgence of Soviet activity. What do you think, Bill? I think the Soviets are the ones who are going to try to move in.

MR. HYLAND: In Asia.

MR. HABIB: Yes. They will try.

MR. INGERSOLL: Henry, this started before the fall of Vietnam. There was a reappraisal going on in Asia since the Nixon Doctrine started. It has been accelerating.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: But the Nixon Doctrine meant we will help countries to help themselves. And we must not forget if South Vietnam had not collapsed this year, it would have collapsed next year as a result of an aid cutoff. There is no doubt that military aid to Vietnam would have been absolutely emasculated by this Congress if it had been voted at all. The $300 million supplemental would never have been voted, and the new bill, it is inconceivable to me that they would have voted a bill.

MR. McCLOSKEY: I think it is one thing to hope and expect that by our own conduct we can convince these countries to stay with the United States. But what I fear is less that they will stay with us than we will be able to manifest the conduct that would convince them to do it. I believe if a dust-up occurred in Korea, that you would actually lose in the Congress right now in carrying out that treaty commitment.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: Well, in the Senate Relations Committee yesterday they wanted us to resubmit the treaty. If we do that, we will be dead. We will have to resubmit every treaty.

MR. BUFFUM: Mr. Secretary, I do think that this reaction is concentrated largely in Asia, for obvious reasons. But from the contacts I have had, mostly UN circles admittedly, I think the reports that have been given this morning do reflect, if there is any common denominator, a perception on the part of most people that Vietnam has loomed overly large in our own eyes. They have never viewed it with the same degree of seriousness we have, particularly the third world. And what they are looking for is the conclusion we draw in terms of our future foreign policy; are we going to withdraw into ourselves, or are we going to re-engage in problems of development particularly. And I do think this means what happens in the General Assembly next fall is going to take on exceptional significance, because of the image and posture we project, in terms of the direct commitment we are ready to make of the problems of the future, putting the past behind us.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: You know we cannot make any major commitments to development right now.

MR. BUFFUM: I don't mean new aid programs, but a sense of concern and involvement, and even minimal independent constructive proposals. I think this reflects both what Bill said —

SECRETARY KISSINGER: Are you working on any?

MR. BUFFUM: Yes.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: I don't happen to believe it will make any difference, but I am strongly in making them. I just think the third world trends are much more powerful and more political, and much less economic and much less influenced by do-good American speeches. But I am strongly in favor of making them.

MR. McCLOSKEY: Mr. Secretary, I thought a point you made at lunch yesterday was both educational and necessary, because I'm afraid there is a little confusion developing publicly and, I think, on the Hill, by talking about a reassessment beginning with the Middle East, arid now the possibility of assessing the consequences in the Far East of what happened in Vietnam — that this is now being misunderstood as a total re-evaluations of all American policy. And I thought the point you were making at lunch yesterday is valid. So that the two things are not confused.

SECRETARY KISSINGER Which is what?

MR. McCLOSKEY: That there are main lines to American foreign policy which are traditional, which are sound, and which will continue, and that the consequences that we are looking at as a result of Vietnam should not be confused with the desire or a need now to transform or re-evaluate the totality of American foreign policy. Some of this is getting confused on the Hill. Lester Wolff has now said he is going to conduct hearings because there ought to be a reassessment of American foreign policy. And I think —

SECRETARY KISSINGER: Unfortunately, fascinating as this discussion is, let's continue it on Friday, because I have to go over some speech drafts. I agree, it is an important topic. But if I don't go into those now and do the speech drafts, I won't have anything to talk about next week.

(Whereupon at 8:50 a.m. the meeting was adjourned.)

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Transcripts of Secretary of State Kissinger’s Staff Meetings, 1973–1977, E5177, Box 7. Secret. The discussion of East Asian perceptions of U.S. foreign policy was not resumed at the next staff meeting, which occurred on May 9, 1975. (Ibid.)

14. Memorandum From W.R. Smyser of the National Security Council Staff to Secretary of State Kissinger, Washington, May 7, 1975. 14. Memorandum From W.R. Smyser of the National Security Council Staff to Secretary of State Kissinger, Washington, May 7, 1975.1

Washington, May 7, 1975

MEMORANDUM
NATIONAL SECURITY COUNCIL
ACTION

May 7, 1975

MEMORANDUM FOR: SECRETARY KISSINGER
FROM: W.R. SMYSER [WRS initialed]

SUBJECT: Policy Review on Asia

After recent developments in Indochina, with their reverberations in many Asian countries, we may wish to review our policy in Asia in order to get a clearer picture of where we are and where we want to go.

We could follow a number of policies. We could continue the strategy we have been pursuing, sustaining our friends and developing our strategic and diplomatic position; we could go to a more maritime strategy, concentrating on the island nations and perhaps such peninsulas as Korea while abandoning our remaining Asian mainland positions; or we could move toward an emphasis on economic relations and draw down our military presence throughout Asia as a whole.

As we plan our course, there are two things we need to keep in mind: — First, the current problems of Asia, and our approaches to those problems, are not uniform: One group of nations, which includes Thailand, Korea, Indonesia, the Philippines, Singapore and Malaysia, appears to be most deeply affected by Indochinese developments and most in need of careful handling. Another group, including Japan, Australia and New Zealand, seems less affected though still concerned. China, of course, is a separate issue.

— Second, the nations of Asia are increasingly skeptical about the capacity of the U.S. Administration to make and sustain policy. Many question American consistency. They also watch what our Congress does more and more. They may regard anything we say or do with great skepticism, at least until we take a series of steps that do develop some demonstrable popular and Congressional support.

As you know, Bill Kintner is doing a study on Southeast Asia but that need not interfere with other efforts.

We have three options on where we proceed from here: 1. Develop our own concepts and manage policy from here under tight control and in coordination with our Ambassadors and with Phil Habib . We are doing this already, and are already moving ahead to redistribute and expand aid, to redistribute Vietnamese military assets, and to increase Presidential activities in terms of meetings and — as I will propose separately — perhaps more foreign visits by the President.

— The principal advantage of this course is that it is discreet and arouses little excitement in the bureaucracy, enabling us to manage and tailor each situation. Its principal disadvantage is that offices may get out of control if we do not catch every little point, and may also do their own studies. Essentially, it makes our actions here central to the policy process which is not unprecedented but which I believe you want to de-emphasize.

2. Deal with the problems through NSSMs on selected countries. As you know, we already have NSSM studies under way on Indonesia, Singapore and Taiwan. The Taiwan paper should be with you next week; the Singapore and Indonesian papers should be finished in a month. I am proposing, as part of this memorandum, new NSSMs on Thailand and Korea.

— The principal advantage of this course is that it recognizes that, while our problems in Asia have broadly common elements, the basic policy responses must be tailored to the quite different contexts of individual countries if they are to be effective. This approach also recognizes that our immediate need is to deal effectively with the more acute problems in these particular countries, and that the broadest Asian problem can — and perhaps should — wait a bit "until the dust settles." The principal disadvantage is that this process makes it more difficult to bring cohesion to our policies in Asia as a whole.

3. A NSSM on Asian policy. This study would analyze the new situation in Asia and present options on how to achieve our objectives. It would not necessarily invalidate the NSSMs already started, but — simply for bureaucratic reasons — would probably make it difficult to begin any other individual country NSSMs until it is complete.

— The principal advantages of such a study are that it would provide an opportunity for a general review and that, once it is completed, there should ideally be common understanding of where we are trying to go. The principal disadvantages are that the study would be very general, that it may not produce any changes in policy but will heighten expectations and thus frustrations when nothing new develops, and that its existence may leak and add to Asian uncertainties. In addition, the new dimensions of the Asia-wide problems are not yet sufficiently clear to make a broad approach effective.

My View

I think an Asian NSSM is premature at this point. It is too early to assess the full impact of developments and the conclusions in a NSSM would not really help us to deal with the specific policy problems in each country. On the other hand, I think it is essential to proceed with studies on Thailand and Korea, the two countries most likely to be affected by developments in Indochina. Mr. Solomon concurs with this view.

Since, however, I understand you wished to examine the possibility of an Asian NSSM, I have drafted one and attached it under cover of a memorandum to the President. We could even try to do all of the NSSMs, which would strain the system but could give us the best look at policy. At Tab I is a memorandum to the President recommending that he proceed with the two country NSSMs on Thailand and Korea.

At Tab II is a memorandum to the President recommending a NSSM on Asia.

Of course, you may prefer to discuss these with him in person rather than to send any memorandum.

RECOMMENDATION:
That you sign the memorandum to the President recommending NSSMs on Thailand and Korea (Tab I).

ALTERNATIVELY:
That you sign the memorandum to the President recommending a NSSM on Asia (Tab II).

Concurrence: Dick Solomon
Donald MacDonald

1 Source: Ford Library, NSC Institutional Files (H-Files), Box H–36, NSSM 226, Review of U.S. Policy Toward the Korean Peninsula. Secret; Sensitive. Sent for action. Solomon and MacDonald concurred in the memorandum. Near the top of the first page, Kissinger wrote, “Agree. HK.” Attached but not published is Tab I, the memorandum to the President recommending NSSMs on Thailand and Korea, which Kissinger drew a line through and wrote, “not necessary.” Also attached but not published is Tab II, the memorandum to the President recommending a NSSM on Asia, which Kissinger drew a line through and wrote, “Not required.” As Smyser recommended, Scowcroft, acting on behalf of Kissinger, signed two NSSMs on May 27. NSSM 225, Document 401, requesting a review of U.S. policy toward Thailand and NSSM 226, Document 268, toward the Korean Peninsula.

15. Minutes of the Acting Secretary of State’s Staff Meeting, Washington, June 13, 1975, 8–9:05 a.m. 15. Minutes of the Acting Secretary of State’s Staff Meeting, Washington, June 13, 1975, 8–9:05 a.m. 1

Washington, June 13, 1975, 8–9:05 a.m.

The Secretary's 8:00 a.m. Staff Meeting
Friday, June 13, 1975

Participants:

THE SECRETARY OF STATE - HENRY A. KISSINGER

D - Mr. Ingersoll

P - Mr. Sisco

M - Mr. Eagleburger

C - Mr. Sonnenfeldt

AP - Ambassador Davis

ARA - Mr. Rogers

EA - Mr. Habib

EUR - Mr. Hartman

NEA - Mr. Atherton

INR - Mr. Hyland

S/P - Mr. Lord

EB - Mr. Katz, Acting

S/PRS - Mr. Funseth, Acting

PM - Mr. Vest

IO - Ambassador Blake, Acting

H - Ambassador McCloskey

L - Mr. Leigh

S/S - Mr. Oritz, Acting

S - Mr. Bremer

[Omitted is material unrelated to Habib's trip to Southeast Asia.]

MR. HABIB: Well, generally speaking, in Southeast Asia the other countries perceive a fundamental power shift, a shift having taken place, and they look upon Hanoi's success. They fear it. And they see it as a major force in the sub-region which has arms and zeal and the momentum of success. And they expect Hanoi not necessarily to preoccupy itself with the reconstruction and rehabilitation of Vietnam alone, but to continue to try to play an expansionist role in the area.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: They still don't have a government in South Vietnam.

MR. HABIB: Not officially, no. They are being governed by these revolutionary committees, but it is quite obvious what is governing them is the Lao Dong party structure.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: The point is we may never see a PRG.

MR. HABIB: I would say we are still going to see a PRG, but it will be a short-lived one, and the ties between the PRG and Hanoi are going to be so close and intimate —

SECRETARY KISSINGER: Why would they put up a PRG at all?

MR. HABIB: I think partly to try to take care of the southern sensitivities first, southern nationalism, and then also because they said they were going to do it. Ands then finally, because that will allow them to restructure the south in a way that fits in and that coincides with the structure in the north on a more gradual basis.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: Have they got all foreign correspondents out of Saigon?

MR. HABIB: Not all. There are still a few left. I think there are two or three Americans, and a few French and Japanese. They are not all out. They are talking now, it is not only correspondents, but they are talking about getting all foreigners out of Vietnam. I think that they are working up to the fact that the South Vietnamese themselves still have associations with a lot of Frenchmen and others who were present.

Meanwhile, of course, they are going to do everything else. They will make their gestures towards Peking. They will probably even make some towards Moscow, but less so, despite the fact that generally speaking they fear Peking. Generally speaking, they distrust Moscow and they are suspicious of Moscow.

The Southeast Asian countries will have, by everything that is being said or you read in the paper, a very deep-seated hope that the United states will not only stay with them, but will now, without Vietnam as a millstone, be able to assert itself in a policy in Southeast Asia, which is more akin to their own sense of nationalism, desire for economic development, and the internal security problems that they all generally face. With the exception of Singapore, and one could even say Singapore, each one of them faces an internal security problem of some sort. And that drives them to even greater fear of Hanoi, sitting up there with all those arms.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: What does it mean — that with the millstone of Vietnam around our neck?That sounds like one of our Harvard colleagues.

MR. HABIB: That is the way they look at it.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: They look at Vietnam as our millstone and say "Thank God you are out of there now; you can devote yourselves to us?"

MR. HABIB: Let me adjust myself. As I said, they all feel that a fundamental power shift has taken place which they do not like, and their first feeling was "My God, what a disaster." They looked upon our defeat in South Vietnam as our defeat — not just simply South Vietnam's defeat.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: It happens to be true.

MR. HABIB: They thought that was a disaster. However, they have got to live, and they come out of it now with a feeling, well, not only are they going to have to associate among themselves, but that it is possible in their view that it will be possible now for the United States to be able to get the resources out of Congress and get American opinion poised in such a manner that we will be willing to do the things in Southeast Asia that they look for us to do.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: Like what?

MR. HABIB: Which all takes money. Economic assistance and military assistance. Modest military assistance, and in some cases —

SECRETARY KISSINGER: Are you doing something about these MAP figures?

MR. INGERSOLL: Yes.

MR. HABIB: Now, in each case —

SECRETARY KISSINGER: Especially for Indonesia.

MR. HABIB: I think we want to take a close look at Malaysia For example, Malaysia is a country which has held off from us for a long time, and now wishes to come a little closer on a military relationship because they face an insurgency which they see being fed by both Thai instability and Hanoi's aggressiveness. The Indonesians are in the same position. The Thai, of course, have a weak government and a border which now has Laos on the north, Cambodia on one side, and behind it all Hanoi. The Thai are desperate to find some means of protecting themselves so they will try every diplomatic channel. They have received the North Vietnamese, the PRG, they are going to go to China. But at the same time, they will be pleading, I am sure, with the ASEAN group to give them the support of the regional organization, and they will undoubtedly be looking to us for military assistance, particularly on the Army side. The Army is not happy with the way the government operates, but there is no indication at the moment they are going to overthrow it.

All the governments seem fairly stable except for the Thai government. The Thai government is the one in the area that they are all worried about.

Now, the conclusion I draw out of the trip was that from our standpoint, they are not worried about the constancy of the administration. You remember you asked me to express our determination, our consistency. I did that in each case. In each case they accepted it. And not only accepted it but welcomed it. But in each case, each of them asked me "What about Congress?" They are concerned about what they read about the United States. The daily newspaper in those parts of the world carry the reports of the deliberations in our committees, which is more than you can say about some of the provincial newspapers in the United States. And it is their constant preoccupation, what is going to happen to them if we no longer play the role in East Asia that they want us to play.

So we have the opportunity to play that role. But it is going to take some resources. And I think it is going to take both military and economic resources.

SECRETARY KISSINGER Do you think we could put — I don't suppose that fits into the Japan speech — in some of these perceptions? I ought to take the occasion say something like that. I have plenty of other opportunities. Are you going to have that —

MR. LORD: Tonight.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: Okay. Does anyone want to argue with Phil?

(Whereupon at 9:05 a.m. the meeting was adjourned.)

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Transcripts of Secretary of State Kissinger’s Staff Meetings, 1973–1977, E5177, Box 7. Secret.

16. Memorandum From Secretary of State Kissinger to President Ford, Washington, June 13, 1975. 16. Memorandum From Secretary of State Kissinger to President Ford, Washington, June 13, 1975.1

Washington, June 13, 1975

THE SECRETARY OF STATE
WASHINGTON

June 13, 1975

MEMORANDUM FOR: THE PRESIDENT
FROM: Henry A. Kissinger [HK initialed]

SUBJECT: Philip C. Habib's Trip to Southeast Asia

Philip C. Habib, Assistant Secretary for East Asian and Pacific Affairs, visited Australia, Indonesia, Malaysia, Singapore, Thailand, Laos and the Philippines between May 18 and June 11. I believe his general comments and specific observations will be of interest to you. There follows a summary of his comments, which I had him prepare for your reading.

Attachment:
Trip Report

Southeast Asia: General Observations — In each country it is believed that Hanoi's success in Indochina has brought about a fundamental power shift in the region. All the Southeast Asian countries fear Hanoi, which they now see as a major force in the sub-region with plenty of arms, revolutionary zeal and the momentum of success. This compels the various nations to explore what adjustments in their policies might help them to meet the new realities. The initial shock of the unwanted Indochina debacle has been absorbed, and now there is a second phase of a serious but not panicky search for long-range security options. In a sense there is relief, not because there is satisfaction with the outcome of Indochina, but more because there is hope that the U.S. will now be able to devote more attention to the remainder of the area:

— The five-nation Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN), particularly for Indonesia, Malaysia and Singapore, has quickly emerged as a potential loose mechanism for security cooperation—imperfect but relatively safe and possibly useful.

— All of the nations in the area fear the PRC. Therefore, part of the adjustment for all ASEAN members is to change or consider a change in their relationship with the PRC: Malaysia and the Philippines have already established ties with China, and Thailand is moving rapidly in that direction. Singapore and Indonesia are holding back but will eventually make their peace.

— With regard to the Soviet Union, they are all suspicious, but it is further away and there is no Russian minority to deal with. So they place their trust in the U.S. deterrent and the Sino-Soviet conflict as the basic checks on Soviet expansionism in Asia.

— With respect to the U.S., our affirmations of good intentions are welcomed by all. There is a uniform desire that the U.S. play a supporting—and deterrent—role in the region. There is nevertheless a deep suspicion that the U.S. will fail to provide the type of financial and security resources the ASEAN countries perceive as essential. ASEAN doubts are rooted in the concern that the U.S. Congress will not join in an Administration policy of a continued active interest and role in the region.

— With the exception of Thailand, the regimes in the ASEAN countries are relatively stable, and should remain so over the next several years. Thailand could surprise us, and Khukrit—a man whose sophistication and political sense are increasingly impressive—may survive the odds against him longer than we anticipate. Lee Kuan Yew, not unexpectedly, has a lock on his power position. The others—Indonesia, Malaysia and the Philippines—labor under varying degrees of potential instability, with substantial medium-range threats of social or communal unrest.

— Nationalism in SEA has been spurred significantly by various world developments, and by the Indochina outcome. In some ways it is a healthy development, but in any event we cannot be caught bucking it. There is no doubt that we can adjust to the forms presently being manifested, and in the long run nationalism can serve our interests vis-a-vis the kind of open and independent SEA we would like to see emerge.

— American bases in SEA, in the form to which we have become accustomed, will no longer be available to us. In Thailand, at best we may be able to retain some residual access and minimal operational and intelligence facilities. In the Philippines, we must make an early and conscious decision to discuss substantial modification of the current terms under which we exercise our rights, to avoid an escalation of Filipino emotions regarding sovereignty. By doing so we will be able to retain the facilities as major operating bases.

— U.S. assistance is still relevant, indeed perhaps more so than in recent years. Modest amounts of MAP grant and FMS credit to Indonesia, Thailand and the Philippines can: a) provide military equipment which the countries need for their own security requirements; b) offer concrete evidence of the U.S. intention to play an active role in SEA—at a time when we are most doubted in our capacity for follow-through; and, c) in the Philippines at least, and possibly Thailand, enhance our opportunities for access to bases. For all the ASEAN countries, except Singapore, U.S. economic assistance—some of it on concessional terms—can contribute to social development and infrastructure projects, and in turn aid in the reassertion of our diminished influence and credibility.

— There is little to be salvaged in Laos, where we can only pare down to the barest minimum over the next two weeks, holding back our new Ambassador until that has been accomplished, and then take stock as to the nature of a relationship which would be useful and possible. Similarly, there is no significant interest to be served in our recognizing Hanoi or Saigon at this time. Others, such as Australia, Japan, France and some of the ASEAN countries, can proceed to probe, recognize, aid or what-have-you, while we watch from the sidelines.

— The extraordinary period of crisis in SEA has run its course (leaving aside the possible final act of Laos), and the task now is to adjust to our revised but continuing interests in the area, and to Asian hopes and requirements. We can now gear for the long-haul relationships which demand step-by-step development. In the process we will be aided by the desire of each of the nations in the area to retain its independence and by the deep-rooted feeling among them that all will be well if only the U.S. really can help out. The thing they fear the most is the loss of U.S. interest in their future.

— In each country the leaders interviewed had some trenchant observations or views worth noting:

Prime Minister Whitlam recognizes the primacy of the U.S.-Australian relationship in Australian foreign policy, and counts on an active U.S. role in Southeast Asia.

President Suharto views Thailand's prospects as dim indeed, is deeply concerned that insurgency in Malaysia may reach serious proportions, and hopes that—under Indonesian leadership—ASEAN can serve as a counter to a communist Indochina. He believes it is of critical importance that the U.S. play a discreet but active role in assisting the ASEAN countries.

Prime Minister Lee Kuan Yew , having little faith in the Thai and worried about Malaysia, looks to the U.S. to provide selective but vital assistance to the ASEAN members. Like the others in the region, Lee fears Hanoi and anticipates eventual Vietnamese support for subversion in the ASEAN area.

Prime Minister Razak is focusing on ASEAN, with quiet American support, as a possible security blanket at a time when his insurgency problems could be compounded greatly if Hanoi so chooses. He is anxious to avoid confrontation with the communist regimes in Indochina, but is increasingly aware of the importance of keeping his powder dry.

Prime Minister Khukrit , forced to deal with major leftist student and labor pressures and significant communist insurgencies, is fully cognizant of Hanoi's potential threat. He is seeking to adjust his external relationships with the hope of garnering some protection against Hanoi, but still hopes the U.S. will contribute security assistance to help the Thai defend themselves.

Prime Minister Souvanna Phouma says Laos will continue to require American economic aid, but he has lost control of the situation in the face of overwhelming communist strength and pressure.

President Marcos is intent on adjusting Philippine foreign policy away from the "U.S. stooge" image of which others accuse the Philippines, but he is equally firm in his expressions that the U.S.-Philippine

security relationship is essential to his country. He insists that Philippine sovereignty must be established over U.S. bases, but he does not want U.S. military operational capabilities to suffer adversely from the revised base agreements he seeks.

1 Source:Ford Library, National Security Adviser, Presidential Country Files for East Asia and the Pacific, Box 1, Southeast Asia (3). Confidential; Exdis. Attached and published is Habib’s summary of his trip report. Ford initialed Kissinger’s covering memorandum.

17. Memorandum From W.R. Smyser of the National Security Council Staff to Secretary of State Kissinger, Washington, July 15, 1975. 17. Memorandum From W.R. Smyser of the National Security Council Staff to Secretary of State Kissinger, Washington, July 15, 1975.1

Washington, July 15, 1975

MEMORANDUM
NATIONAL SECURITY COUNCIL
ACTION

July 15, 1975

MEMORANDUM FOR: SECRETARY KISSINGER
FROM: W.R. SMYSER [WRS initialed]

SUBJECT: The Situation in Asia

About a year and a half ago, I sent you a memorandum in which I said that the nations of Asia were adjusting well to the Nixon Doctrine and the different American presence.

It is a remarkable testimonial that this remains true, though not as much as before, even after recent events in Indochina.

Most nations in Asia apparently believe that revolutionary warfare of the Vietnamese model, like a car accident, is something that happens to other people. Therefore, they do not feel quite as discomfited by some of the "lessons of Indochina" as one might suppose they should.

On the other hand, they are worried about North Vietnamese expansionism, which they quite accurately regard as having been the principal determinant of events in Indochina. They are also worried about the danger of increased Russian and Chinese activity, though they still regard these in rather amorphous terms.

The crucial ingredient, in the future as in the past, is what the United States will do. Virtually every Asian Embassy in Washington is spending more effort on the Hill because they recognize the growing importance and growing independence of the Congress. But they still look principally to the Administration, not only because of past associations but because they believe that the Administration remains the center of policy-making.

Even those countries that are most concerned about our determination and our capacity to sustain an effort will still work with us largely because they see little other option. This may have elements of whistling in the dark but, from their standpoint, it seems the most reasonable course.

The nations that have been most affected by events in Indochina have, of course, been those who have been most closely associated with us; e.g. Korea, Thailand, and the Philippines.

— The Koreans remain most anxious to work with us because they see no other option (and, in fact, they have none until Pyongyang changes courses or until Peking and Moscow break loose from Pyongyang).

— The Thai are unable to make up their minds between efforts at accommodation — for which they would have to expel us — or between a neutral formula — for which they would need to keep at least some American backing. Since few of them see the problem in these terms they tend to vacillate and posture.

— The Philippines are in the peculiar position of wanting a firmer commitment while reducing our overt presence. But their basic objectives are not hostile to our interests.

What is most noteworthy is that countries like Malaysia, Australia, and Singapore seem to be turning to us more than before, even after Indochina. One can adduce some complex reasons for this, which are not worth elaborating, and I suppose one might term it the "reverse domino" effect as countries that felt safe now begin to wonder.

Policy

As for policy, I think we can set a fairly straightforward general course but the application will be tricky in a number of countries.

— Generally, we clearly must stay and help those who want our assistance as they appear genuinely to do.

— Thailand. I think we can and should ride with the storm and cut our forces, if necessary completely, so as to avoid providing cheap issues. The problem is to do it in a way that does not discourage our friends and to accompany our military departure with an increase in other forms of collaboration as well as in aid.

— In the Philippines, I see no reason to keep sovereignty over the bases but I recognize the problems this might create for you in Panama.

— In Indochina, I am in no hurry to proceed back though I think we should keep a mission in Laos as long as decently possible as a morale booster for the Thai.

— In Korea, I think we are on the right course of making our concern shrilly known. But I see little beyond stalemate, unless and until Moscow and Peking change their attitudes. Bringing about such a change should be a major objective.

— In Malaysia, Singapore, and Indonesia, the best we can do is to expand military aid. It is what they need and what they will appreciate.

— As for the rest, our course is generally set and will probably work if we can keep control.

One specific recommendation is that we seriously consider having the President visit Manila, Jakarta, and Singapore on his way from Peking. I have discussed this with Brent and with Phil. I was against it until a month or two ago but have begun to change my mind for three reasons: — First and most important, the President does very well on these trips. They will help us in Asia, and will cheer over friends.

— Second, the Chinese cannot really object because they want to keep us in Asia.

— Third, it will reduce the pressures on him for immediate results, whatever they may be, in Peking.

I recognize the disadvantages, including the risk of over-commitment and the danger that a jealous opposition here will reduce aid money to undercut the President's impact. But I think we should study such a trip seriously.

RECOMMENDATION:
That you authorize the NSC Staff to prepare a study on having the President visit Manila, Jakarta and Singapore on his way back from Peking.
APPROVE
DISAPPROVE

1 Source: Ford Library, National Security Adviser, Presidential Country Files for East Asia and the Pacific, Box 1, Southeast Asia (3). Secret; Sensitive; Eyes Only. Sent for action. Kissinger did not approve the recommendation on the last page, but the correspondence profile indicates that on July 16 Kissinger made a decision in response to Smyser’s recommendation. In December 1975, Ford visited Jakarta and Manila but not Singapore. The memorandum from Smyser to Kissinger, which is also discussed in Document 18, was not found.

18. Memorandum From John A. Froebe of the National Security Council Staff to Secretary of State Kissinger, Washington, July 21, 1975. 18. Memorandum From John A. Froebe of the National Security Council Staff to Secretary of State Kissinger, Washington, July 21, 1975.1

Washington, July 21, 1975

MEMORANDUM
NATIONAL SECURITY COUNCIL
ACTION

July 21, 1975

MEMORANDUM FOR: SECRETARY KISSINGER
FROM: JOHN A. FROEBE, JR [JAF initialed]

SUBJECT: Recent Australian Initiative on SEATO

State (EA) has sent you an options memorandum on the recent Australian initiative to terminate SEATO forthwith. I differ with State's definition of the policy options, and I would also attach greater importance to two aspects of the description of the policy problem.

The Policy Problem

I would place greater emphasis than State has on two points: — Whitlam, embattled at home politically, is probably trying to produce a dramatic foreign policy breakthrough. He may also hope that, by seizing on SEATO, he can eliminate a regional security pact he has long described as an anachronism and can further distinguish Australian foreign policy from that of the U.S. Even if he now wants to do away only with the SEATO organization but not the Pact (this seemed ambiguous in his government's original representation), Whitlam could be expected to claim that he had further diffused the situation in Southeast Asia.

— The U.S. still has a substantial interest in SEATO as the embodiment of our security commitment to Thailand. The Thai NSSM now in process is considering how much effort and resources we should devote to preservation of our alliance with Thailand — in terms of the potential regional impact if Thailand shifted toward neutralism. We do not want to see the precipitate end of SEATO as an organization nor as a treaty until we have been able to sort this situation out and have consulted with the Thai. Particularly in the wake of Indochina, SEATO's early termination could be destabilizing.

The Policy Options

In contrast to State's options, we would: — Define the options in a way that gives greater emphasis to our Thai interests in SEATO and to Thailand's interest in the Treaty Organization. State's options tend to submerge the Thai interest in a consideration of SEATO members attitudes generally — which in effect gives greater relative weight to the Australian view than we believe the present context justifies.

— Recognize that the Philippines is likely to acquiesce in Thailand's position on whether SEATO is to be continued and if so in what form. The State options assume that, even if Thailand wants to continue SEATO for at least the near term, the Philippines might well side with Australia to oppose SEATO's continuation.

We would base our options on the assumption (1) that Thailand for at least the next one to two years will want to continue the SEA TO organization in some form (the Thai have pulled back recently from their effort to normalize relations with Hanoi, possibly because of their success in normalizing with Peking); and (2) that the Philippines, if Thailand wants to retain SEATO for the near term, will at least not oppose continuation of the organization and the treaty. If this assumption is invalid, then our policy presumably would be — as you indicated in your Japan Society speech — to phase the SEATO organization and treaty out as quietly as possible.

Option 1

That we support continuation of the SEATO organization as well as of the Pact.

— This would demonstrate U.S. resolve to continue commitments desired by their beneficiaries, and would strengthen the hand of the Thai senior military leadership in current Thai foreign policy debate. On the other hand, this would probably involve us in another contentious round of foreign policy differences with the Whitlam Government.

Option 2

That we agree to disassemble the SEATO organization quietly, but to preserve the military pact.

— This would preserve the legal embodiment of our security relationship with the Thai, and thus would not undercut our professions that we will maintain a security presence in Southeast Asia. It would reduce the potential for a confrontation with the Whitlam Government since Canberra now indicates it will not oppose the pact for the near term at least. On the other hand, this option could raise some questions about the strength of our security resolve in Southeast Asia.

Option 3

That we agree to phase out both the SEATO organization and the Manila Pact.

— This would avoid almost any chance of confrontation with the Australians. On the other hand, it could raise substantial serious questions about our security resolve in Southeast Asia.

My View

I favor Option 1. The Thai, in preparing for Prime Minister Khukrit's meeting with President Marcos in Manila on July 21, have indicated to Embassy Bangkok that they want SEATO to continue in its present form at least for the near term. The Marcos Government, though it recently has become interested in SEATO's gradual demise, is not likely to side with Australia against Thailand on this issue. New Zealand has given no indication that it wants to alter SEATO at this point. If we do not take a strong position against further immediate alteration of SEATO (we cooperated with the de -emphasis last year on SEATO's purely military aspects), our position could easily be misread in Southeast Asia generally as well as by the conflicting groups in Thailand's internal foreign policy debate.

Tactically, we should try to isolate the Whitlam Government quickly on this issue, and to make clear to Whitlam that his timing is bad. One means of doing this could be to demonstrate continued U.S. flexibility on SEATO by agreeing to discuss in general terms at the September SEATO Council meeting the question of SEATO's future.

That you approve Option 1.
APPROVE
DISAPPROVE

That we express willingness, when asked, to discuss SEATO's future at the SEATO Council meeting in September.
APPROVE
DISAPPROVE

1 Source: Ford Library, National Security Adviser, Presidential Country Files for East Asia and the Pacific, Box 1, Australia (5). Secret. Sent for action. Kissinger did not initial a decision; a handwritten notation on the first page of the memorandum reads, “OBE.” At Kissinger’s staff meeting of July 22, Habib said, “The Australians have pulled away from the recommendations to dissolve SEATO.” Kissinger asked, “Would it be so bad for us if SEATO got dissolved, as long as we don’t do it?” Habib replied, “I think it’s important—what the Thais want—because the Thais are the ones that receive—they’re the only members of SEATO that don’t have a mutual security pact with us. And the Thais have indicated that they want very much for it to continue. There may be a halfway step where you keep the Manila Pact, where you don’t have the SEATO organization itself.” (National Archives, RG 59, Transcripts of Secretary of State Kissinger’s Staff Meetings, 1973–1977, E5177, Box 8)

19. Telegram 196461 From the Department of State to the Embassy in Thailand, August 19, 1975, 1459Z. 19. Telegram 196461 From the Department of State to the Embassy in Thailand, August 19, 1975, 1459Z.1

Thailand, August 19, 1975

TELEGRAM
Department of State
State 196461

OP 191459Z AUG 75 ZFF4

FM SECSTATE WASHDC
TO AMEMBASSY BANGKOK NIACT IMMEDIATE
INFO AMEMBASSY CANBERRA PRIORITY
AMEMBASSY LONDON PRIORITY
AMEMBASSY MANILA PRIORITY
AMEMBASSY WELLINGTON PRIORITY
CINCPAC PRIORITY

E.O. 11652: GDS
TAGS: SEATO

SUBJECT: DISSOLUTION OF SEATO
REF: CANBERRA 5459; BANGKOK 16965; BANGKOK 17079

1. DEPARTMENT HAS NO OBJECTIONS TO HAVING SEATO SECRETARIAT DRAW UP A PLAN FOR THE PHASE OUT OF THE SEATO ORGANIZATION FOR CONSIDERATION AT THE SEATO COUNCIL MEETING IN NEW YORK. WE BELIEVE, HOWEVER, THE SECRETARIAT WILL BE HARD PRESSED TO COME UP WITH A PROPOSAL ON SUCH SHORT NOTICE THAT MAKES ADEQUATE PROVISION FOR STAGING DOWN SEATO AND TRANSFERRING FUNCTIONS, SUCH AS THOSE THAILAND WISHES CONTINUED, TO OTHER ENTITIES.

2. WE BELIEVE THE MAJOR PORTION OF THE "PHASE OUT" WORK WILL HAVE TO COME AFTER THE SEATO COUNCIL MEETING IN SEPTEMBER, AND THAT THE DECISION TO TERMINATE THE ORGANIZATION WILL MOST LIKELY OCCUR AT THE 1976 SEATO COUNCIL MEETING. ANY MOVE TO TERMINATE THE ORGANIZATION AT THE UPCOMING SEPTEMBER MEETING — WHICH WE SUSPECT IS THE AUSTRALIAN INTENTION — WE WOULD VIEW AS PRECIPITOUS AND UNWISE. SUCH A MOVE SHOULD BE OPPOSED UNLESS IT HAS THE UNEQUIVOCAL SUPPORT OF THAILAND AND THE PHILIPPINES. SIMILARLY WE WOULD OPPOSE ANY MOVE TO ELIMINATE FUTURE COUNCIL MEETINGS, MILITARY EXERCISES AND INTELLIGENCE COMMITTEE MEETINGS UNTIL SUCH TIME AS A FORMAL DECISION IS MADE BY THE COUNCIL MEMBERS TO TERMINATE THE SEATO ORGANIZATION.

3. YOU ARE AUTHORIZED TO SUPPORT THE THAI POSITION AS STATED IN BANGKOK 17079 FOR GRADUAL PHASE OUT OF SEATO ORGANIZATION OVER PERIOD OF TIME. ADDITIONALLY, WE HAVE BEGUN PROCESS OF ALTERING ARRANGEMENTS SO THAT THE SEATO COUNCIL MEETING CAN BE HELD ON SEPTEMBER 24. PENDING FURTHER INSTRUCTIONS, YOU MAY ACQUIESCE TO SEPTEMBER 24 AS THE COUNCIL MEETING DATE IF A MAJORITY OF THE COUNCIL REPS SO DECIDE. KISSINGER

1 Source: National Archives, Record Group 59, Central Foreign Policy Files. Confidential; Niact; Immediate. Repeated to Priority to Canberra, London, Manila, Wellington, and CINCPAC. Drafted by Gallagher; cleared in EA/RA, EA, and S/P; and approved by Sisco. Telegram 4467 from USUN, October 24, stated, “As anticipated, SEATO Council meeting of September 24 resulted in decision to phase out SEATO organization over period of approximately two years. FYI: Philippines made statement for record that both treaty and organization should be phased out together but as result of compromise between Thai and Philippine delegations, Romulo agreed that Philippines would remain silent on the Manila Pact.” (Ibid.)

20. Memorandum From Thomas J. Barnes and Richard Solomon of the National Security Council Staff to Secretary of State Kissinger, Washington, September 11, 1975. 20. Memorandum From Thomas J. Barnes and Richard Solomon of the National Security Council Staff to Secretary of State Kissinger, Washington, September 11, 1975.1

Washington, September 11, 1975

NATIONAL SECURITY COUNCIL
ACTION

September 11, 1975

MEMORANDUM FOR SECRETARY KISSINGER
FROM: THOMAS J. BARNES

SUBJECT: Recommendations on Presidential Visit to Southeast Asia and Japan

Issue

Although the precise dates have not yet been set for the President's visit to Peking, we believe we should now decide in principle whether he should make several other stops in East Asia en route or on his way home. We specifically endorse Indonesia and the Philippines, also suggest Australia and New Zealand, and recommend postponement of a decision on Japan. An early decision is important for planning purposes, but we would not approach the governments concerned until you have checked with the Chinese, possibly during your discussions later this month with Chiao Kuan-hua. Public announcements would follow the announcement of the dates of the China trip.

Background

The time appears to be ripe for a Presidential trip to Southeast Asia. The dust of the Indochina collapse is clearing away. The course of a new post-war era in Southeast Asia is beginning to emerge. Important changes are taking place in the international politics of the region, while the broad strategic picture has altered little.

Most ASEAN states are seeking accommodation with the Communist powers, in particular China. There is increased talk of regionalism and of retaining independence of action through the balancing of great power interests. The non-Communist states are also polishing up their nationalistic and even "non-aligned" images and accepting the reality that domestic peace requires self-reliance and internal progress. At the same time there is concern about Hanoi's intentions, and uncertainty about the long-term future role of China the Soviet Union, and also Japan.

Thus, all the ASEAN states have separately indicated their desire for increased U.S. military assistance and for a continuing strategic balance in the Western Pacific favorable to the United States.

A Presidential trip to Southeast Asia near the end of the year would: — Illustrate the continuing major U.S. interest and role in Southeast Asia.

— Demonstrate that outside of Indochina, the U.S. remains the permanent friend and preferred power of the ASEAN states.

— Establish a turning point in U.S. relations with Southeast Asia — away from the previous focus on Indochina and toward a forward-looking confident posture.

— Underscore to the Chinese, the Soviets, and others, the continuation of a strategic balance favorable to the U.S.

— Boost the confidence and morale of the ASEAN states.

— Provide a self-confident environment for a possible subsequent move of reconciliation with the Indochina states.

Indonesia and the Philippines

We believe that the President can visit two of the ASEAN states without raising questions as to why he is not visiting the others. The Malay Archipelago is likely to be the focus of our future strategic and political influence in Southeast Asia. Indonesia, the most important country in this area, is a natural choice for a Presidential visit.

A Presidential visit to Manila would also provide a favorable atmosphere for our later renegotiation with the Philippine Government of the Military Bases Agreement. Our military bases in the Philippines will provide the ongoing U.S. strategic presence in Southeast Asia, and Subic Bay in particular is vital to our position in the Western Pacific and the Indian Ocean. Moreover, given our historic ties, failure to include Manila in a Presidential tour of the region would have serious repercussions in the Philippines.

Australia and New Zealand

Likewise, while the President is in the Southeast Asian area, we believe it would also be useful to include visits to our two traditional allies, Australia and New Zealand. By the time of the President's travel to East Asia, the SEATO Council of Ministers is likely to have agreed to the gradual phaseout of the SEATO organization. Under Prime Minister Whitlam, Australia has been following a more independent line and, contrary to our desires, New Zealand has gone ahead with its resolution in the United Nations for a South Pacific Nuclear Free Zone. A Presidential visit to Canberra and Wellington would underscore the fact that, despite these events, we continue to desire a strong alliance with these two nations. Visits to Australia and New Zealand, however, would have considerably less priority than either Indonesia or the Philippines.

Singapore: Malaysia and Thailand

A visit to Singapore but not to Kuala Lumpur would cause awkwardness and some suspicion in Malaysia. And if both Singapore and Malaysia were included, we could not appear to be excluding only Thailand from the itinerary. There are arguments in favor of a Presidential visit to Thailand, but we recommend that consideration of such a visit be delayed until after the withdrawal of U.S. combat forces from Thailand by next March. Additionally, Thai Prime Minister Khukrit Pramot may visit the United States later this year, either to attend the UNGA or on a separate official trip. We consequently believe that the President should not visit Singapore, Malaysia, and Thailand this year.

Japan

Last spring you told Japanese Foreign Minister Miyazawa that the President might stop over briefly in Japan on his way to or from the People's Republic of China. You indicated that if either party thought this stopover was desirable, we would consult. The feeling in the State Department (EA) is that one year after the first Presidential visit to Japan, only a few months following Prime Minister Miki's reception in Washington, an even shorter time since Secretary Schlesinger's visit to Japan, and in the train of Hirohito's forthcoming visit to the States, a Presidential stopover in Tokyo would be too much of a good thing. In addition, State is concerned that the Japanese Government itself might not be enthusiastic about ginning up for another Presidential visit, presumably one that might again involve the Emperor.

A personal briefing of the Japanese by the President on his China trip could, however, serve several objectives: — Underscore that the U.S.-Japan alliance is on a par with that of any of our West European allies.

— Demonstrate at the highest level U.S. faithfulness to its pledge to coordinate with Japan our relations with the Communist powers, in particular China.

— Enhance the aura of U.S.-Japanese cooperation in the Asia-Pacific region prior to the President's visit to Southeast Asia (more subtlety, a Peking-Tokyo route to Southeast Asia would suggest the current conjunction of U.S.-Japanese-Chinese interests in stability in the Asia-Pacific area, including the Korean Peninsula).

Whether we expect a breakthrough in U.S.-PRC relations during the President's trip to Peking will be an important factor influencing a decision on a Tokyo stopover. After your preparatory trip to Peking in late October, you will be able to stop in Tokyo and provide the Japanese some indication of our expectations. On the assumption that there is to be no breakthrough in U.S.-PRC relations, this advance discussion — together with a debriefing after the President's visit to China by either yourself or Assistant Secretary Habib should meet Japanese expectations.

If, however, we move to the establishment of diplomatic relations, a Presidential stopover could be important in preventing another "shock" to our relations with Japan.

In early August you indicated to Prime Minister Miki that you did not expect normalization with the PRC this year. If, following your advance trip, there should be a change in this assessment, it will be especially important for us to demonstrate our sincerity to the Japanese. In this case we should consider an "unofficial" rest stop in Tokyo by the President on his way into China, in addition to your October advance briefing. Consequently, we recommend holding off a decision on the Tokyo visit until after your preparatory trip to Peking.

Proposed Travel Schedule

If the President spends a maximum of five days in China, we would envision: — the sixth day in travel to Manila;

— the seventh day in the Philippines;

— the eighth day in travel to Jakarta;

— the ninth day in Indonesia;

— the tenth day in travel to Canberra;

— the eleventh day in Australia;

— the twelfth day in travel to Wellington;

— the thirteenth day in New Zealand;

— the fourteenth and fifteenth days in travel back to the U.S.

Assuming that the President leaves Washington for Peking by the end of November, this schedule should put him back home by the middle of December.

RECOMMENDATION:

That you sign the memorandum to the President at Tab A recommending that a decision on a Japan stopover be held in abeyance, and that Presidential visits be approved in principle at this time to:

Approve Disapprove

Philippines

Indonesia

Australia

New Zealand

State concurs in this recommendation.

1 Source: Ford Library, National Security Adviser, NSC Staff for East Asia and Pacific Affairs, Convenience Files, Box 18, President’s Trip to the Philippines and Indonesia, December 1975 (2). Secret. Sent for action. The Department of State concurred in the memorandum. None of the recommendations on the last page were approved or disapproved, but, in the top right hand corner of the first page, Scowcroft wrote, “Probably will be no other stop.”

21. Memorandum from the Director of the Policy Planning Staff (Lord) to Secretary of State Kissinger, Washington, October 16, 1975. 21. Memorandum from the Director of the Policy Planning Staff (Lord) to Secretary of State Kissinger, Washington, October 16, 1975.1

Washington, October 16, 1975

DEPARTMENT OF STATE
BRIEFING MEMORANDUM

October 16, 1975

To: The Secretary
From: SAP Winston Lord

US Strategy in Asia: Trends, Issues, and Choices

Shortly after Saigon fell, we sent you our assessment of the probable impact of developments in Indochina on our position in the region along with options for managing the fallout from those events. We promised a more considered judgment once the dust had settled a bit. Six months have now passed, and the attached paper represents our current evaluation of where we stand and the future issues we face in Asia.

In most respects this is an upbeat assessment. The structure of the Major Power balance in the Far East appears unchanged in its essentials, despite some new uncertainties. The Soviets are looking for political openings, but they've probably lost as much ground (versus China) in Northeast Asia (Korea, Japan) as they have gained in Southeast Asia (Hanoi). Peking entertains ( additional doubts about our political will and staying power, but the strategic factors underlying the PRC's interest in closer ties with us remain valid. In Japan there are some fresh breezes blowing on security issues, but changes in Japanese policies will come only gradually.

In Southeast Asia overreactions to Hanoi's victory have been avoided, but policy adjustments in the direction of greater self-reliance, more diversified diplomatic strategies, and stronger regional efforts—initially stimulated by the Nixon doctrine—have been given an emphatic new impetus. Our position in that region is undergoing a marked transformation, but our basic interests are not in serious jeopardy. It looks like we can retain a foothold in Thailand for some residual military presence and continue our substantial presence in the Philippines; all Southeast Asian countries—save those in Indochina—are eager to keep us engaged, politically and economically.

In Korea we continue to face serious policy dilemmas. But these are inherent in the situation itself; they are not a derivative consequence of the setback in Indochina.

The key issues for the future are familiar.

— In what direction should we seek to push the evolution of Great Power relations? Should we lend ourselves to a tacit anti-Soviet entente in the Far East by promoting the coordination of policy on political and security issues with the PRC and Japan?

— How should we play the Ford visit to China?

— What kinds of Soviet involvement in Asia should we seek to obstruct? Which should we seek to encourage?

— What kinds of adjustments in Japan's security posture and regional role should we urge on the GOJ?

— How should we respond to South Korean efforts to develop independent defense options (including a possible nuclear option) and to adopt increasingly oppressive internal measures? Should we undertake new initiatives—including direct contacts with North Korea—to attempt to stabilize North-South relations and to catalyze new Great Power understandings with respect to Korea?

— What kind of residual military presence should we seek to sustain in Southeast Asia?

— Should we attempt to augment our current relations with ASEAN countries? In that connection should we concentrate on intensified bilateral ties with its individual members or efforts to shape a relationship with ASEAN as a regional grouping?

— What pattern of future relations should we seek to develop with Hanoi and the successor regimes in Indochina?

These are not novel issues, and this paper will tell you a good deal that you already know. Nonetheless, as you embark on extensive travel to Asia over the next two months, we thought it would be useful for you to have this comprehensive piece.

Throughout this exercise we have consulted widely with EA and have tried to reflect their comments on an earlier draft in this version. I gave copies of this paper to Phil Habib and Bill Gleysteen, but they have been swamped by the rush of last minute preparations for the Peking trip and have not yet had a chance to react.

Attachment:
Paper: US Strategy in Asia.

1 Source:Ford Library, NSC Institutional Files (H-Files), Box H–40, NSSM 235, U.S. Interests and Objectives in the Asian-Pacific Region (2 of 2) (11). Secret. In the top right-hand corner of the first page, an unknown hand wrote, “Mike Armacost gave me this thoughtful document.” On October 3, Armacost drafted the attached paper, which is not published.

22. Editorial Note 22. Editorial Note

On October 31, 1975, former Ambassador to Thailand William Kintner sent an Executive Summary and Summary Report of his study on “U.S. Policy Interests in the Asian-Pacific Area” to Deputy Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs Brent Scowcroft. On January 15, 1976, Thomas Barnes of the National Security Council Staff forwarded it to Scowcroft under a covering memorandum that stated, “The study is a notable achievement in that it is the first comprehensive review of our Asian posture. While many of its judgments are sound, it reflects much of the traditional hard-line Kintner approach about the Soviet Union, which features more prominently than actual Soviet presence and influence in Asia would dictate.” (Ford Library, National Security Adviser, Presidential Country Files for East Asia and the Pacific, Box 1, Ambassador Kintner’s Study of U.S. Policy Interest in the Asian-Pacific Area)

Kintner’s executive summary attached to Barnes’ memorandum “rationalizes a continued US presence in the various subregions of the area with a reduced, modified, but not insignificant, military presence. It proposes a concept of economic development for Southeast Asia by providing transfers of real resources through the creation of financial consortia for given countries involving governments (including OPEC members), international financial organizations and private banks. It calls for a major campaign to deal with the food-population syndrome in Southeast Asia. The study underscores the need for a strong and more creative cultural-psychological effort to offset the impression that the US is losing interest in that part of the world where its previous policies ended so calamitously.”

23. National Security Study Memorandum 235, Washington, January 15, 1976. 23. National Security Study Memorandum 235, Washington, January 15, 1976.1

Washington, January 15, 1976

NATIONAL SECURITY COUNCIL
WASHINGTON, D.C. 20506

January 15, 1976

National Security Study Memorandum 235

TO: The Secretary of State
The Secretary of Defense
The Director of Central Intelligence

SUBJECT: Review of U.S. Interests and Security Objectives in the Asia-Pacific Region — Issue: Military Bases Negotiations with the Philippines

The President has directed an assessment of U.S. security interests, objectives, and strategic issues in the Asia-Pacific area over the next three to five years, together with the role of U.S. bases in the Philippines in supporting these security interests and objectives.

1. The study should review U.S. interests and objectives in the region during the next three to five years in light of the following: a. The end of the Indochina conflict.

b. US relations with ASEAN countries and the potential role of ASEAN in the security of the region.

c. The phase-out of SEATO.

d. Japan's objectives and potential as a political and economic force in Asia.

e. The policies, intentions, and capabilities of the People's Republic of China.

f. Vietnamese capabilities and intentions.

g. Soviet capabilities and intentions in the region.

h. The Sino-Soviet and Sino-Vietnamese rivalries in Southeast Asia.

2. Based upon the above assessment, the study should evaluate the role of our air, naval, and intelligence presence in the Philippines and present the issues and options to be addressed in the upcoming base negotiations with the Philippines.

The study should be prepared by the NSC Interdepartmental Group for East Asia and forwarded no later than February 4, 1976 for consideration by the Senior Review Group prior to transmittal to the President.

[signed]
Brent Scowcroft

cc: The Chairman, Joint Chiefs of Staff

1 Source:Ford Library, NSC Institutional Files (H-Files), Box H–39, NSSM 235, U.S. Interests and Objectives in the Asia-Pacific Region (2 of 2) (1). Secret. A copy was also sent to the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff. On September 2, 1975, Barnes sent a memorandum to Kissinger suggesting a review of U.S. policy toward military bases in the Philippines in anticipation of future negotiations with the Philippine government. On the first page of Barnes’ memorandum, Scowcroft wrote, “HAK wants the review in terms of our entire Pacific posture and interests—not just SEA.” (Ibid., Box H–40, NSSM 235, U.S. Interests and Objectives in the Asia-Pacific Region [2 of 2] [11])

24. Memorandum From Thomas J. Barnes, Richard Solomon, and Clinton Granger of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Scowcroft), Washington, June 1, 1976. 24. Memorandum From Thomas J. Barnes, Richard Solomon, and Clinton Granger of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Scowcroft), Washington, June 1, 1976.1

Washington, June 1, 1976

MEMORANDUM
NATIONAL SECURITY COUNCIL
ACTION

June 1, 1976

MEMORANDUM FOR BRENT SCOWCROFT
FROM: THOMAS J. BARNES [TB initialed]
RICHARD H. SOLOMON [RS initialed]
CLINTON E. GRANGER [CG initialed]

SUBJECT: SRG Meeting: U.S. Interests and Security Objectives in the Asia-Pacific Area

Purpose of This Meeting: — To review the regional assessment and the statement of U.S. interests and objectives in the Asia-Pacific area as set out in the response to the first section of NSSM 235.

— To reach a consensus on this policy statement prior to putting it before the President in a proposed NSDM(Tab F), either at an NSC meeting or in a memorandum.

Background

Last August we recommended to Secretary Kissinger that prior to looking at our policy in the forthcoming Philippine base negotiations, we should have an inter-agency review of U.S. interests and security objectives in Southeast Asia. Secretary Kissinger recommended that the NSSM should cover the entire Asia-Pacific area. Subsequently, because of the expected early beginning of our negotiations with the Filipinos, you recommended that we combine the broad review of U.S. policy with the particular issue of our position in the Philippine base negotiations. With your approval, the NSC then issued NSSM 235, that called for a review of developments in the Asia-Pacific region, an assessment of the intentions and capabilities of major nations in the region, and a statement of U.S. interests and objectives. We received the NSSM response (Tab C) at the end of March. The NSC then circulated separately Section I of the NSSM response to State, Defense, and CIA, informing them that the statement of U.S. interests and security objectives would serve as the framework for future consideration of specific area issues. (Future NSSMs, for example, will deal with the particular issues you raised regarding a larger defense role for Japan and future U.S. military presence in Korea.) State, Defense, and CIA accepted the NSSM response without change.

Agency Views

State will endorse the paper as a timely and useful statement of U.S. policy within which future specific issues can be considered. Deputy Secretary Robinson will recommend Presidential approval of the NSSM study. CIA will probably concur in the study's intelligence judgments, but, as a matter of principle, avoid comment on the policy aspects. Although DOD approved the NSSM response, we understand that it will now argue that we should not issue a NSDM on the subject. This attitude reflects DOD's interest in maintaining as much flexibility as possible on its own deployment and strategic policies, and in some respects its penchant for making policy without reference to higher authority. The latest "Defense Policy and Planning Guidances" paper, dated November 1975, asserts, for example, that we will encourage Japan to improve its capabilities to contribute to protection of the Pacific Ocean lines of communication. This point involves a Japanese ASW capability to the Philippine Sea, 1000 miles beyond Kyushu, and runs counter to one of the study's principal conclusions — avoiding a regional security role for Japan, an objective stated in the 1974 NSSM on Japan. Deputy Secretary Clements may point specifically to the listing of the missions of U.S. forces in the Pacific on page 13 of the study (Tab C) as too specific or unnecessary. He may also state that the President's speech in Honolulu last December provides sufficient policy direction.

Need for Reassessment

As we noted in our April 12 memorandum to you, the NSSM response represents the first comprehensive national statement of U.S. interests and security objectives in the Asia-Pacific region in seven years. A serious review is in order because of the developments that have altered the fundamental dynamics of international politics in the area: the Sino-Soviet conflict, the marked changes in Sino-U.S. and Sino-Japanese relations, the fall of Indochina, and the U.S. military withdrawal from the mainland of Southeast Asia.

We support your inclination to issue a detailed elaboration of policy such as in the proposed NSDM. We believe that a meaningful but still flexible statement of U.S. policy in the region is sorely needed. We believe that the list of U.S. security objectives in the NSDM fills this function.

The study itself is overly long and often redundant. Some failing in this regard was almost inevitable because of the need to accommodate many views on wide-ranging subjects. The study is also more descriptive than analytical, but this is a natural characteristic of inter-agency assessments. Nevertheless, there was agreement on the trend of events, as well as on the capabilities and intentions of Japan, the Soviet Union, China, Vietnam, and the ASEAN states; and on the U.S. interests and objectives that flow from the new situation. We believe that the recommended objectives are realistic in terms of both U.S. interests and capabilities. We have extracted the major judgments of the inter-agency study to form Tab B.

Your Approach at the Meeting

Talking points for the meeting are at Tab A.

We suggest that you open the meeting by establishing the importance of the paper as a major policy document. You should underscore that you believe a thorough reassessment of the situation in the Asia-Pacific area, and a statement of our interests and objectives, are timely. You should note that the statement of U.S. interests and objectives is intended to provide a broad policy framework within which other specific issues can be addressed. These issues include: — Our position in the Philippine base negotiations.

— The U.S. security role in Korea over the next three to five years.

— Enhanced U.S.-Japan defense cooperation and encouragement of greater Japanese efforts in self-defense.

— Expansion of Japanese defense capabilities.

— Our negotiating posture with regard to the five districts of Micronesia whose political future remains undetermined.

— Future military drawdowns from Taiwan.

— Normalization of our relations with China.

— Our advanced weapons and technology transfer policies toward Taiwan, Korea, and the Peoples Republic of China.

— Our future security assistance to Thailand and other Southeast Asian states.

— Normalization of our relations with Vietnam.

You should indicate that the purpose of the meeting is to try to reach a general consensus on the basic judgments of the inter-agency study and on the statement of interests and objectives. In addition, you may wish to add that, as much as possible, the meeting should try to avoid getting bogged down in minor and editorial issues.

We suggest that you then proceed to review the major judgments (Tab B) of the inter-agency review and to inquire whether there are any basic disagreements. You may then ask if there are any fundamental differences with the statement of interests and objectives.

If Defense argues that we should not issue a NSDM, you may wish to state that you believe the President would like the record to show that this Administration has made an intelligent reassessment of policy in light of the fundamental changes that have taken place in East Asia in the past few years. The last overall assessment is seven years old, and obsolete. Moreover, while the Honolulu speech of last December represented a fine statement of the basic premises of U.S. policy, the President wants to be involved in setting policy guidelines that go beyond these generalities.

If Defense asserts that the listing of military missions on page 13 of the study is unnecessary, you should reply that: this section is an important aspect of the policy statement; such a definition of military missions is a political question that the President should determine; the wording on this subject is still broad and flexible; and we will consider any military deployment questions separately and in detail but within the NSSM 235 framework.

1 Source:Ford Library, NSC Institutional Files (H-Files), Box H–17, Institutional Files, Meetings (IFM), SRG Meeting, NSSM 235, June 4, 1976 (1). Secret. Sent for action. Attached but not published are Tab A, Scowcroft’s undated talking points, and Tab B, the major judgments of the inter-agency review. Tab C refers to the NSSM 235 paper. Section I of the NSSM 235 paper is attached but not published. Section II is ibid., Box H–39, NSSMs, NSSM 235 (1 of 2). Tab F, the proposed NSDM is ibid., H–91, SRG Mtgs., 6/4/76, NSSM 235, Folder 6.

25. Minutes of Senior Review Group Meeting, Washington, June 4, 1976, 3:10–4:08 p.m. 25. Minutes of Senior Review Group Meeting, Washington, June 4, 1976, 3:10–4:08 p.m. 1

Washington, June 4, 1976, 3:10–4:08 p.m.

SENIOR REVIEW GROUP MEETING
June 4, 1976

Time and Place: 3:10 p.m. - 4:08 p.m., White House Situation Room

Subject: NSSM 235

Participants:

Chairman: Brent Scowcroft

State: Charles Robinson

Philip Habib

James Goodby

DOD: William Clements

Amos Jordan

Morton Abramowitz

JCS: Lt. Gen. William Y. Smith

CIA: Lt. Gen. Vernon Walters

Evelyn Colbert

NSC Staff:

Thomas Barnes

Richard Solomon

Michael Hornblow

Donald MacDonald

Lt. Gen. Walters gave intelligence briefing. (Attached)

Gen. Scowcroft: Are there any questions? Well the NSSM 235 study was designed in the aftermath of Vietnam to serve as an umbrella for other Asian country studies we might wish to conduct. It does have the characteristics of an umbrella study and does contain a number of truisms. There were, though, a number of things which challenged me regarding substantive political changes and I thought it was important for us to get together and see where we want to go from here. Chuck do you have any comments?

Mr. Robinson: We think the study is a useful background document. It provides a good summary of problems in the light of current events. We think it could serve as a basis for decisions arising out of subsequent studies.

Gen. Scowcroft: It was not designed to be a decision-making document but as a policy document. We have had no policy document on East Asia since 1969.

Mr. Robinson: We think it is a useful summary which will be helpful in producing more detailed studies leading to decisions.

Gen. Scowcroft: What do you think Bill?

Mr. Clements: I have not read the report and can't really comment on it. Joe may have some comments. Dick (to Gen. Walters) in your analysis there were two things which I missed. One concerns the growth of the Chinese Navy and the other is the Russian production facility on their Pacific Coast.

Lt. Gen. Walters: That is correct. There has been a substantial reinforcement of the Chinese fleet [text not declassified]

Ms. Colbert: The buildup of their South Seas fleet was done to correct serious deficiencies. They considered it important to build up their defensive capabilities because of the increased threat to their sealanes. However, as compared to the Soviet Fleet their Navy is very limited.

Lt. Gen. Walters: The one area not cut back by the Chinese is the Navy.

Mr. Clements: I would like to carry this one step further. I would like to know whether within the added naval effort submarines have received more attention? Is there some significance to this? For example, there have been extensive expansions of Soviet submarine production facilities.

Lt. Gen. Walters: [text not declassified]

Mr. Clements: Won't both China and Russia have significant production capabilities in two to three years?

Lt. Gen. Walters: [text not declassified]

Mr. Solomon: Have they tested SLBM'S?

Lt. Gen. Walters: [text not declassified]

Mr. Jordan: We believe that this is a useful background study, but it has not sorted our priorities enough and should not lead to a NSDM.

Gen. Scowcroft: If the consensus is that this statement should not lead to a policy-making document, should it be turned into an umbrella guidance document.

Mr. Jordan: We think the study should be more precise about our military objectives and the probable threats to our military, and the importance of our military force in the area. The study is now tog general. It is a catalogue and provides no real guidance.

Lt. Gen. Smith: The problem is it gives the appearance of guidance without providing guidance. For example, it says nothing specific about force deployments.

Mr. Habib: We would need a specific paper covering deployments. In this study we cannot get into that specific kind of requirement.

Mr. Abramowitz: The study does set forth force design objectives.

Mr. Jordan: It sets our priorities. The deployments would follow from the priorities.

Gen. Scowcroft: On what basis are our deployments decided now?

Mr. Jordan: It is hazy indeed.

Mr. Habib: We have no problem with this as providing general guidelines. After all it is derived from the President's Honolulu speech. We feel we already have clear guidelines.

Lt. Gen. Smith: Since a policy has been enunciated in the President's speech, what more is needed?

Gen. Scowcroft: We need something more than a Presidential speech.

Mr. Habib: If we get into deployments, that is a separate problem.

Mr. Clements: Is the study supposed to cover our basic general relations with Japan and the Philippines?

Mr. Habib: Yes.

Mr. Abramowitz: According to the study Japan would not have an important regional role. I question this conclusion.

Mr. Habib: This paper does not deny Japan a role in the area. But we do want to deny Japan a regional military role. I remind you this paper was cleared by Defense.

Gen. Scowcroft: We are now getting into specifics. In this meeting we have to decide what to do with the study. If we bless the study, should we have a NSDM? There is no point in getting into specific items in the study. The decisions we have to make is what we should do with the study.

Mr. Habib: Well, there is a real problem with Japan which has just been pointed out. This is the sort of problem that you get in with these kinds of general guidelines.

Gen. Scowcroft: Well, it does foreclose a Japanese regional security role based on the 1974 NSSM on Japan.

Mr. Habib: That is what guided the Secretary of Defense in his last major go-around with the Japanese.

Mr. Abramowitz: That was only because of sensitivity to the Japanese political scene.

Mr. Habib: That raises the problem of how this was carried out. If what Brent says is true, it should not have been carried out.

Mr. Clements: The whole thing is fuzzy. In our government we have no clear policy of where we are regarding Japan.

Gen. Scowcroft: Are there any fundamental problems with the study? Can't we scrub it down with a view to having an overall policy document?

Mr. Habib: I have one basic objection; what did we ask the working group for? Was it an options paper, or are we just going to take this and shred it? We won't get the precision you want in an umbrella document.

Gen. Scowcroft: I am not talking about precision I am talking about broad guidelines, but there is a problem in the paper with Japan and Korea.

Mr. Habib: There should be separate documents on Korea and Japan.

Ms. Colbert: One of the problems in basing something else on this paper is its point of departure. This paper focuses on South East Asia. This is where the serious analysis is. China and Korea, for example, are not discussed on the same level. If the principal problems are Korea and Japan then separate NSSM'S on Japan and Korea are needed.

Mr. Habib: I think this is a hell of a good background paper.

Gen. Scowcroft: I am trying to reverse the proliferation of studies which just evaporate. These exercises must be useful to the people who work on them.

Mr. Habib: Producing the Philippine paper has raised two other questions. Should there be separate NSSM'S on Japan and Korea?

Lt. Gen. Walters: Must everything be tied together?

Gen. Scowcroft: If you just put this study on the shelf it will have no status.

Mr. Habib: It has more status than you are giving it.

Gen. Scowcroft: Defense doesn't want it to have status because they don't agree with it.

Mr. Abramowitz: Right.

Mr. Robinson: Our challenge is to get it to say something we can all agree on.

Mr. Jordan: There are surface issues which are buried in the study such as the defensive role of Japanese forces outside of the home islands. There are also definite problems in Northeast Asia which are slighted.

Gen. Scowcroft: I have no objection to 95 percent of the paper. It was not designed to be a complete study of everything in the area. It was designed to have an overall Asian framework. I don't like what the paper says regarding Japan. I recognize it as an issue which should be studied in depth.

Lt. Gen. Smith: It is hard to draw the line. There is a need for other studies. Substantive decisions should follow from such a paper.

Gen. Scowcroft: Yes -95 percent of this paper is okay. We need a general statement of our Asian policy. The last such statement dates back to 1969 when we had a different strategy.

Mr. Clements: Well, let's work on that five percent.

Mr. Habib: The paper does provide good guidelines. If it just sat, people could refer to it and deal with the issues it discusses. I would like to see some debate over the Japanese security role.

Gen. Scowcroft: There are several alternatives to consider. On one extreme we can drop the study now and it would not have any status. On the other extreme, we could write a NSDM based on the study. There is an option in between in which we would draft something for my signature or Jeanne Davis' signature to send out, saying that this study has been considered and reflects the general guidelines of our Asian policy. This will give it some kind of legitimacy.

Mr. Jordan: We could ask a working group to flesh out the Northeast Asian topics which were slighted, and then make some assessments and surface the issues and meld them into a final paper.

Mr. Habib: What more needs to be said? The Northeast Asian issues are specifically dealt with in this paper.

Mr. Jordan: They are dealt with only in the most general terms. There is just a one sentence assertion.

Mr. Habib: It is not an assertion but a one sentence statement, which if you don't agree with should be changed. Perhaps the China section could be beefed up?

Mr. Abramowitz: Yes, there is no talk of arms sales to the Chinese.

Mr. Clements: And there is no mention of technological transfer to the Japanese in relation to their military forces.

Mr. Habib: This is not the purpose of this paper.

Mr. Clements: I have now read the Japanese section of this paper. I don't find that these general guidelines give me an understanding of Japan's role.

Mr. Habib: Look at pages 13 and 14.

Mr. Abramowitz: Do we never want the Japanese to sell APC'S to Singapore?

Mr. Habib: No, I think we should sell APC'S to Singapore. However, this paper cannot deal with that kind of detail. If we take Joe's suggestion the paper won't serve a general umbrella purpose.

Lt. Gen. Smith: It can lead to that, but it doesn't have to lead to that.

Mr. Abramowitz: I think that the President's Pacific Doctrine speech offered us a good rubric. There were elements left out where we need some guidance, but they are not covered here. What you have here is motherhood. Do we want an evolving Japanese security role in the area or not?

Gen. Scowcroft: Just because this thing is motherhood doesn't make it necessary for us to turn our backs on it. There is nothing wrong with motherhood, if it represents a document the Bureaucracy can use as a starting point.

Mr. Habib: Well, it does do that. If we take the middle role you suggested, it does do that.

Lt. Gen. Smith: After we make certain changes.

Mr. Habib: I don't know why we couldn't do that before. This is the first time I have heard any Defense Department objections.

Gen. Scowcroft: Would we get something out of it that would be worth the extra effort going into it?

Mr. Jordan: Why don't we in Defense pull out that five percent and identify alternate approaches and then put it back into the hopper.

Gen. Scowcroft: That is all right. I do think there is a problem with the Japanese phraseology. We can deal, or not deal with the issue.

Mr. Jordan: One-third or less of the NSSM deals with Northeast Asia.

Mr. Barnes: The heart of the problem is pages 12 and 13 and most of that relates to Northeast Asia.

Gen. Scowcroft: My problem with the Korean part of the paper is the use of the word "adjust" in describing what we will do with our forces over the next five years. It is not true that we will "adjust" in any respect to the level of Korean forces. The implication in this study is that we will pull out our forces as things quiet down. That just is not true. Our forces in Korea serve a number of purposes.

Mr. Habib: That is your interpretation. The word "adjustment" can mean a lot of different things.

Gen. Scowcroft: When was the last time we "adjusted" up?

Mr. Habib: A word change would take care of your problem.

Gen. Scowcroft: What we need is a memorandum ratifying this document, saying that it is a useful background document. I just don't like things like this to go into limbo.

Mr. Habib: We could say that the study would form the basis for more detailed examinations.

Gen. Scowcroft: The working group should meet and make adjustments, and we should then circulate the paper.

Lit. Gen. Smith: Even though the paper contains a lot of motherhood, it also has a lot of good things in it.

Mr. Clements: May I bring up a different issue that is Thailand. [text not declassified] is concerned about where he moves his physical assets. Time is cranking us up. Should they be moved to Taiwan or the Philippines? (General Scowcroft is called away from the room. )

Mr. Habib: We have been meeting about this and there is a third alternative which is Hong Kong. Of these three the most favorable one is Hong Kong. Since there are technical problems in the Philippines, it really comes down to two alternatives: Hong Kong or Taiwan. The British are sympathetic regarding Hong Kong, but I would not close out the Taiwan option without careful consideration. The working group has come up with some general guidelines.

Mr. Abramowitz: That is not correct. The question is what sort of internal arrangements can we devise with Thailand?

Mr. Habib: Today it was all thrashed out.

Mr. Clements: Was it put up as an issue?

Mr. Habib: The working group is working very well. In Thailand it has come to a crunch point and we are now seeing if we can get the aircraft rights we really want. It is a political problem the Thai's are not going to accept them.

Mr. Clements: The working group deserves great credit. They have made a great effort. We must be out of Thailand in July.

Mr. Abramowitz: Is something working now?

Mr. Habib: [text not declassified]

Mr. Abramowitz: George Bush sent over something.

Mr. Habib: Yes.

Mr. Clements: What about Singapore?

Mr. Habib: It is fine for air rights but not worth it [text not declassified]

Lt. Gen. Walters: [text not declassified]

Mr. Habib: The air facility is much more important.

Lt. Gen. Smith: We will balance one against the other. (Gen. Scowcroft returns to the meeting. )

Mr. Habib: If you balance, you would have to go for the air facility. Brent, Tom should brief you on what was said regarding Thailand. [text not declassified]

1 Source: Ford Library, NSC Institutional Files (H-Files), Box H–24, Meeting Minutes, SRG, Originals, June 1976. Secret; Sensitive. The meeting was held in the White House Situation Room. The text of Walter’s briefing is ibid., H–91, SRG Meetings, June 4, 1976, NSSM 235, Folder 6. Scowcroft received these minutes under a covering June 28 memorandum from Davis. Michael Hornblow drafted the minutes and showed them to a colleague on the NSC staff (probably Thomas Barnes), who wrote, “My principle reaction is tears at how the meeting went, but I have made only minor adjustments to the disjointed proceedings which I think you caught quite well.” (Ibid.) In lieu of a NSDM, on November 5, Scowcroft sent out a new version of Part I of the NSSM 235 paper to DOS, DOD, and CIA, and noted, “The attached NSSM response as revised is circulated as a useful reference for U.S. interests and objectives in the Asia-Pacific region.” (Ibid., Box H–39, NSSMs, NSSM 235 [1 of 2], Folder 1)

Chapter II: Australia, New Zealand, ANZUS, Papua New GuineaChapter II: Australia, New Zealand, ANZUS, Papua New Guinea

26. Memorandum From John Holdridge of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger), Washington, February 1, 1973.

Washington, February 1, 1973

Holdridge informed Kissinger of Whitlam’s recent foreign policy statements.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 504, Country Files, Far East, Australia, January 1972–December 31, 1973. Secret. Sent for information. Kissinger initialed the memorandum on March 20.

27. Memorandum From John Holdridge of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger), Washington, March 1, 1973.

Washington, March 1, 1973

Holdridge informed Kissinger of Whitlam’s discussions with Suharto.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 504, Country Files, Far East, Australia, January 1972–December 31, 1973. Secret. Sent for information. Kissinger initialed the memorandum on March 20.

28. Information Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian and Pacific Affairs (Green) to Secretary of State Rogers, Washington, March 3, 1973.

Washington, March 3, 1973

Green notified Rogers of improvements in relations between Australia and North Korea.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970–1973, POL AUSTL–KOR N. Secret; Exdis. Drafted by Picard. Concurred in by Sneider and Ranard in EA/K and Hall in EA/ANZ.

29. Memorandum From Secretary of State Rogers to President Nixon, Washington, March 16, 1973.

Washington, March 16, 1973

Rogers reported on his conversation with Plimsoll.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 504, Country Files, Far East, Australia, January 1972–December 31, 1973. Secret.

30. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, May 2, 1973, 5:40–6:35 p.m.

Washington, May 2, 1973, 5:40–6:35 p.m.

Kissinger and Wilenski discussed U.S.-Australian relations.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 504, Country Files, Far East, Australia, January 1972–December 31, 1973. Secret. The conversation took place in Kissinger’s Office at the White House. Kissinger’s talking points from Froebe, May 2, are ibid. Following the meeting, Kissinger instructed Rodman to send Nixon a proposal for a visit by Whitlam. (Memorandum from Rodman to Kissinger, May 3; ibid. [secret])

31. Précis of National Intelligence Estimate 44-73, Washington, May 17, 1973.

Washington, May 17, 1973

[2 pages not declassified.]

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 362, Subject Files, National Intelligence Estimates [1 of 3]. Secret.

32. Telegram 3139 From the Embassy in Australia to the Department of State, June 6, 1973, 0820Z.

June 6, 1973

Green described his and Barnard’s discussion about a possible visit by Whitlam to the United States.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970–1973, POL 7 AUSTL. Confidential; Nodis. Kissinger approved a memorandum from Froebe, July 6, which approved a draft State cable directing Green to respond orally to a confidential letter of June 15 from Australian opposition party leaders recommending that Nixon receive Whitlam. (National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 504, Country Files, Far East, Australia, January 1972-December 31, 1973)

33. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, June 8, 1973.

Washington, June 8, 1973

Hay and Godley discussed the future of Papua New Guinea.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970–1973, POL 19 NEW GUIN. Confidential. Drafted by Martin. On May 22, the Embassy in Australia transmitted telegram 2850 about the future of Papua New Guinea. (Ibid., Central Foreign Policy Files.)

34. Memorandum From John Froebe of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger), Washington, July 11, 1973.

Washington, July 11, 1973

Froebe advised Kissinger not to meet separately with Whitlam.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 910, VIP Visits, Australia, PM. Whitlam Visit, July, 1973 [2 of 2]. Secret. Sent for action. Concurred in by Eagleburger. Kissinger initialed his disapproval of the recommendation.

35. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, July 25, 1973, 5:04–5:28 p.m.

Washington, July 25, 1973, 5:04–5:28 p.m.

Kissinger and Plimsoll discussed Whitlam’s upcoming visit.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 504, Country Files, Far East, Australia, January 1972–December 31, 1973. Top Secret; Sensitive; Exclusively Eyes Only.

36. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, July 28, 1973, 12:30 p.m.

Washington, July 28, 1973

Kissinger and Green discussed U.S.-Australian relations.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 910, VIP Visits, Australia, PM. Whitlam Visit, July, 1973 [1 of 2]. Secret; Sensitive. The conversation took place at the White House. Drafted by Froebe.

37. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, July 30, 1973, 10–11 a.m.

Washington, July 30, 1973, 10–11 a.m.

Kissinger and Whitlam discussed U.S.-Australian relations with particular emphasis on Indochina.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 910, VIP Visits, Australia, PM. Whitlam Visit, July, 1973[1 of 2]. Secret; Sensitive. The conversation took place in Kissinger’s office at the White House. Froebe sent this memorandum of conversation to Kissinger under a covering memorandum, August 9. (Ibid.)

38. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, July 30, 1973.

Washington, July 30, 1973

Nixon and Whitlam discussed U.S.-Australian relations.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 910, VIP Visits, Australia, PM. Whitlam Visit, July, 1973, folder 7. “Top Secret” is handwritten on the top of the first page. The President’s Daily Diary indicates that the meeting lasted from 11:15 a.m. until 12:33 p.m. (National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, White House Central Files, President’s Daily Diary) Drafted by Green. Nixon’s undated talking points from Kissinger, which the President saw, are ibid. [1 of 2]. Rogers sent a briefing memorandum to the President On July 26. (Ibid., RG 59, Central Files 1970–1973, POL 7 AUSTL)

39. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, July 31, 1973.

Washington, July 31, 1973

Rogers and Whitlam discussed the international relations of East Asia.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970–1973, POL 7 AUSTL. Secret; Exdis. Drafted by Moser; cleared by Sneider and Green.

40. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to President Nixon, Washington, September 27, 1973.

Washington, September 27, 1973

Kissinger reported on Kirk’s speech to the United Nations General Assembly.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 934, VIP Visits, New Zealand, Prime Minister Kirk [1 of 2]. Confidential. Sent for information.

41. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, September 27, 1973.

Washington, September 27, 1973

Nixon and Kirk discussed relations between the United States and New Zealand.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 1027, Presidential/HAK Memcoms, April–November 1973, HAK & Presidential [2 of 5]. Secret; Sensitive; Eyes Only. Undated talking points from Kissinger, initialed by Scowcroft and seen by the President, are ibid., Box 934, VIP Visits, New Zealand, Prime Minister Kirk, Folder 4.

42. Editorial Note

43. Letter From Acting Secretary of State Rush to Secretary of Defense Schlesinger, Washington, December 21, 1973.

Washington, December 21, 1973

Rush communicated to Schlesinger the importance of Barnard’s visit.

Source: Washington National Records Center, OSD Files: FRC 330–78–0001, Australia, 091.112, 1973. Secret. On bottom of the first page “22 Dec 1973. Sec Def has seen” is stamped, Rush received this letter for his signature under a covering memorandum from Sneider dated December 20. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970–1973, POL 7 AUSTL)

44. Memorandum From W.R. Smyser of the National Security Council Staff to Secretary of State Kissinger, Washington, January 3, 1974.

Washington, January 3, 1974

Smyser reported on a recent conversation with Marshall Green.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 505, Country Files, Far East, Box 505, Australia, 1 January 1974–. Secret; Sensitive; Eyes, Only. Sent for action. Kissinger initialed his approval of recommendations 1, 3, and 4, and his disapproval of recommendation 5. He left recommendation 2 blank.

45. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, January 9, 1974, 11:30–1:15.

Washington, January 9, 1974, 11:30–1:15

Schlesinger and Barnard discussed U.S. facilities in Australia, U.S.-Australian relations, and visits by nuclear powered warships.

Source: Washington National Records Center, OSD Files: FRC 330–78–0011, Australia, 091.112, 1974. Secret. Prepared by Doolin and approved by Peet. The conversation took place in Schlesinger’s office. A memorandum of conversation from Schlesinger’s meeting with Marshall Green, which lasted from 9:55 until 11:05 and included discussion of Japan and U.S. facilities in Australia, is ibid.

46. Editorial Note

47. Telegram 1262 From the Embassy in Australia to the Department of State, March 2, 1974, 0255Z.

March 2, 1974

Rush described his meeting with Whitlam.

Source: Library of Congress, Manuscript Division, Kissinger Papers, Box CL 105, Australia, March–August, 1974. Secret; Cherokee; Nodis.

48. Minutes of the Acting Secretary of State’s Staff Meeting, Washington, June 14, 1974, 3:10 p.m.

Washington, June 14, 1974

Ingersoll and Sisco discussed the election of Cairns as Deputy Prime Minister.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Transcripts of Secretary of State Kissinger’s Staff Meetings, 1973–1977, Entry 5177, Box 3. Secret. At the June 21 meeting, Hummel said that EA had changed its attitude toward Cairns’ election: “we think that the problem is really not our problem to solve. For one reason, we do not in fact give clearances for individuals in the Australian Government for the sensitive intelligence and defense installations. The Australian Government does that itself and tells us afterwards. So it is not up to us to clear or not clear Mr. Cairns. The problem is really the Prime Minister’s problem to solve. And I think this is the proper and mature approach. So that we don’t tear down the relationships we have by arbitrary action on our part, so that we don’t engage in spooky fiddling with the situation, in which we might get caught—in some of the other proposals that have been made. They are logical to consider, but we think not logical to carry out.” (Minutes of Under Secretary Sisco’s Staff Meeting, June 21, 3 p.m.; Ibid., Box 4)

49. National Security Study Memorandum 204, Washington, July 1, 1974.

Washington, July 1, 1974

NSSM 204 directed the CIA and the Departments of State and Defense to review U.S. policy toward Australia in light of recent changes in the Labor Government.

Source: Library of Congress, Manuscript Division, Kissinger Papers, Container CL 316, National Security Council, National Security Memoranda, Studies, June 1973–September 1974. Secret; Sensitive; Nodis. Hummel, the Acting Chairman of the Interdepartmental Group for East Asian and Pacific Affairs, sent Kissinger the response to NSSM 204 on August 5, 1974. The study recommended preservation of the ANZUS alliance, encouragement of Australia’s stabilizing role as a regional power, and encouragement of “Australian foreign policies that harmonize with, rather than undercut, those of the US.” The study also advocated maintenance of US access to defense installations in Australia and careful regard for political pressure that may require their eventual relocation. The study is attached to a memorandum on NSSM 204 from Smyser to Kissinger, August 22, in the Ford Library, NSC Institutional Files (H-Files), Box H–12, Institutional Files, Meetings (IFM), SRG Meeting, August 15, 1974, Australia, NSSM 204 [1]) There is no evidence that the SRG met to discuss NSSM 204.

50. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, August 1, 1974, 5 p.m.

Washington, August 1, 1974

[text not declassified in time for publication]

Source: Ford Library, National Security Adviser, NSC Staff for East Asia & Pacific Affairs, Convenience Files, Box 1, Australia, February–September 1974 [1]. Top Secret; Sensitive. The meeting took place in the White House.

51. Telegram 6178 From the Embassy in Australia to the Department of State, September 20, 1974, 0607Z.

September 20, 1974

The Embassy provided advice for Ford’s meeting with Whitlam.

Source: National Archives, Record Group 59, Central Foreign Policy Files. Confidential; Priority; Exdis.

52. Editorial Note

53. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, February 7, 1975, 1600–1645.

Washington, February 7, 1975, 1600–1645

Green and Schlesinger discussed US-Australian relations.

Source: Washington National Records Center, OSD Files: FRC 330–78–0058, Australia, 091.112, 1975. Top Secret. Drafted and approved by Crowe. The conversation took place in Schlesinger’s office.

54. Telegram 97105 From the Department of State to the Embassy in Australia, April 26, 1975, 0054Z.

April 26, 1975

The telegram described the ANZUS Council meeting held in Washington on April 24 and 25.

Source: National Archives, Record Group 59, Central Foreign Policy Files. Confidential; Priority. Repeated for information to Bangkok, Singapore, Kuala Lumpur, Seoul, Geneva, USUN New York, Vientiane, Jakarta, Port Moresby, London, Paris, Manila, Tokyo and CINCPAC. Drafted by Michaud, officer for the ANZUS desk; and approved by Zurhellen. The memorandum of conversation recounting Kissinger’s remarks at the afternoon session of April 24 is ibid., P–820125–0600.

55. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, May 7, 1975.

Washington, May 7, 1975

Kissinger and Rowling discussed U.S.-New Zealand relations.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy Files, P–820125–0393. Secret; Nodis. Drafted by Knowles and approved by Covey. According to his daily diary, Ford met with Rowling from 11:06 a.m. until 12:08 p.m. on May 7. (Ford Library, Staff Secretary’s Office, President’s Daily Diary) During this meeting, Ford stated that the United States would continue to play a major role in the Pacific despite the fall of South Vietnam, but that it might reexamine its defense commitments if South Pacific nations enact a restrictive nuclear free zone. The memorandum of conversation from this Rowling-Ford meeting is in Ford Library, National Security Adviser, Memoranda of Conversation, Box 11.

56. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, May 7, 1975, 3 p.m.

Washington, May 7, 1975

Ford and Whitlam discussed U.S.-Australian relations in the wake of the fall of Saigon.

Source: Ford Library, National Security Adviser, Memoranda of Conversation, Box 11, 5/7/75. Confidential. Drafted by Habib. Ford’s talking points from Kissinger, marked, “The President has seen,” are ibid., Presidential Country Files for East Asia and the Pacific, Box 1, Australia [3]. Before visiting Ford, Whitlam met with Kissinger at 2 p.m. The memorandum of conversation is available in the National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy Files, P – 820125 – 0398.

57. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, October 9, 1975, 3 p.m.

Washington, October 9, 1975

Kissinger met the Prime Minister of Papua New Guinea.

Source: Ford Library, National Security Adviser, NSC Staff for East Asia & Pacific Affairs, Convenience Files, Box 15, Kissinger memoranda (6), October–December 1975. Confidential; Nodis. Drafted by Knowles and approved by Covey. The meeting was held in Kissinger’s office at the White House.

58. Telegram 260731 From the Department of State to the Embassy in Australia, November 4, 1975, 1706Z.

November 4, 1975

The Department of State instructed the Canberra Embassy to deny accusations that the US government had given donations to Australian politicians.

Source: National Archives, Record Group 59, Central Foreign Policy Files. Confidential; Immediate. Repeated for information to Wellington, Melbourne, Sydney, and CINCPAC. Telegram 7446 from Canberra, November 5, reported that this directive was accomplished.

59. Telegram 8624 From the Embassy in Australia to the Department of State, December 31, 1975, 0601Z.

December 31, 1975

The embassy outlined Fraser’s views on politico-military relations with the United States.

Source: National Archives, Record Group 59, Central Foreign Policy Files. Secret; Exdis. On November 11, Governor General Sir John Kerr dismissed Whitlam and installed Fraser as interim Prime Minister. Fraser won election on December 13.

60. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, March 17, 1976, 12:45 p.m.

Washington, March 17, 1976

Kissinger and Peacock talked about world affairs over lunch.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy Files, P–820117–1629. Secret; Nodis. Drafted by Squire and approved by Covey.

61. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, June 8, 1976, 1400.

Washington, June 8, 1976

Killen and Rumsfeld discussed NATO, Diego Garcia, nuclear powered warships, Thailand, Philippine negotiations, Law of the Sea, Australian defense, and Papua New Guinea.

Source: Washington National Records Center, OASD/ISA Files: FRC 330–79–0037, Australia, 333, Memcons (only), 1976, June–September. Confidential. Prepared by Houser and approved by McAuliffe. The conversation took place in Rumsfeld’s office.

62. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, July 27, 1976, 10:55 a.m.–12:27 p.m.

Washington, July 27, 1976, 10:55 a.m.–12:27 p.m.

Ford and Fraser discussed international relations.

Source: Ford Library, National Security Adviser, Memoranda of Conversation, Box 20, 7/27/76. Secret; Nodis.

63. Memorandum From Robert Hormats of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Scowcroft), Washington, October 14, 1976.

Washington, October 14, 1976

Hormats recommended that Scowcroft intervene in a controversy over proposed meat import regulations.

Source: Ford Library, National Security Adviser, Presidential Correspondence with Foreign Leaders, Box 1. Confidential. Sent for action. Concurred in by Gleysteen. Attached but not published at Tab A is Scowcroft’s undated talking points; attached but not published at Tab B is Fraser’s undated letter to Ford. Fraser’s letter concluded, “it is my firm view that the quantity of Australian meat to be permitted entry to the USA this year, should be in no way reduced below the level of 632.2 million pounds previously agreed between our two governments.” On November 6, Deputy Executive Secretary Frank Ortiz notified Scowcroft that Australia had been informed that its quota for 1976 was 632.2 million pounds. (ibid.)

26. Memorandum From John Holdridge of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger), Washington, February 1, 1973. 26. Memorandum From John Holdridge of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger), Washington, February 1, 1973.1

Washington, February 1, 1973

MEMORANDUM
NATIONAL SECURITY COUNCIL
INFORMATION
February 1, 1973

MEMORANDUM FOR: MR. KISSINGER [HK initialed]
FROM: JOHN H. HOLDRIDGE Again

In a comprehensive foreign policy statement delivered January 27 before an Australian academic audience, Prime Minister Whitlam persisted in his public debate with us over Vietnam and charted his plans to realign Asian regional arrangements. His principle points were that: — In criticizing our Vietnam policy he was adhering to his Party's long-standing three principles on the question: opposition to Australia's involvement in Vietnam, opposition to U.S. bombing of the North, and a determination to use Australia's influence to end the war. The recent election has given him an "abundantly clear" mandate to pursue this line.

— The end of the "American intervention" in Indochina will remove the "really serious difference" between the Australian and U.S. Governments, and will free U.S. energies for "constructive" pursuits in the region. The U.S. has learned its lesson in Vietnam: "The U.S. herself now accepts that its cold war commitment to global containment of Communism represented a gross over-extension of her real power."

— There is no linkage between Australia's position on Vietnam and the continuation of an ANZUS Treaty relationship. [This is probably in response to Secretary Roger's telling him last May — and reminding Ambassador Plimsoll last month — that Australia's pulling out of SEATO could call ANZUS into question.]

— Australia must not be subservient to the U.S., and his Government will encourage Australians "to shed old stultifying fears and animosities which have encumbered the national spirit for generations and dominated, often for domestic partisan purposes, the foreign policy of [Australia]."

— North Vietnam will not pose a post-settlement threat to Southeast Asia. Australia therefore will support Malaysia's neutralization proposal, and will "encourage other countries involved in the region to endorse the proposition."

— Australia's Southeast Asian policy will place primary emphasis on Indonesia, and will discard the earlier policy of forward defense [which put primary emphasis on the Five Power Defense Arrangement for Malyasia-Singapore (FPDA.)].

— Australia will press for a restructuring of Asian regional bodies. Whitlam singled out ASPAC — which he hinted should expel the ROC — and ASEAN — which he said should be enlarged.

Comment: Whitlam apparently is determined to bull ahead with his rather doctrinaire notions on reshaping Asian security arrangements. He seems more driven by his own half-formed ideas than by pressures from his Party's dogmatic left-wing. As New Zealand Prime Minister Kirk summed up his impression of Whitlam after their meeting last month, Kirk felt Whitlam was concerned with ideological appearances to the neglect of serious pragmatic consequences, and was prone to take black and white approaches. Kirk characterized Whitlam as being dominated by "Calvinistic" impulsiveness.

Of some consolation at this point, Whitlam has drawn back on SEATO and FPDA. On the former, he has said he will not pull out, wants to see how we lower its profile, and will consult with the other members before acting. On the latter, he will honor Australia's commitment, and has indicated he will limit his withdrawal of Australian ground forces from Singapore to its infantry battalion, thus leaving the larger and more important logistics force, which supports New Zealand and U.K. forces there as well.

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 504, Country Files, Far East, Australia, January 1972–December 31, 1973. Secret. Sent for information. Kissinger initialed the memorandum on March 20.

27. Memorandum From John Holdridge of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger), Washington, March 1, 1973. 27. Memorandum From John Holdridge of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger), Washington, March 1, 1973.1

Washington, March 1, 1973

MEMORANDUM
NATIONAL SECURITY COUNCIL
INFORMATION
March 1, 1973

MEMORANDUM FOR: MR. KISSINGER [HK initialed]
FROM: JOHN H. HOLDRIDGE [JHH initialed]
SUBJECT: Australian Prime Minister Asks Indonesian President to Press Thailand for Removal of U.S. Bases There

According to the Australian record of Prime Minister Whitlam's discussions with President Suharto in Jakarta last month (passed to us by a "high Australian source" in Jakarta), Whitlam asked Suharto to discuss with Thailand the need for an early removal of the U.S. military presence, adding that he planned to take the matter up directly with Thailand in the SEATO framework. Whitlam reasoned that the U.S. military presence in Thailand would only provoke North Vietnam, which would destabilize the situation in Indochina again. Whitlam alluded to his axiom that, after the Korean War and the Geneva Accords on Indochina, the great powers had lost the chance to secure peace in Asia, and that Australia and others must now ensure that this does not happen again.

Suharto politely demurred, saying that some other Southeast Asian countries such as Thailand might very possibly feel a need for U.S. bases until they were able to build sufficient national unity to withstand external pressures.

Hanoi as a Potential Threat

Suharto in the previous day's discussion had also asserted that North Vietnam — as well as the PRC — still posed a subversive threat to Southeast Asia, and suggested that Australia, New Zealand, and Japan help economically as well as militarily these countries' efforts to strengthen themselves against this threat. Suharto thus ranged himself against Whitlam on an additional score, since Whitlam has taken the position in a recent major public statement of his foreign policy that North Vietnam must not be thought of as replacing the PRC as a threat to Southeast Asian stability, or that Thailand will now necessarily replace South Vietnam as Hanoi's primary target. (Whitlam in that same statement then went on to support Malaysia's neutralization scheme for Southeast Asia, and to say that Australia would be mobilizing the support of others for this scheme.) Whitlam has also withdrawn its military assistance to South Vietnam and Cambodia.

Whitlam Differs with Suharto on Re-structuring Asian Regional Cooperation

During his first day's discussion with Suharto, Whitlam broached his plan for a wider regional grouping — which he professes can develop consultative and cooperative practices that will insure the peace and stability of Asia. Suharto rejected such an expansion in the near future, saying that the most that can be hoped for would be ASEAN's plan to bring Burma and the four Indochinese states into its fold. Suharto suggested that Australia and others might become observers at meetings of such an expanded ASEAN.

Indonesian Foreign Minister Malik subsequently indicated to the press something of this difference between Whitlam and Suharto on an expanded regional grouping. This was played in the Australian press as Suharto's rebuffing a rather naive Whitlam proposal, much to the consternation of Whitlam and his party. Whitlam in his second day's talks with Suharto took the line that he had "proposed" nothing, but was merely "exploring" the possibility of expanded regional cooperation.

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 504, Country Files, Far East, Australia, January 1972–December 31, 1973. Secret. Sent for information. Kissinger initialed the memorandum on March 20.

28. Information Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian and Pacific Affairs (Green) to Secretary of State Rogers, Washington, March 3, 1973. 28. Information Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian and Pacific Affairs (Green) to Secretary of State Rogers, Washington, March 3, 1973.1

Washington, March 3, 1973

DEPARTMENT OF STATE
INFORMATION MEMORANDUM
March 3, 1973

To: The Secretary
From: EA - Marshall Green

Australian-North Korean Relations

As part of their expanded diplomatic activities last year North Korean diplomats made efforts to meet and have discussions with diplomatic officials of Japan, the U.K. and Australia. The Australians informed us of infrequent contacts with North Korean diplomats in Moscow, Islamabad, Jakarta during 1972 and early this year. When the Whitlam government took office, North Korean President, Kim Il Sung, sent a message of congratulations and another North Korean message was sent some weeks later on the occasion of "Australia Day." These messages were publicized in the North Korean Media.

On February 15 the Australians informed us, the British, the Japanese and the ROK of their decision in principle to move toward relations with North Korea. They also made known their intention to encourage countries in the communist world and others to move toward relations with the South. They did not plan early recognition but did plan to take the following four steps in the very near future: call North Korea by its official name, DPRK; authorize Australian diplomats to accept routine social invitations from North Korean diplomats and engage in exchanges of views; exchange of short-term visits by journalists and trade missions; and receive short-term "unofficial" visits by North Korean officials. The Australians said they planned to inform the PRC and USSR of their four preliminary steps, and tell them that further measures to normalize North Korean-Australian relations would depend on positive Chinese and Soviet moves to normalize relations with the ROK.

We, the British, and the ROK immediately made representations to Canberra urging that the Australians reconsider this policy. Our request cited adverse effects of the proposed Australian policies on the ROK's international position and its position in talks with the North. The Australians replied that they did not plan to move quickly on recognition but did intend to go ahead with low key, unpublicized contacts with North Korea as well as other actions included in their four preliminary steps.

In the meanwhile Foreign Minister Kim Yong-Shik made an attempt to visit Canberra on his way home from the U.S. so that he could make representations personally as well as carry a message to Whitlam from President Park. The Australians have deflected the visit but have agreed to defer speaking to the North Koreans, Chinese or Russians pending consideration of Park's letter which they received this week.

Drafted: EA/K:BDPicard:dpw
X29330: 3/2/73
Concurrence: EA - Mr. Sneider
EA/K - Mr. Ranard
EA/ANZ - Mr. Hall

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970–1973, POL AUSTL–KOR N. Secret; Exdis. Drafted by Picard. Concurred in by Sneider and Ranard in EA/K and Hall in EA/ANZ.

29. Memorandum From Secretary of State Rogers to President Nixon, Washington, March 16, 1973. 29. Memorandum From Secretary of State Rogers to President Nixon, Washington, March 16, 1973.1

Washington, March 16, 1973

THE SECRETARY OF STATE
WASHINGTON
March 16, 1973

MEMORANDUM FOR THE PRESIDENT

Ambassador Plimsoll of Australia called on me today to discuss the SEATO and ANZUS meetings. During the discussion, he pointed out that it is the Australian Labor Party caucus in Parliament, not the Prime Minister, which selects from among its members who will be Ministers. The Prime Minister merely assigns the portfolios. This is not the case in conservative (Liberal and Country Party) governments where Prime Ministers exercise the right to appoint and fire Ministers.

This was one of several facts that he advanced for the difficulties Prime Minister Whitlam has in disciplining his own Cabinet (some of whom made some most unfortunate remarks three months ago). There are, of course, many other factors involved, including the fact that Labor has been out of power for 23 years and no member of the Cabinet has had Executive Branch experience previously.

Plimsoll (who incidentally is an excellent ambassador and a strong supporter of the U.S. position in Indochina) indicated that Whitlam is seeking to get things under control after a bad start but the big showdown in the Party will come at its conference this July when the leftists will try to throw overboard all military alliances and eject our highly classified U.S. defense space installations from Australia.

Whitlam took a firm public stand personally today in support of and in protecting the secrecy of our several highly classified defense space installations in Australia.

At a Press Club luncheon in Melbourne, he was asked about the discrepancy of his position now and his position before the elections, when he — like other ALP members — had said there should be no secrets about the functions of foreign installations in Australia. He said straightforwardly that this was one campaign position he was reversing. He was not going to reveal any secrets about the installations.

[signed] William P. Rogers

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 504, Country Files, Far East, Australia, January 1972–December 31, 1973. Secret.

30. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, May 2, 1973, 5:40–6:35 p.m. 30. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, May 2, 1973, 5:40–6:35 p.m.1

Washington, May 2, 1973, 5:40–6:35 p.m.

THE WHITE HOUSE
WASHINGTON
MEMORANDUM OF CONVERSATION

PARTICIPANTS:

Mr. Peter Wilenski, Private Secretary to Australian Prime Minister Whitlam

Dr. Henry A. Kissinger, Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs

Kathleen Anne Ryan, NSC Staff

DATE AND TIME: Wednesday, May 2, 1973
5:40-6:35 p.m.

PLACE: Dr. Kissinger's Office
The White House

Dr. Kissinger: [After talking on the telephone] I don't know if you have the problem of getting people off the telephone. They have something prepared and will not stop until it has been said.

Mr. Wilenski: If they can get through.

Dr. Kissinger: I am delighted to see you. I was terrified that I would have to stand up a member of the Australian Labor Party, as happened once before.

Mr. Wilenski: Mr. Whitlam realizes what happened. He is quite relaxed about that. Because of the importance he attaches to the relations with the United States, and with the minimum of intermediaries he would like to be able to get across the conceptual framework of our foreign policy and the restraints in formulating it [foreign policy]. Whenever a new government comes into power, a discontinuity of policy with the old government has to be stressed rather than the continuity with the old. At the same time he wants to see what framework you see Australian foreign policy in relation to that of the United States. [It is] not a major factor.

Dr. Kissinger: It is a significant factor. First, how do you view the situation?

Mr. Wilenski: Right after the election itself — the campaign had four considerations; national security, a policy regarding New Guinea, Indonesia, and relations with the region in general.

Up to now the Australian campaign has been dominated by fear of Communist hordes and the gravitational theory. It was rather significant that in this particular instance that sort of campaign couldn't get under way. And as one of domestic issues, it shows greater sophistication in Australian consensus and awareness. We have gone away from the fear of the Asian menace. You also contributed to that by your visit to Moscow near the time of our Prime Minister's.

In many ways Whitlam is freed from constraints. We had urgent decisions last fall as it was the closing of the General Assembly. Some call these decisions impulsive. Our feeling is different; they were carefully thought out over seven years of opposition. In regard to recognition of North Vietnam, I think that was one of the changes that our predecessors would have taken any way. They would probably have done it at a slower pace.

Secondly, we are less interested in having troops on the ground in our region. We are still continuing military assistance to Indonesia, Malaysia and Singapore, but we will gradually phase out our troops. We are not in a hurry. We will still have some planes. We are not anxious to have troops in a situation where they are involved in local conflicts.

Thirdly, we are less racial in our aboriginal problems.

We want a defense policy that can deal with local threats. We will not cut down the percentage of GNP on defense. We are cutting off options, such as the possibility of building bombs. Yet, we want to maintain a regional stance. An American alliance is the background for these things.

It is taken for granted in the community of interest that the security thing is an important element in the entire framework. On security we would like U.S. defense. Obviously, the United States will look at its own interests first. The sort of things we do will influence these sort of perceptions. The Prime Minister feels we provide something to the United States in the form of those bases for which the Prime Minister has gone out on a limb. He has said to the people, "I have studied the question of American bases here, they are important elements and you will have to trust me."

Dr. Kissinger: We know that and we appreciate that.

Mr. Wilenski: We feel in the flurry of nuclear activity the other continuing activities are sometimes being forgotten. Therefore, it is important to stress them and our view of relations with the U.S. as not changing. Perhaps there will be times that we will disagree with the United States, but they will be in private. We know that some Ministers have said things in public. Our system is not like that in Great Britain. The Prime Minister does not have the power to choose the Ministers. He does not have the right to select or fire them.

Dr. Kissinger: Can he make their life impossible?

Mr. Wilenski: Yes, that is true. Whitlam wants to have a very positive stance in our region.

Dr. Kissinger: How do you define your region?

Mr. Wilenski: The countries of the Pacific: Indonesia, Malaysia, Singapore. Then you, of course, get into the difficult area of Indochina. We define our region in different ways for different purposes. You cannot define the region without including Japan. On the other side we have the whole Indian Ocean area, which introduces a whole new element into our foreign policy, the Soviet Union. We don't say that the Soviet Union is in our region. Defining that region will be done in the next 18 months; we will be most anxious not to extend our commitments beyond our capacity. We will concentrate on Indonesia, the countries north, the Pacific, then beyond in China and Japan. The latter are the outer limits of our region. Where do you see our region?

Dr. Kissinger: First, let me say, when you and I talk we can be frank. None of this will go beyond this office. How will this conversation go in your area?

Mr. Wilenski: It will go to the Prime Minister.

Dr. Kissinger: I hope that your Ministry will not check with our State Department. It is quite embarrassing for them if they do not know anything. Whoever you inform, I will let our counterparts here know.

Our relation with your government has started inauspiciously. We take great umbrage, even to keep it private, to be put on the same level as Hanoi. It seemed gratuitous and unreal and therefore, we never answered. The public comments of your Ministers compounded the problem.

We feel the following: We found that when we got into office, Vietnam had 550, 000 people there. I can argue about the rate of withdrawal and critics have the advantage of extolling their cause. Nothing fails like failure. Your critics never give you credit for following their advice. The Christma s bombing is silly to debate. Now, we did not bomb population centers, and it achieved its purpose — to get ground for a settlement. That is not the issue; it is in the past.

I can also see that a Labor Party which has had strong views over a long period of time was put in a very sensitive time during the first four weeks of its beginning. One doesn't form foreign policy on one particular action. I hope so, or else your Prime Minister would not talk to me.

What is our general attitude? We hope not to be involved in an analogous situation again. The problem is if you wait until something is unambiguously clear to the world opinion, you also run the risk of a situation which is a great risk. The other side is that if you act in anticipation, you can never be sure if this was truly necessary. This is a very serious issue.

I come from an academic background. I know what the academic community, the intellectuals and the left wing think, and most of my personal friends are on the left rather than on the right. There is a great reluctance of the left wing to face the fact of power. Our thinking is that we should move from military to economic aid. Yet, today I had a cable from our Ambassador in Delhi, you know him, Patrick Moynihan, a liberal. He said it is sad to think that we are giving food to Bangladesh while the Russians are giving arms. And with the arms they will have more influence.

Mr. Wilenski: That is not always the lesson of history.

Dr. Kissinger: Yes, that is not always the lesson of history, but take India. They are dependent on the Soviet Union for spare parts and for military aid. We have no intention of going back into weapons sales in India nor Bangladesh. We are pursuing close to what you have described.

But I sometimes have the fear that we are bringing about a state of affairs where the most primitive people are going to take over the world. We do face the problem of having to analyze some minimum power positions that must be maintained, even if doing this is less exhilarating and morally satisfying.

In the Pacific we are opening to China. We are accelerating our relations. We are prepared to normalize relations with Hanoi if we can get a ceasefire maintained.

Our basic position is not different — in making the distinction between Allies and opponents. If all are treated the same, you get in the position of total flexibility.

Secondly, you have unpleasant things that have to be done.

Thirdly, in regard to security in the Pacific, Australia will be harmed before the U.S. in any ten to fifteen year period. We gain more time.

Finally, we don't say we have identical policies. It is better if there is some understanding between governments which provides for flexibility. Again I am not talking about December. I understand the conditions of taking over the government. I think the observation you made in the beginning of our conversation correctly described that discontinuity is important to stress in the initial undertakings of a new government.

I must tell you, and you probably know, that there was very bad feeling here toward your Prime Minister, particularly because the President has a warm spot towards Australia, and therefore this hurt him.

In the future we believe that the alliance with Australia should continue and we are prepared to have a close relationship with Australia. Each side will have to consult its national interests in specific cases.

On the specifics on where do we want Australia to play a security role. I myself would have thought we would not have recommended pulling troops out of Singapore. Not of course for the numbers that were involved, but because you get a symbolic retreat of Western power.

Mr. Wilenski: It is not a process which we started.

Dr. Kissinger: No, we started too. Each country can legitimatize what it is doing by looking at other countries. I have not studied the Australian situation, but we were vastly overcommitted and had to withdraw.

Mr. Wilenski: The Indonesian case is a better model in regard to maintenance of these troops.

Dr. Kissinger: I am affected by that particular event because Prime Minister Lee Kuan Yew was here. He considered that a move that was not helpful to his position.

Mr. Wilenski: He has moved in the past.

Dr. Kissinger: So can all of them. The danger is that we can create a situation for countries to save themselves, and other countries will move in.

Mr. Wilenski: Singapore is not the hub of Southeast Asia.

Dr. Kissinger: My basic point is as long as Australia has security interests, it has to make the ultimate decision of where these interests are. A real Australian security interest, the Australians must feel it is essential.

Mr. Wilenski: I was wondering whether you see our role as being with Indonesia or in a more traditional view of outer Pacific American defense in regard to the bases in Pine Gap, etc.?

Dr. Kissinger: It is certainly beyond the bases we have in Australia. I would have thought it would certainly have included Indonesia. How far beyond is a question of fine judgment. The perimeter of Asia . . . our whole concept is that the perimeter should take care of itself. Therefore, we are not taking the same role.

Mr. Wilenski: Would you give up bases in the Philippines with reluctance?

Dr. Kissinger: Yes, it would be difficult for us. Indonesia would be more easy.

Mr. Wilenski: Where do you see the solution lying in Cambodia?

Dr. Kissinger: We have made a major effort to broaden the Phnom Penh government. North Vietnam and China, to my mind, have agreed to have Sihanouk as the formal head of the opposition forces. Therefore there are two identifiable heads, and that creates a theoretical basis for a ceasefire. One difficulty is that Leninists have no desire to share power. In practice whenever you negotiate with any Leninists they strive for something that would give them the possibility of a takeover. Laos is a possibility; we would settle for that and would stop our bombing. We are bombing to create a basis for negotiations.

As you know, I will see Le Duc Tho. I think there is a 50/50 chance for some amelioration of the present ceasefire conditions.

Mr. Wilenski: We can say that our Prime Minister is very much aware of the security that you have talked about, and at the same time he wants to add a different flavor to his foreign policy.

Dr. Kissinger: Many things he has done have coincided with our policies.

Mr. Wilenski: Yes, they have coincided, as in the case of China. In Indochina and Thailand it is obvious that there are differences in perceptions. As you have explained it, we appreciate your dilemmas but we genuinely do not believe that maintenance of foreign troops, once hostilities have ceased will help these governments.

Dr. Kissinger: You mean where?

Mr. Wilenski: Thailand. The presence of troops will add, rather than subtract to the problems.

Dr. Kissinger: The troops in Thailand are not there to deal with the Thai problem but those problems in Laos, Cambodia and Vietnam.

If the ceasefire was observed, you would see a very substantial reduction of forces in Thailand. I cannot but argue that the Agreement that the U.S. had signed has been cynically violated, and what this will do to the American capacity to conduct a serious foreign policy . . . We obviously didn't desire the situation and have not spent four years in order to look for a pretext to reinvolve ourselves. If the people in Hanoi were not professional warmakers, if they had any understanding at all, they would not force us to make actions we didn't want to take. The Agreement was immediately violated.

Mr. Wilenski: It must be very difficult to sort out precisely how and where the violations have occurred.

Dr. Kissinger: Look, all the Vietnamese are bastards. And I am not saying that our fellows are paragons of virtue. They are all monomaniacs, and this added to Confucianism and the French administrative system creates havoc. Our side is also committing violations. But these violations are tactical maneuvers that don't change the strategic situation. The violations committed by Hanoi follow a very clear design. This makes a big difference, I am not even counting the 60 daily violations. I don't even mention them. But when you talk about massive infiltration — they have brought in 300 tanks. We have not supplied Saigon in this manner. We are prepared to use a maximum degree of influence to enforce the Agreement, but we need some help from Hanoi.

Mr. Wilenski: In the political history of this dispute our attitude to it now would be that one wants no part of the dispute.

Dr. Kissinger: We are not asking for your support now.

Mr. Wilenski: I realize that. Even if a settlement were not reached, we would continue to say that this is a hands-off sort of thing. There are, though, many members of our party that have personally suffered a great deal because of their opposition to the war. I hope you are successful with Le Duc Tho without taking any stronger action.

Dr. Kissinger: I don't know what I have done to be punished by having to meet Le Duc Tho again. I like him, but he is so tiring.

Mr. Wilenski: Some day the Prime Minister would like to meet with the President.

Dr. Kissinger: In principle yes. What would you like to do?

Mr. Wilenski: One doesn't like to be invited.

Dr. Kissinger: We used to have with the old government a place for confidential communications. In principle we have no issues in which to confront each other.

Mr. Wilenski: Our Prime Minister is going to the heads of government meeting in Ottawa in August and will be passing by the United States at that time.

Dr. Kissinger: I appreciate that. The President is going to the West Coast as soon as the Congressional session terminates.

Mr. Wilenski: He is visiting Mexico first and will be free between July 30 and August 1.

Dr. Kissinger: We have the Japanese Prime Minister July 31 and August 1. Would he be free any other time?

Mr. Wilenski: I will try.

Dr. Kissinger: We can have an informal visit.

Mr. Wilenski: He could be passing through Washington, an hour visit, no formalities or parties.

Dr. Kissinger: We could give him a party. Let me explore that. I am sure we will prefer it with some interval between the Japanese. How do I get in touch with you?

Mr. Wilenski: It depends on how you want to do it. By direct channel.

Dr. Kissinger: We did it through your Ambassador.

Mr. Wilenski: That is fine.

Dr. Kissinger: Do you have any other means?

Mr. Wilenski: There may be advantages in establishing some other means. How other than a direct telephone conversation?

Dr. Kissinger: That is not very secure.

Mr. Wilenski: How about through your embassy to our office.

Dr. Kissinger: Everything we send, they make copies. If we ever have to get the Prime Minister we have an alternative system of communication that doesn't go through the State Department.

Mr. Wilenski: Then through our Embassy.

Dr. Kissinger: If you have something for me, make sure your Ambassador marks it through the White House channel. Shall I work through you or the Prime Minister directly?

Mr. Wilenski: It is the same thing. Whatever goes to me will immediately go to the Prime Minister.

Dr. Kissinger: Then I will address it to you and I will let you know about the possibility of a meeting early in August.

Mr. Wilenski: I don't know what you think about this. One has to be careful with the press. If this meeting were announced it would help Australian-U.S. relations.

Dr. Kissinger: Fine. What will you do, confirm?

Mr. Wilenski: We will release it to the press that a meeting has taken place.

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 504, Country Files, Far East, Australia, January 1972–December 31, 1973. Secret. The conversation took place in Kissinger’s Office at the White House. Kissinger’s talking points from Froebe, May 2, are ibid. Following the meeting, Kissinger instructed Rodman to send Nixon a proposal for a visit by Whitlam. (Memorandum from Rodman to Kissinger, May 3; ibid. [secret])

31. Précis of National Intelligence Estimate 44-73, Washington, May 17, 1973. 31. Précis of National Intelligence Estimate 44-73, Washington, May 17, 1973.1

Washington, May 17, 1973

[2 pages not declassified.]

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 362, Subject Files, National Intelligence Estimates [1 of 3]. Secret.

32. Telegram 3139 From the Embassy in Australia to the Department of State, June 6, 1973, 0820Z. 32. Telegram 3139 From the Embassy in Australia to the Department of State, June 6, 1973, 0820Z.1

June 6, 1973

TELEGRAM
Department of State
CANBERRA 3139

R 0608207 JUN 73
FM AMEMBASSY CANBERRA
TO SECSTATE WASHDC 1050

E.O. 11652: GDS
TAGS: AS, PFOR, MARR

SUBJECT: PRIME MINISTER WHITLAM'S VISIT TO THE US

1. ACTING PRIME MINISTER AND DEFENSE MINISTER LANCE BARNARD CALLED AT RESIDENCE TODAY. HE EXPLAINED THAT THIS UNUSUAL CONFIDENTIAL VISIT IN ADVANCE OF MY CREDENTIALS PRESENTATION WAS HIS PERSONAL INITIATIVE. NEITHER PRIME MINISTER NOR OTHER MEMBERS OF GOVERNMENT WERE AWARE OF HIS ACTION, HE SAID.

2. BARNARD DISCUSSED THE HIGH IMPORTANCE HE AND WHITLAM ATTACHED TO AUSTRALIA'S ALLIANCE WITH THE U.S. THEY WERE CONVINCED OF THE ESSENTIALITY OF U.S. DEFENSE AND SCIENTIFIC FACILITIES IN AUSTRALIA. THEY HAD PROTECTED THESE FACILITIES AGAINST STRIDENT LEFT WING CRITICISM AND WOULD CONTINUE TO DO SO. AT THE FEDERAL LABOR PARTY CONFERENCE IN EARLY JULY U.S. FACILITIES WOULD AGAIN BE UNDER ATTACK BUT WHITLAM WOULD AGAIN SUCCESSFULLY PRESERVE THEM.

3. HOWEVER, THE QUESTION OF WHETHER OR NOT PRESIDENT NIXON WOULD RECEIVE PM IN WASHINGTON HAD BECOME AN EMOTIONAL ISSUE IN AUSTRALIA. IF AT CONFERENCE WHITLAM WERE STILL UNABLE TO STATE THAT HE WOULD MEET WITH PRESIDENT, THIS FACT WOULD BE UTILIZED BY LEFT OPPONENTS AT CONFERENCE TO CAST DOUBT UPON IMPORTANCE U.S. ITSELF ATTACHED TO ALLIANCE AND TO BASES. BARNARD WAS CONFIDENT THAT EVEN IN THESE CIRCUMSTANCES WHITLAM WOULD SUCCEED IN DEFENDING AMERICAN FACILITIES. BUT THE DEBATES WOULD BE DIFFICULT AND WOULD ATTRACT WIDE ATTENTION THROUGHOUT COUNTRY.

4. HE AND WHITLAM COULD HANDLE SUCH ATTACKS EITHER FROM WITHIN LABOR PARTY OR FROM OPPOSITION. HOWEVER, THE AVERAGE AUSTRALIAN WAS NOW BECOMING WORRIED ABOUT THE STRENGTH OF U.S./AUSTRALIAN RELATIONS BECAUSE OF UNCERTAINTY OVER WASHINGTON RECEPTION OF PM, THIS CONCERNED BARNARD DEEPLY. WITH GREAT SINCERITY HE URGED THAT PRESIDENT NIXON AGREE TO RECEIVE PRIME MINISTER, EVEN MOST INFORMALLY. IF WHITLAM COULD MAKE CLEAR THAT HE WOULD MEET WITH PRESIDENT DURING HIS TRIP TO NORTH AMERICA, THE DAMAGING DEBATES COULD BE MINIMIZED AND THE AUSTRALIAN PUBLIC COULD BE REASSURED ABOUT THE HEALTH OF THE ALLIANCE.

5. BARNARD SAID HE WELL UNDERSTOOD THAT U.S. GOVERNMENT AND PRESIDENT NIXON HAD BEEN OFFENDED BY COMMENTS FROM AUSTRALIA AT TIME OF NORTH VIET NAM BOMBING RESUMPTION. THE STATEMENTS MADE WERE INDEED OFFENSIVE. PERHAPS WE DID NOT KNOW THAT HE AND WHITLAM HAD CALLED THE THREE OFFENDING MINISTERS BEFORE THEM FOR STERN DRESSING DOWN AND WARNING. BARNARD ADDED THAT IN HEAT OF DEBATE PM SOMETIMES MADE COMMENTS HE LATER REGRETTED. HE HOPED THAT WASHINGTON WOULD READ WITH CARE EXPRESSIONS OF CONSIDERED AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT POSITION SUCH AS PM'S MAY 24 FOREIGN POLICY ADDRESS. BARNARD SAID HE HAD CALLED PRIVATELY AT HIS OWN INITIATIVE TO SET FORTH THE FACTS WHICH MIGHT BE DIFFICULT FOR THE PM HIMSELF TO COMMUNICATE.

6. I TOLD BARNARD I WAS HONORED BY HIS VISIT AND IMPRESSED BY THE EVIDENT SINCERITY AND HONESTY OF HIS REMARKS. I AGREED WITH HIM THAT SOME OF THE STATEMENTS EMANATING FROM CANBERRA HAD INDEED BEEN INSULTING AND UNFORTUNATE. I SAID THAT PRESIDENT NIXON ALONE WOULD DECIDE ABOUT A MEETING IN WASHINGTON. I ASSURED HIM I WOULD RELAY THIS MESSAGE.

7. COMMENT: THIS WAS A MOVING AND, I BELIEVE, ENTIRELY CANDID DISCUSSION. BARNARD DID NOT ATTEMPT TO BLACKMAIL US BY CLAIMING THE FUTURE OF OUR INSTALLATIONS WAS AT STAKE. I WILL ANALYZE THE SITUATION IN AUSTRALIA IN SUBSEQUENT MESSAGES AFTER I HAVE TALKED WITH OTHER POLITICAL LEADERS AND WITH THE PRIME MINISTER ON JUNE 8.

GREEN

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970–1973, POL 7 AUSTL. Confidential; Nodis. Kissinger approved a memorandum from Froebe, July 6, which approved a draft State cable directing Green to respond orally to a confidential letter of June 15 from Australian opposition party leaders recommending that Nixon receive Whitlam. (National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 504, Country Files, Far East, Australia, January 1972-December 31, 1973)

33. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, June 8, 1973. 33. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, June 8, 1973.1

Washington, June 8, 1973

DEPARTMENT OF STATE
Memorandum of Conversation

DATE: June 8, 1973

SUBJECT: Papua New Guinea's Future

PARTICIPANTS:

Mr. David Hay, Secretary, Australian Department External Affairs

John McCarthy, First Secretary, Australian Embassy

G. McMurtrie Godley, Assistant Secretary, EA

James V. Martin, Director, EA/ANZ

COPIES TO:
EA - 2 Amembassy CANBERRA - 1
EA/ANZ - 2 Amconsul BRISBANE - 1
IO/UNP - 2 EA/RA - 2

Mr. Hay said he had just been at the Trusteeship Council meeting and had found it a pleasant experience in contrast with former years. Everyone, including the Russians, was extremely cordial because PNG was getting self government this December. The ALP Government had taken a firm line on granting independence at an early date — a firmer line than the people of PNG. The Russians were faintly amused by the fact that Australians were trying to get rid of PNG as fast as possible. Mr. Hay said that although there was not a complete meeting of the minds between the Australians and the Papua New Guineans, there was no real conflict. Both looked to independence and the Papua New Guineans would doubtless be ready by 1975; even if they were not ready, the rushing events would push them. Already it was becoming increasingly difficult from the Australian point of view to look after their foreign affairs and defense interest which, indeed, the Papua New Guineans wished to look after themselves.

In response to Mr. Godley's question whether the Papua New Guineans would be able to make a go of it, Mr. Hay responded that he was reasonably confident they could. They would have to overcome certain basic problems, including the divisive elements of tribalism and sectionalism. In a way, Mr. Hay said, the tribal jealousies acted as a safety valve to siphon off latent hostilities against foreign industries in the country as, for example, the copper mining company in Bougainville.

Mr. Godley wondered if the Papua New Guineans would seek Australian technical and financial assistance. Mr. Hay said that this was being done at present. The Australian Government put some of its own people into the Papua New Guinean government structure to fill essentially non-competitive jobs, and the GOA paid their salaries. The costs covered by the GOA in such fashion run to $40 or $50 million a year.

Responding to Mr. Godley's question concerning the anticipated extent of Australian aid, Mr. Hay said that A$120 million was extended in direct aid and some $20-$30 million was extended in military assistance. He noted that the local army was quite good.

Mr. Godley wondered if Australians had had time to provide adequate training through the local military personnel. Mr. Hay answered that promotions had been quite fast and there were already several Majors studying at the Australian Staff College. While they were not fully qualified by Australian standards it was anticipated that they would become qualified in due course and that they were expected to become good leaders.

Mr. Hay noted that the quality of local administrators and business leaders was good, but that the number of good people was insufficient. He referred to Papua New Guinea ministers with whom he had been in New York: Minister Chan (half Chinese) had a high school education and was articulate and sensible; Minister Kavali had had little formal education but had learned much as a warder in a corrective institution. The number of Papua New Guinean students studying on scholarships in Australia was less than 100, but some 300 young administrators were studying at the School of Pacific Administration in Sydney.

Mr. Godley wondered if perhaps the Australians were not moving out a few years too soon. Mr. Hay responded that it would be splendid if the Australians had a little more time but there was no more time. They were forced to accelerate the program of transition and to insure that there would be a number of Australians around within the Papua New Guinea structure. But this could not last forever as locals were already looking over their shoulders and hoping to inherit the Australian jobs.

With regard to the economy of PNG, Mr. Hay noted that the bulk of incomes derives from the plantation economy, but that minerals and secondary industries were growing rapidly in importance. One day beef and cattle would be exported. Seventy percent of the coffee growing was in native hands.

Foreign investment would be needed but at the moment the Government of PNG was making equivocal statements. They were also looking to Japan for increased investments at a time when Australian investments were flattening out. The Japanese people were pretty well accepted in PNG. They were not alarmed by immediate political prospects and took the long term economic view.

When asked about relations with Indonesia, Mr. Hay responded that the present Indonesian government and the present PNG government will get along all right. There had been problems along the border a few years ago but these had been taken care of. Sooner or later a border regime would be negotiated. Mr. Hay saw no great problems arising and predicted that relations with Indonesia would be good.

Asked if the eastern portion of New Guinea were the richer, Mr. Hay said it was, and noted that it was also more fully populated. PNG would not be an insignificant country locally, and indeed, the Australians would have to readjust to this fact. Whether PNG would regard itself as part of the Pacific or as part of Asia in the future was uncertain at this point.

Mr. Hay said he would like to have the Americans understand that the leadership of PNG was hardheaded and without any preconceived ideological leanings. They were people who thought clearly about their own interests and were easy to do business with.

In regard to a question about the Chinese population of PNG, Mr. Hay said there were only about 10 or 15 thousand Chinese. They were active commercially but caused no problem and would be welcome to stay on after independence.

Concerning political parties, Mr. Hay noted that the Pangu Party and 3 or 4 smaller parties currently form a coalition government. Strangely, he said, there were no major philosophical differences between parties, and the people did not seem to be very happy with the party system. In his judgment differences between the parties would become even more fuzzy, but the inherent lack of differences between parties should not cause a problem within the political situation in PNG.

There were few residual foreign interests other than American business interests. The Germans had phased out long since. There was, to be sure, a considerable international interest, namely the World Bank and, of course, the Australian interests.

He noted that PNG depends for about 50% of its public expenditures upon Australia. Education and public health were largely in indigenous hands although the University at Port Moresby is still largely under expatriate management. With regard to foreign investment PNG looks first to the World Bank, second to Australia and third to Japan.

Foreign volunteers were very welcome though earlier on there had been ministers who were strongly against it. Missionaries had made a considerable contribution to development. Indeed, they were responsible for about one half of all the education that has been provided in PNG. New Zealand, not a source of aid in the past, was now offering some small assistance. Mr. Hay expressed dissatisfaction with the idea of aid coming in bits and pieces from all over. He thought it better for PNG to rely on Australia, the World Bank and Japan.

Mr. Godley asked if thought had been given to setting up a coordinating board to insure the proper funneling of aid to necessary channels. He pointed out that lack of such coordination had caused problems in posts of his previous administration (he mentioned Africa and Laos).

Mr. Hay enthusiastically took up the suggestion and pointed out that Mr. Morrison, the Minister for External Territories, wanted very much to set up a coordinating board and had said so publicly. There was a possibility that it would be established as a unit in the Ministry of Finance. He noted that the planning unit in the PNG government was in the Chief Minister's office.

With regard to the act of self determination for independence, Mr. Hay expressed the hope that a vote by the House of Assembly would be acceptable. He noted that the Trusteeship Council members seemed agreeable to relying on a vote by the House. His preference for a vote by the House of Assembly rather than a referendum by the whole people was based on the assumption that the majority vote in a referendum would be against independence, at least in the near future. This was because there are 900 thousand highlanders who are reluctant to entrust their future to the lowlanders. Mr. Hay said that the aim of the Government of Australia was to seek a decision in the House of Assembly by a substantial majority representative of all areas of the country; it should be a recorded vote and should be witnessed by representatives of the United Nations.

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970–1973, POL 19 NEW GUIN. Confidential. Drafted by Martin. On May 22, the Embassy in Australia transmitted telegram 2850 about the future of Papua New Guinea. (Ibid., Central Foreign Policy Files.)

34. Memorandum From John Froebe of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger), Washington, July 11, 1973. 34. Memorandum From John Froebe of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger), Washington, July 11, 1973.1

Washington, July 11, 1973

MEMORANDUM
NATIONAL SECURITY COUNCIL
ACTION

July 11, 1973

MEMORANDUM FOR: MR. KISSINGER
FROM: JOHN A. FROEBE, JR. [JAF initialed]

SUBJECT: Possible Meeting Between You and Prime Minister Whitlam

It has been suggested informally by State that you meet with Prime Minister Whitlam separately either before or after he calls on the President on the morning of July 30.

I believe that it would not be useful you to do so. It would be a waste of your time and an indication of excessive interest in the Prime Minister, given the present state of our relations with Australia. The President's meeting with Whitlam will prove an opportunity for us to make clear our attitudes toward the present course of our relations with Australia. In addition, Secretary Rogers is scheduled to meet with Whitlam and to give him a luncheon. This is all the attention Whitlam deserves or requires.

Recommendation:

That you not meet separately with Prime Minister Whitlam during his visit here.

Approve
Disapprove [HK initialed]

Concurrence:
Mr. Eagleburger

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 910, VIP Visits, Australia, PM. Whitlam Visit, July, 1973 [2 of 2]. Secret. Sent for action. Concurred in by Eagleburger. Kissinger initialed his disapproval of the recommendation.

35. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, July 25, 1973, 5:04–5:28 p.m. 35. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, July 25, 1973, 5:04–5:28 p.m.1

Washington, July 25, 1973, 5:04–5:28 p.m.

MEMORANDUM
THE WHITE HOUSE
WASHINGTON

MEMORANDUM OF CONVERSATION

PARTICIPANTS:

Ambassador James Plimsoll of Australia

Dr. Henry A. Kissinger, Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs

John Froebe, Jr., NSC Staff

Kathleen A. Ryan, NSC Staff Notetaker

DATE AND TIME:
Wednesday, July 25, 1973
5:04 - 5:28 p.m.

PLACE:
Dr. Kissinger's Office
The White House

Mr. Kissinger: I have her [Miss Ryan] take notes to refresh my memory. They stay in the White House. Do you mind?

Ambassador Plimsoll: There is nothing to hide.

I thought it would be useful if I came to talk to you in order to prepare the groundwork. I don't know what the Prime Minister is going to talk about naturally.

Mr. Kissinger: What does naturally mean? What subjects is he likely to raise?

Ambassador Plimsoll: The important thing is some sort of personal contact between the two men and confidence between the two—to trust one another.

Mr. Kissinger: I agree. However, that is not quite the situation today. On the other hand, I don't want to say they distrust each other.

Ambassador Plimsoll: I think there is more distrust on your side than on ours.

Mr. Kissinger: You know our attitude.

Ambassador Plimsoll: We broke down the new government's position on the resumption of bombing. It is too bad the settlement didn't come a little earlier, or the new government a little bit later.

That was the first thing.

Mr. Kissinger: The principle thing.

Ambassador Plimsoll: Then oar ministers made a couple of statements.

Mr. Kissinger: There is no sense reviewing the whole record. But a warm feeling does not exist. Rationally we believe that Australia is an important country with which we want to be on good terms. I personally have never met the Prime Minister. I understand that he is a very attractive man.

Ambassador Plimsoll: He is an intelligent man. He has a weakness: sometimes he has a big mouth in letting some things come out before thinking.

Mr. Kissinger: What the President takes very badly to is when he gets the feeling he is being lectured to from a sense of moral integrity.

I remember when Michael Stewart came in to talk to him — with the best of intentions. He was leaving office anyway. He wanted to leave with the President his distilled wisdom. I have never seen such a disaster. John Freeman and I almost died knowing what the reaction would be. Then the government was voted out of office.

Ambassador Plimsoll: I can put that across to Whitlam without telling him it came from you.

Mr. Kissinger: Yes, it is better that you raise it. Let's have the Prime Minister start off.

Ambassador Plimsoll: As long as there is no agreeing and disagreeing on specific points.

Mr. Kissinger: Couldn't you just state your view, and the President can decide for himself if he agrees or not.

Ambassador Plimsoll: Our views are not far apart, as in SEATO.

Mr. Kissinger: We will probably want you to take a slightly more active role on Singapore.

Ambassador Plimsoll: We are committed some more years — the Prime Minister agrees with his party.

Mr. Kissinger: Our basic view is that Singapore is more essential to your security than to ours. We are not going to brawl with you.

Ambassador Plimsoll: Our views are similar — and other places.

Mr. Kissinger: I think so. In relations with China there is not much disagreement.

Ambassador Plimsoll: I don't see much problem.

Mr. Kissinger: Japan.

Ambassador Plimsoll: He will be interested in Cambodia. I have always felt a little edgy about the bombing. The Prime Minister avoided this lately.

Mr. Kissinger: The tragedy in Cambodia is that I had a negotiation all set. In my judgment we were almost certain to have a ceasefire. It is hard to offer to negotiate when they know that we are thwarted. Now negotiations are stopped until August 15.

Ambassador Plimsoll: It will unravel.

Mr. Kissinger: It is really the single most irresponsible action that I have seen. I was so confident that I told Congress we could stop the bombing by September 15. This has not been one of the most heroic periods of American history.

Ambassador Plimsoll: Yes, I can't say anything on that either. The new government has been against military action.

Mr. Kissinger: We don't ask them to [join in military action]. I am just trying to explain the situation.

Ambassador Plimsoll:Whitlam will be interested in Cambodia.

Mr. Kissinger: I don't know now whether the Khmer Rouge have any plans to bring Sihanouk back in any capacity — except maybe as a figurehead.

Ambassador Plimsoll: Is there any real interest in getting him back?

Mr. Kissinger: There is no interest if he becomes sort of dependent on the Khmer Rouge. We have no interest in getting him back. Prior to this we thought that he might be able to assemble a non-Communist government.

Ambassador Plimsoll: And Laos, you are a bit happy.

Mr. Kissinger: Yes, the end of the month.

Ambassador Plimsoll: Politically in Vietnam, what do you see? Mr. Kissinger: Nothing.

Ambassador Plimsoll: Will Thieu be able to start the political development on a more permanent basis?

Mr. Kissinger: He thinks that he has it on a permanent basis.

Ambassador Plimsoll: Does the political situation freeze the need to have a building up of roots in the administration?

Mr. Kissinger: I think he will. I feel we have gained two or three years of relative calm. I left the Agreement with an almost Korean-type solution, and all intelligence reports indicate that they [the Viet Cong] are beginning to have the expected troubles and morale problem and fewer supplies. Some of the uncertainty depends on us.

Ambassador Plimsoll: I suppose it still depends on whether they want something clearly demonstrated or a gradual infiltration.

Mr. Kissinger: If there is an open clash, I don't think they can make it.

Ambassador Plimsoll: Korea — we may be interested in that. The United States and Australia are working together on that.

Mr. Kissinger: We consulted you before adopting the whole program.

Ambassador Plimsoll: I think that has worked very well. Do you see the Chinese moving towards action against the two Koreas?

Kissinger: I have been talking to them. They haven't rejected it or accepted it. I will get a clearer idea when I go there. I have put that off until after August 15.

Ambassador Plimsoll: Is there anything you see that the U.S. wants to get out of the visit?

Mr. Kissinger: I think your judgment is right. The fact of the meeting is what is important. The importance of the visit is that the men develop confidence in each other. We should get back to the confidential exchanges that we used to have with you — which doesn't mean there should always be agreement. We recognize the importance of Australia on an intellectual level, and we are sure that you realize the importance of our bilateral relations. It is somewhat a psychological problem at the moment. They can have a humanly easy discussion on problems, if we don't go about enumerating on what we agree and disagree. We will probably emerge with a ninety percent agreement on policies and one hundred percent on objectives. We will see eye to eye.

Ambassador Plimsoll: I don't see any real question on foreign policy between the two. On Vietnam, I remember in the early days when those who are now complaining about the bombing were for intervention in Vietnam.

Mr. Kissinger: Yes.

Ambassador Plimsoll: This happened as early as 1945.

Mr. Kissinger: How long have you been here?

Ambassador Plimsoll: For three years, but I made a trip to the United States practically every year before that.

Mr. Kissinger: Clifford was the most bloody interventionist. In October 1965 when I was sent by Johnson to inspect the situation in Vietnam, I ran into Clifford. I told him that the way we were running the war, it was an inconceivable way of winning the war. Clifford was then head of the Foreign Intelligence Advisory Board and a close friend and adviser of Johnson's. He dismissed me as an intellectual, and said intellectuals should not be sent to Vietnam. I was involved in a negotiation in 1967. At that time most of the present doves were interventionists — now they are violently opposed. They thought we could win — including McGeorge Bundy.

Ambassador Plimsoll: If the war had been fought differently. . .

Mr. Kissinger: If it had been fought the way the previous administration did.... As it is we achieved our objective — keeping South Vietnam from going Communist. Our opponents have obliterated the fact that the war in Vietnam has ended. And they say the war in Cambodia is a continuation of that war.

Ambassador Plimsoll: I think that Whitlam personally has done his best to fight the battle very hard on American defense installations. And he ran political risks and has carried the Party with him.

Mr. Kissinger: We are aware of that.

Ambassador Plimsoll: Our secret cooperation in intelligence has not been interrupted.

Mr. Kissinger: I have a personal problem with your Prime Minister because I didn't see him. I don't remember exactly what happened.

Ambassador Plimsoll: I don't think he was insulted. You agreed to see him, the appointment was postponed twice and then finally cancelled.

Mr. Kissinger: I think we were writing the annual review.

Ambassador Plimsoll: When he left he did not seem upset. Then the newspapers got after it, that he didn't see the President. But at the same time that the President couldn't see him, he did see the head of a German opposition party. I told Whitlam the reason for this was that the U.S. wanted something out of the opposition party of Germany — not to destroy the agreement with the Soviet Union. That was a real reason.

Mr. Kissinger: That is right. I understand I am seeing Whitlam.

Ambassador Plimsoll: He is coming to see you before seeing the President. Ten o'clock Monday.

Mr. Kissinger: He will want to discuss the same sort of thing?

Ambassador Plimsoll: I should think so. He is an intelligent man, not just a glad chatter. As long as you treat him that way.

Mr. Kissinger: No problem.

Ambassador Plimsoll: There will be no trouble. He knows your record over a long period of time and your contributions. I am giving him three dinners.

Mr. Kissinger: Is he staying that long?

Ambassador Plimsoll: Saturday, Sunday, and Monday. Would you like to come to one?

Mr. Kissinger: Can I let you know? I have a friend in town. It would have to be Saturday or Monday. I will let you know tomorrow.

Ambassador Plimsoll: Another question is whether he is to see the Vice President. We have put in a bid to see the Vice President.

Mr. Kissinger: I will get it done. You want him to?

Ambassador Plimsoll: Yes. He saw the Vice President the last time he was here before, and would like to see him again.

Mr. Kissinger: We agreed to change the day.

Ambassador Plimsoll: ... of the speeches. The Vice President did see Andrew Peacock of the opposition party.

Mr. Kissinger: I saw some convoluted memoranda between my deputy and that of the Vice President's. I will arrange it. I will let you know about the dinner.

[The meeting then ended.]

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 504, Country Files, Far East, Australia, January 1972–December 31, 1973. Top Secret; Sensitive; Exclusively Eyes Only.

36. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, July 28, 1973, 12:30 p.m. 36. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, July 28, 1973, 12:30 p.m.1

Washington, July 28, 1973

THE WHITE HOUSE
WASHINGTON
MEMORANDUM OF CONVERSATION

PARTICIPANTS:

Mr. Henry A. Kissinger, Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs

Ambassador Marshall Green, U.S. Ambassador to Australia

Mr. John A. Froebe, Jr., Staff Member, NSC

DATE TIME AND PLACE: July 28, 1973, 12:30 p.m.
The White House

SUBJECT: Prime Minister Whitlam's Coming Visit

Mr. Kissinger:(Referring to the meeting he had just attended.) I have just found out what our two national security problems are. What face should we put on the President and my meetings with Whitlam?

Ambassador Green: As you have seen from my reports, we believe that Whitlam will continue in power, in spite of the fact that his party is sliding slightly. We must get along with him. He has much in common with the President — they both have climbed the political ladder, they both have a deep interest in foreign policy.

Mr. Kissinger: What does he want to discuss with me?

Ambassador Green: Southeast Asia. He also just wants to say that he has seen you.

Mr. Kissinger: I have given him one hour.

Ambassador Green: I thought it was only a half hour.

Mr. Kissinger: But we extended it to an hour.

Ambassador Green: I think we must get to Whitlam on three points: First, Whitlam has some strong ideological bents, and some bias against the use of military power. He is inclined to believe that international problems can be resolved by friendship. Second, we are in the midst of serious negotiations with our adversaries. If it looks to them like our friends are pulling back, it will not be of help to us in these negotiations. Third, our defense installations in Australia must be preserved. We should also give him the large picture, and impress on him the point that you stressed to me when you came back from Hanoi: that North Vietnam understands only power.

Mr. Kissinger: Will he leak?

Ambassador Green: No.

Mr. Kissinger: I don't want to hear him going out to the press afterward with any "depths of human depravity" line.

How is Australia?

Ambassador Green: Good — but I would like to come back to Washington.

Mr. Kissinger: You are the first Foreign Service Officer I have heard say he wants to come back here. They all want to get an embassy and get overseas.

Ambassador Green: I can't tell you how much I appreciated the President's agreeing to this meeting with Whitlam. The matter was taking on some nationalistic overtones. Whitlam was worried that his left wing could exploit this. The timing of the decision also was good: made Whitlam sweat a bit.

The visit will show he is on good terms with the U.S., something that is still very important with Australian prime ministers. Many people come to me and tell me not to pay any attention to the Labor Party left wing. At the same time, we must recognize that Whitlam wants to identify more with Asia.

I would define U.S. interests in Australia as: (1) preserving our defense installations; (2) maintaining our investment and trade there (we are doing well on trade, but our investment is beginning to come under fire); and. (3) that Australia not turn inwardly, but that we both rather get together with Asian nations.

The Australian perception of the threat in Asia is on the decline. Australia has good relations with Indonesia and Japan. Whitlam and many of his party admire our normalization of relations with the PRC, our getting out of Vietnam, and our contributions to reduced tension in Asia generally.

At the same time, Whitlam doesn't want to be overly identified with the U.S. We should have a broader relationship with Australia, one that defines a lower profile for our military installations there.

Mr. Kissinger: But don't Australian interests make it more necessary for them to be on good terms with us than for us to be on good terms with them?

Ambassador Green: Yes... The issue of U.S. defense installations in Australia has been temporarily defused.

Mr. Kissinger: What would you recommend that I take up with Whitlam as opposed to what the President takes up with him?

Ambassador Green: I think you both should press our general world views on him.

Mr. Kissinger: Do you want to join the meetings?

Ambassador Green: Yes. That with the President as well? Will Plimsoll be sitting in on the one with the President?

Mr. Kissinger: I must check with the President on your sitting in. I don't know whether Plimsoll will in the President's meeting. I'll check.

Ambassador Green: The Australian press has been after me on the effects Watergate has had on our foreign policy.

Mr. Kissinger: Do you think it is hurting us? Of course, it can't help but hurt — but in what way as you have seen it?

Ambassador Green: It has hurt to some extent. I don't go along with the sort of line taken up by James Michener in his "Is America Burning?". Watergate has had less impact in Australia than elsewhere. They understand American institutions — better than we understand theirs. It has certainly had less impact in Australia than in Europe.

Mr. Kissinger: I have a hard time assessing this one.

Ambassador Green: But Watergate also hurts us in Hanoi. Others feel it hurts the Administration in Congress.

Mr. Kissinger: In Congress, definitely.

Ambassador Green: You sent me a message saying that the Whitlam meeting with the President was on the tracks. I was under tremendous pressure at the time. But the position I took publicly was noncommittal. The delay in the President's response raised a storm in Australia. Fortunately, the President's answer came through about three weeks before the Labor Part's biennial conference. Whitlam's having the invitation in hand made a hell of a difference at the conference. Whitlam succeeded in turning off his left wing's criticisms of our defense installations. The only adverse impact in this regard was on the Omega project.

I was a bit worried on not having been able to see you before leaving for Canberra last May...

I hope for a reasonably good rapport between the President and Whitlam. Whitlam should be given a good understanding of our perspectives, We should do our best to broaden Whitlam's approach, so that he will return with a better grasp of our approach on such issues as SALT and other global strategic questions.

The PRC ambassador's attitude has changed from when I first arrived. The Chinese even gave a dinner in my honor not long ago. The Australians love this U.S.-PRC relationship. This helps our policies in Australia generally. Dave Osbourne, when I was passing through Hong Kong on my way to Canberra, told me that in his view the PRC has three interests in Australia: wheat, keeping the USSR out of Southeast Asia and the Indian Ocean, and good U.S.-PRC relations.

Mr. Kissinger: The Chinese are our best NATO ally. They have the perception, but not the force.

Ambassador Green: If you can get across to Whitlam the perspective that the U.S. wants good relations with Australia… that we need good relations with our allies generally...

Mr. Kissinger: What themes should the President develop with Whitlam?

Ambassador Green: The same message. But I would suggest that the President should aim to get out of Whitlam a statement along the following lines; "I don't have complete control over all my cabinet ministers, but I'm going to protect U.S. interests — defense installations, investments (I can't increase U.S. investments, but I'll protect existing U.S. investment). Please understand, though, that from time to time I must say certain things that are not going to be wholly palatable to you, but you should consider these to be necessary for my internal tactical needs." Whitlam will live up to such a statement.

Mr. Kissinger: But Whitlam must volunteer this.

The President at this point has many preoccupations. He may not be on target on all questions. You and I must help him out.

(To Mr. Froebe.) May I see Marshall alone for two minutes? (Mr. Froebe left the room. )

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 910, VIP Visits, Australia, PM. Whitlam Visit, July, 1973 [1 of 2]. Secret; Sensitive. The conversation took place at the White House. Drafted by Froebe.

37. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, July 30, 1973, 10–11 a.m. 37. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, July 30, 1973, 10–11 a.m.1

Washington, July 30, 1973, 10–11 a.m.

THE WHITE HOUSE
WASHINGTON
MEMORANDUM OF CONVERSATION

PARTICIPANTS:

Gough Whitlam, Prime Minister of Australia

Dr. Peter Wilenski, Private Secretary to Prime Minister Whitlam

Sir James Plimsoll, Australian Ambassador to the United States

Henry A. Kissinger, Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs

Marshall Green, United States Ambassador to Australia

John A. Froebe, Jr., Staff Member, NSC

DATE, TIME, AND PLACE: July 30, 1973, 10:00 - 11:00 a.m.
Mr. Kissinger's Office

SUBJECT: Recent U.S. - Australian relationships in general; French Nuclear Tests; Korean policy; Indonesia situation.

(Mr. Kissinger asked Prime Minister Whitlam to join him briefly in private at the beginning of the meeting; he asked the others in after about five minutes.)

Prime Minister Whitlam: Mr. Kissinger was just mentioning to me his regrets that he was unable to see me during my last visit to Washington.

The matter got blown out of all proportion when an Australian correspondent imported that you (Mr. Kissinger) had snubbed me. In actuality, you had been seeing the wives of the POWs. You also had to go to Camp David that weekend. I was completely satisfied with the visit.

I myself can't see many people who come to Canberra. I know that you are a very busy man.

Mr. Kissinger: Still, it was bad manners. I assure you it was not out of any lack of respect for you. It was just one of my bad weeks.

Prime Minister Whitlam: The correspondents had played the story as your having snubbed me. When they picture it this way, it is all too easy to become a prisoner of the story. We in Australia still have an obsession with the media. Particularly as regards our relations with the U.S., every action or reaction becomes the object of great attention.

Mr. Kissinger: I would never have accused the Australians of sycophancy.

Prime Minister Whitlam: Australia and Canada are useful barometers of reactions to the U.S. Relations between both of these countries and the U.S. can be so intimate. Any differences in the family then can be much more distressing. Politically and diplomatically the sheer resemblance between the countries can heighten our differences. Going back to last year, I myself saw Marshall Green twice.

Ambassador Plimsoll: Sometimes problems arise because we don't really think of each other as foreigners. We say things to each other that we would not say to foreigners.

Mr. Kissinger: One of the things the President objected to last December was Australia's treating the U.S. on a par with other foreign countries. However, I agree with your general point on Australian-U.S. relations.

Prime Minister Whitlam: It's been said that your people in Canberra had not expected or correctly assessed our change in government last December. Perhaps the media doesn't realize that Washington also has changed. Australia likewise is not the same. Under McMahon Australia was not the same as under Gorton or Menzies.

Mr. Kissinger: We do not see recent changes in Australia as a greater assertion of Australian autonomy. Rather, we look on it as a change in some of the mechanics in our relations.

Prime Minister Whitlam: There have been changes in Australia's diplomatic position. We are also undergoing some change in the ownership of our resources. In actuality, there are probably greater differences within the Liberal Party. This was certainly the case when there were more Liberals. Gorton's people would have sensed the change that has come about in the Australian populace in the last year or so. The Party which does badly in an election frequently finds differences growing between its main body and its more remote elements.

Mr. Kissinger: This has been the problem in the Republican Party.

Prime Minister Whitlam: There have been these problems in recent years that have worried the American people...those in New York rather than those in the White House. Gorton was the first to recognize this as a problem for Australian foreign policy, but he was not very effective in dealing with it.

Mr. Kissinger: As I was saying to Ambassador Plimsoll the other day, we understand the problem that you faced in coming into office and the strong opposition within your party on this issue [of U.S. policy toward Vietnam].

Prime Minister Whitlam: This issue had become polarized in Australia.

Let me take this opportunity to make clear that I have discouraged the idea that your Embassy in Canberra was not perceptive in anticipating my Party's victory last December.

Mr. Kissinger: Our people expected you to win.

Prime Minister Whitlam: Your people were perfectly correct and cordial — with all of the parties. A few years ago we might have had some complaints.

Mr. Kissinger: But we had worked with the previous government and we felt comfortable with it. Our instructions to our Embassy as regards the election last December were to keep hands off.

Prime Minister Whitlam: Your people in Canberra were very observant. Ambassador Rice and his number two were completely cordial. However, it has always been my feeling that in the State Department your people don't pay as much attention to a country with which you have no problems.

Ambassador Green: We do tend to concentrate on countries such as Cambodia rather than Australia.

Mr. Kissinger: I came here as an authority on foreign policy planning — but found out it is the day-to-day problems that overwhelm you.

I hope our Ambassador is under control. You don't have to tolerate his puns as we did for four years here in Washington.

Prime Minister Whitlam: I first met him here nine years ago.

Ambassador Green: And you still find me tolerable?

Prime Minister Whitlam: Completely, we are gratified to have a career man.

Mr. Kissinger: One of our best.

Prime Minister Whitlam: Yes.

Ambassador Green: I accept that.

Prime Minister Whitlam: What should I raise with the President? I might take up the question of French nuclear tests. These are of unquestionable importance in Australia, New Zealand and Fiji. I have no doubts that the tests are a big issue in these countries — as well as here in the U.S. It is inevitable that with the French tests pressures for a denuclearization of the South Pacific will grow. New Zealand is committed to this. My own party is not, however. I don't like to adopt a gimmicky attitude on such issues. I prefer rather to look at them as a whole.

When I was in Mexico just before coming here, they suggested extending westward the Treaty of Tlatelolco. I'm not expecting the U.S. to denounce the French, even though the press might say "Nixon rebuffs Whitlam on French nuclear tests." Other countries are also pressing this issue and the French testing inevitably is adding to such pressure.

Mr. Kissinger: In your meeting with the President, we are approaching this with the attitude that Australians and Americans have strong emotional bonds. This is reflected in our ties. We can't deny that we have had some strains recently — but we consider these as a matter of the past. If you want to begin your meeting with the President by making a few observations on Asia and the Pacific, the President can then reply and we can then let the rest of the conversation run freely.

Prime Minister Whitlam: He's a more austere person than I.

Mr. Kissinger: Yes, but I might mention that he is sensitive to any suggestion of being lectured. Have you met him?

Prime Minister Whitlam: Yes, twenty years ago when I was a new Member of Parliament. I then recognized him as a rising leader having the most brilliant of futures.

Mr. Kissinger: I can keep the conversation moving in various ways.

Prime Minister Whitlam: I would appreciate that. I'm not particularly inhibited, but I'm afraid I might freeze up with him.

Mr. Kissinger: If you speak with him as you've spoken with me, I'm sure it will all go well. I will go in to see him for a few minutes.

Prime Minister Whitlam: To soften him up?

Mr. Kissinger: No softening is needed.

Prime Minister Whitlam: I assume he doesn't want U.S.-Australian relations to be contentious.

Mr. Kissinger: This is definitely our attitude. We are not looking for the slightest confrontation.

Prime Minister Whitlam: As to the way we will play this for the press...

Mr. Kissinger: We'll put out something positive to the press after the meeting.

On the question of French testing, our general policy is to avoid public statements. We have talked to the French. We believe that they don't want to go beyond two more years of testing. We are willing to let them test in our underground facilities. This is all confidential, of course, you understand.

Prime Minister Whitlam: I get the impression that your State Department leaks more than our Foreign Affairs Department.

Mr. Kissinger: As regards the basic question of our two countries' policy towards the French tests, we differ only in the tactics of how to handle the tests publicly.

Prime Minister Whitlam: I only wanted to make the point that the chances for a confrontation are growing.

Mr. Kissinger: On the question of denuclearization of the South Pacific, we have not yet studied this question. I suppose we could live with it. But I'm not sure how it might affect such things as the transit of aircraft.

From the historical perspective, Australia might want to consider how it might affect its own security. You have such problems in your recent past as Sukarno, and there are other similar potential problems to be considered. I don't know whether denuclearization of the region would be in Australia's basic interest or not.

Prime Minister Whitlam: The whole matter would be a dead issue if the French would stop their testing. If it were in the U.S. interest not to allow these pressures to grow... We are not trying to be devious about this.

Mr. Kissinger: After the current French test series end, we will offer the French our underground testing facilities. For tactical reasons we don't want to make this offer to them at this point. But we believe they will test only one or two years more.

Prime Minister Whitlam: The French were probably angrier with my predecessor than with me.

Ambassador Plimsoll: Is the U.S. against all atmospheric tests?

Mr. Kissinger: Yes, but with the French and the Chinese we have not made a public issue of this problem. Obviously, we can't offer the Chinese our underground testing facilities. Our relationship with the Chinese has not advanced that far.

Prime Minister Whitlam: Do you think you are getting along well with the PRC?

Mr. Kissinger: Yes.

Prime Minister Whitlam: What about the problem of North Korea?

Mr. Kissinger: You are familiar of course with the new direction of South Korean foreign policy. We will favor both Koreas joining international organizations.

Prime Minister Whitlam: When North Korea joined WHO, we thought they would be interested in joining others as well.

Mr. Kissinger: But if you look carefully at the North Korean statement commenting on the new South Korean foreign policy, the North seems to be playing on the subtleties of some sort of confederal arrangement. We want to discuss this with the Chinese. I delayed my trip to Peking since I didn't want to be there when the bombing in Cambodia stopped on August 15. The trip has been delayed a few weeks. If there had been no Congressional cut-off, my going would have created problems for both the U.S. and China. I will probably go sometime in September. We had never set a date for my trip, but it probably would have taken place in early August.

Prime Minister Whitlam: What will happen in Cambodia?

Mr. Kissinger: This is a very difficult situation. Let me first explain the bombing. The elements of the situation include the Khmer Rouge, who are controlled by Hanoi. Then there is Sihanouk who is not under Hanoi's thumb. The PRC wants to give Sihanouk a role because they don't want Hanoi to control the situation — a circumstance in which Hanoi might end up leaning on the Soviets against the PRC. The U.S. has a basic interest in the neutrality and independence of Cambodia. Sihanouk, however, needs Phnom Penh. The U.S. for its part must be able to offer Sihanouk something he needs. We had intended to stop all B-52 raids on July 1 and to continue only enough tactical bombing to make clear to the Khmer Rouge that they could not win a military victory. Under this situation, I could have gone to Peking. With the Congressional cut-off, we had to continue the bombing. Sihanouk is now being reduced to the status of a figure head and would come back now only as a tool of the Khmer Rouge. We must now wait to see whether Phnom Penh will come apart after August 15. We are getting widely different opinions on how long Phnom Penh can hold up. Some say a few weeks — some say a year. I must say I don't agree with the most optimistic. If this is wrong the Khmer Rouge will win. The PRC in that event would presumably turn their support to the Khmer Rouge as the revolutionary party in the situation.

Prime Minister Whitlam: The PRC does seem to be looking to Sihanouk.

Mr. Kissinger: Yes, if Sihanouk returns under this situation, he must lean on the non-communists, the PRC must support him, and Hanoi will have some influence. But the bombing pause has interrupted some very delicate negotiations.

I would point out that in my experience with the PRC, they have not once gone back on their word. They may negotiate long and hard trying to avoid giving in on a point that you want, but if they do they will stick to their commitment.

Prime Minister Whitlam: How overt is Peking in referring to Hanoi's dominance of fifty million people?

Mr. Kissinger: The Chinese are very circumspect when talking about Indochina. The PRC has said it is in favor of a free and independent Cambodia — free of outside influence.

Prime Minister Whitlam: What about the Laos situation?

Mr. Kissinger: We now have a satisfactory settlement there. It is a pity that the U.S. domestic situation has caused the U.S. negotiations in Cambodia to come apart. Whatever the claims of liberal humanitarian philosophy, it has some decided deficiencies as regards dealing with North Vietnam. Have you yourself dealt with them?

Prime Minister Whitlam: Only in the course of negotiating diplomatic recognition.

Mr. Kissinger: We have no objection, you know, to your recognizing Hanoi.

Hanoi was at its most impossible when they took Quang Tri. At that time I offered them a cease-fire and they treated me with complete disdain. They treated me best in two instances: (1) last October when during the election campaign the President was twenty points ahead, and (2) last January when in private Le Duc Tho in the meeting room was so affable that he couldn't keep his hands off of me. They are an extremely tough, heroic people. To take on the greatest industrial country in the world...When you visit Hanoi, you wonder how they could have lasted six months in this war.

In Cambodia, Hanoi will watch the balance of forces very carefully — if Phnom Penh can last —

Prime Minister Whitlam: What about the Paris economic talks?

Mr. Kissinger: We have formed the Joint Economic Commission. We have reached a substantial economic understanding. We completed the Laos talks, but we refused to sign. We have told them that only when the Laos settlement is completed will we withdraw our troops. If they will withdraw their troops, we will sign the agreement. We have also told them that until there is a settlement in Cambodia, we will not ask Congress for funds for Indochina rehabilitation.

Prime Minister Whitlam: How durable is Phnom Penh?

Mr. Kissinger: This is the key question. Based on my conversations with Le Duc Tho and the Chinese, we were moving toward a settlement. But the bombing cut-off then threw a new element into the equation.

I can give you some feeling for Le Duc Tho as a negotiator by telling you one of his comments to me at my last meeting with him: approaching me very cautiously at one point, he said "I want to talk to you very frankly and sincerely: you're a liar." I must say that he puts on an impressive performance. Coming from his background and that little country, he negotiates with me for four years — at times he can be absolutely maddening to deal with — along with the South Vietnamese. There must be something of a Vietnamese national characteristic about it.

Ambassador Plimsoll: Do the South Vietnamese have a good chance of surviving?

Mr. Kissinger: In June we concluded that South Vietnam, as perceived by Hanoi, was infinitely stronger than before. The tone of my June negotiations with Hanoi was much different. Hanoi behaved as if South Vietnam were here to stay. We can't tell at this point whether Hanoi thinks that the U.S. is domestically so weak that it is no longer a factor. But at the same time the Soviets and the Chinese have reduced their shipments to North Vietnam.

Prime Minister Whitlam: Is the settlement in Laos really in train?

Mr. Kissinger: In the next few days we will be able to tell. We would very much appreciate it if Australia would continue its participation in FEOF.

Prime Minister Whitlam: Our budget will be coming out in the next few weeks. We don't want to make new commitments in Cambodia.

Mr. Kissinger: But FEOF pertains to Laos.

Ambassador Green: Yes, ESF is in Cambodia.

Prime Minister Whitlam: Our problem begins with our domestic inflation. We must restrain either government expenditures or private expenditures — and we can't restrain the latter. We also can't cut domestic public expenditures. So we must cut on the foreign side. We recent established a small task force which went through government expenditures. Their report will be completed on August 21. They recommended cuts on Laos and Cambodia. These will both be chopped. Nevertheless, we still could take up FEOF in the supplemental. But if there is a settlement in Laos, we can put a new face on the matter. If a new coalition in Laos wants us to continue our contribution, we will reconsider. We are in a very tight budgetary situation. [Mr. Kissinger left the room to confer with the President.]

Ambassador Green: The U.S. problem is that if Australia drops out it hurts us in Congress. This fund keeps Laos together.

Ambassador Plimsoll: Could we avoid announcing the contribution?

Prime Minister Whitlam: There will be no announcement. We don't want negative announcements. On this we don't particularly want attention drawn to what we are undoing.

Dr. Wilenski: We could background the press to the effect that if a coalition in Laos sticks together we would be willing to reconsider.

Ambassador Green: Funds are not now in the budget?

Prime Minister Whitlam: No. We must look at the total foreign aid context. What we are doing here would look lousy by comparison with our professions. My big trouble is not over-extending ourselves. We have just overridden Treasury on Papua-New Guinea. There is a very considerable sum involved there.

Ambassador Green: If there is a settlement, we might be able to look at it again.

Ambassador Plimsoll: But we can't reconsider before November. We might consider telling the Laotians privately that our contribution might continue.

[Mr. Kissinger returned.]

Mr. Kissinger: What I'll be good for when I leave this job is to become headmaster for a school for wayward boys. I'm getting a solid background for that sort of job in dealing with our bureaucracy.

Prime Minister Whitlam: (Looking at the exterior of the State briefing book) The number of these briefing books you produce must be prodigious, given the number of visitors who must troop through here. There must be tremendous pressure on you and the President.

Mr. Kissinger: This sort of book can be very educational, not in the case of Australia, where we keep up to date on events, but in the case of the small countries.

Prime Minister Whitlam: But in Australia, I must point out that the new Prime Minister still must get his legitimacy within the first few months by gaining U.S. accolades. I would like to be able to get to the place in my relations in the U.S. Government — as with the U.K. — that Australian heads of government can drop into Washington informally for discussions.

Mr. Kissinger: I very firmly believe that our relationship should rest on a friendly basis of total equality.

[Mr. Kissinger escorted Prime Minister Whitlam to the President's office.]

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 910, VIP Visits, Australia, PM. Whitlam Visit, July, 1973[1 of 2]. Secret; Sensitive. The conversation took place in Kissinger’s office at the White House. Froebe sent this memorandum of conversation to Kissinger under a covering memorandum, August 9. (Ibid.)

38. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, July 30, 1973. 38. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, July 30, 1973.1

Washington, July 30, 1973

WHITE HOUSE MEETING, MONDAY, JULY 30, 1973

PARTICIPANTS:

The President

Australian Prime Minister Gough Whitlam

Dr. Henry A. Kissinger

Australian Ambassador Sir James Plimsoll

Ambassador Marshall Green

After the photographers had left the room and after opening pleasantries, the President asked the Prime Minister how he saw the future of Australian-US relations, commenting that he did not expect that we would have serious bilateral problems but that we both faced issues with third countries, notably in Asia. The President remarked that there were those in the US who felt we should get out of Asia and Europe, and that that view may well prevail since it is a view that is shared by a strong group in the State Department as well as in Congress. Americans have an affectionate regard for their Australian friends and we have a sound alliance between us. But, it is a question of where we go from here. Do we try to muddle through or do we try to develop a concept of where we are going and how we propose to get there? There is no doubt that the Russians and Chinese have a very clear view of where they are headed. On the other hand, there may be some 50 different viewpoints within our own bureaucracy as to where we are going; all of these views are well intentioned but most of them are wrong. A number of our European friends have criticized us in the past for not negotiating with the Russians and Chinese, but, now that we are at long last doing so, these European friends feel neglected.

The Prime Minister responded: The US is without doubt the greatest power in the world. The Nixon Doctrine has generated a greater sense of self reliance among the developing countries of the world; and you have made a major contribution to world peace in effecting a rational relationship with China and a detente with the Soviet Union. You should derive great satisfaction from the fact that you had advocated these successful measures many years ago, measures widely appreciated in Australia and around the world, including the Soviet Union and China which see the dangers in power vacuums.

The President acknowledged with a smile that NATO's strongest supporter seems to be Chou En-lai and that the Chinese, unlike some in our own bureaucracy, are opposed to our quitting Japan. However, we must remember that if the US cuts the umbilical cord with Japan, the latter does have options. It already has one of the world's strongest economies and qualifies as a "mini-nuclear power." Japan has options to make a deal with the Russians at this time, or possibly later on with the Chinese, or Japan could go nuclear. At the moment Japan feels very much alone in a dangerous world, which underlines the importance of Japan's continuing its close ties with its friends like the US and Australia.

The Prime Minister replied: I suppose even American critics of the Administration's policy do not wish to see the US withdraw from Japan and the West Pacific since it would only encourage militarism in Japan. They must recognize that US protective arrangements with Japan and Germany prevented a resurgence of militarism there. I further suppose that the strongest critics to current shifts in American policy are those on the far right and it is therefore essential to have at the helm of the US Government a man who is considered by them to be reliable.

The President observed that this proved helpful in handling the Taiwan issue. He asked the Prime Minister how he knew our politics so well.

The Prime Minister replied: When I was in school in the 1930's I mastered Western European history but was ignorant of the histories of the US, Japan and the USSR. Idle periods during my wartime service provided opportunity to study the history of these other countries, especially the US. One of the things I learned was that the US Congress lacked the voting discipline of the Australian parliamentary process. Perhaps the US could learn more about our system.

The Prime Minister continued: The international moves you spearheaded have Australia's support, and your general objectives are perceived to be right. Your inaugural address bespoke a practical approach to international affairs, one that Australia welcomed. Whether Democrat or Republican, or whether Labor or Liberal, both our countries can work together. We cannot make issues between us a matter of contention in a way that jeopardizes our relations. "You may be discouraged at times — though you are not the type to be discouraged — by some of what goes on, but we know that your strongest critics are in the US itself." I well recall your address to the Australian Parliament back in 1953 when I was a very junior parliamentarian. I knew then that a glittering future lay before you.

The President said: Whatever our problems may be today, it is a better world today than it was back in 1953. I specifically recall the tough assignment I was given by President Eisenhower of telling Syngman Rhee that he couldn't march north; that if he did go north, we would have to get out of Korea. The world today is better because, for one thing, the polarization of the 1950's and '60s is behind us. The Nixon Doctrine is not designed to wash our hands of international responsibilities. At the beginning of our talk I was being the devil's advocate; I was trying to point up the malaise of liberal thinking: to hell with everything. Suppose we were to face another crisis in Berlin or the Middle East, our intellectuals would demand that we stay out of these affairs and we would have a hard time exercising influence. Thus we really have to decide whether we are going to opt out of the world. But can we afford to? Looking ahead another quarter of a century, there will be over one billion Chinese and 350 million Russians. Now they glare at each other; but suppose those powers got together? Meanwhile Japan will be straining within the straight jacket of its land shortage. The countries of the Southern hemisphere 20-25 years from now will be taking on more and more importance, despite all the troubles of Africa and Latin America. The peoples of these areas could have great quality. Who would have foreseen many years ago that the Vietnamese and Koreans would be amongst the best fighters in the world? As far as Australia is concerned, I have a deep admiration for Australians, and Australia has great resources. One of Australia's main handicap is shortage of water, but desalinization and nuclear fusion could change all that.

The President continued: We understand your politics and internal problems. As I look at Western civilization, I do not see us in confrontation with the Communists but we will be faced with challenges where your Parliament and our Congress have something very precious in their hands to preserve; but do they have the wisdom to do that which will enable our civilization to survive? Neither of our countries wants to appear in a colonialist role, and neither of us may exactly approve of some of the governments in Asia where authoritarianism prevails; but these are forces with which we must deal, and we must do so in the closest cooperation — standing together against predators. In this connection, any evidence of our pull-out from Malaysia or other key countries could have tragic consequences. Our problem is that public opinion moves strongly in the other direction in a world weary of war and beset with economic problems. But we must take the longer view, and if we weaken in our resolve we present a vacuum which will be exploited by men I don't hate but who will inevitably react adversely to our interests if leaders of Western civilization "don't get a new charge." The Soviets are now talking about reciprocal reduction of armaments, but if we reduce unilaterally, why should they? American strength and evidence of our willingness to use that strength when necessary evokes a curious kind of respect from China; and when we get that respect from China, it has a desirable effect upon soviet attitudes toward us. In short, if we get out of the world as some of our people and your people recommend, that may be fine in theory but in practice it could be totally otherwise.

The Prime Minister said: Australia with its well-developed, literate, internationalist community, must live cheek by jowl with a large grouping of developing nations to the near north whose combined GNP is less than that of Australia. In dealing with these developing countries, Australia has three close associates — the US, the UK and Japan, though the latter has only economic power. Our task is how to sustain hope amongst all these developing people and provide assistance, even though what Australia can do is but a drop in the bucket. The contrast between our standards of living and theirs is stark indeed. But we are trying to break down differences. The "White Australian policy" has been discarded; and there have been great improvements in our handling of the Aborigines of Australia just as there has been in America's handling of racial issues.

The Prime Minister continued: I am the first Australian Prime Minister to have visited Latin America. No Australian Prime Minister has ever visited Africa, though my assistant, Minister Willisee, just visited there recently. I was the first Australian Prime Minister to visit India in the past 14 years.

The President commended the Prime Minister for these visits which comport with Australia's role as a world power. He specifically suggested that the Prime Minister visit Brazil, a country of great future significance. As far as China is concerned, Australia moved properly and in timely fashion to recognize the PRC.

The President summarized his view of Australian-American relations as follows: In personal terms there could be no two peoples with more in common. I have never met an Aussie I didn't like. That bond will always remain. Economically our ties will continue to grow for it is so much in our mutual interests to do so. We can work closely together as allies, even though alliances are no longer relevant in all cases. Finally, we are both free countries with a free-swinging press, often irresponsible but vigorous and strong. In short, we have a lot in common and a lot to protect in common. What remains is to determine our roles in defending our heritage and interest. We cannot get out too far in front of public opinion, and since the latter is beset with isolationist trends we must fight against that tide, both of us. The main point is that we are at a critical turning point in history. After all the wars we have been through, we face the questions: do we have the will and economic power to cope with the challenges ahead? Can we afford to create a vacuum which others will fill? The view in Peking and Moscow is that their systems will prevail, not through nuclear war, but through other means. China is now preoccupied with a host of problems but it will have an even vaster population and an even greater nuclear arsenal. By pandering to public opinion we could leave the world. But why should we do so when it is within our power to maintain a sufficient presence along with our friends so that there can be a reciprocal reduction in armaments and the prospect of real peace? Our views of the world may differ but our goals are the same.

The Prime Minister said: Australia is not pulling out of Southeast Asia; its air squadron will remain in Malaysia. More importantly, it is widely understood that Australia's effectiveness in its relations with Asia depends upon a reputation for good relations with the US. This Australia will maintain, just as it will seek to advance its economic ties with the US, Australia recently having appreciated its dollar and cutting tariffs by 25%.

The President concluded by directing attention once again to the importance of our relationships with Japan, a nation of prodigious economic power and highly capable people, yet a nation with which we must have the best of relations so that the Japanese feel they share our destiny in the world.

The Prime Minister responded that he will be visiting Japan shortly and continuing the annual ministerial talks that were started several years ago between the Japanese and Australian cabinets.

Upon the conclusion of their cordial one hour, 20 minutes meeting, the President accompanied the Prime Minister to his car where he bade him farewell.

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 910, VIP Visits, Australia, PM. Whitlam Visit, July, 1973, folder 7. “Top Secret” is handwritten on the top of the first page. The President’s Daily Diary indicates that the meeting lasted from 11:15 a.m. until 12:33 p.m. (National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, White House Central Files, President’s Daily Diary) Drafted by Green. Nixon’s undated talking points from Kissinger, which the President saw, are ibid. [1 of 2]. Rogers sent a briefing memorandum to the President On July 26. (Ibid., RG 59, Central Files 1970–1973, POL 7 AUSTL)

39. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, July 31, 1973. 39. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, July 31, 1973.1

Washington, July 31, 1973

DEPARTMENT OF STATE
Memorandum of Conversation
DATE: 31 July 1973

SUBJECT: Secretary's Meeting with Australian PM Gough Whitlam

PARTICIPANTS:

Australia

Mr. Gough Whitlam, Prime Minister and Foreign Minister

Sir James Plimsoll, Australian Ambassador to US

Sir Keith Waller, Secretary, Department of Foreign Affairs

Dr. P. Wilenski, Principal Private Secretary to PM

Mr. R.A. Woolcott, First Assistant Secretary, South Asia, DFA

Mr. B.D. Hill, First Assistant Secretary, Pacific & Western Division, DFA

Mr. D.H. McKay, Secretary, Departmment of Overseas Trade

United States

Secretary of State William P. Rogers

Deputy Secretary Kenneth Rush

US Ambassador to Australia Marshall Green

Deputy Assistant Secretary of State, Bureau of East Asian and the Pacific, Richard L. Sneider

Director, Australia, New Zealand and the Pacific, Leo J. Moser

PLACE: Secretary's Office, July 30, 1973, 2:30 p.m.

COPIES TO: EA, EUR, IO, S/PC, PM, S/5, Canberra, Wellington, Djakarta, Singapore, Kuala Lumpur, Saigon, an, Phnom Penh, Vientiane, Manila, Taipei, Seoul, Tokyo, CINCPAC FOR POLAD, US Mission USUN New York, London, Paris, Peking, Ottawa, Moscow, Mexico, New Delhi H, ARA, NSC, DOD, CIA

The meeting opened with Prime Minister Whitlam describing his schedule for the day as a very full one. He noted that after seeing the Secretary and signing the science agreement, he would be going over to the Senate Foreign Relations Committee. There was a brief discussion of the role of that Committee in the American political system. The Secretary commented that many in the Senate had serious reservations about our system of alliances generally — and that what Mr. Whitlam said in respect to such matters would, therefore, be particularly significant.

Mr. Whitlam stated that he understood that the executive branch of the United States Government would probably have great difficulty in negotiating any new security treaties, given the present attitudes of Congress. Therefore it seemed in his view important to keep the present ones, "even if they are not perfect." In his view, he stated that the only "perfect" alliance was the ANZUS one. Australia had great difficulty in its participation in ASPAC because Taiwan was in it; Japan, he felt, had much the same concern as Australia. Australia had some difficulties with SEATO as well; Britain, Australia and New Zealand all had recognized Peking and the United States was moving toward much better relations with the Communist Chinese. As an example of the kind of difficult position Australia was put in by its membership in SEATO, Mr. Whitlam mentioned the SEATO exercise that had been planned in the South China Sea. This was due to come off at the precise time that he was to be in Peking; and therefore Australia felt that it could not participate in that exercise. Mr. Whitlam stated, however, that his government would not pull out of SEATO, since he realized that it represented the only formal security link between the United States and Thailand; and he would not want his action to upset that relationship.

Mr. Whitlam stated that he did not know where things stood on the proposed ANZUS Council meeting. He knew that Prime Minister Kirk of New Zealand was anxious to have a meeting in Wellington and he agreed that the ANZUS Council meeting should be scheduled in such a way as to make it clear that ANZUS was not ancillary to any other treaty. It is a self-contained treaty; as a matter of fact, as far as Australia is concerned, it is the oldest treaty relationship in force. The question of the ANZUS Council meeting was one of "where, when and who" would attend. Mr. Whitlam stated that his government would like attendance by the Secretary.

The Secretary responded by saying that although each country with which the United States has a security treaty arrangement tends to think in terms of its own treaty with the United States, it is necessary for the US to think of its alliances as a general "alliance system for mutual security." Today this system includes 44 nations. Many people in the field of foreign affairs in the United States, including some members of the Senate, feel that this system is "outmoded." The United States Government does not share this view. The Secretary stated that if any of our treaty relationships would start to crumble, it would have eroding effect on all remaining. If, for example, SEATO should be seriously denigrated, the whole treaty system would come under increased criticism. This could have a snowballing effect on all other treaty relationships including ANZUS. The SEATO agreement is in place, the Secretary said, and is not presenting any major problem. The United States has shown that it can improve its relations with both the Communist Chinese and the USSR without having to loosen its relationships with its allies. The Chinese Communists have not importuned us to change our position on such matters as SEATO; to the contrary, they seam relaxed on this issue. Mr. Whitlam added that they (the Chinese Communists) obviously want no more new uncertainties in the area.

Turning to Korea, the Secretary stated that much of the same type of criticism of our relationship with the Republic of Korea came up from time to time in Congress and elsewhere. He told them, he said, "why should we change, everything is going okay in the area." Overall US military forces have been reduced in the world, and it does not cost any more to maintain a small portion of those troops in Korea than it would to have the same troops in, say, Georgia. Of course, we should not do any "contentious things" in the Korea area. Both the Chinese and the Russians, the Secretary stated, appear to respect us for maintaining a consistent and responsible policy in the world — whether they agree with us or not.

Mr. Whitlam said that perhaps he had "overstated" the case in same of his Comments at the National Press Club on SEATO. The Secretary responded by saying that "you can't have it both ways"; pot shots at SEATO will encourage the critics in the United States to take pot shots at other alliances, including ANZUS.

In way of explanation of his previous statements on the subject of SEATO, Mr. Whitlam stated that the whole SEATO relationship had been "exploited" in the past in Australia by previous governments. That alliance had been "used" by his predecessors as if it involved some sort of "coalition" with the United States. This, he said, was an "explanation — if not a justification" of same of his previous statements on the subject of SEATO.

The United States must realize, Mr. Whitlam stated, that one party had been in power in Australia for 23 years. There was, therefore, a tendency for the opposition to overreact to issues that had been used against them. The only longer span in the English-speaking world during which one party had maintained power had been that between the Presidencies of Lincoln and Cleveland.

The Secretary stated that he understood this situation. Mr. Whitlam had to understand, however, that the United States felt particularly sensitive about criticism from Australian sources precisely because our past relationship had been so very good. During his own service in the Pacific during the Second World War, he recalled how strongly all Americans felt about Australians as allies. For that reason, criticism from Australian sources was particularly noted in the United States. He hoped that the Prime Minister's visit would get our mutual relationship back on to its traditional basis.

Mr. Whitlam stated that same of his colleagues (in the Labor party) were characterized from time to time by the press as "anti-American"; in fact, they were not. Many of the most "pungent" critics of the United States in Australia were people who felt very positively about the United States and considered show that "you had let them down." Many did not understand the nature of President Nixon's foreign policy.

Mr. Whitlam stated that he felt that President Nixon's policy of detente with China, removal of troops from Vietnam, and the like, was very clear and consistent in its objectives. In fact, these policies permitted the Labor Party to win its elections. He mentioned that he could not control the appointment of ministers under his system of government; but he added in defense of his ministers that "I don't think my crowd is hostile to the United States." Much of the problem was created by the way in which the "press worries an issue to a rag" once it gets on to it.

The Secretary stated that he had found at the European conference in Helsinki that there had been general agreement that US foreign policy had been exceptionally successful in the past few years. All countries (except Malta) had praised our general posture. Mr. Whitlam stated that he also felt that US policy had been very successful.

The Secretary stated that Australia had a great reservoir of goodwill in the United States. Our desire to maintain those close relationships had been the primary reason for assigning Marshall Green as our Ambassador to Canberra. Mr. Whitlam responded that the Green assignment had indeed been "very flattering" to Australia. Ambassador Green commented that he had to be sent in order to match the assignment of Ambassador Plimsoll to the United States, who set a kind of plimsoll line for measuring diplomats.

Ambassador Green stated that he was happy to see in Mr. Whitlam's speech a reference to the need to "remove ideology" as the major consideration in relations between states. Mr. Whitlam stated that he felt it was rather pointless to cavil at non-democratic states. This was a consideration in Australian relations with Indonesia and Thailand, both of which have governmental traditions quite alien to countries like Australia, New Zealand or the United States. If the Australians wanted to maintain good relations with the Thais, for example, it would have to accept them for what they were.

Mr. Whitlam stated that he hoped to see an expansion of regional contacts in his area. He had no firm attitudes on form, but believed there ought to be a loose forum for Asian leaders to meet and discuss their problems. The OAS had been very beneficial in the western hemisphere; and it was his opinion that the Commonwealth was similarly beneficial, providing an opportunity for its leaders to get together from time to time and discuss common concerns. After the forthcoming meeting in Ottawa, he added, his opinion might change; but at the present he could see only benefit from such institutions.

One major problem that Australia faced in its relations with the other nations of its region was that it is an industrially advanced state and whenever it talks to some of the less developed countries, they evidence an immediate interest in finding out what type of economic advantage Australia might be willing to grant them. "Welcome to the club" remarked the Secretary. As an aside, Mr. Whitlam mentioned that even in Mexico during his recent visit there he had run into this same problem.

The Secretary stated that the US favored regional organizations of all types. We, for example, felt that the Andean Pact was an excellent idea. Recent policy developments had also shown that countries can have improved relations with both China and Russia without changing their regional relationships.

A major issue today, the Secretary noted, is that of Japan. In the last several years, China has been much in the news. Japan, however, is presently a much more significant nation; the only thing that they do not have that would make for great power status is nuclear weaponry. The Secretary said that he hoped that the forthcoming Tanaka visit would help in assuring Japan's proper role. Japanese initiatives in the field of regional organizations are welcome by the United States. If the United States does not make immediate public statements about such Japanese initiatives, this should not be considered lack of interest. It may simply be our desire to assure that a Japanese initiative rains a "Japanese initiative." Mr. Whitlam remarked that if the Japanese raise the issue of talks, Australia will want to be responsive "otherwise they will think we are standoffish." He noted than in terms of Australian politics, he had no record of being "anti-Japanese." Both the Secretary and Mr. Whitlam agreed in the need for both governments to reassure the Japanese and help them to maintain self confidence in their role in the region.

Mr. Whitlam mentioned Japanese pride and referred to Japan's sensitivity over US initiatives toward China. In fact, however, US policy had made the way much easier for Japan in resuming its relations with China, Mr. Whitlam concluded.

Ambassador Green asked if Australia had yet engaged in conversations with Japan on the subject of regional organization, and if so, what type of organization was envisioned. Mr. Sneider added that he felt that the Japanese were groping for much the same things as the Australians in the way of improved regional contacts. Mr. Whitlam replied that he had gotten no clear idea of Japanese concepts. The type of organization that he would have in mind would be one designed purely to meet and talk over mutual concerns on a regular basis. Thus far, he said, there has always been an unfortunate tendency to assume that any regional association would be interested primarily in matters of aid or mutual defense.

Ambassador Green remarked that one of the major problems in setting up regional organizations in Asia, as compared to other parts of the world, was that of the number of divided countries in the area. Mr. Whitlam agreed that this was a difficult issue. On the matter of Korea, he had favored the initiative of South Korea to have both Koreas seated in the United Nations — only to find that Kim Il Sung was inclined to charge Australia with being "insincere" on this matter.

The Secretary said that he thought that having two Koreas in the United Nations would be a wise solution. US policy on UNCURK, perhaps not yet made public, would be for UNCURK to delay until about August 15 and then recommend its own demise. In the meanwhile, the US hoped that the status of the UN command would not be disturbed in Korea — since to do so would be destabilizing. The Secretary stated that he hoped that the United States and Australia could work together in a three point policy: 1) to seat both Koreas in the United Nations; 2) to have UNCURK disband itself ; and 3) maintain the UN command for the time being. Ambassador Plimsoll remarked that he felt that once both Koreas were seated in the UN, the UN command in Korea could be disbanded.

Mr. Whitlam noted that his government had recognized North Vietnam before anyone had the chance to raise the issue of the PRG. It was only after that point that the North Koreans had approached him.

The meeting ended with a brief discussion of Mr. Whitlam's schedule and reference to the science agreement that was to be signed in a few minutes.

Drafted :EA/ROC :LJMoser:jw 7/31/73
Clearance :EA: Mr.Sneider
Ambassador Green

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970–1973, POL 7 AUSTL. Secret; Exdis. Drafted by Moser; cleared by Sneider and Green.

40. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to President Nixon, Washington, September 27, 1973. 40. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to President Nixon, Washington, September 27, 1973.1

Washington, September 27, 1973

MEMORANDUM
THE WHITE HOUSE
WASHINGTON
INFORMATION

September 27, 1973

MEMORANDUM FOR: THE PRESIDENT
FROM: HENRY A. KISSINGER

SUBJECT: New Zealand Prime Minister at U.N. General Assembly Sides with Small Nations Against Great Powers

In his speech to the U.N. General Assembly on September 26, Prime Minister Kirk aligned New Zealand with the small and developing nations, strongly criticizing the great powers as having made notably little progress since World War II on the world's major problems. Kirk attributed this state of affairs to great power self-aggrandizement and accumulation of material goods, and said the basic solution lies in nations drastically changing their attitudes in the direction of a pursuit of idealism. Kirk called on small nations to combine to force this change.

More specifically, Kirk: — Criticized the emerging detente as "temporary and fragile," noting that balance of power arrangements in the past have given the great powers another guise to continue competition and rivalry and have always failed.

— Pegged the achievement of international economic and social justice as the foremost global problem, calling attention to the growing gap in standards of living and worsening food and population problems.

— Welcomed in principle my proposed World Food Conference, but criticized indirectly U.S. domestic agricultural policies and asked for improved access for food producing nations to foreign markets.

— Proposed a comprehensive nuclear test ban treaty, consideration of partial disarmament or regional demilitarization, and a South Pacific nuclear-free zone. (In the course of this, Kirk also supported the ASEAN plan for the neutralization of Southeast Asia and nuclear-free zones in the Indian Ocean and Latin America.)

— Attributed UN ineffectiveness to the failure of the great powers to make sufficient use of the world body.

Kirk's speech is wholly consistent with his sympathy with the "little guy," and his belief in resolving international tensions largely by economic development and disarmament. His suspicions of the great powers betray his frequent naiveté on world affairs, particularly on the largest issues, although he also shows a hard-headed pragmatism on some more limited issues such as SEATO and Five Power Defense Arrangement for Malaysia-Singapore. The only new elements in the speech are the call for a comprehensive test ban treaty (which follows on his unsuccessful protests against French nuclear testing in the South Pacific this past summer) and his effort to range the small nations against the large. This being his first major speech before a world forum may account for the lengths to which he has projected some of his longer-standing positions.

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 934, VIP Visits, New Zealand, Prime Minister Kirk [1 of 2]. Confidential. Sent for information.

41. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, September 27, 1973. 41. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, September 27, 1973.1

Washington, September 27, 1973

THE WHITE HOUSE
WASHINGTON
MEMORANDUM OF CONVERSATION

PARTICIPANTS:

Norman E. Kirk, Prime Minister of New Zealand

Frank H. Corner, New Zealand Secretary of Foreign Affairs

Lloyd White, New Zealand Ambassador to the United States

The President

Henry A. Kissinger, Secretary of State

John A. Froebe, Jr., Staff Member, National Security Council

DATE, TIME AND PLACE: September 27, 1973, 10:40 - 11:40 a.m.
The Oval Office

SUBJECT: Basic U.S. foreign policy posture; Japan's role in Asia; Declaration of Principles; U.S. - New Zealand cooperation in science research; South Pacific development; U.S. - New Zealand bilateral trade.

The President: [After an initial exchange of pleasantries during the press photo opportunity] I regret that I never got to New Zealand during World War II. I did see Guadalcanal, Noumea, and the New Hebrides. Confidentially, I can recall that our fighter pilots when they got leave preferred taking it in New Zealand rather than Australia. They were offered either Sidney or Auckland. Auckland was almost invariably the preferred place.

Prime Minister Kirk: I can remember well when the Japanese came. I also remember earlier in the war when the Prince of Wales and the Repulse went down.

The President: Yes. That was the end of the era of the battleships.

Secretary Corner: It was also the end of the British in the Pacific.

Prime Minister Kirk: I was interested to see at a recent celebration of the Coral Sea victory that about one-half of the Americans attending had New Zealand wives. This also shows the strong relationship that exists between our two countries.

The President: I was in New Zealand in 1953 for three days. I remember New Zealand as a beautifully green country. I met with members of all three of your parties, who told me that New Zealand lives on grass. They also said that I must see the South Island while I was there.

Secretary Corner: The Prime Minister, you know, is from the south.

The President: Then I said the right thing! The south has spectacular scenery.

Prime Minister Kirk: Most of my country's population is presently drifting north. Now more than half of the population is located on the North Island.

Basic U.S. Foreign Policy Posture

The President: I want you to know that we are very happy to have you here, Mr. Prime Minister. I look forward to seeing you again this evening. I am sorry that your wife is not here also. All who will be at the dinner tonight will be your friends, and they will include both Democrats and Republicans.

I noted from your U.N. General Assembly speech of yesterday that you put emphasis on the relationship between small and large nations. I want you to know that I feel very strongly that, although we have met with the Chinese and the Russians — and I have emphasized this point to the State Department and to Secretary Kissinger — we must remember that each nation is important to U.S. policy. Who can say where the next leadership will come from. Bolivia and the Ivory Coast will be here next week — but I am not putting New Zealand at that level. We [the U.S. and New Zealand] have our differences, but our goals are the same.

One last point — and Secretary Kissinger may have mentioned this in his U.N. General Assembly speech — some may say that the U.S. is interested only in the balance of power. We are deeply concerned that Japan does not feel it has to turn toward the Soviet Union, that the Chinese do not feel they have to turn inwardly, and that the Soviets do not turn toward an adventuristic policy. I would also mention our concern for the European Community, within which there are many differences. However, when you look across this great spectrum, what matters finally are people. We are vitally interested not in a paternalistic relationship with our allies, but in one that grows out of mutual respect.

That is our basic position. Secretary Kissinger may want to add something to that.

Secretary Kissinger: I have nothing to add, Mr. President.

Prime Minister Kirk: But when you're only three million people, you can pursue only political solutions. New Zealand is the odd man out. There are some considerable hurdles to get over. New Zealand intends to follow independent policies, but proceeding from the principle of mutual respect between nations.

Japanese Question

Prime Minister Kirk: We think that the next few years are extremely critical for Japan. Japan must not feel isolated. For this reason the GATT negotiations which have just gotten underway are terribly important. If we can avoid isolating Japan through trade, then within five to six years through regionalization — which would include the PRC and the Indonesians (who are also scared of Japan) — we may be able to avert this danger. We hope that through bilateral arrangements we can create a regional association that all pull them together in efforts aimed at self-help.

The President: By region are you referring to Southeast Asia?

Prime Minister Kirk: In general, yes. I would also include the South Pacific states, but not necessarily India.

Secretary Kissinger: From our experience, India would be hard to include in such an organization.

Prime Minister Kirk: A basic objective would be to stimulate Japan to contribute more toward the development of the region. We would hope to create common interests that will hold Japan and the nations of the region together. New Zealand will try to get close to the ASEAN countries, working through bilateral arrangements. For example, we are now talking to Malaysia about new immigration arrangements. We have worked out with Malaysia a mutual immigration scheme. It is a scheme that is within realistic limits. It provides for an equal number of immigrants going each way, and is not based on racial discrimination.

The President: If you can carry this out, you are indeed a masterful politician.

Prime Minister Kirk: New Zealand has already accepted 50,000 Polynesian islanders.

The President: Are they able to get New Zealand citizenship?

Prime Minister Kirk: Yes, they receive New Zealand citizenship. We are now accepting about 1,500 Polynesian islanders a year. Interestingly, as Prime Minister I represent more Cook Islanders than there are in the Cook Islands.

We found that if you disperse new immigrants well and provide them with technical training and employment, they can be absorbed. In addition, we cannot very well tell Asians, "We want an equal relationship with you but don't want your people."

So as I indicated, we have been discussing this with Malaysia. We have also been interested in U.S. immigration. But your citizens do not want to give up their U.S. citizenship if they come to New Zealand. What we in New Zealand need is some sort of dual citizenship for these Americans.

The President (to Secretary Kissinger): Do we have this with Israel?

Secretary Kissinger: Israel gives them dual citizenship. But we do not recognize this. The U.S. legal position is that we cannot recognize dual citizenship.

Prime Minister Kirk: We would like to have dual citizenship since we believe that immigrants should be able to participate fully in the life of the country to which they go. Also, there would be no better bond between our two countries.

The President: Right! Trade is good but people are better.

Secretary Corner: U.S. citizens in New Zealand would be better even than our ANZUS Treaty.

Prime Minister Kirk: We already have a number of Americans in New Zealand engaged in our joint Antarctic research project.

The President: I am impressed by your analysis of Japan. I have many times told European leaders — including Brandt, Pompidou and Heath — "In working towards the European Community, don't isolate Japan." The difficulty with Japan is that they have their past. They lost a war. They have now become an economic giant but they are still a military pigmy. We believe they must, however, continue to rely on the U.S. security-wise. Japan without the U.S. defense commitment would have two options: either they would have to make a deal with the Soviets, or they would have to rearm.

Another point is that on the economic side the Japanese are moving with tremendous speed. With this in mind, we should remember that we cannot have a global economic community without Japan. Japan must be right at the head table.

Declaration of Principles

The President: Secretary Kissinger brought your comments on your and Australia's relationship with the Declaration of Principles to my attention. There is also the idea of a Pacific Basin organization that would include Australia, New Zealand, Japan, Canada, and the U.S. The experts can work out the details of such a proposal. But what I want to assure you is that in working towards a Declaration we don't intend to create a great power condominium. We don't want to leave Australia and New Zealand out.

Secretary Kissinger: I think the Prime Minister, knowing the French, realizes that working this out with the French will be extremely difficult.

The President: Yes.

Secretary Kissinger: The French this past week in New York told me that they are willing to accept almost anyone else in the Declaration except Australia.

Prime Minister Kirk: I can assure you that we have been very careful in our statements that might affect France.

The President: The point I would make is that the Australians demagogue the issues. New Zealand has expressed concern, but in a proper way. The French see and appreciate these distinctions.

Prime Minister Kirk: We were not anti-French in our statements; we were anti-nuclear testing.

Secretary Kissinger: But you did it diplomatically.

In the declaration we are discussing with the Europeans we may end up with two sets of negotiations. Then we could have an umbrella declaration that would bring in Japan, Australia, and New Zealand. This may be the easiest way. .

Japanese Question

Prime Minister Kirk: Japan's problem is complicated by their historical background and by their endless capacity to be organized — like robots. I am afraid that we may be reaching a critical point with Japan.

Secretary Kissinger: Chou En-lai recently told visitors — and this should not go outside this room — that his government is now considering encouraging the Japanese to rearm so that they will use up their resources. They fear the economic strength that Japan will have in ten years if they do not. I think that it is interesting that the more the Chinese have gotten to know the Japanese, the more nervous they have become about them. You remember what Chou told you, Mr. President.

The President: Yes, it was 180 degrees away from this position. At that time Chou said that Japan should renounce its Mutual Security Treaty with the U.S., and that we should get out of Korea. To be sure, if we would bring our troops home, it would be easier for us politically domestically.

Your analysis of Japan is very acute, Mr. Prime Minister. I find it interesting that the Chinese seem to absorb almost everyone while the Japanese seem to absorb almost no one. But I agree that a Japan left alone will become a serious threat.

Prime Minister Kirk: In the next ten years Japan will be the principal threat in Asia, after that maybe the Chinese will become the primary threat. We have found as a result of our Minister of Trade's recent visit to Peking that we were able to develop with the Chinese the theme that if you do not want Russia in Asia then you [the Chinese] should not frighten the small countries in Asia. The Chinese responded to this argument. It seems to me that if the Chinese frighten such nations as Thailand, this will invite the Soviets to come in. We told the Chinese that they could help improve stability in the area by avoiding such actions.

Secretary Corner: There are signs that the Chinese are easing up on their support for subversion in Southeast Asia.

Basic U.S. Foreign Policy Posture

The President: Given our common goals and systems of government, it should be recognized first — and we can be thankful for this — that we have no ambitions in terms of expansion. Our goal is rather to contribute to lifting the standards-of-living for all the world. This may seem like idealistic soft-headedness. But it is in all of our interest to see that the economic well-being of the nations of the world will be the dominant force that will move their leaders.

I would be less than candid if I did not take up the question of why the U.S. supports such governments as South Vietnam — in its military capability — and why the U.S. maintains forces overseas. This is no winner for the U.S. either at home or abroad. It has, however, been a political ploy for many foreign leaders to kick the U.S. around as long as the U.S. does not go home. The point I would make is that everything is based on self-interest. However, the U.S. self-interest is best served by our continuing to play a leavening role in Asia. Then governments like Japan, Indonesia, and Singapore will not feel totally alone with their neighbor to the north, and we will avoid possibly encouraging the soviets to dabble in the area.

Prime Minister Kirk: But kicking the U.S. around arose out of policies of the past. I think there might be an advantage to your withdrawing [some of your] forces from abroad. Such a reduction might give the U.S. credibility as a great power — it is not every great power that would be willing to do this.

The President: You mean in line with the policy of helping others to help themselves?

Secretary Corner: New Zealand has done this by reducing its forces in Singapore.

The President: And I want to express my appreciation for your aid to South Vietnam. But New Zealand has decided to play a role in this area. I believe that you must play a role, for if you do not someone else will.

Prime Minister Kirk: I believe that I can sometimes be helpful by saying things publicly [about the situation in Asia] that you, as a leader of a great power, cannot.

As to our forces in Singapore, we told Singapore that we would leave our troops there as long as they want us to stay. I myself doubt that the Five Power Arrangement will last more than another five or six years. I might note that Indonesia supports the Five Power Arrangement.

The President: It is well that you understand the importance of Indonesia.

As I recall, Green Island is pretty close to Indonesia. This is where I got to know New Zealanders [during World War II]. Our planes were there evacuating the wounded. The planes also brought in medical alcohol on occasion. Some of the alcohol, however, would be "liberated." We found ways of mixing this with orange juice. It made a horrible concoction. As I remember, the Australian beer that we came by there was very strong. On one occasion when an Australian pilot brought some in — we had a ball.

But seriously, going back to Indonesia — it is incredibly rich in natural resources. It is important that they also do not feel alone.

Prime Minister Kirk: And particularly with their common border with Papau-New Guinea. This new frontier could become an irritant between Australia and Indonesia. Economic development could help.

The President: But aren't we starting with a very low level of people? A good part of their population there is actually back in the Stone Age. Other nations in the world, such as India for example, may be poor but they have some history behind them

Prime Minister Kirk: Papua-New Guinea is nearing self-government.

GATT Negotiations

Prime Minister Kirk: If I might change the subject, we appreciate very much your decision to include agricultural products in the GATT round. We hope that this will help keep pressure on Japan to liberalize its import controls on agricultural products.

The President: Our interests here are parallel. But on this question of agricultural products we immediately run into a buzz-saw with the Europeans.

Prime Minister Kirk: But it seems inevitable that the European policies in this area must change. They must find a way to gear their agriculture to a constant flow of agricultural products. Again I want to say that we welcome U.S. support on this issue.

U.S. - New Zealand Cooperation in Science Research

Prime Minister Kirk: Going on to another area, we had an invitation to send some of our people to a California seminar on geothermal power. I believe that there is considerable room for U.S.-New Zealand cooperation in scientific research. We have in our country people of considerable talent in this area. Particularly in light of the energy crisis, this whole question of developing substitute sources of energy seems to me to be especially relevant at present. We would like to fit our cooperation in this area into some overall framework. We would like to explore the possibility of cooperation with you in this field.

The President: Done! We will give this high priority. We have no language and some of the other barriers between our two countries that might impede such cooperation. I didn't realize that we did not already have an agreement in this field.

Secretary Kissinger: I think that we already have some cooperation in the scientific area, but I believe the Prime Minister wants to get into new areas of scientific and technical cooperation.

The President (to the Prime Minister): You develop the proposition. We will cooperate.

Prime Minister Kirk: We could have a treaty on scientific and technical cooperation.

The President: We will have our foreign ministers work this out. Done!

South Pacific Development

Prime Minister Kirk: I would also like to point out that we are increasing our foreign aid. We are now devoting about 50 percent of this aid to the South Pacific and we plan to increase this further. The island societies of this area seem to turn to us. We have also given three-quarters of a million dollars to the South Pacific Conference in an effort to shake it out of its lethargy. We have also promoted the South Pacific Forum and the South Pacific Bureau. We are working on a South Pacific Council which would be similar in principle to the Nordic Council and would be essentially a parliamentary body.

But the U.S. is not there. If we are able to develop a South Pacific Council, we hope that we could have some form of U.S. representation. The U.S. as a Pacific power could play a useful part — in a quiet way. We are hoping for speedy changes in the living standards in the South Pacific. We hope to be able to work with them to stabilize this area. It is obviously of great interest, lying alongside Australia and to the north New Zealand, if we can establish a South Pacific Council. We may later also try to get Indonesia to join in, and to widen it in order to include Papua-New Guinea. Basically, we believe that such a parliamentary association can be a very useful supplement to the more usual inter-governmental cooperation.

The President: Yes. We have participated in similar groupings with Japan and with Europe.

Secretary Kissinger: But we have not examined this whole question yet.

Mr. Prime Minister. There is a question, for example, as to whether we should include Micronesia.

Prime Minister Kirk: A South Pacific Council might be able to help with some of the problems in Micronesia.

Secretary Kissinger: We will study the matter and will let you know through Ambassador White.

U.S.-New Zealand Cooperation in Science Research

Prime Minister Kirk: To return to the question of scientific cooperation, I believe that New Zealand has a great potential to be of assistance in this area, particularly as regards geothermal energy.

Secretary Corner: About one-third of New Zealand's energy needs are now derived from underground steam.

Ambassador White: Some here in the U.S. have sought New Zealand advice in this field.

Secretary Corner: One of our greatest exports is scientists. If we could increase research in New Zealand, we might be able to retain some of these people. I myself have even thought of the possibility of harnessing wind.

The President: Could we make use of that produced in the Senate?

In the statement we issue at the end of our talks this morning I want to give strong emphasis to cooperation in the energy field.

Prime Minister Kirk: I want to point out that in the past New Zealand scientists have also made significant contributions in the field of nuclear research.

Secretary Corner: The Prime Minister insists that in anything New Zealand does with the U.S. we pay an equal share of the expenses involved.

Prime Minister Kirk: New Zealand has produced a fair quota of scientists over the years.

Secretary Corner: We have some of the most outstanding heart surgeons, and some Americans have traveled to Wellington to avail themselves of their skills. There are areas in which we can give as well as receive.

Prime Minister Kirk: New Zealand has a high standard of education. The problem is to retain the people that our education produces. Each year we lose our best.

The President: Where to?

Prime Minister Kirk: To you here, to Australia, and to the U.K. If we find areas where we can contribute, then New Zealand also will gain.

The President: The U.S. will be most forthcoming. I assumed we were already cooperating in this area. It is in the U.S. interest to do this. Like man in the Stone Age, we never know what chemistry between persons — between Americans and Chinese, between Americans and New Zealanders — will produce a basic new idea. We welcome it.

U.S. - New Zealand Bilateral Trade

Prime Minister Kirk: Speaking of our relationship in general, aside from trade we have no complaints.

The President: I remember several years ago your predecessors asked if we could take more lambs. We increased our imports a little. Now we are asking for all we can get.

Prime Minister Kirk: What we want is a steady growth of trade.

The President: I would think that you would also want a stable market here.

Prime Minister Kirk: We must plan four to six years ahead. We do need stable markets and a stable rate of growth. I also have had our Trade Development Board consider what New Zealand might do to increase access to our market for U.S. exports. Where we can we will do so. We have considerable interest in poultry imports. A fortnight ago we increased quotas for some items. We recognize that we must buy more in order to be able to sell more.

The President: We will have a chance to talk-again at inner tonight, and I am looking forward to this.

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 1027, Presidential/HAK Memcoms, April–November 1973, HAK & Presidential [2 of 5]. Secret; Sensitive; Eyes Only. Undated talking points from Kissinger, initialed by Scowcroft and seen by the President, are ibid., Box 934, VIP Visits, New Zealand, Prime Minister Kirk, Folder 4.

42. Editorial Note 42. Editorial Note

On October 19, 1973, Secretary of State Henry Kissinger transmitted a telegram to Ambassador Marshall Green, asking him to present Australian Prime Minister Gough Whitlam a message regarding the conflict in the Middle East. The message stated, “Australia holds the presidency of the Security Council in these critical days as we continue to search for ways to bring the hostilities to an end; for this reason particularly, I want to stay closely in touch with your government as the situation evolves.” Kissinger went on to discuss his desire for a ceasefire, his concern over the Soviet airlift, and the resupply effort that the United States had initiated in response. He concluded, “I have gone to some length, Mr. Prime Minister, to describe our present policies and concerns because I believe we may yet have an opportunity in the Security Council to bring about a ceasefire that will lead to negotiations on a peace settlement.” (Telegram 207785 from the Department of State to the Embassy in Canberra, October 19, 1973, 2113Z.; National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Country Files, Far East, Box 504, Australia, January 1972–December 31, 1973.)

On October 21, Whitlam replied, “You may be assured, Mr. Secretary, of the Australian government’s determination to contribute, both within the Security Council and by any other available means, to the achievement of a ceasefire at the earliest possible moment and to the negotiation of a just and durable settlement. I look forward to continuing consultation between our two governments and their representatives in this matter.” (Telegram 5765 From the Embassy in Canberra to the Department of State, October 21, 1973, 0100Z.; Ibid.)

43. Letter From Acting Secretary of State Rush to Secretary of Defense Schlesinger, Washington, December 21, 1973. 43. Letter From Acting Secretary of State Rush to Secretary of Defense Schlesinger, Washington, December 21, 1973.1

Washington, December 21, 1973

DEPARTMENT OF STATE
WASHINGTON

The Honorable
James R. Schlesinger
Secretary of Defense

December 21, 1973

Dear Mr. Secretary:

We have become increasingly concerned, as I know you have, with certain trends in our relationships with Australia since Prime Minister Whitlam's Labor Government came to office a little over one year ago. Some rather erratic and even irresponsible Australian foreign and defense policy decisions, and leftist pressures within the Labor Party have all combined to place strains on our formerly close relationships. Clearly some of Whitlam's public remarks have been regretted immediately and some of Australia's recent policy decisions can be understood, if not excused, by the inexperience and preconceptions of a political party which had been out of office for 23 years. But if present trends are not halted, there is little question that grave damage will be done to Australian/American relationships and, in the process, to our vital interests in Australia. On the latter point, I need not convince you of the importance to the US of our several defense installations in Australia.

Against this background, I am convinced that Deputy Prime Minister and Defense Minister Lance Bernard's forthcoming visit to Washington provides an excellent opportunity to attempt to at least restrain present trends which could ultimately threaten the viability of our Australian installations.

Barnard, by all accounts, is not only close to Whitlam, but also a very positive influence on him and the Australian Cabinet with respect to US defense and foreign policy interests in Australia. Even opposition party conservatives describe him as the most reasonable member of the current government. Our own assessment is that he may in fact be our best friend in the Australian cabinet. To our further advantage, Barnard is open-minded and prepared to listen to our point of view on issues of importance to us, and to convey back to Canberra accurately (and perhaps even with sympathy) our concerns on those matters which now divide us.

Barnard is also, I understand, a man of some pride and sensitivity. Given these traits, the manner in which we handle him could determine whether his will to fight our battles in Canberra will be strengthened or weakened.

In the above circumstances, I think all of us who will meet with Barnard would be well advised to put considerable effort into educating him and through him, Whitlam and his Cabinet, on some of the strategic realities which concern us, and should concern Australia. Various officers of the Australian Government who share our worries about the current state of our relationships with that country have been generous in taking us into their confidence by offering some solid suggestions for the kind of discussion approaches which might have the most positive effect on Barnard. These are now being developed into a paper which we will provide to your staff, and to other senior US officials who will be meeting Barnard. I would, however, emphasize one point made by those who know Barnard well — the importance of recognizing Barnard's pride and sensibilities as they relate to his positions of Deputy Prime Minister and Defense Minister, and the seriousness of Barnard's desire to have as thorough as possible discussions with US officials of global, regional, and bilateral matters of concern to our two countries.

We are similarly advising other senior officials of the foregoing in connection with their own meetings with Barnard.

Sincerely,
[signed]
Kenneth Rush
Acting Secretary

1 Source: Washington National Records Center, OSD Files: FRC 330–78–0001, Australia, 091.112, 1973. Secret. On bottom of the first page “22 Dec 1973. Sec Def has seen” is stamped, Rush received this letter for his signature under a covering memorandum from Sneider dated December 20. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970–1973, POL 7 AUSTL)

44. Memorandum From W.R. Smyser of the National Security Council Staff to Secretary of State Kissinger, Washington, January 3, 1974. 44. Memorandum From W.R. Smyser of the National Security Council Staff to Secretary of State Kissinger, Washington, January 3, 1974.1

Washington, January 3, 1974

MEMORANDUM
NATIONAL SECURITY COUNCIL

ACTION

January 3, 1974

MEMORANDUM FOR: SECRETARY KISSINGER
FROM: W.R. SMYSER [WRS initialed]

SUBJECT: Ambassador Green and Australian Matters

During a meeting that Jack Froebe and I had with Marshall Green, our Ambassador to Australia, Green raised the following subjects:

Appointment to see you. Ambassador Green said he wanted very much to see you at some point during his Washington visit, which would last about a month. He wants your guidance on a number of matters relating to Australia.

U. S. attitudes on Australian gaffes. Green said that he had been reacting firmly to such Australian statements as Whitlam's recent mischaracterization of our alert and Cairns' attacks and misrepresentations regarding U.S. policy in Vietnam. Green has made some public statements. He has also made private protests and has pushed our views with Whitlam and others.

Green wants to know the depth of our concern about Australian statements, in order to be able accurately to reflect our views. At the same time, he does not believe he can boycott meetings with Australian officials to reflect U.S. displeasure.

I told Green you would certainly give him guidance if and when you saw him. If you could not see him, my feeling was that he should continue to see Australian officials but should maintain a reserved attitude and should make very clear that Australian statements are not quickly forgotten and do have an impact on our attitudes.

U.S. visitors to Australia. Green said that our policy of cancelling U.S. visits to Canberra has had some effect. There are now three more visits coming up. Assistant Secretary Ingersoll will get to Australia in mid-February as part of his tour of Asia; Deputy Secretary Rush will go there in March after the ANZUS meeting; and Admiral Gayler, CINCPAC, will probably go later in March or in April. Mr. Green thinks all these visitors can be helpful in stating our views. He thinks that Admiral Gayler's visit, which can be used to review a number of U.S.-Australian military collaboration issues, can be particularly useful. He is not inclined to cancel the visits unless the Australians come up with a new monstrosity.

Using Asian allies to weigh in. Green thinks that the Australians will often pay much more attention to criticism from Asian states, especially Indonesia and Japan, than to criticism from the U.S. For example, a recent Mainichi article voicing Japanese concern that Australia was paying more attention to the Afro-Asian bloc than to its fellow Asians had major impact in Canberra and provoked some reservations about Whitlam's flirtation with neutrality.

Green said, however, that Indonesia and Japan have in the past been reluctant to chide the Australians. I am also uncertain whether we should encourage them in this direction, though we might be able to do so discreetly should the occasion arise. If you wish, I could talk to the Japanese and you might raise it with your Indonesian channel.

Recommendations

1. That you see Ambassador Green while he is in town.

Approve [HK initialed]
Disapprove

2. That, if you do not see him, you approve my giving him the guidance cited above (that he should continue to see Australian officials but should maintain a reserved attitude and should make very clear that Australian statements are not quickly forgotten and do have an impact on our attitudes).

Approve
Disapprove

3. That you approve visits by three U. S. officials unless the Australians make another gaffe.

Rush
Approve [HK initialed]
Disapprove

Ingersoll
Approve [HK initialed]
Disapprove

Gaylor
Approve [HK initialed]
Disapprove

4. That we put something regarding Australia in your next talker with your Indonesian friends.

Approve [HK initialed]
Disapprove

5. That I also ask the Japanese to say something to the Australians if they make another misstatement.

Approve
Disapprove [HK initialed]

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 505, Country Files, Far East, Box 505, Australia, 1 January 1974–. Secret; Sensitive; Eyes, Only. Sent for action. Kissinger initialed his approval of recommendations 1, 3, and 4, and his disapproval of recommendation 5. He left recommendation 2 blank.

45. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, January 9, 1974, 11:30–1:15. 45. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, January 9, 1974, 11:30–1:15.1

Washington, January 9, 1974, 11:30–1:15

ASSISTANT SECRETARY OF DEFENSE
WASHINGTON D.C. 20301
MEMORANDUM OF CONVERSATION

SUBJECT: Secretary Schlesinger's Meeting with Deputy Prime Minister Barnard of Australia
TIME AND DATE: 1130-1315, 9 January 1974
PLACE: Secretary Schlesinger's Office - Pentagon

PARTICIPANTS:

Australian Side

Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Defence - Lance Barnard

Ambassador to the US - Sir James Plimsoll

Secretary of Defence - Sir Arthur Tange

First Assistant Secretary of Defence, Planning Div. - William B. Pritchett

Minister's Special Advisor - Mr. A. G. McGuarr

US Side

Secretary of Defense - James R. Schlesinger

Deputy Secretary of Defense - William P. Clements, Jr.

Chairman, Joint Chiefs of Staff - Admiral Thomas H. Moorer

Ambassador to Australia - Marshall Green

Acting Assistant SecDef (ISA) - VAdmiral Ray Peet

Principal Deputy ASD (I&L) - Hugh Witt

Deputy Assistant Secretary of State/EAPA - Richard Sneider

Deputy ASD (ISA) - Dennis J. Doolin

Military Assistant to SecDef - MGeneral John A. Wickham

US FACILITIES IN AUSTRALIA

(S) Minister Barnard said that he appreciated the opportunity to meet the Secretary and discuss some of our problems. He had decided that he should come to Washington to discuss US facilities in Australia. There is no question, the Minister said, of Australia's reliance on ANZUS, and the cooperation Australia has provided in the past will continue in the future. The Minister said he was speaking for the Government of Australia (GOA). As Prime Minister Whitlam has said, the alliance with the US is of very great importance, and the GOA has no intention of breaking agreements or exposing any secrets. The Minister said Australia wants to accept a greater responsibility for her own defense and not rely totally on an ally in this regard. The Minister commented favorably on the US-Soviet detente, the Vietnam cease-fire, and our improved relations with the People's Republic of China. Australia supports these developments, as they contribute to world peace.

(S) With regard to US facilities in Australia, the GOA has some internal problems, especially if the purpose of the facilities must remain secret. Mr. Barnard said that he and Prime Minister Whitlam agree that secrecy is necessary and so do the overwhelming majority of the Australian people. However, the GOA needs some assistance with regard to Northwest Cape in order to assist it in answering some remaining internal opposition. The Minister then recounted the arrangement concerning the US Naval facility at Northwest Cape, pointing out that GOA policy clearly states that a facility in Australia that derogates Australia's sovereignty is not tolerable. The Minister said that the GOA recognizes the importance of the US facilities in Australia to both countries, and noted that the proposed joint statement on Northwest Cape will enable us to get away from the situation whereby people in Australia can criticize the US installations. Secretary Schlesinger said that there is a parallel sentiment on the part of a small number of people in the US regarding the United Nations — that we should withdraw and have the United Nations Headquarters removed from New York — but we keep this sentiment down. The Secretary said that he understood our two navies were working together to meet Australia's requirements and that there is no reason why consultative arrangements cannot be worked out, although the privacy of communications must be maintained. Mr. Barnard said that the GOA agrees, provided there are adequate consultations. The Secretary and Admiral Moorer said they considered this to be a reasonable set of requests and that the consultative arrangements can be worked out. Mr. Barnard said that Australia recognizes and appreciates how much the US relies on these installations, and he assured the Secretary that the privacy of communications will be guaranteed.

(S) Minister Barnard said another matter that had embarrassed the GOA was when the US facilities in Australia were put on alert without the host government being informed. He said the GOA must be informed in the future. Secretary Schlesinger said this was a perfectly reasonable request and that it had merely been an oversight in October. Admiral Moorer told the Minister that there are five degrees of alert and that he did not consider placing US forces under DefCon 3 as going on alert, inasmuch as US forces in Southeast Asia have been on DefCon 3 since 1965. Admiral Moorer said that we will see to it that it doesn't happen again. Minister Barnard expressed his gratitude for the US assurances on this point. The Minister continued, "I don't want any possible debate in Australia about these bases. They make a significant contribution to US and Australian security and to world peace. I want to get them accepted by the public and not a subject of debate. Mr. Whitlam and I are prepared to accept responsibility for these bases." The Minister also expressed his hope that there will be no restriction on fraternization between our servicemen at Northwest Cape, adding that he considers Woomera to be a model in this regard. Secretary Schlesinger, Mr. Clements, and Admiral Moorer assured the Minister there would be no problem in this regard.

(U) Minister Barnard then asked the Secretary to endorse the joint statement on Northwest Cape. The Secretary read the draft and said he had no problem with it, and he agreed to the exchange of notes.

AUSTRALIAN POLICY

(S) Secretary Schlesinger told the Minister that he had some general questions and some specific questions and that he would like to begin with the general ones. He said that, if we look at the last 28 years, it can be said that Australia's most important national interest is to retain the support of the US. During the 1960's, there was concern with regard to the situation to the north of Australia and also with regard to Communist China's strategic weapons systems. There seems to be less concern in Australia now, even though the strategic threat is greater today. Strategic development continues, and the US provides the nuclear umbrella to counter that threat. Looking at another set of possibilities that does not involve nuclear weapons, Japan may rearm, or we may want her to rearm, because of the vulnerability of her sea lines of communication. In any event, Japan may change. We also have a more stable SEA than we had two years ago. In short, it has been a period in which there have been major changes and there are more to come. How does the GOA see the changes in the external environment Australia faces and what policy moves would the GOA take to meet these changes? Minister Barnard replied that Australia recognizes the need for her alliance with the US, especially ANZUS. Australia has to assume a greater share of the responsibility in this alliance, and, in this connection, Australia's armed forces at present are the greatest that country has ever had in peacetime. Australia has a special interest in SEA, and a very good relationship with Indonesia. Australia is providing economic and military assistance to Indonesia and Australia has a special responsibility to help Djakarta with its internal problems. Australia has maintained relations with Malaysia and Singapore; there have been some changes in Australian forces based there, but the GOA continues to support the Five-Power Defense Arrangement with economic and military aid and will continue to keep two Mirage squadrons in Malaysia and some non-combat forces in Singapore. The Mirages will remain in Malaysia until at least 1975, or longer if required, until the Malaysians acquire the air capability on their own. The GOA also supports a zone of peace and neutrality in the area, hopefully larger than ASEAN and including Indochina. Canberra's current strategic assessment is that there is no significant threat facing Australia over the next 10 years, and that period of time will be used to strengthen Australia's military capabilities for the main purpose of defending continental Australia. However, this is not an isolationist policy and Australia will keep her agreements. Australia would not want Japan to rearm at this time. The Secretary asked whether this last remark applied to ASW forces as well as nuclear capabilities. The Minister replied that it applied across the board as Australia does not want Japan "to get too near." The Secretary asked how the Minister saw the situation in SEA. Mr. Barnard said there seems to be a degree of stability that Australia would not have anticipated, but that it will be some time before area stability is realized. Secretary Schlesinger said some in the area see the following possibility: a Communist take-over in Cambodia, renewed hostilities in Vietnam, a Sino-Thai detente, increased guerrilla activity in Malaysia and increasing pressure on Singapore. If such a gloomy prognostication came to pass, what would be the GOA attitude and actions? Sir Arthur Tange said that his analysts will reassess the aforementioned strategic estimate every 12 months, but that the scenario that the Secretary described seemed unlikely in large measure because of actions taken in the area by the US. Secretary Schlesinger replied that the scenario cannot be dismissed out-of-hand. Two factors should be considered. First, the Chinese Communist elite is old — Mao is 80, Chou is 75. Second, the Sino-Soviet split has been to the advantage of the Free World. However, there is a degree of political instability in the PRC that could cause a change in Peking's present policy and lead to a Sino-Soviet rapprochement. This would dramatically alter the position of Japan and could cause a renewed Moscow-Peking-Pyongyang-Hanoi axis. Planning must be done to deal with what might happen. Although it is probable there will be some changes in the PRC's stance, a return to a pre-1960 Sino-Soviet alliance is highly unlikely. The change will be volatile. There will also be changes in Europe, but not of comparable potential volatility. The Japanese situation is an especially interesting one, as the blow of the potential embargo of petroleum products is a shock that goes to the heart of Japan's post-war approach and one that far exceeds the so-called Nixon shocks. One should recall the Japanese reaction to our August 1941 embargo. Japan will now seek new internal and external accommodations. Minister Barnard noted that Japan's problems impact on her neighbors. The Secretary said that the financial and economic implications of increased oil prices are hard to calculate but Japan will be adversely affected. We are moving into a period of instability, and in this period the economic situation will impact on all political problems. Mr. Clements said that Japan will make a more aggressive bilateral approach and attack the problems from an economic base. The Secretary said that, if Japan seeks greater cooperation/collaboration with the Middle East — in effect a quasi-Greater East Asia Co-Prosperity Sphere — this should be of great interest to Australia. There are no single, separate, strategic theaters; the world is one strategic theater. Thus, if the Russians took over the Middle East oil, our way of life would be drastically altered. Admiral Moorer noted that Japan must make basic accommodations to see that an oil crisis does not happen again. Sir Arthur asked if one of the consequences would be that Japan will expand and strengthen her Navy. The Secretary, Deputy Secretary, and Admiral Moorer all agreed that this is quite possible.

NUCLEAR POWERED WARSHIP (NPW) VISITS

(S) Secretary Schlesinger said the final topic that he wished to discuss was nuclear powered warship (NPW) visits to Australia. The US has had over 1100 years' operation of these reactors and no problems. Moreover, the need for such reactors is increasing. There is a note of obscurantism in not recognizing that NPW's are safe. It is recognized that this obscurantism developed under the previous Liberal government. Thus, it would be a propitious time for the Labour government to, reverse the previous flimsy and technically wrong position. Mr. Barnard replied that the UK had also raised this question with him. There are a number of problems the GOA has to consider. For one thing, there are State authorities and State powers that the GOA cannot interfere with. Another problem is the case before the International Court of Justice concerning the French atmospheric nuclear tests in the Pacific. That is why the GOA has delayed a decision, as to permit NPW visits at the present time may prejudice Australia's case. Also, a determination has to be made as to what Australian ports could be visited by NPW's. (There followed a general discussion of nuclear powered vessels and the fact that nuclear propulsion looks more attractive as oil prices climb.) Sir Arthur said that the fundamental problem is that Australia has not classified her berths, whereas the US has. The GOA must survey anchorages and berths throughout the country, for it is recognized that Australia is far behind the US in this regard. Minister Barnard said he sees the need to resolve this problem. He desires to see a decision made as soon as possible, but again stated the perceived problems referred to above. He promised to review the situation as soon as opportune, together with other departments in Australia who must be involved in the decision. Admiral Moorer said that nuclear power is not a nuclear weapon, and that the atomic bomb should be decoupled from nuclear power in the Australian mind. The Secretary said that it is just not a rational policy to deny a significant part of the US Navy — all US submarines, some aircraft carriers, and some escort vessels — from access to Australian ports when these forces are there in a common defense effort. The US Government faces public criticism for allowing these inhibiting factors to continue, and Australia must move as expeditiously as possible to resolve this problem. The Minister acknowledged that this problem has to be resolved. He again expressed his government's appreciation for the significant contributions of the US to Australia's security, and said that the US-Australia alliance will remain no matter what party is in power in Australia. He concluded by stating that Cockburn Sound, when completed in 1978, will unquestionably be made available to US Navy vessels.

(U) The meeting concluded at 1315 with an exchange of gifts.

Prepared by: Dennis J. Doolin [signed]
Date: January 10, 1974

Approved by: Adm. Ray Peet DepAsstSec (ISA) [signed]
Date: 23 Jan 1974

Distribution: SecDef
DepSecDef
OSD Files
Ch/JCS
CNO
RC (ISA) -2 cys
EAPA (State)
PDASD (I&L)
ASD (ISA)
PDASD (ISA)
A
AD

1 Source: Washington National Records Center, OSD Files: FRC 330–78–0011, Australia, 091.112, 1974. Secret. Prepared by Doolin and approved by Peet. The conversation took place in Schlesinger’s office. A memorandum of conversation from Schlesinger’s meeting with Marshall Green, which lasted from 9:55 until 11:05 and included discussion of Japan and U.S. facilities in Australia, is ibid.

46. Editorial Note 46. Editorial Note

On December 18, 1973, New Zealand Ambassador Lloyd White called on Richard Sneider, the Acting Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian and Pacific Affairs, to talk about the agenda for the upcoming Australia-New Zealand-United States Security Treaty (ANZUS) Council meeting in Wellington. White said that his government would wish to discuss its preliminary ideas for a South Pacific nuclear free zone. (Telegram 247025 to Wellington, December 19, 1973; National Archives, Record Group 59, Central Foreign Policy Files) Two months later, the Embassy in Wellington received instructions on this issue: “Department wishes to avoid any frontal conflict during forthcoming ANZUS meeting on issue of PM Kirk’s proposed ‘South Pacific Nuclear Free Zone.’ Consequently, if at all possible, you should seek early meeting with PM Kirk, but if necessary Foreign Secretary, in order to assure that Kirk realizes that US opposes creation of a zone in this area and hopefully to discourage him from raising it actively.” (Telegram 032376 to Wellington, February 16, 1974; ibid.)

Following the ANZUS meeting, the Department of State described the conference proceedings: “New Zealand did not raise subject of South Pacific nuclear free zone. There had been extensive speculation in local press that this would be prominent theme at meeting. However, NZ change of heart—in response to Australian and US representations—was signaled at Monday meeting of communiqué drafting committee where New Zealand reluctantly agreed to deletion any reference to subject in communiqué.” (Telegram 041029 to All East Asian and Pacific Diplomatic Posts, March 1, 1974; ibid.)

47. Telegram 1262 From the Embassy in Australia to the Department of State, March 2, 1974, 0255Z. 47. Telegram 1262 From the Embassy in Australia to the Department of State, March 2, 1974, 0255Z.1

March 2, 1974

TELEGRAM
Department of State
CANBERRA 1262

R 020255Z MAR 74
FM AMEMBASSY CANBERRA
TO SECSTATE WASHDC 2685

DEPTO 44

FOR THE SECRETARY FROM THE DEPUTY SECRETARY

E.O. 11652: GDS
TAGS: OVIP (RUSH)

SUBJ: MEETING WITH WHITLAM

1. I HAD EXTENDED LUNCH SESSION WITH PRIME MINISTER WHITLAM ON MARCH 1, AT AMBASSADOR GREEN'S RESIDENCE. AFTER EXCHANGE OF PLEASANTRIES AND SMALL TALK INTERSPERSED WITH WHITLAM'S LAUDATORY COMMENTS ON AMERICAN, WHITLAM TOOK INITIATIVE TO RAISE SUBJECT OF HIS RECENT STATEMENT ON VIETNAM BOMBING. OBVIOUSLY HE WAS THOROUGHLY AWARE OF MY PRIOR BARBED CRITICISM TO FOREIGN MINISTER WILLESEE AND AMBASSADOR SHAW. HE HAD FOR OUR SESSION THOROUGHLY PREPARED AND PERHAPS EVEN REHEARSED BRIEF, AND THROUGHOUT HIS DISCOURSE CAREFULLY, WITH CLEAR PAUSES, CHOSE HIS WORDS.

2. PURPORT OF WHITLAM BRIEF WAS CLOSEST TO AN APOLOGY THIS PROUD MAN COULD DELIVER. RECOGNIZING OUR DEEP CONCERN ABOUT HIS BOMBING STATEMENT HE POINTED OUT POSITION OPPOSING BOMBING HELD BY HIM SINCE 1967—HANDLING ME CLIPPINGS FROM 1967, PERSONALLY MARKED, ATTACKING BOMBING POLICY OF PRESIDENT JOHNSON, WHOM HE OTHERWISE GREATLY ADMIRED. BANGKOK STATEMENT WAS ACTUALLY MADE IN RESPONSE TO QUESTION AND IN PART HARKENED BACK TO '67 BOMBING. WHITLAM FURTHER ACKNOWLEDGED HIS LANGUAGE INTEMPERATE. HE CONCLUDED WITH MOST FULSOME PRAISE FOR THE "HISTORIC," SEMINAL "POLICIES OF THE PRESIDENT AND YOURSELF IN DEVELOPING DETENTE WITH SOVIET UNION AND CHINA.

3. I DID NOT LET WHITLAM OFF THE HOOK EASILY. I REVIEWED FOR HIM REASONS FOR BOMBING OF HANOI IN DECEMBER 1972 AS AGONIZING BUT ESSENTIAL MEASURE TO SECURE PARIS AGREEMENT AND RELEASE OF PRISONERS. I REHEARSED OUR OBJECTIONS TO HIS STATEMENT, STRESSING PARTICULARLY, THAT HIS CRITICAL STATEMENTS WERE EXPLOITED AND PLAYED UP BY PRESS AND FOES OF PRESIDENT TO DEBILITATE HIM, LEAVING WHITLAM'S IMAGE AS ENEMY OF PRESIDENT DESPITE HIS OTHER STATEMENTS PRAISING OUR POLICY.

4. WHITLAM REACTED SPONTANEOUSLY, REMARKING THAT "NO WONDER HE HIT THE ROOF. HE THINKS I STABBED HIM IN THE BACK." WHITLAM SHEEPISHLY DENIED THAT WAS HIS INTENTION. WHILE ACKNOWLEDGING THAT HE HAD DIFFERENCE WITH OUR POLICIES IN INDOCHINA AND PARTICULARLY CAMBODIA, HE REITERATED HIS PRAISE FOR PRESIDENT'S EFFORTS AND AGREED WHEN I MENTIONED PRESIDENT'S OVERRIDING GOAL TO ESTABLISH "GENERATION OF PEACE."

5. IN OTHER RESPECTS, WHITLAM WENT OUT OF HIS WAY TO SIGNAL HIS DESIRE FOR CLOSE RELATIONS WITH US AND ACCEPTANCE OF US POLICIES. HE REJECTED KIRK'S NUCLEAR FREE ZONE AS UNREALISTIC SHORT TERM OBJECTIVE; HE AGREED WITH MY EXTENDED DESCRIPTION OF DETENTE AND NEED TO COUNTER SOVIET EFFORTS TO ACHIEVE NUCLEAR SUPERIORITY; HE REITERATED HIS INTENTION TO OBTAIN DEFENSE INSTALLATIONS AND AVOID ANY STATEMENT DAMAGING TO THEIR SECURITY; AND HE REAFFIRMED BARNARD' S PLEDGE TO WORK OUT NEW VISITS WHILE OUTLINING LEGAL DIFFICULTIES WITH STATES ON THIS ISSUE.

6. FINAL ACT WAS EXTRAORDINARY AND LENGTHY PRESENTATION BY WHITLAM WITH FRIENDLY BUT POINTED REFERENCE TO PRESS REPORTS THAT AMBASSADOR GREEN HAD BEEN APPOINTED DELIBERATELY FOR THE PURPOSE OF "LEANING ON" WHITLAM GOVERNMENT, AND BY IMPLICATION THIS WAS FORM OF INTERFERENCE IN HIS INTERNAL AFFAIRS. HE DID, HOWEVER, EXPRESS APPRECIATION FOR KNOWLEDGEABLE CAREER AMBASSADORS, LIKE GREEN.

7. COMMENT: ALL IN ALL THIS WAS EXTRAORDINARY PERFORMANCE BY WHITLAM. HE HAS FULLY COMPREHENDED OUR SIGNALS AND HAS BEEN SHAKEN BY THEM. HE HAS OFFERED A FULL-SCALE TRUCE AND IS PREPARED TO FALL IN LINE IF WE DO LIKEWISE. HE HAD NOT UNDERSTOOD DOMESTIC EXPLOITATION OF HIS CRITICISM IN US WHICH HE READILY RECOGNIZED SEEMED TO REINFORCE HIS DETERMINATION TO CALL A TRUCE. THERE HAVE BEEN OTHER RECENT INDICATIONS OF WHITLAM'S FRIENDLY LINE, NOT ONLY AT ANZUS BUT FROM BARNARD AND WILLESEE AND FROM SUDDEN EASING IN PAST FEW WEEKS OF EMBASSY CONTACT WITH WHITLAM INNER CAMP OF ADVISORS. WITH WHITLAM, ONE CAN NEVER AFFORD TO BREATH EASILY; HE HAD A SELF-ACKNOWLEDGED TEMPTATION TO MAKE THE ILL-CONSIDERED QUIP AND HE HAS LONG-FELT DISAGREEMENTS WITH US ON INDOCHINA POLICY. BUT, HE SEEMS TO BE GOING TO GREAT LENGTHS, FOR HIM, TO MAKE "HIS PEACE" WITH US. I WOULD ADVISE WE GIVE HIM THE OPPORTUNITY TO PROVE HIS INTENTIONS.

RUSH

1 Source: Library of Congress, Manuscript Division, Kissinger Papers, Box CL 105, Australia, March–August, 1974. Secret; Cherokee; Nodis.

48. Minutes of the Acting Secretary of State’s Staff Meeting, Washington, June 14, 1974, 3:10 p.m. 48. Minutes of the Acting Secretary of State’s Staff Meeting, Washington, June 14, 1974, 3:10 p.m.1

Washington, June 14, 1974

THE ACTING SECRETARY'S PRINCIPALS' AND REGIONALS' STAFF MEETING - FRIDAY, JUNE 14, 1974, 3:10 P.M.

PRESENT:

THE ACTING SECRETARY — MR. SISCO

AMBASSADOR BROWN

MR. SONNENFELDT

AMBASSADOR MCCLOSKEY

AMBASSADOR INGERSOLL

AMBASSADOR EASUM

AMBASSADOR ANDERSON

MR. HYLAND

MR. LORD

MR. MAW

MR. SPRINGSTEEN

MR. SOBER

MR. HARTMAN

MR. ENDERS

MR. KUBISCH

[Omitted here is material unrelated to Australia.]

MR. INGERSOLL: On Australia, we have a considerable concern over the new government and its Deputy Prime Minister, Cairns. He won the Deputy Prime Ministership by a very large margin over Barnard, who was the former Deputy Prime Minister. In fact, the whole shift of the government seems to be more to the left. Barnard was moved from I think second to tenth in the voting. Other members close to Whitlam were also down-graded. And it seems as if Cairns and the left wing of the ALP have become much stronger.

Now, nobody has been able to determine that Cairns is a communist — although he has sided with Hanoi and Peking in many issues. He has said unequivocally that all foreign military installations should be removed from the country. And he wants to disband ANZUS. So that we have a possible security problem with Cairns and some of his — the Deputy Prime Minister of Defense also is a leftist, a fellow named Bill Morrison. And we have a concern about him.

We have discussed this with Sir Arthur Tang, who is the top bureaucrat in the Defense Ministry, before the election even took place, because we were concerned that it might happen, and what that would do to our security relationships, intelligence relationships, with Australia. He believes — and I think he discussed this with Whitlam, although we are not sure — that there would be no reason for Cairns to be cleared for much of this intelligence, even if Whitlam were out of the country; that Whitlam would be operating from wherever he is, rather than having Cairns have access to these sensitive matters. This we are not sure of. And we would have to get, I think, some concrete assurance from Whitlam to make sure in the future.

Frankly, the advice from Canberra and also from our desk here is that we should be very careful about upsetting our relationship with the Labor Government, because if we publicly or in some way so that the word became public would indicate that we have concerns about Cairns, or the security of our intelligence information, that the general Australian public would react unfavorably against us. Now we have a favorable image in Australia. But it might go against us if there became a news media furor over our trying to influence the Australian Government in any way with respect to their defense or security issues. And we are now studying just what we would recommend in our relationship in the near future. We just don't want to move fast on it and don't have any recommendation right now.

MR. SISCO: How are they doing economically, Bob?

MR. INGERSOLL: They are doing very well economically, except for inflation. They have a substantial inflation of about 15 percent, which is even higher than ours. This is the issue that really I think caused people to think that Whitlam might be overthrown, or the Labor Government might be overthrown. Actually their majority is half of what it was before in the Lower House, and the Upper House has not been decided yet. They have a definite 20 out of 60 seats, and they might get 30. But we are not sure yet, because it is not finally decided — in two different districts.

But we cannot count on the Labor Government being overthrown, even though they are in a weaker position than they were before. They may be around for another three years.

MR. SISCO: Then the election on the whole was as close as everybody predicted.

MR. INGERSOLL: Oh, yes. But it went the wrong way.

MR. SISCO: Went the other way.

Any questions?

MR. INGERSOLL: Bill, you may have some comment on this.

MR. HYLAND: This was discussed yesterday at the United States Intelligence Board. They are starting a survey of possible relocation of two of the projects there on the assumption that we might be asked out. And it would require a tremendous lead time, a lot more money.

MR. SISCO: But do you think there is a serious risk that we will be asked out? I understand the security problem. But does this fellow — does this carry this much clout?

MR. INGERSOLL: Well, Whitlam made a statement before the Parliament was dissolved, saying that they wanted to eventually phase out foreign military installations. Now, the statement that he read had been changed by him personally from what the Foreign Office gave him. We ran this down. And he personally changed the statement which they said — well, the first part of it was innocuous. But the second part, he deliberately put in that they were going to eventually phase these out.

Now, we haven't been able to get to him to find out exactly what he had in mind. But he did this, they tell us, deliberately to prevent the left-wing people from opposing him. He had to keep his leadership in the party. And he had to make such a statement, so they say. But he has it now on public record. And we did get sort of a withdrawal from Barnard to Marshall Green. But it was never public. So that public statement still stands. And we think this is the way Whitlam believes, and certainly Cairns has made many statements of this type.

MR. SISCO: And the Foreign Minister now is really down-graded in the hierarchy. And certainly the people in the Foreign Ministry — we all know them as you do, and they are all well-oriented, and they want to be very helpful. Which really leads me to ask this question. Should we, among other things, as we look at this situation, be considering how we, as a government, at the upper reaches, really get at Whitlam? Because he is the man that is calling the shots. And we have got, I think, very good contact at the Foreign Ministers level. And I am sure that Marshall has access to Whitlam whenever he wants. But there are, among the things that we ought to consider, things we ought to be considering as to how we get at Whitlam directly. Because I suspect we are going to have to deal with this fellow for a long time.

MR. INGERSOLL: He may be over here for the General Assembly and he may not. And he may not come to Washington even if he is. But I think we should make an effort to get close to him.

MR. HYLAND: The first issue really is, if Cairns asks to be briefed, or Whitlam asks that Cairns be briefed, the State Department is going to have to make the decision whether to brief him, or not, and how far they can go.

MR. SISCO: With all sorts of political ramifications — this fellow will make it an absolute major issue in those circumstances. I would suspect there may be a way to brief him judiciously, if I can put it that way. I would guess that that would be the way to finesse this.

MR. INGERSOLL: Sir Arthur Tang says Whitlam sad Cairns will not have to have clearance. But we are not sure whether this is going to pertain.

MR. INGERSOLL: You know, for me, who knows the Australia of World War II, having lived there for two years, to me these political movements are almost incomprehensible. It is a different Australia, completely, from the two years I spent there.

MR. INGERSOLL: You can see how close it is, though. The Australians are split over the issue, too.

MR. SISCO: Sure.

[Omitted here is material unrelated to Australia.]

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Transcripts of Secretary of State Kissinger’s Staff Meetings, 1973–1977, Entry 5177, Box 3. Secret. At the June 21 meeting, Hummel said that EA had changed its attitude toward Cairns’ election: “we think that the problem is really not our problem to solve. For one reason, we do not in fact give clearances for individuals in the Australian Government for the sensitive intelligence and defense installations. The Australian Government does that itself and tells us afterwards. So it is not up to us to clear or not clear Mr. Cairns. The problem is really the Prime Minister’s problem to solve. And I think this is the proper and mature approach. So that we don’t tear down the relationships we have by arbitrary action on our part, so that we don’t engage in spooky fiddling with the situation, in which we might get caught—in some of the other proposals that have been made. They are logical to consider, but we think not logical to carry out.” (Minutes of Under Secretary Sisco’s Staff Meeting, June 21, 3 p.m.; Ibid., Box 4)

49. National Security Study Memorandum 204, Washington, July 1, 1974. 49. National Security Study Memorandum 204, Washington, July 1, 1974.1

Washington, July 1, 1974

THE WHITE HOUSE
WASHINGTON
July 1, 1974

National Security Study Memorandum 204

MEMORANDUM FOR
The Acting Secretary of State
The Secretary of Defense
The Director of Central Intelligence

SUBJECT: U.S. Policy Toward Australia

The President has directed a review of U.S. policy toward Australia in the light of recent changes in the Labor Government. The study should examine the impact of these changes on basic U.S. objectives toward Australia, particularly in the political-security area. It should define and evaluate policy options for giving effect to the resulting objectives.

In particular, the study should deal with the following issues: —The implications of changes in the Australian Government for future relations between Australia and the United States.

—The prospects for keeping U.S. defense installations in Australia, and the policy options for trying to prolong their existence there.

—The alternatives for relocating essential existing U.S. security functions outside of Australia, and the impact on our alliance relationship of doing so.

— The prospects for locating additional U.S. defense installations in Australia, and the policy options for trying to do so.

—The risks involved in continued sharing of intelligence with Australia, the alternative means for reducing these risks, and the impact on our alliance with Australia of curtailing or ending such intelligence sharing.

—The prospects for growing divergence between Australia and U.S. policy in Asia and elsewhere, and the alternative means for minimizing the potential damage of such divergences to our alliance relationship.

The study should be prepared by the NSC Interdepartmental Group for East Asia, and should be submitted no later than July 15, 1974, for consideration by the Senior Review Group.

[Richard Kennedy signed for]
Henry A. Kissinger
cc: The Chairman, Joint Chiefs of Staff

1 Source: Library of Congress, Manuscript Division, Kissinger Papers, Container CL 316, National Security Council, National Security Memoranda, Studies, June 1973–September 1974. Secret; Sensitive; Nodis. Hummel, the Acting Chairman of the Interdepartmental Group for East Asian and Pacific Affairs, sent Kissinger the response to NSSM 204 on August 5, 1974. The study recommended preservation of the ANZUS alliance, encouragement of Australia’s stabilizing role as a regional power, and encouragement of “Australian foreign policies that harmonize with, rather than undercut, those of the US.” The study also advocated maintenance of US access to defense installations in Australia and careful regard for political pressure that may require their eventual relocation. The study is attached to a memorandum on NSSM 204 from Smyser to Kissinger, August 22, in the Ford Library, NSC Institutional Files (H-Files), Box H–12, Institutional Files, Meetings (IFM), SRG Meeting, August 15, 1974, Australia, NSSM 204 [1]) There is no evidence that the SRG met to discuss NSSM 204.

50. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, August 1, 1974, 5 p.m. 50. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, August 1, 1974, 5 p.m.1

Washington, August 1, 1974

[text not declassified in time for publication]

1 Source: Ford Library, National Security Adviser, NSC Staff for East Asia & Pacific Affairs, Convenience Files, Box 1, Australia, February–September 1974 [1]. Top Secret; Sensitive. The meeting took place in the White House.

51. Telegram 6178 From the Embassy in Australia to the Department of State, September 20, 1974, 0607Z. 51. Telegram 6178 From the Embassy in Australia to the Department of State, September 20, 1974, 0607Z.1

September 20, 1974

TELEGRAM
Department of State
CANBERRA 6178

P 200607Z SEP 74

FM AMEMBASSY CANBERRA
TO SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 4116

CANBERRA 6178

E.O. 11652: GDS
TAGS: PFOR, AS, US

SUBJECT: WHITLAM MEETING WITH PRESIDENT
REF: STATE 204300

1. MEETING BETWEEN PRESIDENT AND PRIMIN WHITLAM OCCURS AT A TIME WHEN US-AUSTRALIAN RELATIONS HAVE GREATLY IMPROVED SINCE END OF 1972 WHEN LABOR CAME INTO POWER. WHAT ISSUES THERE ARE IN OUR RELATIONS ARE MUTED THESE DAYS, PARTLY BECAUSE OF AUSTRALIA'S INTERNAL PREOCCUPATIONS (INFLATION AND UNEMPLOYMENT) AND BECAUSE OF WHITLAM'S MATURING VIEWS ON INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS, INCLUDING US-AUSTRALIAN RELATIONS.

2. WHITLAM'S PRINCIPAL AIM IN WASHINGTON WILL BE TO ESTABLISH THE VERY BEST PERSONAL AND OFFICIAL RELATIONS WITH THE PRESIDENT AND HIS ADMINISTRATION AND HE WILL BE INTERESTED IN GAINING INSIGHTS INTO THE PRESIDENT'S ATTITUDES TOWARDS AUSTRALIA AND TOWARD THIRD COUNTRY PROBLEMS WHERE US AND AUSTRALIA HAVE A MAJOR STAKE.

3. WHITLAM IS LIKELY TO RAISE, IN THE CONTEXT OF HIS DESIRE TO MAINTAIN CLOSE US-AUSTRALIAN COOPERATION IN WORLD AFFAIRS, THE IMPORTANCE HE PERSONALLY ATTACHES TO ANZUS AND TO CERTAIN US FACILITIES IN AUSTRALIA, WHICH ARE NOW BEING PLACED ON A MORE FULLY JOINT US-AUSTRALIAN RESPONSIBILITY BASIS. HE MAY PROVIDE SOME STRONG PERSONAL ORAL ASSURANCES ON HIS CONTINUING SUPPORT FOR THESE FACILITIES.

4. WHITLAM WILL ACKNOWLEDGE THAT US AND AUSTRALIAN POSITIONS ON THIRD COUNTRY ISSUES (NOTABLY RE INDOCHINA) AND NOT ALWAYS THE SAME, BUT DIFFERENCES ARE NEGLIGIBLE COMPARED TO AREAS OF FULL AGREEMENT AND COOPERATION. HE MAY SAY THAT HE WILL GREATLY WELCOME IMPROVED CONSULTATION ON ISSUES OF MUTUAL CONCERN AND THAT, FOR HIS PART, HE WILL DO WHAT HE CAN TO AVOID COMPLICATING OUR PROBLEMS WHEN AND IF WE SHOULD HAVE DIFFERENCES OF VIEWPOINTS. (THIS MIGHT BE HIS INDIRECT WAY OF TRYING TO SAY THAT HE WILL NOT INDULGE IN THE KIND OF GRATUITOUS REMARKS THAT HAVE OCCASIONALLY FILED OUR RELATIONS SINCE ALP CAME INTO POWER, BUT NOT FOR FIVE MONTHS NOW.)

5. AS TIME PROVIDES, WHITLAM WILL WANT TO GET INTO SPECIFIC SUBJECTS OF KEEN INTEREST TO GOA, SUCH AS NUCLEAR PROLIFERATION (INDIAN EXPLOSION SHOCKED AUSTRALIA); INDIAN OCEAN (IS THERE SOME WAY US AND USSR CAN AGREE ON RESTRAINTS AND AVOID ESCALATORY BUILD-UP?); PRESIDENT'S TRIP TO JAPAN AND HOW PRESIDENT SEES JAPAN MOVING IN WORLD AFFAIRS; PRESIDENT'S VIEWS OF US-USSR RELATIONS AS WELL AS US-CHINESE RELATIONS AND PROSPECTS IN SOUTHEAST ASIA, INCLUDING INDOCHINA.

6. THE PRESIDENT SHOULD MENTION HIS WARM REGARD FOR AUSTRALIA AND AUSTRALIANS (ANYTHING PERSONAL HERE WILL BE MOST APPRECIATED, SUCH AS WARTIME EXPERIENCES, ETC.) AND HIS HIGH HOPES FOR US-AUSTRALIAN RELATIONS. THE PRESIDENT WILL NATURALLY WISH TO COVER THE ESSENTIALITY OF CONTINUED COOPERATION BETWEEN AUSTRALIA AND THE US IN MAINTAINING PRESENT JOINT FACILITIES, DEFENSE AND INTELLIGENCE SHARING AND ANZUS RELATIONS GENERALLY. HE MIGHT NOTE THAT ANZUS HAS IN MANY WAYS BEEN THE LEAST CONTROVERSIAL AND MOST NATURAL OF OUR INTERNATIONAL ALLIANCES.

7. THE PRESIDENT MIGHT POINT OUT THE GROWING IMPORTANCE OF US-AUSTRALIAN COOPERATION, ESPECIALLY IN AREAS OF WORLDWIDE CONCERN WHERE US AND AUSTRALIAN RESOURCES WILL PLAY AN EVEN MORE SIGNIFICANT ROLE. HE MIGHT STRESS HIS DESIRE FOR THE BEST IN THE WAY OF FRANK CONSULTATIONS AND EXCHANGES, FRANKLY ADMITTING THAT THESE HAVE NOT ALWAYS BEEN THE BEST, BUT EXPRESSING HIS FIRM INTENTION TO SEE THAT THEY IMPROVE.

8. THE PRESIDENT MIGHT ALSO FIND OCCASION (IF WHITLAM HAS NOT COVERED IT) TO SAY THAT, WHILE DIFFERENCES ARE TO BE EXPECTED BETWEEN EVEN SUCH GOOD FRIENDS AS AUSTRALIA AND THE US, HE WOULD HOPE THAT THESE DIFFERENCES COULD BE TALKED OUT QUIETLY AND FRANKLY AND WORKED OUT IN SUCH A WAY THAT NEITHER COUNTRY BY ITS WORDS OR ACTIONS WOULD UNNECESSARILY COMPLICATE THE PROBLEMS OF THE OTHER.

9. THE PRESIDENT MIGHT ASK WHITLAM FOR HIS VIEWS ON THE FUTURE OF PAPUA NEW GUINEA AND OF AUSTRALIAN-INDONESIAN RELATIONS. THESE ARE SUBJECTS OF GREAT MOMENT AND INTEREST TO AUSTRALIA, WHERE WHITLAM IS LIKELY TO SPEAK FRANKLY AND INFORMATIVELY. CERTAINLY HE WILL APPRECIATE BEING ASKED.

10. THE ELEMENT OF FRANKNESS WILL BE PARTICULARLY APPRECIATED BY WHITLAM, AND I AM SURE HE WILL PROTECT CONFIDENCES. SECRETARY KISSINGER'S FORTHRIGHTNESS IN HIS RECENT MEETING WITH AMBASSADOR SHAW WAS DEEPLY APPRECIATED HERE BY THE VERY FEW AUSTRALIANS WHO WERE PRIVY TO SHAW'S REPORT ON THIS PRIVILEGED CONVERSATION.

11. FINALLY, AND ALMOST INEVITABLY, WHITLAM WILL EXTEND A GENUINELY CORDIAL INVITATION FOR THE PRESIDENT TO VISIT AUSTRALIA WHENEVER THAT MIGHT BE POSSIBLE. GREEN

1 Source: National Archives, Record Group 59, Central Foreign Policy Files. Confidential; Priority; Exdis.

52. Editorial Note 52. Editorial Note

Australian Prime Minister Gough Whitlam visited Washington on October 4, 1974. In anticipation of that visit, Secretary of State Henry Kissinger sent briefing material to President Gerald Ford, which stated that Whitlam’s defiance of U.S. foreign policy reflected emerging Australian nationalism and a sense of security that détente had amplified. It further described how U.S.-Australian relations had suffered in the last six months due to Whitlam’s public challenge to the future of U.S. defense bases in Australia, followed soon thereafter by the election of Jim Cairns to the position of Deputy Prime Minister. The briefing memorandum added that relations had recently improved, and that Whitlam now indicated he would not press for the early removal of U.S. bases. (Ford Library, National Security Adviser, Presidential Country Files for East Asia and the Pacific, Box 1, Australia [2])

On October 5, 1974 at 11 a.m., Whitlam visited the White House and met with Ford. The two leaders did not discuss serious problems. Ford said, “We are grateful for all the good relations we have with you. I want you to know the United States Government’s position on foreign policy will be the same as it has been. I always believed in the policy because it is good. We are on the right track on relations with the Soviets and Chinese. We will remain strong in NATO and we want a presence, in a constructive way, in your part of the world. Our relations with Australia are part of that worldwide policy.” Neither side raised the issue of American defense facilities in Australia. (Memorandum of Conversation, October 5, 1974; ibid., Memoranda of Conversation, Box 6)

53. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, February 7, 1975, 1600–1645. 53. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, February 7, 1975, 1600–1645.1

Washington, February 7, 1975, 1600–1645

OFFICE OF THE ASSISTANT SECRETARY OF DEFENSE
WASHINGTON, D.C. 20301

3 March 1975
In reply refer to: 1-35059/75

MEMORANDUM OF CONVERSATION

SUBJECT: Meeting between US Ambassador to Australia, Marshall Green, and Secretary of Defense Schlesinger (U)

Participants

Secretary of Defense James R. Schlesinger

US Ambassador to Australia, Marshall Green

Military Assistant to the Secretary of Defense, Major General John Wickham

Director, East Asia & Pacific Region, OASD/ISA, RADM William J. Crowe

Time: 1600-1645, 7 February 1975
Place: Secretary Schlesinger's Office, Pentagon 1. (S) After some initial pleasantries, Ambassador Green made a few comments about the Australian Prime Minister, Mr. Whitlam. When Whitlam came into office he had grave reservations about the U.S. bases, but has gradually come to appreciate the importance of these installations not only to the U.S. and Australia, but also to world peace. This was confirmed this week by Whitlam's public and spirited defense of the U.S. presence. Significantly, Minister Cairns has not insisted on being cut in on the details of these activities.

2. (S) Mention was made of the Labor Party's call for opening a PRG information office in Australia. Green believes that implementing this decision will take some time and that he may be able to prolong it indefinitely. In any event, he considers this an important but not vital issue.

3. (TS) Secretary Schlesinger expressed the opinion that U.S. installations would be allowed to remain in Australia as long as Whitlam is in charge. Green agreed, with two exceptions: (1) If Minister Cairns ever became head of the Labor Party, the U.S. would find it difficult to stay; (2) if current investigations in the U.S. became linked with Australia, the resulting storm might shorten our stay. A brief discussion ensued on the management of Pine Gap and there was general agreement that the arrangement should remain as is. If a change was desired, the Government of Australia should be consulted first. The Ambassador doubted that one year would be sufficient time to relocate and Secretary Schlesinger said that two years was more realistic. Green was relatively confident that he could arrange a two-year period if necessary.

4. (S) The Ambassador then proceeded to review the political picture. There is a good possibility that the opposition could bring down the government in the spring and given the country's current mood, the ALP could be turned out. However, the country is experiencing profound economic problems and the Liberals may not feel that it is a propitious time to assume office. From the U.S. perspective, we are probably better off if Labor stays in office a respectable period. If the Labor Party was defeated, Whitlam might fall and Cairns replace him as the head of the party. It is unlikely that the opposition could solve the many pressing problems and when Labor returned it could be a disaster for the United States. In general, the U.S. is better off if the two parties alternate in power at respectable intervals.

5. (S) By and large, the game is played differently today than when Green went to Canberra. His initial instructions were to be hardnosed. Now, however, the approach has softened considerably. Despite some irritants in the relationship, it is clear that Australia is on our side on most important issues (nuclear proliferation, cartels, oil prices, food production, etc.). Green heartily recommends that we play down lesser subjects (e.g., PRO, Diego Garcia, law of war, etc.) in order to keep the focus on major problems. To do otherwise generates controversy and diverts attention from our vast common interests. Therefore, we should be considering priorities and put our emphasis on the positive aspects of the relationship. Secretary Schlesinger commented that as long as they behave, we should also.

6. (S) The Ambassador briefly sketched Australia's economic problems and pointed out that their attitude toward the U.S. improved with hard times. During a recession they are more occupied with internal problems, welcome outside capital and have less resources to devote to defense — consequently, they better appreciate the U.S. security umbrella.

7. (S) The Ambassador closed this part of the discussion by stressing that what happened in Washington would have a lot to do with the future. We are presently muting the issues that divide us; we could just as easily heat up the crucible at any time, either accidentally or intentionally. In essence, he currently advises that we make every effort to keep a low profile.

8. (S) Secretary Schlesinger asked about nuclear powered warship visits. The Ambassador pointed out that most of the major Australian objections seemed to have been accommodated and that in his opinion it is time to raise the issue again with Mr. Barnard. The Ambassador suggested that we request clearance for a nuclear surface ship visit during the Coral Sea celebration (second week of May). He further recommended Fremantle (adjacent to Perth) as a suitable port. The Secretary commented, "Let's push that."

9. (S) The conversation turned to Diego Garcia. According to the Ambassador, the Indian nuclear explosion somewhat sobered the Australian leaders and we now hear less rhetoric about big power involvement in the Indian Ocean. The Australians will follow the Indonesian lead, but unfortunately the Indonesian leaders are not saying publically what they tell us privately. In the Ambassador's opinion, the best course for Whitlam and his deputies is to keep quiet on the subject and he believes that we will hear less and less. In turn, it is to our advantage to keep them informed of what the Soviets are doing in the Indian Ocean.

Memorandum of Conversation
Prepared by: RADM W.J. Crowe
Approved by: [Crowe signed]
Director, East Asia & Pacific Reg. Date: 3 March 1975

1 Source: Washington National Records Center, OSD Files: FRC 330–78–0058, Australia, 091.112, 1975. Top Secret. Drafted and approved by Crowe. The conversation took place in Schlesinger’s office.

54. Telegram 97105 From the Department of State to the Embassy in Australia, April 26, 1975, 0054Z. 54. Telegram 97105 From the Department of State to the Embassy in Australia, April 26, 1975, 0054Z.1

April 26, 1975

TELEGRAM
Department of State
097105

P R 260054Z APR 75

FM SECSTATE WASHDC
TO AMEMBASSY CANBERRA PRIORITY
AMEMBASSY WELLINGTON PRIORITY
INFO AMEMBASSY BANGKOK
AMEMBASSY SINGAPORE
AMEMBASSY KUALA LUMPUR
AMEMBASSY SEOUL
USMISSION GENEVA
USMISSION USUN NEW YORK
AMEMBASSY VIENTIANE
AMEMBASSY JAKARTA
AMCONSUL PORT MORESBY
AMEMBASSY LONDON
AMEMBASSY PARIS
AMEMBASSY MANILA
AMEMBASSY TOKYO
CINCPAC HONOLULU HI

STATE 097105

E.O. 11652: GDS
TAGS: AS NZ, US, ANZUS

SUBJECT: ANZUS COUNCIL MEETING

CINCPAC ALSO FOR POLAD

1. TWENTY-FOURTH MEETING OF ANZUS COUNCIL WAS HELD IN WASHINGTON APRIL 24 AND 25. LEADERS OF DELEGATIONS WERE FOREIGN MINISTER WILLESEE, NEW ZEALAND LABOR MINISTER FAULKNER, AND US DEPUTY SECRETARY OF STATE INGERSOLL, WHO CHAIRED THE THREE SESSIONS. SECRETARY KISSINGER PARTICIPATED IN ONE SESSION AND IN THE RECEPTION HOSTED BY THE US ON APRIL 24.

2. COUNCIL SESSIONS WERE CHARACTERIZED BY FRANK DISCUSSION OF A WIDE RANGE OF ISSUES, WITH SPECIAL EMPHASIS ON THE IMPACT OF EVENTS IN INDOCHINA, ESPECIALLY ON THAILAND AND KOREA AND ON SOVIET AND PRC PERCEPTIONS OF US. OTHER DELS AGREED WITH US POSITION THAT THERE WAS NO POINT IN THEIR RECOGNIZING PRG NOW, SINCE GOVERNMENT OF SOUTH VIET-NAM ITSELF IN PROCESS OF EXPLORING OPTIONS FOR THE FUTURE. AUSTRALIAN AND NEW ZEALAND DELS SAID THEY FOUND OUR ASSESSMENT OF PROSPECTS FOR THAILAND MORE PESSIMISTIC THAN THEIR OWN.

3. US SIDE MADE IT CLEAR THAT US IS NOT RPT NOT WITHDRAWING FROM ASIA/PACIFIC REGION, THAT IT INTENDS TO CONTINUE PLAYING MAJOR ROLE THERE, AND THAT ITS NEED FOR CONTINUING ACCESS TO PACIFIC AND INDIAN OCEANS FOR STRATEGIC MOBILITY IS HEIGHTENED DURING TIMES OF POLITICAL UNCERTAINTY. AUSTRALIANS REITERATED DESIRE FOR AGREEMENT BETWEEN US AND USSR ON LIMITING FORCES IN INDIAN OCEAN. ON OTHER HAND, NEW ZEALANDERS CITED INCREASED SOVIET SHIP VISITS TO SOUTH PACIFIC AS A MATTER OF SOME CONCERN. WHILE AUSTRALIAN SIDE SAID IT PLANNED LEAVE SEATO AND FPDA AS THEY ARE, NEW ZEALANDERS INDICATED THEY ARE CURRENTLY THINKING OF WITHDRAWING FORCES FROM FPDA IN ABOUT TWO YEARS.

4. AUSTRALIANS AND NEW ZEALANDERS EXPRESSED CONFIDENCE THAT US WOULD BOUNCE BACK FROM INDOCHINA EXPERIENCE. FAULKNER THOUGHT THAT DETENTE HAS NOT LIVED UP TO PROMISE, AND THAT ARGUMENT COULD BE MADE IT HAS WEAKENED WESTERN ALLIANCES. US SIDE NOTED THAT WITH REMOVAL OF VN AS FOCAL POINT, HOPEFULLY US COULD RETURN TO RATIONAL AID PROGRAM, BUT THAT FEWER RESOURCES MIGHT BE AVAILABLE. US SIDE STATED THAT OF ALL AREAS, MOST PROFOUND EFFECT OF INDOCHINA EVENTS HAS BEEN FELT IN KOREA; JAPAN SO FAR HAS NOT ENGAGED IN FUNDAMENTAL REASSESSMENT.

5. BOTH NPW ISSUE AND SOUTH PACIFIC NUCLEAR FREE ZONE WERE DISCUSSED. NEW ZEALANDERS STATED THAT NPW ISSUE GIVES THEM POLITICAL DIFFICULTY BEFORE ELECTIONS THIS YEAR, AND THAT GONZ NOT IN POSITION TO MAKE DECISION AT THIS TIME BUT HOPE TO DO SO BY END OF YEAR. NEW ZEALANDERS ALSO SAID THAT GONZ COMMITTED TO BEGIN WORKING TOWARD ESTABLISHMENT OF SPNFZ, BUT DID NOT BELIEVE PROPOSAL WOULD GO AS FAR AS TO EMBARRASS ALLIES. US SIDE ASKED FOR MOST COMPLETE CONSULTATION BEFORE GONZ GOES PUBLIC WITH ANY PROPOSAL. NEW ZEALAND SIDE SAID THIS WELL UNDERSTOOD, BUT THAT GONZ MUST BE "SEEN TO BE MOVING" TOWARD THIS IDEAL. GONZ FONSEC CORNER SAID NEW ZEALAND PLANS INTRODUCE RESOLUTION AT NEXT UNGA ASKING FOR STUDY OF SPNFZ.

6. DURING SESSION ON REGIONAL COOPERATION, NEW ZEALAND PROPOSED A BROADENING OF THE PURPOSES OF THE ANZUS ALLIES BEYOND MILITARY SECURITY TO COOPERATION FOR THE ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT OF OTHER STATES IN THE REGION. NEW ZEALANDERS DID NOT ENVISION ANY NEW ORGANIZATIONAL FORMS, BUT RATHER A COMMON APPROACH. NEW ZEALANDERS FELT THAT US POLICY IN ASIA FOR PAST 10 YEARS HAS OVER-EMPHASIZED MILITARY ELEMENT, AND THAT TIME HAS COME FOR DIFFERENT BALANCE. AT ONE POINT, FAULKNER SPOKE OF DESIRABILITY OF A QUOTE MARSHALL PLAN FOR ASIA UNQUOTE. AFTER NOTING OUR MAJOR PROGRAMS OF ECONOMIC ASSISTANCE, US SIDE EXPRESSED READINESS DISCUSS THIS THROUGH NORMAL DIPLOMATIC CHANNELS, BUT ADDED THAT WE SHOULD NOT LOSE SIGHT OF PRIMARY PURPOSE OF ANZUS.

7. AUSTRALIAN SIDE SAID PROMPT ACTION NEEDED IF NPT IS TO SURVIVE; NOTED LIKELY CRITICISM OF VERTICAL PROLIFERATION AT REVIEW CONFERENCE AND SAID RESTRAINT BY GREAT POWERS WOULD ENCOURAGE OTHERS; SAID THRESHOLD TEST BAN NOT EFFECTIVE ARMS CONTROL MEASURE AND THAT COMPREHENSIVE TEST BAN DESIRABLE; REVIVED PROPOSAL FOR INTERNATIONAL PNE SERVICE; AND RAISED POSSIBILITY THAT NUCLEAR WEAPONS STATES DECLARE THEY WOULD NOT USE NUCLEAR WEAPONS AGAINST NON-NUCLEAR WEAPONS STATES. NEW ZEALAND GENERALLY SUPPORTED AUSTRALIAN POSITION. US SIDE REBUTTED WITH STANDARD ARGUMENTS.

8. ON ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENTS, NEW ZEALAND SIDE NOTED THAT WHILE CURRENT PICTURE NOT BRIGHT, IT COULD BE MUCH WORSE, AND THERE ARE ENCOURAGING SIGNS OF INTERNATIONAL COOPERATION. FAULKNER AND CORNER SAID THAT "NEW ECONOMIC ORDER" SHOULD BE TAKEN SERIOUSLY, THAT IT REQUIRES NEW WAY OF LOOKING AT ECONOMIC RELATIONSHIPS, AND THAT NEW ZEALAND FEARS THREAT AT GROWING CONFRONTATION BETWEEN UNDERDEVELOPED WORLD AND INDUSTRIALIZED COUNTRIES, ESPECIALLY US. AUSTRALIAN SIDE (SHAW) POINTED TO DIFFERENCE OF EMPHASIS BETWEEN AUS/NZ ON ONE HAND AND US ON OTHER; AUSTRALIA HAD SENSE OF URGENCY THAT UNDERDEVELOPED WORLD HAVE GREATER SHARE OF TRADE AND WEALTH. US SIDE EXPRESSED CONCERN AT EFFECT OF WIDELY FLUCTUATING PRICES ON UNDER-DEVELOPED COUNTRIES, AND NOTED THAT US PURSUING REAPPRAISAL OF POSITION ON COMMODITY AGREEMENTS, WHICH HAVE NOT BEEN SUCCESSFUL IN PAST.

9. WE EXPRESSED APPRECIATION FOR AUSTRALIAN AND NZ EFFORTS TO HELP RELOCATE AND RESETTLE VIET-NAM REFUGEES. SAID US WOULD NOT EXPECT TO TAKE ALL THE REFUGEES FROM VIET-NAM AND THAT IT WOULD BE DIFFICULT FOR US IF OUR ANZUS ALLIES DID NOT DO THEIR SHARE IN RESPONDING TO APPROACHES FROM INTERNATIONAL ORGANIZATIONS FOR ASSISTANCE IN FINANCING AND IN RESETTLING REFUGEES.

10. WE WILL SEND FOLLOW UP CABLES ON ADDITIONAL DISCUSSIONS OF SPECIAL INTEREST. MORE DETAILED REPORT OF PROCEEDINGS WILL BE POUCHED TO ADDRESSEES.

11. FYI: AGREEMENT ON COMMUNIQUÉ (SEPTEL) REQUIRED SOME NEGOTIATION, DUE PRIMARILY TO NEW ZEALAND CONCERNS ABOUT LANGUAGE ON INDOCHINA AND ON NEED FOR NEW WORLD ECONOMIC ORDER. END FYI. KISSINGER

1 Source: National Archives, Record Group 59, Central Foreign Policy Files. Confidential; Priority. Repeated for information to Bangkok, Singapore, Kuala Lumpur, Seoul, Geneva, USUN New York, Vientiane, Jakarta, Port Moresby, London, Paris, Manila, Tokyo and CINCPAC. Drafted by Michaud, officer for the ANZUS desk; and approved by Zurhellen. The memorandum of conversation recounting Kissinger’s remarks at the afternoon session of April 24 is ibid., P–820125–0600.

55. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, May 7, 1975. 55. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, May 7, 1975.1

Washington, May 7, 1975

DEPARTMENT OF STATE
Memorandum of Conversation

DATE: May 7, 1975
SUBJECT: Southeast Asia, NPW Visits

PARTICIPANTS:

US: The Secretary

Mr. Habib, Assistant Secretary, EA

Armistead Selden, US Ambassador to New Zealand

Mr. Richard Smyser, NSC Senior Staff Member

Mr. John Knowles, EA/ANP (notetaker)

NEW ZEALAND: W.E. Rowling, Prime Minister

Lloyd White, New Zealand Ambassador

H. H. Francis, Assistant Secretary of Foreign Affairs

DISTRIBUTION: S/S, WH (Rodman)

The Secretary: Welcome.

PM Rowling: I am pleased to be here.

The Secretary: Have you been here before?

PM Rowling: Three previous times. Always as a Member of Parliament, not as a Minister.

The Secretary: I knew that you had planned to come for the ANZUS Council Meeting.

PM Rowling: Yes. As it turned out, my Deputy Prime Minister had to represent New Zealand at the Asian Development Bank Meeting in Manila and my next senior minister was also away from New Zealand. So I had to change my plans and stay at home.

The Secretary: Is the Deputy Prime Minister the one who gave a speech yesterday?

PM Rowling: Yes. I saw some notes on it. I never cease to be surprised.

The Secretary: Well, I never cease to be surprised either.

Rowling: He got ahead of my Government.

Selden: He jumped the gun, didn't he?

Rowling: The question of NPW visits to New Zealand has not been the subject of a cabinet decision at all. We have not received departmental reports yet.

Secretary: More and more ships are nuclear-powered.

Rowling: I think Faulkner spoke about the NPW question at the ANZUS Council Meeting. Despite the comments made yesterday, no decision has been made. I want to hold off a decision until after our elections.

Secretary: When are the elections?

Rowling: November. That is to say, no later than November.

Secretary: Have you met Mr. Habib before? He is losing some countries and part of his area.

Rowling: The situation gives some cause for concern.

Secretary: The most bloody minded bastards I've met are the North Vietnamese. When people speak of reconciliation, they often mean it. This includes the Soviets and the Chinese. But the North Vietnamese have a great capacity to lie and trick. They also have a heroic ideal—we have to admit that. But they concentrate all their energies on tricking others.

Rowling: How do you think the North Vietnamese will behave?

Secretary: I think they will be bloody-minded. I expect at a minimum that they will step up their support of revolutionary war in Northeast Thailand and Malaysia and put pressure on other countries in the area.

Rowling: How do you think the Thais will react?

Secretary: I believe they will switch subtly to a different orientation.

Rowling: I assume we can expect a step-up of arms to the Thai insurgents.

Secretary: At a minimum the North Vietnamese will step-up sending cadres and arms into Northeast Thailand. They will try to create a situation similar to the situation in Northeast Laos ten years ago. The North Vietnamese will put the pressure on the Thai Government.

Rowling: What about Indonesia?

Secretary: I don't know about Indonesia. Let me ask Dick Smyser whether he agrees with my characterization of the North Vietnamese. Smyser is a North Vietnamese expert.

Smyser: I do, absolutely.

Secretary: Smyser was on all the secret negotiations with North Viet-Nam. The North Vietnamese are really arrogant and convinced of their cause. They have some reason to believe it since they beat the French and the United States—and they acted against the advice of their allies: the USSR and the PRC.

Rowling: How do you think Viet-Nam will affect the perceptions of the Soviets and the PRC?

Secretary: Hanoi will play one off against the other. We will probably see the emergence of the Soviet's Asian security concept. The Chinese will be scared. The Chinese think we're still a significant force in the Pacific and see us as a balance against the Soviets.

Rowling: The PRC would be more deeply disturbed if it thought the United States was looking inward.

Secretary: Yes. I think the Chinese have been very restrained in recent weeks — conciliatory. Their perceptions will depend on what we do.

Rowling: Will you be able to do something to bolster the morale of the Thai Government?

Secretary: I was just telling Habib that I thought we ought to wait until things have settled down before taking any actions. We were talking about this in connection with our new ambassador who is just going off to Thailand.

Habib: How do you see moves to boost the morale of the countries in SEA?

Rowling: We need a fairly clear expression that Viet-Nam is behind us and that the United States is not retreating to a Fortress America, not packing up and going home. At the ANZUS Council Meeting I had Faulkner stress the importance of our all helping to strengthen the economies of the Southeast Asian countries.

Secretary: Yes, I recall the discussion at ANZUS. It is true that security is not enough, but there is no substitute for security.

Rowling: The economic side is very important. Lee Kuan Yew—who is a tough guy—by building economic strength weakened the dissident elements in Singapore. Malaysia has also become stronger. I was impressed at the Commonwealth Meeting in Jamaica that the countries had a sort of unity we didn't expect them to have.

Secretary: (Smiling) I note that it is not in keeping with the Monroe Doctrine that the Commonwealth Meeting was held in Jamaica.

Habib: Thailand is not weak economically—its economy is probably the best in Southeast Asia—, but the Thai are weak militarily.

Rowling: I talked to both Razak and Lee. They were pretty concerned.

Habib: Razak is very much concerned.

Secretary: It has been a real pleasure to meet with you. This is the only way I can find out the thinking of others. It enables me to know what questions to ask at my staff meetings. When am I seeing Razak?

Habib: He has already passed through Washington. He just stopped at the airport.

The Secretary escorted the Prime Minister and his party to the call on the President.

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy Files, P–820125–0393. Secret; Nodis. Drafted by Knowles and approved by Covey. According to his daily diary, Ford met with Rowling from 11:06 a.m. until 12:08 p.m. on May 7. (Ford Library, Staff Secretary’s Office, President’s Daily Diary) During this meeting, Ford stated that the United States would continue to play a major role in the Pacific despite the fall of South Vietnam, but that it might reexamine its defense commitments if South Pacific nations enact a restrictive nuclear free zone. The memorandum of conversation from this Rowling-Ford meeting is in Ford Library, National Security Adviser, Memoranda of Conversation, Box 11.

56. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, May 7, 1975, 3 p.m. 56. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, May 7, 1975, 3 p.m.1

Washington, May 7, 1975

DEPARTMENT OF STATE

Memorandum of Conversation

DATE: May 7, 1975
Time: 3:00 P.M.
Place: White House

SUBJECT: Call on the President by Australian Prime Minister Whitlam

PARTICIPANTS:

UNITED STATES

President Gerald R. Ford

Secretary of State Henry A. Kissinger

Lieutenant General Brent Scowcroft

Assistant Secretary of State Philip C. Habib

AUSTRALIA

E. Gough Whitlam, Prime Minister

Lionel Bowen, Special Minister of State

Alan P. Renouf, Secretary of Foreign Affairs

Sir Patrick Shaw, Ambassador to the US

PRESIDENT: (Welcoming Remarks)

WHITLAM: You are having a spate of Foreign Ministers from the Jamaica Conference. Rowling, Wilson, Lee, myself.

PRESIDENT: How do you feel the Conference went?

WHITLAM: It has the great advantage that no formal resolutions are taken, there is no polarization, and matters are decided by consensus. That way agreed statements on thorny issues can be made. People realize how far you can go and they keep talking until you come to the consensus. With differences of country sizes and substances they can all discuss things tolerantly and come up with some sort of consensus.

PRESIDENT: You must get a broad perspective of world problems with members from all continents.

WHITLAM: There are 34 members now. A few years ago there were only 20. We have 6 in the Caribbean and now we are getting more in the South Pacific. Fiji and Papua New Guinea will be next. Papua New Guinea is the biggest of the South Pacific islands, and the most sophisticated.

KISSINGER: Sophisticated?

WHITLAM: They have a very active Parliament.

KISSINGER: I never associated sophistication with New Guinea.

WHITLAM: The Chief Minister is Michael Somare. You would be fascinated with the range of his discussion. They are lucky to have a fellow emerge like that.

KISSINGER: What is the population?

WHITLAM: 2 1/2 to 3 million. At the Conference, about 15 of the 34 countries present are around the Indian Ocean. The debates get protracted but everyone was tolerant.

BOWEN: No one attacked us.

WHITLAM: The only other Conference I attended was in Ottawa in 1973. Things were more pungent then. Heath and Lee got stuck into me a bit. But Wilson is a change and Lee took a different attitude this time. All the developed countries have Social Democratic or Labor governments, the U.K., Australia, New Zealand and Singapore. Pierre Trudeau added Canada.

PRESIDENT: Fortunately your visits came after the traumatic experience of a week or 10 days ago. This has been a setback. It is over and this gives us an opportunity to indicate privately what we say publicly. The U.S. will keep its promises, stay strong and, to the extent that the President can, I will keep Congress' feet to the fire, so as to keep our commitments to our allies and the world as a whole.

WHITLAM: That is good to hear. We want to assist in that process. Everyone at the Commonwealth Conference would have been critical of participation in Indochina but there was no pleasure expressed in the reverse. Most are developing countries but there was no political or economic anti-Americanism expressed. Some old hands, like Nyerere, would not agree with anything the U.S. does, but there was a good deal of generosity and no gloating or exultation.

There was little reference to Viet-Nam. There was some talk about getting international efforts to reconstruct the country. You must get a bit depressed by what is sometimes said, but there was no anti-Americanism. The Caribbean countries got upset about Cuba, but there was little time spent on that. The rival systems got no sentiment in favor of them.

PRESIDENT: The U.S. is going to live up to its commitments and is going to have the capability to do so. We do not want potential enemies to get the idea that they can fish in troubled waters. We appreciate the strong position you have taken on our installations in your country. We are going to move ahead in our talks with Moscow. These installations are important to testing and verification.

WHITLAM: It is a contribution we thought we could make to balance the feeling of detente you and the Soviets have developed. This could have been an issue in Australia but it has been completely defused. Before we came to power, a seer would have said it would have been a source of trouble. I don't see it now. They will take and trust my judgment. Our parliamentary system is different than yours. I went in to Parliament in 1952. Let me take the Indochina business as an example. In the U.S., Republicans and Democrats have, at one time or another, both supported intervention.

KISSINGER: In fact the ones who now are against it, if they had been against it previously, I wonder how it would have gotten done.

WHITLAM: In our country my side was always against intervention. The other side was wholeheartedly in favor. The position is different in the British Parliamentary system. For twenty years there was a clear-cut difference. In yours there was a blend. Now we are concerned with the situation and are willing to help with reconstruction and resettlement of refugees, to a certain extent, through international organizations. The sums and numbers would be a fraction of yours but we are contributing substantial amounts. Five times more to South Viet-Nam than to North Viet-Nam. Also, on the evacuation, we made aircraft available and they are now under U.N. colors.

PRESIDENT: You were helpful in Danang.

WHITLAM: Yes, but we had to call it off when it became unsafe to fly the C-130's. Concerning refugees, we will roughly do about 1/2 of what Canada does. They have some Vietnamese residents and many of the Vietnamese do speak French so it is easier in Canada. But that is the sort of thing we have in mind.

PRESIDENT: Our big problem is roughly 120,000 or more refugees and, despite what some politicians allege, we have gotten a good response from labor and church groups who are in favor of taking them. We can handle them but anything you can do would help.

KISSINGER: The Canadians are talking about taking 3,000 but we want to get it up to 5,000.

PRESIDENT: Out of the 120,000 refugees there are about 35,000 heads of families. With a working population of 70 million, 35,000 is very small. And, most have skills. Very few come from uneducated classes. They will make good citizens and will be productive when assimilated.

WHITLAM: About 60 nations have signed the UN Convention on Refugees and certainly half of them would take some. We took some at the end of World War II. Indonesia and the Philippines should take some.

KISSINGER: Is Indonesia interested? They are not likely to. They do not like the Chinese and the Vietnamese might add to their minority problem.

WHITLAM: The more involved the better. There are quite a number in Singapore and Hong Kong and we will take some. We want to get the UNHCR involved in it.

PRESIDENT: We will take care of the refugee problem and have asked Congress for $507 million. There is a different feeling about funding for reconstruction. As far as we are concerned, the Congress would not tolerate it even if I put on the pressure so our major effort will be in refugees.

WHITLAM: You will undoubtedly do a disproportionate share. About reconstruction, there is provision in our budget. It will not be a large amount, but we will do it. I can understand resistance here but we will do something there and probably through international agencies if they are available. The North Vietnamese are always suspicious of them. But I understand about rehabilitation, which is too much for Congress to consider.

PRESIDENT: After the long history it would be too hard for people to accept.

WHITLAM: In other countries of the Pacific their political structure is not so divided as in Viet-Nam. Take the Thais, their dynasty has ruled for several hundred years. They have a coherent culture. Indonesia is the most difficult. There are so many people in different groups. There are tens of thousands of political detainees. Some liberals in my country are criticizing the Indonesian Government, nevertheless we give them aid. Our largest aid program goes to Papua New Guinea, next to Indonesia and then to Bangladesh. The UK is also going to give some aid to Indonesia. There is always the danger of a coup d'état there. In the countryside, particularly in Java, they support the Government.

PRESIDENT: We have been encouraged by the progress there which has been helped by their energy earnings. We will do what we can to be helpful in economic and military assistance. We think it vitally important to preserve the structure of views of that Government and are glad to hear you say that you and the UK will help.

WHITLAM: We are placing a lot of emphasis on political and economic relations with Japan and Indonesia. It fits in with what you are trying to do.

PRESIDENT: Stability out there will inevitably increase now that we are over the hump.

WHITLAM: We are trying to get closer relations with the Philippines. We never had it before. We are trying to do a bit, but there again the Marcos regime gets a lot of criticism from us. However, it is ridiculous to say the previous regime was democratic. It was an oligarchy.

KISSINGER: Comparable to the wife.

WHITLAM: The steel butterfly. She queens it. Some years ago at the Holt funeral she was all in black and looked quite grand. She also came out to our Opera House opening in Sydney and we put her up. We will try to do a bit for them.

The Secretary said it might not be out of order if I mentioned the Indian Ocean. We are worried and concerned at the prospect of the U.S. and Soviets building up where hitherto there has been less confrontation. We suggest you confer with each other. When the Suez opens there will be a range of political sentiment in Australia. Our opponents will say that with the Soviets moving in, we want the Yanks out. We do not want to be pushed into a controversy on what is a domestic situation.

PRESIDENT: I am sure the Secretary told you that we were going to proceed with Diego Garcia. It is not because we want any major presence. It is not a military installation in the full sense of a big naval installation. It will have limited capability but it is essential. That is the best military recommendation I can get.

We may have some problems in Congress. But this is not a first step that will lead us to others. It will just give us a capability which our military people see as a necessary backstop.

KISSINGER: I told him that after we have the principle established by Congress, we will consider arms limitations talks with the Soviet Union.

PRESIDENT: We need something to bargain with to get a fair equitable settlement.

WHITLAM: We all will not be happy. Everyone is cozy about this. The Shah and Lee would be happy, but will not say it publicly. Lee was in favor on Viet-Nam but did not send anyone or say anything.

PRESIDENT: Diego Garcia will not be a major facility. We will have a runway and refueling capability.

WHITLAM: We have something like that in western Australia at Perth, Freemantle and an airfield at the North West Cape. These could be used but they are not capable of repair on ships or aircraft.

PRESIDENT: I commissioned the 8,500 ton aircraft carrier NIMITZ the other day. It is the largest warship we have ever built.

WHITLAM: It can stay at sea for a long time.

PRESIDENT: It has a fuel capacity of 13 years without refueling. There are 6,500 people on board. I was on a carrier in World War II — the MONTERREY—we were in the carrier group that hit Rabaul in 1943-44.

WHITLAM: It is interesting that Kennedy, Nixon, Johnson and you were all in the Navy.

KISSINGER: That is why the Navy gets 50% of the money.

PRESIDENT: About 1/3 of our Navy is nuclear-powered. A formidable task force can be put together now.

WHITLAM: Our predicament about three years ago was that we did not want nuclear-powered vessels in our harbors. One objection has been overcome.

PRESIDENT: Congress passed a liability legislation in foreign ports and we hope that relieves the problem.

WHITLAM: That relieves one problem but the other one is environmental. The state governments run our ports and the most important naval facility is in Sydney. We will have to consult with state authorities. I do not think there will be any difficulty. Our politics are ragged. We have the Huey Longs and the Talmadges just as you did in the past.

PRESIDENT: Both their sons are in the Senate.

KISSINGER: Talmadge and Long are bright.

PRESIDENT: They are shrewd politicians, more sophisticated than their fathers but not more effective than them.

WHITLAM: Byrd is a second generation. Also, is he a Republican?

PRESIDENT: He is an Independent, but on committees within the Democratic allocation. About two weeks ago we had a Republican fund-raising dinner in Virginia and he showed up. There are not many Independent fund-raising affairs.

KISSINGER: He is a cordial gentleman, but very tough on issues in committees. For example, Rhodesia.

WHITLAM: That was an issue in the Commonwealth Conference. Tanzania and Zambia are training Rhodesians so if there is no movement there will be Rhodesian militants. That is clearly indicated.

PRESIDENT: The Byrd amendment restricts our policy.

KISSINGER: He gave us a bad time.

WHITLAM: I had a press conference in Jamaica and they asked me if I would raise Rhodesia when I saw-you.

PRESIDENT: (Laughing). Well now you can say it did come up.

WHITLAM: I don't think that will be necessary.

1 Source: Ford Library, National Security Adviser, Memoranda of Conversation, Box 11, 5/7/75. Confidential. Drafted by Habib. Ford’s talking points from Kissinger, marked, “The President has seen,” are ibid., Presidential Country Files for East Asia and the Pacific, Box 1, Australia [3]. Before visiting Ford, Whitlam met with Kissinger at 2 p.m. The memorandum of conversation is available in the National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy Files, P – 820125 – 0398.

57. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, October 9, 1975, 3 p.m. 57. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, October 9, 1975, 3 p.m.1

Washington, October 9, 1975

DEPARTMENT OF STATE
Memorandum of Conversation

TIME: 3:00 PM
DATE: October 9, 1975
PLACE: Secretary's Office

SUBJECT: Papua New Guinea

PARTICIPANTS:

US: The Secretary

Philip C. Habib, Assistant Secretary, EA

John F. Knowles, EA/ANP Acting Director

John J. Taylor, NSC Staff

PAPUA NEW GUINEA: Prime Minister Michael Somare

Philip Bouraga, Secretary, Department of the Prime Minister

Benais Sabumei, First Assistant Secretary, Department of Foreign Relations and Trade

Paulias Matane, Charge d'Affaires, Papua New Guinea Embassy

DISTRIBUTION: S—Mr. Adams, Mr. Bremer, WH-Mr. Rodman, S/S

SECRETARY: (Referring to the photographers who had just taken photos and departed) There are some professions which fascinate me. For example, in a symphony orchestra there is some guy in the rear who gets to hit a triangle once every two hours. I have always wondered how he chooses his profession. Of course, I can understand someone wishing to make a career with a symphony orchestra.

I am delighted to welcome you here. I know there are many difficult problems ahead of you.

PRIME MINISTER: I am also delighted that you could have time to receive me. This is my first time to visit the United States since my country achieved independence and my first time to meet with you.

I will be taking a seat on behalf of my Government at the UN tomorrow.

SECRETARY: Are you going to make a speech?

PRIME MINISTER: Yes

SECRETARY: Are you going to attack us? (Looking at Habib) They'll attack me for this, for saying something that a diplomat ought not to say. However, I have not received their training and I am not a diplomat.

HABIB: (Addressing the PM) Do you treat your staff that way?

PRIME MINISTER: They have been known to have been treated that way.

HABIB: You didn't answer the Secretary's question. Are you going to attack us tomorrow?

PRIME MINISTER: My purpose will be to listen.

SECRETARY: You are speaking tomorrow.

PRIME MINISTER: Yes. I have always believed that when you first come into a crowd, you first want to know their thinking.

SECRETARY: What time of day are you speaking?

BOURAGA: There are various resolutions and other things on the UN agenda for tomorrow, but we are tentatively scheduled to speak at 10:30 AM.

HABIB: We cosponsored the resolution to admit Papua New Guinea to the UN.

SECRETARY: Is this your first visit to the US?

PRIME MINISTER: This is my second visit. I came once before on a State Department leadership grant.

HABIB: That was not a poor choice, which was made by a professional diplomatist.

SECRETARY: How long have you been in New York?

PRIME MINISTER: The last time I was there four days. I looked around at the UN and the Australian office.

SECRETARY: What would you say are the major problems between our two countries?

PRIME MINISTER: I don't think my country is known to Americans except to those Americans who served in Papua New Guinea during World War II. Communications have to be established between our two countries.

SECRETARY: What is the population?

PRIME MINISTER: Almost three million.

SECRETARY: What's the population of Rabaul?

PRIME MINISTER: 70,000 on the peninsula. New Britain is divided into west and east districts for administrative purposes. Taking west and east together, there are about 120,000 people. The west is where the World Bank has been sponsoring an oil palm project which has been successful.

SECRETARY: Are your relations with Australia good?

PRIME MINISTER: Yes, relations have been very good. Since the time when Australia became the administering authority under the UN Trusteeship, the relationship has been remarkable,

SECRETARY: How about Indonesia?

PRIME MINISTER: We have a very good relationship with Indonesia, which has a common boundary with us. So far relations have been very good. Indonesia has a diplomatic set-up in Papua New Guinea.

SECRETARY: Does Indonesia govern West Irian as an autonomous area?

BOURAGA: Irian Jaya is administered as a province of Indonesia.

SECRETARY: Do the people living in the Indonesian part of New Guinea have the same character as the people of Papua New Guinea?

PRIME MINISTER: Yes. We come from the same ethnic groupings.

SECRETARY: Do you have different tribes?

PRIME MINISTER: Yes, for example in the highlands.

SECRETARY: Do you have one common language?

PRIME MINISTER: No, we have 700 different dialects.

SECRETARY: How many do you know?

PRIME MINISTER: Two.

SECRETARY: (Speaking to Bouraga) How about you?

BOURAGA: I know one. Our medium of communication is Pidgin English.

SECRETARY: If any of you four were speaking your own dialect, would you all understand?

PRIME MINISTER: No. I could understand Matane, since I was brought up in Rabaul, but I could not speak in his dialect.

SECRETARY: Are the dialects totally different?

PRIME MINISTER Yes.

SECRETARY: Is there a written language?

PRIME MINISTER: Yes, notably three of which Enga is the largest.

SECRETARY: Is there any similarity with the natives in Australia?

PRIME MINISTER: They are totally separate.

SECRETARY: It must be very complicated.

BOURAGA: It is a major problem in Papua New Guinea.

SECRETARY: So your young men must learn English or some other common language.

BOURAGA: There are two — English and Pidgin.

HABIB: Pidgin doesn't lend itself to complicated thoughts. Pidgin is spoken in various places in the South Pacific, for example Fiji.

SECRETARY: Is Pidgin an invented or a developed language?

HABIB: A developed one.

BOURAGA: The Germans were responsible for this in New Guinea.

HABIB: Pidgin has a lot of English words. .

SECRETARY: You say English words; are there also words from other languages?

PRIME MINISTER: Yes, Pidgin varies a lot in different places.

SECRETARY: (Speaking to Habib) Were you there during World War II?

HABIB: No, after the war. I was stationed in New Zealand during the War. Joe Sisco, with whom the Prime Minister had lunch yesterday, served in Papua New Guinea during the War.

SECRETARY: What are our major problems?

HABIB: Not a lot. We have quite a number of missionaries, and we have business interests and investments in Papua New Guinea. Of course, Papua New Guinea is important in terms of geographic location. Our interests in Papua New Guinea are, of course, not as great as in many countries elsewhere. We have not been discussing any problem areas with the Prime Minister. Just before this meeting the Prime Minister signed the articles of agreement of the IBRD and the IMF.

SECRETARY: When are we sending an ambassador to Papua New Guinea?

HABIB: We are awaiting a decision on our recommendation that we seek agreement for our ambassador.

SECRETARY: Why not?

HABIB: It is over at the White House.

SECRETARY: Then you are not waiting for me. (Turning to the Prime Minister) When our diplomatic establishments are fully set up, you should feel free to tell us what concerns you have about our relations, and we will treat them sympathetically. I know that you are a moderate and responsible leader of your country. I think Australia can be of great help, and we shall be working with them.

It has been a pleasure to meet you.

1 Source: Ford Library, National Security Adviser, NSC Staff for East Asia & Pacific Affairs, Convenience Files, Box 15, Kissinger memoranda (6), October–December 1975. Confidential; Nodis. Drafted by Knowles and approved by Covey. The meeting was held in Kissinger’s office at the White House.

58. Telegram 260731 From the Department of State to the Embassy in Australia, November 4, 1975, 1706Z. 58. Telegram 260731 From the Department of State to the Embassy in Australia, November 4, 1975, 1706Z.1

November 4, 1975

TELEGRAM
Department of State
STATE 260731

O R 041706Z NOV 75

FM SECSTATE WASHDC TO AMEMBASSY CANBERRA IMMEDIATE
INFO AMEMBASSY WELLINGTON
AMCONSUL MELBOURNE
AMCONSUL SYDNEY
CINCPAC HONOLULU HI

STATE 260731

E.O. 11652: GDS
TAGS: PFOR, AS

SUBJECT: WHITLAM ACCUSES ANTHONY OF RECEIVING CIA MONEY
REF:A.CANBERRA 7343 B. CANBERRA 7411

CINCPAC FOR POLAD

1. YOU ARE AUTHORIZED TO APPROACH THE GOA TODAY AT THE HIGHEST AVAILABLE LEVEL, CATEGORICALLY DENYING ON BEHALF OF THE USG THAT THE CIA PAID MONEY TO THE NATIONAL COUNTRY PARTY OR ITS LEADER DOUGLAS ANTHONY. NEITHER THE CIA NOR ANY OTHER US AGENCY HAS GIVEN OR PASSED FUNDS TO ANY AUSTRALIAN POLITICAL PARTY OR CANDIDATE FOR AUSTRALIAN POLITICAL OFFICE.

2. YOU SHOULD ADD THAT, AS A MATTER OF STANDING PRACTICE, THE USG NEITHER CONFIRMS NOR DENIES PUBLICLY ALLEGATIONS OF THE TYPE REPORTED TO HAVE BEEN MADE BY THE PRIME MINISTER. THE USG REGRETS, HOWEVER, THAT SUCH A CHARGE AGAINST NCP LEADER ANTHONY, IF CORRECTLY REPORTED, COULD HAVE DAMAGING FALLOUT ON OTHER ASPECTS OF US-AUSTRALIAN RELATIONS.

3. RESPONSE TO INQUIRIES FROM MEDIA SHOULD BE ONE OF NO COMMENT, NOTING THAT AS MATTER OF POLICY USG DOES NOT COMMENT ON ALLEGATIONS OF THIS TYPE. KISSINGER

1 Source: National Archives, Record Group 59, Central Foreign Policy Files. Confidential; Immediate. Repeated for information to Wellington, Melbourne, Sydney, and CINCPAC. Telegram 7446 from Canberra, November 5, reported that this directive was accomplished.

59. Telegram 8624 From the Embassy in Australia to the Department of State, December 31, 1975, 0601Z. 59. Telegram 8624 From the Embassy in Australia to the Department of State, December 31, 1975, 0601Z.1

December 31, 1975

TELEGRAM
Department of State
CANBERRA 8624

R 310601Z DEC 75

FM AMEMBASSY CANBERRA TO SECSTATE WASHDC 7181

CANBERRA 8624

EXDIS
EO 11652: EXGDS-3 TAGS: AS,US, MARR, PINT

SUBJ: THE FRASER GOVERNMENT'S ATTITUDE TOWARDS U.S. DEFENSE FACILITIES AND OTHER RELATED ISSUES

1. SUMMARY: THIS CABLE OUTLINES PRIME MINISTER FRASER'S VIEWS ON POLITICO-MILITARY RELATIONS WITH THE UNITED STATES, THE CURRENT POLITICAL CLIMATE IN AUSTRALIA, AND THE EMBASSY'S RECOMMENDATIONS FOR DEALING WITH OUTSTANDING POLITICO-MILITARY ISSUES. END SUMMARY.

2. PRIME MINISTER FRASER IS A DEEPLY CONSERVATIVE MAN WHO VALUES AUSTRALIA'S DEFENSE RELATIONSHIP WITH THE UNITED STATES. HE HAS PLEDGED TO STRENGTHEN RELATIONS WITH THE UNITED STATES GENERALLY, AND HIS ATTITUDE TOWARDS U.S. DEFENSE FACILITIES IN AUSTRALIA AND OTHER POLITICO-MILITARY ISSUES WILL BE MORE FORTHCOMING THAN WHITLAM'S. THE FRASER APPROACH TO POLITICO-MILITARY PROBLEMS WILL BE TO DEMONSTRATE THAT AUSTRALIA IS A WORTHY ALLY WITH WHOM DEFENSE TIES SHOULD BE MAINTAINED FOR THE INDEFINITE FUTURE.

3. IT SHOULD BE BORNE IN MIND HOWEVER, THAT FRASER IS ASSUMING POWER IN AN AUSTRALIA WHICH HAS CHANGED MARKEDLY FROM THE QTE ALL THE WAY WITH LBJ DAYS. END QTE. THE VIETNAM WAR, A GROWING SENSE OF NATIONALISM, AND 25 YEARS OF PEACE HAVE ALL COMBINED TO CREATE AN ATMOSPHERE IN WHICH DEFENSE ALLIANCES AND THREATS OF WAR SEEM TO THE AVERAGE AUSTRALIAN TO HAVE A SOMEWHAT UNREAL QUALITY ABOUT THEM. MOREOVER, CLOSE IDENTIFICATION WITH THINGS AMERICAN HAS LOST SOME OF ITS LUSTER IN RECENT YEARS. VIETNAM, THE WATERGATE AFFAIR, THE KENNEDY AND KING MURDERS, STUDENT UNREST, RACIAL PROBLEMS, AND THE LOT HAVE BLURRED THE TRADITIONAL AND MORE HOPEFUL VISION OF AMERICAN LIFE. WHILE THE NUMBER OF AUSTRALIANS OPPOSED TO ANZUS AND U.S. DEFENSE FACILITIES REMAINS SMALL THERE NOW IS THE POTENTIAL FOR SUBSTANTIAL PUBLIC SUPPORT FOR ANTI-AMERICAN POLITICAL STANCES IN AUSTRALIA.

4. FRASER IS VERY MUCH AWARE THAT THE SITUATION HAS CHANGED AND WILL CAREFULLY CONSIDER THE GOA'S POSITION ON EACH POLITICO-MILITARY ISSUE SO AS NOT TO CREATE THE IMPRESSION THAT HIS GOVERNMENT IS GIVING THE USG TOO MUCH TOO FAST. FRASER'S MAIN OBJECTIVE WILL BE TO HEAD OFF POSSIBLE CRITICISM OF THE US-AUSTRALIAN DEFENSE RELATIONSHIP AND U.S. DEFENSE FACILITIES IN AUSTRALIA FROM THE LEFTWING OF THE ALP.

5. FRASER IS BY NATURE A CAUTIONS AND THOROUGH ADMINISTRATOR. HE WILL BE GUIDED INITIALLY MORE BY THE ADVICE HE RECEIVES FROM HIS TOP CIVIL SERVANTS THAN BY THE ADVICE HE RECEIVES FROM HIS NEW MINISTERS. FOR THESE REASONS OUR RECOMMENDATIONS FOR DEALING WITH THE GOA ON OUTSTANDING DEFENSE ISSUES TAKES INTO ACCOUNT OUR BEST ESTIMATE OF OFFICIAL GOA ATTITUDES ON EACH ISSUE. OUR RECOMMENDATIONS ON DEALING WITH SPECIFIC POLITICO-MILITARY ISSUES ARE OUTLINED BELOW.

6. NUCLEAR WARSHIP VISITS TO AUSTRALIAN PORTS - DFA AND THE DEPT. OF DEFENSE ARE WORKING UP A NEW SUBMISSION TO CABINET ON NUCLEAR WARSHIP VISITS TO AUSTRALIAN PORTS. THIS SUBMISSION IS DESIGNED TO SPEED UP CABINET APPROVAL OF NPW VISITS. THE FRASER GOVERNMENT WILL BE MOVING QUICKLY ON NPW VISITS AND THE PROFESSIONALS IN THE AUSTRALIAN DFA AND DOD APPRECIATE THE IMPORTANCE WHICH WE ATTACH TO SUCH VISITS. EMBASSY RECOMMENDATION: THAT THE USG NOT PRESS THE GOA FURTHER ON NPW VISITS FOR THE TIME BEING.

7. SOON - THE FRASER GOVERNMENT LIKE THE WHITLAM GOVERNMENT WILL NOT WANT THIS FACILITY LOCATED NEAR NORTHWEST CAPE AND WILL ASK THAT IT BE MANNED BY CIVILIANS RATHER THAN BY USAF PERSONNEL. DFA AND DOD ARE AWARE THAT THE USG IS INTERESTED IN MOVING AHEAD WITH THIS PROJECT IN THE NEAR FUTURE AND DFA HAS PROMISED A FORMAL RESPONSE TO OUR REQUEST TO ESTABLISH THIS FACILITY IN WESTERN AUSTRALIA EARLY IN JANUARY. EMBASSY RECOMMENDATION: THAT THE USG CONSIDER SITING THE STATION AT A LOCATION OTHER THAN NORTHWEST CAPE AND MANNING IT WITH CIVILIAN PERSONNEL.

8. SEISMIC STATION AT ALICE SPRINGS, DET. 421 - THE GOA IS ANXIOUS TO COMPLETE ARRANGEMENTS FOR TRANSFERRING THE MANAGEMENT AND OPERATION OF THIS STATION FROM THE USAF TO THE AUSTRALIAN DEPT. OF SCIENCE. IT IS TOO LATE NOW FOR US TO ATTEMPT TO REVERSE THIS POSITION. IF WE WERE ABLE TO CONVINCE THE FRASER GOVERNMENT TO AGREE TO ALTERNATIVE ARRANGEMENTS, THE GOVERNMENT WOULD IMMEDIATELY DRAW FIRE FROM THE ALP FOR REVERSING A POSITION WHICH THE WHITLAM GOVERNMENT AND THE USG HAD PREVIOUSLY AGREED TO. IN ANY EVENT WE BELIEVE THAT THE FRASER GOVERNMENT WILL FOLLOW DFA'S RECOMMENDATIONS AND INSIST THAT THE MANAGEMENT AND OPERATION OF THE STATION BE TAKEN OVER BY THE GOA. WE ANTICIPATE NO DIFFICULTY IN ARRANGING ANOTHER SIX MONTH EXTENSION OF THE EXISTING AGREEMENT WHILE ARRANGEMENTS FOR THE TRANSFER OF THE FACILITY ARE COMPLETED AND GOA EMPLOYEES AND GOA CONTRACT PERSONNEL ARE TRAINED TO OPERATE IT. EMBASSY RECOMMENDATION: THAT WE MOVE AHEAD WITH NEGOTIATIONS TO COMPLETE THE TRANSFER OF THE STATION TO THE GOA WHILE SECURING AN ADDITIONAL SIX MONTH EXTENSION OF THE EXISTING AGREEMENT TO GIVE US TIME TO COMPLETE THE TRANSFER AND TRAIN AUSTRALIAN PERSONNEL.

9. OMEGA - DFA BELIEVES THAT THE FRASER GOVERNMENT WILL APPROVE THE CONSTRUCTION OF AN OMEGA STATION IN THE NEAR FUTURE. GIVEN THE FACT THAT RESPONSIBLE ALP POLITICIANS SUPPORT THE CONSTRUCTION OF OMEGA HERE, DFA ANTICIPATES LITTLE POLITICAL FLAK WHEN THE GOA APPROVES THIS PROGRAM. EMBASSY RECOMMENDATION: THAT THE USG SIT TIGHT. WE SHOULD HAVE GOOD NEWS SOON.

10. COMMENT: THE ABOVE RECOMMENDATIONS CONCERN FACILITIES AND ISSUES WHICH ALTHOUGH IMPORTANT TO THE U.S. ARE NOT OF AS GREAT NATIONAL INTEREST TO US AS PINE GAP, WOOMERA, AND NORTHWEST CAPE. WE BELIEVE THAT THE POSITIONS RECOMMENDED IN DEALING WITH THESE SUBJECTS WILL MAKE IT LESS LIKELY THAT THE RETENTION OF THE THREE MAJOR FACILITIES HERE WILL BECOME A CONTENTIOUS POLITICAL ISSUE IN THE FUTURE. WE HAVE IN THE FRASER GOVERNMENT A CONSERVATIVE GROUP WHICH APPRECIATES THE IMPORTANCE OF AUSTRALIA'S DEFENSE TIES TO THE UNITED STATES AND WHICH IS PREPARED TO WORK WITH US TO SEE THAT THESE TIES AND THE FACILITIES IN AUSTRALIA WHICH REINFORCE THEM WILL BE MAINTAINED FOR THE INDEFINITE FUTURE. WHILE IT IS DIFFICULT TO SEE TOO FAR AHEAD WE BELIEVE THAT A WILLINGNESS ON THE USG'S PART TO GIVE WAY ON ISSUES OF LESSER IMPORTANCE NOW WILL HELP TO MAINTAIN A POLITICAL CLIMATE HERE WHICH COULD HELP TO INSURE THAT OUR MAJOR FACILITIES IN AUSTRALIA CAN BE RETAINED FOR AT LEAST SEVERAL YEARS. END COMMENT. PERCIVAL

1 Source: National Archives, Record Group 59, Central Foreign Policy Files. Secret; Exdis. On November 11, Governor General Sir John Kerr dismissed Whitlam and installed Fraser as interim Prime Minister. Fraser won election on December 13.

60. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, March 17, 1976, 12:45 p.m. 60. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, March 17, 1976, 12:45 p.m.1

Washington, March 17, 1976

DEPARTMENT OF STATE
Memorandum of Conversation

DATE: March 17, 1976
Time: 12:45 P.M.

SUBJECT: Secretary's Lunch with Australian Foreign Minister

PARTICIPANTS:

UNITED STATES

Secretary Kissinger

Brent Scowcroft, NSC

Helmut Sonnenfeldt, Counselor

Philip C. Habib, Assistant Secretary, EA

Lester E. Edmond, Deputy Assistant Secretary, EA

Christopher A. Squire, Director, EA/ANP (notetaker)

AUSTRALIA

Andrew Peacock, Foreign Minister

Alan Renouf, Secretary, Department of Foreign Affairs

Nicholas Parkinson, Ambassador of Australia

Gordon Upton, Minister-Counselor, Embassy of Australia

John Ridley, Private Secretary to Minister Peacock

Dennis Argall, Counselor, Embassy of Australia

COPIES TO: S, S/S, WH - Peter Rodman

SECRETARY: I will be going to Canberra in August 1976 to head the US delegation to the ANZUS Council meeting there. Mr. Habib will let me go only to Canberra; I would like to see more of Australia.

HABIB: Remember you are going to Bali, too.

SECRETARY: I had you put that in the schedule.

MINISTER PEACOCK: Bali is fine; they just had the ASEAN summit there.

SECRETARY: When is Malik coming here?

HABIB: He was scheduled for April but he's ill. Now it is in early May.

SECRETARY: I don't know how your system works (to Peacock).

Here I only get a chance to make a decision when Bureaus disagree among each other. But they are learning this too, so we have less disagreement among Bureaus.

MINISTER PEACOCK: Do you make use of options papers?

SECRETARY: Yes. I am always presented with three options. My 14 year old son — in fact, an illiterate-would quickly learn to check the middle option, and he would be right 90 percent of the time. The options usually come in such forms as "Shall we surrender to Russia", "Shall we make nuclear war", or "Will I attend the ANZUS meeting."

MINISTER PEACOCK: We have the same procedure in our shop, and I'm opposed to it.

SECRETARY: You would think that occasionally they would prefer option 1 — but it is always option 2. The system is amazing. One Bureau has been trying for four weeks to get me to say something. I have refused. In effect, it would invite the Cubans to attack the Rhodesians. Yesterday in a Foreign Relations Committee hearing a particular remark of mine taken out of context, could possibly be interpreted to mean that we would not firmly oppose the Soviets. Wouldn't you know that Bureau called in the press. Although we cannot support Smith in Rhodesia, we won't tolerate another Cuban move.

PEACOCK: How can you prevent it? You have to get the Hill's support.

SECRETARY: We have 60 days under the War Powers Act. If we cannot take care of Cuba in 60 days —

PEACOCK: That is a much stronger statement than I expected you to make.

SECRETARY: We will not let Cuba get away with it. But we will not support Smith or help any white minority regime stay in power in Africa.

PEACOCK: I saw a replay of your Foreign Relations Committee appearance on TV between 1–2 A.M. this morning. I saw Brzezinski interpreting what you were really saying to the audience.

SECRETARY: I told Brzezinski recently that there was no constitutional requirement that the Secretary of State be foreign born.

PEACOCK: You seem to be taking an increasingly hard line now towards Russia. You have been very critical of them recently.

SECRETARY: Oh yes. Russia is taking extreme criticism from us; some of it is unjustified. Senator Jackson of course has been criticizing Russia all along. But the Soviets are not interfering much in the Middle East — not as much as they certainly could. They have remained relatively uninvolved there. Remember, we are talking about detente, not about entente.

PEACOCK: That is, aspiration as opposed to reality.

SECRETARY: What we have as a major problem is the domestic policy line this year.

PEACOCK: What do you see next year then, different from this year? The Soviets have a succession problem too. What do you see post Brezhnev?

SECRETARY: I foresee great difficulties first for our policy coordination. In the Cabinet we have had to position ourselves politically to consider how to resist Soviet expansionist moves from the point of view of maintaining domestic consensus to avoid a repetition of the Viet-Nam experience. Secondly we have a problem with natural competition with the Soviets and the restraints of detente. Thirdly, when you have drawn up the net gains and losses, you come out relatively ahead on detente. The danger is that in this political year the Democrats are trying to move to the right of the Administration. Their public posture is extremely tough. If they came to office, however, they would again do as they did in the 60's. When in power their actions would be much softer.

You do have to keep after an improvement of relations with the Soviets — partly to keep the Chinese honest, partly because evolution will eventually bring the Soviets to a real detente as China's power increases.

PEACOCK: What you say is very interesting. We hear criticisms from various quarters that your efforts to make the most important deals with the Soviets may end up dead. What do you feel?

SECRETARY: The primary brake on the Soviets is SALT I. Even if SALT II negotiations are not successful this is not so important in the light of SALT I. Even granted that the Soviets violated SALT I - and if we had an hour I could prove to you that this idea is absurd — SALT I caused a real brake on Soviet missiles.

In any case the Soviets had to cut back and we had no possibility of increasing our nuclear lead even without detente.

PEACOCK: On China itself, again many critics are talking about the bankruptcy of US policy there, with the Formosa question unresolved, the Nixon trip. Do you agree?

SECRETARY: Not at all. First in terms of general strategy, we are after good relations with the Soviet Union, and also good relations with China. It depends on what you mean. When you say bankruptcy of our relations, you are using fictitious yardsticks. Whether a country has diplomatic relations with China or not has made no difference. Without diplomatic relations we have seen no disruption of our basic programs with China in the last three years. But the Chinese cannot understand a country which in effect hobbles itself by taking such actions as dissolving its intelligence services and attacks its allies as we have Turkey. The Chinese are the most cold-blooded analysts of power. Their doubts about US resolution are the main problem. During the Nixon visit they laid great stress, however, on good relations with the US.

PEACOCK: Is China in the long term a still greater danger than the Soviet Union?

SECRETARY: If the country stays together. Within the next ten years, however, they will not be so powerful. If they are attacked during the next ten years we will do our best to support them. They need us to keep the Soviets in check. But China is a most formidable country. After ten years we will have to worry.

I took David Bruce to a meeting with Mao. Bruce has met almost all the world's great leaders since World War II. Mao knew at the time that Chou was ill — at that point we did not. Mao spent four hours getting on record Chinese foreign policy, presumably so that it would be Mao policy. It was a spectacular tour de force. Bruce said he had never seen anything like it. Mao was lucid, perceptive, elliptical — totally unemotional and non dogmatic. I do not agree that our relations with China are sterile.

The Chinese wish to be in the enviable position that Stalin thought himself to be when he signed the Hitler-Stalin pact. The Chinese would like to see us so embroiled with the Soviets that we both had no other options. Then, I guarantee you that the Chinese would move away from us. When we were bombing the daylights out of Hanoi — the best reception I got in China was six weeks after the Christmas bombing. Most of our detente agreements with the Soviets were signed in 1973. We hear no peep out of the Chinese then. But in 1974 it was different. When you added our accommodation to the Soviets to our apparent weakness that year, that was too much. As long as we remain strong, the Chinese do not object to our accommodation to the Soviets.

PEACOCK: You are, I hear, far more pessimistic about China over the long term than you let on publicly.

SECRETARY: I try to be as realistic as possible. We need them over the next ten years — they need us. They are more able, less bureaucratic, less hidebound by dogma than the Soviets. As they gain strength they will push the Soviets closer to the West. A lot depends on the vitality of the Western nations in the Pacific.

PEACOCK: My Prime Minister will be taking his first trip to Japan and Peking in June. I am somewhat worried about his new-found popularity among the Chinese.

SECRETARY: That's because the Chinese Ambassador has been telling him how good your relations are with Peking. I strongly support your emphasizing your relations with China. But I found that the Chinese charm you so much on your first trip, that it takes seven trips to put you in the proper perspective.

PEACOCK: We should be as realistic as possible and make our foreign policy as responsive as possible. We do see a role where we can coordinate very closely with you. We will do whatever we can, with our relatively limited resources, to support you in any way we can be of help.

SECRETARY: We should mesh our resources, concentrate on the areas that each of us does best. There are some things we can do. The Chinese cannot go beyond a certain point of visible warmth as long as Formosa remains at issue. But we should not hurry to drop Formosa — we don't get anything for it.

PEACOCK: We are looking at various possibilities on the Indian Ocean issue. Perhaps we could work out with the Soviets a limitation on ship times in that ocean.

SECRETARY: You can't believe any military statistics. Our navy tells us that Soviet ship time in the Indian Ocean far exceeds ours. Why they unilaterally accept this fact I do not understand. But if we freeze ship times according to some yearly figure we immediately put ourselves at a disadvantage, since the Soviet rates are already more than ours. I consider this criterion irrelevant, unless you put a limit on ship size.

PEACOCK: We talk about supporting you on Diego Garcia. But although we don't say it publicly, we feel Diego Garcia is far more important as a back door to the Middle East.

SECRETARY: It provides us with options in case of another oil embargo.

PEACOCK: Jordan's King Hussein left Australia a few days before we left. He was extraordinarily pessimistic. He indicated he might have to turn to the Soviets for air defense.

SECRETARY: I am not surprised. He has been badly treated by our Congress.

PEACOCK: He said to me, and to the Prime Minister, that it was the Congress which was jeopardizing his country — as well as his personal future.

I'd like to raise another question. We attended last year, under the previous Government, the Non-Aligned Conference in Lima. It is possible we may be invited again this year, to Colombo this time. I believe it might be useful for us to make the best of both worlds, and that if invited we ought to go. Personally I think we ought to take a step back — instead of my going, I am thinking of sending our Ambassador at the UN. Would that worry you?

SECRETARY: No. We have to be mature about this. I think it would be quite useful to have a friend we can trust at these meetings. From what we know about your Government we would think it a good idea.

PEACOCK: It is predicated on our getting an invitation. India is opposed to our presence there.

SECRETARY: Perhaps you could get Moynihan to go for you.

PEACOCK: That would mean you really did not want us to attend.

HABIB: Are you and Indonesia now agreed on Timor?

PEACOCK: Not completely. We've said what we had to say. We could not condone what they did. It will probably come up before the Security Council.

SECRETARY: I will not make a formal toast — I never read the toasts they write for me anyway. But I offer you our friendship, and closer relations between our two countries.

PEACOCK: My thanks for your reception. We are looking forward to receiving your wife in Australia. I am most grateful.

SECRETARY: I need not tell you how much I regret the circumstances which make you leave so quickly.

PEACOCK: I am delighted that you could set aside the time.

SECRETARY: I think we should try to agree what each of us is about. We will try to keep you informed of what we are thinking, as well as what we are doing.

PEACOCK: If nothing else came out of our lunch but this, it would be a most useful thing. From time to time, when something serious comes up, I would like without bothering you unduly to discuss the matter with you.

SECRETARY: I think that would be an excellent idea. You could either write or telephone the latter might be more effective. What is the time difference?

PEACOCK: Australia is ahead by 15 hours.

HABIB: To raise a final point. On NPW visits — you said that August might not be a bad time.

PEACOCK: Yes. You told me about Prime Minister Muldoon and that he said August was a good month, as it was too cold for demonstrations. We do not care about protests. I said to you in Canberra that — speaking personally — I had not consulted the Prime Minister — I saw no difficulties.

HABIB: Please get your Department to work on the details. The lawyers seem to have some problems.

PEACOCK: I'll fire it up at the political level. There are no problems there. The problems are with the legal aspects of liability. When I was still in Opposition I took a decision with my committee on NPW visits.

SECRETARY: We should not make such a big affair out of it — in the US I mean. It should be routine.

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy Files, P–820117–1629. Secret; Nodis. Drafted by Squire and approved by Covey.

61. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, June 8, 1976, 1400. 61. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, June 8, 1976, 1400.1

Washington, June 8, 1976

ASSISTANT SECRETARY OF DEFENSE
WASHINGTON, D.C. 20301
In reply refer to: 1-6335/76

MEMORANDUM OF CONVERSATION
SUBJECT: Meeting with Mr. Killen, Minister of Defense, Government of Australia

Australia

Minister of Defense, Mr. Dennis James Killen

Ambassador to U.S., Mr. Nicholas Parkinson

Head of the Australian Defense Staff, MGen Peter Falkland

Personal Secretary to Minister of Defense, Mr. Liddicoat

United States

The Secretary of Defense, Donald H. Rumsfeld

Military Assistant to SECDEF, Rear Admiral M. Staser Holcomb

USN Deputy Secretary of Defense, Mr. William P. Clements, Jr.

Assistant Secretary of Defense (ISA), Mr. Eugene V. McAuliffe

Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense, East Asia & Pacific Affairs (ISA), Morton I. Abramowitz

Director, East Asia & Pacific Region (ISA), RADM William J. Crowe

USN Country Director, Australia, Colonel H. Parks Houser III, USA

Time: 1400 hours, 8 June 1976
Place: Office of the Secretary of Defense

(C) NATO Cohesiveness. In response to a question on this subject, The Secretary stated that NATO has held together remarkably well. He granted that there had been problems but in each case they had been worked out. He said attention was now turning to Spain. The King had taken steps to liberalize the old policies and some of Western Europe's leaders were now changing their views toward Spain. The Secretary closed by stating that this administration feels it is essential to bring Spain into NATO.

(C) Diego Garcia. Mr. Killen asked whether there had been any softening in the Congressional attitude toward Diego Garcia. The Secretary said there had not been in spite of continued Soviet efforts to build up their naval forces. Mr. Clements commented that in his Congressional hearings on Diego Garcia he was forced to stick to the U.S. side of the issue. The recent Australian public statement of support for Diego Garcia will be very helpful to the U.S. and will give a clear signal of regional support. The Secretary expressed strong appreciation for Australian support and said it was invaluable. Mr. Killen said he would report the Secretary's comment to the Prime Minister. He urged the Secretary to continue to use the public GOA statement.

(C) Nuclear Powered Warship Visits. Mr. Killen commented that the Prime Minister had announced that NPWs could visit Australian ports and emphasized that they would welcome a visit as soon as possible. In this regard, he noted that Cockburn Sound Naval Base was being completed and could now receive ships. The Secretary expressed his appreciation for the Australian action.

(C) Thailand. Mr. Killen wondered if moving out of Thailand was going to cause problems for the USG. Noting that it would reduce U.S. logistic capability in the Western Pacific, The Secretary replied that negotiations with Thailand had not gone well but that we would find an alternative to our facilities in Thailand. The secretary said he was relaxed on this issue. Any agreement with another country must involve mutual interests and underlying domestic political support and obviously the latter was lacking in Thailand.

(C) Philippine Negotiations. When asked the status of this issue, the Secretary commented that things were progressing at a satisfactory pace. Mr. Killen asked if the Filipinos were requesting more "commercial activity" on the bases. Mr. Clements stated that they did want to become more involved in the administration of the bases and perhaps wanted some more money; however, he did not feel that their terms were unreasonable. Ambassador Parkinson noted that from the beginning the Filipinos had stated they did not want to reduce the U.S. strategic capability. (Killen noted that being out for more money was not a charge that could be laid against Australia.)

(C) Law of the Sea. Mr. Killen thought that LOS problems would loom very large in the future. He felt that if the width of the territorial waters extended to 12 miles, it would have a tremendous impact on international security and political arrangements and would lead to significant conflicts between nations. In particular the Philippine and Indonesian archipelagoes would present us with significant problems in that 118 straits would become domestic waters. Mr. McAuliffe noted that the Soviets had problems with this too but that current proposals would keep open key straits to international traffic.

(C) Australia's Defense Budget. Mr. Killen stated that the Australian Defense Department was the one department in Canberra that had escaped the comptroller's axe and that over the next five years it could receive 12 billion. This equated to a real increase of six percent per year. The Secretary congratulated the Australians on this policy. The Secretary noted that most NATO countries had been increasing about one percent per year and the U.S. had just now been able to turn its defense spending curves around. He thought that these actions by Western nations were encouraging and mutually reinforcing.

(C) Patrol Frigate Program. In the context of complementarily of defense programs, Mr. Killen inquired about the U.S. patrol frigate program, asking whether it still involved a buy of fifty ships. Mr. Clements said yes, although only twelve or so will be authorized through FY 77. Mr. Killen said Australia might well add to its two-ship buy.

(C) Papua and New Guinea. Mr. Killen said this was one area that worried him. This new country was ripe for internal subversion and fragmentation and as a result, GOA was putting a lot of its economic resources there. He hoped the Indonesians were not going to try to take advantage of this situation.

(C) Increased Defense Cooperation. Mr. McAuliffe stated that one of the by-products of recent official level U.S.-Australian defense consultations was the suggestion that there were some areas where we could increase our defense cooperation. Mr. Killen agreed, noting that Indian Ocean surveillance was beyond the capability of New Zealand and Australia combined and, thus, one promising possibility. Others were increased intelligence gathering in the Southwest Pacific and larger and more frequent joint exercises. Mr. Clements asked if the Australian ships would like to visit Diego Garcia. Mr. Killen was enthusiastic about the proposal and urged that it be followed up, possibly as soon as the destroyer Hobart's return from Opsail in July.

Approved by:
Assistant Secretary of Defense (ISA)
Date: 7/7/76

DISTR
SecDef
DepSecDef Clements
DepSecDef Ellsworth
ASD/ISA
PDASD/ISA
DASD/ISA (EAPA)
RADM Holcomb
ISA/AD (COL Houser)
State/EA
State/PM
AMEMB Canberra

1 Source: Washington National Records Center, OASD/ISA Files: FRC 330–79–0037, Australia, 333, Memcons (only), 1976, June–September. Confidential. Prepared by Houser and approved by McAuliffe. The conversation took place in Rumsfeld’s office.

62. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, July 27, 1976, 10:55 a.m.–12:27 p.m. 62. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, July 27, 1976, 10:55 a.m.–12:27 p.m. 1

Washington, July 27, 1976, 10:55 a.m.–12:27 p.m.

MEMORANDUM
THE WHITE HOUSE
WASHINGTON

MEMORANDUM OF CONVERSATION

PARTICIPANTS:

J. Malcolm Fraser, Prime Minister of Australia

Andrew S. Peacock, Minister for Foreign Affairs

Amb. Nicholas F. Parkinson, Australian

Ambassador to the United States

John L. Menadue, secretary, Department of Prime Minister and Cabinet

President Ford

Dr. Henry A. Kissinger, Secretary of State

Brent Scowcroft, Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs

Amb. James W. Hargrove, U.S. Ambassador to Australia

DATE AND TIME: Tuesday, July 27, 1976 10:55 a.m. - 12:27 p.m.

[The press came in to take photos. There were greetings and small talk about the Olympics. The press then departed].

The President: I am delighted to have you here. Congratulations on your victory — not only your personal victory, but your party's. I envy your majority. I wish we had it, but we are working on it.

Fraser: Thank you very much, Mr. President. It is great to be here and I deeply appreciate the invitation during such a busy period. I wish you well in your coming trial. A little luck is always useful.

We particularly wanted to visit in order to wash away a few vestiges of difference between our countries.

The President: I very much appreciate the change. There has been virtually complete change on the Indian Ocean and in general attitude on national security problems, like letting our nuclear warships into ports again.

We are determined to maintain a role in the Indian Ocean, and we are working on the Congress to convince them of the need for Diego Garcia. I think we will make it. I want close cooperation with you. Perhaps we can cooperate with you on the P–3 flights and other aspects of an Indian Ocean military presence. Perhaps you could be of some help with Singapore on this too.

When I was in Congress I was known as a Hawk, and I can't change now that I am in the White House. You might be interested in where we are going on the defense budget. It's a much better situation. Over the past decade they have regularly and systematically cut Presidential defense proposals. They've cut all together over $50 billion. This year I recommended an increase of $14 billion in obligations and $10 billion in expenditures, and they've cut less than one percent. Some of their cuts were okay; some were not. There's been a big change in public opinion.

Fraser: Pm glad to hear it. The history was discouraging. We've had a similar experience. Appropriations will be increased significantly this year and for the next four years.

I understand our experts are working on renewal of Pine Gap. It had been on an annual basis, but I would propose renewal on a ten-year basis if you would find that useful.

The President: That would be very helpful.

Fraser: And I would welcome some sort of cooperative program on the P–3's. We fly them, you know, and I think it would be good. Some of the internal equipment may be different. When Admiral Hayward was in Australia in April he asked if the airport at Learmonth [Northwest Cape] would be of use [for transit flights to Diego Garcia], but Hayward said it was too far South. But if you can use it, we'd be willing, and maybe you could use it for the P–3's.

The President [To Scowcroft]: Who's negotiating this for us?

Scowcroft: Probably Defense.

The President: I will tell our people to press the cooperative approach.

Fraser: I spoke to some of your Congressmen on Diego Garcia.

Kissinger: You gave them the answer they didn't want!

Fraser: I thought I had to lay it on the line. A number of countries around the Indian Ocean privately approve of your moves to counter the Soviets in those waters, even though they aren't in a position to say so publicly. China is an example.

The President: I appreciate the letter you sent me on your trip to China. We hear nothing about Teng Hsiao-ping now.

Fraser: We got the same kind of demonstration in every village we visited. Hua Kuo-feng still seems to be in charge.

The President: Chiao Kuan-hua is still Foreign Minister, isn't he? He was farther down the line when I was there in '72 and he was very articulate and bright. I liked him.

Fraser: He's impressive and forceful.

Kissinger: He's a minor edition of Chou.

Fraser: I would think he'd be a tough negotiator.

The President: Yes, except when he was with Teng, Chiao said very little.

Fraser: And with us when he was with Hua.

The President: How about Mao?

Fraser: They stopped his appearances just before I came. They trotted out Chu Teh two weeks before he died. They had him under careful control and he seemed very vague and frail.

The President: I thought Mao was mentally very alert when I saw him.

Kissinger: Mao was better with you than when I had seen him the previous month.

Fraser: I got several impressions. First is that anyone who makes predictions on China is foolhardy. I got the impression also that they aren't going to make issues out of Southeast Asian problems or the Korean situation or the Taiwan situation. They consider the Soviet problem overriding and won't let these less important problems complicate it.

The President: That's our impression too.

Fraser: They are taking a sharp line on Taiwan, for example in their conversation with Senator Scott.

Kissinger: But he provoked it.

Fraser: One other impression, which may be a misunderstanding. There was only an oblique reference. They wanted us to have the feeling there was not adequate communication.

Kissinger: With Australia or with us?

Fraser, Peacock: With the United States.

Fraser: It's true on Australia particularly but the doors to China have been shut so long and they have so much reason to be suspicious. But the impression we got was they want more dialogue with you. One thing the SALT talks going on — which we support — and they are not a part of it; they are concerned something may happen which would affect them. This was just a general feeling we got. I think we all should try patiently to draw them out and to encourage them as they emerge and engage them more freely in some wider framework. Not that you are not doing that, but I thought I should pass this on.

The President: I never had that impression during our talks in December. They were critical of some of the things we do, but I never got the feeling they thought there was a gulf.

Kissinger: The Chinese are masters. They are near-geniuses and cold-blooded analysts of the balance of power. Sentiment is not something they are concerned with. In fact, we brief them more than anyone else but our close allies. Whenever we are about to meet with the Russians at a high level, we brief them in detail. And they tell us nothing. Now they are concerned that we are weak. They see Vietnam; they see Angola; they see Turkey. And they would like to freeze us into total hostility to the Soviet Union. That would get them off the hook. And then they can organize the Third World against us both. Their game is very complicated but they are doing their best to maneuver us into a position where we have no options. Their policy is becoming more transparent because their leadership is less competent now. We need to maintain our options with respect to both. Being frozen into hostility with the Soviets would worsen our relations with China, not help them.

Fraser: We don't want that. Hostility to the Soviet Union appears absolute now but the possibility of reconciliation we must keep in mind. We have to offer them an alternative home to the Soviet Union. They shouldn't feel a need to repair their relations with the Soviets.

Kissinger: Yes, we must walk this line. It isn't easy. They should feel they can count on us but not take us for granted.

Fraser: Any enduring relationship with China has to take into account your relations with Western Europe too.

The President: We have kept our allies fully abreast of our SALT II negotiations.

Kissinger: And the Chinese. And on MBFR.

The President: In SALT, we think a good foundation was laid in Vladivostok. The problems now are how to negotiate these ambiguous systems like Backfire and cruise missile. I happen to think SALT is in everyone's interest. I won't sign a bad agreement just to sign an agreement. We won't compromise principles but I want an agreement.

Fraser: We certainly support that.

The President: We are after an agreement. Otherwise both sides will have to move ahead with major programs. So we are looking for an agreement through 1985. We don't have much time, since the Interim Agreement ends in '77.

Kissinger: And if we went into competition, in ten years we would be no better off really. Our estimates are that we would lose as many as 125 million people in a nuclear war if we didn't strike first, and 110 million if we did. Even with our 6-to-1 advantage in warheads. We need to spend the money on conventional forces.

The President: We have a study underway now on our Navy. The figures you see are misleading since a lot of their ships are used for coastal defense and minesweeping. Our tonnage is almost double theirs. But we are taking a hard look at whether we need an extra push on Navy.

Of course we are also debating with Congress on what to do with the B-1. An evaluation will be complete by 1 November. I think we need it — the B-52 is aging.

Kissinger: It would be a disaster if the B-1 were scrapped. The thing the conservatives don't realize is that their SALT opposition has left open the B-1 to attack.

The President: Carter supports a $7-9 billion cut in the defense budget. I don't think it can be done.

Kissinger: Did you see the defense advisers who met with Carter yesterday? $7- 9 billion cut is just the tip of the iceberg. They would have to cut in Asia and Europe and the B-1.

The President: There's no question they would stop the B-1 and try to modify the B-52. Humphrey tried to stop R&D on the cruise missile.

Fraser: Would they reduce the commitments to match?

Kissinger: Not necessarily.

The President: The cruise missile isn't the ultimate weapon but it's still necessary.

Fraser: How do you see the economy going? Was the Puerto Rico meeting a success?

The President: Yes, it was. I think things are going well. At Rambouillet we were all in the trough of the recession; we tried to coordinate our programs for recovery. At Puerto Rico the recovery was under way — with our economy way ahead. We all recognized the need to curb inflation while reducing unemployment. We also discussed North-South and East-West economic issues.

[Describes domestic recovery, with relevant statistics and trends.] It's much better than even in January. The trends are all in the right direction.

Fraser: That must be nice for later this year.

The President: Yes, though we would rather have the employment higher and the inflation lower. How about you?

Fraser: We are getting back, but it is difficult. The previous government just gave the unions anything they wanted. I think now we are in the early stages of recovery, but some indicators are going in each direction. I think inflation is the chief problem and we can't move until we get that licked. We cut $3 billion off the budget this year and there are signs inflation is coming down. We've had trouble getting the unions to restrain their wage demands. Treasury is convinced the recovery is underway, but slowly.

The President: I notice the British have taken some tough decisions, but I notice they had some defectors. He can't afford too much defection.

Fraser: No. It is always difficult taking on these very tough programs. I think it is probably better that Labor does it than the Conservatives.

The President: Callaghan called me and told me he has had to defer some defense spending, in order to insist on deferral of some social program costs, but he said it was no more than a temporary defense deferral.

Fraser: Are the NATO countries increasing their defense spending?

The President: Yes, but not as much as we would like. We are trying to improve cooperation and standardization.

Kissinger: General Haig is doing a superb job of utilizing what he has.

The President: I am very worried about the situation in Italy.

Peacock: Hasn't Carter said he could live with Communists in the Italian government?

Kissinger: Yes. And that is disastrous. The Communists will bide their time until the U.S. election, hoping for a Carter victory and an easier posture from the new Administration. If the US backs down, that'll be a disaster, because France will then follow the same road.

Once you get to arguing how much participation is okay, you are lost.

Fraser: Isn't this how Czechoslovakia went?

Kissinger: I had a study made showing that the East European Communists were making precisely the same kind of statements in 1945 to 1948. They sound just like Berlinguer and the French Communists today. I will give you a copy tomorrow.

Fraser: Yes, I'd like that.

President: Our hard line in Portugal seems to have paid off well.

Kissinger: But Italy is more complicated. Like on Diego Garcia, many of the Europeans agree with us on Italy but criticize us in public.

Fraser: That is bad. It reminds me of Vietnam.

Kissinger: It's interesting that all the crazies who were protesting the killing in Vietnam and elsewhere are totally silent about the 500,000 who almost certainly were killed in Cambodia.

Fraser: At least.

Peacock: The Cambodians have come to us in Peking to suggest that we establish diplomatic relations by 6 August. We couldn't do it by then but I wanted to discuss that. There might be some advantages but that may be too soon.

Kissinger: The Chinese want to build a barrier to the Vietnamese. While the Cambodians are dreadful, it does make some sense.

Fraser: We would have to disclaim any idea of approving their actions.

Peacock: We could perhaps be useful to you — I want to talk about it in more depth.

Kissinger: It might be a good idea. Anything that would help to contain Vietnam would be good. Though I consider the Cambodian Government loathsome.

The President: Do you have relations with North Korea?

Fraser: Yes. It was established by the previous government. We have kept them.

Kissinger: How do they treat you?

Fraser: There is virtually no contact. We were kicked out quickly because they didn't like the way we abstained on the UNGA vote.

The President: Well, we are looking forward to seeing you at dinner this evening.

Fraser: There is one domestic problem I need to raise for the record — your beef imports.

The President: Yes, we have the same problem. I'm getting pressure from meat producers here.

Kissinger: I was hit with it when I was in Oregon for a speech.

Fraser: We are having a serious drought and people are killing the cattle. There are arguments on both sides of the question and I would simply like to say I mentioned it.

[There was additional brief discussion of the prospective grain crops in Australia and the U.S. The conversation then ended.]

1 Source: Ford Library, National Security Adviser, Memoranda of Conversation, Box 20, 7/27/76. Secret; Nodis.

63. Memorandum From Robert Hormats of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Scowcroft), Washington, October 14, 1976. 63. Memorandum From Robert Hormats of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Scowcroft), Washington, October 14, 1976.1

Washington, October 14, 1976

MEMORANDUM
NATIONAL SECURITY COUNCIL
ACTION

October 14, 1976

MEMORANDUM FOR: BRENT SCOWCROFT
FROM: ROBERT HORMATS [RH initialed]
SUBJECT: Meat Imports

In connection with the announcement of import quotas on beef, Agriculture intends to issue in the next day or so a regulation concerning meat shipments through Foreign Trade Zones. As presently drafted by Agriculture, the regulation would take effect immediately and thus would apply to Australian beef shipments now being processed at Mayaguez, Puerto Rico.

State has sent a letter to Agriculture pointing out that the proposed regulation is inconsistent with the terms of our various meat restraint agreements and would have a damaging effect on our relations with Australia and other supplying countries. Jules Katz has also discussed this matter with Dick Bell, but Agriculture has thus far refused to budge. Bell contends that the Administration must make a further gesture to the domestic cattle industry and thus is pushing this regulation, which will in effect force Australia to absorb approximately 11 million pounds of beef now in Mayaguez into its overall import quota.

The Australian Government has, however, made it clear that any action taken by us to reduce its quota below the negotiated restraint level would be viewed as discriminatory and would likely provoke a strong reaction in Australia. Prime Minister Fraser wrote the President on October 11 concerning this matter (Tab B). He alluded to possible consequences for our bilateral relations if we move to cut the Australian quota. He said that ". . . the Australian Government could not accept, and the Australian people will not be able to understand, any decision which penalizes, or appears to penalize, Australia for failure on the part of others." Fraser stressed that our meat import problem stems from above-estimate shipments by Canada, which is not a party to the US voluntary restraint program.

I share State's concern about this matter, particularly with respect to the possible impact on our relations with Australia. The regulation should apply prospectively not retroactively. We should not penalize Australia at this late date for taking advantage of a loophole in our legislation especially when we told the Australians officially that we had no intention of doing so. The Australians are on solid legal grounds and will hold us accountable in the GATT and elsewhere if we force them to count the recent shipment to Mayaguez under their 1976 quota.

There are some precedents for dealing with situations such as these. For example, when we recently raised the duty on sugar, we exempted shipments in transit from the higher tariff. Also, the Senate this year passed the Curtis Amendment concerning Foreign Trade Zones. The amendment would have required that only those meat shipments which entered a Foreign Trade Zone after the effective date of the act be counted as part of an individual country's quota. Although the amendment died in the House, it does give us some idea of what might be acceptable to the Congress. Domestic cattlemen supported the amendment.

I recommend that you call Acting secretary of Agriculture Knebel and explain to him the broader policy implications of the proposed regulation and request that his Department give consideration to its modification so that it applies only to future shipments through Foreign Trade Zones. At Tab A are suggested talking points for your call to Knebel.

RECOMMENDATION
That you phone Knebel and discuss with him the proposed meat import regulation.

Concur: W.R. Gleysteen

1 Source: Ford Library, National Security Adviser, Presidential Correspondence with Foreign Leaders, Box 1. Confidential. Sent for action. Concurred in by Gleysteen. Attached but not published at Tab A is Scowcroft’s undated talking points; attached but not published at Tab B is Fraser’s undated letter to Ford. Fraser’s letter concluded, “it is my firm view that the quantity of Australian meat to be permitted entry to the USA this year, should be in no way reduced below the level of 632.2 million pounds previously agreed between our two governments.” On November 6, Deputy Executive Secretary Frank Ortiz notified Scowcroft that Australia had been informed that its quota for 1976 was 632.2 million pounds. (ibid.)

Chapter III: IndochinaChapter III: Indochina

64. Intelligence Memorandum, Washington, January 31, 1975.

Washington, January 31, 1975

This intelligence memorandum assessed the potential internal consequences of a communist takeover in Cambodia.

Source: Central Intelligence Agency, NIC Files, Job 79R01142A, Box 1, Life in Cambodia After a Communist Takeover. Secret. According to the covering memorandum, not published, the CIA prepared this memorandum for Habib. CIA briefing memoranda, “The Khmer Communists’ ‘Communal’ Campaign,” January 29, 1974; “The Rebellious Chams,” January 22, 1974; and “Problems in the Pagodas,” February 5, 1974, attached but not published.

65. Minutes of the Secretary of State’s Staff Meeting, Washington, April 30, 1975, 8 a.m.

Washington, April 30, 1975

Kissinger and his staff discussed the situation in Vietnam and Cambodia.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Transcripts of Secretary of State Kissinger’s Staff Meetings, 1973–1977, Entry 5177, Box 7, Secretary’s Staff Meetings. Secret. Kissinger chaired the meeting, attended by all the principal officers of the Department or their designated alternates.

66. Telegram 3140 From the Embassy in Laos to the Department of State, May 8, 1975, 1150Z.

May 8, 1975

Chapman reported on developments in Laos after the Communist victories in Cambodia and Vietnam and asked the Department of State for guidance on U.S. policy toward Laos.

Source: National Archives, Record Group 59, State Archiving System. Secret; Priority; Limdis. Repeated for information to Bangkok, Paris, and CINCPAC.

67. Memorandum For Secretary Kissinger, Washington, May 2, 1975.

Washington, May 2, 1975

The White House Situation Room summarized the situation in Cambodia, Laos, and Vietnam.

Source: Ford Library, National Security Adviser, NSC Files, Presidential Daily Briefings, Box 3, 5/2/1975. Top Secret; Sensitive; Codeword.

68. Defense Intelligence Notice, Washington, May 9, 1975.

Washington, May 9, 1975

The Defense Intelligence Agency reported on the depopulation of Phnom Penh.

Source: Ford Library, National Security Adviser, Presidential Country Files for East Asia and the Pacific, Box 3, Cambodia (17). Top Secret; Sensitive; Codeword. Prepared by A. Burger in DIA. A handwritten note at the top of the unpublished covering memorandum from Stearman to Kissinger, May 12, reads: “HAK has seen.”

69. Telegram 109710 From the Department of State to the Embassy in Laos, May 11, 1975, 0234Z.

May 11, 1975

Responding to telegram 3140 from the Embassy in Laos, the Department of State outlined U.S. policy toward Laos.

Source: Ford Library, National Security Adviser, Presidential Country Files for East Asia and the Pacific, Box 12, Laos, State Department Telegrams, From SECSTATE, Nodis. Secret; Immediate; Nodis. Drafted by Rives; cleared by Habib and Scowcroft; approved by Kissinger. Telegram 3140 is Document 66.

70. Telegram 3300 From the Embassy in Laos to the Department of State, May 13, 1975, 1208Z.

May 13, 1975

Chapman responded to telegram 109710 from the Department of State on the future of U.S. policy toward Laos.

Source: Ford Library, National Security Adviser, Presidential Country Files for East Asia and the Pacific, Box 12, Laos, State Department Telegrams, To SECSTATE, Nodis. Secret; Nodis. Telegram 109710 is Document 69. The Department of State report, “Issues Paper on Laos,” May 14, prepared by Rives and Henderson, contains lengthy coverage of the situation in Laos. According to a covering memorandum, May 14, the Department prepared the report, not published, for Secretary Kissinger’s May 15 meeting with President Ford. Kissinger and Ford did not discuss the topic on May 15. (Ford Library, National Security Adviser, Presidential Country Files for East Asia and the Pacific, Box 12, Laos)

71. Memorandum From William Smyser and William Stearman of the National Security Council Staff to Secretary of State Kissinger, Washington, May 16, 1975.

Washington, May 16, 1975

Smyser and Stearman prepared this memorandum to guide discussions at a scheduled May 17 WSAG meeting on Indochina; the group did not meet as planned.

Source: Ford Library, National Security Adviser, Presidential Country Files for East Asia and the Pacific, Box 27, WSAG Meeting, Indochina, May 17, 1975. Secret. A slash appears across the first page of the memorandum; a handwritten note at the top of the page reads: “Meeting Cancelled.” Tab A, Talking Points, undated, attached but not published. For Tab B, see source note, Document 70. Tabs C and D not attached.

72. Telegram 122371 From the Department of State to the Embassy in Laos, May 26, 1975, 0049Z.

May 26, 1975

The Department conveyed a message from Secretary Kissinger to Prime Minister Souvanna Phouma concerning U.S.-Lao relations.

Source: Ford Library, National Security Adviser, Presidential Country Files for East Asia and the Pacific, Box 12, Laos, State Department Telegrams, From SECSTATE, Exdis. Secret; Flash; Exdis. Drafted by Zurhellen; cleared by Eagleburger and Huntington; approved by Kissinger. In WH 50942/TOHAK 009, May 27, Scowcroft informed Kissinger, then traveling in Europe: “The President was very quiet this morning. He was pleased to see that the Embassy in Laos would be reduced to less than 50 people. My impression is that he would be sympathetic to closing it down entirely.” (Ford Library, NSC Files, HAK Trip Files, Box 9, May 26–June 3, 1975, Europe, TOHAK, 1)

73. Telegram 3953 From the Embassy in Laos to the Department of State, June 3, 1975, 0725Z.

June 3, 1975

Habib reported on his visit to Vientiane.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, State Archiving System. Secret; Immediate; Nodis. Habib visited Vientiane from June 2 until 3. The Embassy in Laos relayed background papers to Habib in telegrams 3864 and 3876, May 30. (Ibid.)

74. Memorandum From William Stearman of the National Security Council Staff to Secretary of State Kissinger, Washington, June 6, 1975.

Washington, June 6, 1975

Stearman outlined U.S. options in Laos for WSAG consideration.

Source: Ford Library, National Security Adviser, Presidential Country Files for East Asia and the Pacific, Box 12, Laos. Secret. Urgent; Sent for information. Kissinger’s initials appear at the top of the first page. According to an attached correspondence profile, Kissinger noted the report on June 9. The NSC staff scheduled a WSAG meeting for June 27 to consider U.S. policy toward Laos, Vietnam, and Thailand, but a handwritten notation in the June 27 WSAG Briefing Books reads: “HAK Cancelled.” (Ibid., Box 27, WSAG Meeting, Indochina, June 27, 1975)

75. Memorandum From William Smyser of the National Security Council Staff to Secretary of State Kissinger, Washington, June 9, 1975.

Washington, June 9, 1975

Smyser summarized and analyzed the DRV’s May 28 message to the United States and recommended that the United States respond positively.

Source: Ford Library, National Security Adviser, Kissinger-Scowcroft West Wing Office Files, General Subject Files, Box 34, Vietnam, Camp David File (2), 3/24/75–12/11/75. Top Secret; Sensitive; Exclusively Eyes Only; Outside the System. The DRV message, May 28, and draft U.S. response, June 11, are attached at Tabs A and B but not published. Text of the messages are in Document 76.

76. Backchannel Message WH 51044 From the President’s Deputy Assistant for National Security Affairs (Scowcroft) to the U.S. Air Attaché to France (Oveson), June 11, 1975, 0627Z.

June 11, 1975

Scowcroft provided the U.S. response to the DRV message for Oveson to deliver to the North Vietnamese in Paris.

Source: Ford Library, National Security Adviser, NSC East Asian and Pacific Affairs Staff Files, Box 11, Vietnam (11). Top Secret; Sensitive; Eyes Only.

77. Telegram 139334 From the Department of State to the Embassy in Laos, June 13, 1975, 2321Z.

June 13, 1975

The Department relayed policy decisions to the Embassy on the U.S. presence in Laos.

Source: Ford Library, National Security Adviser, Presidential Country Files for East Asia and the Pacific, Box 12, Laos, State Department Telegrams, From SECSTATE, Nodis. Drafted by Rosenthal and Gardiner; cleared by Stearman, Crowe, and Shackley; approved by Habib.

78. Telegram 160796 From the Department of State to the Embassy in Laos, July 9, 1975, 0129Z.

July 9, 1975, 0129Z

The Department provided additional details on U.S. interests in Laos.

Source: Ford Library, National Security Adviser, Presidential Country Files for East Asia and the Pacific, Box 12, Laos, State Department Telegrams, From SECSTATE, Nodis. Secret; Immediate; Nodis. Drafted by Miller; cleared by Habib; and approved by Kissinger.

79. Backchannel Message 0124 From the U.S. Air Attaché to France (Oveson) to the President’s Deputy Assistant for National Security Affairs (Scowcroft), July 17, 1975, 0944Z.

July 17, 1975

Oveson sent the text of the DRV response to Scowcroft.

Source: Ford Library, National Security Adviser, NSC East Asian and Pacific Affairs Staff Files, Box 11, Vietnam (11). Top Secret; Sensitive; Exclusively Eyes Only. On August 9 the DRV again contacted the Embassy in France with an offer to return to the United States the remains of three U.S. servicemen killed during the Vietnam War. (Telegram 20633 from Paris, 9 August, ibid.)

80. Memorandum From Secretary of State Kissinger to President Ford, Washington, September 29, 1975.

Washington, September 29, 1975

Kissinger reported on conditions in Vietnam since the communist takeover.

Source: Ford Library, National Security Adviser, NSC Files, Presidential Daily Briefings, Box 5, 9/29/1975. Top Secret; Sensitive; Codeword. In New York on September 28, Kissinger discussed Indochina with PRC Foreign Minister Ch’iao Kuan-hua. (See memorandum of conversation, Foreign Relations of the United States, 1969–1976, Vol. XVIII, China, 1973–1976, Document 119)

81. Memorandum From Secretary of State Kissinger to President Ford, Washington, November 3, 1975.

Washington, November 3, 1975

[text not declassified in time for publication]

Source: Ford Library, National Security Adviser, NSC Files, Presidential Daily Briefings, Box 5, 11/3/1975. Top Secret; Sensitive; Codeword.

82. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Scowcroft) to Secretary of State Kissinger, Secretary of Defense Rumsfeld, Secretary of Treasury Simon, and the Director of Central Intelligence (Colby), Washington, November 18, 1975.

Washington, November 18, 1975

Scowcroft requested studies with recommendations on U.S. policy concerning American arms captured in Indochina.

Source: Ford Library, NSC Institutional Files (H-Files), Box 16, SRG Meeting, Taiwan, February 27, 1976 (3). Secret. A copy was sent to the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff.

83. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, December 17, 1975, noon.

Washington, December 17, 1975

President Ford discussed U.S.-Vietnamese relations and MIA issues with congressional representatives going to Hanoi.

Source: Ford Library, National Security Adviser, Memoranda of Conversations, Box 17, Chronological File. Top Secret. The meeting was held in the Oval Office. Brackets are in the original.

84. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Scowcroft) to President Ford, Washington, January 19, 1976.

Washington, January 19, 1976

Scowcroft summarized for President Ford a Department of State report on conditions in South Vietnam.

Source: Ford Library, White House Central Files, Subject Files, Box 59, CO 165–2, Vietnam (South). Confidential. Sent for information. Ford initialed the first page of the memorandum; a notation at the top of the document reads: “The President has seen.” Airgram 313 from Bangkok, December 16, 1975, is attached but not published.

85. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, January 26, 1976, 4:43–5:30 p.m.

Washington, January 26, 1976, 4:43–5:30 p.m.

Members of the House Select Committee on MIAs reported to President Ford on their trip to North Vietnam.

Source: Ford Library, National Security Adviser, Memoranda of Conversations, Box 17, Chronological File. Secret; Nodis. The meeting was held in the Oval Office. Brackets are in the original. Article 21 of the January 1973 Paris Agreement involved postwar reconstruction.

86. Minutes of Senior Review Group Meeting, Washington, February 27, 1976, 3:40–4:02 p.m.

Washington, February 27, 1976, 3:40–4:02 p.m.

Members of the SRG discussed problems related to U.S. equipment captured in Vietnam.

Source: Ford Library, NSC Institutional Files (H-Files), SRG Meeting Minutes, Originals, February 1976 (2). Top Secret. Briefing book, with documents requested by Scowcroft on November 18, 1975, is ibid., Box 16, SRG Meeting, Taiwan, February 27, 1976 (3).

87. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Scowcroft) to President Ford, Washington, March 29, 1976.

Washington, March 29, 1976

Scowcroft encouraged President Ford to approve the March 6 Senior Review Group policy recommendations on the sale of American arms captured in Vietnam. Scowcroft also asked the President to approve a NSDM on the issue.

Source: Ford Library, NSC Institutional Files (H-Files), NSDM Files, Box 64, NSDM 322, American Equipment Captured in Indochina (3). Secret. Sent for action. Ford initialed his approval on page 5. A notation at the top of the first page reads: “The President has seen.” Tab A, a draft NSDM, undated; and Tab B, Department of State report, “American Arms Captured in Indochina,” undated, are attached but not published. For the NSDM as approved, see Document 88.

88. National Security Decision Memorandum 322, Washington, March 31, 1976.

Washington, March 31, 1976

Statement on U.S. policy regarding American equipment captured in Indochina.

Source: Ford Library, NSC Institutional Files (H-Files), NSDM Files, Box 64, NSDM 322, American Equipment Captured in Indochina (3). Secret. Copies were sent to the Attorney General, the Director of the Office of Management and Budget, and the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff.

89. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Scowcroft) to President Ford, Washington, May 10, 1976.

Washington, May 10, 1976

Scowcroft summarized for President Ford a Department of State report on life inside Cambodia.

Source: Ford Library, National Security Adviser, Presidential Country Files for East Asia and the Pacific, Box 3, Cambodia (23). Confidential. Sent for information. Ford initialed the first page of the memorandum; a notation at the top of the document reads: “The President Has Seen.” Tab A, Airgram 74 from Bangkok, March 31, is attached but not printed. The NSC staff prepared a second report, “Life Inside Cambodia,” May 29, from unclassified sources for public dissemination. (Ibid., White House Central Files, Subject Files, Box 10, CO 26, Khmer Republic, Cambodia) Kissinger discussed Southeast Asian issues, including the Cambodian internal situation, with Australian Prime Minister Fraser on July 27. (See Document 62)

90. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Scowcroft) to President Ford, Washington, July 10, 1976.

Washington, July 10, 1976

Scowcroft summarized for President Ford the experiences of refugees fleeing Vietnam.

Source: Ford Library, National Security Adviser, Presidential Country Files for East Asia and the Pacific, Box 20, Vietnam (30). Confidential. Sent for information. Ford initialed the first page of the memorandum; a notation at the top of the document reads: “The President Has Seen.” Tab A, Airgram 136 from Bangkok, June 16, attached but not published. A related NSC report, “Assessment of Developments in Indochina Since the End of the War,” July 15, requested by the President, offers a detailed appraisal of the situation in Southeast Asia. (Ibid., Box 1, Southeast Asia, 7)

91. Telegram 33637 From the Embassy in France to the Department of State, November 12, 1976, 1805Z.

November 12, 1976

A summary of the November 12 meeting between Vietnamese and Embassy officials in Paris.

Source: Ford Library, National Security Adviser, Kissinger-Scowcroft West Wing Office Files, 1969–1977, General Subject Files, Box 34, Vietnam War, Camp David Files (3), 12/12/75–12/15/76. Secret; Flash; Exdis. In telegram 72569 to Paris, March 25, Kissinger sent a note to the DRV on the establishment of relations. (National Archives, Record Group 59, State Archiving System) On August 30, Kissinger approached Ford: “We got a note from Vietnam. Do you want meetings? We would say it was for the MIA’s.” The President responded: “As long as that cast was put on it.” Kissinger finished: “They would raise other things. But we could stick with MIA’s. Of course we could drag it out, and certainly no conclusion would come before November.” (Ibid., National Security Adviser, Memoranda of Conversations, Box 20, Chronological File)

92. Telegram 290657 From the Department of State to the Embassy in France, November 27, 1976, 1612Z.

November 27, 1976

The Department of State sent instructions for another meeting with the Vietnamese.

Source: Ford Library, National Security Adviser, Kissinger-Scowcroft West Wing Office Files, 1969–1977, General Subject Files, Box 34, Vietnam War, Camp David Files (3), 12/12/75–12/15/76. Confidential; Priority; Exdis.

93. Telegram 35242 From the Embassy in France to the Department of State, November 29, 1976, 1805Z.

November 29, 1976

A report on the November 29 meeting between Vietnamese and Embassy officials in Paris.

Source: Ford Library, National Security Adviser, Kissinger-Scowcroft West Wing Office Files, 1969–1977, General Subject Files, Box 34, Vietnam War, Camp David Files (3), 12/12/75–12/15/76. Secret; Immediate; Exdis. Telegram 290657 to Paris, November 27, is Document 92.

94. Telegram 37000 From the Embassy in France to the Department of State, December 15, 1976, 1242Z.

December 15, 1976

Report on the December 15 meeting between Vietnamese and Embassy officials in Paris.

Source: Ford Library, National Security Adviser, Kissinger-Scowcroft West Wing Office Files, 1969–1977, General Subject Files, Box 34, Vietnam War, Camp David Files (3), 12/12/75–12/15/76. Secret; Immediate; Exdis. Telegram 35242 from Paris, November 29, is Document 93. The Department of State did not respond to this message; no evidence of a January 10 meeting has been found.

95. Research Study Prepared by the Central Intelligence Agency, Washington, December 1976.

Washington, December 1976

The Office of Political Research assessment of the internal situation in Cambodia.

Source: Central Intelligence Agency, Office of Current Intelligence, Job 79T00889A, Box 9, “Democratic Cambodia: An Experiment in Radicalism.” Secret.

64. Intelligence Memorandum, Washington, January 31, 1975. 64. Intelligence Memorandum, Washington, January 31, 1975.1

Washington, January 31, 1975

January 31, 1975

INTELLIGENCE MEMORANDUM

SUBJECT: Consequences Within Cambodia of a Communist Takeover*

*This memorandum, prepared under the aegis of the National Intelligence Officer for South and Southeast Asia, was drafted by the Office of Current Intelligence and coordinated within CIA.

1. The immediate objective of the Khmer Communists (KC) following any capitulation of the Cambodian Government (GKR) would be the occupation of urban centers so as to fully disarm the Cambodian Armed Forces (FANK) and take over the machinery of state. Bloodletting would be inevitable as KC units mopped up pockets of resistance and their leaders settled old scores with some leading provincial and national GKR officials and senior FANK officers unable to flee the country. Bureaucrats, technicians, intelligentsia, and former FANK officers would no doubt be subjected to an intense indoctrination and "re-education" process which would most likely involve incarceration, coercion, and some, but probably not mass, exemplary executions. The lower strata of urban society would probably undergo a less formal and traumatic process.

2. Once in full control of the former GKR zones, the KC would begin pursuing the long-term objective: centralization of control over the instruments of production by a KC government. Essentially this would mean the implementation in the former GKR zones of programs long underway in KC controlled territory. These would include: — the confiscation of privately-owned land and the tools of agriculture and the establishment of Communist-controlled collectives;

— the gradual replacement of Buddhism by Communist-controlled mass front organizations;

— the destruction of the traditional administrative system and its replacement by a centralized government under the leadership of the Khmer Communist Party;

— the nationalization of all light industry and means of commerce.

3. Such measures have not gone down well with the land-proud and independent-minded Cambodian peasantry and over the years have caused almost two million peasants to abandon their farms and flee to the GKR zone. Smoldering resentment among those that have remained behind has on occasion resulted in small-scale uprisings which the KC have put down ruthlessly. Even if they won full control of the country, they would continue to meet similar resistance to their programs. The KC lack the organizational pool of well trained cadres possessed by their Vietnamese allies, but they could be expected to push their efforts to regiment and collectivize Khmer society relentlessly, using force where necessary.

4. Most population centers in zones presently controlled by the GKR would have large numbers of refugees following a KC takeover and except for the Battambang area, stocks of basic commodities would be extremely low. Living conditions for all would deteriorate markedly as these commodities ran out. To ease the situation the KC would forcefully resettle the large numbers of refugees now in the GKR zone and might also have to evacuate many city-dwellers into the countryside where conditions would not be much better. The Communists would have major difficulties in coping with refugees and with supply shortages for some months — and the population would suffer real hardship — unless the KC were provided liberal and rapid assistance.

5. The situation would ease as soon as the next seasonal crop cycle began, although difficulties would remain. Some dependence on imported foods might persist, but consumption of vegetable crops with short growing spans and use of readily available fish would reduce external needs. Since so much of the sharp decline in rice production from the 3.8 million ton level in 1969 to less than 1 million tons in recent years has been a function of wartime disruption to the countryside, there is an excellent chance that Cambodia would rapidly reapproach self-sufficiency in basic foodstuffs even without significant changes in technology or major inputs of equipment or chemicals.

6. Attached as of possible interest are several earlier brief memoranda prepared by the Central Intelligence Agency on various aspects of rule in areas of Cambodia already under KC control.

1 Source: Central Intelligence Agency, NIC Files, Job 79R01142A, Box 1, Life in Cambodia After a Communist Takeover. Secret. According to the covering memorandum, not published, the CIA prepared this memorandum for Habib. CIA briefing memoranda, “The Khmer Communists’ ‘Communal’ Campaign,” January 29, 1974; “The Rebellious Chams,” January 22, 1974; and “Problems in the Pagodas,” February 5, 1974, attached but not published.

65. Minutes of the Secretary of State’s Staff Meeting, Washington, April 30, 1975, 8 a.m. 65. Minutes of the Secretary of State’s Staff Meeting, Washington, April 30, 1975, 8 a.m.1

Washington, April 30, 1975

The Secretary's 8:00 a.m. Staff Meeting
Wednesday, April 30, 1975

PRESENT:

P - Mr. Sisco

E - Mr. Robinson

T - Mr. Maw

M - Mr. Eagleburger, Acting

AF - Ambassador Davis

ARA - Mr. Rogers

EA - Mr. Habib

EU - Mr. Hartman

NEA - Mr. Atherton

INR - Mr. Hyland

S/P - Mr. Lord

EB - Mr. Glitman

S/PRS - Ambassador Anderson

PM - Mr. Vest

IO - Ambassador Buffum

H - Ambassador McCloskey

L - Mr.Leigh

S/S - Mr. Springsteen

S - Mr. Bremer

[Omitted here is discussion unrelated to Indochina.]

SECRETARY KISSINGER: Phil?

MR. HABIB: Saigon surrendered, as you know.

I have a couple of subsidiary questions.

First of all, we will move to freeze their assets. But I propose that we delay until about three o'clock this afternoon to let our friends in the Embassy here pay their debts, pay their employees. I have talked to the Ambassador who asked that we give them some time until this afternoon so they can pay their employees three months pay and a few things like that. Unless you see some reason not to, we will move to freeze their assets and then —

SECRETARY KISSINGER: I see no reason. How much does that involve?

MR. HABIB: I don't know, For one thing, there are obligations that Americans have to Vietnamese, that would be a transfer of funds. I was told it is up to $106 million the other day. And things like that. What this will do is prevent that kind of payment until we decide how we want to do it — until we decide what obligations they have to us.

It will be in effect a holding action until we sort it out.

We did the same thing in Cambodia.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: We're getting pretty good at it.

MR. HABIB: We get practice. In each case we get better.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: We can't afford to lose a war any more.

MR. HABIB: We have one more to go very soon, and there will be a third and fourth to follow. That will be within the next year.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: Well, that is an elegant way of closing your bureau.

MR. EAGLEBURGER: We are going to make a recommendation that EA be transferred to NEA.

MR. HABIB: In any event, that is one problem. The next one is I am scheduled to appear before the Kennedy committee this morning, Subcommittee on Refugees, which is going to raise the same old business. First of all, they are going to castigate me for not bringing Dean Brown along, but I can slough that off.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: I didn't understand Dean Brown wasn't permitted to testify. Who thought that up?

MR. EAGLEBURGER: Your friend Scowcroft and I.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: Why?

MR. EAGLEBURGER: I can explain it later. He's such a lousy witness. (Laughter)

MR. HABIB: In any event, one of the things we are up against is Kennedy keeps saying "Why don't you give some of this assistance through international agencies." And this is a kick with which he comes at me every time. In the past I have been able to handle it more or less easily. But we have a suggestion.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: What? We won't give any. So you start from that.

MR. HABIB: Let me make my suggestion. We have 50,000 tons of rice that belong to us in Saigon.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: You tried to sell that to me on Cambodia.

MR. HABIB: No. We have 50,000 tons of rice in Saigon. It is in warehouses. And when people proposed it to me this morning, I accused them of hypocrisy. But the more I thought about it — we can turn that rice over to the United Nations and tell the United Nations to distribute it. It is captured. The North Vietnamese have it. It strikes me as a little bit hypocritical. But nevertheless hypocrisy is not unknown in diplomacy.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: I don't care about these gimmicks. If you say we have 50,000 tons in Saigon, and if the Communists want to turn it over to the UN —

MR. HABIB: It belongs to us. We own title.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: Well, unless Graham Martin stayed at the last minute, there is no one there to keep them from seizing it. It is a minor league gimmick. If you want to —

MR. HABIB: That is what I feel also. But I felt impelled to raise it, because both AID —

SECRETARY KISSINGER: I have no objection to you saying there are 50,000 tons of rice in Saigon which we are delighted to turn over to the UN. But it is a sort of preposterous proposal. I would not make anything of it. Because obviously if there is a need, there is a need for more rice to come in, not for who distributes it.

MR. HABIB: No. As a matter of fact, they don't need much rice. That would be about enough to meet —

SECRETARY KISSINGER: Look — if they don't need rice then — it is a minor league problem. It is a sort of tawdry little maneuver. If you want to do it, I have no objection to it. But it doesn't take care of the Kennedy problem. Secondly, it was absolutely clear to me at the congressional leadership meeting yesterday that the overwhelming sentiment of the leaders that were at that meeting was against aid to Communist Vietnam. And in fact, a number of them said if they had any idea that it would pass, that we would do it, they would add a rider to the foreign aid bill prohibiting it. So we must not be confused by a small group of humanitarian inclined Senators about what the predominant trend at least of the leadership is that was at the meeting yesterday. Not even Phil Burton spoke out for humanitarian aid.

MR. HABIB: The bill does state that you cannot give it — isn't that right — the bill states that you cannot give it to Communist —

MR. MONROE: Section 11.

MR. HABIB: But it doesn't say you cannot give it to international agencies who can give it to Communists. We can interpret it that way.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: Up to now AID has taken the position that if one request is refused they come in with another one. I saw Parker yesterday. Every day they come in with some other formula in the hope of getting it past us. The answer is that the President does not wish to do it. I do not wish to have any more requests from AID until we make a decision. Now, damn it, I want somebody who is in charge of AID to implement this. It is not a question of which island gets it. Nobody gets it until the President makes a decision. We are going to say we want to see what political developments are in South Vietnam, and just say if there is a blood bath, as there is going on in Cambodia, we absolutely will not do it. That gives you an opportunity to say — if at some later time they can identify specific hardship areas where we can do something under international supervision, we are willing to look at it.

MR. BUFFUM: In fact, Mr. Secretary, if we make this offer of the rice, doesn't that already breach the principle? Then the question is what else are you going to do through the UN.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: I am not in favor of the rice.

MR. HABIB: Neither am I, because I think it is hypocritical.

MR. BUFFUM: It already breaches the principle. Either we are going to be prepared to contribute through international agencies to South Vietnam or we are not. If we are not going to —

SECRETARY KISSINGER: I am not saying we absolutely may not contribute a small amount at some point if the political evolution — I see no reason to do anything in Cambodia, given the behavior of the Cambodian government. Of course there is no one there to distribute it any way, so it doesn't make any difference.

MR. HABIB: The ICRC is still in Cambodia.

MR. LORD: Do we know what is going on in Cambodia?

MR. HABIB: We have some indications of what is going on.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: If even Sihanouk and his Prime Minister think a blood bath is going on in Cambodia, you have to think it is going on. We have reached a point where if people run extermination camps, unless you have international inspection it is not recognized by the liberal community. When you have intercepts and other overwhelming evidence — I mean I don't know what is going on in Viet Nam. There we have no conclusive evidence. But in Cambodia we have evidence that I consider conclusive. What do you think, Bill?

MR. HYLAND: We had one yesterday — 90 senior officers and their families killed.

MR. LORD: Is this in the public consciousness?

SECRETARY KISSINGER: No — because you can't get people to print it.

MR. HABIB: We say it, tell it to people, but they don't write it.

MR. HYLAND: We should just publish those messages. It wouldn't be all that sensitive.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: Why don't we do that. And why don't you give this in answer to questions of humanitarian aid. Just say that in situations like that, if it is a situation like Cambodia — "I want you to know this is going on in Cambodia." In South Vietnam, we have no conclusive evidence. Isn't that right?

MR. HYLAND: That is right. But of course they just took over yesterday.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: I mean in the occupied part.

MR. HYLAND: We have some evidence in the northern part.

MR. HABIB: They have shot people, taken them away, they have them in concentration camps, they are indoctrinating them. There is no doubt something is going on up there.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: That is clear. The question is as to mass executions. In Cambodia, it is obvious that they are killing thousands. Why are they throwing all foreigners out of Cambodia, including those who were friendly to them?

MR. HABIB: You mean what reason do they give or why?

SECRETARY KISSINGER: I think they are doing it to settle accounts. And then they will let them back in.

MR. HYLAND: They are also being fairly bloody minded about the foreigners. They had an offer to bring in French planes and let them fly out and they refused, made them go out in a convoy, which is very hard on these people. It is going to take them five days, by truck, to go out of Phnom Penh to Thailand.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: Where are they staying overnight?

MR. HYLAND: They are going to stay along the road.

MR. HABIB: They want to parade them through the country like cattle.

MR. HYLAND: Most of them are French. There are some Americans.

MR. HABIB: They want to parade them through the country.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: Well, it couldn't happen to nicer people — when you think of the abject way by which the French recognized them.

MR. HABIB: One other thing that I think will come up. Whitlam is in real trouble over the publication of some cables that he sent to his embassies in Saigon and Hanoi, in which he obviously tilted in favor of Hanoi and his opposition is really after him.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: How did they get published?

MR. HABIB: Somebody gave them to the Herald to be published. I thought you would be intrigued by that story.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: Well, I want to say that Phil and Dean did a really super-human job under extraordinarily difficult circumstances, and so did everyone in EA who worked with them. There will be a four-hour moratorium on abuse of EA.

MR. HABIB: I wanted to remind you — we got out only four hours before the VC tanks came down the road.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: I agreed with you. I felt I had to check —

MR. HABIB: There was no doubt it was time to get out.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: Do you think the North Vietnamese changed signals? Why did they say at first they wanted to implement the Paris Accords? I mean at first, very late in the game, say as late as Wednesday or Thursday, there was talk of negotiation. Why did they then shift?

MR. HABIB: I am going to take the most critical attitude towards it. I think they intended to do this all along; that they positioned themselves, that they deliberately wanted to break down the structure so as to make it even easier than it would otherwise have been. It was a very carefully conceived approach to the whole thing.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: In order to get a surrender?

MR. HABIB: A surrender, under the easiest and most complete circumstances possible. They first got Thieu down, then they said Huong was no good, then they make certain demands.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: I heard this morning they arrested Minh.

MR. HABIB: They took him away. Whether they arrest him or not —

SECRETARY KISSINGER: What do you think?

MR. HYLAND: Well, I think they were indecisive almost until the day Minh came in and made his speech. I think his speech convinced them there was no sense of playing around. He was still talking about a cease-fire and sending people to Paris. They were almost ready to go militarily, so they just let it rip.

MR. HABIB: That is the nicest interpretation for that. I am not so sure it wasn't preconceived in this way.

MR. HYLAND: We have a lot of evidence that weeks ago they said "Take Saigon." They sent our directives that negotiation; are a farce, "We won't make the mistake the Chinese made in 1948. We want a military victory," which they called the Danang solution.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: What mistake did the Chinese make in '48?

MR. HYLAND: In letting the Nationalists get away to Taiwan and not forcing a total surrender.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: Could they have done that in '48?

MR. HYLAND: Well, they could have taken Taiwan. But still — you had an obvious pause. And they used the pause to improve their military position.

MR. BROWN: And their psychological position.

MR. HARTMAN: Is the PRG established now?

SECRETARY KISSINGER: I doubt under those conditions that they will establish a PRG.

MR. HABIB: It is now Ho Chi Minh City. Saigon has been renamed.

MR. HYLAND: Mrs. Binh is already talking about unification and how they need an interval. But they intend to proceed step by step to unification.

MR. LORD: They clearly made a decision to let 50,000 South Vietnamese get away, it seems to me. They could have done more to try to avoid that.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: I was always convinced they were going to proceed to a Communist take-over. But I thought they would set up a tripartite government in accordance with the Paris Accords —

MR. HABIB: They still will. My guess is they will set up a government in which they will deliberately try to include what they will characterize as a third force and a nationalist element.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: I wouldn't be so sure.

MR. HABIB: They have done that with the revolutionary committees in Danang and places like that when they set them up. They deliberately do that as a part of —

SECRETARY KISSINGER: Yes. But it makes a lot of difference whether they set it up or whether it comes about through a negotiation.

MR. HABIB: I think they will set one up like this — something that they will characterize as such. It will be a complete phony.

MR. HYLAND: There is a big problem for the north, whether to allow a semi-non-communist government to be set up and recognized.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: Semi-non-communist — they will certainly not set that up. The question is whether they will set up a Communist government which has five percent non-Communists in it. But even that is going to be a big problem, whether they should permit that to exist with international recognition. Because the Chinese and some others may be sorely tempted to play it up and then unification may become extremely difficult.

MR. HABIB: But it exists already with international recognition. And the first one to try to move to recognize them since the takeover has been Sweden. The Swedes have announced their desire to recognize them.

MR. BUFFUM: On recognition, we will probably have this come up very quickly now in the UN specialized agencies admitting them as full members, probably without objection, unless we choose to object, which really would only serve the purpose of making a record statement.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: Can we wait a few days?

MR. BUFFUM: It might come up as early as Friday from the WMC.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: We can abstain, can't we?

MR. BUFFUM: Yes, if there is a vote. But I suspect the president of the conference will say unless there is objection, given the changed circumstances in Vietnam —

SECRETARY KISSINGER: I think on Friday we should object on the ground that the circumstances are not clear, without making a judgment on the government — if it is as early as Friday. By next week we can then take a formal position.

[Omitted here is discussion unrelated to Indochina.]

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Transcripts of Secretary of State Kissinger’s Staff Meetings, 1973–1977, Entry 5177, Box 7, Secretary’s Staff Meetings. Secret. Kissinger chaired the meeting, attended by all the principal officers of the Department or their designated alternates.

66. Telegram 3140 From the Embassy in Laos to the Department of State, May 8, 1975, 1150Z. 66. Telegram 3140 From the Embassy in Laos to the Department of State, May 8, 1975, 1150Z.1

May 8, 1975

TELEGRAM
Department of State
VIENTIANE 3140

P R 081150Z MAY 75

FM AMEMBASSY VIENTIANE
TO SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 3699
INFO AMEMBASSY BANGKOK
AMEMBASSY PARIS
CINCPAC

VIENTIANE 3140

CINCPAC FOR POLAD

E.O. 11652: GDS
TAGS: PFOR, PINT, PINS, LA

SUBJECT: ISSUES ARISING OUT OF DETERIORATING SITUATION IN LAOS

1. THE RAPIDLY MOUNTING ACCUMULATION OF DEVELOPMENTS IN LAOS IN THE WEEK SINCE SAIGON FELL, AND PARTICULARLY IN LAST TWO OR THREE DAYS, HAVE ALL BUT ELIMINATED THE NON-COMMUNIST ELEMENT OF THE LAO COALITION. FROM REPORTING IN THIS AND OTHER CHANNELS, ADDRESSEES ARE AWARE OF THESE PRINCIPAL EVENTS: A) NORTH VIETNAMESE TAKEOVER OF FORMER GVN CHANCERY AND EFFORTS TO ASSUME CONTROL OF LOCAL VIETNAMESE COMMUNITY.

B) GROWING EXODUS, OR PREPARATIONS FOR DEPARTURE, BY VIETNAMESE AND CHINESE MERCHANTS, AS WELL AS SOME LAO, WITH RESULTING PRESSURE ON THE KIP (NOW DOWN TO 2200-2400 TO THE DOLLAR ON SMALL TRANSACTIONS, AND DROPPING DAILY) AND UPSURGE IN CONSULAR BUSINESS AT U.S. AND FRENCH EMBASSIES.

C) REINITIATION OF PL MILITARY ACTION BEGINNING AT SALA PHOU KHOUN, WITH TANK-LED FORCES MOVING ON ROUTE 13 BOTH NORTH AND SOUTH OF JUNCTION AND, IN LATTER DIRECTION, ALMOST TO VANG VIENG AS OF MID-DAY MAY 8. OTHER PL FORCES ARE ALSO REPORTED AT HIEN HEUP (TG 19.63).

D) TIGHTENING ECONOMIC STRANGULATION OF LUANG PRABANG AS RESULT OF CLOSURE OF ROUTE 13.

E) DEMONSTRATION, SO FAR GENERALLY ORDERLY BUT WIDELY SUPPORTED, IN PAKSE WITH ECONOMIC GRIEVANCES AS OSTENSIBLE PUBLIC ISSUES, AND POSSIBILITY THAT DEMONSTRATION OF SIMILAR NATURE WILL BE ORGANIZED IN SAVANNAKHET.

F) SOUVANNA'S ORDERS TO MILITARY COMMANDERS, AND TO VANG PAO IN PARTICULAR, NOT TO OFFER RESISTANCE, WITH IMPLICIT THREAT THAT HE WILL REMOVE ANY WHO DO RESIST.

G) TALK OF RESIGNATION AMONG VIENTIANE SIDE CABINET MEMBERS (MR-V COMMANDER GENERAL THONGLITH RESIGNED MAY 8).

H) ASSASSINATIONS NIGHT OF MAY 6 OF PRINCE BOUN OM NA CHAMPASSAK AND COMPANIONS, WHO INCLUDED A RELATIVE OF ABHAY FAMILY AND A LEADER OF LOCAL CHINESE COMMUNITY, THUS STRIKING THREE PROMINENT GROUPS AT ONE BLOW AND REVIVING FEARS OF VIENTIANE SIDE LEADERS FOR THEIR SAFETY.

2. IT SEEMS APPARENT THAT THE PRIME MINISTER HAS NOW DECIDED, PARTLY UNDER INFLUENCE OF EVENTS IN CAMBODIA AND VIET-NAM, THAT IT IS SIMPLY IMPRACTICABLE TO RESIST ANY NEW PL PRESSURE.

3. DEMONSTRATIONS AGAINST U.S. AND THAI EMBASSIES THREATENED FOR MAY 8 DID NOT COME OFF, BUT THERE ARE IN PROSPECT DEMONSTRATIONS BY LAO LEFTISTS ON MAY 9 AND 11 AND BY PRO-COMMUNIST VIETNAMESE ON MAY 19, HO CHI MINH'S BIRTHDAY. DEMONSTRATIONS OF ANY SORT REMAIN TECHNICALLY BANNED BY SOUVANNA'S ORDER OF LAST JANUARY, WHICH WAS REITERATED AS A COMMUNIQUÉ AFTER THE MAY 7 CABINET MEETING AND BROADCAST OVER LAO NATIONAL RADIO MAY 8, BUT EFFECTIVENESS OF THESE ORDERS REMAINS IN DOUBT.

4. THESE SCHEDULED EVENTS AND OTHERS THAT ARE MERELY RUMORED (E.G., CLOSURE BY THE RTG OF THE THAI BORDER, AT ANY DATE THROUGH MAY 17) HEIGHTEN THE TENSION.

5. ASSUMING THAT THE VIENTIANE SIDE CONTINUES TO CRUMBLE (AND IT IS LARGELY GONE NOW), WE MAY BE FACED IN A MATTER OF DAYS WITH A DE FACTO PATHET LAO TAKEOVER OF THE GOVERNMENT. SOUVANNA MAY WELL REMAIN IN OFFICE AND THE FAÇADE OF COALITION MAY CONTINUE, BUT ANY REPLACEMENTS AMONG CABINET OFFICERS AND MILITARY REGION COMMANDERS ARE LIKELY TO BE SUBSERVIENT TO THE PATHET LAO.

6. THE PL MILITARY INTENT IS STILL NOT CLEAR, ALTHOUGH THE MINIMUM OBJECTIVE APPEARS TO BE THE ISOLATION OF MR II. WHATEVER THE INTENT, IT HAS BECOME EVIDENT IN LAST FEW DAYS THAT FEW FAR COMMANDERS OR TROOPS ARE DISPOSED TO RESIST. IT IS NO LONGER A QUESTION OF HOW WELL THE FAR WOULD FIGHT BUT WHETHER ANY SIGNIFICANT NUMBERS WOULD FIGHT AT ALL.

7. WE DO NOT AT THIS TIME FORESEE A MILITARY THREAT TO VIENTIANE OR OTHER URBAN AREAS EXCEPT VANG VIENG (FROM WHICH WE EVACUATED OPERATION BROTHERHOOD PERSONNEL MAY 7) WE BELIEVE THAT THE PATHET LAO IN PRESENT CLIMATE WILL BE ABLE TO ACHIEVE MOST IF NOT ALL OF THEIR IMMEDIATE POLITICAL/MILITARY OBJECTIVES WITHOUT USE OF MORE THAN A TOKEN AMOUNT OF FORCE. WE MUST ANTICIPATE, HOWEVER, GROWING PRESSURE FOR AN END TO U.S. AND ASSOCIATED FOREIGN PRESENCE IN THE PROVINCES SUCH AS FILIPINOS, JAPANESE PEACE CORPS, AND BRITISH V.S.O. A DEMAND TO THIS EFFECT IS HIGH ON THE LIST OF THE PAKSE DEMONSTRATORS AND WILL SPREAD. THE EFFECTIVE TERMINATION OF OUR OPERATIONS IN BAN HOUEI SAI AND THE PRESSURE BROUGHT ON THE DOOLEY FOUNDATION NURSES IN KHONG ISLAND, WHICH LED TO THEIR RELOCATION TO PAKSE OVER THE WEEKEND, ARE FORETASTES THAT GIVE SUBSTANCE TO SUCH A TREND. ANY SUCH DEVELOPMENT WILL INCREASE THE STRAIN ON OUR DEPENDENTS AND LOCAL EMPLOYEES, WHICH IS ALREADY EVIDENT IN VIENTIANE, AND HAS LED US TO AUTHORIZE THE USAID AREA COORDINATORS AT THEIR DISCRETION TO OFFER LIMITED AND TEMPORARY EVACUATION TO DEPENDENTS AND NON-ESSENTIAL PERSONNEL AT FIELD SITES.

8. THE LARGER CONSEQUENCES OF THESE DEVELOPMENTS FOR U.S. POLICY AND FOR THE OPERATION OF THIS MISSION CANNOT BE FULLY ANTICIPATED AT THIS TIME, BUT WE AND WASHINGTON AGENCIES MUST BEGIN TO ADDRESS THEM NOW. THE LARGEST ISSUES ARE THOSE OF BASIC POLICY: A) CAN LAOS, UNDER EFFECTIVE PL DOMINATION, CONTINUE TO CONSTITUTE A VIABLE BUFFER BETWEEN NORTH VIET-NAM AND THAILAND?

B) DO WE WISH TO MAINTAIN ANYTHING LIKE OUR PRESENT LEVEL OF SUPPORT FOR A LAO GOVERNMENT OF THAT STRIPE?

C) WHAT IN FINAL ANALYSIS ARE U.S. OBJECTIVES IN LAOS IN LIGHT OF CHANGED CIRCUMSTANCES ELSEWHERE IN SOUTHEAST ASIA?

9. IMPORTANT SUBSIDIARY QUESTIONS ARE: A) WHETHER WE CAN OR SHOULD CONTINUE THE MAP PROGRAM IF MINISTRY OF DEFENSE CEASES TO BE A VIENTIANE SIDE OPERATION AND IF PL BECOME ABLE TO INSIST THAT THEIR FORCES SHARE IN ITS BENEFITS.

B) WHETHER WE SHOULD CONTINUE OUR PARTICIPATION IN FEOF IF OUR ABILITY TO CARRY OUT OTHER AID PROGRAMS IS CURTAILED BY LACK OF FIELD REPRESENTATION OR INABILITY TO TRAVEL.

C) HOW WE SHOULD REACT IF VANG PAO AND THE HMONG DECIDE TO EXFILTRATE MR II AND SEEK REFUGE IN THAILAND.

10. OTHER QUESTIONS THAT WILL CONFRONT US AS A MISSION INCLUDE: A) WHETHER NEW EMPLOYEES AND DEPENDENTS SCHEDULED TO TRAVEL TO POST IN NEXT FEW WEEKS SHOULD BE HELD UP, AND WHETHER DEPENDENTS NOW HERE SHOULD BE REDUCED THROUGH SUCH MEANS AS ADVANCE TRAVEL AUTHORIZATION FOR THOSE SCHEDULED TO DEPART DURING SUMMER REPLACEMENT CYCLE.

B) WHETHER WE CAN CONTINUE TO EMPLOY VIETNAMESE NATIONALS WHO CHOSE TO REMAIN HERE AND ARE OBLIGED TO TAKE OUT PRG DOCUMENTATION, AND IF SO UNDER WHAT CIRCUMSTANCES.

11. WE ARE CONFIDENT OF OUR ABILITY TO HANDLE TACTICAL ASPECTS OF SITUATION AND WILL PROCEED PRUDENTLY BUT QUIETLY. ANY PREMATURE MOVES ON OUR PART COULD DESTROY WHAT REMAINS OF VIENTIANE SIDE MORALE, NOT TO MENTION UNNERVING FURTHER OUR DEPENDENTS AND LOCAL EMPLOYEES. WE REITERATE, HOWEVER, BELIEF THAT QUESTIONS SET FORTH ABOVE NEED CONSIDERATION IN WASHINGTON AS WELL AS HERE, AND ON A PRIORITY BASIS. WE ARE REMAINING STEADY, BUT EVENTS ARE MOVING RAPIDLY AND PSYCHOLOGICAL CLIMATE IS WORSENING FROM DAY TO DAY. CHAPMAN

1 Source: National Archives, Record Group 59, State Archiving System. Secret; Priority; Limdis. Repeated for information to Bangkok, Paris, and CINCPAC.

67. Memorandum For Secretary Kissinger, Washington, May 2, 1975. 67. Memorandum For Secretary Kissinger, Washington, May 2, 1975.1

Washington, May 2, 1975

MEMORANDUM
THE WHITE HOUSE

WASHINGTON

May 2, 1975

MEMORANDUM FOR SECRETARY KISSINGER

FROM: The Situation Room

SUBJECT: Additional Information Items

Chinese Leaders Congratulate the Vietnamese on the "Liberation" of South Vietnam: On April 30, Chairman Mao, NPC chairman Chu Teh and Premier Chou En-lai sent a message of congratulations to leaders in North and South Vietnam on the "liberation" of South Vietnam. The message seems notable in two respects: The Chinese stress the distinction between North and South, giving the clear impression that they expect the division of the country to be maintained and Hanoi to sustain the fiction of a successful South Vietnamese revolutionary movement. This is indicated by the fact that the message distinguishes between Vietnamese leaders in Saigon and Hanoi, by the way the Chinese attribute the victory in the South to "South Vietnamese army men and civilians," and, most interestingly, by the way the message expresses support for the South Vietnamese people in "carrying through their national and democratic revolution."The Chinese expect the North Vietnamese to delay the incorporation of the South into the DRV, as is indicated by the last line of the message which says that "a new Vietnam that is independent, free, and unified and prosperous will certainly come into being"— that is, such a development is not imminent.

The second notable aspect of the message, which is consistent with other recent Chinese statements on Indochina developments, is the downplaying of the significance of Vietnam's "liberation" as a defeat for the United States. There are only two references to the U.S., one a comment on the successful struggles by the Vietnamese against the "war unleashed by U.S. imperialism," and then a notably straight-forward characterization of the U.S. in a sentence which observes that after the signing of the Paris agreement, the Vietnamese people "fought back in self-defense" against violations of the Paris agreement committed by the Saigon government "with the backing of the U.S. government."The wording of this message suggests that Peking looks to Hanoi to go slow in expanding its influence into South Vietnam, much less into Cambodia and Laos. Second, the Chinese seem to have their fingers crossed that these recent developments will not prove too damaging to the American international position, or to U.S.-PRC bilateral relations. (Solomon)

Vietnamese Aircraft Arrivals at U-Tapao, Thailand: As of May 2, 16 7 SVN aircraft had arrived at U-Tapao Air Force Base, Thailand. Included in this number are 22 F5-E, 2 7 A-37, and eight C-130 aircraft. (Quinn)

South Vietnamese Communists Demand Return of Military Equipment in Thailand: An April 30 Provisional Revolutionary Government statement demanded the return of all ships, aircraft, and the "tens of tons of gold bullion" that fleeing South Vietnamese took to Thailand and other countries. The statement contends that this property belongs to the new South Vietnamese government and calls on the countries involved to return it. (Quinn)

Communists Ban Private Publication in Saigon: A May 1 announcement by communist radio in Saigon ordered a "temporary" halt to the publication of all privately owned books, newspapers, and magazines. It also stated that all publications printed without permission of the military governing committee must be "immediately confiscated."(Quinn)

Refugee Situation at Guam: The following information was received from the refugee processing station on Guam: — The general health status of evacuees continues to be without serious problems or increases in communicable diseases. Immunizations with polio, measles, and rubella vaccines of children ages one through five began on April 30. Since that time, 650 children ready for departure have been inoculated.

— Mobile information teams are being formed and public address systems are being erected as quickly as possible at Orote Point. The Vietnamese/English newspaper possibly will be published today.

— A pilot "locator project" is to be started today that will provide a skills catalog and also pinpoint the actual location of family groups and individuals within the camp.

— Guam authorities have indicated that medical, public health, and dental personnel who are qualified will be invited to remain on Guam as permanent residents.

— No serious political problems on Guam have been encountered, primarily because of the governor's strong public support for Operation New Life and the basic hospitality of Guamanians. However, several legislators , for economic and social and cultural reasons, have voiced opposition to large numbers of refugees remaining on Guam as permanent residents.

— Processing of evacuees began at 0800 yesterday with five sites in operation. By the end of the day, three sites had been cleared with 2,940 evacuees ready for transport. (Quinn)

Moscow Commentary on U.S. Involvement in Vietnam: An April 29 Moscow press item in English, sent to North America, reporting on the fall of the Saigon government ends with the following paragraph:

"The United States press writes that the events in Vietnam are a blow to American prestige, but it should be said in all justice that the Vietnam adventure was never an expression of America's greatness and prestige. America's greatness lies in the great score of the people's activities and in a sober, realistic approach to international affairs."(Quinn)

Khmer Communist Measures Against the Population: Several KC communications observed between April 18 and 22 directed KC cadre to "eliminate" FANK military officials and "high-ranking government officials" secretly. Provincial officials of the former government who reportedly owe the KC a "blood debt" are to be included in the group to be "eliminated without exception." Several other KC reports have dealt with the civilian population evacuated from Phnom Penh and other Cambodian cities. An April 23 communication disclosed that the purpose of the evacuation was to permit the KC to become well organized. The KC eastern region alone is to accept 500,000 to 600,000 people relocated from Phnom Penh. An April 20 report reveals that the people have been segregated into groups according to social, economic, and possibly political position. The various groups in turn are to be placed under KC sector, district, and subdistrict administrative echelons. KC cadre are to undertake the political indoctrination of these people. (Quinn)

[Omitted here is material unrelated to Indochina.]

1 Source: Ford Library, National Security Adviser, NSC Files, Presidential Daily Briefings, Box 3, 5/2/1975. Top Secret; Sensitive; Codeword.

68. Defense Intelligence Notice, Washington, May 9, 1975. 68. Defense Intelligence Notice, Washington, May 9, 1975.1

Washington, May 9, 1975

DEFENSE INTELLIGENCE NOTICE

DIADIN 1128-75

9 MAY 1975

CAMBODIA

This Notice is designed to provide intelligence in support of future decisions with respect to security policy or posture.

CAMBODIA

KHMER COMMUNIST REPRISALS

(S SPOKE/NFD) The Khmer Communists are apparently continuing purges against former government and military leaders considered to be a potential threat to the new regime. Press reports from Phnom Penh have indicated the execution of some senior officials, including Sirik Matak and former Prime Minister Long Boret. Most reports on executions have emanated from the KC northern regime, but there are indicators suggesting that similar atrocities are being carried out elsewhere, probably under orders of the Communist Party Central Committee. Outside the northern region, the KC appear to be conducting executions on a selective basis as a technique in consolidating their power, particularly in light of population control and resettlement programs occurring countrywide. It is probable that the Party Central Committee is providing policy guidelines to the various regions, but these may vary by locale.

(S/NFD) The forced mass evacuation of the population in the capital and most key urban centers was accomplished expeditiously with little concern for the people (photographs overleaf) Indiscriminate killings or atrocities, if continued, were probably ordered to expedite the process. (XGDS-2 Declassify upon notification of originator)

SOURCES: NSA 1715372, 221513Z, 222019Z, 2420212, 291726Z and 230523Z Apr 75 (S SPOKE)

[Photograph: Population relocation]

[Photograph: Phnom Penh Central Market; Normal Day]

[Photograph: Phnom Penh Central Market; After Evacuation]

1 Source: Ford Library, National Security Adviser, Presidential Country Files for East Asia and the Pacific, Box 3, Cambodia (17). Top Secret; Sensitive; Codeword. Prepared by A. Burger in DIA. A handwritten note at the top of the unpublished covering memorandum from Stearman to Kissinger, May 12, reads: “HAK has seen.”

69. Telegram 109710 From the Department of State to the Embassy in Laos, May 11, 1975, 0234Z. 69. Telegram 109710 From the Department of State to the Embassy in Laos, May 11, 1975, 0234Z.1

May 11, 1975

TELEGRAM
Department of State
109710

DRAFTED BY EA/LC:LMRIVES:HHS
APPROVED BY THE SECRETARY
EA: MR. HABIB
S/S: HOGANSON
NSC: GEN. SCOWCROFT (SUBS)

O 110234Z MAY 75
FM SECSTATE WASHDC
TO AMEMBASSY VIENTIANE IMMEDIATE

E.O. 116521 GDS
TAGS: PFOR, LA

SUBJECT: US POLICY TOWARD LAOS
REF: VIENTIANE 3140
FOR THE CHARGE

1. ON THE BASIS OF AVAILABLE EVIDENCE, WE AGREE WITH YOUR CONCLUSION THAT SOUVANNA HAS DECIDED TO SEE LAOS REUNIFIED UNDER PATHET LAO DOMINATION. EVENTS DURING THE PAST WEEK OR SO HAVE IN FACT MOVED LAOS VERY FAR DOWN THAT ROAD ALREADY.

2. IN THESE CIRCUMSTANCES, THE U.S. OBJECTIVE IS TO ADAPT IT'S POLICY AND PROGRAMS TO THE NEW SITUATION AS IT UNFOLDS. WE DO NOT WANT OUR ACTIONS TO LEAD INTERNAL DEVELOPMENTS IN LAOS. RATHER, WE WANT TO ADAPT TO THOSE DEVELOPMENTS AS THEY OCCUR.

3. WITH SOUVANNA OUR STANCE SHOULD BE THAT OF MAINTAINING OUR CONTINUED SUPPORT FOR A NEUTRAL AND INDEPENDENT LAOS UNDER THE VIENTIANE ACCORDS, BUT AT THE SAME TIME POINTING OUT THAT TO THE DEGREE THAT GROWING PATHET LAO DOMINATION OF THE COALITION GOVERNMENT IS DIRECTED AGAINST THE UNITED STATES. WE WILL HAVE TO ADAPT OUR POLICIES AND PROGRAMS ACCORDINGLY. YOU SHOULD ALSO CONTINUE TO REMIND HIM THAT WE LOOK TO HIS GOVERNMENT TO PROVIDE ADEQUATE PROTECTION FOR AMERICANS IN LAOS.

4. FOR YOUR GUIDANCE, WE FORESEE THE LIKELIHOOD OF A MUCH REDUCED DIPLOMATIC MISSION IN VIENTIANE, SCALING DOWN FROM PRESENT LEVELS AS EVENTS DICTATE. WE WOULD THEREFORE LIKE YOUR EARLY RECOMMENDATIONS REGARDING A MINIMAL US DIPLOMATIC MISSION, INCLUDING FUNCTIONS IT WOULD PERFORM. SIMILARLY, WE ENVISAGE SCALING BACK BOTH MILITARY AND ECONOMIC AID PROGRAMS TO MINIMAL LEVELS AS EVENTS UNFOLD. WE WOULD ALSO LIKE YOUR EARLY RECOMMENDATIONS AS TO HOW THIS MIGHT BE ACCOMPLISHED AND WHAT ESSENTIAL PROGRAMS SHOULD BE MAINTAINED TO DEMONSTRATE CONTINUING US INTERESTS IN LAOS. IN FORWARDING YOUR RECOMMENDATIONS, YOU SHOULD BEAR IN MIND THAT WE WISH TO AVOID ANY ACTIONS ON OUR PART CONTRIBUTING OR LEADING EVENTS IN LAOS.
KISSINGER

1 Source: Ford Library, National Security Adviser, Presidential Country Files for East Asia and the Pacific, Box 12, Laos, State Department Telegrams, From SECSTATE, Nodis. Secret; Immediate; Nodis. Drafted by Rives; cleared by Habib and Scowcroft; approved by Kissinger. Telegram 3140 is Document 66.

70. Telegram 3300 From the Embassy in Laos to the Department of State, May 13, 1975, 1208Z. 70. Telegram 3300 From the Embassy in Laos to the Department of State, May 13, 1975, 1208Z.1

May 13, 1975

TELEGRAM
Department of State
VIENTIANE 3300

R 131208Z May 75
FM AMEMBASSY VIENTIANE
TO SECSTATE WASHDC 3799

E.O. 11652: GOS
TAGS: PFOR, LA
SUBJECT: US POLICY TOWARD LAOS

REF: STATE 109710

1. WE VERY MUCH WELCOMED REFTEL BECAUSE IT IS VERY MUCH IN ACCORD WITH OUR OWN THINKING AND ENUNCIATED POLICY FLOWS VERY WELL FROM POSTURE WE HAVE TAKE OVER PAST TWO-THREE WEEKS. WE HAVE TAKEN LINE, PARTICULARLY WITH SOUVANNA AND PHOUMI, THAT: A) U.S. MAINTAINING SUPPORT FOR PRIME MINISTER AND HIS POLICY OF INSURING A NEUTRAL AND INDEPENDENT LAOS WITHIN VIENTIANE ACCORDS; B) CLIMATE OF INSECURITY PGNU HAD ALLOWED TO DEVELOP HAD HOWEVER RAISED QUESTIONS WITH REGARD TO THE POSSIBILITY OF MAINTAINING SUCH SUPPORT; C) PGNU COULD NOT ON ONE HAND ASK FOR AID AND ON OTHER HAND ALLOW VERBAL AND PHYSICAL THREATS AGAINST USAID AND AMERICANS TO GO UNANSWERED. (TO PHOUMI AND TO HIS CHIEF DE CABINET SOUBANH I ALSO MADE QUITE CLEAR THAT EVERY DIPLOMATIC OBSERVER IN TOWN BELIEVED THAT THE DEMONSTRATIONS WHICH HAD ATTACKED USAID HAD LPF/PL PATRONAGE. BOTH DISCLAIMED THIS).

2. WITH REGARD TO THE FUTURE OF OUR AID PROGRAMS AND OF THE NATURE OF THE DIPLOMATIC MISSION IN VIENTIANE, OUR THINKING HAS BEEN ALONG THE FOLLOWING LINES: A. WE ASSUME THAT VIENTIANE SIDE, MILITARY AND CIVILIAN, NO LONGER EXISTS AS A MEANINGFUL FORCE. NEVERTHELESS, WE ENVISAGE THE CONTINUATION OF A NOMINAL COALITION GOVERNMENT UNDER PRIME MINISTER SOUVANNA, AS FORESEEN BY THE VIENTIANE AGREEMENTS. MANIFESTLY, SUCH A COALITION WILL BE UNDER POLITICAL DOMINATION OF THE LPF. IT WILL FOLLOW A FOREIGN POLICY OF MAINTAINING DIPLOMATIC RELATIONS WITH ALL "FRIENDLY" COUNTRIES INCLUDING THE U.S. AND WILL SEEK AID FROM ALL SOURCES "WITHOUT CONDITIONS.", MEANING FEW FOREIGN ADVISERS AND MINIMUM SUPERVISION OF THIS DISPOSITION OF AID. IT WILL FOLLOW AN INTERNAL POLICY OF ESTABLISHING RIGID CONTROLS OVER THE WHOLE COUNTRY AND IN ALL FIELDS.

B. LPF (WITH FEW EXCEPTION) HAVE VERY LIMITED UNDERSTANDING OF ECONOMIC AND ASSISTANCE PROBLEMS, AND VIEW THESE PRIMARILY IN POLITICAL TERMS. THEY ARE, HOWEVER, CONDITIONED BY A PHILOSOPHY OF NATIONAL AUSTERITY AND SELF-SUFFICIENCY. THEY ACCEPT THE IDEA THAT THIS WILL ENTAIL ON THE WHOLE FEWER SERVICES AND A LESSER STANDARD OF LIVING. (SECSTATE FOR HEALTH KHAMLIENG (LPF) TOLD USAID PUBLIC HEALTH CHIEF WHEN CONSIDERING POSSIBILITY OF CLOSING ON OF HOSPITAL: "LAO WILL HAVE TO REDUCE THEIR EXPECTATIONS AND LEARN TO LIVE MORE SIMPLY.") THEY ARE SERIOUS ABOUT PUTTING PEOPLE TO WORK — EVEN MOVING URBAN RESIDENTS TO RURAL AREAS FOR THIS PURPOSE — AND THEY PROBABLY CONCEIVE OF FOREIGN AID AS SIMPLY A MATTER OF TURNING EITHER MONEY OR COMMODITIES OVER TO THE GOVERNMENT TO MANAGE AS IT SEES FIT. THEY CERTAINLY WANT TO REDUCE THE NUMBER OF FOREIGNERS, PARTICULARLY AMERICANS. SPECIFICALLY, WE BELIEVE THAT THEY WANT ALL AMERICANS OUTSIDE VIENTIANE TO LEAVE AND A VERY MUCH REDUCED USAID MISSION HERE.

C. THERE IS A PERSPECTIVE ON U.S. RELATIONS WITH A PL-DOMINATED PGNU THAT WE MUST KEEP IN MIND. A GROUP OF 15 COUNTRIES AND SEVEN INTERNATIONAL ORGANIZATIONS MET WITH PGNU REPRESENTATIVES, INCLUDING PL VICE MINISTER OF FINANCE IN MANILA AND EXPRESSED POSITIVE INTEREST IN ECONOMICALLY ASSISTING THE PGNU. ATTITUDES OF OTHER DONORS ABOUT THEIR CONTINUING INTEREST IN PROVIDING SUCH ASSISTANCE CAN BE EXPECTED TO BE INFLUENCED NEGATIVELY OR POSITIVELY BY U.S. ATTITUDE AND ACTIONS VIS-A-VIS THE COMPOSITION OF POLICIES OF THE NEW PGNU. AN IMMEDIATE AND PUBLICLY NOTICEABLE REDUCTION IN USAID PROGRAM SHOULD GIVE SUBSTANCE TO THE THEORY THAT THE AMERICANS WERE WILLING TO SUPPORT THE PGNU ONLY SO LONG AS ITS "IMPERIALIST LACKEYS," THE RECENTLY DEPARTED SENIOR VIENTIANE SIDE LEADERSHIP, WERE PART OF THE COALITION GOVERNMENT. THIS ATTITUDE WAS MADE VERY CLEAR TO ACTING USAID DIRECTOR RAMSEY BY ONE OF THE LEADERS IN THE "21 ORGANIZATIONS" GROUP IN A MEETING LATE AFTERNOON ON MAY 9, FOLLOWING THE DEMONSTRATION AT THE U.S. EMBASSY. SOME THINKING GROUPS IN LAOS CONSIDER CONTINUANCE OF AID A TEST OF U.S. SINCERITY AND GOOD INTENTIONS AS TO WHETHER OR NOT THE U.S. WILL HELP LAOS TO DEVELOP IN PEACE AS MUCH AS IT HELPED RLG SURVIVE IN WAR.

D. ON THE BASIS OF THE ABOVE AND THE FURTHER ASSUMPTION THAT THE U.S. NATIONAL INTEREST LIES PRINCIPALLY IN MAINTAINING A NEUTRAL AND INDEPENDENT LAOS AS A BUFFER STATE, THE COUNTRY TEAM CONSIDERS THAT THE ROLE OF U.S. ECONOMIC ASSISTANCE SHOULD SHIFT IN EMPHASIS. FIRST, WE SHOULD FULFILL ALL ONGOING USAID COMMITMENTS UNLESS PGNU ASKS US TO DO OTHERWISE. SECOND, NO NEW ASSISTANCE COMMITMENTS WILL BE UNDERTAKEN EXCEPT AT THE SPECIFIC REQUEST OF THE PGNU UNDER NEW GROUND RULES THAT INEVITABLY WILL EVOLVE. WE SHOULD ALLOW RECOGNITION OF NEED FOR NEW ASSISTANCE TO BE GENERATED FROM WITHIN THE GOVERNMENT AND THEN UNDERTAKE AN OVERALL NEGOTIATION ON THE NATURE AND EXTENT OF PROGRAMS AND OUR FUTURE USAID MISSION WITH THE PRINCIPAL MINISTERS, INCLUDING THE FOREIGN MINISTER. THEORETICALLY, THIS COURSE COULD LEAD TO ELIMINATION OF OUR USAID MISSION AND A PHASEOUT OF OUR AID. WE SHOULD ACCEPT THIS POSSIBILITY COLD BLOODEDLY. THIRD, THE U.S. WILL, AS A MATTER OF POLICY, ENCOURAGE AND ASSIST OTHER DONORS, PARTICULARLY INTERNATIONAL HUMANITARIAN AGENCIES, IN CARRYING OUT HUMANITARIAN, ECONOMIC ASSISTANCE AND DEVELOPMENT PROGRAMS IN LAOS THAT THEY NEGOTIATE WITH THE PGNU.

E. AS REGARDS MILITARY ASSISTANCE, WE RECOGNIZE AT PRESENT NO RPT NO OBJECTIVE THAT IT CAN SERVE UNDER THE NEW PGNU. HOWEVER, WE BELIEVE THAT FOR THE TIME BEING, RPT FOR THE TIME BEING, WE SHOULD MAINTAIN AS IN THE PAST THE FLOW OF CONSUMABLES: RICE, POL, AND MEDICINE. (WE HAVE ALREADY STOPPED DELIVERY OF AMMUNITION AND MILITARY HARDWARE.) TO CUT OFF THESE COMMODITIES ABRUPTLY WOULD MEAN THAT SOME 50,000 ARMED MEN AND THEIR FAMILIES WOULD BE SUDDENLY WITHOUT SUPPORT WHICH THE PGNU COULD NOT EASILY CONTROL, AND WHICH COULD IMMEDIATELY BE TURNED AGAINST ALL AMERICAN PERSONNEL.

F. WE SHALL SEND SPECIFIC AND DETAILED RECOMMENDATIONS ON THE ECONOMIC AND MILITARY ASSISTANCE PROGRAMS SEPARATELY BY USAID AND DAO CHANNELS. WE SHALL ALSO SEND OTHER MESSAGES ON THE PROPOSED SIZE AND COMPOSITION OF A U.S. MISSION IN VIENTIANE.

CHAPMAN

1 Source: Ford Library, National Security Adviser, Presidential Country Files for East Asia and the Pacific, Box 12, Laos, State Department Telegrams, To SECSTATE, Nodis. Secret; Nodis. Telegram 109710 is Document 69. The Department of State report, “Issues Paper on Laos,” May 14, prepared by Rives and Henderson, contains lengthy coverage of the situation in Laos. According to a covering memorandum, May 14, the Department prepared the report, not published, for Secretary Kissinger’s May 15 meeting with President Ford. Kissinger and Ford did not discuss the topic on May 15. (Ford Library, National Security Adviser, Presidential Country Files for East Asia and the Pacific, Box 12, Laos)

71. Memorandum From William Smyser and William Stearman of the National Security Council Staff to Secretary of State Kissinger, Washington, May 16, 1975. 71. Memorandum From William Smyser and William Stearman of the National Security Council Staff to Secretary of State Kissinger, Washington, May 16, 1975.1

Washington, May 16, 1975

MEMORANDUM
NATIONAL SECURITY COUNCIL

MEMORANDUM FOR: SECRETARY KISSINGER

FROM: W.R. SMYSER

WILLIAM L. STEARMAN

SUBJECT: WSAG Meeting on Indochina, May 17, 10:00 a.m.

You called this WSAG meeting to discuss tying up loose ends in Indochina. This also represents the first opportunity at an interagency level to set the course of our basic policy in Indochina after the fall of Vietnam and Cambodia, We need to start thinking about where we have residual interests we should preserve or whether we want to pull out completely. The following items you may wish to raise in the meeting in order to make decisions:

Laos

In reaction to recent developments in Laos, we have suspended deliveries of military hardware and ammunition but have continued to provide some consummables (POL, food, medical supplies) which provide subsistence for the 50,000 non-Communist soldiers. An abrupt cutoff of these funds, the Embassy believes, could further exacerbate the deteriorating economic situation.

Our economic aid program has continued, and Pathet Lao officials have indicated they want to continue to receive American aid. At the same time they are conducting a campaign against our USAID Mission there. They probably would like to continue receiving our money, but without supervision.

In response to the demonstrations against our compounds in several outlying towns, all official USG personnel have been pulled back to Vientiane, with the exception of three in Savannakhet who were being held captive until May 15. Charles Dean is still held captive by the Pathet Lao. We should not forget him.

The King of Laos will travel to Paris and Moscow in July. It has been suggested that we invite him to Washington to demonstrate our continued interest in Laos. (These questions are covered in more detail in State's issues paper at Tab B.)

The following are the policy decisions that need to be taken: — Should military assistance be continued, including consummables for supporting FAR troops?

— Should economic assistance be continued?

— Should we further reduce the number of official Americans in Laos?

— Should an invitation be extended to the King of Laos to visit Washington this summer?

— What can be done to effect the release of Charles Dean?

U.S. Position on South Vietnam

Hanoi's extensive military and political control of South Vietnam has effectively ended its sovereignty. We now have to decide the extent to which we will either oppose or go along with the fiction of a separate South Vietnam. This will, for example, affect our attitude toward PRG participation in international organizations and any relations we might have with the new Saigon administration. In this connection, the main questions are: — Should we push the view that South Vietnam is no longer sovereign?

— Should we actively oppose PRG membership in international organizations?

— What relations, if any, should we have with the present Saigon regime?

— What caretaker arrangements should we make both in Saigon and Washington?

Trade with and Aid to Areas Under Communist Control

We can anticipate continued pressure from the Hill and some private groups for at least humanitarian aid to areas under Communist control in Indochina. Some international organizations which we support financially will be providing such aid. Also some U.S. firms will want to do business with Vietnam and Cambodia. Basically we should decide: — Are we going to oppose the use of any U.S. funds for aid to these areas, even when administered by international organizations, or should we approve the use of at least limited U.S. funds in providing humanitarian aid to Communist-controlled areas?

— Should there be restrictions on U.S. trade with Vietnam and Cambodia (also perhaps Laos)? Would we have anything to gain from U.S. trade with these countries?

MIA Problem

The collapse of the GVN complicates further accounting for MIA's. The Four Party JMT no longer exists, and we no longer have working arrangements for handling this problem. In addition, we are interested in recovering the bodies of the two Marines killed during the evacuation. Based on past experience, one can expect the Communist side to extract concessions (e.g., aid, PRG recognition, etc.) in return for cooperation in respect to MIA's and the dead Marines. Questions to be resolved are: (Also at Tab C are questions submitted by Defense.)

— How can we induce the Communist side to cooperate in MIA accounting and the return of two dead Marines? What will it cost us?

— Should we attempt to resurrect the Four Party JMT — even though one part has disappeared? Would the other side go along with this?

CIA Activities

The CIA has been conducting a number of operations in Vietnam and Cambodia. It appears to make little sense to continue those. Bill Colby would probably prefer not to discuss details at a WSAG but would be prepared to deal with the general notion of curtailing of CIA operations.

The CIA working paper at Tab D provides intelligence requirements for Southeast Asia — including Indochina — and lists the facilities available to meet those requirements [text not declassified]

— Are there any CIA operations in Vietnam or Cambodia that warrant continuation?

— How important is continued intelligence on Indochina?

— Should we continue all present intelligence operations (e.g., SR-71 flights over Indochina)? If not, which should be eliminated?

Your talking points are at Tab A.

1 Source: Ford Library, National Security Adviser, Presidential Country Files for East Asia and the Pacific, Box 27, WSAG Meeting, Indochina, May 17, 1975. Secret. A slash appears across the first page of the memorandum; a handwritten note at the top of the page reads: “Meeting Cancelled.” Tab A, Talking Points, undated, attached but not published. For Tab B, see source note, Document 70. Tabs C and D not attached.

72. Telegram 122371 From the Department of State to the Embassy in Laos, May 26, 1975, 0049Z. 72. Telegram 122371 From the Department of State to the Embassy in Laos, May 26, 1975, 0049Z.1

May 26, 1975

TELEGRAM
Department of State
122371

DRAFTED BY EA: J. OWEN ZURHELLEN, JR.
APPROVED BY THE SECRETARY
M: MR. EAGLEBURGER
AID: MHUNTINGTON
S/S-O: PK JOHNSON

Z 260049Z MAY 75

FM SECSTATE WASHDC
TO AMEMBASSY VIENTIANE

E.O. 11652: GDS
TAGS: PFOR, LA

SUBJECT: MESSAGE TO PRIME MINISTER SOUVANNA PHOUMA

1. PLEASE DELIVER FOLLOWING LETTER FROM THE SECRETARY TO PRIME MINISTER SOUVANNA PHOUMA:

2. BEGIN TEXT. YOUR HIGHNESS: MR. CHAPMAN HAS KEPT ME INFORMED ON THE COURSE OF EVENTS IN LAOS DURING RECENT DAYS, AND I HAVE FOLLOWED WITH KEEN INTEREST THE EFFORTS OF YOUR HIGHNESS AND YOUR GOVERNMENT TO MAINTAIN THE TRADITIONAL TIES OF FRIENDSHIP BETWEEN OUR TWO COUNTRIES. AS YOU KNOW, I HAVE INSTRUCTED MR. CHAPMAN TO COMPLY WITH YOUR DESIRE TO HAVE THE UNITED STATES AID MISSION TO LAOS WITHDRAWN AS AN ENTITY. WHILE RESERVING FOR FURTHER DISCUSSION THE QUESTION OF THE FUTURE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN OUR GOVERNMENTS IN THE AID FIELD. IN ACCORDANCE WITH THAT DECISION, THE PERSONNEL OF THE AID MISSION AND THE MEMBERS OF THEIR FAMILIES ARE BEING BROUGHT HOME AS RAPIDLY AS THE MEANS OF TRANSPORTATION PERMIT, AND WE ARE TAKING OTHER STEPS TO REDUCE THE SIZE OF OUR EMBASSY IN VIENTIANE TO THAT NECESSARY TO CARRY OUT NORMAL DIPLOMATIC FUNCTIONS IN OUR NEW RELATIONSHIP.

PARTICULARLY IN VIEW OF THE SPEED AND AMITY WITH WHICH YOUR GOVERNMENT AND OURS HAVE BEEN ABLE TO AGREE TO THESE MOVES, I AM DEEPLY CONCERNED THAT AN APPARENTLY HOSTILE ATTITUDE ON THE PART OF CERTAIN GROUPS IN LAOS HAS HINDERED OUR ABILITY TO REMOVE OUR PERSONNEL AND CARRY OUT OTHER WORK WITH THE FREEDOM THAT IS GUARANTEED UNDER THE VIENNA CONVENTION ON DIPLOMATIC RELATIONS TO WHICH LAOS AND THE UNITED STATES ARE PARTIES. OUR PEOPLE HAVE BEEN HINDERED FROM GOING IN AND OUT OF THEIR HOMES AND OFFICES, THEIR PERSONAL BAGGAGE HAS BEEN SEIZED AND SEARCHED IN VIOLATION OF DIPLOMATIC PRACTICE, AND OUR EMBASSY HAS BEEN THEREBY HANDICAPPED IN CARRYING OUT ITS IMPORTANT TASK OF WORKING WITH THE LAO GOVERNMENT ON THE FURTHERANCE OF OUR MUTUAL INTERESTS.

I CANNOT BELIEVE, YOUR HIGHNESS, THAT THESE ACTIONS ARE ANYTHING OTHER THAN THOSE OF A MISGUIDED FEW WHO DO NOT COMPREHEND THE SANCTITY OF DIPLOMATIC IMMUNITY AND THE NEED, FOR THE SAFE OF ALL GOVERNMENTS, FOR THE UNHINDERED RIGHT OF REPRESENTATIVES OF OTHER COUNTRIES TO CARRY OUT THE ESSENTIAL TASKS OF COMMUNICATION BETWEEN NATIONS. I APPEAL TO YOUR HIGHNESS, THEREFORE, TO TAKE THE NECESSARY MEASURES FOR THE IMMEDIATE RESTORATION OF A STATE OF RELATIONS CONSISTENT WITH OUR FRIENDSHIP OF SO MANY YEARS. IN ALL CANDOR, YOUR HIGHNESS, I MUST TELL YOU THAT IF THESE ACTS AGAINST US PERSONNEL CONTINUE WE WILL HAVE NO CHOICE BUT TO CLOSE OUT OUR DIPLOMATIC MISSION TO THE KINGDOM OF LAOS COMPLETELY.

PLEASE ACCEPT, YOUR HIGHNESS, THE ASSURANCES OF MY HIGHEST CONSIDERATION. HENRY A. KISSINGER. END TEXT.

KISSINGER

1 Source: Ford Library, National Security Adviser, Presidential Country Files for East Asia and the Pacific, Box 12, Laos, State Department Telegrams, From SECSTATE, Exdis. Secret; Flash; Exdis. Drafted by Zurhellen; cleared by Eagleburger and Huntington; approved by Kissinger. In WH 50942/TOHAK 009, May 27, Scowcroft informed Kissinger, then traveling in Europe: “The President was very quiet this morning. He was pleased to see that the Embassy in Laos would be reduced to less than 50 people. My impression is that he would be sympathetic to closing it down entirely.” (Ford Library, NSC Files, HAK Trip Files, Box 9, May 26–June 3, 1975, Europe, TOHAK, 1)

73. Telegram 3953 From the Embassy in Laos to the Department of State, June 3, 1975, 0725Z. 73. Telegram 3953 From the Embassy in Laos to the Department of State, June 3, 1975, 0725Z.1

June 3, 1975

TELEGRAM
Department of State
VIENTIANE 3953

O 030725Z JUN 75

FM AMEMBASSY VIENTIANE
TO SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 4208

VIENTIANE 3953

FOR THE SECRETARY FROM HABIB DEPT
PASS BANGKOK FOR HABIB

E.O. 11652: GDS
TAGS: PFOR, EAID, MASS, US, LA

SUBJECT: RECOMMENDATIONS ON FUTURE LAOS POLICY
REF: STATE 127430

1. I HAVE HAD THOROUGH DISCUSSIONS WITH MISSION STAFF DURING MY VISIT TO VIENTIANE AND HAVE ALSO HAD BENEFIT OF THINKING OF PRIME MINISTER SOUVANNA PHOUMA AND FOREIGN MINISTER PHOUMI VONGVICHIT. THE PRIMARY REQUIREMENT FOR OUR MISSION HERE IS POLICY GUIDANCE ON WHERE WE ARE HEADED IN LAOS. THE MISSION HAS DONE EXTREMELY WELL UNDER VERY TRYING CIRCUMSTANCES OVER THE PAST MONTH BUT IS CONFRONTED NOW WITH A SITUATION WHICH REQUIRES THE MOST URGENT DECISIONS FROM WASHINGTON. A GREAT DEAL OF THIS STEMS FROM THE PRACTICAL TAKEOVER OF THE PGNU BY THE PATHET LAO AT THE OPERATING LEVEL AND WITH ALL MILITARY STRENGTH UNDER COMMUNIST CONTROL.

2. I CONCLUDE THAT THE PRIMARY IMMEDIATE OBJECTIVE MUST BE TO CLEAR THE DECKS OF PAST PROGRAMS AND RESPONSIBILITIES, THUS PERMITTING A REDUCTION OF MISSION STAFF TO A LEAN, 50-ODD LEVEL. COMPLETE TERMINATION OF AID AND MAP PROGRAMS IS ESSENTIAL TO THIS OBJECTIVE. EMBASSY IS SUBMITTING ALTERNATIVE PLANS AND TARGET DATES TO GET TO THAT STAFFING LEVEL. IT MAY NOT BE NECESSARY TO HOLD TO THE JUNE 5 TARGET DATE FOR STAFF REDUCTION TO 50, BUT REDUCTION OF PERSONNEL AND TERMINATION OF PREVIOUS AID PROGRAMS SHOULD BE COMPLETED WELL BEFORE JUNE 30. THE ONLY EXCEPTION WOULD BE A CONTINUING FLOW, FOR THE TIME BEING, OF MAP RICE AND (SMALL QUANTITIES) OF MAP POL TO THE FAR UNDER THE FY 75 BUDGET ALLOCATION. THESE COMMODITIES WILL BE NEEDED IN THE IMMEDIATE FUTURE IF WE ARE LITERALLY NOT TO STARVE THE ARMY WHICH WE HAVE SUPPORTED FOR SO LONG, AND THUS AROUSE LAO REACTION WHICH COULD JEOPARDIZE THE REMAINDER OF OUR ACTIONS. THE MILITARY AID PROGRAM IS SUCH THAT WE CAN TURN IT OFF ON VERY SHORT NOTICE, AND THAT IS WHAT I PROPOSE WE BE PREPARED TO DO AT JUST THE RIGHT MOMENT WITH REGARD TO OUR OTHER INTERESTS. WE HAVE NO NEED OR DESIRE TO SEE THE FAR RETAINED AS A FORCE. IT IS WORTHLESS FROM ALL MILITARY VIEWPOINTS.

3. THE USAID SITUATION IS MUCH MORE COMPLICATED. WE HAVE EQUIPMENT, FACILITIES AND PROJECTS SCATTERED ALL OVER. THE MANNER IN WHICH THE PGNU IS APPROACHING THE TURNOVER LEAVES US OPEN TO THE MOST NIGGLING AND UNNECESSARY NEGOTIATING PROCESS WHICH TAKES A GREAT DEAL OF TIME AND MANY SCARCE MAN-HOURS. IT IS ENTIRELY POSSIBLE THAT THESE NEGOTIATIONS WILL IN A MATTER OF DAYS PROVE HOPELESS, EITHER BECAUSE THE PGNU WILL INSIST ON TREATING THE EXTRANEOUS ISSUES THEY INTRODUCED JUNE 2 OR BECAUSE THEY WILL INSIST ON INVENTORYING EVERY LAST ITEM THAT USAID BROUGHT INTO THIS COUNTRY. AT THAT POINT THE ACTING USAID DIRECTOR SHOULD BE ABLE TO WALK OUT OF THE NEGOTIATIONS WITHOUT ANOTHER WORD AND ABANDON EVERYTHING — ALL USAID ASSETS — WHETHER COVERED BY PROGRAM AGREEMENTS OR NOT; ALL THE FURNITURE; AND ALL THE REAL ESTATE. HE DOES NOT NOW HAVE SUCH AUTHORITY AND SHOULD BE GIVEN IT IMMEDIATELY. (HE IS REQUESTING SUCH AUTHORITY IN A TELEGRAM TO ADMINISTRATOR PARKER JUNE 3.)

4. MEANWHILE, THE MISSION SHOULD TEST THE ASSURANCE SOUVANNA GAVE ME YESTERDAY AND REPEATED LATER IN PHOUMI'S PRESENCE: THAT MILITARY ASSISTANCE AND OTHER EXTRANEOUS QUESTIONS WILL BE DIVORCED FROM THE TURNOVER NEGOTIATIONS ACTING USAID DIRECTOR RAMSEY IS CONDUCTING WITH AN UNWIELDY TEAM OF 21 FROM MOST OF THE MINISTRIES IN TOWN (HE DOES NOT EVEN HAVE PROJECT AGREEMENTS WITH SOME OF THEM). IF THESE NEGOTIATIONS NOW GO FORWARD AMICABLY AND IN A BUSINESSLIKE MANNER, FINE; IT WILL BE WORTH KEEPING THE 30-PLUS USAID PEOPLE FOR A FEW MORE DAYS, BECAUSE THOSE NOT INVOLVED IN THE MEETING ROOM WITH RAMSEY WILL BE WORKING ON SEVERANCE PAY FOR LOCAL EMPLOYEES, OUTBOUND HHE SHIPMENTS AND SO FORTH. IF THE NEGOTIATIONS BOG DOWN, THE SAME 30-ODD USAID OFFICERS CAN SIMPLY GET ON A PLANE AND LEAVE, PROVIDING AUTHORITY MENTIONED PRECEDING PARAGRAPH HAS BEEN GRANTED.

5. AT THIS TIME I DO NOT BELIEVE IT WISE TO SEND GALEN STONE HERE WHEN HE IS CONFIRMED, OR IF THE CONFIRMATION HEARINGS HAVE NOT BEGUN THEY MIGHT BE POSTPONED. WE NEED MAKE NO PUBLIC ANNOUNCEMENT, BUT THAT DECISION SHOULD AWAIT DEVELOPMENTS OVER THE NEXT SEVERAL WEEKS. STONE'S ARRIVAL SHOULD BE DIRECTLY RELATED TO EVIDENCE THAT THE PGNU INTENDS TO BEHAVE IN A MORE RESPONSIBLE MANNER THAN IT HAS RECENTLY, AND WHEN IT APPEARS MORE CERTAIN THAN IS NOW THE CASE THAT THE U.S. WILL HAVE AN ACCEPTABLE AND DIGNIFIED ON-GOING DIPLOMATIC RELATIONSHIP WITH LAOS.

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, State Archiving System. Secret; Immediate; Nodis. Habib visited Vientiane from June 2 until 3. The Embassy in Laos relayed background papers to Habib in telegrams 3864 and 3876, May 30. (Ibid.)

74. Memorandum From William Stearman of the National Security Council Staff to Secretary of State Kissinger, Washington, June 6, 1975. 74. Memorandum From William Stearman of the National Security Council Staff to Secretary of State Kissinger, Washington, June 6, 1975.1

Washington, June 6, 1975

MEMORANDUM
NATIONAL SECURITY COUNCIL
URGENT INFORMATION

June 6, 1975

MEMORANDUM FOR: SECRETARY KISSINGER
FROM: WILLIAM L. STEARMAN

SUBJECT: U.S. Policy on Laos

Early WSAG discussion of Laos has been recommended, and the main question will be: What is it worth to us to maintain a presence in Laos?

The main arguments being made for keeping a presence are: — Our Mission would serve as a listening post in Laos.

— Our presence in Laos might give us some influence in the country. Specifically, we might be able to influence Soviet, Chinese and North Vietnamese attitudes.

— Our presence in Laos would reassure the Thai. Conversely, our withdrawal would disturb the Thai.

— It is customary and convenient for us to maintain a presence in most countries whether Communist or non-Communist, friendly or unfriendly.

On balance we are virtually all agreed that it would be desirable to keep a presence in Laos. Disagreement will arise over the price we should pay. I submit that maintaining our presence is, for the following reasons, not worth the price we will probably have to pay.

—As a listening post, Vientiane will be marginal at best because our contacts — and those of the whole diplomatic community — will be severely restricted. We will probably learn more about Lao developments in Udorn, Thailand than in Vientiane — just as for years Vienna was a better source of information on Czechoslovakia and Hungary than were Prague and Budapest.

— It is extremely difficult to see how we can have any influence in Laos. One basic fact, which is often ignored or not understood, is that Hanoi calls the shots in Laos. We have ample intelligence showing how tight North Vietnamese control has been over the Pathet Lao. Our influence over the North Vietnamese is now practically nil. I can see little reason why either the Chinese or Soviets should be receptive to our views on Laos. The Chinese have consistently supported the Hanoi position on Laos and, for example, seemed to have cooperated closely with the North Vietnamese and the Pathet Lao in the roadbuilding operation in Northern Laos. The Soviets have been somewhat less supportive of Hanoi's role — as was the case in Cambodia — and probably have little influence left in the country.

— It would, no doubt, please and reassure the Thai if we remained in Vientiane. It would, however, not reassure the Thai if we permitted ourselves to be humiliated or blackmailed as the price for keeping an Embassy in Laos.

Basically, the PGNU request for "unconditional" aid is probably an extension of Hanoi's public demand for U.S. reparations under Article 21. If we came up with enough aid — which would be hard to justify to Congress or anybody else in light of what has recently happened — our people might be left alone; however, Hanoi might still find it hard to resist the temptation to have its Pathet Lao proxies occasionally rub our noses in it just to demonstrate our impotency in Southeast Asia.

If we give little or no aid — especially if we cut off our vital contributions to FEOF — there is little doubt that our remaining personnel would be subjected to further harassment and humiliations which could only further damage our prestige in Southeast Asia. In this case we lose both by staying under these circumstances or by allowing ourselves to be forced out of the country.

In summary, we should remain in Laos only if it costs us little or nothing in aid and if we can be reasonably assured of freedom from further harassment, and both seem improbable at this time.

We can stall for awhile longer, but sooner or later the crunch will come if and when the other side realizes we are not going to help subsidize Hanoi's Laotian colony.

1 Source: Ford Library, National Security Adviser, Presidential Country Files for East Asia and the Pacific, Box 12, Laos. Secret. Urgent; Sent for information. Kissinger’s initials appear at the top of the first page. According to an attached correspondence profile, Kissinger noted the report on June 9. The NSC staff scheduled a WSAG meeting for June 27 to consider U.S. policy toward Laos, Vietnam, and Thailand, but a handwritten notation in the June 27 WSAG Briefing Books reads: “HAK Cancelled.” (Ibid., Box 27, WSAG Meeting, Indochina, June 27, 1975)

75. Memorandum From William Smyser of the National Security Council Staff to Secretary of State Kissinger, Washington, June 9, 1975. 75. Memorandum From William Smyser of the National Security Council Staff to Secretary of State Kissinger, Washington, June 9, 1975.1

Washington, June 9, 1975

MEMORANDUM
NATIONAL SECURITY COUNCIL
ACTION

June 9, 1975

MEMORANDUM FOR: SECRETARY KISSINGER
FROM: W.R. SMYSER [WS initialed]
SUBJECT: Message to the DRV

We have received, through the Russians, the message from the DRV at Tab B.

The DRV message contains three points: — First, that the DRV is "in favor of good relations with the United States based on mutual respect,"

— Second, that North Vietnamese troops deliberately slowed their offensive to give us more time to evacuate Saigon;

— Third, that the DRV has "strived to make (sic) everything necessary for not worsening the relations with the United States in the future" and that "there is no enmity toward the United States in Vietnam and they would like to see the same from the American side as well."

As you know from our earlier discussions, I regard the claim of North Vietnam's delay in the move on Saigon to be at least somewhat self-serving for both Hanoi and Moscow. Considering the number of South Vietnamese forces still in the vicinity of Saigon, the NVA moved pretty quickly. But I have always been reluctant to ask our military for an appraisal of this since it would mainly produce speculation.

Of greater interest is the material indicating that the DRV now wishes to improve relations. I regard that as genuine. The North Vietnamese have always appreciated the greater freedom of maneuver that they could gain from being associated with a number of major powers, and they probably believe that they could benefit politically as well as financially by some sort of association with us.

While they want this association, the background noises are still very tough. I am convinced that Hanoi is directing most of what is happening in Laos, and probably all of it. Hanoi is also putting on the public record (which we have briefed for you) all kinds of conditions for US-DRV relations. We again, as so often in the past, have two tracks; the private one for the real message, and the public one that complicates our response and puts us under pressure.

You should also know that the Indochina Resources Center is going around the refugee camps telling the refugees to propagandize in the United States for American aid to PRG areas, and there are some hints that the PRG may be using leverage against the refugees in order to try to develop them into lobbying instruments for aid. It is too early to be certain of the latter, but we should be aware of the pressures we will be getting.

I understand you favor a positive response. I agree that our reply should make some positive noises, though we would have domestic difficulties in proceeding very far very fast and though I do not get the impression that the type of response we give would have any effect on the types of policies the North Vietnamese might pursue in Southeast Asia. Our principal benefit is that we would at least be conducting a dialogue and we might be able to get out some Americans as well as perhaps some data on MIA's.

I do not, however, see any hope that we could really improve relations unless the North Vietnamese drop the pre-conditions that they have voiced publicly, and I doubt that they are prepared to drop those soon. DRV statements suggest that the DRV leadership believes American public opinion favors aid to North Vietnam, or can be persuaded to favor it (they even appear to believe that the Administration, rather than Hill opposition, sabotaged the earlier aid agreement). While Hanoi may have enough political interest in relations with us to drop the aid demand at some point, I do not see that happening soon if at all. Hanoi also has an interest in having our return to Indochina come on North Vietnamese terms if it comes at all (this is one of the secondary arguments for hanging on in Laos, but also a reason why we may not be able to do it).

With this in mind, I suggest a positive message that contains a hint of a relationship but on a new basis, in order to try to deflect in advance whatever requests for "reparations" Hanoi may envisage.

From Hanoi s response we can judge our next step, if any.

RECOMMENDATION:
That you approve the attached message (Tab A) for dispatch to the DRV.

1 Source: Ford Library, National Security Adviser, Kissinger-Scowcroft West Wing Office Files, General Subject Files, Box 34, Vietnam, Camp David File (2), 3/24/75–12/11/75. Top Secret; Sensitive; Exclusively Eyes Only; Outside the System. The DRV message, May 28, and draft U.S. response, June 11, are attached at Tabs A and B but not published. Text of the messages are in Document 76.

76. Backchannel Message WH 51044 From the President’s Deputy Assistant for National Security Affairs (Scowcroft) to the U.S. Air Attaché to France (Oveson), June 11, 1975, 0627Z. 76. Backchannel Message WH 51044 From the President’s Deputy Assistant for National Security Affairs (Scowcroft) to the U.S. Air Attaché to France (Oveson), June 11, 1975, 0627Z.1

June 11, 1975

OP IMMED
DE WTE #3116 1630627

0 120609Z JUN 75

FM THE WHITE HOUSE
TO COLONEL OVERSON PARIS

JUNE 11, 1975

TO: COLONEL OVERSON
FROM: GENERAL SCOWCROFT

1. PLEASE PASS THE FOLLOWING MESSAGE TO YOUR DRV CONTACT, TOGETHER WITH THE INCOMING NOTE RECEIVED FROM THE SOVIET UNION AS QUOTED IN PARAGRAPH 2. BELOW:

"THE UNITED STATES SIDE HAS RECEIVED THE MESSAGE FROM THE LEADERSHIP OF THE DRV, DELIVERED THROUGH SOVIET CHANNELS, THAT THERE IS NO ENMITY TOWARD THE UNITED STATES IN VIETNAM AND THAT THE DRV IS IN FAVOR OF GOOD RELATIONS.

"THE UNITED STATES SIDE BEARS NO HOSTILITY IN PRINCIPLE TOWARD THE DRV SIDE. THE U.S. SIDE PROPOSES TO PROCEED ON THIS BASIS IN ANY RELATIONS BETWEEN THE TWO SIDES AND IS PREPARED TO LISTEN TO ANY SUGGESTIONS WHICH THE DRV SIDE MAY WISH TO PUT FORTH."

2. THE NOTE FROM THE DRV AS RECEIVED FROM THE SOVIET UNION FOLLOWS:

"THE LEADERSHIP OF THE DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF VIETNAM ASKED US TO CONVEY TO THE US SIDE THE FOLLOWING.

"THE LEADERSHIP OF THE DRV IS IN FAVOUR OF GOOD RELATIONS WITH THE UNITED STATES BASES ON MUTUAL RESPECT.

"PROCEEDING FROM THIS AND TAKING INTO ACCOUNT THE RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE SOVIET LEADERSHIP, THE VIETNAMESE SIDE DISPLAYED RESTRAINT DURING THE LIBERATION OF SAIGON WHEN THE AMERICANS WERE GIVEN THE OPPORTUNITY FOR UNHINDERED COMPLETION OF THE EVACUATION OF THEIR PERSONNEL. THE VIETNAMESE SIDE HAS STRIVED TO MAKE EVERYTHING NECESSARY FOR NOT WORSENING THE RELATIONS WITH THE UNITED STATES IN THE FUTURE. THERE IS NO ENMITY TOWARDS THE UNITED STATES IN VIETNAM AND THEY WOULD LIKE TO SEE THE SAME FROM THE AMERICAN SIDE AS WELL."

WARM REGARDS.

1 Source: Ford Library, National Security Adviser, NSC East Asian and Pacific Affairs Staff Files, Box 11, Vietnam (11). Top Secret; Sensitive; Eyes Only.

77. Telegram 139334 From the Department of State to the Embassy in Laos, June 13, 1975, 2321Z. 77. Telegram 139334 From the Department of State to the Embassy in Laos, June 13, 1975, 2321Z.1

June 13, 1975

TELEGRAM
Department of State
139334

DRAFTED BY EA/LC: JROSENTHAL/AA/EA:AZGARDINER;A
APPROVED BY EA:P. C. HABIB
[GARBLE] - MR. STEARMAN
DOD/ISA - [GARBLE] CROWE
CIA - MR. SHACKLEY
S/S - JMOFFAT

D132321Z JUN 75

FM SECSTATE WASHDC
TO AMEMBASSY VIENTIANE IMMEDIATE

E.O. 11652:GDS
TAGS: PFOR, LA, US

SUBJECT: FUTURE RELATIONS WITH PGNU

REF: A. STATE 133376; B. VIENTIANE 4009; C. VIENTIANE 4218

1. IN REGARD TO OUR FUTURE RELATIONS WITH PGNU, THE POLICY DECISIONS HAVE BEEN MADE THAT WE ARE PREPARED TO MAINTAIN A MODEST DIPLOMATIC PRESENCE BUT WITHOUT ANY FURTHER AID PROGRAMS. YOU SHOULD NOT RPT NOT INFORM THE PGNU OF THESE DECISIONS.

2. WHILE WE OF COURSE WOULD LIKE TO ACHIEVE ORDERLY TERMINATION OF USAID ON BASIS WE CAN ACCEPT, CURRENT NEGOTIATIONS OFFER VERY LITTLE PROSPECT OF THIS. NOR DOES IT APPEAR THAT THERE IS ANY REALISTIC POSSIBILITY OF GETTING PROPERTY OUT OF THE COUNTRY. WE ASSUME YOU SHARE THIS VIEW. FOR THESE REASONS AND IN LIGHT OF POLICY DECISIONS TO TERMINATE ALL AID TO LAOS, WE BELIEVE YOU SHOULD PLAN TO ABANDON USAID PROPERTY UNDER AUTHORITY GRANTED REF A. WOULD PREFER YOU AVOID BLANKET TRANSFERS WHICH MIGHT APPEAR TO LEGITIMIZE THE TRANSACTION ALTHOUGH FINAL DECISION ON PROCEDURE IS LEFT WITH YOU. YOU SHOULD BEGIN BY TAKING STEPS FOR ALL AID AND NON-ESSENTIAL PERSONNEL TO DEPART LAOS IN AS UNOBTRUSIVE AND URGENT A MANNER AS POSSIBLE. TO THE EXTENT CONSISTENT WITH THIS OBJECTIVE, PLEASE MAKE EVERY EFFORT TO CARRY OR SEND OUT REMAINING ESSENTIAL AID RECORDS. (WHILE WE OF COURSE DO NOT WISH TO TIP OUR HAND TO LAO RE FUTURE OF AID, YOU SHOULD BE AWARE THAT HOUSE APPROPRIATIONS COMMITTEE HAS JUST VOTED IN OPEN SESSION TO INCLUDE PROHIBITION AGAINST ANY AID TO LAOS AFTER JUNE 30. IF LAO QUESTION YOU ABOUT THIS, YOU SHOULD SAY THIS IS ONE STEP IN THE LEGISLATIVE PROCESS AND IS BY NO MEANS DEFINITIVE.)

3. YOU SHOULD ALSO BEGIN TO REDUCE THE MISSION STAFF IMMEDIATELY TO ABSOLUTE MINIMUM EVEN BELOW INITIAL ESTIMATE OF 56 PER REF B. OUR TENTATIVE THINKING IS THAT YOU SHOULD GET DOWN BELOW THIRTY AS PROMPTLY AS POSSIBLE, AND WE ARE DISCUSSING THIS WITH INTERESTED AGENCIES HERE. WOULD APPRECIATE URGENTLY YOUR THINKING AS TO HOW THIS MIGHT BEST BE ACHIEVED.

4. CONCERNING DISPOSITION OF LAO MAP ASSETS OUTSIDE OF LAOS, WE INTEND TO CONTINUE DELAYING ANY DECISION FOR TIME BEING, AND TO TELL LAO WHEN ASKED THAT REPAIRS ARE STILL UNDERWAY, ETC. WE DO NOT WANT YOU TO LIFT SUSPENSION OF ECONOMIC AID SHIPMENTS AND YOU ARE NOT AUTHORIZED TO DO SO WITHOUT PRIOR CONCURRENCE OF WASHINGTON.

5. WE HAVE DECIDED THAT AMBASSADOR STONE WILL DELAY HIS DEPARTURE PENDING CLEARER UNDERSTANDING OF PGNU INTENTIONS AND REACTIONS TO ABOVE.
KISSINGER

1 Source: Ford Library, National Security Adviser, Presidential Country Files for East Asia and the Pacific, Box 12, Laos, State Department Telegrams, From SECSTATE, Nodis. Drafted by Rosenthal and Gardiner; cleared by Stearman, Crowe, and Shackley; approved by Habib.

78. Telegram 160796 From the Department of State to the Embassy in Laos, July 9, 1975, 0129Z. 78. Telegram 160796 From the Department of State to the Embassy in Laos, July 9, 1975, 0129Z.1

July 9, 1975, 0129Z

TELEGRAM
Department of State
160796

DRAFTED BY EA:RHMILLER:ADA
APPROVED BY THE SECRETARY
EA:P.C. HABIB
S/S - O:DLMACK

O 090129Z JUL
FM SECSTATE WASHDC
TO AMEMBASSY VIENTIANE

E.O. 11652:GDS
TAGS: PFOR, APER, LA, US

SUBJECT: US-LAO RELATIONS
FOR CHARGE

1. AS WE HAVE STATED IN SEVERAL MESSAGES OVER THE PAST WEEKS, WE PLAN TO MAINTAIN A SMALL DIPLOMATIC PRESENCE IN VIENTIANE IF CONDITIONS PERMIT BUT WITHOUT PROVIDING ANY FURTHER MILITARY OR ECONOMIC AID. ON THE OTHER HAND, WE SEE NO U.S. INTEREST TO BE SERVED BY SIMPLY PROVIDING A WHIPPING-BOY FOR THE PGNU. THIS IS WHY WE ASKED FOR YOUR RECOMMENDATIONS ABOUT CLOSING THE POST AND WITHDRAWING ALL PERSONNEL IF AND WHEN YOU BELIEVE CIRCUMSTANCES WARRANT SUCH A MOVE (STATE 153540 AND 1535341). WE ASSUME, IN THE ABSENCE OF SUCH A RECOMMENDATION FROM YOU, THAT YOU BELIEVE U.S. INTERESTS CONTINUE TO BE SERVED BY STAYING AND PGNU HARASSMENT REMAINS WITHIN TOLERABLE LIMITS.

2. IN ANY CASE, WE DO NOT BELIEVE THAT U.S. INTERESTS WILL BE SERVED AT PRESENT BY SENDING AN AMBASSADOR TO LAOS. WE THEREFORE PLAN TO CONTINUE TO BE REPRESENTED BY A CHARGE D AFFAIRES FOR THE FORESEEABLE FUTURE. STONE WILL BE REASSIGNED IN THE NEAR FUTURE AND THIS WILL BECOME KNOWN TO THE LAO IN DUE TIME. WE BELIEVE THAT YOU SHOULD ALSO BE REPLACED SOON AND WE WOULD WELCOME ANY THOUGHTS YOU MAY HAVE AS TO TIMING. YOUR REASSIGNMENT AT THIS TIME IN NO WAY REFLECTS ADVERSELY ON YOU; ON THE CONTRARY, AS THE ACTING SECRETARY'S RECENT MESSAGE TO YOU INDICATED, YOU HAVE PERFORMED WELL OVER THE PAST TWO MONTHS UNDER VERY DIFFICULT CIRCUMSTANCES. HOWEVER, AS YOU YOURSELF SUGGEST IN VIENTIANE 4417, YOUR CAPITAL WITH SOUVANNA AND PHOUMI MAY BE LARGELY USED UP AND, PARTICULARLY IF WE DO NOT NOW SEND AN AMBASSADOR, WE BELIEVE WE SHOULD HAVE NEW LEADERSHIP IN THE EMBASSY WITH NO ASSOCIATION WITH THE DIFFICULTIES OF MAY AND JUNE.

3. WE ASSUME THAT BY NOW THE PGNU HAS A PRETTY GOOD IDEA THAT U.S. AID IS A THING OF THE PAST, EVEN THOUGH WE HAVE NOT INFORMED THEM FORMALLY — AND DO NOT INTEND TO DO SO — THAT U.S. AID HAS BEEN TERMINATED. OVER THE NEXT FEW DAYS AND WEEKS WE WILL BE OBLIGED TO TAKE A NUMBER OF SPECIFIC TERMINATING ACTIONS WHICH WILL BRING THIS HOME MORE CONCRETELY TO THE LAO: FORMAL TERMINATION OF AID PROCUREMENT, DISPOSITION OF ACCUMULATED GOODS IN BANGKOK, TERMINATION OF MAP AND AID TRAINEES IN CURRENT COURSES, ETC. MOREOVER, IT WILL BECOME CLEAR IN ONGOING FY 1976 AID HEARINGS THAT WE ARE NOT SEEKING PROGRAMS FOR LAOS. THE GENERAL IMPACT OF THESE STEPS ON THE LAO, IN ADDITION TO GROWING ECONOMIC DIFFICULTIES, COULD PLACE ADDITIONAL STRAINS ON U.S.-LAO RELATIONS IN THE WEEKS AHEAD. IN THIS CONNECTION, WE STILL DO NOT WISH TO MAKE A DEFINITIVE DECISION ON THE DISPOSITION OF THE MAP ASSETS IN THAILAND. IF THE LAO MAKE AN ISSUE OF IT, WE WILL DETERMINE HOW TO DEAL WITH THE PROBLEM IN THE OVERALL CONTEXT OF OUR RELATIONS AT THE TIME.

4. IF WE ARE ABLE TO MAINTAIN A POST IN VIENTIANE, IT WILL HAVE LITTLE FUNCTION BEYOND THAT OF SHOWING THE FLAG AND OF BEING A LISTENING POST. IN THESE CIRCUMSTANCES, WE SEE NO NEED FOR KEEPING MORE THAN A MINIMAL STAFF. WE CAN APPRECIATE THAT YOUR PRESENT TRANSITIONAL WORKLOAD MAY TEMPORARILY REQUIRE BRINGING BACK TO VIENTIANE A FEW OF YOUR STAFF CURRENTLY IN THAILAND, ESPECIALLY ADMINISTRATIVE AND CONSULAR PERSONNEL, AND WE HAVE SENT SEPARATE AUTHORIZATION DESIGNED TO MEET YOUR NEEDS. HOWEVER, YOU — AND YOUR SUCCESSOR — SHOULD PLAN TO CONFIGURE THE MISSION TO A MINIMUM LIMIT (ABOUT 20) OVER THE NEXT TWO OR THREE MONTHS. WE ENVISAGE PERMITTING DEPENDENTS TO RETURN — WITH EMPHASIS ON WORKING WIVES TO THE EXTENT POSSIBLE — AS CONDITIONS PERMIT. WE WOULD WELCOME YOUR RECOMMENDATIONS ON HOW TO ACHIEVE THESE OBJECTIVES.

5. FINALLY, WITH RESPECT TO A PROTECTION POWER, WE HAVE IN MIND ASKING EITHER THE U.K. OR JAPAN (IN THAT ORDER OF PREFERENCE) TO UNDERTAKE THIS RESPONSIBILITY IF THE NEED ARISES, BUT WE DO NOT RPT NOT WISH TO DISCUSS THE MATTER WITH EITHER THE BRITISH OR THE JAPANESE UNTIL AND UNLESS WE ACTUALLY MAKE THE DECISION TO CLOSE THE POST AND WITHDRAW ALL PERSONNEL. WE REALIZE THIS POSES PRACTICAL DIFFICULTIES FOR YOU, BUT YOU SHOULD TAKE NO ACTION ON THE SUBJECT OF A PROTECTING POWER WITHOUT SPECIFIC AUTHORIZATION FROM THE DEPARTMENT.
KISSINGER

1 Source: Ford Library, National Security Adviser, Presidential Country Files for East Asia and the Pacific, Box 12, Laos, State Department Telegrams, From SECSTATE, Nodis. Secret; Immediate; Nodis. Drafted by Miller; cleared by Habib; and approved by Kissinger.

79. Backchannel Message 0124 From the U.S. Air Attaché to France (Oveson) to the President’s Deputy Assistant for National Security Affairs (Scowcroft), July 17, 1975, 0944Z. 79. Backchannel Message 0124 From the U.S. Air Attaché to France (Oveson) to the President’s Deputy Assistant for National Security Affairs (Scowcroft), July 17, 1975, 0944Z.1

July 17, 1975

O 172944Z JUL 75

TO: GENERAL SCOWCROFT THE WHITE HOUSE
FROM: COL OVESON PARIS

THE FOLLOWING MESSAGE WAS RECEIVED FROM CUSTOMER AT 1000 HOURS THIS DATE:

QUOTE.

THE DRVN SIDE HAS RECEIVED AND CAREFULLY CONSIDERED THE US MESSAGE DATED JUNE 11, 1975.

THE DRVN POINT OF VIEW REGARDING THE NORMALIZATION OF RELATIONS BETWEEN THE DRVN AND THE US HAS BEEN CLEARLY EXPOUNDED: "NOW THAT THE WAR HAS ENDED AND PEACE HAS BEEN RESTORED IN THE WHOLE OF VIETNAM. ALL POSTWAR QUESTIONS CONCERNING VIETNAM AND THE UNITED STATES, SUCH AS THE U.S. CONTRIBUTION TO HEALING THE WOUNDS OF WAR IN THE TWO ZONES OF VIETNAM, THE SEARCH FOR MIA'S, THE EXHUMATION AND REPATRIATION OF THE REMAINS OF THE AMERICAN DEAD, ARE THE OUTSTANDING QUESTIONS THAT CALL FOR AN EARLY SOLUTION. THE GOVERNMENT OF THE DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF VIETNAM IS PREPARED TO TALK WITH THE US GOVERNMENT SO AS TO SETTLE THESE QUESTIONS. AT THE SAME TIME, IT REAFFIRMS THAT THE US RESPECT FOR THE VIETNAMESE PEOPLE'S FUNDAMENTAL NATIONAL RIGHTS, THE TOTAL CESSATION OF ITS INTERFERENCE IN THE INTERNAL AFFAIRS OF SOUTH VIETNAM, AND THE FULFILLMENT OF ITS OBLIGATION TO CONTRIBUTE TO THE HEALING OF THE WOUNDS OF WAR AND TO POSTWAR RECONSTRUCTION IN BOTH ZONES OF VIETNAM, WILL CREATE CONDITIONS FOR THE ESTABLISHMENT OF NORMAL RELATIONS BETWEEN THE DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF VIETNAM AND THE UNITED STATES, IN THE SPIRIT OF ARTICLE 22 OF THE PARIS AGREEMENT".

THE DRVN SIDE'S ATTITUDE IS ONE OF SERIOUSNESS AND GOODWILL VIS-A-VIS THE US DESIRE FOR BILATERAL RELATIONS EXPRESSED IN THE US MESSAGE OF JUNE 12, 1975. UNQUOTE.
WARM REGARDS

1 Source: Ford Library, National Security Adviser, NSC East Asian and Pacific Affairs Staff Files, Box 11, Vietnam (11). Top Secret; Sensitive; Exclusively Eyes Only. On August 9 the DRV again contacted the Embassy in France with an offer to return to the United States the remains of three U.S. servicemen killed during the Vietnam War. (Telegram 20633 from Paris, 9 August, ibid.)

80. Memorandum From Secretary of State Kissinger to President Ford, Washington, September 29, 1975. 80. Memorandum From Secretary of State Kissinger to President Ford, Washington, September 29, 1975.1

Washington, September 29, 1975

MEMORANDUM
THE WHITE HOUSE

WASHINGTON

September 29, 1975

MEMORANDUM FOR: THE PRESIDENT
FROM: HENRY A. KISSINGER

SUBJECT: Information Items

CIA Summary: Vietnam After the Fall: Nearly five months after the fall of Saigon, South Vietnam remains under a form of martial law in which North Vietnamese military personalities make all day-to-day political, administrative, and economic directives. The primary authority, however, appears to be Pham Hung, fourth-ranking member of the North Vietnamese Politburo, who is in charge of party and military affairs in the South. The South Vietnamese Provisional Revolutionary Government, which ostensibly serves as a national government, has no meaningful authority over either Pham Hung or the military management committee. Immediately after the take-over, the communists moved to offset the lack of capable and trustworthy administrators by importing large numbers of officials from the North. Many of these appear to have been former southerners who had come north at the time of the 1954 Geneva accords.

Communist policies to date have been aimed primarily at restoring order and the economy. The communists early adopted a relatively conciliatory approach in order to mobilize support. But given the long and bitter nature of the conflict and the abundance of firearms in the country, they are now admitting to opposition from a variety of sources, including former government soldiers, religious sects, and ethnic minorities in the highlands. The continued presence of 18 of the 20 North Vietnamese divisions in the south attests to the fact that security remains a problem. The economy is probably far more worrisome. The communists admit that it is still in bad shape. Low production and high unemployment have reduced the level of living throughout the country. Considerable help from Hanoi's foreign allies will be required to get the economy on its feet. So far the communists have not attempted to make fundamental or sweeping changes in the South's economic structure and they are depending heavily on private enterprises to revive the economy.

Vietnamese officials, both North and South, proclaim formal reunification as their foremost objective. At the same time, they make it clear that the process will be gradual, following progress in developing an acceptable communist administrative structure and in restoring order and economic stability. Although the communists are maintaining the fiction of an independent South Vietnamese state, there is no question that Vietnam is now one country with one policy.

1 Source: Ford Library, National Security Adviser, NSC Files, Presidential Daily Briefings, Box 5, 9/29/1975. Top Secret; Sensitive; Codeword. In New York on September 28, Kissinger discussed Indochina with PRC Foreign Minister Ch’iao Kuan-hua. (See memorandum of conversation, Foreign Relations of the United States, 1969–1976, Vol. XVIII, China, 1973–1976, Document 119)

81. Memorandum From Secretary of State Kissinger to President Ford, Washington, November 3, 1975. 81. Memorandum From Secretary of State Kissinger to President Ford, Washington, November 3, 1975.1

Washington, November 3, 1975

[text not declassified in time for publication]

1 Source: Ford Library, National Security Adviser, NSC Files, Presidential Daily Briefings, Box 5, 11/3/1975. Top Secret; Sensitive; Codeword.

82. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Scowcroft) to Secretary of State Kissinger, Secretary of Defense Rumsfeld, Secretary of Treasury Simon, and the Director of Central Intelligence (Colby), Washington, November 18, 1975. 82. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Scowcroft) to Secretary of State Kissinger, Secretary of Defense Rumsfeld, Secretary of Treasury Simon, and the Director of Central Intelligence (Colby), Washington, November 18, 1975.1

Washington, November 18, 1975

THE WHITE HOUSE
WASHINGTON

November 18, 1975

MEMORANDUM FOR:
THE SECRETARY OF STATE
THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE
THE SECRETARY OF THE TREASURY
THE DIRECTOR OF CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE

SUBJECT: American Arms Captured in Indochina

As a result of the events of last spring in Indochina, the Communist regimes of North and South Vietnam have acquired a vast quantity of American-supplied arms and military material, having an estimated acquisition cost of $6 billion. During the past few weeks there have been reports that the Vietnamese Communists have initiated contacts with several governments in an effort to sell some of this equipment.

It is requested that an analysis of possible responses by the United States Government to attempts to sell this equipment be undertaken immediately. Specific consideration should be given inter alia to the following issues: — Should the United States attempt to control the transfer of captured US military equipment out of Vietnam?

— How should the United States respond to queries from friendly governments that have been approached by the Vietnamese Communists as potential recipients of captured US military equipment?

— What measures can the United States take to influence the flow of US military equipment out of Vietnam?

— What actions might the United States take in order to influence the transfer of US military equipment under domestic or international law?

This review shall be undertaken by an ad hoc committee comprised of representatives of the addressees and the NSC Staff and chaired by the representative of the Department of State. The review should be conducted on a close hold basis. A full range of options together with recommendations should be forwarded to the Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs by November 26, 1975.

Brent Scowcroft

cc: The Chairman, Joint Chiefs of Staff

1 Source: Ford Library, NSC Institutional Files (H-Files), Box 16, SRG Meeting, Taiwan, February 27, 1976 (3). Secret. A copy was sent to the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff.

83. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, December 17, 1975, noon. 83. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, December 17, 1975, noon.1

Washington, December 17, 1975

MEMORANDUM
THE WHITE HOSE
WASHINGTON

MEMORANDUM OF CONVERSATION

PARTICIPANTS:

President Ford

Brent Scowcroft, Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs

Congressman G.V. (Sonny) Montgomery (D.-Miss.)

Congressman Benjamin Gilman (R.-New York)

Congressman Paul N. (Pete) McCloskey (R.-Calif.)

DATE AND TIME: Thursday, December 17, 1975 12:00 p.m
PLACE: The White House
The Oval Office

The President: I understand you had a good trip to Paris and that you are planning to go to Hanoi to pick up the bodies and talk to the North Vietnamese.

Montgomery: Yes, but we have heard there is a change. They want us to get the bodies to Bangkoj.

The President: [Reads the cable.]

Montgomery: When we said we would accept the remains, we said we would do it in Hanoi — then they said Bangkok. The UN High Commissioner for Refugees today called and said they would do it in Hanoi, but in a UNHCR plane. We would go from Bangkok into Hanoi Saturday night. At noon Sunday we will receive the bodies in a ceremony. They asked for an expert to identify the bodies. We would hope to talk to the Vietnamese about other MIA's. We have good files of people we knew were alive.

They will want to talk about the development of our relations.

Gilman: The MIA families reacted very favorably to what you brought back from China. They think things may be gearing up. We would hope we would indicate that our government is considering a further gesture. We think that would be helpful — perhaps oil drilling.

The President: I would remind them of my Hawaii speech [Dec. 7]. We will look to the future. But I think we need to see that they deliver — if they do it as a gesture. But I don't think I can say ahead of time that we will open up on oil, trade or something. Let's get some performance. We know their performance heretofore has been damned little.

McCloskey: I told Brent I would be the hardliner. There are two points: Our committee ends in September, so we are in a bigger hurry than State.

Montgomery: We will wrap it up in a report. It may be a sad one, but we will try to ease it off.

McCloskey: They clearly know the difference between words and actions. I told them I would try to get the trade embargo lifted. They released the nine Americans last October. They said they would return the three, the two Marines, and search for MIA's. I think that our success will depend on simultaneity. I know State is preparing a list I would like you to announce beforehand — a strong step — that if they do what they promise you will lift the embargo. There is a Bingham bill to do it, but I think it should be your initiative, not the Congresses. Brent is worried about the political effect, but I think it would be a good decision now.

The President: Without seeing the NSC list, I would think oil might be more beneficial.

Gilman: I heartily agree. They have been probing oil companies and I think this is the right move. I think it is our move.

The President: My quick reaction is that you go over and get the bodies, get a promise of what they will do and what quid pro quo they want.

McCloskey: Could you make some sort of statement between now and Saturday?

The President: I would want to think on that.

Scowcroft: Why can't you refer to the Hawaii speech and say the President stands behind it? We want to start a new relationship, not on the basis of suspicion.

The President: Tell them to forget performance; start from scratch. "You don't have any performance either." Let them show what they will do; then we can act.

Montgomery: I don't have any trouble with what you are saying. Your Hawaii speech was right on track. Pete would like to offer something, but if we could tell them you are favorably disposed.

We are hoping to get an aircraft to get us out there.

Gilman: The North Vietnamese Ambassador said if their actions remain unilateral and we don't reciprocate, they would have a problem with their public opinion.

The President: How many sites did you say you had?

Montgomery: When we narrow it down we will have only about 14-15 good alive cases, and maybe 250 bodies.

McCloskey: We could perhaps get 100-200 bodies they have buried.

Gilman: Kissinger left 80 case files out there in '73. If we could just get information on cases like that.

The President: I hope you will shoot down the Fat Man. Grivas is the name. He is a fraud and a crook. [Described the cases].

Montgomery: We will have a problem with some of the families, but I think most of them will accept it if we do a good job. Some of them get edgy when we say North Vietnam says it has no more prisoners, but we can handle them. Your China trip helps, because some of the families think they may have marched them over into China.

McCloskey: We have to be more friendly than you, to get results. I hope if we get something you could respond quickly.

The President: I will be here after 30 December. Let me think out loud. Maybe I could give you a letter.

Montgomery: That would be great.

The President: Or I will call you. When do you leave?

Montgomery: Thursday night at the latest.

Gilman: Can we say when we are talking to them that there is interest in oil?

The President: I would like to think about that and see the NSC list of things we could do.

Montgomery: I think the Vietnam thing has quieted down some and even in my conservative district there won't be an outcry.

Can we tell the press you stand by your Hawaii speech and you support efforts on MIA's?

The President: Yes.

Montgomery: Is it fair to say that you will match their actions?

The President: There must be reciprocity.

1 Source: Ford Library, National Security Adviser, Memoranda of Conversations, Box 17, Chronological File. Top Secret. The meeting was held in the Oval Office. Brackets are in the original.

84. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Scowcroft) to President Ford, Washington, January 19, 1976. 84. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Scowcroft) to President Ford, Washington, January 19, 1976.1

Washington, January 19, 1976

MEMORANDUM
THE WHITE HOUSE
WASHINGTON
INFORMATION

January 19, 1976

MEMORANDUM FOR: THE PRESIDENT
FROM: BRENT SCOWCROFT [BS initialed]
SUBJECT: State Department Report on Life in South Vietnam

Our Embassy in Bangkok has prepared an airgram on "Life in South Vietnam"(Tab A) which reports the observations of three non-Vietnamese who recently left Saigon — a Korean, a Cambodian, and a New Zealander. They all speak Vietnamese fluently, had lived in Vietnam a long time, and had numerous contacts there. They departed between November 19 and December 5.

The key points which these three observers made to our Embassy officers in Bangkok are as follows: — The mood in Saigon is one of despair, suspicion, and hardship. Many people have fallen into bitter self-recrimination for not having done something in time to prevent the Communist victory.

— The NVA are living interspersed among the civilian population. There are frequent nighttime block or precinct meetings that often turn into denunciation sessions, making each person suspicious of his neighbor. These meetings also have a people's court aspect in which a show of hands of those attending determines the punishment for a person accused of past or present misdeeds. The offender is then led away to an unknown destination.

— Unemployment remains high, with no prospects for change in sight.

— Prices are rising daily in Saigon, despite official, fixed prices that even the state stores do not respect. Cigarettes are ten times more expensive than on April 30. A person is limited to fifteen kilos of rice per month and to beef twice a month.

— There continues to be a migration into the countryside. People who have gone to farm in the new economic areas are discouraged by the government requirement that they turn over 50 percent of their rice production to the authorities.

— The NVA in Saigon always seem to have money; they buy Seiko watches, radios, cameras, U.S. Army shoes, bicycles and Samsonite luggage.

— Corruption is as bad now as under the GVN. One of the most popular forms is black marketeering. NVA soldiers purchase large quantities of items such a soap, sugar, and cigarettes and resell them on the black market. Another popular form of corruption is under-the-table transactions to facilitate bureaucratic processing or a favorable decision. Finally, there are the shake-downs to avoid arrest or re-education.

— Resistance continues in several areas. In the central highlands resistance forces recently cut Highway 20 to Dalat, the principal source of vegetables for the Saigon area. Closer to Saigon, many people say the Communists have only daytime control of certain areas north of the city, and there are reports of elements who make forays along the coast. In the Mekong Delta, the Hoa Hao Buddhists continue to resist in provinces near the Cambodian border.

— Travel within South Vietnam remains difficult, Saigonese are free to leave the city only to travel to a new economic area or their home villages.

— All schools are now in the hands of the government. The new authorities use class time at some high schools to form the students into self-defense units. Some especially "revolutionary" students carry AK–47's and pistols with them at all times in school.

— A high-ranking NVA official is inhabiting the Ambassador's residence.

1 Source: Ford Library, White House Central Files, Subject Files, Box 59, CO 165–2, Vietnam (South). Confidential. Sent for information. Ford initialed the first page of the memorandum; a notation at the top of the document reads: “The President has seen.” Airgram 313 from Bangkok, December 16, 1975, is attached but not published.

85. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, January 26, 1976, 4:43–5:30 p.m. 85. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, January 26, 1976, 4:43–5:30 p.m. 1

Washington, January 26, 1976, 4:43–5:30 p.m.

MEMORANDUM
THE WHITE HOUSE
WASHINGTON
MEMORANDUM OF CONVERSATION

PARTICIPANTS:

President Ford

House Select Committee on MIA's

Cong. G.V. (Sonny) Montgomery (D.-Miss.), Chairman

Cong. Paul N. McCloskey, Jr. (R.-Calif.)

Cong. Richard L. Ottinger (D.-NY)

Cong. Benjamin Gilman (R.-NY)

Angus MacDonald, Staff Director

Brent Scowcroft, Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs

Max Friedersdorf, Assistant to the President for Legislative Affairs

Bob Wolthius, Deputy Assistant to the President for Legislative Affairs

DATE AND TIME: Monday, January 26, 1976 4:43 - 5:30 p.m.
PLACE: The Oval Office

[Small talk]

The President: Tell me about your trip.

Montgomery: It was a very good trip. The attitude of the leadership was very different from the early days when Kissinger used to deal with them. We were told we couldn't have US military and flags for recognizing the remains, but we did it our way. We had a fine ceremony at the airport, with North Vietnamese looking on. We didn't see any bomb damage — we didn't want to. Only the bridge. It's an old town. The only new building is the Cuban hotel. We saw the Hanoi Hilton. They stressed there were no Americans alive.

They discussed Article 21 of the Agreement. We met with Pham Van Dong. He was cordial and he raised Article 21. We told him of your letter and of your Asian speech [Honolulu speech, December 7] about mutual gestures of good will. And we got a shopping list of wants from him. It is really the JEC list.

The Committee still hasn't taken any policy steps but we feel the ball is back in our court. They have lived up to everything they have told us. They let the nine go; they gave us the three bodies; we could have the two marines if Kennedy would get on the ball.

The gestures should best come from you. We told them there was no way to get economic or reconstruction aid. [Mentioned things which could be done.]

Dong said he wanted to come to the United States and wanted more Americans to come to Vietnam.

The President: Do they let Americans come freely?

Montgomery: No, not now.

Gilman: I seriously think they want better relations with us. I mentioned the oil drilling.

The President: How many MIA's do you think are left in Vietnam?

Montgomery: Probably about a total of 2500-odd MIA's but I think not more than 250 bodies could be recovered. There are many problems involved — the impact, animals, vegetation, etc.

The President: Have you had any contact with the League of Families?

McCloskey: Here is a resolution of the League. We meet with them Saturday.

Two other things: You would get along well with Pham Van Dong. He is a gracious man. We thought your Hawaii speech was an affirmative speech, but they said you came over and doubled the aid to Indonesia and the Philippine s.

I don't know when you would invite Dong here but you would get along with him as well as you did with Teng Hsiao-ping.

We want to wrap up by September. State has a two-to-four year time frame so we are in conflict with them. I urge you to hasten on the reciprocal gestures. State thinks lifting the trade ban is too big a gesture, but…

The President: Would they let us look for MIA's?

Ottinger: They said if we would drop our hostility, they could cooperate on MIA's. There are two alternatives: deal on a step-by- step basis or sit down with State and negotiate the whole thing out. I think that is the way to go to give them some independence.

The President: Do they acknowledge they have closer ties with the Soviet Union?

Montgomery: They never mentioned the situation and we never saw a Soviet or a Chinese.

The President: How about Laos?

Montgomery: There was a mixup there. They thought at first we were coming in there to spy. They told us there were no Americans alive. They had no information on where they crashed. The government is pretty loosely managed.

McCloskey: They badly need medicine, etc.

Ottinger: They admitted they were desperate.

McCloskey: The Lao and the Thai are right across the river from each other. The question is whether they will stimulate insurgency in Thailand.

The President: Is the Lao Government independent or pro-North Vietnam, or pro-Chinese, or pro- Soviet?

Montgomery: I think the North Vietnamese call the shots. There are some Soviets there also. We did see some.

McCloskey: They are not sure of their control as in North Vietnam.

The President: Are there MIA's in Cambodia?

Montgomery: Yes, 30. We couldn't even make contact with them.

The President: We couldn't either, during Mayaguez.

Gilman: The JCRC have 23 North Vietnamese MIA's which we could use for exchange,

The President: I appreciate this information. Let us take a good look at the situation and what can be done. I will talk to Kissinger.

Ottinger: He has bitter memories. What we have to remember is it isn't the same,

The President: The first thing is to get the remains back. The second is to see if we can breach the relationship with the Soviet Union. The Chinese are worried about that. We will look into it. In the meantime there are more and more families changing status.

Montgomery: We have an agreement with DOD that there will be no status changes unless requested until after our report in September. The parents are the biggest problem. Some of them don't ever want a change. There is a tremendous financial difference.

Montgomery: Maybe the UNHCR could work with the new MIA agency in Hanoi on this MIA data.

McCloskey: We are getting some plastic surgeons to go over to help some children. They give time each year to do things like this. They have done this work on a doctor-to-doctor basis, not only in the US but in Latin America and other areas.

Gilman: They went out of their way to make a clear gesture of these three bodies. I think through some gesture on your part we can keep the ball rolling.

The President: What would you suggest?

Gilman: I think the aid is best.

McCloskey: I, of course, tend toward trade, but they really lack hotel facilities. There are people here who would like to go in there.

Ottinger: I would like to resolve it all at once rather than at a snail's pace. Give recognition, get a neutral agency to go in to look for sites — let the American people know these are tied together.

1 Source: Ford Library, National Security Adviser, Memoranda of Conversations, Box 17, Chronological File. Secret; Nodis. The meeting was held in the Oval Office. Brackets are in the original. Article 21 of the January 1973 Paris Agreement involved postwar reconstruction.

86. Minutes of Senior Review Group Meeting, Washington, February 27, 1976, 3:40–4:02 p.m. 86. Minutes of Senior Review Group Meeting, Washington, February 27, 1976, 3:40–4:02 p.m.1

Washington, February 27, 1976, 3:40–4:02 p.m.

SENIOR REVIEW GROUP MEETING
February 27, 1976
PART II of II

Time and Place: 3:40 p.m. - 4:02 p.m., White House Situation Room

Subject: US Equipment Captured in Vietnam

Participants:

Chairman: Brent Scowcroft

State: Robert Ingersoll

Robert Miller

William Gleysteen

Thomas Sterns

DOD: William Clements

Amos Jordan

Morton Abramowitz

JCS: Gen. George S. Brown

Lt. Gen. William Smith

CIA: George Bush

William Christison

Theodore Shackley

Treasury: Richard Albrecht

Stanley Sommerfield

NSC Staff: William G. Hyland

Thomas Barnes

Col. Clint Granger

Michael Hornblow

General Scowcroft: We are now going to review US policy regarding the sale of captured US equipment in Vietnam. The first thing I would like to know is how much of it is still in sellable condition?

Mr. Christison: One half or more is in good condition.

Mr. Shackley: There are 780,000 M16s available and there has been a discussion of a sale of 20,000. Other offers talk about spare parts.

General Scowcroft: But how about aircraft and tanks and other heavy equipment which deteriorates rapidly.

Mr. Shackley: The offer on the market deals with the M-16s. I have not seen any lists.

General Scowcroft: Have there been any hard offers?

Mr. Christison: They are offering 20,000 M-16s for a basic price of $328 each. In this connection they want a $100,000 letter of credit and a $100,000 performance bond. It is a brokerage deal in the international arms market.

Mr. Shackley: Have there been any specific requests from countries asking about our position?

Mr. Stern: No, although there have been some queries from arms dealers.

Mr. Clements: Would arms dealers take their information to the CIA and share it?

Mr. Christison: Not likely.

General Scowcroft: The study that was prepared in this question identified three options. Under the first option we would try to prevent the sale and shipment of captured US equipment. At the other extreme is an option which would encourage friendly governments to purchase the equipment. Under the middle option we would take no formal policy action in advance and would judge requests on a case by case basis. Apparently there are some differences of opinion as to which option is the best.

Mr. Bush: I do feel strongly that the CIA should not take a policy position on such questions. The previous topic [text not declassified] directly concerned us, so we had a position. I know my predecessor had an opinion on this subject but I don't want to take a position. So I want to be excused from the voting and go back to sleep.

General Scowcroft: Okay but you don't have to keep quiet. Bill?

Mr. Clements: I must frankly say that we are split. We have two thoughts in DOD and have vacillated around. JCS has one position and the Department or OSD has a position that we should prevent the sale of the equipment and just let it stay in Vietnam and deteriorate. I personally am vacillating. The JCS position is that it should be decided on a case-by-case basis. George will explain their position. On the other side there are all kinds of good reasons for just letting the material deteriorate.

Mr. Ingersoll: Do you think we have that option?

Mr. Clements: Yes, I do. A good bit of that equipment requires regular maintenance. It is mechanical equipment which requires care or it will go to hell. The large majority of the equipment there will deteriorate and will deteriorate quickly. But on the other hand what if we have an ally who needs help and we don't want to drawdown from our own equipment. Why shouldn't they be allowed to purchase this equipment? Those are our differences. George, do you have anything to add?

General Brown: If we take a hard policy we would find that we are impotent to prevent the sales. We just can't control such sales.

General Scowcroft: That is basically true although we could delay and slow them down.

Mr. Ingersoll: Our position is that we don't look with favor on any such arms transfer and would do our best to discourage it. But if a friendly country needs and wants these arms we would want to be able to evaluate such a case on its merits.

General Scowcroft: We would be better off having these arms go to a friendly country rather than to guerilla groups.

Mr. Clements: You are absolutely right, Brent. Take those rifles for example. You can put them in oil and they can be preserved indefinitely. We would not want those weapons to go to someone like Qadhafi. There are alternatives here. I would hate to see us settle into a concrete position.

Mr. Abramowitz: What if the President or the Secretary of Defense gets asked at a news conference about supplying spare parts to a country which has purchased these captured weapons? The President would have to say no. It is a public relations question. Politically he would have to say no.

Mr. Clements: But what if it was a country like Morocco. We would certainly want to help them.

General Scowcroft: There are inconsistencies. It depends on the country.

General Brown: That is why we support the case by case option.

General Scowcroft: Treasury — what is your position?

Mr. Albrecht: The sale of these high technology, big items could generate considerable foreign exchange for North Vietnam. We think that a public announcement by the United States opposing such sales might drive down the price and would discourage sales.

Mr. Clements: I have no problem with that.

General Scowcroft: You think there should be a public statement of our position?

Mr. Albrecht: Yes, in addition it would discourage American arms dealers.

Mr. Stern: No it wouldn't — they would just use International arms dealers as frontmen.

Mr. Clements: The North Vietnamese are going to have a considerable amount of difficulty selling this equipment unless there is some assurance of spare parts from us. That equipment could become as useless as tits on a boar hog. The leverage in this situation is with the U.S. and not the North Vietnamese. They might be willing to accept bargain basement prices just to get rid of the stuff.

General Scowcroft: There is a wide divergence of position here ranging from a hard line public announcement to letting Morocco buy these arms.

Mr. Albrecht; Maybe there could be some modification in the wording of the public announcement.

Mr. Clements: The announcement should specifically say that these sales must be approved by the State Department.

General Brown: Perhaps we should take this opportunity to buy back some of our APCs.

Mr. Clements: That is right.

General Scowcroft: There seems to be a consensus here in favor of a soft public statement which would discourage the purchase of this military equipment and give no assurance on spares.

Mr. Albrecht: We would then judge these on a case-by-case basis.

Mr. Clements: And process them through the Department of State.

Mr. Miller: It will be necessary to prepare some guidance to our posts in the field.

General Scowcroft: Okay.

1 Source: Ford Library, NSC Institutional Files (H-Files), SRG Meeting Minutes, Originals, February 1976 (2). Top Secret. Briefing book, with documents requested by Scowcroft on November 18, 1975, is ibid., Box 16, SRG Meeting, Taiwan, February 27, 1976 (3).

87. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Scowcroft) to President Ford, Washington, March 29, 1976. 87. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Scowcroft) to President Ford, Washington, March 29, 1976.1

Washington, March 29, 1976

MEMORANDUM
THE WHITE HOUSE
WASHINGTON
ACTION

March 29, 1976

MEMORANDUM FOR: THE PRESIDENT
FROM: BRENT SCOWCROFT [BS initialed]
SUBJECT: American Equipment Captured in Indochina

The Problem

There are a number of indications that North Vietnam is preparing to sell some U.S. manufactured military equipment it captured in South Vietnam. A U.S. policy position with respect to the possibility of such a sale is required. An interagency study (Tab B) has identified a range of policy options. The Senior Review Group considered this study on February 27, and recommends a policy of public opposition to North Vietnam's sale of this equipment but quiet cooperation with any friendly countries who actually purchase it.

Background

With the fall of South Vietnam and Cambodia, Hanoi acquired an estimated$6.0 billion worth of U.S. equipment, ranging from sidearms to sophisticated transport and fighter aircraft. The right to war booty under international law gives the Vietnamese clear title to the captured equipment. While the Foreign Assets Control Regulations, issued under the Trading With the Enemy Act, prohibit persons or firms subject to U.S. jurisdiction from unlicensed dealings with North Vietnam in this equipment, our ability to influence and control the movement of the captured equipment, particularly into unfriendly hands, is obviously quite limited.

We have a number of intelligence reports that North Vietnam may be attempting to sell some of this equipment. Moreover, during recent months, representatives of such friendly governments as Singapore and Nigeria have approached the United States for advice regarding potential purchases. We have also received from private arms merchants and other sources several reports of possible equipment transfers. To date, however, there have been no confirmed sales or transfers.

A number of friendly countries want weapons of the type that the Vietnamese captured. We do not at this time supply this equipment, either for policy reasons, lack of available materiel in our inventory or in timely production, or because of funding limitations. It could thus be in the United States interest that captured stockpiles fill these requirements at bargain prices. This action would also forestall unfriendly forces from acquiring these weapons and provide a basis for continuing our defense relationship with friendly countries through future supply of spare parts and rehabilitation services.

Options

An interagency review identified the following alternative responses to attempts by Vietnam to sell captured American equipment:

Option I. Use all practicable means to prevent the outflow of U.S. equipment from Vietnam. We would inform all potential purchasers that we would object to any acquisition and that we would furnish no spares or support for such equipment.

This course of action could minimize criticism by Congress or the public. Its disadvantages are that it could involve the U.S. in lengthy and possibly counterproductive disputes with foreign governments, restrict the arms flow to friendly countries, and still not prevent the equipment from reaching unfriendly hands.

Option II. Attempt to insure that friendly governments acquire the equipment. We would actively encourage friendly governments to negotiate with Hanoi and would assure them of our willingness to furnish spare parts and rehabilitation assistance insofar as legally possible. We would also be prepared to license private transactions by U.S. firms on condition that any subsequent resale be subject to prior USG approval. We would ask purchasing governments to treat the equipment as subject to the same restrictions applicable under the Foreign Military Sales Act with respect to use and disposition.

This approach would be based on the assumption that Vietnam will export much of the equipment in any case, and that it is therefore in the U.S. interest to influence the flow to the maximum extent possible. Although we could not prevent entirely the delivery of equipment to unfriendly governments or groups, we would through this option maximize the amount which would go to friendly countries.

This course of action could produce serious Congressional and public criticism. Licensing U.S. firms to participate in this trade could open the door to heavy pressure for comparable arrangements by oil companies, export-import dealers, and banks.

Option III. Take no formal policy action in advance concerning the captured equipment. We would respond to potential foreign governmental purchasers by stating that we would not look with favor on their acquisition of the equipment, and we would review the question of spare parts on a case-by-case basis. We would take all reasonable steps to inhibit the flow of the equipment to unfriendly hands.

This approach would provide the USG with considerable flexibility, since it would not require us to take action until after Vietnam had made or begun to make its sales. Therefore, we could adjust our responses to the circumstances and to our bilateral relationships with the countries involved.

Despite our efforts to prevent this equipment from falling into the hands of terrorist groups, this course of action could prove inadequate. We could be criticized for not attempting more vigorous efforts to control the flow of the equipment. We could also be criticized for assisting some recipients with spare parts and rehabilitation support, while denying such support to others.

Domestic Legal Considerations

The Department of Justice has reviewed the legal issues that could arise from prohibiting U.S. firms and persons from engaging in such transactions. It has concluded that such a prohibition is fully and directly within Executive authority under present law and regulations, particularly Munitions Control authority delegated to the Secretary of State; various regulations of the Departments of Transportation and Commerce affecting shipment of Munitions List items in U.S. vessels or aircraft; and the Trading With the Enemy Act.

SRG Recommendation

The Senior Review Group has recommended a course of action which is a combination of Options II and III. We would discourage Vietnam from selling this equipment by taking a public stance against the sale; do what we can to impede those countries that oppose us from acquiring this equipment; and discreetly help those countries that are friendly to us if the decide to purchase equipment from Vietnam despite our pronouncement. There is little we can do to prevent the movement of equipment into unfriendly hands and this approach avoids favoring our enemies over our friends. We would hope that an announced policy of not favoring the sale of the equipment would raise doubts concerning availability of U.S. - supplied spare parts and services, thereby reducing both selling price and the number of sales. This case-by-case approach retains maximum USG flexibility concerning whom we cooperate with and, since we would not be actively promoting sales, public and Congressional criticism would be minimized.

More specifically, we would pursue the following course of action: — The basic approach of the United States concerning Hanoi's possible sale of this equipment will be one of quiet cooperation with those countries friendly to the United States who are potential purchasers. The United States will not actively promote such equipment acquisitions, however.

— The United States will determine its response to requests for spare parts and technical service support on a case-by-case basis, and in accordance with our bilateral relations with the foreign governments concerned.

— We will not authorize private transactions by U.S. firms, or by persons subject to U.S. jurisdiction. The Department of the Treasury, in coordination with other interested agencies, will be responsible for developing the regulatory definitions, procedures, and restrictions necessary to implement and enforce this policy.

— The Department of State, in coordination with the Department of Defense, will administer United States cooperation with foreign governments concerning this equipment.

— United States agreement to cooperate in the provision of spare parts and technical services to a specific foreign government purchasing this equipment will require White House approval.

I concur in this approach, as do Phil Buchen, John Marsh, and Max Friedersdorf. If you agree with this position, the Department of State will release at an appropriate moment a statement indicating that the United States looks with disfavor on the Vietnamese sale of this captured equipment.

RECOMMENDATION

That you approve the approach recommended by the SRG and authorize me to sign the implementing NSDM at Tab A.
Approve [GRF initialed]
Disapprove

1 Source: Ford Library, NSC Institutional Files (H-Files), NSDM Files, Box 64, NSDM 322, American Equipment Captured in Indochina (3). Secret. Sent for action. Ford initialed his approval on page 5. A notation at the top of the first page reads: “The President has seen.” Tab A, a draft NSDM, undated; and Tab B, Department of State report, “American Arms Captured in Indochina,” undated, are attached but not published. For the NSDM as approved, see Document 88.

88. National Security Decision Memorandum 322, Washington, March 31, 1976. 88. National Security Decision Memorandum 322, Washington, March 31, 1976.1

Washington, March 31, 1976

March 31, 1976
National Security Decision Memorandum 322

TO: The Secretary of State
The Secretary of the Treasury
The Secretary of Defense
The Director of Central Intelligence

SUBJECT: American Equipment Captured in Indochina

The President has considered the recommendations of the Senior Review Group concerning American equipment captured in Indochina. He has determined that United States objectives concerning this equipment will be to discourage Vietnam from selling it by taking a public stance against the sale; to do what we can discreetly to help those countries that support U.S. policies if they decide to purchase equipment from Vietnam and to take all feasible measures to impede sales to others. The Department of State will develop an appropriate public statement indicating that the United States looks with disfavor on the sale of this captured equipment by Vietnam.

More specifically, we will pursue the following course of action: — The basic approach of the United States concerning Hanoi's possible sale of this equipment will be one of quiet cooperation with those countries friendly to the United States who are potential purchasers. The United States will not actively promote such equipment acquisitions, however.

— United States response to requests for spare parts and technical service support will be determined on a case-by-case basis, and in accordance with our bilateral relations with the foreign governments concerned.

— In return for United States cooperation concerning spare parts and technical service support, the foreign government concerned must agree to treat the equipment as subject to the same United States Government controls as are applicable under the Foreign Military Sales Act with respect to use and disposition.

— We will not authorize private transactions by U.S. firms, or by persons subject to U.S. jurisdiction. The Department of the Treasury, in coordination with other interested agencies, will be responsible for developing the regulatory definitions, procedures, and restrictions necessary to implement and enforce this policy.

— The Department of State, in coordination with the Department of Defense, will administer United States cooperation with foreign governments concerning this equipment.

— Any United States agreement to cooperate in the provision of spare parts and technical services with a specific foreign government purchasing this equipment will require White House approval.

cc: The Attorney General of the United States
The Director, Office of Management and Budget
The Chairman, Joint Chiefs of Staff

1 Source: Ford Library, NSC Institutional Files (H-Files), NSDM Files, Box 64, NSDM 322, American Equipment Captured in Indochina (3). Secret. Copies were sent to the Attorney General, the Director of the Office of Management and Budget, and the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff.

89. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Scowcroft) to President Ford, Washington, May 10, 1976. 89. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Scowcroft) to President Ford, Washington, May 10, 1976.1

Washington, May 10, 1976

INFORMATION
May 10, 1976

MEMORANDUM FOR THE PRESIDENT
FROM: BRENT SCOWCROFT
SUBJECT: Life Inside Cambodia

Our Embassy in Bangkok has prepared a comprehensive report on "Life Inside Cambodia" (Tab A) based on numerous interviews with Cambodian refugees who have fled to Thailand and on information available from intelligence sources. The report indicates that the Cambodian Communists are radically reconstructing that country using extremely harsh and brutal methods to implement their policies. Some of the more notable comments which the report makes are: — Since January 1 the Communists have executed former teachers, students, and even low ranking enlisted men of the Lon Nol military forces. Moreover, anyone who shows any sign of being educated also risks arrest or execution.

— Executions are reportedly widespread and in many cases members of the entire family of former government officials or soldiers are executed along with the head of the family. Almost all executions occur in the same manner: several Communist cadre beat the person to death with hoe handles or other blunt instruments.

— The regime is extremely anti-intellectual. One former school teacher described book burnings in Phnom Penh following the Communist takeover including one instance in which the entire contents of the National Library were destroyed.

— Education has virtually ceased to exist save for some ideological training for children between the ages of 7 and 12.

Organized religion is being eradicated. Monks are forced to do work in the fields. Most pagodas have been either dismantled or are being used for other purposes such as to store grain.

— Virtually everyone has been made a member of a "production cooperative" and forced into agricultural work. To exert control over the population, the Communists have divided cooperatives into ten-man and ten-woman work groups. These groups are further subdivided into three person cells with the tenth person serving as group leader. Each person within a cell is responsible for the other two and should any one member flee, the remaining members of the cell may be executed.

— Work hours are from dawn to dusk and sometimes even longer. In one province people worked by torchlight after dark until 9 or 10 p. m., and slept at the work site so they could begin work early the next morning.

Standards of health have declined drastically and disease is rampant. There are widespread epidemics of malaria, dysentery, and cholera in various parts of the country. Remaining medical facilities are open only to Communist cadre. Most doctors are no longer allowed to practice but are either forced into manual labor or executed.

In several areas the family unit is being destroyed with children permanently separated from their parents and husbands and wives placed in separate work groups.

The Embassy report concludes that Cambodia is under the control of a xenophobic collective leadership dedicated to attaining a radical change in the social, political, and economic makeup of the country in the shortest time possible. In its determination to achieve results, it appears willing to use any means possible. Other reports reaching us confirm the level of brutality which this Embassy Bangkok airgram portrays.

1 Source: Ford Library, National Security Adviser, Presidential Country Files for East Asia and the Pacific, Box 3, Cambodia (23). Confidential. Sent for information. Ford initialed the first page of the memorandum; a notation at the top of the document reads: “The President Has Seen.” Tab A, Airgram 74 from Bangkok, March 31, is attached but not printed. The NSC staff prepared a second report, “Life Inside Cambodia,” May 29, from unclassified sources for public dissemination. (Ibid., White House Central Files, Subject Files, Box 10, CO 26, Khmer Republic, Cambodia) Kissinger discussed Southeast Asian issues, including the Cambodian internal situation, with Australian Prime Minister Fraser on July 27. (See Document 62)

90. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Scowcroft) to President Ford, Washington, July 10, 1976. 90. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Scowcroft) to President Ford, Washington, July 10, 1976.1

Washington, July 10, 1976

MEMORANDUM
THE WHITE HOUSE
WASHINGTON
INFORMATION

July 10, 1976

MEMORANDUM FOR THE PRESIDENT
FROM: BRENT SCOWCROFT [BS initialed]
SUBJECT: Escape from South Vietnam

Our Embassy in Bangkok has compiled information (Tab A) on the most recent instances of Vietnamese refugees fleeing from South Vietnam. Since the risks involved are so serious and the sacrifices so large, I thought you should have this brief summary of the report.

The Embassy states that even now, more than one year after the fall of Saigon, the flow of refugees from South Vietnam continues. More than 400 persons are currently at ports in Thailand hoping to continue on to the U.S. or other countries following their escape by sea. Others are in Malaysia, Singapore, the Philippines and even Brunei.

These refugees have told Embassy officers that escape is a risky undertaking requiring preparations carried out in utmost secrecy over a long period of time. Gasoline required for the long journey is scarce, expensive, and rationed and therefore must be obtained in small amounts and kept hidden until the day of escape. The most dangerous part comes when the escapees must rendezvous, load the supplies undetected on to the boat, and then somehow evade the constant coastal security patrols. The refugees say that new laws in South Vietnam prohibiting meetings in groups of three or more people make these efforts even more difficult. Finally, if the people do get past the patrols and out into the open seas they find themselves in the hostile environment of a vast ocean with frequent storms and dangerous currents.

Apparently most of those starting out to flee do not make it. Some refugees estimate that about one half are caught by authorities before they can get under way and perhaps one third of the remainder perish at sea. Our limited intelligence reporting confirms that some groups have been captured.

One of the most interesting cases detailed in the Bangkok report involved a former ARVN officer who had become a shrimp fisherman. For nine months he carefully saved the food and fuel needed for the journey and learned the timing of security patrols. On the appointed day in mid-May he brought his small fishing boat into shore and loaded 23 people on board including 7 children. The boat, never designed for the high seas and powered by an engine with only two working cylinders, was so overcrowded that the passengers could not lie down. The only map available was a page torn from a travel brochure which contained a four inch map of the entire South China Sea. In the six days and nights it took them to get to Thailand, they survived one severe tropical gale and several lesser storms during which everyone had to bail water to keep the boat from going under.

Another fascinating case is that of a refugee who first escaped from Vietnam months ago, entered the U.S. refugee system and settled in Brooklyn. After obtaining travel documents here, he traveled to Thailand where he lived on a boat and secretly returned to Vietnam. In Vietnam he assembled 16 members of his family, developed an escape plan, and then successfully sailed back to Thailand once again.

In a separate episode, a Communist coastal patrol intercepted a boat at sea and placed an armed crew on board to bring it back to Vietnam. As the boat was making its way into port, the unarmed escapees, including women and children, rushed the crew, threw them overboard, and then steamed off for Thailand.

1 Source: Ford Library, National Security Adviser, Presidential Country Files for East Asia and the Pacific, Box 20, Vietnam (30). Confidential. Sent for information. Ford initialed the first page of the memorandum; a notation at the top of the document reads: “The President Has Seen.” Tab A, Airgram 136 from Bangkok, June 16, attached but not published. A related NSC report, “Assessment of Developments in Indochina Since the End of the War,” July 15, requested by the President, offers a detailed appraisal of the situation in Southeast Asia. (Ibid., Box 1, Southeast Asia, 7)

91. Telegram 33637 From the Embassy in France to the Department of State, November 12, 1976, 1805Z. 91. Telegram 33637 From the Embassy in France to the Department of State, November 12, 1976, 1805Z.1

November 12, 1976

Z 121805Z NOV 75

FM AMEMBASSY PARIS
TO SECSTATE WASHDC FLASH 7085

E.O.11652: XGDS-3
TAGS: PFOR VN US

SUBJ: US-VIETNAMESE RELATIONS: FLASH SUMMARY OF NOVEMBER 12 MEETING
REF: STATE 275285

1. MEETING BEGAN AS SCHEDULED AT 1500 AT SRV RESIDENCE. DCM GAMMON WAS US REPRESENTATIVE, ASSISTED BY FSO'S PRATT AND ROSENTHAL. VN SIDE HEADED BY COUNSELOR OF SRV EMBASSY TRAN HOAN, ASSISTED BY 2 EMBASSY OFFICERS AND INTERPRETER.

2. GAMMON READ TEXT OF OPENING STATEMENT TRANSMITTED REFTEL. HOAN ASKED SEVERAL QUESTIONS, PRIMARILY ON US POSITION RE PARIS ACCORD AND OUR ALLEGED DEMAND THAT WE ARE INSISTING ON THEIR OBLIGATION UNDER ARTICLE 8B ON MIA'S WHILE EVADING US OBLIGATION UNDER ARTICLE 21. GAMMON RELIED ALONG LINES OF OPENING STATEMENT AND FURTHER MATERIAL REFTEL TO EFFECT THAT OUR MIA DEMAND IS BASED ON GENEVA CONVENTION AND NORMAL HUMANITARIAN PRACTICE OVER AND ABOVE ARTICLE 8B AND THAT WE CONSIDER WE HAVE NO AID OBLIGATION IN VIEW OF VIETNAMESE VIOLATIONS OF ACCORD. GAMMON ALSO REITERATED FROM STATEMENT AND OTHER GUIDANCE OUR VIEW OF "SATISFACTORY" ACCOUNTING, IN RESPONSE TO HOAN'S QUESTION. HOAN ASKED WHETHER SRV MUST FIRST MEET OUR DEMAND ON MIA'S BEFORE US MOVES ON NORMALIZATION, TO WHICH GAMMON RESPONDED BY REFERRING TO PART OF OUR STATEMENT INDICATING YES.

3. BREAK ENSUED, DURING WHICH GAMMON RAISED INFORMALLY WITH HOAN THE QUESTION OF AMCITS AND CLOSE RELATIVES STILL IN VIET-NAM AND ASKED THAT SRV TAKE STEPS TO FACILITATE THEIR DEPARTURE. HOAN REPLIED HE WOULD LOOK INTO THIS. HE THEN INDICATED POSITIVE ACTION MIGHT BE FORTHCOMING SHORTLY ON RETURN OF REMAINS OF 12 KIA RECENTLY IDENTIFIED TO US AND SAID LIAISON OFFICERS WOULD BE IN TOUCH SOON.

4. AFTER BREAK, HOAN READ STATEMENT (TEXT SEPTEL) OUTLINING STANDARD SRV POSITION ON PARIS ACCORD AND US-VN RELATIONS. STATEMENT SAID SRV IS READY TO FULFILL ITS OBLIGATIONS UNDER ARTICLE 8B AND TO ENTER INTO DISCUSSION RE NORMALIZATION, BUT US MUST ALSO ASSUME ITS OBLIGATIONS RE RECONSTRUCTION AID.

5. HOAN THEN ADDED EXTRA REMARKS ELABORATING ALONG SAME LINES, PARTICULARLY RE CONTINUING VALIDITY OF BASIC PRINCIPLES OF PARIS ACCORD REGARDING POSTWAR PROBLEMS. HE CLAIMED US DENIED VALIDITY OF PARIS ACCORD. HE CRITICIZED WHAT HE SAID WAS PRECONDITION (RE MIA'S) WE WERE POSING TO NORMALIZATION AND SAID NEITHER SIDE SHOULD DO THIS.

6. GAMMON REPLIED THAT WE LOOK TO FUTURE RATHER THAN PAST, SELECTIVE INTERPRETATION OF ACCORD IS NOT SUITABLE BASIS FOR NORMALIZATION, AND WE HAVE NO FURTHER OBLIGATION UNDER IT NOR CAN IT SERVE AS FOUNDATION FOR NEW RELATIONSHIP WE SEEK. HE AGREED WITH HOAN THAT EACH SIDE'S REMARKS SHOULD BE GIVEN CAREFUL STUDY.

7. ON FUTURE MEETINGS, GAMMON INDICATED THAT WE WOULD BE IN TOUCH THROUGH LIAISON OFFICERS. HOAN ASKED WHETHER ANOTHER MEETING COULD BE SCHEDULED NOW, TO WHICH GAMMON REITERATED THIS WOULD HAVE TO BE.

8. RE PRESS HANDLING, HOAN AGREED TO OUR POSITION THAT EACH SIDE BE FREE TO CHARACTERIZE AND COMMENT ON MEETING. GAMMON INDICATED WE WOULD CONFIRM THAT MEETING TOOK PLACE, MATTERS OF MUTUAL INTEREST WERE DISCUSSED, AND WE MADE CLEAR OUR PRIMARY CONCERN WAS MIA'S. HE NOTED WE WOULD ALSO BE COMMENTING BRIEFLY ON SRV POSITION. HOAN RESERVED RIGHT TO CORRECT LATTER IF THERE WAS ANY DISTORTION OF THEIR POSITION. HE HOPED NOTHING WOULD BE SAID ABOUT TIME AND PLACE OF NEXT MEETING, SO AS TO AVOID GATHERING OF THE PRESS AT SITE AS OCCURRED TODAY.

9. VIETNAMESE DID NOT RAISE OR OTHERWISE MENTION UN MEMBERSHIP QUESTION.

10. MEETING ENDED AT 1645. ATMOSPHERE WAS QUITE CORRECT AND BUSINESSLIKE DURING DISCUSSIONS, RATHER FRIENDLY DURING INFORMAL CONTACTS AT BREAK.

11. IN RESPONSE TO PRESS QUERIES FOLLOWING MEETING, EMBASSY PRESS ATTACHE GAVE STATEMENT IN PARA 29 REFTEL.
RUSH

1 Source: Ford Library, National Security Adviser, Kissinger-Scowcroft West Wing Office Files, 1969–1977, General Subject Files, Box 34, Vietnam War, Camp David Files (3), 12/12/75–12/15/76. Secret; Flash; Exdis. In telegram 72569 to Paris, March 25, Kissinger sent a note to the DRV on the establishment of relations. (National Archives, Record Group 59, State Archiving System) On August 30, Kissinger approached Ford: “We got a note from Vietnam. Do you want meetings? We would say it was for the MIA’s.” The President responded: “As long as that cast was put on it.” Kissinger finished: “They would raise other things. But we could stick with MIA’s. Of course we could drag it out, and certainly no conclusion would come before November.” (Ibid., National Security Adviser, Memoranda of Conversations, Box 20, Chronological File)

92. Telegram 290657 From the Department of State to the Embassy in France, November 27, 1976, 1612Z. 92. Telegram 290657 From the Department of State to the Embassy in France, November 27, 1976, 1612Z.1

November 27, 1976

PRIORITY
P 271612Z NOV 76

FM SECSTATE WASHDC
TO AMEMBASSY PARIS PRIORITY 5058
STATE 290657

E.O. 11652: GDS
TAGS: PFOR, VN, US

SUBJECT: U.S.-VIETNAMESE RELATIONS: A FURTHER MEETING

1. EMBOFF SHOULD SEE THE VIETNAMESE LIAISON OFFICER EARLY IN WEEK OF NOVEMBER 29 AND CONVEY ORALLY THE FOLLOWING: IN RESPONSE TO THE VIETNAMESE REQUEST DURING THE MEETING ON NOVEMBER 12 TO ESTABLISH A DATE FOR ANOTHER MEETING, WE PROPOSE DECEMBER 20 AND INVITE THE REPRESENTATIVE OF THE EMBASSY OF THE SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF VIETNAM TO MEET WITH OUR DEPUTY CHIEF OF MISSION AT HIS RESIDENCE ON MONDAY, DECEMBER 20 AT 3:00 PM UNDER THE SAME PROCEDURAL ARRANGEMENTS AS THOSE AGREED FOR THE NOVEMBER 12 MEETING. (WE ASSUME THE VIETNAMESE REPRESENTATIVE WOULD WISH TO SPEAK FIRST). WE EXPECT THE U.S. PARTICIPANTS TO BE THE SAME.

2. EMBOFF SHOULD ALSO, IF HE HAS NOT ALREADY DONE SO, GIVE THE VIETNAMESE IN WRITING, IN RESPONSE TO THEIR ORAL REQUEST AT NOVEMBER 12 MEETING, THE NAME OF TUCKER GOUGLEMANN REPEAT TUCKER GOUGLEMANN, THE ADULT AMERICAN REMAINING IN VIETNAM.

3. FINALLY EMBOFF SHOULD REMIND THE VIETNAMESE LIAISON OFFICER THAT TRAN HOAN INDICATED ON NOVEMBER 12 THAT WE MIGHT EXPECT TO HEAR OF HANOI'S FAVORABLE DECISION REGARDING THE REPRESENTATION OF THE REMAINS OF THE TWELVE SERVICEMEN LISTED BY THE SRV ON SEPTEMBER 6, AND CONFIRM THAT WE ARE READY TO MAKE THE NECESSARY ARRANGEMENTS AS SOON AS POSSIBLE. ROBINSON

1 Source: Ford Library, National Security Adviser, Kissinger-Scowcroft West Wing Office Files, 1969–1977, General Subject Files, Box 34, Vietnam War, Camp David Files (3), 12/12/75–12/15/76. Confidential; Priority; Exdis.

93. Telegram 35242 From the Embassy in France to the Department of State, November 29, 1976, 1805Z. 93. Telegram 35242 From the Embassy in France to the Department of State, November 29, 1976, 1805Z.1

November 29, 1976

OP IMMED
DE RUFNPS #5242 3341820
O 291805Z NOV 76

FM AMEMBASSY PARIS
TO SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 7481
PARIS 35242

E.O. 11652: XGDS-3
TAGS: PFOR VN US

SUBJ: US-VIETNAMESE RELATIONS: A FURTHER MEETING
REF: STATE 290657

1. EMBOFF SAW SRV FIRST SECRETARY DO THANH AT 1600 LOCAL TIME AND RAISED THE THREE SUBJECTS IN REFTEL. DO THANH TOOK CAREFUL NOTES. HE SAID HE WOULD FORWARD OUR THREE ORAL POINTS TO HANOI AND HOPED TO BE ABLE TO HAVE A REPLY FROM HANOI BY THE END OF THE WEEK.

2. FURTHER MEETING ON DECEMBER 20. DO THANH SAID THAT HE WAS NOT SURE WHETHER HIS GOVERNMENT WOULD AGREE TO A MEETING AT THIS TIME. THEIR PREVIOUS INSTRUCTIONS (THOSE AT THE TIME OF THE NOVEMBER 12 MEETING) PERMITTED THEM TO MOVE TO A SECOND MEETING WITHOUT CONFIRMATION BY HANOI AND HE HAD THEN EXPECTED TO CALL ON EMBOFF WEEK OF NOVEMBER 15. WITH THE US VETO OF VIETNAMESE UN MEMBERSHIP, THESE INSTRUCTIONS HAD BEEN CHANGED. HE WOULD INFORM HANOI OF OUR PROPOSAL FOR A NEW MEETING, BUT HE COULD NOT ASSURE US THAT THE RESPONSE WOULD BE FAVORABLE. DO THANH SAID HIS GOVERNMENT AND HE PERSONALLY CONSIDERED THE US JUSTIFICATION FOR VETOING VIETNAMESE MEMBERSHIP TO BE UNCONVINCING, AND HE NOTED THAT THE VOTE IN THE UNGA AS WELL AS SECURITY COUNCIL SEEMED TO SUPPORT THE VIETNAMESE POINT OF VIEW. IN ADDITION, DO THANH NOTED THE US INCONSISTENCY IN REJECTING HANOI'S MEMBERSHIP IN 1975 BECAUSE OF THE SOUTH KOREAN QUESTION AND THEN ADOPTING THE ARGUMENT THAT THE SRV WAS NOT "HUMANITARIAN" IN 1976. THIRDLY HIS GOVERNMENT CONSIDERED MEMBERSHIP IN THE UN TO BE SO MUCH ORE IMPORTANT THAN THE MIA QUESTION; THE US RESPONSE WAS INCOMMENSURATE WITH ITS GRIEVANCE. DO THANH SAID THAT HIS GOVERNMENT THOUGH THAT THE US VETO WAS AN UNFRIENDLY ACTION WHICH PARALYZED EFFORTS TOWARDS THE NORMALIZATIONS OF RELATIONS.

3. TUCKER GOULGELMANN. EMBOFF TOOK ADVANTAGE OF THIS FIRST MEETING WITH DO THANH SINCE NOVEMBER 12 TO PASS WRITTEN NAME OF TUCKER GOUGLEMANN IDENTIFIED AS AN ADULT AMERICAN REMAINING IN VIETNAM.

4. REPATRIATION OF REMAINS. DO THANH DID NOT DIRECTLY ADDRESS THE REASON FOR NOT HAVING BEEN IN CONTACT WITH US CONCERNING THE REPATRIATION OF THE REMAINS OF THE 12 SERVICEMEN ON THE SEPTEMBER 6 LIST. HE IMPLIED, HOWEVER, THAT THIS WAS ONE OF THE SUBJECTS ON WHICH HE EXPECTED TO BE IN CONTACT WITH US PRIOR TO HANOI'S ORDER TO STAND DOWN CONTACTS BECAUSE OF US VOTE. EMBOFF NOTED WE WOULD PREPARE TO MAKE THE NECESSARY ARRANGEMENTS "AS SOON AS POSSIBLE," AND DO THANH'S EXPRESSION INDICATED HE DOUBTED HANOI WOULD MOVE VERY SOON.
RUSH

1 Source: Ford Library, National Security Adviser, Kissinger-Scowcroft West Wing Office Files, 1969–1977, General Subject Files, Box 34, Vietnam War, Camp David Files (3), 12/12/75–12/15/76. Secret; Immediate; Exdis. Telegram 290657 to Paris, November 27, is Document 92.

94. Telegram 37000 From the Embassy in France to the Department of State, December 15, 1976, 1242Z. 94. Telegram 37000 From the Embassy in France to the Department of State, December 15, 1976, 1242Z.1

December 15, 1976

OP IMMED
DE RUFNPS #7000 3501244

O 151242Z DEC 76

FM AMEMBASSY PARIS
TO SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 7999
PARIS 37000

E.O.11652: XGDS-3
TAGS: PFOR VN US

SUBJ: US-VIETNAMESE RELATIONS: A FURTHER MEETING
REF: PARIS 35242

1. SRV FIRST SECRETARY DO THANH SAW EMBOFF AT 1130 PARIS TIME 15 DECEMBER TO PASS THE FOLLOWING MESSAGE, TRANSLATED NEARLY VERBATIM: QUOTE. THE DATE OF DECEMBER 20 AS PROPOSED BY THE US PARTY FOR THE NEXT MEETING OF THE TWO PARTIES PRESENTS DIFFICULTIES FOR OUR SIDE IN MAKING ARRANGEMENTS. WE THEREFORE PROPOSE JANUARY 10, 1976. UNQUOTE.

2. DO THANH HAD NO FURTHER INFORMATION CONCERNING THE OTHER TWO SUBJECTS RAISED DURING THE PREVIOUS MEETING (REFTEL), THAT IS TUCKER GOULGELMANN AND REPATRIATION OF REMAINS OF THE 12 SERVICEMEN ON THE SEPTEMBER 6 LIST.

3. IF DEPARTMENT WISHES EMBOFF TO PRESS AGAIN ON THESE TWO SUBJECTS WHEN HE CONVEYS US RESPONSE TO SRV PROPOSAL FOR JANUARY 10 DATE, PLEASE ADVISE.
RUSH

1 Source: Ford Library, National Security Adviser, Kissinger-Scowcroft West Wing Office Files, 1969–1977, General Subject Files, Box 34, Vietnam War, Camp David Files (3), 12/12/75–12/15/76. Secret; Immediate; Exdis. Telegram 35242 from Paris, November 29, is Document 93. The Department of State did not respond to this message; no evidence of a January 10 meeting has been found.

95. Research Study Prepared by the Central Intelligence Agency, Washington, December 1976. 95. Research Study Prepared by the Central Intelligence Agency, Washington, December 1976.1

Washington, December 1976

PRINCIPAL FINDINGS

Since the fall of Phnom Penh in April 1975, the Khmer Communists have shown themselves to be the most extreme of the world's totalitarian regimes. The regime's politico-economic policies have been characterized by the total mobilization of the Cambodian people. The forced resettlement of the entire urban population in the rural areas has been justified as a means to create a huge permanent labor force in the countryside. The unprecedented cruelty with which the experiment was carried out resulted in the death of hundreds of thousands of people including almost the entire educated stratum.

Unorthodox economic practices, such as the complete abolition of private ownership and the departure from a money economy, reflect the Khmer Communists' determination to implement a social system that is alien to other Communist countries. The regime has departed from Marxist-Leninist practice by refusing to identify "Democratic Cambodia" as a member of the Communist camp, The Khmer Communists' vagueness about the country's political system and their avoidance until recently of standard Communist terminology are actions amounting to a unique "Cambodian model."

The most striking departure has been the regime's decision to keep the Khmer Communist Party (KCP) underground. The denial of the Communist Party's leading role in the post-revolutionary period, and the use of the vague term "revolutionary organization" in lieu of the Party are innovations without precedent in Communist practice.

Indications are that the continued underground status of the KCP did not diminish its decision-making role in the political life of the regime. Recent evidence that Prime Minister Pol Pot and KCP General Secretary Saloth Sar are the same person tends to strengthen that conclusion.

In the area of foreign policies, the Khmer Communist regime is concerned above all with maintaining Cambodia's independence. Especially fearful of Vietnamese ambitions, the regime pursues a policy of neutrality, nonalignment and nonparticipation in any military bloc or regional alliance.

Having no overt Communist Party of its own, Cambodia restricts its relations with other Communist countries to state-level contacts. Despite its overwhelming reliance on China for economic and military assistance, the regime has avoided forming an ideological alliance with Peking. Cambodia does not even have diplomatic relations with the Soviet Union, but by refraining from public polemics with Moscow, the Khmer Communists are keeping the door open to future ties with the Kremlin.

Recent efforts to ease Cambodia's initial diplomatic isolation are expected to continue. For the time being, however, the regime is not likely to change its hostile attitude toward the US or to make any overtures to the US.

The Khmer Communists have lately been showing an increasing interest in forming economic and trade contacts with the rest of the world. However, the continued scarcity of export commodities and the virtual lack of hard currency earnings is likely to prevent the regime from substantially reducing its reliance on Chinese economic and military aid for some years to come.

[Omitted here is the Study, "Democratic Cambodia: An Experiment in Radicalism"]

1 Source: Central Intelligence Agency, Office of Current Intelligence, Job 79T00889A, Box 9, “Democratic Cambodia: An Experiment in Radicalism.” Secret.

Chapter IV: Indonesia and the East Timor CrisisChapter IV: Indonesia and the East Timor Crisis

96. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, April 24, 1973, 1405–1430.

Washington, April 24, 1973

Eagleburger and Galbraith discussed U.S. relations with Indonesia.

Source: Washington National Records Center, OASD/ISA Files: FRC 330–76–117, Indonesia, 333, 1973, May 2. Secret. Drafted by Shaid and approved by Doolin. The conversation took place in Eagleburger’s office. Eagleburger’s talking points for the meeting are ibid. On April 25, Kissinger disapproved a recommendation that he meet with Galbraith. (Memorandum from Holdridge to Kissinger, April 23; National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Country Files, Far East, Box 533, Indonesia, Volume 4, 1 January 1973–)

97. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, May 15, 1973, 4:30 p.m.

Washington, May 15, 1973

Scowcroft and Hasnan Habib discussed intergovernmental communication, military assistance, Indochina, the Sino-Soviet conflict, and Watergate.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Country Files, Far East, Box 533, Indonesia, Volume 4, 1 January 1973–. Secret; Sensitive. The meeting was held in Scowcroft’s office. John Froebe gave Scowcroft’s talking points, May 15, which began, “You have agreed to meet with General Hasnan Habib, aide to General Sumitro(the number three man in Indonesia), today at 4:30 p.m. As you know, General Sumitro maintains contact with Dr. Kissinger as the special channel of communication between President Suharto and the President.” (Ibid.)

98. Letter From President Nixon to Indonesian President Suharto, Washington, July 12, 1973.

Washington, July 12, 1973

Nixon replied to Suharto’s request for three destroyer escorts.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 755, Presidential Correspondence, Indonesia, Suharto [1970–1974]. No classification marking. On August 7, Clements informed Kissinger that the Department of Defense would be able to transfer the destroyer escorts to Indonesia “approximately within the time frame desired.” (Ibid., Country Files, Far East, Box 533, Indonesia, Volume 4, 1 January 1973–)

99. Letter From Ambassador Galbraith to Secretary of State Designate Kissinger, Washington, September 5, 1973.

Washington, September 5, 1973

Galbraith reported on the situation in Indonesia and asked to remain on as ambassador.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Country Files, Far East, Box 533, Indonesia, Volume 4, 1 January 1973–. Confidential; Eyes Only; Personal. David Newsom replaced Galbraith as Ambassador in February 1974.

100. Memorandum of Conversation, New York, October 4, 1973, 5:30–6 p.m.

New York, October 4, 1973, 5:30–6 p.m.

Kissinger and Malik discussed Indochina, foreign aid, and the Middle East.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 533, Country Files, Far East, Indonesia, Volume 4, 1 January 1973–. Secret; Exdis. The meeting was held in apartment 35A at the Waldorf Towers. Cleared by Hummel and approved by Bremer. Talking points for this meeting are ibid.

101. Memorandum From Charles A. Cooper of the National Security Council Staff to Secretary of State Kissinger, Washington, November 24, 1973.

Washington, November 24, 1973

Cooper suggested that Kissinger send a backchannel cable about the level of aid to Indonesia.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 533, Country Files, Far East, Indonesia, Volume 4, 1 January 1973–. Secret. Sent for urgent action. At the top of the document Scowcroft wrote, “Cable sent. BS.” The draft backchannel message is attached but not published. The backchannel message as sent to Galbraith, November 25, is ibid., Box 411, Backchannel Messages, Southeast Asia, Volume II, 1973, Part 1. Galbraith’s backchannel response, November 30, is also ibid.

102. Memorandum From Charles A. Cooper of the National Security Council Staff to Secretary of State Kissinger, Washington, December 4, 1973.

Washington, December 4, 1973

Cooper reported to Kissinger on Suharto’s decision about the level of aid to Indonesia.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 533, Country Files, Far East, Indonesia, Volume 4, 1 January 1973–. Secret. Sent for information. Kissinger initialed the memorandum. Attached Tab A is Galbraith’s backchannel message of December 3; attached Tab B is Kissinger’s November 25 backchannel to Galbraith; Tab C was not attached.

103. Memorandum From Acting Secretary of State Rush to President Nixon, Washington, January 16, 1974.

Washington, January 16, 1974

Rush recommended that Nixon send Suharto a letter on the Law of the Sea negotiations.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 755, Presidential Correspondence, Indonesia, Suharto [1970–1974]. Secret. The proposed letter, not attached, is Document 106.

104. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, January 22, 1974, 1100–1130.

Washington, January 22, 1974, 1100–1130

Newsom met with Department of Defense officials and discussed the Law of the Sea, military aid, and military liaison with Indonesia.

Source: Washington National Records Center, OASD/ISA Files: FRC 330–77–0054, Indonesia, 333, 1974, January 31. Secret. Drafted by Shaid and approved by Peet. The conversation took place in the office of the Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs.

105. Telegram 1100 From the Embassy in Indonesia to the Department of State, January 26, 1974, 0304Z.

January 26, 1974

The embassy analyzed the Indonesian government’s view on oil prices.

Source: National Archives, Record Group 59, Central Foreign Policy Files. Secret; Exdis. Repeated for information to Abu Dhabi, Caracas, Kuwait, London, Rome, Tehran, Jidda, and Tripoli.

106. Letter From President Nixon to Indonesian President Suharto, Washington, February 1, 1974.

Washington, February 1, 1974

Nixon offered to send a delegation to Jakarta to discuss the Law of the Sea.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 755, Presidential Correspondence, Indonesia, Suharto [1970–1974]. Secret. Kissinger sent this letter to Nixon under a covering memorandum, January 28, recommending that he sign the letter as proposed by Deputy Secretary Rush. (Ibid.) For Rush’s recommendation, see Document 103.

107. Telegram 47882 From the Department of State to the Embassy in Indonesia, March 9, 1974, 0010Z.

March 9, 1974

The Department of State informed the Embassy of aid cuts.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 533, Country Files, Far East, Indonesia, Volume 4, 1 January 1973–. Confidential; Priority; Exdis. Drafted by Shakow and Deaver; cleared by MacDonald in AID/AA/ASIA, Griffel in AID/PPC, and Bushnell in the NSC; and approved by Ingersoll. The Embassy’s reply, telegram 3040 from Jakarta, March 12, is ibid.

108. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, April 15, 1974, 12:45–1:15 p.m.

Washington, April 15, 1974, 12:45–1:15 p.m.

Kissinger and Malik discussed foreign aid, the Law of the Sea, Indochina, and the Middle East.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 1028, Presidential/HAK Memcons, 1 March 1974–8 May 1974 [2 of 4]. Confidential; Exdis. Drafted by Dobbins. Kissinger followed up this meeting with a message to Malik explaining he would do all he could to support aid for Indonesia. (Telegram 083508 to Jakarta, April 24; ibid., Record Group 59, Central Foreign Policy Files)

109. Backchannel Message WH 42123 From W.R. Smyser of the National Security Council Staff to the Ambassador to Indonesia (Newsom), Washington, June 22, 1974, 1500Z.

Washington, June 22, 1974, 1500Z

Smyser sent a backchannel telegram to Newsom on aid levels for Indonesia.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 412, Backchannel Messages, Southeast Asia, Volume III, 1974. Secret.

110. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to President Nixon, Washington, undated.

Washington, undated

Kissinger recommended that Nixon approve the issuance of a NSSM on U.S. policy toward Indonesia.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Institutional Files (H-Files), Box H–206, NSSMs, NSSM 205. Secret; Sensitive. Sent for action. Kissinger initialed the “approve” option on behalf of Nixon. The correspondence profile indicates that the document was sent to Kissinger on July 16 and that he approved it on July 20, 1974. The tab is attached, but the approved NSSM is Document 111.

111. National Security Study Memorandum 205, Washington, July 20, 1974.

Washington, July 20, 1974

NSSM 205 asked for a review of U.S. aid policy toward Indonesia.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Institutional Files (H-Files), Box H–206, NSSMs, NSSM 205. Secret; Sensitive. A copy was also sent to the Director of the Office of Management and Budget, the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, and to the counselor to the President for Economic Policy.

112. Telegram 9984 From the Embassy in Indonesia to the Department of State, August 14, 1974, 0435Z.

August 14, 1974

The Embassy reported Malik’s comments about Portuguese Timor.

Source: National Archives, Record Group 59, Central Foreign Policy Files. Confidential. Repeated for information to the Embassies in Lisbon and Canberra, to the Mission at the UN, and to the Consulates at Medan and Surabay.

113. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, September 25, 1974, 4:30 p.m.

Washington, September 25, 1974

Ford, Kissinger, and Malik discussed U.S.-Indonesian relations and Indochina.

Source: Ford Library, National Security Adviser, Memoranda of Conversation, Box 6. Secret. The conversation took place in the Oval Office. Tab A, not attached, is a letter from Suharto to Ford, September 12, expressing appreciation for Ford’s assurances of continuity in U.S. foreign policy. (Ibid., NSC Staff for East Asia and Pacific Affairs, Convenience Files, Box 3, Indonesia [3], September 1974–May 1975) Ford’s talking points for the meeting are ibid., Presidential Country Files for East Asia and the Pacific, Box 6, Indonesia (1).

114. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, November 21, 1974, 1130–1155.

Washington, November 21, 1974, 1130–1155

Newsom and Clements discussed military aid and Portuguese Timor.

Source: Washington National Records Center, OASD/ISA Files: FRC 330–77–0054, Indonesia, 333, 1974, November 29. Secret. Drafted by Connors and approved by Ellsworth. The conversation took place in the office of the Deputy Secretary of Defense.

115. Memorandum From W.R. Smyser of the National Security Council Staff to Secretary of State Kissinger, Washington, December 30, 1974.

Washington, December 30, 1974

Smyser recommended that Kissinger meet with his special Indonesian contacts.

Source: Ford Library, National Security Adviser, Presidential Country Files for East Asia and the Pacific, Box 6, Indonesia (1). Top Secret; Sensitive; Eyes Only. Sent for urgent action. Kissinger initialed the approve option and the option of meeting at the White House.

116. Backchannel Message 179 From the Ambassador to Indonesia (Newsom) to W.R. Smyser of the National Security Council Staff, Jakarta, January 13, 1975, 1139Z.

January 13, 1975

Newsom responded to Smyser’s backchannel telegram about a proposed meeting between Kissinger and Indonesian emissaries.

Source: Ford Library, National Security Adviser, NSC Staff for East Asia and Pacific Affairs, Convenience File, Box 7, Backchannel Messages, Southeast Asia, Incoming, 1/75. Secret. The undated text of the January 11 backchannel message from Smyser to Newson, initialed by Scowcroft with a note that it was sent, is ibid., Outgoing, 1/75.

117. Telegram 026805 From the Department of State to the Embassy in Indonesia, February 6, 1975, 0006Z.

February 6, 1975

The Department asks for Embassy assessment of the Portuguese Timor situation.

Source: National Archives, Record Group 59, Central Foreign Policy Files. Secret; Exdis. Sent for information to Lisbon and Canberra. Drafted by Ingraham; cleared in EUR/IB and INR/REA; and approved by Habib.

118. Telegram 1731 From the Embassy in Indonesia to the Department of State, February 10, 1975, 0915Z.

February 10, 1975

The Embassy reported on Indonesian intentions toward Portuguese Timor.

Source: National Archives, Record Group 59, Central Foreign Policy Files. Secret; Exdis. Sent for information to Canberra and Lisbon.

119. Telegram 2022 From the Embassy in Jakarta to the Department of State, February 19, 1975, 0001Z.

February 19, 1975

The Embassy summarized a contingency paper on Portuguese Timor.

Source: National Archives, Record Group 59, Central Foreign Policy Files. Secret; Exdis. Repeated for information to Canberra Lisbon, and USUN.

120. Memorandum From W.R. Smyser of the National Security Council Staff to Secretary of State Kissinger, Washington, March 4, 1975.

Washington, March 4, 1975

Smyser recommended that Kissinger not authorize a conversation with the Indonesian Defense Attaché about Portuguese Timor.

Source: Ford Library, National Security Adviser, Presidential Country Files for East Asia and the Pacific, Box 6, Indonesia (2). Top Secret; Sensitive; Eyes Only. Sent for action. Kissinger initialed the approve option.

121. Telegram 3570 From the Embassy in Indonesia to the Department of State, March 26, 1975, 0455Z.

March 26, 1975

The Embassy reported on the Law of the Sea Negotiations with Indonesia.

Source: Ford Library, National Security Adviser, Presidential Country Files for East Asia and the Pacific, Box 6, Indonesia, State Department Telegrams to SECSTATE, NODIS (2). Secret; Immediate, Nodis; Stadis. Repeated immediate to the Geneva Mission.

122. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to President Ford, Washington, May 7, 1975.

Washington, May 7, 1975

Kissinger recommended reallocating $25 million of financial aid to Indonesia and Morocco.

Source: Ford Library, National Security Adviser, Presidential Country Files for East Asia and the Pacific, Box 6, Indonesia (2). Secret. Sent for action. Ford initialed the approve option on May 9. Tab A is attached but not published. On May 9, Davis informed Springsteen of the fund reallocation. (Ford Library, National Security Adviser, Presidential Country Files for East Asia and the Pacific, Box 6, Indonesia [2])

123. National Intelligence Estimate 55–1–75, Washington, June 30, 1975.

Washington, June 30, 1975

The estimate examined the prospects for Indonesia over the next five years.

Source: Central Intelligence Agency, OPI 122 (National Intelligence Council), Job 79R01012A, Box 498, NIE 55–1–75, Folder 5. Secret. All members of the U.S. Intelligence Board concurred in the estimate except the representatives of the FBI and the Deputy Assistant Administrator for National Security, Energy Research and Development Administration. The intelligence sections of the Army, Navy, and Air Force also participation in the estimate.

124. Memorandum of Conversation, Camp David, Maryland, July 5, 1975.

Camp David, Maryland, July 5, 1975

Kissinger spoke with Ford about his upcoming meeting with Suharto.

Source: Ford Library, National Security Adviser, Memoranda of Conversation, Box 13. Secret; Nodis.

125. Memorandum of Conversation, Camp David, Maryland, July 5, 1975, 12:45–2 p.m.

Camp David, Maryland, July 5, 1975

Kissinger and Malik led a conversation about East Asia and economic issues.

Source: Ford Library, National Security Adviser, NSC Staff for East Asia and Pacific Affairs, Convenience Files, Box 21, Visit of President Suharto of Indonesia, July 5, 1975 (2). Secret; Exdis.

126. Memorandum of Conversation, Camp David, Maryland, July 5, 1975, 12:40–2 p.m.

Camp David, Maryland, July 5, 1975

Ford and Suharto discussed economic and foreign policy issues of mutual concern.

Source: Ford Library, National Security Adviser, Memoranda of Conversation, Box 13. Secret; Nodis.

127. Minutes of the Secretary of State’s Staff Meeting, Washington, August 12, 1975.

Washington, August 12, 1975

Habib and Kissinger discussed reports of a coup in Portuguese Timor.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Transcripts of Secretary of State Kissinger’s Staff Meetings, 1973–1977, E5177, Box 8. Secret.

128. Telegram 194779 From the Department of State to the Embassies in Indonesia and Australia, August 16, 1975, 0028Z.

August 16, 1975

The Department gave its view on the situation in Portuguese Timor.

Source: National Archives, Record Group 59, Central Foreign Policy Files. Secret; Immediate; Exdis. Repeated for information to Lisbon. Drafted by Ingraham; cleared by Sisco; and approved by Zurhellen.

129. Telegram 10044 From the Embassy in Indonesia to the Department of State, August 16, 1975, 0810Z.

August 16, 1975

The Embassy responded to the Department’s telegram on Portuguese Timor.

Source: National Archives, Record Group 59, Central Foreign Policy Files. Secret; Exdis. Repeated to Canberra and Lisbon.

130. Memorandum From John J. Taylor of the National Security Council Staff to Secretary of State Kissinger, Washington, August 25, 1975.

Washington, August 25, 1975

Taylor recommended that Kissinger direct the under Secretaries Committee to prepare a position paper on the organization of U.S.-Indonesian joint consultative machinery.

Source: Ford Library, NSC Institutional Files (H-Files), Box H–61, NSDM 311, U.S.-Indonesian Consultative Arrangements. Confidential. Sent for action. On the first page of the memorandum, Kissinger wrote, “Change date.” Kissinger also crossed out the due date on the second page. Next to Kissinger’s marginalia on the first page, an unknown hand wrote, “Done—Oct 6, 1975.” Tab A is attached but not published.

131. Telegram 209709 From the Department of State to the Embassy in Indonesia, September 3, 1975, 2339Z.

September 3, 1975

Habib and Nuryadin discussed Portuguese Timor.

Source: National Archives, Record Group 59, Central Foreign Policy Files. Secret; Exdis. Repeated to Lisbon and Canberra. Drafted by Ingraham; cleared in S/S; and approved by Habib.

132. Telegram 10849 From the Embassy in Indonesia to the Department of State, September 4, 1975, 0416Z.

September 4, 1975

Newsom and Mochtar discussed Portuguese Timor.

Source: National Archives, Record Group 59, Central Foreign Policy Files. Secret; Exdis.

133. Memorandum of Conversation, September 5, 1975.

September 5, 1975

Kissinger and Malik conversed about East Asia, East Timor, and other topics.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy Files, P–820123–1427. Secret; Nodis. Drafted by Ingraham; cleared by Habib; and approved by Covey.

134. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to the Chairman of the Under Secretaries Committee (Ingersoll), Washington, September 15, 1975.

Washington, September 15, 1975

Kissinger asked the National Security Council Under Secretaries Committee to prepare a position paper on the organization of U.S.-Indonesian joint consultations.

Source: Ford Library, NSC Institutional Files (H-Files), Box H–72, NSC, U/SM–158, U.S. Indonesian Joint Consultative Group. Confidential. On October 15, Wreatham E. Gathright, the Staff Director of the Under Secretaries Committee, forwarded to the President the requested paper from Ingersoll, October 14, in which the Under Secretaries Committee recommended option 1; a joint consultative commission co-chaired by the Secretary of State and an Indonesian official, and including other relevant officials for a renewable two-year term.

135. Telegram 225061 From the Department of State to the Embassy in Indonesia, September 20, 1975, 1913Z.

September 20, 1975

The Department reported Murdani’s comments on Timor.

Source: National Archives, Record Group 59, Central Foreign Policy Files. Secret; Exdis. Repeated to Lisbon and Canberra. Drafted by Gleysteen; cleared in S/S and by Shackley of the CIA; approved by Habib.

136. Minutes of the Secretary of State’s Staff Meeting, Washington, October 8, 1975.

Washington, October 8, 1975

Habib and Kissinger discussed the situation in Portuguese Timor.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Transcripts of Secretary of State Kissinger’s Staff Meetings, 1973–1977, E5177, Box 8. Secret. At the 8 a.m. meeting on October 31, Robert H. Miller, Acting Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian and Pacific Affairs, said, “The Indonesian Foreign Minister is expected to open talks tomorrow on Timor. The pro-Indonesian forces are gradually making progress on the ground.” Kissinger remarked, “It is going to wind up with Timor going to Indonesia.” Miller replied, “I think so. Maybe within a couple of months.” (Ibid., Box 9)

137. Memorandum of Conversation, Camp David, Maryland, October 29, 1975, 4 p.m.

Camp David, Maryland, October 29, 1975, 4 p.m.

Scowcroft and Moertopo discussed East Asian affairs.

Source: Ford Library, National Security Adviser, Memoranda of Conversation, Box 16. Secret. The meeting was held in Scowcroft’s office. Scowcroft’s talking points are ibid., Presidential Country Files for East Asia and the Pacific, Box 6, Indonesia (3).

138. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to President Ford, Washington, October 30, 1975.

Washington, October 30, 1975

Kissinger recommended that Ford approve the issuance of a NSDM proposing a single Joint U.S.-Indonesia Consultative Commission.

Source: Ford Library, NSC Institutional Files (H-Files), Box H–61, NSDM 311: U.S.-Indonesian Consultative Arrangements. Confidential. Sent for action. Tab A is attached. Tab B, the recommendations from the Undersecretaries Committee, is described in the source note for Document 134. Ford initialed the“approve” option. A notation at the top of the first page reads, “Signed 10/31.”

139. National Security Decision Memorandum 311, Washington, November 1, 1975.

Washington, November 1, 1975

Kissinger issued NSDM 311 concerning U.S.-Indonesia Consultative Arrangements.

Source: Ford Library, NSC Institutional Files (H-Files), Box H–69, NSDM Originals (2 of 2) (1), NSDM 301–NSDM 315. Confidential. Copies were sent to the Secretary of the Treasury, the Administrator of the Agency for International Development, the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, and the Director of Central Intelligence.

140. Memorandum From Kenneth Quinn of the National Security Council staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Scowcroft), Washington, December 4, 1975.

Washington, December 4, 1975

[text not declassified in time for publication]

Source: Ford Library, National Security Adviser, Presidential Country Files for East Asia and the Pacific, Box 6, Indonesia (4). Secret; Sensitive. Sent for action. Scowcroft wrote “Thanks” near the top of the memorandum. Tab A (background information and talking points), Tab B (responses to journalistic questions), and Tab C (Telegram 285276 to the Secretary of State while traveling, December 4) are attached, but not published.

141. Telegram 14946 From the Embassy in Indonesia to the Department of State, December 6, 1975, 1000Z.

December 6, 1975

Newsom sent Washington a memorandum of conversation from Ford’s meeting with Suharto.

Source: Ford Library, National Security Adviser, Presidential Country Files for East Asia and the Pacific, Box 6, Indonesia, State Department Telegrams to SECSTATE, NODIS (3). Secret; Priority; Nodis. The President’s Daily Diary indicates that Ford and Suharto met from 8:05 until 9:30 on September 6. (Ford Library, Staff Secretary’s Office, President’s Daily Diary)

142. Telegram 14947 From the Embassy in Indonesia to the Department of State, December 6, 1975, 1200Z.

December 6, 1975

Newsom sent Washington an account of Kissinger’s breakfast meeting with Malik.

Source: Ford Library, National Security Adviser, Presidential Country Files for East Asia and the Pacific, Box 6, Indonesia, State Department Telegrams to SECSTATE, NODIS (3). Secret; Immediate; Nodis. Kissinger and Malik met for breakfast before the 8:05 a.m. meeting between Kissinger and Suharto.

143. Memorandum From Thomas J. Barnes of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Scowcroft), Washington, December 9, 1975

Washington, December 9, 1975

Barnes sent Scowcroft a memorandum recommending that the United States avoid involvement in the dispute over Portuguese Timor.

Source: Ford Library, National Security Adviser, Presidential Country Files for East Asia and the Pacific, Box 6, Indonesia (5). Secret; Sensitive. Sent for urgent action. Scowcroft wrote “Is this true?” next to a statement on the first page that“The Indonesian intervention in Timor is attracting increasingly bitter attention at the UN and in the media.” On the last page, Scowcroft check marked his approval of the first recommendation and his disapproval of the second. Tab A, undated press guidance for Ron Nessen, is attached but not published. Tab B, telegram 288596 to the Secretary, December 7, is attached but not published. Tab C, undated suggested questions and answers for Ron Nessen, is also attached but not published.

144. Memorandum From Thomas J. Barnes of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Scowcroft), Washington, December 12, 1975.

Washington, December 12, 1975

Barnes sent Scowcroft a memorandum on Indonesia’s future prospects in Portuguese Timor.

Source: Ford Library, National Security Adviser, Presidential Country Files for East Asia and the Pacific, Box 6, Indonesia (6). Top Secret; Sensitive. Sent for information. Tab A is attached but not published. Scowcroft wrote “Thanks” and initialed the memorandum. The same day, Granger sent Scowcroft a memorandum on Indonesian use of MAP equipment in Timor. (Ibid.)

145. Telegram 15438 From the Embassy in Indonesia to the Department of State, December 17, 1975, 0742Z.

December 17, 1975

The Embassy reported on U.S.-Indonesian relations.

Source: National Archives, Record Group 59, Central Foreign Policy Files. Secret; Priority; Limdis. Repeated priority to USUN New York and for information to Canberra, Lisbon, Medan, Surabaya.

146. Memorandum From Secretary of State Kissinger to the Under Secretary for Security Assistance (Maw), Washington, December 19, 1975

Washington, December 19, 1975

A memorandum from Kissinger asked Maw to suspend MAP grants and FMS sales to Indonesia.

Source: Library of Congress, Henry Kissinger Papers, Geopolitical File, CL 151, Indonesia, 1973–75, Folder 7. Secret.

147. Minutes of the Secretary of State’s Staff Meeting, Washington, December 23, 1975, 8:12 a.m.

Washington, December 23, 1975, 8:12 a.m.

Kissinger and his aides discussed the situation in East Timor.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Transcripts of Secretary of State Kissinger’s Staff Meetings, 1973–1977, E5177, Box 9. Secret. Habib referred to a letter from Gary Hart to Rumsfeld. The letter, December 16, asked whether U.S. weapons were used in the Indonesian invasion of East Timor and whether U.S. officials possessed foreknowledge of the Indonesian plans. (Ford Library, National Security Adviser, Presidential Country Files for East Asia and the Pacific, Box 6, Indonesia [6])

148. Minutes of the Secretary of State’s Staff Meeting, Washington, January 12, 1976, 8:11 a.m.

Washington, January 12, 1976, 8:11 a.m.

Kissinger and his aides discussed the situation in East Timor.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Transcripts of Secretary of State Kissinger’s Staff Meetings, 1973–1977, E5177, Box 9. Secret. The minutes are incorrectly dated January 12, 1975.

149. Telegram 1151 From the Embassy in Indonesia to the Department of State, January 27, 1976, 0851Z.

January 27, 1976, 0851Z

The Embassy reported an Australian query regarding U.S. military assistance to Indonesia.

Source: National Archives, Record Group 59, Central Foreign Policy Files. Secret; Cherokee; Nodis.

150. Telegram 1239 From the Embassy in Indonesia to the Department of State, January 28, 1976, 0851Z.

January 28, 1976, 0851Z

The Embassy evaluated the situation in Timor and its implications for military assistance to Indonesia.

Source: Ford Library, National Security Adviser, Presidential Country Files for East Asia and the Pacific, Box 6, Indonesia, State Department Telegrams to SECSTATE, NODIS (4). Secret; Cherokee; Nodis.

151. Telegram 1250 From the Embassy in Indonesia to the Department of State, January 28, 1976, 0928Z.

January 28, 1976, 0928Z

Newsom described a meeting with Malik on Timor.

Source: Ford Library, National Security Adviser, Presidential Country Files for East Asia and the Pacific, Box 6, Indonesia, State Department Telegrams to SECSTATE, NODIS (4). Secret; Cherokee; Nodis.

152. Telegram 2098 From the Embassy in Indonesia to the Department of State, February 17, 1976, 0541Z.

February 17, 1976, 0541Z

The Embassy reported on military assistance to Indonesia.

Source: Ford Library, National Security Adviser, Presidential Country Files for East Asia and the Pacific, Box 6, Indonesia, State Department Telegrams to SECSTATE, NODIS (4). Secret; Nodis.

153. Memorandum From Thomas J. Barnes of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Scowcroft), Washington, February 18, 1976.

Washington, February 18, 1976

Barnes sent Scowcroft a memorandum on contingency planning for military supply to Indonesia.

Source: Ford Library, National Security Adviser, Presidential Country Files for East Asia and the Pacific, Box 6, Indonesia (7). Secret; Nodis. Sent for information. Don McDonald of the NSC staff initialed his concurrence. At the bottom of the page, in response to Barnes’ statement about the dangers of a study, Scowcroft wrote, “Should it be turned off?” Tab A, telegram 2097 from Jakarta, February 17, is in the National Archives, Record Group 59, Central Foreign Policy Files. On February 22, Scowcroft wrote a note to Barnes, “Tom—I do not believe a study is necessary but I hope some thought is being given to the question. Brent.” (Ibid.)

154. Telegram 5606 From the Embassy in Indonesia to the Department of State, April 29, 1976, 0400Z.

April 29, 1976, 0400Z

The Embassy gave a brief overview on Indonesian use of U.S. arms in Timor.

Source: National Archives, Record Group 59, Central Foreign Policy Files. Secret; Exdis. Telegram 101116 to the Secretary’s Delegation, April 30, provided the text of an April 14 letter from Senators Humphrey and Case stating that USG representations to the GOI had apparently been ignored.

155. Telegram 6442 From the Embassy in Indonesia to the Department of State, May 17, 1976, 0235Z.

May 17, 1976, 0235Z

The Embassy warned that Indonesia would soon become aware of delays in MAP training.

Source: National Archives, Record Group 59, Central Foreign Policy Files. Secret; Immediate; Nodis.

156. Memorandum From Thomas J. Barnes of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Scowcroft), Washington, May 17, 1976.

Washington, May 17, 1976

Barnes sent Scowcroft a memorandum on military equipment deliveries to Indonesia.

Source: Ford Library, National Security Adviser, Presidential Country Files for East Asia and the Pacific, Box 6, Indonesia (7). Secret; Sensitive. Urgent; sent for information. Scowcroft wrote on the memorandum, “Thanks. BS.” Jakarta Telegram 6442, March 17, is Document 155. Humphrey’s and Case’s April 28 letter is contained in Telegram 104735 to the Secretary’s delegation, May 1. (National Archives, Record Group 59, Central Foreign Policy Files) On May 17, at 2005Z, telegram 120825 to Jakarta gave the Department’s reply to telegram 6442 from Jakarta. The telegram, drafted by Miller and approved by Maw, stated, “The training program you cite will proceed on schedule. You can inform Indonesians accordingly.” (Ibid.)

157. Minutes of the Secretary of State’s Staff Meeting, Washington, June 1, 1976, 8:10 a.m.

Washington, June 1, 1976, 8:10 a.m.

Kissinger and his aides discussed military aid to Indonesia.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Transcripts of Secretary of State Kissinger’s Staff Meetings, 1973–1977, E5177, Box 10. Secret.

158. Memorandum From Thomas J. Barnes of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Deputy Assistant for National Security Affairs (Hyland), Washington, June 2, 1976.

Washington, June 2, 1976

Barnes sent a memo to Hyland about upcoming negotiations with Indonesia.

Source: Ford Library, National Security Adviser, Presidential Country Files for East Asia and the Pacific, Box 6, Indonesia (7). Secret. Hyland wrote, “good” near the top of the memorandum.

159. Minutes of the Secretary of State’s Staff Meeting, Washington, June 17, 1976, 8:18 a.m.

Washington, June 17, 1976, 8:18 a.m.

Kissinger and his aides discussed whether to send a diplomatic representative to accompany an Indonesian Parliamentary Delegation to East Timor.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Transcripts of Secretary of State Kissinger’s Staff Meetings, 1973–1977, E5177, Box 10. Secret.

160. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, June 29, 1976.

Washington, June 29, 1976

Kissinger conferred about Indonesia with several Department of State officials.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy Files, P–820118–1488. Secret; Nodis. Drafted by Ingraham and approved by Collums.

161. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, June 29, 1976.

Washington, June 29, 1976

Kissinger, Malik, and other officials discussed U.S. aid to Indonesia at a U.S.-Indonesian Joint Consultation.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy Files, P–820118–1495. Secret; Nodis. Drafted by Ingraham and approved by Collums.

162. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, June 29, 1976, 2:30 p.m.

Washington, June 29, 1976, 2:30 p.m.

Kissinger and Malik discussed East Asian affairs.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy Files, P–820118–1470. Secret; Nodis. Drafted by Ingraham and approved by Collums. A more concise version of this conversation, under the heading, “Summary of U.S.-Indonesian Joint Consultations,” is available at the Ford Library, National Security Adviser, Presidential Country Files for East Asia and the Pacific, Box 6, Indonesia (7).

163. Minutes of the Secretary of State’s Staff Meeting, Washington, August 25, 1976, 8 a.m.

Washington, August 25, 1976, 8 a.m.

Kissinger and his aides discussed whether to sell a missile system to Indonesia.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Transcripts of Secretary of State Kissinger’s Staff Meetings, 1973–1977, E5177, Box 11. Secret.

164. Memorandum of Conversation, October 7, 1976, 5 p.m.

Washington, October 7, 1976, 5 p.m.

Ford and Malik discussed foreign aid and other matters.

Source: Ford Library, National Security Adviser, Memoranda of Conversation, Box 21. Secret; Nodis. Ford’s talking points from Scowcroft stated, “There are no major contentious issues in our relations with Indonesia.” The memorandum noted that the United States had increased Indonesia’s PL–480 commodity support by 200,000 extra tons of rice and its grant military aid by $9.8 million, adding, “The Indonesians have been informed of your decision and are very pleased by it.” (Ibid., Presidential Country Files for East Asia and the Pacific, Box 6, Indonesia [7]).

96. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, April 24, 1973, 1405–1430. 96. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, April 24, 1973, 1405–1430.1

Washington, April 24, 1973

ASSISTANT SECRETARY OF DEFENSE
WASHINGTON D.C.

MEMORANDUM OF CONVERSATION
SUBJECT: Home Leave Consultation Call by Ambassador Galbraith (U)

PARTICIPANTS:

Defense

Mr. Lawrence S. Eagleburger - ASD/ISA, Acting

Mr. Dennis J. Doolin - DASD/ISA/EAPA

Captain R. A. Shaid - Desk Officer/ISA/EAPR

State

Francis J. Galbraith - U.S. Ambassador to Indonesia

Mr. William Grant - Desk Officer

Time: 1405-1430, 24 April 1973
Place: Mr. Eagleburger's Office, Pentagon

(S) Mr. Eagleburger opened the discussion by asking Ambassador Galbraith for his views on the U.S.-Indonesian Law of the Sea (LOS) issue. Ambassador Galbraith replied that this particular issue was the only thing he sees on the horizon where the U.S. and Indonesia might be on a collision course. Various other areas of interest have associated problems to contend with, but represent basically compatible interests on both sides. He went on to reflect that the Indonesians prefer much more loosely worded statements or agreements, under which they can bend a little one way or the other, but run into trouble when forced into "chiseling principles in rock," as U.S. legal minds are wont to do. The Ambassador commented that the LOS issue will definitely be a problem unless we can find a better formula vis-a-vis the Indonesians, or some suitable compromise. He expressed a wish that we could just leave the issue alone, and just continue to provide telephonic notice slightly in advance of U.S. ship transits through the archipelago. Moreover, he added, the GOI welcomes our ship transits, it complements Indonesia's own limited surveillance effort, particularly when the U.S. is trailing or watching third country (communist/insurgent) ship/craft movements. ..General Sumitro has expressed GOI desire for U.S. ships to continue tracking and surveillance on into Indonesian waters when required. Mr. Eagleburger commented that any exception for Indonesia would cause serious problems elsewhere in dealing with the many other countries which support the archipelago concept.

(S) Mr. Eagleburger asked how the MAP program was coming along. The Ambassador replied that things were "OK so far," that the GOI was understanding relative to our problems with Congress (program dollar levels/authorizations). He reflected that President Suharto doesn't want to complain too much and cause problems for President Nixon, since he knows that President Nixon wants to help as much as he can.

(S) The Ambassador commented on a problem of MAP equipment deliveries, and how we often delivered piecemeal (mortars without baseplates which arrive months later, training ammunition which arrived two years after the related weapons were delivered). He recommended that deliveries come in a complete package when feasible, and suggested that a "watchdog" arrangement in DOD would be helpful toward that purpose. The Ambassador noted the Indonesians have complained that only about 20% of the equipment promised (funded under MAP) has been delivered thus far. He considers our program for the GOI to be a relatively small program, and that it would seem that we ought to be able to do better on implementation. Mr. Doolin and Mr. Eagleburger both indicated that ISA would look into the situation. (Comment: Captain Shaid will coordinate a letter response for Mr. Eagleburger's signature, to inform the Ambassador on the status of undelivered MAP balances and whether the situation related thereto can be improved.)

(S) The Ambassador reflected on the positive effects of the provision of excess defense articles, the T-33 jet trainer aircraft and H-34 helicopters, and added that future transfer of excess trucks in relatively good condition for use by the National Police would also have a positive effect. With regard to allocation of additional (three Claud Jones class) DE's which the Indonesians want, he supported a sale to GOI when available, but preferred spacing the allocation thereof at intervals of about one per year. He wants to insure that the DE's can be effectively assimilated in the face of limited Indonesia budget support and maintenance capabilities. He noted that with the addition of these kind of items, the Indonesians would not be "so rigid on figures" (specific grant levels).

(S) Captain Shaid suggested that the Ambassador table his views on Embassy-Defense Liaison Group (DLG) relations, which he had aired with Vice Admiral Peet during the preceding call. Ambassador Galbraith stated that if the Ambassador is to be the President's representative, then he must know what is going on, and that he had found his greatest difficulty (in Indonesia) to be on the military (DLG) side of the house. He added that his comments included relations with the Defense Attaches/DIA on occasion. He continued that he did not care who took the lead with regard to implementation of the MAP program, that the important matter was to get the job done right. As the Ambassador, he considered it his job to coordinate and direct all efforts of the USG in Indonesia. If communications to the DLG do not inform the Embassy, or if communications from the DLG are not coordinated with the Embassy, then such actions undermine his capability to exercise judgment, which is why he has been placed there. He emphasized the need for effective, open exchanges of communications between those concerned—State, DOD, CINCPAC, the Embassy and the DLG.

(C) Mr. Eagleburger stated the intent of Defense is to keep the Ambassador fully informed, but that it was not possible to go so far as to direct the DLG to coordinate all traffic with the Embassy, due to the terms of reference problems. He indicated that we would do all we can here in Washington to be responsive, and suggested that the Ambassador make his views known to Admiral Gayler when he passes through Hawaii on the way back to Jakarta. The Ambassador stated that he already had planned to be in Hawaii for a forthcoming political-military conference.

(C) The call was concluded with Mr. Eagleburger's departure for another meeting. While Captain Shaid was waiting with the Ambassador for his transportation to arrive, he asked the Ambassador if a visit by COMSEVENTHFLT aboard his flagship might be well received in Indonesia. the Ambassador replied there would be no objection to such a visit if it came at a suitable time, as outlined in recent message traffic (maximum of one ship visit every six months to Jakarta, same for Surabaya; overall maximum of one visit per quarter to Indonesia). He also agreed that COMSEVENTHFLT's visit should probably be after Admiral Sudomo is relieved by the new GOI Navy Chief of Staff, and that Jakarta would be the better port for the visit.

Memorandum of Conversation Prepared by:
Captain R.A. Shaid, USN

Approved by:
[signed] The Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense (ISA/EAPA)

1 Source: Washington National Records Center, OASD/ISA Files: FRC 330–76–117, Indonesia, 333, 1973, May 2. Secret. Drafted by Shaid and approved by Doolin. The conversation took place in Eagleburger’s office. Eagleburger’s talking points for the meeting are ibid. On April 25, Kissinger disapproved a recommendation that he meet with Galbraith. (Memorandum from Holdridge to Kissinger, April 23; National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Country Files, Far East, Box 533, Indonesia, Volume 4, 1 January 1973–)

97. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, May 15, 1973, 4:30 p.m. 97. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, May 15, 1973, 4:30 p.m.1

Washington, May 15, 1973

MEMORANDUM
NATIONAL SECURITY COUNCIL
MEMORANDUM OF CONVERSATION

PARTICIPANTS:

General Hasnan Habib, Aide to General Sumitro, Government of Indonesia

Brigadier General Nichlani Soedardjo, Military Attache, Embassy of Indonesia

Brigadier General Brent Scowcroft, Deputy Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs

Mr. John A. Froebe, Jr., Staff Member NSC

DATE, TIME, PLACE: May 15, 1973, 4:30 p. m., General Scowcroft's Office

SUBJECT: Military Assistance, Indochina, Sino-Soviet Conflict, Watergate

General Scowcroft began by noting Mr. Kissinger's regrets that he could not meet with General Habib himself, since he was leaving for Paris tomorrow.

Special Channel Between the President and President Suharto

General Habib, reviewing the background of the special channel, said that it had been in existence for several years. He noted that on each of his visits to Washington he had met with Mr. Kissinger in order to convey greetings from President Suharto to President Nixon and from General Sumitro to Mr. Kissinger. General Sumitro, because of his new duties, now finds it difficult to visit Washington with the frequency that he used to. General Habib said that President Suharto wants to preserve this special channel in order to avoid surprises. Also, in President Suharto's view, the special channel is a natural consequence of the special relationship that exists between himself and President Nixon. General Habib noted his Government's desire to keep this channel secret, and said that on their side even Ambassador Thajeb is not aware of its existence—that in the Embassy here only General Nichlani is so aware.

Request for Three More Destroyer Escorts

General Habib said that he wanted to present a personal letter from President Suharto to President Nixon concerning U.S. military assistance to Indonesia. He said that the role of Indonesia's Navy had now become more important than before—it must prevent encroachments by foreign fishermen on Indonesian fishing grounds and control smuggling. He said that the present condition of the Indonesian Navy is such that if it does not receive additional attention it will soon be down to only 14 ships. The goal that has been decided upon is 54 vessels—as opposed to the present 89 with the backbone of the new Navy being speedy patrol boats and one division of destroyer escorts. The destroyer escorts are to number 4 and are to have a dual role: patrolling and the maintenance of basic seamanship skills in the Navy to provide a core for its possible future expansion.

Therefore, President Suharto in his letter to President Nixon has asked for three more destroyer escorts—which would be in addition to the one the U.S. has already agreed to provide.

General Habib noted that the Australians have also been helpful in the modernization of Indonesia's Navy: Australia has now agreed to provide six patrol boats. For its own part, Indonesia plans to devote significant budgetary resources of its own to this project. General Habib said his Government is of course aware of the constraints on U.S. resources as regards military assistance.

General Scowcroft said that the Administration was very sympathetic to Indonesia's needs on this score, and would do its very best to be responsive. He noted that Congress has placed severe limitations on U.S. military assistance programs, and that the Administration had to stay within these bounds.

Indochina

Taking out his list of other questions, General Habib asked about the prospects for the coming Paris talks, noting Indonesia's concern over the Indochina situation particularly in light of its own participation in the ICCS. General Scowcroft expressed the Administration's profound gratitude for Indonesia's participation in the ICCS. He said that the U.S. hoped that the ICCS would become increasingly effective in helping enforce the Vietnam settlement. He also noted that in this connection the U.S. has made representations to Poland and Hungary, and that we are hopeful that Canada will remain a member of the body. In the U.S. view, he said, the ICCS is critical to meaningful implementation of the Vietnam Agreement.

Addressing the question of enforcement of the Agreement, he said that the U.S. definitely did not sign the Agreement only to have it disregarded. The U.S. views most seriously Hanoi's violations of the settlement, especially as concerns its use of Laos and Cambodia to resupply its forces in South Vietnam and to infiltrate new personnel there.

General Scowcroft said that Mr. Kissinger was meeting with Le Duc Tho in an effort to prevent further deterioration of the Agreement. Mr. Kissinger would make clear that the current situation is intolerable. He said, however, that he thought it premature to speculate on the outcome of the meeting. Nevertheless, we firmly believe that the serious violations of the Agreement that are occurring must end so that the two sides can get on with the problems of reconciliation.

General Habib asked how the questions of Laos and Cambodia might be treated in the talks. General Scowcroft said that we would concentrate on trying to find ways to get the other side to observe Articles 7 and 20, rather than focusing on the conclusion of a supplementary agreement. We believe that if we can get North Vietnam to agree to withdraw their forces from Laos and Cambodia, the prospects for these two countries will be very substantially improved.

General Habib asked if the ICCS would be a primary instrument in the effort. General Scowcroft replied that it would, along with the Two Party Commission General Habib asked if it would be the job of the ICCS to verify the force withdrawals from Laos and Cambodia. General Scowcroft said that the U.S. thought this should be the job of the old ICC, and in response to General Habib's question said that we were hopeful that the ICC would be capable of doing this if it would be willing to reactivate itself. General Habib asked how the U.S. visualizes the smooth coordination of the efforts of the ICCS and the ICC. General Scowcroft said he did not think this would be a particular problem since they have separate roles—the ICCS being concerned with South Vietnam, while the ICC focuses on Laos and Cambodia.

General Habib noted that Thailand continues to see North Vietnam as a substantial threat to its security, while Hanoi sees U.S. bases in Thailand as a definite threat to its security; General Habib wondered about the possibility for eliminating these threats from both sides. General Scowcroft replied that basic movement on this question depended on Hanoi's showing better intentions. If Hanoi did so then the U.S. would be willing to consider reciprocal actions.

General Habib asked about the possibility of holding general elections in South Vietnam. General Scowcroft said that this would depend on agreement between the two Vietnamese parties. President Thieu for his part had said that he was willing to go ahead with these elections. The PRG, however, has not been so inclined, and probably would not be in the near future; General Habib said that in general he agreed with this appraisal, and asked if this question would be taken up in the Paris talks. General Scowcroft said it would, as well as in the National Committee of Reconciliation and Concord when that body begins functioning. Most basically, General Scowcroft said, the U.S. is seeking nothing less than full implementation of the Vietnam Agreement.

General Habib asked if the same basic approach that was used in arriving at the settlement in Vietnam, including the question of elections and commissions, could be applied in the case of Cambodia and Laos. General Scowcroft replied that we saw the two problems as somewhat different. In Laos, the cease-fire already exists and the two sides are negotiating. In Cambodia, the problem is whom the Government in Phnom Penh can negotiate with on the other side. Lon Nol, who has committed himself to negotiations, is having considerable difficulty in finding a forum in which to negotiate a cease-fire. General Scowcroft said that in general we saw the Cambodian situation as being considerably more nebulous than that in Laos. General Habib asked the U.S. attitude toward bringing Lon Nol and Sihanouk into negotiations with each other. General Scowcroft said that if the conflicting parties were willing to engage in discussions, the U.S. would be willing to support such discussions. The problem is that we have not yet reached such a situation.

General Habib asked about the possibilities of the U.S. working with the PRC toward this end. General Scowcroft replied that the U.S. is willing to work with and through all who are interested in achieving a settlement in Cambodia. He said that the U.S. is presently working quietly to try to bring the two parties together, but so far the principal obstacle has been Sihanouk's refusal to sit down for discussions. General Scowcroft said that in general the U.S. would be willing to embrace whatever device might be useful toward the achievement of a settlement in Cambodia.

General Habib asked whether the U.S. had any particular preferences as to the future of Vietnam—a unified Vietnam or two Vietnams, an anti-Communist Vietnam or a Vietnam characterized by a special brand of Communism such as that in Yugoslavia. General Scowcroft said that the overriding U.S. interest was that the people of Vietnam decide their own political forms. The U.S. would accept whatever decision they come to. What the U.S. fundamentally opposes is a solution which might be imposed on one party by another through force of arms.

General Habib asked what influence the PRC and Soviet Union have on Hanoi. General Scowcroft said that Hanoi was of course dependent on both the PRC and the Soviets for much of its military equipment. However, the Soviet and PRC goals could not be assumed to be the same, and it therefore could not be said that Peking and Moscow exercise control over Hanoi.

Sino-Soviet Conflict

Raising the question of the on-going Sino-Soviet conflict, General Habib asked for General Scowcroft's estimate of the chances of a border flare-up, given recent increases in tension along their common border. General Scowcroft replied that any answer to this question would be highly speculative, and that indeed it was extremely difficult to say what these two nations' basic goals might be. He noted that some such as Joseph Alsop speculate that the Soviet Union would make a pre-emptive attack on the PRC. General Scowcroft said that he saw possible dangers in such speculation, and that personally he did not believe that the Sino-Soviet tensions are any worse now than they have been in the past few years.

General Habib asked if there was anything that the U.S. might do to calm this situation. General Scowcroft said that the U.S. has no interest in a conflict between Peking and Moscow. Whenever we think it useful, we make clear to each that we want to avoid a conflict between them. General Habib noted that the continuation of the Sino-Soviet conflict constituted a threat to the U.S. efforts to enhance chances for peace and stability. General Scowcroft emphasized that the U.S. is not trying to play Moscow and Peking off against each other. What we are trying to do is work with each to improve the chance for peace. Hopefully, they will be able to keep their conflict within reasonable bounds.

General Habib wondered whether General Scowcroft thought Japan might become involved in the Sino-Soviet conflict. General Scowcroft commented that Japan has no military capability to do so. He added that, at the same time, Japan obviously has an interest in Sino-Soviet relations, given its status as a major world power. General Habib said that he had heard in Japan from certain intellectuals that Japan should have a larger political role in the world and asked whether the U.S. would support a United Nations Security Council seat for Japan. General Scowcroft said that he had no clear answer to give at this point.

Watergate

General Habib asked if the Watergate affair was likely to have an impact on U.S. foreign policy. General Scowcroft said that he had not been able to detect any so far, but that what the future holds is difficult to say. The Watergate problem might affect the Administration's ability to get foreign affairs legislation through the Congress.

General Habib asked if General Scowcroft had any comment on the recent agreement between Moscow and West Germany on a pipeline. General Scowcroft said that he was not aware of this particular project.

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Country Files, Far East, Box 533, Indonesia, Volume 4, 1 January 1973–. Secret; Sensitive. The meeting was held in Scowcroft’s office. John Froebe gave Scowcroft’s talking points, May 15, which began, “You have agreed to meet with General Hasnan Habib, aide to General Sumitro(the number three man in Indonesia), today at 4:30 p.m. As you know, General Sumitro maintains contact with Dr. Kissinger as the special channel of communication between President Suharto and the President.” (Ibid.)

98. Letter From President Nixon to Indonesian President Suharto, Washington, July 12, 1973. 98. Letter From President Nixon to Indonesian President Suharto, Washington, July 12, 1973.1

Washington, July 12, 1973

THE WHITE HOUSE
WASHINGTON

His Excellency
General Suharto
President of the Republic of Indonesia Jakarta

July 12, 1973

Dear Mr. President:

Thank you for your letter, delivered by General Hasnan Habib on May 15, in which you described Indonesia's maritime security problem. I am pleased that the destroyer escort which the United States Navy recently transferred to your Navy is already proving of assistance in this regard.

I fully understand your interest in obtaining three additional destroyer escorts of the Claud Jones class. I can assure you, Mr. President, that Indonesia's need for ships of this type is being given priority consideration. The three U.S. Navy ships that might fulfill your needs presently are performing missions with the U.S. fleet. However, it is my hope that at least one of these ships can be made available early in the coming year and the remainder early in the following year. Ambassador Galbraith will be in touch with your Government when specific arrangements for transferring these ships can definitely be confirmed.

May I again express my admiration for the progress which Indonesia has made under your leadership. As you know, my Government wants to do what it can, within the limits of our resources, to assist your country's outstanding efforts to add to the stability of Southeast Asia.

With warm personal regards,

Sincerely,

[signed]
Richard Nixon

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 755, Presidential Correspondence, Indonesia, Suharto [1970–1974]. No classification marking. On August 7, Clements informed Kissinger that the Department of Defense would be able to transfer the destroyer escorts to Indonesia “approximately within the time frame desired.” (Ibid., Country Files, Far East, Box 533, Indonesia, Volume 4, 1 January 1973–)

99. Letter From Ambassador Galbraith to Secretary of State Designate Kissinger, Washington, September 5, 1973. 99. Letter From Ambassador Galbraith to Secretary of State Designate Kissinger, Washington, September 5, 1973.1

Washington, September 5, 1973

Jakarta, Indonesia

September 5, 1973

The Honorable
Henry A. Kissinger
Secretary-Designate
Department of State
Washington, D. C.

Dear Henry:

I would like to join the many who cheer your appointment as Secretary of State. We need a good teacher who can explain, especially through the press, the complexities of our foreign affairs to the American people and win their support. I know of no one as good at this as you are.

I would also like to reiterate my desire to serve on here as long as you and the President want me. Secretary Rogers and others in the Department have implied that I would be replaced sometime this year. It was their policy to encourage those of us nearing or over sixty to retire — and I did as of last January 31st, with the understanding that it would not affect my appointment here.

I believe I understand and am accepted by the Indonesians as few if any other foreigners are and that this is worth something to us. Feeling as I do at the peak of my physical and professional powers, I would prefer to go on working in some way that would make use of my accumulated experience on Indonesia and this part of the world generally. The best use I can make of it, I feel, is as Ambassador here.

Thanks to the interest and support of the President and yourself, and those in the Department of State and elsewhere in the U.S. Government, our relations with Indonesia have gone well during my time here. The most salient features of those relations have been and are: (a) Indonesian appreciation of our lead in the fields of economic and military assistance (b) the growth of U.S. investment and business interest and the concomitant growth in demand for my Embassy's guidance and support from the American business community here (c) Indonesia's emergence as leader in the region (d) Indonesia's accommodation to our posture in the Asian Pacific area in the context of its own nonaligned posture and Indonesia's wish for closer bilateral ties with Japan, Australia and the United States in the context of a recognized common interest and tacitly agreed strategy.

During any future trip you may make to this part of the world, I hope it will be possible for you to visit us here. Should you come here, my wife and I would be particularly pleased if you would stay with us at the Residence and allow us to show you something of this country — one of mankind's most benign and beautiful environments. President Suharto and Foreign Minister Adam Malik and others here would also welcome your visit. They like to be reassured that we take them into consideration as we chart our policies. Indeed they want a close, albeit nonaligned relationship and would be pleased at your attention.

And when you have the opportunity to think about what you want to do about this Ambassadorial post — whether to leave me here or replace me — I would be grateful for word from you that will allow me to plan accordingly.

With the beginnings you have already made in opening up an era of peaceful coexistence and expanding trade and other intercourse between east and west, I am sure you will be one of our greatest Secretaries. I would like to help you in any way I can to realize the potential of the initiatives the President and you have taken.

Warm regards.

Sincerely,

[signed]
Francis J. Galbraith
Ambassador

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Country Files, Far East, Box 533, Indonesia, Volume 4, 1 January 1973–. Confidential; Eyes Only; Personal. David Newsom replaced Galbraith as Ambassador in February 1974.

100. Memorandum of Conversation, New York, October 4, 1973, 5:30–6 p.m. 100. Memorandum of Conversation, New York, October 4, 1973, 5:30–6 p.m.1

New York, October 4, 1973, 5:30–6 p.m.

TWENTY-EIGHTH SESSION OF THE UNITED NATIONS GENERAL ASSEMBLY
New York

MEMORANDUM OF CONVERSATION
Date: October 4, 1973 Time: 5:30-6:00 p.m.
Place: Waldorf Towers 35A

PARTICIPANTS:

Indonesia

Foreign Minister Malik

DG for Political Affairs Foreign Ministry Mr. Djajadiningrat

Amb. Anwar Sani

Chef de Cabinet Mr. Alex Alatas

U.S.

The Secretary

Mr. Hummel, Acting Asst Sec

Mr. Heavner, Notetaker

Mr. Stearman, NSC

Subject: U.S. Indonesian Bilateral: Cambodian Situation, PL–480 Commodities for Indonesia, Middle East Problem

Distribution: S, E/S, EA

Clearance: EA - Hummel

SECRETARY: The last time I saw you was in Brussels I believe.

MALIK: Yes, that is right. I know you are a busy man, Mr. Secretary, but I don't want to take too much of your time here, though we are still hoping to invite you to Bali where we can have a little more time. First of all, I want to congratulate you on the new heavy load you have on your shoulders as Secretary of State.

SECRETARY: I should tell you about what I said to Gromyko when he became a member of the politburo. That was before I was Secretary — and I sent him a message congratulating him on having been elevated to my level.

MALIK: As I indicated in my cable to you sent through Amb. Galbraith, we are very anxious to have your views on Cambodia.

SECRETARY: On Cambodia our view is, first we are facing difficulties with Congress. To be very honest with you, the cut off of the bombing was certainly untimely and not to be wished. Since then the military situation has developed better than many of us feared, however. Now there is some prospect of a military balance.

Our view as expressed to President Suharto and to you is that we want to preserve an independent, neutral Cambodia, and within the limits imposed upon us we will do all we can to that end. In this effort we welcome help from other countries. We are aware of your long assistance, and your support on the principle of neutrality and independence is particularly helpful.

You know, Sihanouk is given to exalted statements. He announces every few weeks that he won't see me. Of course the truth is I never asked to see him, and I have no intention of seeing him in Peking. I have nothing against him in the abstract; however, we want to deal with the real forces in Cambodia. If a military balance can be maintained, negotiations have a chance, and hopefully a solution could be reached along the lines of the Laotian solution. If that happens, we can live with it, as I suppose you can also. If there is no. military balance, there is no point in it (negotiation).

In any event we do not see why we should get in the forefront of the effort to find a solution. To the degree that we show no eagerness, Sihanouk becomes more eager. We are willing to see someone come up with a solution. It would not be helpful for the US to be the principal negotiator, and we are taking a somewhat aloof position, while of course giving military and economic assistance to the Phnom Penh Government. We hope that Southeast Asian countries will exert influence where they can.

MALIK: I was wondering whether in your talks with the Chinese the question has come up concerning the race between the various Red factions in Cambodia. I mean the factions supported by the Red Chinese and those supported by Sihanouk.

SECRETARY: And those supported by Moscow, too. You are right that there is a conflict between the various rebel factions. One reason negotiations are so difficult is that there is no unified leadership on the other side.

MALIK: If we were to support Sihanouk we fear that he might not be strong enough to control the emergents.

SECRETARY: It would be a mistake to support Sihanouk, and we won't do it. If he were only the spokesman of the Red Khmer, we should deal directly with the Red Khmers. If he is not the spokesman of the Red Khmer, why talk to him? We must first know what the Red Khmers are doing. If there is a balance between the Red Khmers and Phnom Penh, then there might be a role for Sihanouk to play.

You should pay no attention to the misleading newspaper stories about our attitude on this. I am not going to Peking to negotiate the Cambodian situation.

MALIK: The picture is very clear then. We have the same evaluation of the situation. We are not enthusiastic about supporting any move which would put Sihanouk into the picture.

SECRETARY: If there were a military balance between the Red Khmer and Phnom Penh, if Sihanouk gave assurances of remaining neutral and could deliver anything and if the major powers were agreed, the situation would be different. If not, there would be no deal. But the situation is not right for that, and we are ignoring Sihanouk, confining ourselves a few enigmatic noises.

MALIK: It is also our view that the present Government in Phnom Penh should be given an opportunity to stand fast for some time so that a balance can be struck.

SECRETARY: I completely agree. Unless the other side offers a proposal which is truly balanced, we continue to strengthen the Phnom Penh Government and give it an opportunity to achieve the necessary military balance.

MALIK: We have continuously urged Phnom Penh to strengthen itself and to prepare for major pressure from the other side.

SECRETARY: The main thing now is for Phnom Penh to stabilize itself and devote itself to better organization of its military forces. Any help you could give would certainly be welcome.

MALIK: We have already given them all the benefit of our experience. During our last meeting you hinted that you wanted us to help with pilots. This we cannot give.

SECRETARY: If there are any major developments we will inform you. Anyway, don't interpret my Peking trip as having anything to do with the Cambodian problem. This will be the least important aspect of the trip.

MALIK: That is clear to us now, and we will inform our friends in Southeast Asia.

SECRETARY: Please not all the details.

MALIK: The second thing I wanted to bring up with you is a message from President Suharto through me. We want to make sure that, if possible, the U.S. Government will cause no difficulties in providing supplies (PL–480 commodities); I mean rice.

SECRETARY: Our problem is the inadequacy of supplies. What is the situation, Mr. Hummel?

MR. HUMMEL: We are studying the problem of allocating our very scarce resources. A decision has to be made in a week on what is available in PL 480. But no final decision has been taken.

SECRETARY: When will there be a decision?

MR. HUMMEL: Within a week or two, we hope. There is a study of the problem now in the NSC.

SECRETARY: Mr. Stearman, are you sitting on that? Look into it, please, and be sure I am informed. (To Malik) We will let you know. It (PL 480) may be less than what you want.

You know of course that we attach a high priority to Indonesia and are keenly aware of the friendship of the President for President Suharto.

MALIK: What we want to be sure of is that if there are cuts in the PL–480 program or if the rice program is to be abolished, it is important to give us time to plan.

SECRETARY: This will be told you.

HUMMEL: Figures on PL 480 have been sent to the NSC.

SECRETARY: (To Stearman) l want to see those figures this weekend.

MALIK: Also, Mr. Secretary, I wanted to ask if there are any developments on the Middle East situation in which Indonesia could be helpful.

SECRETARY: Well, this is a situation in which there must be secret diplomacy. Any public statement we make is immediately shot at from all sides.

Secondly, we need some cooperation from the Arab countries. It is important that they work with us. We would welcome any help you can give us with the Arab countries. You cannot begin a negotiation with the final details of the agreement. They have to have the confidence to start on a road with us. I have seen the Israeli, Egyptian and Saudi Arabian Ambassadors.

We are serious about making some progress in this problem, but it will take time. Everybody says that because of past successes, we can come up with miracles. It took me 4 years on Indo-China and 2 1/2 years on China. Frankly, it was easier with Indo-China when you could bomb one side and cut off the supplies of the other side but you can't do either in the Middle East.

Perhaps you could tell your Arab friends that if they deal with us responsibly, we will make a major effort. Tell them we are serious and that they should have confidence in our efforts. I don't think, at this stage, we should write out the whole program. What do you think?

MALIK: I have been following this problem from year to year. I have had many talks with the Arabs, most recently at Algiers. I have concluded that they don't really know the way out, and some new road must be found. Last year when I met with the Israelis I suggested that perhaps they could take a new initiative of some kind.

SECRETARY: Not before the election. There is an election in Israel in three weeks and until then, they can't do anything.

MALIK: Well, after the election then. What is important is that the Israelis have the courage to take an initiative.

SECRETARY: I agree.

MALIK: In all my talks with the Israelis it has been clear that they are fearful of taking any steps.

SECRETARY: There is of course the problem that if they make concessions, they don't get anything for it and then those concessions merely become the starting point for the next round of negotiations. They are fearful of this, of their public opinion, and even one another. They contribute to the deadlock.

As long as both sides stick to maximum positions, they have a great excuse for not doing anything. We are serious about this matter. What your Arab colleagues must understand is that they have to have a little confidence in us. They can't go around saying that the U.S. is treacherous and then expect us to do their work for them. Perhaps you can encourage them in that direction.

MALIK: This of course I can do.

SECRETARY: Thank you.

MALIK: Now that you are Secretary, the Arabs have high hopes for a solution.

SECRETARY: They think I am a magician. They don't think I'm a diplomat. But there is no magic solution, and it won't happen that way. It will take a lot of difficult and detailed work.

MALIK: I think they have reached the point where they can neither find a peaceful solution nor wage war. Also the radicals have no way out. Some of them are placing great hope in you.

SECRETARY: I will do my best, but they must help. If they make an effort, I will make an effort.

MALIK: I think they will make an effort.

SECRETARY: Let me know what their reaction is.

MALIK: Yes, I will.

SECRETARY: Well, Mr. Minister it is always a joy to see you.

MALIK: It is always good to see you, and I want to say finally that I hope you know my invitation still stands. You must come to see Bali.

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 533, Country Files, Far East, Indonesia, Volume 4, 1 January 1973–. Secret; Exdis. The meeting was held in apartment 35A at the Waldorf Towers. Cleared by Hummel and approved by Bremer. Talking points for this meeting are ibid.

101. Memorandum From Charles A. Cooper of the National Security Council Staff to Secretary of State Kissinger, Washington, November 24, 1973. 101. Memorandum From Charles A. Cooper of the National Security Council Staff to Secretary of State Kissinger, Washington, November 24, 1973.1

Washington, November 24, 1973

MEMORANDUM
NATIONAL SECURITY COUNCIL
URGENT ACTION

November 24, 1973

MEMORANDUM FOR: SECRETARY KISSINGER
FROM: CHARLES A. COOPER [CAC initialed]
SUBJECT: Indonesian Aid Level

The Indonesian Government is about to announce its aid request for next year to consortium members. This request will be for $600 million of bilateral non-food aid—our share, if we stick with our traditional one-third, would be $200 million. We could use about $30 million of PL–480 cotton in meeting this—bringing the AID requirement down to$170 million. This compares to an AID request to Congress for $90 million this year.

In view of Indonesia's oil earnings and reserve levels, there is no conceivable economic rationale for almost doubling our AID level, and Congress would almost certainly balk even if we could pressure OMB and AID. Unfortunately, other donors, particularly the Japanese, will probably have no difficulty saying yes as visions of Indonesian oil dance in their eyes.

Our AID people have tried to get the Indonesians to hold down their request so that we get more credit for our food aid which doesn't count. But the Indonesians decided at a political level not to make things easy for us. Consequently, unless we get to the Indonesians immediately, we will be faced with an Indonesian request which will be close to impossible for us to meet on our usual formula. It would be ironic indeed if we were to lose political credit with Indonesia in a year in which our over-all aid went up substantially—from $90 to $130 million in economic aid and from $20 million to maybe $100 million in PL–480.

Although it is very late in the game, I suggest you send the following back channel to Galbraith to try to head this problem off. It would be better to send a fully staffed out front channel message, but there simply isn't time. The Indonesians are expected to inform other donors of their request level for next year early next week preparatory to a consortium meeting on December 10.

Recommendation:
That you send the back channel cable to Ambassador Galbraith at Tab A.
Other

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 533, Country Files, Far East, Indonesia, Volume 4, 1 January 1973–. Secret. Sent for urgent action. At the top of the document Scowcroft wrote, “Cable sent. BS.” The draft backchannel message is attached but not published. The backchannel message as sent to Galbraith, November 25, is ibid., Box 411, Backchannel Messages, Southeast Asia, Volume II, 1973, Part 1. Galbraith’s backchannel response, November 30, is also ibid.

102. Memorandum From Charles A. Cooper of the National Security Council Staff to Secretary of State Kissinger, Washington, December 4, 1973. 102. Memorandum From Charles A. Cooper of the National Security Council Staff to Secretary of State Kissinger, Washington, December 4, 1973.1

Washington, December 4, 1973

MEMORANDUM
NATIONAL SECURITY COUNCIL
INFORMATION

December 4, 1973

MEMORANDUM FOR: SECRETARY KISSINGER
FROM: CHARLES A. COOPER [CAC initialed]
SUBJECT: Indonesian AID Level Decision.

Indonesian President Suharto has selected (Tab A) one of the options you offered (Tab B) on next year's aid level. He prefers to hold to the one-third of bilateral aid formula but to apply it to all bilateral aid (including food aid) whereas it has previously been applied only to non-food aid. At Tab C is Ambassador Galbraith's interim reply in which he indicates that our political objective of avoiding any negative political signal has been accomplished. Galbraith chose not to offer the option of a higher MAP level.

The formula selected requires $233 million of U.S. assistance — $105 million of PL–480 commodities and $128 million for development loans. OMB has agreed to these levels. This issue does not have to go to the President since it has now been resolved. Tom Pickering is handling the mechanics with State/AID.

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 533, Country Files, Far East, Indonesia, Volume 4, 1 January 1973–. Secret. Sent for information. Kissinger initialed the memorandum. Attached Tab A is Galbraith’s backchannel message of December 3; attached Tab B is Kissinger’s November 25 backchannel to Galbraith; Tab C was not attached.

103. Memorandum From Acting Secretary of State Rush to President Nixon, Washington, January 16, 1974. 103. Memorandum From Acting Secretary of State Rush to President Nixon, Washington, January 16, 1974.1

Washington, January 16, 1974

DEPARTMENT OF STATE
WASHINGTON

January 16, 1974

MEMORANDUM FOR THE PRESIDENT

SUBJECT: Letter to President Suharto on the Law of the Sea Negotiations

The Law of the Sea Conference is scheduled to begin its first substantive session in June 1974. Among the most important issues in these negotiations is freedom of navigation. The United States has proposed specific treaty articles which would, among other things, guarantee free transit through and over international straits. Several countries have opposed the U.S. on this issue. This opposition has come principally from certain countries bordering on international straits and certain archipelago states such as Indonesia and the Philippines. These countries wish to gain international recognition of their archipelago concept which, in effect, could deny high seas freedoms to all waters within the archipelago.

It is possible that the archipelago countries can be accommodated in these negotiations without injuring U.S. navigational interests. U.S. representatives have discussed this issue with representatives of Indonesia and they have indicated they would welcome further exploratory talks. A formula which could be worked out with Indonesia might be acceptable to most, if not all, other archipelago states. Were this to happen, a major element of opposition to our straits proposal would be removed and the prospects for a successful Law of the Sea Conference improved.

I believe that exploratory talks on this issue should begin at an early date and that the best method to initiate such talks would be by means of a letter from you to President Suharto. Attached for your signature is a proposed letter.

Sincerely,

[signed]
Kenneth Rush
Acting Secretary

Attachment: Proposed letter to President Suharto

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 755, Presidential Correspondence, Indonesia, Suharto [1970–1974]. Secret. The proposed letter, not attached, is Document 106.

104. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, January 22, 1974, 1100–1130. 104. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, January 22, 1974, 1100–1130.1

Washington, January 22, 1974, 1100–1130

ASSISTANT SECRETARY OF DEFENSE
WASHINGTON, D.C. 20301
In reply refer to: I -20251 /74CT

MEMORANDUM OF CONVERSATION
SUBJECT: Call by U.S. Ambassador Designate to Indonesia (U)

PARTICIPANTS:

Department of State

David D. Newsom -U.S. Ambassador Designate to Indonesia

Mr. Mark Dion - Desk Officer

Department of Defense

VADM Ray Peet - Director DSAA, DASD/SA

RADM Thomas J. Bigley - Director, ISA/EAPR

Mr. Walter B. Ligon - Director, Military Assistance, DSAA

COL J. A. Briggs, Jr. - Chief, ISA/SA-PPF Division

CAPT Robert A. Shaid - Asst for Indonesia, ISA/EAPR

Time: 1100 - 1130, 22 January 1974
Place: ASD/ISA Office, Pentagon

1. (S) US-Indonesia Law of the Sea (LOS) Positions.

VADM Peet presented the ISA backup papers for the call to Ambassador Newsom for his retention, which included a summary of opposing U.S. and Indonesia positions on LOS. VADM Peet and RADM Higley reiterated the U.S. policy of not providing courtesy notification to GOI for U.S. Navy ships which transit the Strait of Malacca (between Malaysia and Indonesia), as opposed to other Straits between GOI land masses for which the U.S. does provide oral courtesy notification. Ambassador Newsom was advised that the Chairman, Joint Chiefs of Staff was insistent on keeping applicable posts advised with regard to Indian Ocean deployments, but that information was to be treated as privileged information by the Embassy.

2. (S) US MAP Commitment to Indonesia.

VADM Peet acknowledged high level USG recognition of the importance of Indonesia, but noted that Indonesia was not a part of the total force concept. In that regard he noted Defense supports MAP for Indonesia in the $20 to $25 million range, but desires to maintain a balance with MAP requested for the Philippines. Ambassador Newsom asked if the USG did not in fact have a high level MAP commitment to Indonesia. VADM Peet acknowledged that there is a high level commitment, but being faced with Congressional pressure to reduce worldwide MAP, and the current Cambodia requirement to maintain a $325 million level, resources were insufficient to fully support commitments elsewhere. Ambassador Newsom was advised that although high level determination was made to provide $25 million to Indonesia in FY 1972 and FY 1973, amounts thereafter were to be dependent on future events in Southeast Asia. However, due to various factors, the GOI has viewed US commitment to be a constant $25 million level.

3. (U) Provision of Excess Defense Articles (EDA).

VADM Peet stated that Defense would be alert to provide EDA as in the past, but that new legislation requires certain charges to MAP for EDA which stem from CONUS assets.

4. (S) Sale of US DEs to Indonesia.

VADM Peet noted that we were fortunate to be able to provide four DEs of the same class for sale to Indonesia, but we were not ambitious to provide much mare than a Coast Guard-type capability for Indonesia. RADM Bigley informed Ambassador Newsom of the difficulties experienced thus far relative to Indonesian Navy maintenance of the first DE which was transferred last year.

NOTE: Defense backup material held by Ambassador Newsom requests that the Country Team keep a careful eye on the DE maintenance situation.

5. (C) MAP Support of Indonesian Police.

VADM Peet and Mr. Ligon noted that the question of MAP support for National Police projects, including the police portion of the "INDOCOM" project, was under review by the General Counsel. New legislation may dictate severe reduction of police assistance previously planned through MAP for a number of countries.

6. (C) Provision of C-130 Transport Aircraft.

The Indonesian case for additional C-130s was reviewed and VADM Peet stated that his effort to obtain five C-130Bs at a reduced cost from the USAF was not productive, due to valid USAF requirements for the C-130Bs. Mr. Ligon advised Ambassador Newsom that for the time being we would have to consider the new C-130Es at a flyaway cost of about $5.2 million each, with an annual increase in cost of about ten per cent.

7. (C) Foreign Military Sales Credit (FMSCR) for Indonesia.

In discussing whether FMSCR might be appropriate for Indonesia, VADM Peet noted the general USG policy to shift from grant to FMS (cash and credit). Mr. Ligon endorsed commencement of a FMS program for Indonesia. VADM Peet stated that a buildup of the Defense Liaison Group (DLG) staff would not be encouraged in relation to a FMS program, that such a program should be handled mainly in Washington, along with sending expert assistance to the field as required. Ambassador Newsom expressed concern that the addition of FMSCR might create a corresponding decline in MAP, and that we would need to consider the best method of transition "without breaking political china." VADM Peet said that Defense would welcome some FMSCR for Indonesia, but that none was currently programmed for FY 1975, and we have a worldwide problem on enough FMSCR to meet the demand. In response to Ambassador Newsom's proposal of the possibility of starting with a modest $25 million FMSCR program in FY 1975, VADM Peet noted the advantages of the "squeaky wheel theory." COL Briggs reviewed the negative status of FY 1975 FMSCR for Indonesia as a result of recent State/Defense/OMB/NSC security assistance program review meetings. Ambassador Newsom indicated he would pursue matters further at State.

8. (C) Defense Liaison Group Organization.

VADM Peet, although acknowledging the desirability of keeping US military presence to a minimum in Indonesia, commented on the cost-effective problem of the temporary duty personnel requirements for Indonesian MAP.

He requested that Ambassador Newsom review the question of permanent versus temporary duty personnel from an efficiency viewpoint. Regarding relationships between the Chief, DLG and the Defense Attache, VADM Peet noted that such relationships needed to be viewed on a country-by-country basis toward what is best in each circumstance. Whether the Chief, DLG billet might properly be filled by a Brigadier General was also discussed. VADM Peet deferred to the Ambassador's view from the field on this matter. On the question of DLG communications with CINCPAC and Defense, VADM Peet noted that he had not heard of any concern expressed since his last meeting with Ambassador Galbraith. He reiterated his desire that all interested parties be informed on cables pertaining to common issues. Ambassador Newsom recognized the need to speak, from the field, with a common voice and a common awareness

Memorandum of Conversation
Prepared by: CAPT R. A. Shaid, USN

Approved by:
[signed] Ray Peet
Date: 1/31/74

DISTRIBUTION:
ASD (ISA)
DASD (ISA/EA&PA)
DASD (ISA/SA)
DSAA
JCS (J-5)
CINCPAC (J-8)
CHUSDLG, Indonesia State Dept
AmEmb Jakarta
AD (3)
RC (2)

1 Source: Washington National Records Center, OASD/ISA Files: FRC 330–77–0054, Indonesia, 333, 1974, January 31. Secret. Drafted by Shaid and approved by Peet. The conversation took place in the office of the Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs.

105. Telegram 1100 From the Embassy in Indonesia to the Department of State, January 26, 1974, 0304Z. 105. Telegram 1100 From the Embassy in Indonesia to the Department of State, January 26, 1974, 0304Z.1

January 26, 1974

TELEGRAM
Department of State
JAKARTA 1100

P R 260304Z JAN 74

FM AMEMBASSY JAKARTA TO SECSTATE WASHDC 539
INFO AMEMBASSY ABU DHABI
AMEMBASSY CARACAS
AMEMBASSY KUWAIT
AMEMBASSY LONDON
AMEMBASSY ROME
AMEMBASSY TEHRAN
AMEMBASSY SKIDDA
AMEMBASSY TRIPOLI

JAKARTA 1100

STATE ALSO FOR T/IEP

E.O. 11652: GDS TAGS: ENRG, ID

SUBJECT: ENERGY: OIL PRICES
REFS: A. JIDDA 330; B. JAKARTA 985 (NOTAL); C. JAKARTA 721 (NOTAL); D. JAKARTA 964 (NOTAL); E. JAKARTA 0155 (NOTAL); F. TEHRAN 560

1. SUMMARY: WE BELIEVE THAT INDONESIAN LEADERSHIP WOULD RESIST OIL PRICE REDUCTIONS, DESPITE SOME CONCERN ABOUT ADVERSE EFFECTS ON INDONESIAN LDC AND WORLD ECONOMIES, ARGUING THEIR PRICE IS "REASONABLE" AND THAT COMPANIES ARE BASICALLY RESPONSIBLE FOR HIGH PRICES. MOST CONSTRUCTIVE APPROACH WOULD BE TO SOLICIT INDONESIAN VIEWS, AS CONCERNED MEMBER OF LDC COMMUNITY. INDONESIA MAY ALSO REACT POSITIVELY TO URGINGS FROM LDC CONSUMER NATIONS. RECOMMENDATION: THAT HIGH WASHINGTON ENERGY OFFICIALS ATTEMPT SCHEDULE MEETING WITH INDONESIAN OIL CHIEF IBNU SUTOWO DURING HIS VISIT TO US EARLY FEBRUARY TO OBTAIN HIS VIEWS AND SUGGESTIONS. END SUMMARY.

2. INDICATIONS HERE ARE THAT IT WOULD NOT RPT NOT BE REALISTIC TO EXPECT INDONESIANS TO TAKE LEAD FOR REDUCTION OR EXERT PRESSURE TO MODERATE OIL PRICE DECISIONS OF OPEC COUNTRIES. RATHER WE SHOULD EXPECT GOI TO RESIST PRICE REDUCTION, ALTHOUGH IT IS UNEASY ABOUT POTENTIAL DISRUPTIVE EFFECT OF HIGH OIL PRICES ON WORLD AND INDONESIAN ECONOMIES AND ON DEVELOPING NATIONS. GOI HAS ALSO BEGUN TO WORRY ABOUT PROSPECTS FOR DECLINING INTERNATIONAL AID TO INDONESIA IN LIGHT ITS INCREASED EXPORT EARNINGS. HOWEVER, ATTITUDES OF GOI OFFICIALS REFLECT MUCH STRONGER CONCERN, IN PART FOR DOMESTIC POLITICAL PURPOSES, THAT INDONESIA DO NO LESS WELL THAN OPEC COUNTRIES IN OBTAINING BEST RETURN FOR ITS OIL EXPORTS. GOI CURRENTLY CONCLUDING HARD NEGOTIATIONS WITH FOREIGN OIL PRODUCERS TO OBTAIN 85/15 SPLIT OF OIL PROCEEDS IN EXCESS OF $5 PER BARREL. (REFTEL C). THIS EFFORT FURTHER REFLECTS GOI PREOCCUPATION WITH IMPROVING ITS RETURN ON OIL, BELIEF IT EXERCISED RESTRAINT IN RECENT OIL PRICE INCREASE, AND PERHAPS SOME REGRET IT DIDN'T INCREASE MORE. (REFTEL E).

3. FURTHER AND MORE FUNDAMENTAL CONSIDERATION IS THAT INDONESIA HAS TO OUR KNOWLEDGE NEVER DEVIATED FROM ROLE OF OBSERVER EED FOLLOWER IN OPEC MEETINGS AND DECISIONS. IN RECENT DISCUSSIONS WITH EMBOFFS, GOI ENERGY OFFICIALS HAVE REACTED AGAINST SUGGESTIONS THAT INDONESIA URGE RESTRAINT ON ITS ARAB PARTNERS IN OPEC. SOME KEY GOI OFFICIALS HAVE COUNTERED THAT CONSUMING GOVERNMENTS SHOULD PUT PRESSURE INSTEAD ON OIL COMPANIES TO KEEP PRICES DOWN. AND STATE OIL COMPANY DIRECTOR IBNU SUTOWO HAS EXPRESSED MISGIVINGS TO AMBASSADOR ABOUT FACT IT WAS USG THAT TOOK INITIATIVE IN CALLING CONSUMERS/PRODUCERS MEETING ALTHOUGH IBNU THOUGHT MEETING WAS GOOD IDEA. (REFTEL B)

4. ON BALANCE, WE BELIEVE INDONESIA WOULD RESPOND NEGATIVELY TO ISOLATED US INITIATIVE FOR LOWERING OF OIL PRICES — THE MORE STRONGLY SO IF IT COMES FROM HIGH LEVELS. WE WOULD EXPECT GREATEST INDONESIAN RESPONSIVENESS TO LDC EXPRESSIONS OF CONCERN FOR THEIR OWN PROBLEMS; GOI EFFORTS TO MEET OIL NEEDS OF INDONESIA'S ASEAN PARTNERS ILLUSTRATIVE OF THIS POTENTIAL. INDONESIANS LIKELY TO COUNTER ANY US OR EEC INITIATIVES FOR LOWER OIL PRICES WITH DEMAND THAT DEVELOPED NATIONS MUST ALSO SOMEHOW PROTECT LDCS AGAINST INCREASED COST OF INDUSTRIALIZED COUNTRY EXPORTS TO THEM.

5. INDONESIA INCREASINGLY AWARE OF ITS GROWING STATUS AS POTENTIAL SUPPLIER OF IMPORTANT INCREMENTS OF CRUDE WORLD OIL DEMANDS AND ITS POTENTIAL FOR INFLUENCE AMONG LDC CONSUMERS IN ASIA. WE BELIEVE INDONESIA MIGHT RESPOND POSITIVELY AND HELPFULLY TO SOLICITATION OF ITS VIEWS RPT VIEWS BY HIGH LEVEL US OFFICIALS. GENERAL IBNU SUTOWO, INDONESIA'S HAIL CHIEF TO BE IN US EARLY FEBRUARY (REFTEL D). WE SUGGEST DEPT CONSIDER SCHEDULING APPOINTMENT FOR IBNU TO MEET AT LEAST WITH ENERGY ADMINISTRATOR SIMON AND STATE UNDER SECRETARY DONALDSON, AND POSSIBLY WITH SECRETARY SHULTZ. WOULD STRONGLY URGE THAT SUCH TALKS NOT BE USED TO PRESSURE FOR INDONESIAN LEADERSHIP WITH OIL PRODUCERS ON OIL PRICING MATTERS BUT RATHER TO OBTAIN SUGGESTIONS FROM INDONESIA, FROM LDC VIEWPOINT, OF HOW BEST TO CONCERT EFFORTS OF USG WITH LDC CONSUMER INTERESTS IN FUTURE PRODUCER/CONSUMER ENERGY TALKS.

6. WE ARE IMPRESSED BY ARGUMENTS SET FORTH IN REF F AND URGE FAVORABLE CONSIDERATION FOR RECOMMENDATIONS IN PARA 7, WITH ATTENTION TO LAST POINT OUR PARA 4 ABOVE. GALBRAITH

1 Source: National Archives, Record Group 59, Central Foreign Policy Files. Secret; Exdis. Repeated for information to Abu Dhabi, Caracas, Kuwait, London, Rome, Tehran, Jidda, and Tripoli.

106. Letter From President Nixon to Indonesian President Suharto, Washington, February 1, 1974. 106. Letter From President Nixon to Indonesian President Suharto, Washington, February 1, 1974.1

Washington, February 1, 1974

THE WHITE HOUSE
WASHINGTON

His Excellency
Gen. Suharto
President of Indonesia
Jakarta

February 1, 1974

Dear Mr. President:

Our joint concern with regional security in a framework of world peace causes me to write to you on a subject of growing importance to all nations. The continuing success of your efforts to develop Indonesia's economy, an interest which I share with you, depends in part on the maintenance of regional security and expanding world trade. We share an interest, therefore, in efforts to reach international accord on questions affecting these concerns.

As you know, the Third United Nations Conference on the Law of the sea will begin its substantive session this summer. Both our countries have a strong interest in a successful Conference which satisfactorily resolves outstanding issues in a way enabling all states to become parties to the resulting treaty.

One of these items is the "archipelago principle" advanced by your country. I understand the economic and political interests which underlie Indonesian advocacy of this concept aid understand your nation's strong interest in securing its recognition. On the other hand, I am equally sure you will under stand that my country, as well as other members of the international community, have a strong interest in the protection of navigation rights and the maintenance of high seas freedoms that are so essential for the protection of the security interests of all nations. Consequently, the way the archipelago question is resolved is of great concern to all of us.

I believe a satisfactory accommodation of all our interests is highly desirable for our two countries as well as for the international community. An appropriate formula should be sought which adequately accommodates navigation and overflight rights along with the interests of archipelago states. Such an accommodation could serve as the basis for agreement among all concerned states and would be a positive step, contributing to the resolution of other complex issues. Moreover, I believe that such an accommodation could enhance our two countries' mutual security.

Because of our mutual interest in an appropriate resolution of this issue, I would be pleased to send a small delegation to visit Jakarta to explore with your representatives ways in which this issue might be resolved as soon as possible to our mutual satisfaction. If this proposal is agreeable to you, the U.S. delegation would be prepared to meet with your representatives at the earliest convenient date.

With warm regards.

Sincerely,
[signed] Richard Nixon

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 755, Presidential Correspondence, Indonesia, Suharto [1970–1974]. Secret. Kissinger sent this letter to Nixon under a covering memorandum, January 28, recommending that he sign the letter as proposed by Deputy Secretary Rush. (Ibid.) For Rush’s recommendation, see Document 103.

107. Telegram 47882 From the Department of State to the Embassy in Indonesia, March 9, 1974, 0010Z. 107. Telegram 47882 From the Department of State to the Embassy in Indonesia, March 9, 1974, 0010Z.1

March 9, 1974

TELEGRAM
Department of State
047882

P 090010Z MAR 74

FM SECSTATE WASH DC
TO AMEMBASSY JAKARTA PRIORTTY

SUBJ: U.S. AID TO INDONESIA
REF: JAKARTA 2885

1. APPRECIATE THE DANGERS YOU OUTLINE REFTEL, AND YOU MAY BE ASSURED WE WILL DO ALL WE CAN TO AVOID GIVING GOI IMPRESSION OF DIMINISHING U.S. SUPPORT. TO MAINTAIN GOI CONFIDENCE WE WILL NEED CONTINUING CANDID DIALOGUE, SUCH AS YOU OUTLINE, AND YOUR APPROACH FULLY APPROVED HERE. YOU SHOULD, HOWEVER, ADJUST YOUR COMMENTS ON ECONOMICS ASSISTANCE TO FOLLOWING, WHICH IS RESULT CAREFUL CONSIDERATION HERE OF OVERALL INDONESIAN PICTURE IN CONTEXT WORLDWIDE REQUIREMENTS.

2. DESPITE ADMINISTRATION'S STRONG DESIRE TO FULFILL IGGI PLEDGE MADE LAST DECEMBER, IT IS NOW APPARENT THAT CONGRESSIONAL ATTITUDES TOWARD THE AID PROGRAM IN GENERAL AND OIL PRODUCING COUNTRIES IN PARTICULAR WILL NOT PERMIT US TO SEEK FUNDS I THE FY 75 AID CONGRESSIONAL PRESENTATION ADEQUATE TO MEET THE U.S. PLEDGE (233 MILLION DOLS OR ONE, THIRD OF TOTAL BILATERAL AID TO INDONESIA) FOR 1974/75. WE BELIEVE IT ESSENTIAL IN MINIMIZING ADVERSE POLITICAL REACTIONS THAT WE INITIATE DIALOGUE ON THIS TOPIC WITH GOI IN THE HOPE THAT WE CAN WORK OUT A MUTUALLY SATISFACTORY UNDERSTANDING. WHILE WE APPRECIATE GOI PREOCCUPIED WITH POLITICAL PROBLEMS AND HAS NOT YET FACED UP TO FULL IMPLICATIONS NEW ECONOMIC FACTORS, OUR PLAN WILL HAVE TO BECOME PUBLIC AT TIME OF CONGRESSIONAL PRESENTATION THUS WE HAVE RELATIVELY LITTLE TIME TO PREPARE GOI FOR CUTS IN U.S. AID. (FIRST PUBLIC SURFACING OF OUR AID LEVELS WILL BE IN EARLY APRIL WHEN CP PUBLISHED.) WE WOULD APPRECIATE YOUR REACTIONS TO BOTH TIMING AND CONTENT OF FOLLOWING LINE OF APPROACH TO GOI.

3. FIRST STEP IS TO EXPLORE WITH GOI CURRENT ECONOMIC SITUATION SEEKING TO ELICIT GOI'S BEST ESTIMATE OF IMPACT RECENT PRICE CHANGES WILL HAVE ON INDONESIA'S ECONOMY OVER NEXT YEAR OR SO. IN THIS CONNECTION YOU COULD DRAW UPON USAID PAPER WHICH ESTIMATES VERY SUBSTANTIAL INCREASE IN FX RESERVES AND SIZABLE UNALLOCATED BUDGET SURPLUS, BUT HOPEFULLY YOU WILL BE ABLE TO ENCOURAGE GOI TO COME UP WITH ITS OWN CONCLUSIONS WHICH RECOGNIZE THAT ECONOMIC SITUATION VASTLY IMPROVED OVER ESTIMATES MADE AS RECENTLY AS THREE MONTH AGO. BEST OUTCOME OBVIOUSLY WOULD BE FAR GOT TO REDUCE ITS AID REQUEST. (WE RECOGNIZE SOFTENING OF OIL PRICES COULD CHANGE PRESENT PICTURE, BUT SEEMS UNLIKELY BASIC THRUST OF FORECAST WILL BE ALTERED. WE ALSO MINDFUL INCREASES OF INDONESIAN OIL PRODUCTION ABOVE CURRENT LEVELS OF OUTPUT NOT ASSURED OVER LONG RUN, THOUGH FAILURE TO ACHIEVE INCREASES WOULD NOT AFFECT VASTLY IMPROVED PROSPECTS INDONESIAN FINANCIAL POSITION IN NEXT SEVERAL YEARS.)

4. IN YOUR DISCUSSION YOU SHOULD POINT OUT THAT IMPROVED POSITION OF OIL PRODUCING NATIONS IN GENERAL HAS BEEN SUBJECT OF EXTENSIVE PUBLIC DISCUSSION IN U.S. THIS IS PARTICULARLY REFLECTED IN US CONGRESS. WE HAVE ALREADY BEGUN TO RECEIVE CRITICISM FROM IMPORTANT MEMBERS OF CONGRESS FOR CONTINUING HIGH LEVELS OF AID TO INDONESIA AND WE ANTICIPATE THAT THIS PRESSURE WILL BE EVEN HEAVIER AS WE PRESENT OUR FY 75 PROGRAM IN THE NEXT SEVERAL MONTHS. WE EXPECT THE CONGRESS TO SCRUTINIZE THE INDONESIAN AID REQUEST AND PROGRAM WITH GREAT CARE THIS YEAR AND ANTICIPATE THAT THERE WILL BE SHARP EFFORTS MADE TO CUT IT BACK.

5. YOU SHOULD EMPHASIZE THAT THE ADMINISTRATION CONTINUES TO BELIEVE THAT INDONESIA NEEDS AND DESERVES THE STRONG SUPPORT OF THE UNITED STATES AND OTHER IGGI MEMBERS. WE DO NOT BELIEVE, HOWEVER, IN LIGHT OF CONGRESSIONAL ATTITUDES TOWARD AID PROGRAM THAT WE CAN ASK FOR THE 90 MILLION DOLS IN AID LOAN FUNDS WHICH WOULD BE REQUIRED — IN CONCERT WITH WELL OVER 100 MILLION DOLS IN PL 480 — TO REACH THE ESTIMATED AID PLEDGE LEVELS. THE OVERWHELMINGLY NEGATIVE VOTE ON IDA REPLENISHMENT AND THE CONGRESSIONAL COMMENTS RE OIL PRODUCING NATIONS MADE AT THAT TIME IS AN INDICATION OF OUR PROBLEM. NOT ONLY WOULD HIGH DL FIGURE BE AN IMMEDIATE TARGET FOR AID CRITICS, IT WOULD ALSO BRING INTO JEOPARDY MANY OTHER IMPORTANT AID PROGRAMS IN COUNTRIES WHICH DO NOT HAVE INDONESIA'S ADVANTAGES IN A TIME OF WORLD ENERGY SHORTAGES.

6. THUS, WE RELUCTANTLY CONCLUDE THAT OUR FY 74 DL LEVEL MUST NOW BE SET AT 68 MILLION DOLS AND OUR FY 75 DL REQUEST SET AT 60 MILLION DOLS, WITH THE PROJECTS CONCENTRATED IN THE AREAS OF HIGH CONGRESSIONAL INTEREST TO THE GREATEST POSSIBLE DEGREE. THE FY 75 PL 480 TITLE I LEVEL IN THE CONGRESSIONAL PRESENTATION WILL BE 116 MILLION DOLS YIELDING A PROGRAM (EXCLUSIVE OF MAP AND GRANT ECONOMIC ASSISTANCE) OF 176 MILLION DOLS, STILL THE LARGEST U.S. DEVELOPMENT ASSISTANCE PROGRAM IN THE WORLD. (SEPTEL FOLLOWS ON DETAILS OF CP NUMBERS.)

7. YOU CAN ASSURE GOI THAT WE WILL NOT REPEAT NOT SEEK TO DRAMATIZE SITUATION OR IMPLY BY WORD OR ACTION THAT NEED FOR EXTERNAL ASSISTANCE IS RAPIDLY ENDING — WE PLAN CONTINUING ASSISTANCE RELATIONSHIP WITH INDONESIA AND WE WILL AVOID MAKING STATEMENTS IN INTERNATIONAL FORA PUBLICLY EMBARRASSING TO OR CAUSING DIFFICULTIES FOR THE GOI AT THIS TIME OF CHANGE IN INDONESIA'S NEED FOR CONGRESSIONAL ASSISTANCE,

8. THESE DEVELOPMENTS MAKE ALL THE MORE IMPORTANT THE NATURE OF THE GOI'S RESPONSE TO NEW SITUATION. YOU WOULD EMPHASIZE OUR FEAR THAT THE IGGI MECHANISM, WHICH HAS BEEN EXTRAORDINARILY IMPORTANT TO AND SUCCESSFUL FOR THE INDONESIANS, COULD BE IN REAL DIFFICULTY IF OTHER DONORS FAIL TO SEE THE GOI TAKING AN ACTIVE AND CONSTRUCTIVE ROLE IN RESPONDING TO THE IMPROVED ECONOMIC CONDITIONS. WE BELIEVE THE GOI WILL CONTINUE TO NEED THE IGGI FOR SOME YEARS, AND WE THINK THE IGGI COULD BE SERIOUSLY DAMAGED IF THE GOI WERE TO GO TO THE MAY MEETING WITH A STAND PAT POSITION. WE WISH TO DO WHAT EVER WE CAN TO ASSURE THE CONTINUATION OF AN EFFECTIVE AND STRONG IGGI.

9. GOI STATEMENTS AT THE DECEMBER 1973 IGGI NOTED THAT NEED FOR CONGRESSIONAL CAPITAL ASSISTANCE WOULD DIMINISH OVER PERIOD OF SECOND FIVE-YEAR PLAN; EFFECT OF NEW OIL PRICES WOULD APPEAR TO HASTEN THIS PROCESS, AND WE BELIEVE THAT GOI 74/75 REQUEST TO IGGI NEEDS RETHINKING WITH RESPECT TO BOTH TOTAL AMOUNT AND COMPOSITION. PROGRAM/FOOD ASSISTANCE REQUEST (300 MILLION DOLS) APPEARS ESPECIALLY ANOMALOUS AND WE UNDERSTAND WILL NOT BE SUPPORTED BY IMF. IDEAL SHORT-TERM SOLUTION FROM OUR STANDPOINT WOULD BE FOR GOI TO REDUCE AID REQUEST BY THIS OR SOME SIMILAR AMOUNT TO POINT WHERE WE COULD MEET ONE-THIRD FORMULA WITH RESOURCES LIKELY TO BE AVAILABLE TO US WHICH COULD OF COURSE BE LESS THAN CP REQUEST LEVELS). IF THIS IS NOT ATTRACTIVE TO GOI, THERE APPEAR TO BE TWO OTHER ALTERNATIVES: A) SIMPLY DO THE BEST WE CAN AGAINST OUR ORIGINAL AID PLEDGE, WITH AN INEVITABLE AND SUBSTANTIAL SHORTFALL.

B) SUGGEST TO THE INDONESIANS THAT THE ADDITION OF IBRD FUNDS TO THE IGGI SYSTEM MIGHT LEAD THE GOI TO CONSIDER OTHER FORMS OF HARDER-TERM BORROWING ON A SELECTIVE BASIS, E.G. EXIM BANK. IT WOULD BE UP TO GOI TO DECIDE IF ANY LOANS MADE BY EXIM SHOULD BE COUNTED WITHIN IGGI AID TOTAL.

10. IN DISCUSSIONS WITH GOI LEADERS YOU MAY INDICATE THAT THE SECRETARY HAS AUTHORIZED THE ABOVE GENERAL APPROACH ON ECONOMIC AID (INCLUDING SPECIFIC LEVELS PARA 5), HE ALSO MADE CLEAR THAT REDUCTIONS IN CONCESSIONAL AID IN NO WAY DIMINISH OUR INTEREST IN AND COMMITMENT TO INDONESIA. KISSINGER

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 533, Country Files, Far East, Indonesia, Volume 4, 1 January 1973–. Confidential; Priority; Exdis. Drafted by Shakow and Deaver; cleared by MacDonald in AID/AA/ASIA, Griffel in AID/PPC, and Bushnell in the NSC; and approved by Ingersoll. The Embassy’s reply, telegram 3040 from Jakarta, March 12, is ibid.

108. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, April 15, 1974, 12:45–1:15 p.m. 108. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, April 15, 1974, 12:45–1:15 p.m. 1

Washington, April 15, 1974, 12:45–1:15 p.m.

UNITED STATES MISSION TO THE UNITED NATIONS
MEMORANDUM OF CONVERSATION

PARTICIPANTS:

U.S.

Secretary Kissinger - Department of State

Ambassador Scali - USUN

Mr. J. Dobbins - USUN

(notetaker)

Indonesian

Mr. Adam Malik - Foreign Minister

Dr. B.S. Arifin - Dir. Gen. for Foreign Economic Relations, Ministry of Foreign Affairs

Mr. Alex Alappas - Director of the Office of the Foreign Minister

Time and Place: 12:45-1:15, April 15, 1974
U.S. Mission to the UN

Foreign Minister Malik: Thank you Mr. Secretary for seeing me. I also wish to extend greetings from President Suharto. Before leaving Indonesia, Ambassador Newsom had a meeting with me and President Suharto. He told us then that there may be some decrease in U.S. aid. This was disconcerting news. We had hoped that foreign aid, particularly U.S. aid, would not be reduced. I admit that Indonesia now has additional oil revenues. But we don't know how long this will last. Our five year plans, as you know, have always been modest, because we didn't wish to raise unfounded hopes. Now, with the increased oil income, we hope to be able to raise our targets.

The Secretary: Our problem is with the Congress. We are afraid that they will cut this aid entirely. Many Congressmen believe that the oil revenues will eliminate the need for aid to Indonesia entirely. In any case the proposed reduction in U.S. aid is not all that great.

Mr. Malik: It is not the specific amount, but the momentum that is of concern. If the U.S. reduces its aid, so will other countries. In addition, Indonesia is facing large increases in its expenses for importing rice and fertilizers.

The Secretary: Let me review the question, and let you know if there is anything we can do. We do have a real Congressional problem.

Mr. Malik: We fully understand your situation, and your reasons. But we are convinced that the American example in cutting aid will lead others to do the same.

The Secretary: Let me speak to World Bank President McNamara, whom I will be seeing later this week, to get his views on how the U.S. action may affect other donors. Our goal has been and continues to be to see that Indonesian development succeeds. President Nixon has, as you know, assured President Suharto of this. I will talk with McNamara, and try to see that our decision does not have a multiplier effect.

Mr. Malik: President Nixon sent us a special envoy, Mr. Moore, to discuss Law of the Sea questions. We had good talks.

The Secretary: This is an important subject. Too rigid an application of certain principals could have the effect of closing the Indian Ocean to maritime traffic. (Laughing) Perhaps we will see toll booths erected along the way to the Indian Ocean. I recently told the Indian Ambassador, by the way, that we were going to rename the Indian Ocean the Indonesian Ocean. Every time we send a ship there, I receive a letter of complaint from the Indians. But after all it's not their Ocean. Perhaps, if we rename it, it will then be you who writes.

Mr. Malik: Let's call it the Peace Ocean.

The Secretary: As long as it is open to our aircraft carriers.

Mr. Malik: The Law of the Sea is one issue which we hope can be worked out bilaterally with the U.S.

The Secretary: I have not read the papers on this recently. How are the discussions going.

Mr. Malik: Progress is being made. The trouble is that anything we give to the U.S. will also be demanded by the Soviets.

The Secretary: That is probably right. We after all can not insist that only our own ships go through.

Mr. Malik: The only other item I wish to raise is a small point. I want only to assure you that the reduction of the Indonesian contingent in South Vietnam from 290 to 200 men has been done solely for reasons of economy. Our UNEF contingent is being kept up to strength.

The Secretary: As one of the few countries in the world acceptable to everyone, Indonesia will soon have forces scattered all around the globe. This is the newest form of imperialism.

Mr. Malik: I want to assure you that we will do whatever we can to promote cooperation in the Middle East.

Amb. Scali: As you know, Mr. Minister, the Security Council will be meeting this afternoon, at Lebanon's request. We fear that Lebanon, for its own domestic purposes, may try to have the Security Council pass a resolution. We hope they can be dissuaded from insisting on any such resolution. That could only create more difficulties in the Middle East.

The Secretary: Our problem in the next 2-3 weeks is to get Israel to make some concessions to Syria. Any action which further upsets Israel will only delay the process.

Mr. Malik: We will do whatever we can.

The Secretary: We understand the difficulties of your position as a Moslem country. But in setting up UNEF we had insisted on the inclusion of Indonesia, because we knew that, of all the countries proposed, Indonesia would be the most objective.

Mr. Malik: I have nothing further to raise and I won't take any more of your time Mr. Secretary. Thank you again for seeing me, and please remember my invitation to visit Bali on your next trip to the Far East.

Drafter: JDobbins

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 1028, Presidential/HAK Memcons, 1 March 1974–8 May 1974 [2 of 4]. Confidential; Exdis. Drafted by Dobbins. Kissinger followed up this meeting with a message to Malik explaining he would do all he could to support aid for Indonesia. (Telegram 083508 to Jakarta, April 24; ibid., Record Group 59, Central Foreign Policy Files)

109. Backchannel Message WH 42123 From W.R. Smyser of the National Security Council Staff to the Ambassador to Indonesia (Newsom), Washington, June 22, 1974, 1500Z. 109. Backchannel Message WH 42123 From W.R. Smyser of the National Security Council Staff to the Ambassador to Indonesia (Newsom), Washington, June 22, 1974, 1500Z.1

Washington, June 22, 1974, 1500Z

WH 42123

0 221500Z JUN 74

FM THE WHITE HOUSE
TO AMEMBASSY JAKARTA

TO JAKARTA
FROM WHITE HOUSE
FOR THE AMBASSADOR FROM SMYSER

SUBJECT:

1. I FULLY AGREE WITH THE NEED YOU HAVE STATED IN YOUR LETTER OF JUNE 4 TO MAKE THE TRANSITION AWAY FROM CONCESSIONAL AID A GRADUAL ONE IN ORDER TO PROTECT OUR INTERESTS AND OBJECTIVES IN INDONESIA. YOUR PROPOSED CABLE OF RECOMMENDATIONS ON THIS QUESTION WILL BE MOST TIMELY IN POINTING UP THE IMPORTANCE OF THIS PROBLEM AND IN GIVING PERSPECTIVE TO WASHINGTON CONSIDERATION OF THE QUESTION. MY COMMENTS WHICH FOLLOW, THEREFORE, ARE INTENDED AS SUGGESTIONS FOR THE PRESENTATION OF PARTICULAR ASPECTS OF THIS PROBLEM IN YOUR RECOMMENDATIONS.

2. DIMENSIONS OF THE BASIC PROBLEM. A. I THINK IT MIGHT BE USEFUL TO ELABORATE FURTHER ON THE NATURE OF THE RISK TO OUR INTERESTS AND OBJECTIVES SHOULD WE ENGAGE IN TOO RAPID A TRANSITION AWAY FROM CONCESSIONAL ECONOMIC ASSISTANCE. WE NEED TO COUNTER THE ARGUMENTS BEING MADE IN THIS CITY TO THE EFFECT THAT ANY ADVERSE IMPACT WILL NOT BE SUBSTANTIAL. I SUGGEST THAT YOU SPELL OUT WHAT CONSEQUENCES AN EXCESSIVELY RAPID TRANSITION COULD HAVE FOR THE POLITICAL AND COMMERCIAL ACCESS WHICH WE HAVE DEVELOPED OVER THE PAST DECADE, AS WELL AS FOR INDONESIAN STABILITY AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT, I BELIEVE WE CAN DO THIS HONESTLY, WITHOUT DISTORTING THE FACTS OR ENGAGING IN SPECIAL PLEADING.

B. I UNDERSTAND THAT AT THIS JUNCTION THE PRINCIPAL PROBLEM IS NOT AN IMMINENT END TO GRANT TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE. EVEN IF THIS IS THREATENED LATER, WE DO HAVE PROCEDURES FOR PROVIDING OFFICIAL TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE ON A REIMBURSABLE BASIS, EITHER THROUGH PROVISION OF USG TECHNICIANS THEMSELVES OR THROUGH USG CONTRACTING FOR NON-GOVERNMENTAL TECHNICIANS.

C. WHAT WE DO SEE AS THE PRINCIPAL PROBLEM NOW ARE PRESSURES FOR TOO RAPID A SHIFT AWAY FROM GRANT AID AND PL–480. TO COUNTER SUCH PRESSURES, I SUGGEST WE ARGUE RATHER IN TERMS OF INDONESIAN FINANCIAL PROBLEMS, POLITICAL SUPPORT FOR INDONESIAN TECHNOCRATS, AND CREDIBILITY OF OUR PROFESSED SUPPORT FOR BASIC INDONESIAN STABILITY AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT. YOU MAY SPECIALLY WANT TO POINT OUT THAT THE BENEFITS OF OR MONEY WILL BE SLOW IN COMING IN.

D. WE THINK THE WEANING PROCESS IN MILITARY AID; I.E., FROM GRANT MAP AND FMS CREDITS, COULD PERHAPS BE SLOWER THAN IN THE ECONOMIC FIELD, MCKUEN SUGGESTED THIS, BUT WE WOULD WELCOME YOUR OWN JUDGMENT. GIVEN THE HIGH POLITICAL RETURN WE RECEIVE ON THIS RELATIVELY SMALL INVESTMENT, WE BELIEVE WE MAY HAVE AN IMPORTANT STAKE IN BACKING AWAY AS SLOWLY AS POSSIBLE FROM OUR CURRENT LEVELS OF GRANT MAP. DOING SO WILL, OF COURSE, STILL ALLOW US TO PROCEED THE GRADUAL INTRODUCTION OF FMS CREDITS, THOUGH THERE NEED BE NO ABSOLUTELY INVERSE RATIO.

3. IN ORDER TO GET AN ORDERLY PROCESS GOING WE MAY FIND THAT WE HAVE TO DO A NSSM OR SOME OTHER INTERAGENCY STUDY. YOUR CABLE WILL HELP SET THE TONE. WE BELIEVE WE NEED THIS BROADER SORT OF STUDY BOTH IN ORDER TO AVOID A QUICK AND OVERLY NARROW REACTION FROM THE BUREAUCRACY TO THE PROBLEM WE RAISE AND TO ACHIEVE A BETTER CONSENSUS ON BASIC US OBJECTIVES TOWARD INDONESIA. WE WILL WANT YOUR THOUGHTS AS THIS PROCESS DEVELOPS, INCLUDING YOUR CONCEPT OF INDONESIA'S REGIONAL ROLE, AS WELL AS OF WHAT WE WANT IN INDONESIA IN TERMS OF BASIC SECURITY, POLITICAL INSTITUTIONS, ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT AND US COMMERCIAL ACCESS.

4. I THINK WE MUST BE SURE OF WHAT WE ARE DISCUSSING. THERE CAN BE NO QUESTION THAT OUR AID WILL HAVE TO DECLINE AS INDONESIA GAINS WEALTH. WHAT WE NEED TO DECIDE lS THE PACE AND DIRECTION OF THAT DECLINE AND THE FORMS OF ASSISTANCE THAT CAN HAVE LONGER RELEVANCE AND VALUE AS WE SHIFT. WE ALSO NEED TO FIGURE OUT HOW TO KEEP INDONESIAN UNDERSTANDING AND SUPPORT THROUGHOUT.

5. I HAVE LEARNED, AS YOU HAVE LEARNED, THAT THERE IS A BUREAUCRATIC MOMENTUM IN THE AID PROCESS. WHEN AID IS STARTING OR GOING UP, EVERYBODY RUSHES FORWARD WITH IDEAS ON HOW TO CONTRIBUTE. WHEN AID IS GOING DOWN TOWARD TERMINATION, EVERYBODY WANTS TO BE THE FIRST ONE OUT. SINCE SUCH A WHIPSAW MIGHT HAVE DANGEROUS CONSEQUENCES TO OUR LONG-TERM INTERESTS, WE WANT TO BE ABLE TO DO WHAT WE CAN TO PREVENT IT.

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 412, Backchannel Messages, Southeast Asia, Volume III, 1974. Secret.

110. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to President Nixon, Washington, undated. 110. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to President Nixon, Washington, undated.1

Washington, undated

MEMORANDUM
THE WHITE HOUSE
WASHINGTON

MEMORANDUM FOR: THE PRESIDENT
FROM: HENRY A. KISSINGER [HK initialed]

SUBJECT: Proposed NSSM on Indonesia

We have an urgent need for a NSSM study of our policy toward Indonesia.

We need to decide the rate at which we should shift away from concessional economic and military assistance to Indonesia. In the wake of Indonesia's windfall oil revenues, there are major and growing pressures within our bureaucracy for a rapid termination of concessional assistance, particularly on the economic side. These are strengthened by Congressional pressures in this direction; most recently, Congressman Passman has begun an attack on grant military assistance to Indonesia.

Ambassador Newsom, in a recent comprehensive policy recommendation, has warned strongly against any precipitate end to our concessional assistance. He has argued that this would risk the major influence we have slowly built up with the Suharto Government, would undercut the position of the U.S.-oriented Indonesian technocrats, and would bolster nationalistic and chauvinistic tendencies in Indonesia. He believes we must move gradually.

A longer-range and even more basic problem is what stabilizing role we want Indonesia, as the major regional power in Southeast Asia, to play over the long haul. The working level in our bureaucracy has long argued that we should remain passive as regards a more active regional role for Indonesia. This approach is questionable, given our need for Indonesia to play a more active stabilizing role in light of the reduction of our own presence in Southeast Asia and of the long-term pressures for neutralization of this region.

In addition, this would be an appropriate juncture to review the only existing NSDM on Indonesia — that of 1971 on our then new military assistance program there. That NSDM prescribed a modest grant military assistance program designed largely to demonstrate our political support for the Suharto Government. It needs review.

At Tab A is a draft NSSM requesting such a study.

RECOMMENDATION:

That you approve my signing, in your name, the draft NSSM at Tab A.
Approve [HK initialed for RN]
Disapprove

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Institutional Files (H-Files), Box H–206, NSSMs, NSSM 205. Secret; Sensitive. Sent for action. Kissinger initialed the “approve” option on behalf of Nixon. The correspondence profile indicates that the document was sent to Kissinger on July 16 and that he approved it on July 20, 1974. The tab is attached, but the approved NSSM is Document 111.

111. National Security Study Memorandum 205, Washington, July 20, 1974. 111. National Security Study Memorandum 205, Washington, July 20, 1974.1

Washington, July 20, 1974

NATIONAL SECURITY COUNCIL
WASHINGTON D.C. 20506

July 20, 1974

National Security Study Memorandum 205

TO: The Secretary of the Treasury
The Secretary of Defense
The Deputy Secretary of State
The Director of Central Intelligence
The Assistant to the President for International Economic Policy

SUBJECT: U S. Policy Toward Indonesia

The President has directed a review of U.S. policy toward Indonesia. The study should focus primarily on how the U.S. should continue to give support to Indonesia's evolving role as the major regional power in Southeast Asia, and on how to arrange a smooth transition away from Indonesia's dependence on large amounts of concessional aid in light of Indonesia's increasing oil revenues.

The study should identify and assess U.S. interests in and related objectives for Indonesia over the next five years. All relevant issues, including but not limited to the following, should be considered: — Regional political, security and economic roles the U.S. would like Indonesia progressively to assume over the period;

— Indonesian domestic economic development goals which would be supportive of the desired regional roles;

— Measures which would contribute to internal stability;

— Improvements in Indonesian military capabilities to support desired regional goals, as well as Indonesia's internal stability; and

—The relationship between U.S. trade and investment interests and objectives to achievement of the desired regional goals and Indonesian internal stability.

Based upon the foregoing assessment, the full range of options for U.S. policy over the next five years should be delineated and assessed. In formulating the policy options all principal relevant issues should be identified and considered, including the following: — The use of U.S. military and economic assistance to encourage Indonesia's movement toward agreed objectives.

— Alternative rates by which the U.S. might harden the terms of economic and technical assistance to Indonesia.

— Alternative roles for the IGGI, levels and type of continuing IGGI assistance, and levels of U.S. participation.

— Alternative levels and program composition of U.S. military assistance to Indonesia.

— The relationship between U.S. assistance to Indonesia and Indonesia's interest in increasing aid from the Soviet Union and Eastern Europe.

The study should be prepared by the NSC Interdepartmental Group for East Asia and should be submitted no later than August 30, 1974, for consideration by the Senior Review Group.

[signed]
Henry A. Kissinger

cc: Director, Office of Management and Budget
Chairman, Joint Chiefs of Staff
Counselor to the President for Economic Policy

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Institutional Files (H-Files), Box H–206, NSSMs, NSSM 205. Secret; Sensitive. A copy was also sent to the Director of the Office of Management and Budget, the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, and to the counselor to the President for Economic Policy.

112. Telegram 9984 From the Embassy in Indonesia to the Department of State, August 14, 1974, 0435Z. 112. Telegram 9984 From the Embassy in Indonesia to the Department of State, August 14, 1974, 0435Z.1

August 14, 1974

TELEGRAM
Department of State
JAKARTA 9984

R 140435Z AUG 74

FM AMEMBASSY JAKARTA
TO SECSTATE WASHDC 3859
INFO AMEMBASSY LISBON
USMISSION USUN
AMCONSUL MEDAN
AMCONSUL SURABAY
AMEMBASSY CANBERRA

JAKARTA 9984

E.O.11652: GDS TAGS: PFOR, ID, PO, PT

SUBJ: MALIK ON FUTURE OF PORTUGUESE TIMOR REF: A) LISBON 3315 B) JAKARTA 6958

BEGIN SUMMARY: FOREIGN MINISTER MALIK TOLD AMBASSADOR AUGUST 12 THAT GOI DOES NOT DESIRE MERGER OF PORTUGUESE TIMOR INTO INDONESIA BECAUSE MERGER WOULD CREATE POLITICAL AND ECONOMIC PROBLEMS, AND THAT IF PORTUGAL RELINQUISHES CONTROL OVER PT, GOI WOULD PREFER INDEPENDENT TIMOR FOR TIME BEING. MALIK'S COMMENTS CONFLICT WITH OTHER REPORTS THAT GOI SECURITY OFFICIALS, WHO WILL ULTIMATELY DECIDE POLICY, FEAR INDEPENDENT TIMOR COULD BE THREAT TO SECURITY, AND THEREFORE FAVOR MERGER. END SUMMARY.

1. IN RESPONSE TO AMBASSADOR'S COMMENT THAT COMMUNIQUE ISSUED AT END OF WALDHEIM VISIT TO LISBON (REF A) DID NOT MENTION PORTUGAL'S INTENTIONS TOWARD PT, MALIK INDICATED THAT GOI IS UNEASY ABOUT CHANGE OF STATUS OF PT AND HOPES TO "PLAY THE MATTER QUIETLY." HE SAID THE PORTUGUESE HAD ATTEMPTED TO ARRANGE A MEETING WITH MALIK WHILE HE PASSED THROUGH EUROPE IN JULY ON HIS WAY TO VISIT SEVERAL EASTERN EUROPEAN COUNTRIES, BUT THAT HIS SCHEDULE DID NOT ALLOW A MEETING.

2. MALIK SAID GOI DOES NOT SEEK MERGER OF PT WITH INDONESIA, AS ONE POLITICAL FACTION IN PT PROPOSED FOLLOWING PORTUGUESE ANNOUNCEMENT THAT FUTURE OF COLONY WILL BE DETERMINED BY REFERENDUM (REF B). HE SAID ACQUISITION OF PORTUGUESE TIMOR WOULD PRESENT UNWANTED ADDITIONAL ECONOMIC BURDEN WHICH GOI CANNOT AFFORD. IT WOULD ALSO RAISE "CONSTITUTIONAL" PROBLEM, HE SAID, APPARENTLY REFERRING TO PROPOSAL OF ONE PRO-MERGER GROUP IN PT THAT THE TERRITORY MERGE WITH INDONESIA IN FEDERAL ASSOCIATION WHICH WOULD BE INCOMPATIBLE WITH INDONESIA'S UNITARY CONSTITUTION.

3. MALIK IMPLIED THAT GOI WOULD PREFER STATUS-QUO IN PT, BUT INDICATED THAT SINCE PORTUGAL'S INTERESTS THERE ARE MODEST, CHANGE IN STATUS IS LIKELY. HE SAID IF CHANGE DOES OCCUR, INDONESIA WOULD PREFER AN INDEPENDENT STATE. QUESTION OF MERGER INTO INDONESIA COULD BE CONSIDERED LATER, PERHAPS IN FIVE YEARS, HE SAID, IF THE INHABITANTS AT THAT TIME SHOULD WISH TO JOIN INDONESIA. MALIK SAID THAT IN ORDER TO ACCOMPLISH INDEPENDENT STATUS UNDER GOVERNMENT ACCEPTABLE TO INDONESIA, COMPETING POLITICAL FACTIONS IN PT WOULD HAVE TO BE UNITED AND PRO-MERGER GROUP RESTRAINED.

4. IN RESPONSE TO AMBASSADOR'S QUESTION ABOUT AUSTRALIAN VIEWS ON PT, MALIK SAID AUSTRALIA IS AWARE INDONESIA WOULD PREFER INDEPENDENT STATE IN PT, IF CHANGE OCCURS, AND THAT AUSTRALIA'S PRIMARY CONCERN IS THAT PT DOES NOT BECOME THREAT TO SECURITY IN REGION. IN THIS CONNECTION, MALIK SAID GOI IS ENSURING THAT FUTURE STATUS OF PT DOES NOT PERMIT USE OF AREA FOR INFILTRATION OF INDONESIA BY SUBVERSIVE "CHINESE" ELEMENTS, POSSIBLY THROUGH MACAO.

5. COMMENT: EMBASSY HAS BEEN AWARE THAT GOI, WHICH HAS TRADITIONALLY AVOIDED ANTI-COLONIAL ATTACKS ON PORTUGUESE CONTROL OF PT, IS UNENTHUSIASTIC ABOUT ANY CHANGE THERE. BUT MALIK'S COMMENTS ARE FIRST INDICATION THAT INDONESIA MIGHT ACTUALLY OPPOSE MERGER OF COLONY WITH INDONESIA IF PORTUGAL FOLLOWS THROUGH WITH POLICY OF SELF DETERMINATION THERE. EMBASSY HAS HEARD FROM OTHER GOI SOURCES THAT, ON THE CONTRARY, GOI SECURITY LEADERS BELIEVE THAT IF PORTUGAL WITHDRAWS FROM PT, MERGER WOULD BE ESSENTIAL TO AVOID POTENTIAL SECURITY THREAT IN AREA. THESE SOURCES INDICATE CONCERN THAT REFERENDUM MIGHT BE HELD IN PT BEFORE GOI WOULD HAVE TIME TO INFLUENCE RESULT TOWARD MERGER, OR WORSE, THAT PORTUGAL MIGHT SKIP REFERENDUM AND CEDE COLONY TO HOSTILE TIMORESE FACTION. WE DOUBT, THEREFORE, THAT MALIK'S COMMENTS REPRESENT DOMINANT VIEW IN CURRENT GOI POLICY THINKING ON PORTUGUESE TIMOR. NEWSOM

1 Source: National Archives, Record Group 59, Central Foreign Policy Files. Confidential. Repeated for information to the Embassies in Lisbon and Canberra, to the Mission at the UN, and to the Consulates at Medan and Surabay.

113. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, September 25, 1974, 4:30 p.m. 113. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, September 25, 1974, 4:30 p.m.1

Washington, September 25, 1974

MEMORANDUM
THE WHITE HOUSE
WASHINGTON

MEMORANDUM OF CONVERSATION

PARTICIPANTS:

Adam Malik, Minister of Foreign Affairs of Indonesia

Didi Djajaningrat, Director General for Political Affairs, Ministry of Foreign Affairs

Alex Alatas, Private Secretary to Malik

President Gerald R. Ford

Dr. Henry A. Kissinger, Secretary of State and Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs

Brent Scowcroft, Deputy Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs

DATE AND TIME: Wednesday, September 25, 1974 4:30 p.m.
PLACE: The Oval Office
The White House

[The press was admitted briefly for photographs]

The President: You have been here many times.

Malik: Yes.

Kissinger: He was President of the General Assembly.

Malik: In 1971.

[The press leaves]

Malik: I have brought you a letter from President Suharto and he sends you his greetings. [Letter is at Tab A]. We want to confirm our desire to continue our friendly relations. When I was briefing the President, he said he saw you were going to visit Japan and he would be happy to have you visit Indonesia.

The President: Please thank the President. I am going to Japan in November but unfortunately I will not be able to visit Indonesia on this trip. I am sorry that my trip can't be expanded beyond the time contemplated. But please thank the President and tell him I hope to be able to visit another time.

Malik: I also bring greetings from our Vice President, the Sultan of Jogjakarta. President Suharto also asks that you will consider continuing U.S. aid to Indonesia.

The President: The record of the U.S. in helping Indonesia is an indication of our sympathy and desire that Indonesia build up its economy and country. Our problem is that Presidents tend to be more generous than the Congress. But there is a strong desire on our part to continue this economic and military assistance. Until we get the bills through Congress, though, we won't be sure. The Congressional attitude is to reduce and to restrict the Administration request that President Nixon submitted. But whatever the amounts we get, we will do the best we can.

You have been a fine partner in that part of the world. We appreciate the good relations we have had with you under President Suharto and we give the aid because you are a good ally.

Malik: Thank you very much. We understand the difficulty with the Congress, but given our mutually advantageous relations we hope you will continue to the extent you can.

The President: I see in President Suharto's letter that he is pleased that I will continue the policy of my predecessor. I supported that policy, and I think it was the most successful foreign policy during my lifetime if not through American history. I will continue it. Secretary Kissinger and I have excellent relations. We will broaden detente, we will expand relations with the People's Republic of China, we want to be close to our Asian friends like you, just as we strengthen our NATO alliances. Secretary Kissinger is an essential part of this and he will continue as he has.

Malik: Thank you very much. I will convey your message to my government and we will make every effort to continue our policy as it has been. I am happy my colleague will continue to carry out U.S. policy.

The President: He is the finest Secretary of State we have ever had.

Malik: Are there any questions you might have?

The President: There is one matter. President Nixon and Secretary Kissinger worked very hard to end the conflict in Southeast Asia. We are encouraged by what has happened in South Vietnam although it is far from over. I appreciate Indonesia's role there. Laos has made real headway. In Cambodia, there are problems. If Indonesia could support Cambodia in the fight over its representation in the United Nations...

Malik: We support it.

The President: We think there is hope, and if we could have another year.

Malik: I talked to Bouteflika yesterday and asked him to show understanding for another year.

Kissinger: What is his attitude?

Malik: He seems to be changing his attitude. He asked if we supported Makarios, why not Sihanouk. I said Sihanouk was ousted by his Parliament. He asked about the chances for peace and I said they were very good.

Kissinger: How?

Malik: There are possibilities for getting in touch for fighting parties outside the Khmer. We have been in touch. And they are now persuading 10,000 to come over. There are feelers for more to come over. We discussed this with your Embassy in Jakarta. We think the Lon Nol regime has a chance and that it should be strengthened. It is the Route 3 Army. And they put no conditions on it — just to continue their rank and pay.

Kissinger: I think we should not undertake diplomatic initiatives right now.

Malik: I would wait. We are very active. Bouteflika asked about Sihanouk. I said we could take care of him eventually.

Kissinger: That is very interesting. Sihanouk's only chance is if Lon Nol survives. If the Communists come in...

Malik: He is through.

The President: How is your economic development coming?

Malik: It is coming well, but as it develops, more problems arise, and that is what we are coping with now. The increase in oil prices isn't much because we have only 1.4 billion barrels a year. We need help with rice and fertilizer.

The President: Is Indonesia self-sufficient in rice?

Kissinger: No, we send them a lot of PL–480.

The President: It was very nice to see you. Please give President Suharto my best. I look forward to expanding our relationship. I appreciate the invitation and hope at some time to be able to visit.

1 Source: Ford Library, National Security Adviser, Memoranda of Conversation, Box 6. Secret. The conversation took place in the Oval Office. Tab A, not attached, is a letter from Suharto to Ford, September 12, expressing appreciation for Ford’s assurances of continuity in U.S. foreign policy. (Ibid., NSC Staff for East Asia and Pacific Affairs, Convenience Files, Box 3, Indonesia [3], September 1974–May 1975) Ford’s talking points for the meeting are ibid., Presidential Country Files for East Asia and the Pacific, Box 6, Indonesia (1).

114. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, November 21, 1974, 1130–1155. 114. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, November 21, 1974, 1130–1155.1

Washington, November 21, 1974, 1130–1155

ASSISTANT SECRETARY OF DEFENSE
WASHINGTON, D.C. 20301

MEMORANDUM OF CONVERSATION
SUBJECT: Visit of US Ambassador to Indonesia David D. Newsom with Deputy Secretary of Defense Clements (U)

PARTICIPANTS:

Department of State

David D. Newsom -US Ambassador to Indonesia

Defense

William P. Clements, Jr. - Deputy Secretary of Defense

Robert Ellsworth- Assistant Secretary (ISA)

Morton I. Abramowitz - Deputy Assistant Secretary (ISA)

Michael V. Connors - Assistant for Indonesia (Acting)

Time: 1130-1155, 21 November 1974
Place: Deputy Secretary's Office, Pentagon

1. (S) Submarines and Corvettes.

Ambassador Newsom opened by describing Indonesia's interest in obtaining from us four diesel submarines and four corvette-type ASW vessels. The Ambassador highlighted Indonesia's apparent willingness to pay as much as new ship procurement costs to obtain these items. The Deputy Secretary said that in principle he foresees no problems with these purchases and that we should help the Indonesians to the extent we can. He added that we should certainly not expect the Indonesians to pay new ship replacement costs if we are able to assist with the sales arrangements. The Deputy Secretary then speculated whether Congressional approval would be required for any sales of submarines, should we find that some are available. Mr. Ellsworth confirmed that legislation would be required but that it should not be difficult to obtain. Concerning Indonesia's interest in corvettes, Mr. Abramowitz suggested considering the new Coastal Patrol Interdiction Craft (CPIC) which Korea is purchasing. The Deputy Secretary noted there have been some problems with the CPIC project and it is possible that the Indonesians might not be interested in these vessels. The Ambassador said that it is important that we be as helpful as we can with these Indonesian requests, particularly in view of our rapidly diminishing MAP program.

2. (S) MAP Reductions.

The Ambassador stressed the importance of providing Indonesia with at least some MAP grant assistance in FY 1975. President Suharto attaches great importance to our MAP program and a total cutoff this year could raise serious problems. Mr. Ellsworth briefly reviewed the very serious constraints on worldwide MAP, noting that while the Indonesia program was certainly not being singled out for termination, it may well be that there just will not be enough money to go around after higher priorities in Cambodia and elsewhere are served. It was agreed that in these difficult circumstances, the best tactic to follow with the Indonesians would be to state frankly that we just don't have the MAP assistance we would like to provide but that we will be as helpful as we can in other ways—for example, in arranging purchases of those specific military items Indonesia wants or hopefully in providing excess equipment.

3. (S) Military Sales.

Ambassador Newsom noted that we should make special efforts (1) to obtain FMS CR for a second C-130 and (2) to locate some C-7s from Vietnam or elsewhere. Mr. Abramowitz said that a survey team is currently reviewing equipment requirements in Vietnam but that he is not optimistic that C-7s will be available there. Ambassador Newsom said that the OV–10 sales program is going well. The Indonesians now have twelve and want to purchase four more. The Deputy Secretary emphasized that our most important policy objective in Indonesia is to build a stable and enduring relationship. He agreed, however, with the Ambassador's observation that the military sales program we develop with Indonesia will be the basis of our ongoing relationship with the Indonesian military. Moreover, the sales program offers an excellent mechanism through which we can maintain close, continuing contact with the military.

4. (C) Portuguese Timor.

The Deputy Secretary asked about the situation in Portuguese Timor. The Ambassador said that to date Suharto has prevented his military from moving to take over Timor. Foreign Minister Malik has made clear, however, that Indonesia would not want Portugal to try to do in Timor what it did in Goa. If the Portuguese do persist in holding on to Timor, eventually the Indonesians will begin to agitate.

5. (C) DAO Aircraft.

The Deputy Secretary inquired about the adequacy of the DC-3 and C-117 which the DAO currently uses in Djakarta. Ambassador Newsom described the problems of trying to get along with these aging aircraft. The Deputy Secretary said that he would contact DIA about obtaining a Convair which should better meet the requirements of the mission.

Memorandum of Conversation Prepared by: Michael V. Connors
Approved by: [unclear]
Date: 29 Nov '74

DISTRIBUTION:
DEPSEC
ASD (ISA)
DASD (ISA/EAPA)
DASD (ISA/SA)
DSAA
JCS (J-5)
CINCPAC (J-8)
CHDLG, Indonesia
State Department
AMEMB Djakarta AD (3)
RC (2)

1 Source: Washington National Records Center, OASD/ISA Files: FRC 330–77–0054, Indonesia, 333, 1974, November 29. Secret. Drafted by Connors and approved by Ellsworth. The conversation took place in the office of the Deputy Secretary of Defense.

115. Memorandum From W.R. Smyser of the National Security Council Staff to Secretary of State Kissinger, Washington, December 30, 1974. 115. Memorandum From W.R. Smyser of the National Security Council Staff to Secretary of State Kissinger, Washington, December 30, 1974.1

Washington, December 30, 1974

MEMORANDUM
NATIONAL SECURITY COUNCIL
URGENT ACTION

December 30, 1974

MEMORANDUM FOR: SECRETARY KISSINGER
FROM: W.R. SMYSER [WRS initialed]

SUBJECT: Another Meeting with your Indonesian Contacts

As a result of a recent lunch with the Indonesian Defense Attache here, I believe it would be desirable for you to meet soon again with your special Indonesian contacts.

The Indonesian Defense Attache, General Nichlany, recently invited me to lunch and raised the following matters: — The Indonesian Government would be interested in knowing the American attitude regarding Portuguese Timor (and, by implication, our reaction to a possible Indonesian takeover).

— The Indonesian Government is concerned that South Moluccan separatists are making anti-Indonesian propaganda among Jews in the United States, profiting from the fact that Indonesia is a Muslim state. Since Indonesia, despite its Muslim heritage, is a good friend of Israel, the Indonesian Government hopes that the United States Government can persuade Israel to try to counteract this propaganda.

— The Indonesian Government would be delighted if I would visit Indonesia and it would assure me conversations at the most senior levels in Jakarta.

It seems quite obvious that the Indonesians do not really want to talk to me, but they probably feel a need to get an appraisal of American policy with regard to Southeast Asia and also, I suspect, in other areas of the world. State is not well staffed on Indonesia and simply cannot handle this sort of thing. Of course, the Indonesians really want to talk to you.

I think the reason Nichlany did not suggest a visit by your regular Indonesian contacts is because we have several times in the last year, at your suggestion, put them off. But I believe now would be a good time to invite them. We need to talk to them about the Middle East, about oil, about Indochina, and about several other things. President Suharto undoubtedly would welcome the opportunity to know your thoughts on all these areas.

It is particularly important for you to meet with them now because David Newsom will soon have to give them bad news about aid cuts. Your readiness to meet will show that we still value the senior political relationship between our countries.

I understand your travel schedule is relatively free of engagements the latter portion of January, and I would recommend that we invite your contacts over here to meet with you at that time.

The Indonesians would probably be more impressed to meet you here at the White House than at the State Department. On the other hand, you may want to transfer this function to your State staff.

RECOMMENDATION:
That we invite your Indonesian contacts to come here during the latter part of January for a meeting with you.
Approve [HK initialed]
Disapprove

Location of meeting:
a. White House [HK initialed]
b. State Department
Disapprove

1 Source: Ford Library, National Security Adviser, Presidential Country Files for East Asia and the Pacific, Box 6, Indonesia (1). Top Secret; Sensitive; Eyes Only. Sent for urgent action. Kissinger initialed the approve option and the option of meeting at the White House.

116. Backchannel Message 179 From the Ambassador to Indonesia (Newsom) to W.R. Smyser of the National Security Council Staff, Jakarta, January 13, 1975, 1139Z. 116. Backchannel Message 179 From the Ambassador to Indonesia (Newsom) to W.R. Smyser of the National Security Council Staff, Jakarta, January 13, 1975, 1139Z.1

January 13, 1975

0 131139Z JAN 74 FM JAKARTA

TO THE WHITE HOUSE

131139Z JAN 73

from AMBASSADOR NEWSOM, JAKARTA 179

TO: THE WHITE HOUSE, FOR: MR. SMYSER

SENSITIVE EXCLUSIVELY EYES. ONLY DELIVER AT OPENING OF BUSINESS

REF: SMYSER MESSAGE OF JANUARY 11, 1975

MY STRONG RECOMMENDATION WOULD BE THAT IN VIEW OF CHANGED CIRCUMSTANCES HERE SINCE SECRETARY LAST MET WITH INDONESIAN GENERALS, I PUT MATTER BEFORE MINISTER OF STATE GENERAL SUDHARMONO WHO IS CLEARLY CLOSEST AND MOST DISCREET CHANNEL TO PRESIDENT. SINCE EVENTS OF LAST JANUARY, PRESIDENT KEEPS CARDS CLOSE TO CHEST AND NEITHER NICHLANY, HABIB, NOR MUTROPO APPEAR HAVE HIS FULL CONFIDENCE. MY APPROACH TO SUDHARMONO WOULD CLEARLY GIVE HIM GREATEST FLEXIBILITY TO DECIDE HOW AND WITH WHOM HE WISHED FOLLOW UP SUGGESTION.

I WARMLY WELCOME SECRETARY'S INTEREST IN INVITING INDONESIANS AT THIS STAGE. MEETING WOULD GIVE OPPORTUNITY AT PRESTIGIOUS LEVEL OF SECRETARY IN HIS NSC CAPACITY TO REASSURE INDONESIANS CONCERNING OUR INTEREST AND ANSWER TWO QUESTIONS THAT ARE CURRENTLY UPPERMOST IN THEIR MINDS.

1. FUTURE OF MILITARY ASSISTANCES: I BELIEVE! THAT PROVIDED WE CAN SATISFACTORILY FINESSE IGGI PROBLEM, OURS TRANSITION STRATEGY ON ECONOMIC AID IS WORKING. PRESIDENT SUHARTO, HOWEVER, HAS ATTACHED MAJOR IMPORTANCE TO GRANT MILITARY ASSISTANCE, BOTH AS MEANS LESSENING DEGREE TO WHICH HE MUST DIVERT OTHER FUNDS TO MILITARY PURPOSES AND AS INDICATION U.S. SUPPORT FOR INDONESIA GENERALLY, WE CONTINUE TO BE TOLD THAT NEITHER PRESIDENT NOR PANGGABEAN UNDERSTAND WHY WE ARE CUTTING MAP, EVEN THOUGH EMBASSY AND FREQUENT VISITORS HAVE EMPHASIZED CONGRESSIONAL PROBLEM AND CHANGED CIRCUMSTANCES. IF SUBSTANTIAL MAP CUT INEVITABLE, MEETING WITH SECRETARY WOULD PROVIDE OPPORTUNITY EXPLAIN AT THAT LEVEL WHILE DEFINING AREAS WHERE WE CAN BE HELPFUL IN MILITARY FIELD.

2. VIET NAM: INDONESIANS SEE SOLUTION TO CURRENT IMPASSE IN VIET NAM, INCLUDING ICCS OF WHICH THEY ARE A PART, IN TERMS OF RENEWED U.S. DIPLOMATIC EFFORTS WITH HANOI, SECRETARY'S REITERATION OF IMPORTANCE OF ICCS AND REALISTIC DESCRIPTION OF DIFFICULTIES OF INITIATING NEW DIPLOMATIC EFFORTS WHEN THERE IS NO RESPONSE FROM OTHER SIDE WOULD BE HELPFUL AT THIS POINT. WE HAVE EVERY IMPRESSION INDONESIANS TAKING HARD LOOK AT WHETHER TO REPLACE CURRENT ICCS CONTINGENT WHEN IT ROTATES IN APRIL.

SECRETARY MIGHT ALSO WANT TO CONSIDER TAKING SOUNDINGS ON POSSIBLE SUHARTO VISIT. SINCE OUR DISCUSSION IN WASHINGTON, | HAVE LEARNED THAT SOME THOUGHT BEING GIVEN BY SUHARTO TO VISIT TO CANADA THIS YEAR. IN SUCH CASE, WE WOULD, I BELIEVE, WANT TO EXPRESS PRESIDENT FORD'S INTEREST IN INVITING HIM TO WASHINGTON IN COURSE HIS TRIP TO NORTH AMERICA.

RE TIMOR, THERE IS NO DOUBT SOME IN INDONESIAN MILITARY GROWING IMPATIENT WITH LACK CLEAR SOLUTION TIMOR FUTURE AND ARE ADVOCATING SOME TYPE OF UNILATERAL ACTION. PRESIDENT SUHARTO, SO FAR, HAS HELD OFF HAWKS. IF QUESTION SHOULD ARISE I BELIEVE WE SHOULD MAKE CLEAR THAT WHILE NOT BEING OPPOSED TO PEACEFUL INCORPORATION INTO INDONESIA IF THIS WAS CLEARLY WILL OF PEOPLE WE WOULD NOT FAVOR UNILATERAL MILITARY ACTION. (FYI: EMBASSY PROCESS OF PREPARING CONTINGENCY PLAN ON WHAT WE SHOULD DO IF INDONESIANS TAKE UNILATERAL MILITARY ACTION, USE OF MAP EQUIPMENT COULD AUTOMATICALLY INVOLVE U.S. IN EMBARRASSING PROBLEM.)

1 Source: Ford Library, National Security Adviser, NSC Staff for East Asia and Pacific Affairs, Convenience File, Box 7, Backchannel Messages, Southeast Asia, Incoming, 1/75. Secret. The undated text of the January 11 backchannel message from Smyser to Newson, initialed by Scowcroft with a note that it was sent, is ibid., Outgoing, 1/75.

117. Telegram 026805 From the Department of State to the Embassy in Indonesia, February 6, 1975, 0006Z. 117. Telegram 026805 From the Department of State to the Embassy in Indonesia, February 6, 1975, 0006Z.1

February 6, 1975

TELEGRAM
Department of State
026805

R 060006Z FEB 75

FM SECSTATE WASHDC TO AMEMBASSY JAKARTA INFO
AMEMBASSY LISBON
AMEMBASSY CANBERRA

STATE 026805

E.0. 11652: GDS
TAGS: PFOR, PO

SUBJECT: INDONESIAN INTENTIONS TOWARD PORTUGUESE TIMOR
NOFORN, CONTROLLED DISSEM, NODISEM ABROAD, BACKGROUND USE ONLY

1. YOU WILL HAVE SEEN [text not declassified] REPORTING THAT SUGGESTS INCREASED INDONESIAN CONCERN OVER COURSE OF EVENTS IN PORTUGUESE TIMOR AND POSSIBLE GOI DECISION TO TAKE TERRITORY BY FORCE NEXT SUMMER AS CLIMAX TO STEPPED UP INFILTRATION CAMPAIGN.

2. USG IS PREPARED ACCEPT ANY DISPOSITION OF PORTUGUESE TIMOR ISSUE WHICH IS IN ACCORD WITH WISHES OF TIMORESE POPULACE, AND HAS NO DESIRE TO BECOME INVOLVED IN ANY WAY IN PROCESS OF DETERMINING TERRITORY'S FUTURE. WE RECOGNIZE THAT UNION WITH INDONESIA IS PERHAPS MOST VIABLE SOLUTION, PROVIDED POPULACE ACQUIESCES. INDONESIAN MOVE TO TAKE TERRITORY BY FORCE, HOWEVER, WOULD CREATE SERIOUS DIFFICULTIES FOR US AND WOULD BE LIKELY TO SET BACK OUR EFFORTS TO AVOID OVERLY PRECIPITOUS TERMINATION OF AID PROGRAMS.

3. WOULD APPRECIATE YOUR ASSESSMENT OF CURRENT INDONESIAN INTENTIONS TOWARD PORTUGUESE TIMOR IN LIGHT THESE [text not declassified] REPORTS. IF INDONESIAN MOVE AGAINST TERRITORY DOES APPEAR IN OFFING, WOULD ALSO APPRECIATE ANY THOUGHTS YOU HAVE AS TO HOW GOI MIGHT BE DISSUADED WITHOUT OUR BECOMING ENTANGLED IN ISSUE. KISSINGER

1 Source: National Archives, Record Group 59, Central Foreign Policy Files. Secret; Exdis. Sent for information to Lisbon and Canberra. Drafted by Ingraham; cleared in EUR/IB and INR/REA; and approved by Habib.

118. Telegram 1731 From the Embassy in Indonesia to the Department of State, February 10, 1975, 0915Z. 118. Telegram 1731 From the Embassy in Indonesia to the Department of State, February 10, 1975, 0915Z.1

February 10, 1975

TELEGRAM
Department of State
Jakarta 1731

R 100915Z FEB 75

FM AMEMBASSY JAKARTA
TO SECSTATE WASHDC 6533
INFO AMEMBASSY CANBERRA
AMEMBASSY LISBON

JAKARTA 1731

E.O. 11652: GDS
TAGS: PFOR PO

SUBJECT: INDONESIAN INTENTIONS TOWARD PORTUGUESE TIMOR
REF: A. STATE 026805; B. CANBERRA 835; C. CANBERRA 837

1. WE TAKE SERIOUSLY REPORTS RECEIVED [text not declassified] OF INDICATIONS INDONESIA MAKING ACTIVE EFFORTS TO INCORPORATE PORTUGUESE TIMOR. WE BELIEVE GOI HAS MADE BASIC DECISION THAT AN INDEPENDENT TIMOR, SUSCEPTIBLE TO COMMUNIST INFLUENCE WOULD BE UNACCEPTABLE THREAT TO INDONESIA'S SECURITY, AND THAT INTEGRATION OF TIMOR INTO INDONESIA ONLY ACCEPTABLE LONG TERM SOLUTION. SO LONG AS GOP MAINTAINS CONTROL OF TIMOR AND COOPERATES IN INDONESIA'S EFFORTS TO PERSUADE PORTUGUESE TIMORESE THAT INTEGRATION IS BEST COURSE, GOI DECISION TO USE MILITARY FORCE UNLIKELY. IF, AS NOW SEEMS CASE, GOP THINKING OF HOLDING A PLEBESCITE (WHICH PRO-INTEGRATIONISTS WOULD NOT WIN) OR SEEKING SOME OTHER METHOD END COLONIAL RULE IN NEAR FUTURE, LIKELIHOOD OF GOI'S USING AGGRESSIVE TACTICS TO INCORPORATE TIMOR IS GREATLY INCREASED.

2. WE FULLY APPRECIATE THAT INDONESIAN EFFORT TO TAKE TERRITORY BY FORCE COULD COMPOUND OUR PROBLEMS IN MAKING SMOOTH TRANSITION AWAY FROM CONCESSIONAL AID. WE FACE CRUEL DILEMMA, HOWEVER, BECAUSE U.S. POSTURE IN CLEAR OPPOSITION TO INDONESIAN OBJECTIVE OF INCORPORATING TIMOR COULD BRING REACTIONS HERE AS STRONG OR STRONGER THAN AID TERMINATION. INDONESIA CLEARLY REGARDS AN INDEPENDENT TIMOR AS A SERIOUS SECURITY THREAT. UNLESS WE'RE PREPARED TO INTERCEDE WITH PORTUGUESE TO ASK DELAY IN INDEPENDENCE OR PORTUGUESE HELP IN INCORPORATION WITH INDONESIA, AND DIPLOMATIC APPROACH ON OUR PART WHICH WOULD SEEK TO DISCOURAGE INDONESIAN ACTION WOULD HAVE LITTLE CHANCE OF SUCCESS AND WOULD UNDOUBTEDLY BE RESENTED. WE FULLY AWARE IMPLICATIONS FOR MILITARY ASSISTANCE PROGRAM OF ANY USE U.S. EQUIPMENT IN FORCEFUL TAKE OVER, YET ANY APPROACH SUGGESTING LINK WOULD CREATE EVEN STRONGER ADVERSE REACTION. (DIRECTOR GENERAL POLITICAL AFFAIRS DEPLU QUERIED ME AT LENGTH LAST WEEK ON TURKISH AID CUT OFF; I SUSPECT HE HAD TIMOR ON HIS MIND.) LIKEWISE ANY INDICATION WE WERE FURNISHING OTHERS WITH INTELLIGENCE WHICH MIGHT RESULT IN DEMARCHES AIMED TO DISCOURAGE GOI WOULD BE DANGEROUS. [text not declassified] OFFICIALS ORALLY IN GENERAL TERMS THAT WE HAVE REPORTS FROM AUTHORITATIVE SOURCES INDICATING GOI CONSIDERING DECISION TO MOVE INTO PORTUGUESE TIMOR THIS YEAR. A POSSIBLY MORE ATTRACTIVE ALTERNATIVE WOULD BE TASKING WASHINGTON INTELLIGENCE COMMUNITY TO PREPARE A FINISHED INTELLIGENCE BRIEF FOR PASSAGE TO AUSTRALIAN INTELLIGENCE OFFICIALS.

3. WE WILL BE POUCHING SHORTLY TO DEPARTMENT CONTINGENCY PLAN WHICH GIVES THOUGHTS ON POSSIBLE COURSE OF ACTION. WHILE WE REALIZE IT IS NOT PERFECT SOLUTION, OUR STRONG RECOMMENDATION FOR POSTURE AT THIS POINT IS MAXIMUM OF SILENCE, AVOIDING ANY BASIS FOR SUGGESTING EITHER U.S. ENCOURAGEMENT OR DISCOURAGEMENT OF INDONESIAN ACTIONS. WHETHER WE CAN MAINTAIN THIS POSTURE INDEFINITELY DEPENDS ON FACTORS WE CANNOT FULLY JUDGE HERE: ESTIMATE OF LEGAL AND CONGRESSIONAL POSITIONS ON USE OF U.S. EQUIPMENT; PORTUGUESE ATTITUDES AND OUR RELATIONSHIP TO THEM; AND WHETHER BY TIME WE NEED TO RECONSIDER THIS POSTURE WE WILL HAVE HAD SUFFICIENT POSITIVE ACTIONS IN AID FD TRADE FIELD TO IMPROVE INDONESIAN RECEPTIVITY TO OUR APPROACHES ON DELICATE ISSUES. NEWSOM

1 Source: National Archives, Record Group 59, Central Foreign Policy Files. Secret; Exdis. Sent for information to Canberra and Lisbon.

119. Telegram 2022 From the Embassy in Jakarta to the Department of State, February 19, 1975, 0001Z. 119. Telegram 2022 From the Embassy in Jakarta to the Department of State, February 19, 1975, 0001Z.1

February 19, 1975

TELEGRAM
Department of State
JAKARTA 2022

R 190001Z FEB 75

FM AMEMBASSY JAKARTA TO SECSTATE WASHDC 6628

INFO AMEMBASSY CANBERRA
AMEMBASSY LISBON
USMISSION NEW YORK

JAKARTA 2022

E.O. 11652: GDS
TAGS: PFOR PO ID

SUBJ: PORTUGUESE TIMOR: CONTINGENCY PAPER REF: JAKARTA 1731

1. INTRODUCTION: WE ARE POUCHING TO DEPARTMENT, LISBON AND CANBERRA UNDER COVER OF AN AIRGRAM A CONTINGENCY PAPER ON COURSES OF ACTION AVAILABLE TO US IN VIEW INDICATIONS THAT INDONESIA IS MAKING ACTIVE EFFORTS TO INCORPORATE PORTUGUESE TIMOR (REFTEL). GIVEN TIME FACTORS INVOLVED, THIS TELEGRAM WILL PRESENT OPERATIVE PORTIONS OF STUDY. END INTRODUCTION.

2. STUDY OPENS WITH BACKGROUND AND CURRENT SITUATION WHICH INCLUDES DESCRIPTION OF REASONS GOI FEELS AN INDEPENDENT TIMOR CONSTITUTES AN UNACCEPTABLE SECURITY RISK, INDONESIA'S APPARENTLY UNSUCCESSFUL ATTEMPTS TO OBTAIN PORTUGUESE COOPERATION IN EFFECTING A TRANSFER OF SOVEREIGNTY, UNLIKELIHOOD OF INDONESIA'S CONVINCING THE PORTUGUESE TIMORESE OF THE VIRTUES OF INTEGRATION, AND DIFFICULTIES INDONESIA WILL FACE IN A MILITARY TAKEOVER IF PORTUGAL DECIDES TO FIGHT; IT CONCLUDES THAT GOI HAS APPARENTLY MADE DECISION TO TAKE TIMOR WITHOUT USE OF FORCE IF POSSIBLE, BUT USING FORCE IF NECESSARY.

3. BULK OF SECTION ON "POSSIBILITIES AND OPTIONS" FOLLOWS:

4. "WHILE IT WOULD BE TEMPTING TO 'SIT OUT' AN INDONESIAN MOVE TO ACQUIRE PORTUGUESE TIMOR, IN PRACTICAL TERMS THIS IS NOT A FEASIBLE ALTERNATIVE FOR A VARIETY OF REASONS AMONG WHICH: (A) US IDENTIFICATION WITH GOI, GIVEN LEADING ROLE WE HAVE PLAYED IN FURNISHING ECONOMIC AND MILITARY ASSISTANCE;

(B) VIRTUAL INEVITABILITY THAT, IF INDONESIA USES MILITARY FORCE IN ACQUIRING TIMOR, SOME US GRANT MILITARY EQUIPMENT WILL BE INVOLVED;

(C) EXPECTATION BY AUSTRALIA AND PORTUGAL (UNLESS LATTER HAS TACITLY CONCURRED IN TAKEOVER) THAT US WILL TAKE SOME POSITION AND,

(D) MOST IMPORTANTLY, LIKELY EXPECTATION (HOPE) ON PART OF GOI THAT US WILL UNDERSTAND REASONS FOR INDONESIA'S ACTION AND WILL TAKE RELATIVELY HELPFUL POSTURE. GIVEN IMPORTANCE THE GOI ATTACHES TO TIMOR, AND CURRENT FEELING ON THE PART OF INDONESIA THAT WE ARE TURNING FROM THEM, OUR POSITION ON TIMOR COULD WELL BE REGARDED AS A DECISIVE TEST OF OUR SYMPATHY, AND A PASSIVE POSTURE ON OUR PART MIGHT NOT SUFFICE, IN THE EYES OF GOI. (CONVERSELY, EVEN TO RAISE WITH GOI QUESTION OF US MILITARY EQUIPMENT WOULD CREATE SEVERE DIPLOMATIC PROBLEMS.) INDEED, SHOULD INDONESIA FAIL IN AN ATTEMPT TO EFFECT A SWIFT TAKEOVER, AND FACE THE FRUSTRATIONS OF A PROTRACTED GUERRILLA WAR, THERE WOULD BE A TEMPTATION TO PUT THE BLAME ON UNSYMPATHETIC FOREIGN POWERS — E.G., THE US—UNLESS WE HAD CLEARLY TAKEN A STAND ACCEPTABLE TO THE GOI.

5. "TWO ADDITIONAL FACTORS MILITATE IN FAVOR OF OUR TAKING A "HELPFUL" POSTURE, WHILE TWO IMPORTANT FACTORS ARE DIFFICULT TO ASSESS FROM THE JAKARTA VANTAGE POINT. FACTORS IN FAVOR OF A HELPFUL POSTURE ARE: A) GENERAL US OPPOSITION TO CREATION OF ECONOMICALLY AND POLITICALLY WEAK MINI-STATES WITH INDONESIA THE ONLY LOGICAL COUNTRY INTO WHICH TIMOR COULD MERGE; AND,

B) VIRTUAL ABSENCE OF ANY US INTERESTS IN TIMOR. FACTORS WE CANNOT FULLY EVALUATE ARE: A) LIKELY PUBLIC AND CONGRESSIONAL OPINION AT HOME; AND

B) DEGREE OF IMPORTANCE PORTUGAL ATTACHES TO TIMOR, AND WHETHER GOP WILL PRESS US BILATERALLY AND IN INTERNATIONAL FORUMS TO ADOPT A NEGATIVE STANCE TO AN INDONESIAN TAKEOVER.

6. "OUR PROBLEMS IS, THEREFORE, HOW TO REACT TO ANY EVENTUAL INDONESIAN MOVES TOWARD TIMOR IN A WAY THAT WILL PROTECT OUR RELATIONS WITH INDONESIA WHILE TAKING INTO CONSIDERATION US DOMESTIC SENSIBILITIES, THE VIEWS OF AUSTRALIA AND PORTUGAL (IF PORTUGAL CARES), AND WORLD OPINION—PARTICULARLY LDCS SUCH AS THE AFRICAN STATES.

7. "AGAINST THIS BACKGROUND, IN FORESEEABLE FUTURE, WE CAN SEE FIVE LIKELY SITUATIONS EACH OF WHICH PRESENTS US WITH RANGE OF OPTIONS SOME OF WHICH, WHILE INCLUDED, WOULD APPEAR NEITHER DESIRABLE NOR LIKELY. THIS STUDY DOES NOT DEAL WITH UN-MONITORED PLEBISCITE, SINCE IT WOULD GIVE US NO PROBLEMS.

8. "I. THINGS GO ON AS THEY ARE NOW, WITH PORTUGAL CONTINUING TO GOVERN TIMOR, REMAINING UNCLEAR AS TO ITS ULTIMATE INTENTIONS, WHILE INDONESIA TRIES — PROBABLY WITHOUT MUCH SUCCESS—TO LAY THE GROUNDWORK FOR PEACEFUL INTEGRATION. IN THIS SITUATION WE COULD: A) CONTINUE WITH OUR PRESENT STANCE STATING, IF ASKED, THAT WE WELCOME DECOLONIZATION OF PORTUGUESE COLONIES AND HOPE THAT A SOLUTION WILL EMERGE WHICH WILL MEET DESIRES OF LOCAL POPULATION.

B) STATE WE ARE IN FAVOR OF SOME FORM OF POPULAR EXPRESSION OF WILL—E.G., A REFERENDUM—AND THAT WE HOPE THIS WILL TAKE PLACE, ETC.

C) STATE WE HOPE TO SEE A SOLUTION SATISFACTORY TO ALL CONCERNED, ADDING IMPLICITLY OR EXPLICITLY THAT INDEPENDENCE IS NOT ONLY CHOICE AND THAT ECONOMIC AND POLITICAL VIABILITY OF A UNIT MUST BE CONSIDERED.

D) GO EVEN FURTHER AND STATE MERGER WITH INDONESIA SEEMS A DESIRABLE COURSE.

E) IN ANY OF THE ABOVE COURSES WE COULD COUPLE OUR OVERT POSITION (OR LACK THEREOF) WITH (1) CONSULTATIONS WITH PORTUGAL IN HOPES OF ARRIVING AT A SOLUTION WHICH WOULD AVOID INDONESIA'S RESORTING TO AGGRESSIVE MEASURES; AND/OR (2) A QUIET DEMARCHE TO GOI COUNSELING THAT THEY MAKE EVERY EFFORT TO AVOID RECOURSE TO MILITARY ACTION; OR (3) WE CAN SIMPLY NOT INVOLVE OURSELVES DIPLOMATICALLY.

9. "II. INDONESIA REACHES CONCLUSION THAT AGREEMENT WITH PORTUGAL IS NOT IN CARDS, THAT PORTUGAL IS GOING COMMUNIST—OR THAT PORTUGAL IS HEADING TOWARDS A GRANT OF INDEPENDENCE TO TIMOR—AND, THEREFORE, DECIDES A MILITARY TAKEOVER IS NECESSARY BUT HAS NOT YET IMPLEMENTED THIS DECISION. EITHER THE GOI INFORMS US CONFIDENTIALLY IN ADVANCE, ASKING OUR UNDERSTANDING, OR WE LEARN OF THE PLANS FROM AUTHORITATIVE SOURCES. OUR MAJOR CHOICE WOULD BE WHETHER TO INVOLVE OURSELVES AT THIS STAGE OR NOT. AMONG THE COURSES OF ACTION AVAILABLE WOULD BE: A) COUNSEL INDONESIA PRIVATELY AGAINST SUCH AN ACTION, WARNING OF LIKELY DAMAGE TO INDONESIA'S IMAGE, BILATERAL RELATIONS, ETC.

B) IN CONCERT WITH AUSTRALIA TAKE SAME ACTION AS IN A).

C) CONSULT WITH INDONESIA AND PORTUGAL (WITH OUR WITHOUT AUSTRALIA) IN AN ATTEMPT TO FIND A BETTER SOLUTION.

D) WARN INDONESIA THAT A MILITARY TAKEOVER CANNOT GO UNNOTICED IN THE US AND THAT BILATERAL RELATIONS, INCLUDING ASSISTANCE (IF THERE STILL IS ANY), COULD BE AFFECTED.

E) TELL THE GOI WE CAN UNDERSTAND THEIR RATIONALE AND WILL NOT ACTIVELY OPPOSE A TAKEOVER.

F) DO NOTHING.

10. "III. INDONESIA AND PORTUGAL REACH AGREEMENT RE INTEGRATION WITHOUT BENEFIT OF ANY BROADLY BASED CONSULTATION WITH THE PORTUGUESE TIMORESE. THERE IS THE POSSIBILITY (OR ACTUALITY) OF LOCAL RESISTANCE TO THE TURNOVER OF AUTHORITY. WHILE THE ARRANGEMENT OF ITSELF CAUSES NO PROBLEM IN US-INDONESIAN OR US-PORTUGUESE RELATIONS, THERE IS A LOUD OUTCRY IN US LIBERAL CIRCLES, AUSTRALIA AND THE LDC. CHOICES AVAILABLE ARE MUCH SAME AS THOSE IN II ABOVE, IF INDONESIAN-PORTUGUESE AGREEMENT HAS NOT BEEN IMPLEMENTED. IF A TAKEOVER IS BEING OR HAS BEEN EFFECTED, WE WOULD—AFTER ESTIMATING DEPTH OF REACTION AT HOME, IN AUSTRALIA AND THE DEVELOPING WORLD, ETC—HAVE TO CONSIDER WHICH OF FOLLOWING COURSES OF ACTION (OR COMBINATION THEREOF) TO TAKE (EXTREME COURSES SUCH AS A THREAT TO BREAK RELATIONS ARE NOT INCLUDED): A) ISSUE A STRONG (OR MILD) STATEMENT OF PROTEST CALLING FOR A RETURN TO STATUS QUO ANTE.

C) THREATEN TO, OR ACTUALLY SUSPEND MILITARY AND/OR ECONOMIC ASSISTANCE.

D) ALONE, OR IN CONCERT WITH OTHERS, COUNSEL INDONESIA TO REVERSE ITS COURSE OF ACTION.

E) BASICALLY HEDGE, STATING WE HOPE PEACE WILL BE RESTORED (IF THERE IS ANY EVIDENCE), THAT WILL OF THE PEOPLE WILL BE RESPECTED, ETC.

F) BASICALLY HEDGE, STATE WE DEPLORE VIOLENCE, LOSS OF LIFE, ETC., BUT NOTE THAT GIVEN UNVIABILITY OF MINI-STATES, ETHNIC SIMILARITIES OF PEOPLE ON BOTH SIDES IN TIMOR, ETC., MERGER MAY BE BEST SOLUTION. G) DO NOTHING.

11. "IV. UNREST BREAKS OUT IN PORTUGUESE TIMOR AND ALONG THE BORDER WITH INDONESIAN TIMOR, WITH GENERAL SUSPICION THAT INDONESIA HAS FOMENTED TROUBLES. PRO-MERGER FORCES PROCLAIM THEMSELVES MAJORITY AND CALL ON INDONESIA TO COME IN TO STOP BLOODSHED. INDONESIA OBLIGES AND MANAGES TAKEOVER WITHOUT MUCH (OR WITH CONSIDERABLE) VIOLENCE, FOLLOWED IN SHORT ORDER BY A STAGE-MANAGED "PLEBISCITE" OR SOME OTHER "ACT OF FREE CHOICE" LEADING TO MERGER. THERE IS A HUE AND CRY IN DEVELOPING WORLD, PORTUGAL, AUSTRALIA, AND IN CERTAIN US CIRCLES. IN MAKING A DECISION AS TO WHAT TO DO WE WOULD WANT TO DETERMINE EXTENT OF US DOMESTIC REACTION, AND TO CONSULT WITH PORTUGAL AND AUSTRALIA TO ASCERTAIN THEIR VIEWS WHILE ALSO TURNING AN EAR TO WHATEVER THE USSR AND THE LDCS MIGHT BE SAYING. CHOICES AVAILABLE WOULD BE SIMILAR TO THOSE IN CASE OF TAKEOVER NOTED IN III ABOVE.

12. "V. FOR WHATEVER REASON (INCLUDING FEAR OF A PLEBISCITE), THE GOI DECIDES THAT ITS INTERESTS REQUIRE A SWIFT MILITARY TAKEOVER. IN GOA-LIKE FASHION, INDONESIAN MILITARY FORCES INVADE PORTUGUESE TIMOR, WINNING AFTER SOME (OR A LITTLE, OR A GREAT DEAL OF) LOSS OF LIFE AMONG THE DEFENDING PORTUGUESE AND LOCAL POPULATION. OR, IN WORST POSSIBLE CASE, INDONESIAN MILITARY FORCES INVADE PORTUGUESE TIMOR, WINNING DILI AND SOME OF OTHER MAJOR TOWNS, BUT ARE UNABLE TO TAKE MOUNTAINS AND BACK COUNTRY AREAS, LEADING TO A MESSY GUERRILLA WAR WHICH, WELL PUBLICIZED, POISONS INDONESIA'S IMAGE WORLD-WIDE EVEN MORE THAN WOULD A SWIFT TAKEOVER. PRELIMINARY REVIEW WE WOULD WANT TO TAKE, AND CHOICES AVAILABLE TO US WOULD BE SIMILAR TO THOSE IN IV ABOVE. NOTE: IN CHOOSING OPTIONS DEALING WITH USE OF FORCE BY INDONESIA EMPLOYING US MAP EQUIPMENT, WE WOULD NEED TO ASSUME A SUBSTANTIAL OUTCRY FROM OPPONENTS OF MILITARY AID IN CONGRESS. DIPLOMATIC ACTION IN SUCH A CASE COULD WELL BECOME NECESSARY, ALTHOUGH IT WOULD BE AT THE RISK OF SERIOUS DAMAGE TO OUR RELATIONS WITH INDONESIA. THE FACTS OF THE MATTER ARE, AS FAR AS WE CAN JUDGE HERE, HOWEVER, THAT TERMS OF OUR MILITARY ASSISTANCE PROGRAM WOULD NOT SPECIFICALLY PREVENT THE INDONESIANS FROM USING SUCH EQUIPMENT IN A TIMOR OPERATION. (STUDY DEALS IN DETAIL WITH TECHNICALITIES THIS QUESTION.)

13. FULL TEXT OF STUDY'S CONCLUSION FOLLOWS: "TAKING AS ASSUMPTIONS: A) US PUBLIC AND CONGRESSIONAL REACTION TO A (NOT TOO VIOLENT) TAKEOVER OF PORTUGUESE TIMOR BY ETHNICALLY SIMILAR PEOPLE WOULD NOT BE TOO ADVERSE (THE SLOWER AND MESSIER THE TAKEOVER, THE MORE ADVERSE THE REACTION WE MUST EXPECT).

B) US INTERESTS IN INDONESIA ARE IMPORTANT; IN TIMOR VIRTUALLY NIL;

C) PORTUGAL MIGHT NOT WELCOME A UNILATERAL INDONESIAN TAKEOVER BUT WOULD NOT GO SO FAR AS TO THREATEN MAJOR REPRISALS AGAINST US (NATO INTEREST, ETC.) SHOULD WE NOT TAKE AN ANTI-INDONESIAN STANCE:

D) AUSTRALIA, WHILE UNHAPPY, WILL LIMIT ITSELF TO EXPRESSIONS OF DISMAY AND WILL NOT PERMANENTLY TERMINATE ASSISTANCE OR TAKE THE MATTER TO THE UN;

E) SIMILARLY LDCS OF IMPORTANCE TO THE US WOULD NOT MAKE OUR POSITION ON TIMOR A MAJOR DECIDING FACTOR IN BILATERAL RELATIONS;

F) A POST-TAKEOVER INDONESIAN ADMINISTRATION WOULD BE RELATIVELY BENIGN. US INTERESTS WOULD CALL FOR OUR TAKING THE MILDEST APPROACH IN EACH SITUATION WHICH CIRCUMSTANCES—INCLUDING US AND WORLD OPINION —WOULD PERMIT. FOR PRESENT BEST POSITION APPEARS TO BE ONE OF MAXIMUM SILENCE. GIVEN SUHARTO'S CHARACTER, IT IS UNLIKELY THAT GOI WOULD MOVE UNILATERALLY UNLESS IT FELT THERE WAS NO OTHER WAY; HENCE ANY COURSES SUGGESTING WE COUNSEL INDONESIA TO "CEASE AND DESIST" FROM ITS REPORTED PLANNING FOR A MILITARY TAKEOVER (UNLESS COUPLED WITH FIRM ASSURANCES THAT PORTUGAL WOULD COOPERATE IN A PEACEFUL TRANSFER) WOULD ONLY SERVE TO EXACERBATE RELATIONS. SHOULD INDONESIA ACTUALLY EMBARK UPON AN AGGRESSIVE COURSE OF ACTION TO ACQUIRE PORTUGUESE TIMOR, WE WOULD, AFTER WEIGHING THE IMPLICATIONS OF US DOMESTIC AND CONGRESSIONAL VIEWS, PORTUGUESE GOVERNMENT REACTIONS AND OTHER RELEVANT FACTORS SUCH AS THE REACTIONS OF AUSTRALIA AND THE LDCS, TAKE POSITION MOST LIKELY TO AVOID SERIOUS DAMAGE TO THE US-INDONESIAN RELATIONSHIP. WE WOULD AVOID TO EXTENT POSSIBLE ACTIONS (SUCH AS SUSPENDING MAP) OR STATEMENTS WHICH REFLECT CRITICISM OF GOI AND WOULD, IF AT ALL POSSIBLE, GO SO FAR AS TO STATE (OR IMPLY) THAT LONG-TERM TIMORESE INTERESTS ARE BEST SERVICED BY INTEGRATION INTO INDONESIA, WITHOUT ACTUALLY ENDORSING INDONESIA'S AGGRESSIVE ACTIONS." NEWSOM

1 Source: National Archives, Record Group 59, Central Foreign Policy Files. Secret; Exdis. Repeated for information to Canberra Lisbon, and USUN.

120. Memorandum From W.R. Smyser of the National Security Council Staff to Secretary of State Kissinger, Washington, March 4, 1975. 120. Memorandum From W.R. Smyser of the National Security Council Staff to Secretary of State Kissinger, Washington, March 4, 1975.1

Washington, March 4, 1975

MEMORANDUM
NATIONAL SECURITY COUNCIL
ACTION

March 4, 1975

MEMORANDUM FOR: SECRETARY KISSINGER
FROM: W.R. SMYSER [WRS initialed]

SUBJECT: Policy Regarding Possible Indonesian Military Action against Portuguese Timor

We have received some unsettling reports that Indonesia may choose to incorporate Portuguese Timor by force, which could impact on our relations with Indonesia.

There are many uncertainties regarding developments. Our best information at present is as follows: — The Portuguese Government wants to leave Timor, and has developed plans to transfer sovereignty over a long period of time. Those plans, according to some sources, include collaboration with Indonesia in such a way that Indonesia would have good prospects of assuming sovereignty as Portugal completes its withdrawal. Unfortunately, however, there are also occasional reports from Lisbon that the Portuguese regime intends to pull out more quickly and will, in the process, turn Timor over to an independent regime that would not want to accept Indonesian sovereignty.

— The Indonesian Government fears that a hasty Portuguese pullout will leave a weakened Timor subject to the Left Wing instincts of a few leaders of the independence movement, leaders whom the Indonesians fear to be influenced by Peking. This fear is increased by the fact that the Chinese community, while numbering only about 6,000 out of 600,000, dominates the economy.

— President Suharto has developed programs to increase Indonesian influence in Timor through low-key political operations. These programs have not been very successful. Because of that, there has been mounting pressure in Indonesia for direct military action. We have some Indonesian reports indicating that preparations for such action are proceeding, and there is one report that Suharto has ordered incorporation of Portuguese Timor into Indonesia by no later than August, 1975, by force if necessary. Portuguese officials have told us they will not resist any Indonesian use of force.

— However, Indonesia has publicly denied that it would use force to seize Timor, though it has left itself some room for such justification as self-defense or humanitarian grounds (e. g., potential chaos).

— Australian attitudes are ambivalent. Prime Minister Whitlam told Suharto privately last year that he believed a merger with Indonesia is the only possible course for Timor. But there is strong public opposition to any possible Indonesian use of force. A recent article by a prominent Australian journalist, apparently inspired by some Australian Government sources, warned that Indonesia's use of force in Timor could create major problems in Indonesian-Australian relations.

— Against this background, President Suharto is planning a trip around the world in June and July of this year. It would seem to make little sense for him to direct a military takeover of Timor before he embarks on such a trip since he would be confronted with at least some demonstrations almost everywhere. He is also aware of our probable Congressional reaction.

The State Department has been uncertain about the best policy to follow. Ambassador Newsom has recommended a general policy of silence. He has argued that we have considerable interests in Indonesia and none in Timor. If we try to dissuade Indonesia from what Suharto may regard as a necessary use of force, major difficulties in our relations could result. With some encouragement from us, Bill Gleysteen at State is convening a meeting next week to review what might happen and what we can do.

The dilemma is simple: If we try to stop the Indonesians, we risk hurting our relationships no matter what the Indonesians do. If we do not try to stop them, we are in good shape if they do nothing, but we may be in worse shape if they go ahead and there is a major Congressional reaction. Congress may demand that we cut off aid to Indonesia as we did to Turkey, though there is obviously less domestic interest in the fate of Timor than in the fate of Cyprus.

In the meantime, State has been trying to encourage the Australians and the Portuguese to say something to Indonesia. In particular, it has encouraged the Australians to tell Indonesia that Portugal's latest plans envisage a long turnover of power coordinated with Indonesia. State hopes this will take the heat off.

State has also instructed our press spokesmen to reply to any questions on Portuguese Timor by saying that "any change in Portuguese Timor's status should be carried out peacefully and in accordance with the wishes of the people." It has also instructed Newsom to take a somewhat similar private line if the question arises in his discussions with Indonesian officials.

We have some interest in this because the Indonesian Defense Attache, General Nichlany, asked me several months ago about our attitude toward Portuguese Timor (and by implication, our reaction to a possible Indonesian takeover). I did not say anything at the time and I have not said anything to him since.

Given Newsom's recommendation, I still believe I should say nothing to Nichlany now, though I would express some reservations about a military route if I were asked again. However, if you wish me to, I could easily see him and use our earlier conversation to express our reservations about Indonesian military action.

Of course, if I say nothing to him now, I would undertake to get State to apprise you of its own policy studies to see what steps, if any, we should take.

RECOMMENDATION:

That I say nothing to Nichlany now, unless he again asks me about our attitude regarding Indonesian military action, If he does ask me, I would express the hope that any change in Portuguese Timor should be carried out peacefully.
Approve [HK initialed]
Disapprove

1 Source: Ford Library, National Security Adviser, Presidential Country Files for East Asia and the Pacific, Box 6, Indonesia (2). Top Secret; Sensitive; Eyes Only. Sent for action. Kissinger initialed the approve option.

121. Telegram 3570 From the Embassy in Indonesia to the Department of State, March 26, 1975, 0455Z. 121. Telegram 3570 From the Embassy in Indonesia to the Department of State, March 26, 1975, 0455Z.1

March 26, 1975

TELEGRAM
Department of State
JAKARTA 3570

FM AMEMBASSY JAKARTA
TO SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 7225
USMISSION GENEVA IMMEDIATE

GENEVA FOR AMBASSADOR JOHN NORTON MOORE
E.O. 116521: GDS
TAGS: PLOS

SUBJECT: LOS NEGOTIATIONS WITH INDONESIA
RE: JAKARTA 3542

1. FOLLOWING ARE EMBASSY'S COMMENTS ON CURRENT SITUATION RELATING TO NEGOTIATIONS WITH INDONESIA ON LOS. IN SUMMARY, WE BELIEVE ATTITUDE NOW PREVAILS IN GOI WHICH FEELS EARLY AGREEMENT WITH U.S. ON ARCHIPELAGO AND STRAITS NOT IN GOI INTEREST. MINISTER JUSTICE MOCHTAR NOW CLEARLY IN CHARGE AND MAY BELIEVE U.S. WILL ULTIMATELY ACCEPT LESS THAN DETAILED AGREEMENT ON DEFINITION IN EXCHANGE FOR SUPPORT ON STRAITS. IN THESE CIRCUMSTANCES, WE FEEL WE SHOULD MAKE CLEAR AT HIGHEST INDONESIAN LEVELS EFFORTS WE HAVE MADE, BUT NOT PRESS FOR EARLY AGREEMENT WITH GOI AT GENEVA. U.S. OPPOSITION TO ARCHIPELAGO MAY BE REQUIRED, BUT IT SHOULD NOT BE OF NATURE WHICH WILL CAUSE BILATERAL PROBLEMS OR WILL CLOSE DOOR TO ULTIMATE AGREEMENT END SUMMARY.

2. FROM OUTSET OF EFFORTS TO REACH AGREEMENT WITH INDONESIA ON ARCHIPELAGO AND STRAITS, WE HAVE FACED OPPOSING ATTITUDES WITHIN GOI. ONE HELD LARGELY IN HANKAM, HAS RECOGNIZED U.S. MILITARY TRANSIT REQUIREMENTS AS BEING IN INDONESIA'S INTEREST AND HAS UNDERSTOOD THAT THERE CANNOT BE MEANINGFUL ESTABLISHMENT OF ARCHIPELAGO PRINCIPLE WITHOUT AGREEMENT OF MAJOR MARITIME POWERS AND PARTICULARLY U.S.

3. OTHER ATTITUDE, REPRESENTED BY MINISTER JUSTICE AND WORKING LEVELS IN FOREIGN DEPARTMENT, DOES NOT DISPUTE DESIRABILITY TRANSIT RIGHTS FOR U.S. SHIPS AND PLANES AND NEED FOR MARITIME POWER AGREEMENT TO ARCHIPELAGO PRINCIPLE BUT PROBABLY BELIEVES THESE OBJECTIVES CAN BE OBTAINED WITHOUT DIRECT AND DETAILED AGREEMENT WITH U.S. ON ARCHIPELAGO AND STRAITS WHICH WOULD RISK DAMAGING INDONESIA'S SUPPORT IN THIRD WORLD. THIS GROUP WOULD MUCH PREFER HAVING MARITIME POWERS ACCEPT ARCHIPELAGO CONCEPT "IN PRINCIPLE" FOLLOWING WHICH DETAILED UNDERSTANDINGS ON TRANSIT WOULD BE WORKED OUT ON BILATERAL BASIS. THEY BOLSTER THEIR ARGUMENT BY POINTING OUT TWO MARITIME POWERS, U.K. AND U.S.S.R. ALREADY ACCEPTED ARCHIPELAGO PRINCIPLE "IN PRINCIPLE" IN 1958.

4. MARSHAL SOEDARMONO OF HANKAM HAS SHOWN CONSIDERABLE COURAGE AND APPARENT INITIATIVE IN DISCUSSING THESE ISSUES WITH US. WHEN HE AGREED TO DRAFT MEMORANDUM WITH MOORE (JAKARTA 14917), HE MAY WELL HAVE ANTICIPATED THAT HE COULD GAIN ACCEPTANCE OF POSITION ON KEY ISSUES AS HE PUT THEM FORWARD. ITS SEEMS OBVIOUS HE HAS NOT BEEN SUCCESSFUL.

5. RECENT CONTACTS WITH GOI OFFICIALS AND WHAT WE KNOW OF THEIR NEGOTIATING INSTRUCTIONS SUGGEST MOCHTAR ATTITUDE CURRENTLY PREVAILING. THERE IS THUS RELUCTANCE TO REACH AGREEMENT WITH U.S., RELUCTANCE TO BE INVOLVED IN ANY UNDERSTANDING ON WARSHIP PASSAGE AND OPPOSITION TO TRADING SUPPORT FOR ARCHIPELAGO FOR SUPPORT ON STRAITS.

6. WHAT HAS BROUGHT ABOUT THIS DEVELOPMENT? MOCHTAR'S EXPLANATION IS THAT TALKS WITH SOEDARMONO WERE PURELY "TECHNICAL" AND NOT INTENDED TO SUGGEST WHAT INDONESIA'S "POLITICAL" POSITION WOULD BE. THERE ARE UNDOUBTEDLY OTHER FACTORS. CONSULTATIONS INDONESIA HAS HELD WITH NUMEROUS COUNTRIES HAS DISCLOSED COMPLEXITY OF PROBLEM OF GAINING SUPPORT FOR ARCHIPELAGO. SHOWA MARU INCIDENT INCREASED SENSITIVITY ON STRAITS TRANSIT QUESTION. TIMOR PROBLEM HAS MADE INDONESIA MORE SENSITIVE TO THIRD WORLD OPINION. ALLEGED COMMENTS BY U.S. REPRESENTATIVES THAT SOME AGREEMENT HAD BEEN REACHED WITH INDONESIA MENTIONED MOCHTAR AND SOEDARMONO (JAKARTA 2793) ALSO NOT OBVIOUSLY NOT HELPFUL. REPORTS MAY ALSO HAVE CAUSED SOME EMBARRASSMENT TO MARSHAL SOEDARMONO. MOCHTAR IS UNDOUBTEDLY USING THEM ALSO AS ARGUMENT TO DELAY AGREEMENT WITH US. HE MAY WELL BELIEVE THAT IN LAST ANALYSIS WE MAY HAVE TO JOIN OTHER MARITIME POWERS IN ACCEPTING ARCHIPELAGO CONCEPT IN PRINCIPLE WITHOUT INDONESIA'S HAVING TO MAKE COMMITMENT ON STRAITS. HE MAY ALSO FEEL OUTCOME OF CONFERENCE SO UNCERTAIN THAT INDONESIA HAS LITTLE TO GAIN BY MAKING CONCESSIONS TO US AT THIS TIME.

7. MOCHTAR PROBABLY NOW HOLDS KEY TO INDONESIAN POSITION. FOREIGN MINISTER MALIK MAY BE CLOSER TO MARSHAL SOEDARMONO BUT WE DOUBT HE CARRIES MUCH WEIGHT. PRESIDENT SUHARTO MAY LEAN TOWARD HANKAM POSITION BUT IS SUSCEPTIBLE TO ARGUMENTS THAT INDONESIA SHOULD NOT BE ISOLATED FROM NON-ALIGNED WORLD AND THAT NOW IS NOT PROPITIOUS TIME FOR AGREEMENT WITH U.S. AND OTHER MARITIME POWERS. LESSENING U.S. AID AND UNCERTAINTIES REGARDING OUR ROLE IN AREA MAY ALSO MAKE HIM LESS AMENABLE OUR CONCERNS.

8. GIVE THE CIRCUMSTANCES, OUR OPTIONS ARE: A. TO SEEK TO APPROACH PRESIDENT SUHARTO ON BASIS LATEST U.S. MEMORANDUM AND URGE HIS SUPPORT FOR EARLY AGREEMENT. WE DOUBT THIS WOULD WORK AT THIS STAGE. MEMORANDUM FORWARDED BY GENEVA'S 2019 IS LESS FAVORABLE THAN MOORE-SOEDARMONO MEMORANDUM ON KEY ISSUE OF WIDTH OF SEA LANES AND LESS DEFINITE ON OVERFLIGHT.

B. VARIANT WOULD BE TO SEEK MEETING WITH PRESIDENT SUHARTO TO EXPLAIN EFFORT WE HAVE MADE TO REACH AGREEMENT, TO ADVISE HIM THAT WE MAY HAVE TO OPPOSE ARCHIPELAGO CONCEPT AT SOME STATE, BUT THAT WE STAND READY AT ANY TIME TO RESUME EFFORTS AT AGREEMENT. (WE INTEND, IN ANY EVENT, TO INSURE THAT MINISTER OF STATE SUDHARMONO IS AWARE OF THIS POSITION.)

C. THAT AMBASSADOR MOORE PRESS FOR EARLY MEETING WITH MOCHTAR AFTER HIS ARRIVAL AT GENEVA IN ORDER TO MAKE FURTHER EFFORT AT AGREEMENT.

D. THAT AMBASSADOR MOORE MAKE KNOWN HIS READINESS TO MEET WITH MOCHTAR AT ANY TIME, BUT THAT USDEL NOT PRESS FOR FURTHER MEETINGS WITH INDONESIANS AT THIS TIME.

9. EMBASSY WOULD OPT FOR COMBINATION OF OPTIONS B AND D AT THIS TIME. WE DOUBT FURTHER EFFORTS TO RESOLVE REMAINING DIFFERENCES LIKELY TO BE FRUITFUL AT LEAST UNTIL LATER IN CONFERENCE. IN INTERIM, OUR OBJECTIVE SHOULD BE TO MINIMIZE DAMAGE TO OUR BILATERAL RELATIONS ARISING FROM ANY POSITIONS WE MAY HAVE TO TAKE AGAINST ARCHIPELAGO CONCEPT AND TO KEEP DOOR OPEN FOR FRUITFUL DISCUSSIONS WHEN TIME IS RIPE. OPPORTUNITY TO SEE PRESIDENT SUHARTO WILL PROBABLY ARISE DURING VISIT OF CHAIRMAN OF JOINT CHIEFS BROWN, TENTATIVELY APRIL 5-7, AT WHICH TIME OUR POSITION WITH RESPECT LOS CAN BE MENTIONED. GENERAL BROWN SHOULD BE APPROPRIATELY BRIEFED.

10. ALTHOUGH WE HAVE WARNED INDONESIANS OF POSSIBLE U.S. OPEN OPPOSITION TO ARCHIPELAGO CONCEPT, THIS IS STILL SENSITIVE MATTER. WE WOULD HOPE USDEL COULD DELAY MOVE IN THIS DIRECTION, AT LEAST UNTIL WE HAVE HAD CHANCE TO SEE PRESIDENT SUHARTO. IN EVENT WE MUST MOVE IN THIS DIRECTION, INDONESIAN REACTION WOULD DEPEND IN PART ON WHETHER WE ACTIVELY SOUGHT OTHERS TO OPPOSE AS WELL, WHETHER WE WERE ISOLATED IN OUR OPPOSITION AND ON WHETHER WE MADE ANY MENTION OF OUR PREVIOUS DISCUSSIONS WITH INDONESIANS. OUR OPPOSITION WILL NOT BE UNEXPECTED; IT MAY, BRIEFLY, BE WELCOME, BUT IF IT IS DONE IN MANNER WHICH AWAKENS INDONESIAN RESENTMENT, DOOR COULD WELL CLOSE TO ULTIMATE AGREEMENT WITH THEM.
NEWSOM

1 Source: Ford Library, National Security Adviser, Presidential Country Files for East Asia and the Pacific, Box 6, Indonesia, State Department Telegrams to SECSTATE, NODIS (2). Secret; Immediate, Nodis; Stadis. Repeated immediate to the Geneva Mission.

122. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to President Ford, Washington, May 7, 1975. 122. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to President Ford, Washington, May 7, 1975.1

Washington, May 7, 1975

THE WHITE HOUSE
WASHINGTON
ACTION

May 7, 1975

MEMORANDUM FOR: THE PRESIDENT
FROM: HENRY A. KISSINGER [HK initialed]

SUBJECT: FY 76 Development Loan Funds for Indonesia and Morocco

State's memorandum at Tab A requests your approval to restore $20 million in FY 76 development lending for Indonesia, and $5 million for Morocco. These had been excluded by OMB on the grounds that military assistance would be preferable for the political impact sought and that the Congressional impact and opportunity costs of providing balance of payments assistance to countries not needing it would be adverse. These restorations would be accomplished by reprogramming $25 million in development loan funds from the present $100 million level for India in order to remain within the total AID FY 76 development loan budget you approved.

In spite of an overall balance of payments surplus, individual incomes in Indonesia are low. Since oil revenues will not affect the economy for several years, a gesture now will provide political leverage which a much larger sum could not attain later. The destabilization of Indochina through recent events, together with the shift of several Southeast Asian nations closer to Peking, makes it essential for us to maintain good relations with Indonesia. The MAP levels are now being reviewed following Congressional appropriation action and may not permit much military aid, so we will need to rely heavily on economic aid ties.

Reprogramming is recommended for Indonesia to enhance our credibility with the Suharto Government. Several months ago all economic aid to Indonesia for FY 76 was tentatively eliminated except for a small amount of technical assistance. Last year we reduced our economic assistance from $176 million to $70 million — a drastic reduction from the over $200 million annual level of the previous several years. This cutback, which was deemed necessary in view of Indonesia's oil revenue windfall last year, accompanied Congressional action to reduce FY 75 military assistance (final appropriations may be only half our original request to Congress) and to exclude Indonesia (as an OPEC member), from trade preferences under the new Trade Act.

These actions, coupled with Indonesian pessimism over the reliability of U.S. intentions toward Indonesia, have led the Suharto Government to fear that the U.S. has downgraded Indonesia's importance as a major stabilizing force in Southeast Asia, and that the U.S. no longer intends to help Indonesia toward a more active regional role. President Suharto probably is also puzzled at our reduced support in view of your assurances to him last October that we intended to seek "a substantial level of U.S. military and economic assistance for Indonesia." As a result, Ambassador Newsom has lately encountered reduced access to Indonesian officials, and the Indonesians have been less cooperative on international issues such as the ICCS in Vietnam. Your recent invitation to President Suharto to visit Washington next July will help reverse this trend, but we need to reinforce your invitation by restoring some level of economic assistance.

The restoration for Morocco is proposed in order to fulfill our assurances to King Hassan to help Morocco meet economic and military requirements. These assurances were offered to encourage the King to continue a broad and productive relationship with the U.S., embracing U.S. access to military facilities in Morocco, U.S. interest in maintaining Morocco's pro-western political tendency as a balance to more radical regimes in North Africa, and a constructive Moroccan attitude toward the Middle East settlement negotiations. In addition to pressures for more military hardware.

Reduction of the FY 76 loan program for India from $100 million to $75 million would bring it to the FY 75 Congressional presentation level of $75 million.

OMB maintains its opposition to these-restorations and its view that the political impact sought can better be obtained through military assistance.

RECOMMENDATION

That you approve restoration of $20 million for Indonesia and $5 million for Morocco, and reprogramming of the necessary $25 million from the present $100 million FY 76 program for India.
Approve [GRF initialed]
Disapprove

1 Source: Ford Library, National Security Adviser, Presidential Country Files for East Asia and the Pacific, Box 6, Indonesia (2). Secret. Sent for action. Ford initialed the approve option on May 9. Tab A is attached but not published. On May 9, Davis informed Springsteen of the fund reallocation. (Ford Library, National Security Adviser, Presidential Country Files for East Asia and the Pacific, Box 6, Indonesia [2])

123. National Intelligence Estimate 55–1–75, Washington, June 30, 1975. 123. National Intelligence Estimate 55–1–75, Washington, June 30, 1975.1

Washington, June 30, 1975

PROSPECTS FOR INDONESIA
SCOPE NOTE

This estimate covers the next five years.

KEY JUDGMENTS

Indonesia has good prospects for economic growth over the next five years. Oil revenues, private foreign investment, and foreign aid will permit continued development and diversification of domestic production capacity, although weaknesses in the indigenous institutional framework could slow the process.

Some of the benefits of progress—a stabilized currency, higher levels of production, rising incomes, greater availabilities of consumer goods, improved communications, and new employment opportunities—are filtering down to the general population, although the extent is far from clear. But socio-economic problems, of which population pressure is the most intractable, remain very serious indeed. Moreover, development itself has been heightening social tensions—undermining tradition-sanctioned economic relationships and procedures, destabilizing rural society, stimulating people to move to the cities in numbers that strain social services and exceed employment opportunities, heightening aspirations beyond the possibilities of fulfilling them, and underlining the greatly increased disparities between the conspicuous and corruption-fed consumption of the few and the continued poverty of the many.

Over the period of this estimate, festering social problems will provide rallying cries for the politically disaffected. These now include virtually all of the politically significant civilian elements—party politicians, students, intellectuals, and most important of all, the Muslims—all of whom expected to play a more important role in post-Sukarno Indonesia. Instead, increasingly their activities have been restricted by even more pervasive and effective controls than existed before the military assumed power. However, opposition or potential opposition groups are weak, divided, without widely attractive leaders, and incapable of effective challenge to a united military.

At present, there are no serious challenges to military unity. If this remains the case, the Suharto government will be able to maintain itself in control. There are fissures, however, within the military that could become more important with time. Dissatisfaction with Suharto's leadership could result in his displacement. But if this represented a general consensus, it would not necessarily be destabilizing and would probably result in little more than a change in the cast of characters at the top. Greater changes could result from the breakdown of consensus among more or less evenly balanced factions, seeking to exploit civilian grievances in the struggle for power. A change of government precipitated by serious social upheaval could bring to the fore a puritanical, ultranationalist military reform movement that might well be hostile to continued foreign investment and to a free enterprise economy.

Economic hardship, especially in Java, social dislocations in urban and rural areas, and political frustrations could combine to produce a massive and uncontrollable breakdown of public order. During the period of this estimate violence on this scale is unlikely. There is a good chance, however, that a combination of events and forces will precipitate limited but still serious political disorders. Even under these circumstances if the military remains united, they will be able to maintain control.

Indonesia will probably continue to lean toward the United States and the West. It will focus its foreign and security policy on the Southeast Asian region where, its leaders believe, Indonesia is destined to play the principal role. The other ASEAN states, however, do not automatically accept Indonesian leadership. There are lingering suspicions that Jakarta's regional model is merely a subtler form of Sukarno's grand design for Indonesian regional hegemony. And, as its neighbors recognize, Jakarta for some time to come will be unable to provide practical underpinnings for its regional proposals or assume significant responsibilities in the area.

1 Source: Central Intelligence Agency, OPI 122 (National Intelligence Council), Job 79R01012A, Box 498, NIE 55–1–75, Folder 5. Secret. All members of the U.S. Intelligence Board concurred in the estimate except the representatives of the FBI and the Deputy Assistant Administrator for National Security, Energy Research and Development Administration. The intelligence sections of the Army, Navy, and Air Force also participation in the estimate.

124. Memorandum of Conversation, Camp David, Maryland, July 5, 1975. 124. Memorandum of Conversation, Camp David, Maryland, July 5, 1975.1

Camp David, Maryland, July 5, 1975

MEMORANDUM
THE WHITE HOUSE
WASHINGTON

MEMORANDUM OF CONVERSATION

PARTICIPANTS:

President Gerald R. Ford

Dr. Henry A. Kissinger, Secretary of State and Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs

Lt. General Brent Scowcroft, Deputy Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs

DATE AND TIME: Saturday, July 5, 1975
PLACE: Camp David Maryland

Kissinger: The major thing with the Indonesians is they always smile. But Suharto is a tough cookie. He is anti-Communist but he has doubts about our steadfastness. He likes the idea of special emissaries.

It might be awkward if I was in the first meeting. I would be as firm as possible about the American role in Asia. They are pathological about the Chinese, and worried about Vietnam and the Soviet Union.

The President: The Chinese Communists under Sukarno were most influential weren't they?

Kissinger: Yes, but they loath the Chinese racially. We have to be careful about Indonesia. We tend to take things for granted. Remember they used to get all their military equipment from the Soviet Union. Here is a list of the equipment we could give them.

Ask his views about how Southeast Asia is and how we can organize it. You could send a note for me after about 30 minutes. By then I could have the other group organized. Simon isn't here, so we can't have an OPEC lecture.

1 Source: Ford Library, National Security Adviser, Memoranda of Conversation, Box 13. Secret; Nodis.

125. Memorandum of Conversation, Camp David, Maryland, July 5, 1975, 12:45–2 p.m. 125. Memorandum of Conversation, Camp David, Maryland, July 5, 1975, 12:45–2 p.m.1

Camp David, Maryland, July 5, 1975

THE WHITE HOUSE
WASHINGTON
MEMORANDUM OF CONVERSATION

PARTICIPANTS:

His Excellency Adam Malik, Indonesian Minister of Foreign Affair

Dr. Widjojo Nitisastro, Minister of Economy, Finance and Industry; Chairman of the National Planning Board

Lieutenant General Sudharmono, Minister, State Secretary

His Excellency Rusmin Nurjadin, the Ambassador of the Republic of Indonesia to the United States

Lieutenant General Tjokropranolo, Military Secretary to the President

Mr. R.B.I.N. Didi Djajadiningrat, Director General for Political Affairs, Department of Foreign Affairs

Lieutenant General Widya Latief, Chief of State Protocol, Director General of Protocol, Department of Foreign Affairs

General Leonardus Moerdani, Deputy Chief of State Intelligence

Secretary Henry A. Kissinger, Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs

Mr. William Casey, President and Chairman of the Export-Import Bank

Mr. Daniel Parker, Administrator, Agency for International Development

Mr. Charles Robinson, Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs

Mr. Philip Habib, Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian and Pacific Affairs

Mr. Robert Ellsworth, Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs

Mr. Charles Cooper, Assistant Secretary of Treasury for International Affairs

Ambassador Henry Catto, Chief of Protocol

Mr. W.R. Smyser, National Security Council Staff Member

DATE, TIME & PLACE: Saturday, July 5, 1975
12:45 p.m. to 2 p.m.
Camp David

Kissinger: I am delighted to welcome you here today for this conversation.

The relations between our countries have been close for some time. We admire your internal and external programs and policies. We appreciate the moderate policies that Indonesia has pursued in international forums.

In my conversations with the Foreign Minister, I have developed respect and friendship for him.

We meet at a time when events in Southeast Asia have undoubtedly raised questions about how the United States sees its role in Southeast Asia and in the world. Despite these events in Southeast Asia, many of which are due to internal conditions that it was beyond anybody's power to affect, the United States is determined to continue to play a role in Asia.

The United States considers Indonesia one of the principal countries in Asia, and the main center of power in Southeast Asia. This is the basis of our approach, and we will deal with you on the basis of that attitude. We will also deal with you as friends.

You may wish to get this meeting started by giving us the benefit of your views.

Malik: I am glad to have the chance to meet today.

As for the relations between the United States and Indonesia, we have never had any doubts despite events in Southeast Asia.

This relationship is not based on an American desire to be dependent on Indonesia or vice versa, but on a sense of the common interests that we share.

When Mr. Habib visited Indonesia, this was conveyed to him. So the difficulty is not in Indonesian-American relations but the problem is that with the new situation in Southeast Asia, Indonesia needs to assess its role in the new situation.

As you may remember, when we founded ASEAN seven years ago, we already considered the possibility that eventually ASEAN would have to face a Communist menace in Southeast Asia. But of course seven years ago we could not speak the same language as now with our neighbors in Southeast Asia. Then, many neighbors wanted to be wholly dependent on you.

Now the situation is different. Now some Southeast Asia nations are hoping that Indonesia would fulfill a role on which they could depend. But this is wrong.

At the last ASEAN Foreign Ministers conference, Indonesia made it clear that we could not be dependent on anyone but that together we should strengthen ourselves.

So there has been a change of thinking. But we still need some time.

Our problem is how every Southeast Asian country will implement its resolve to strengthen itself.

At Kuala Lumpur, we gave our own views on strengthening our national resilience, but I stressed that each country would have to find its own role and its own method.

For example, Thailand; I think Thailand is now enveloped in a kind of fervor. They want to do everything democratically. But they are facing a threatening force.

Kissinger: Have you explained this to them?

Malik: We have told them that, in combating Communism, they must have their own ideology. So far as we can see, they do not yet have that. They also need closer cooperation between the civilians and the military. At present, we have the impression that the Khukrit government is not cooperating with the military.

Thailand has strength. The King is a symbol who is widely accepted. So we suggested four points to them: — First, to use the King as symbol of unity.

— Second, to use it to develop a national ideology. This should also be based on Buddhism.

— Third, we suggested the military and the civilians cooperate more.

— Fourth, we suggested that, on the basis of those elements, they build a program of economic and social development.

We will see how they do it and we will help them. In Malaysia, we face a different problem. They have a democratic system with a strong ruling party. They have a difficulty on how to deal with the large Chinese minority. They must also be very careful in developing their relations between west and east Malaysia. Between west and east there are different styles and prescriptions. For example, in their relations with China...

Kissinger: Is one part more pro-Chinese? Is one part more in favor of relations?

Malik: The eastern part is more reluctant because of the Moslem influence. Also, the older leaders are less eager to have relations with the PRC.

In Singapore, the position is not so difficult to assess. Ninety percent of the population is Chinese. Lee Kuan Yew's fear of relations with the PRC is that the Singapore/Chinese may develop into a target for the PRC once relations are established.

The situation in the Philippines depends on how far Marcos, who commands the majority, is able to get the people to support their policies. I think our suggestions for Thailand also apply to the Philippines. It also needs a national ideology, though a different one from Thailand. It also needs effective economic and social programs.

In developing national resilience, we are not just concerned with social and economic programs but also with strengthening defense. So far, ASEAN has developed some military cooperation such as intelligence cooperation and joint exercises. We intend in a short time to have meetings of officials of our countries to determine what cooperation we have in the defense field. But, even if this defense cooperation will proceed as we hope, none of the ASEAN nations at present has the capacity to produce material for defense. The ASEAN nations need assistance from outside countries in producing defense goods.

As we see it now, American support will not decrease but the form of U.S. assistance will change.

If we want to achieve our objectives, we must proceed in such a way as mot to be open to charges that foreign forces are among us, but we want to work with our friends.

The thrust of Indonesian and ASEAN policies has met with Australian support, which faces its own concerns. If ASEAN succeeds, it will mean a lot for Australia.

I will give just one example: The ASEAN countries will be able to build up a capacity for detecting any movement in the area, and eventually to include Australia, and this will also have significance for the United States. We would be able to enhance the capacity to detect movement in the sea lanes.

It is obvious that one country has to take the initiative. We are prepared to do that.

I think that whether the United States remains or removes itself from Thailand bases or from Subic Bay, if we have a common understanding it would not be significant whether you stay.

We must explore how ASEAN can use the bases and continue them.

We believe that America still has large interests and responsibilities in the area, which we think you will meet, but in a new and different way — hopefully as I have indicated.

Of course, in facing the future developments in Southeast Asia, the time factor is important. We need time. Kuala Lumpur recognized this, so that the decision to extend our hands to Indochina took this into consideration — to give time to strengthen ourselves.

We do not know what you will do. It may be the sense of not being threatened by America would have an effect on those countries.

I tried to sketch my ideas. What do you think?

Kissinger: I appreciate your lucid exposition. Let me respond briefly. The philosophy you have outlined can find substantial support in the United States. Events in Indochina have shown that the United States cannot do things for others and that governments must develop their own support.

The principles you have suggested regarding Thailand will find our support.

Your attitude on the role of Indonesia is the same as what we have always affirmed, and we are prepared to cooperate.

The suggestion that the United States should work with others and not be the principal issue is in accord with American domestic attitudes and with our international role.

The question is how to make this concrete. There are a number of specific issues.

We will not try to keep bases when they are not wanted. In Thailand, the presence of U.S. bases may become more and more problematic. But, nations have to understand that it is very difficult for the United States to withdraw from our bases when continuing a security relationship.

We will not make an issue of keeping the bases. But it will have an effect. In Thailand this is more understandable. Even in the Philippines, we will go in the direction that you have outlined. With respect to the Indochina states, I have negotiated with the North Vietnamese for 15 years. I have few illusions about their purpose. You say you have to gain time, I agree with that. We have no objections to ASEAN relations with Indochina. But you should have no illusions. North Vietnam does not expand because it is threatened but on the basis of healthy desires of its own.

Our press used to say the Le Duc Tho was toughest in negotiations when we were doing the nastiest things. But the reverse was true. We must face the fact that North Vietnam will be expansionistic though it may change.

What will we do?

On aid, we have better uses for our aid program than the rehabilitation of Indochina. Political relations would have to improve before aid could develop. If there were a catastrophe or some humanitarian purpose, perhaps something could be arranged. But we think that those who gave them the aid to make a military conquest should also help them with other things.

There will, therefore, be no U.S. aid program for Indochina.

On diplomacy, we can be sure that my friends in Hanoi will conduct diplomacy that will be highly obnoxious to all their neighbors, including the Chinese and Malaysia, though perhaps Indonesia later.

North Vietnam will try to reintroduce us to the scene to trouble others. We may play along, for our own reasons. But we do not have to pay them.

There is no material antagonism between the United States and North Vietnam. We just want them to leave their neighbors alone. If they pursue moderate policies, we will cooperate. If they threaten, we will support our traditional friends. If they approach us, we will conduct ourselves accordingly so long as they do not conduct an aggressive policy.

I do not think we need to worry about missing some subtle signal. I have found that they can be very clear when they are ready to move.

We can survive without diplomatic relations with the DRV. We will not harass them, but we will not run to them. We will support our friends and we will hope that the policies you have described will work.

You outlined some ideas. We want to support you. The problem is how to do it concretely. The problem is how we can work together on economic and security issues.

Let me speak frankly. Many countries want to work with us. How do we prevent others from taking postures against us? This is also an issue we have to consider. We do not ask for support, but there is a limit beyond which constant confrontation cannot be carried without affecting the relationship.

We must keep in touch on this. We welcome your remarks on Australia and we will cooperate.

On the whole, we welcome your exposition and we feel there is a better basis for a long time peace in these ideas than when the U.S. was obliged to do everything. We think Indonesia will play a leading role. We want to work with you. The question is how to do it concretely.

Malik: I think once there is a broad agreement among us on cooperation we can find things. We must do our homework. We have to develop our own policies, discuss them with ASEAN and then we will discuss again with you on concrete matters.

Kissinger: You may do it with a certainty that we will want to be supportive.

Malik: We have experts here in the economic and military field; what do we do?

Kissinger: I thought that, perhaps, the experts might speak.

Widjojo: Please let me address some of these matters.

If we want to develop concrete proposals, the best thing is to find out what is the most pressing problem. One of the key problems is to stabilize the prices of raw materials. This is a big issue. We were concerned at the lack of results in Paris last year.

As members of OPEC, we cannot leave the raw material problem separate from the problem of energy. We cannot just talk about energy and ignore other raw materials. We would just be talking of our problem but not of the concerns of the Malaysians or the Philippines. What we do must reflect the interests of our group as a whole.

Another important matter is the transfer of resources. We appreciate your problem regarding aid, but we would like to see the U.S. continue to play an important role in bringing about the mobilization of resources for Indonesia and Indochina.

There has been a disconcerting role of yours in the past in the IBRD. We were concerned that, because we are in OPEC, some blocks will be put in the flow of funds to us. We consider this a major source of funds for our development.

These are the things I would like to see.

Kissinger: Let me make an observation and then ask Mr. Cooper to state our views.

First, when you say that the issue is to relate the problems of the developing and the industrialized nations, this is the dominant issue — at this Special Session, at the General Assembly, and in Lima.

My general observation has to do with the conduct of the developing toward the undeveloped nations.

You state it as a common problem we have to deal with. This means that we have differences but that we can still talk.

The way Algeria states the problem is unacceptable. It leads to confrontation. We will have to organize ourselves. We will win, but all will lose.

We cannot deal with this by confrontation. We cannot be constantly confronted with manifestos that put us on the moral defensive and then ask us to cooperate.

This does not, of course, apply to Indonesia, but I wanted you to have our views.

Having said this in general, let me deal with the specifics. In this country, many oppose talking about raw materials. We are prepared to discuss raw materials in common with the problem of energy. Most of our economists do not think that price stabilization is the way to handle this.

We are working hard to see how we can cooperate. We will try to find some solution, if not price stabilization, which will respond to the fear of extreme price fluctuation.

Mr. Robinson has just come back from a trip. We do not exclude the relationship between raw materials and energy, but we are opposed to a monster conference which will just lead to abstract declarations. But we will try to cooperate. We hope a dialogue on a wider basis will emerge.

As for the difficulties you raise, the OPEC price escalation presents difficult problems for us. I have opposed legislative and administrative actions against the OPEC countries, especially when they are our friends. I think you will find that some of your difficulties will be eased in coming months.

Let me now ask Mr. Cooper to address our position.

Cooper: On raw materials, you have expressed our position very clearly.

With regard to development, it is now very hard to sustain soft loans in the U.S. Congress. Also, soft loans are limited in amounts.

We recognize the limitations in which you have to work. We recognize your massive needs, despite your oil.

How this is managed is a kind of operational problem. But there is no feeling in the U.S. Government that the World Bank and the ADB should not make a major effort to help Indonesia. I would be misleading you, however, if I were to tell you that the prospect for soft loans is very bright. With the pipeline that we have now built in, it is hard to explain to the U.S. Congress.

(At this point the meeting broke up as Presidents Ford and Suharto were moving to lunch.)

1 Source: Ford Library, National Security Adviser, NSC Staff for East Asia and Pacific Affairs, Convenience Files, Box 21, Visit of President Suharto of Indonesia, July 5, 1975 (2). Secret; Exdis.

126. Memorandum of Conversation, Camp David, Maryland, July 5, 1975, 12:40–2 p.m. 126. Memorandum of Conversation, Camp David, Maryland, July 5, 1975, 12:40–2 p.m.1

Camp David, Maryland, July 5, 1975

MEMORANDUM
THE WHITE HO USE
WASHINGTON

MEMORANDUM OF CONVERSATION

PARTICIPANTS:

President Ford

President Suharto, President of Indonesia

Dr. Henry A. Kissinger, Secretary of State and Assistant to the President for NSA

Lt. General Brent Scowcroft, Deputy Assistant to the President for NSA

Mr. Widodo (Indonesian Interpreter)

DATE & TIME: July 5, 1975 - Saturday
12:40 p.m. - 2:00 p.m.
(1:44 Secretary Kissinger joined)
PLACE: Laurel Cabin, Camp David, Maryland

President: Let me reiterate how pleased we are to have you visit. Secretary Kissinger told me you were here in 1970 when President Nixon was in office. We are just as concerned about our good relations with Indonesia as we were earlier.

Let me say now that we are as firmly committed and interested in Southeast Asia. The events in Indochina have in no way diminished our interest or commitment in the area.

We are committed to detente with the Soviet Union, but it has to be a mutual relationship. We will not let them have a bigger piece of the benefits. We will continue it as long as it is mutually beneficial. We recognize that the Soviet Union keeps assisting and strengthening its friends, just as we do. But they cannot take advantage of us.

In my trip to Brussels, I told my NATO allies that we were committed to them completely, and I want you and the countries in your area to feel the same.

We want to continue our assistance programs. As you know, that depends on the Congress, which has been cutting our program in recent years. This Congress is interested, but it is my intention to increase aid. We are able to make available some military equipment items to help you in your situation — four naval vessels, which may not be in tip-top condition, some tanks, aircraft such as C-47, and four C-123 transports.

Suharto: May I first convey my appreciation and gratitude, Mr. President, for your invitation to visit the United States. And on behalf of the Government and people of Indonesia, may I convey our heartfelt congratulations for the 4th of July. I would take this valuable opportunity and discuss the problems affecting not only Indonesia but all of Southeast Asia in light of recent changes which have swept the peninsula. I had already obtained valuable information from Mr. Habib and from you in respect to furthering American responsibility to its allies in the Southeast Asia region. After obtaining that information and valuable assessment, we have no fear that the United States will abandon its responsibility toward peace in the Southeast Asia region. Considering the bitter and sad experience of the American people in Vietnam, the U.S. has given such great help and to have it turn out so it is necessary to assess why it happened to come out so very badly after such American sacrifice.

If you would allow me, I will elaborate on Indonesia's problems in our struggles for independence against Communism; it will help us understand. It is not the military strength of the Communists but their fanaticism and ideology which is the principal element of their strength. To consider this, each country in the area needs an ideology of its own with which to counter the Communists. But a national ideology is not enough by itself. The wellbeing of the people must be improved so that it strengthens and supports the national ideology. From the experience of Laos and Vietnam in the past, they seem to have forgotten this national ideology to get the support of the people. Despite their superiority of arms in fighting the Communists, the human factor was not there. They lacked this national ideology to rally the people to fight Communism.

It is in this spirit that Indonesia has been unifying and nationalizing the people to prepare to fight the threats which eventually will be made against our independence. So we are busily engaged in encouraging and consolidating in Southeast Asia this national ideology and cooperating with others in the areas of culture, economics, and so on. This is of course to prepare for any eventuality of an Indochina eventually dominated by the Communists.

What will happen after Vietnam? There are two possibilities: Whether they will apply Communism just within their borders in order to improve the conditions of their peoples. If so, we are okay. Ho Chi Minh has always wanted to unify all of Vietnam. We don't know yet what is going on and whether they will unify or whether there will be two separate Vietnams.

President: How long do you think it will take for them to decide this?

Suharto: I have been trying to find out from the Communists and Tito, and the judgment is that the consolidation will take five years, but by then, they will be unified.

President: How about the relations between Vietnam, Cambodia and Laos?

Suharto: Let me explain. As far as Cambodia, they recognize the GRUNK and Sihanouk — although he is still in exile. I asked Tito why he didn't support Sihanouk's return and he said it would take some time. Tito's reply was that due to prevailing conditions in Phnom Penh, it is not safe for Sihanouk to return. There are still some dangerous elements. But my personal opinion is that they don't want him back yet. My information is that it will take Cambodia about five years to consolidate, so it will be similar to Vietnam. Considering that the time for consolidation is so long — five years — they might want two Vietnams and one Cambodia, all three joining a non-aligned world. So they may want to stay separate but with their policies aligned.

Even if it takes some time to consolidate, events will certainly encourage similar elements in Thailand, Malaysia, the Philippines and elsewhere. Of course, this Communist ideological solidarity will take the form of encouraging these elements to step up their activities among labor, farmers and youth. When they have built up the Communist movements, the Vietnamese will be able to supply the military equipment necessary for them to undertake military activities.

President: Are all the Communists working together?

Suharto: The Soviet Union and the Chinese don't work together. They are competing to expand their own individual influence in the region.

The second possibility is they may not stay within their borders but seek to Communize the region and the world. If so, we have to find out whether they will support the Soviet Union and China. Right now, I think Vietnam won't take sides, because then it would become a target between the two. Instead it will work for independent national Communist movements. But in any case, these events will have brief impact on the neighboring countries. The question is how to counter it. Knowing well the Communist tactics — infiltration, fanaticism, etc., it is essential for each country to have a strong national ideology — to strengthen itself in the political, economic and military areas.

We are fortunate we already have this national ideology — Pantchestita(?). The question is, is it strong enough? Here it is important that we strengthen our economic development so we can support our Pantchestita(?). Therefore if we fail in economic developments, it will create a lack of confidence of our national ideology and create doubts in the people and leave them susceptible to other ideologies.

President: You have done very well in controlling inflation. We have had problems in that regard, but we are now making progress. I understand if you don't make economic progress there will be the growth of a Communist ideology in Indonesia.

Suharto: The principal factor is creating a national stability principally in the economic and monetary fields. The role of the U.S. in her responsibility toward this area — the U.S. won't abandon her role, but the American assistance role should be reviewed, both in relation to Indonesia and all of Southeast Asia. Particularly in assisting and supporting those countries in establishing national resilience. That would help in creating a regional resilience and help keep out Communism. But we are running against time because the Communists are working very hard in these countries to convert them to Communism.

The best way of fighting subversion is intelligence and territorial operations, so we can detect Communist activity when it first arises. In carrying these out when the people are participating, we rely heavily on communications. Therefore, communication between areas is very important to knowing when problems emerge, so we can deal with them immediately. If the danger becomes greater and the insurgency becomes greater, we will require mobile units to send to these areas to squelch subversion. To supply and maintain this mobility we will need both sea and air transport so we can put down insurgency before it becomes too big to stop. Especially in the navy field, we need to improve the conditions of the navy — not big ships but to be able to transport men and materials to be able to carry out these operations. Particularly, ships which can fight any attempts to interfere with these operations to cope with insurgency. Indonesia has many islands so we will need many of these ships with great mobility.

Especially at this moment, intelligence and territorial operations are very important. We are in a better condition to do this than other Southeast nations. With American assistance, we have built a national resilience and we are working hard at building it further.

President: How big a Navy do you have and how big do you need?

Suharto: We have many capable navy men prepared to man the Soviet ships we have — that were gathered to liberate West Iran. These ships are now mothballed and useless, however.

If you will agree with those principles to strengthen the national resilience — especially in the military field, we can set up a joint committee to decide what is needed in the Navy, Army and Air Force. We don't need new equipment, just to make them serviceable.

President: I think we should set up a joint commission to decide what is needed and what we can do to supply those needs. I will talk to Secretary Kissinger.

Suharto: But the most important need is not in the military field but in the economic area. This is where we must build the nation. Indonesia can be an example to other countries of the importance of strengthening their national resilience.

President: Our Ex-Im Bank has been working with your people. I would expect we would continue to work with you on providing more credits and grants. It is important that we help with everything we can make available in order to contribute to the essential development you have described.

Suharto: In view of our efforts to accelerate developments, we have four sources: The IGGI (Inter-Governmental Group for Indonesia), international organizations like the World Bank, the Ex-Im Bank, and private banks. These four go from soft to hard terms for loans. We are already obtaining joint Ex-Im commercial loans, and terms are still lower through commercial banks. We hope to continue these loans.

President: In Fortune I saw a ten-page story urging private investment. Is the investment picture encouraging?

Suharto: The figure has now reached $5 billion. What remains is for industry which requires having capital input. Examples of these huge projects are liquefied natural gas ($800 million), nickel ($900 million), copper, and others. These will require the assistance of other countries to get the credits.

With regard to our efforts to strengthen our national resilience, I want to mention the archipelago principle. This principle has been followed by the Indonesian people for years. The purpose is to force ourselves in as a unified nation without any territorial ambition. From various countries we have gotten favorable response, but I see some hesitancy in the U.S. about this principle. Indonesia doesn't want to create difficulties with other countries in establishing this principle in its territory.

President: We were encouraged at the progress of the Law of the Sea Conference and we hope for further progress. We do understand your problem. We do have reservations, and we would be happy to meet with your people to work it out. We must have maneuverability if we are to carry out our responsibility in the world. I assure you we will work with your people to try to work out a mutual understanding.

Suharto: Talks have been conducted bilaterally between us already. The third point I want to raise is Portuguese decolonization. Starting with our basic principle, the new Constitution of 1945, Indonesia will not commit aggression against other countries. So Indonesia will not use force against the territory of other countries. With respect to Timor, we support carrying out decolonization through the process of self-determination. In ascertaining the views of the Timor people, there are three possibilities: independence, staying with Portugal, or to join Indonesia. With such a small territory and no resources, an independent country would hardly be viable. With Portugal it would be a big burden with Portugal so far away. If they want to integrate into Indonesia as an independent nation, that is not possible because Indonesia is one unitary state. So the only way is to integrate into Indonesia.

President: Have the Portuguese set a date yet for allowing the Timor people to make their choice?

Suharto: There is no set date yet, but it is agreed in principle that the wishes of the people will be sought. The problem is that those who want independence are those who are Communist-influenced. Those wanting Indonesian integration are being subjected to heavy pressure by those who are almost Communists. The Communist elements practically sabotaged the recent meeting in Macao. I want to assert that Indonesia doesn't want to insert itself into Timor self-determination, but the problem is how to manage the self-determination process with a majority wanting unity with Indonesia. These are some of the problems I wanted to raise on this auspicious meeting with you.

President: I greatly appreciate the chance to learn your views, especially on the events in Vietnam as they consolidate — and the thought it would take five years to consolidate.

I would like to mention OPEC.

[Secretary Kissinger enters.]

We appreciate your not joining the embargo in '73-74. We are concerned about OPEC raising prices in the fall meeting. We are concerned about the effect on the economic recovery of the United States, the world, and the Third World. I know you feel badly about the Trade Bill's penalties against OPEC members. We are trying to get Congress to change that to make the penalties selective, not comprehensive.

Suharto: We share with the other OPEC states the view that we should not confront the consumers in this energy crisis. We are also aware that some producers have taken a tough stand. We are a small producer, but the others still listen to us. The September meeting I don't think will focus on a price increase but how to keep the purchasing power of the producers from falling. Therefore Indonesia, with the others, is studying the problem seriously so that oil revenue will benefit the people despite the inflation and recessions which have beset the world.

President: We have been through difficult times and we are now coming out of it. The oil price increase would have an injurious effect on our recovery and thus our ability to help the world's economic recovery.

In the past you have sent a special emissary to contact Secretary Kissinger on occasion. I would like that arrangement to continue under me if you agree.

Suharto: I fully share the importance of sending an emissary to contact Secretary Kissinger. I haven't done it so much recently because of the problems that both our countries have been facing recently. I would also agree to resuming these contacts so we can maintain a similarity of views on problems, like with Japan and Australia.

President: Lunch is ready.

1 Source: Ford Library, National Security Adviser, Memoranda of Conversation, Box 13. Secret; Nodis.

127. Minutes of the Secretary of State’s Staff Meeting, Washington, August 12, 1975. 127. Minutes of the Secretary of State’s Staff Meeting, Washington, August 12, 1975.1

Washington, August 12, 1975

[Omitted here is the summary of the meeting.]

The secretary's 8:00 a.m. Staff Meeting
Tuesday, August 12, 1975

PARTICIPANTS:

THE SECRETARY OF STATE — HENRY A. KISSINGER

P - Mr. Sisco

M - Mr. Eagleburger

AF Ambassador Mulcahy, Acting

ARA - Mr. Rogers

EA - Mr. Habib

EUR - Mr. Armitage, Acting

NEA - Mr. Atherton

INR - Mr. Hyland

S/P - Mr. Lord

EB - Mr. Enders

S/PRS - Mr. Funseth

PM - Mr. Vest

IO - Mr. Buffum

H - Mr. Jenkins, Acting

L - Mr. Schwebel, Acting

S/S - Mr. Borg, Acting

S - Mr. Bremer

PR0CEEDINGS

SECRETARY KISSINGER: Joe.

MR. SISCO: Nothing.

MR. EAGLEBURGER: Nothing.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: Phil.

MR. HABIB: We have had an incomplete series of reports on a coup in Portuguese Timor, which is creating little bit of flak in Indonesia and Australia. We are not sure what happened, but evidently one of the Timorese Liberation for Independence groups has taken over the government one way or another. We don't know what their intentions are.

The Indonesians are quite upset and are mobilizing some forces very quietly.

When the situation becomes clear, we will know whether or not it is sufficiently serious that the Indonesians will take action. It is quite clear the Indonesians will not let a hostile group — that is to say a Communist-dominated group — take over.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: Yes. But who is that group?

MR. HABIB: As best we can tell, it is a group called the UDT, the Democratic Union of Timorese, which is not a Communist-controlled group. There is another group on the island which has some armed forces which is a Communist-dominated group.

If it is the UDT, it may very well be that the Indonesians are behind it and are not telling anybody yet. But from intercept traffic, we are not sure that the Indonesians are that fully clued in. And we will just to have to wait. We should have some more information today.

In any event, whichever way it goes, if it is an Indonesian move, or the Indonesians move against it, I think it is a situation in which we should just do nothing. It is quite obvious that the Indonesians are not going to let any hostile element take over an island right in the midst of the Indonesian archipelago.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: It is quite clear that the Indonesians are going to take over the island sooner or later.

MR. HABIB: Eventually. That is always expected. The only ones liable to react verbally will be the Australians, who will feel impaled to say something.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: Why should Whitlam care about the disappearance of a vestige of colonialism?

MR. HABIB: Whitlam has said over and over again they don't mind what happens to Portuguese Timor so long as it is with the consent of the people — and he has taken that high posture, and his party is on record.

As a matter of fact, he said something like that to you when he was here. And they have assumed that it eventually if it will be free, the preferable thing would be to let it stay in Portuguese hands for a couple of years while it sorts itself out.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: What does "sort itself out" mean in Timor?

MR. HABIB: The answer is until the Indonesians have organized sufficiently the Timorese into some kind of pro-Indonesian enosis group.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: Aren't you getting carried away a little bit?

MR. HABIB: It is a Greek word I learned from Tom Enders, who speaks Greek fluently. Or is that Latin you speak?

But in any event, the important thing is that we should not get ourselves sucked into this one by having opinions, unless you disagree — I mean publicly.

(Laughter)

I think it is just made to order –

SECRETARY KISSINGER: You didn't mean that last phrase at all.

MR. HABIB: Well, subject to your confirmation, I have provided the guidance yesterday we should have no

[Omitted here is material unrelated to Portuguese Timor.]

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Transcripts of Secretary of State Kissinger’s Staff Meetings, 1973–1977, E5177, Box 8. Secret.

128. Telegram 194779 From the Department of State to the Embassies in Indonesia and Australia, August 16, 1975, 0028Z. 128. Telegram 194779 From the Department of State to the Embassies in Indonesia and Australia, August 16, 1975, 0028Z.1

August 16, 1975

TELEGRAM
Department of State
STATE 194779

O R 160028Z AUG 75

FM SECSTATE WASHDC TO AMEMBASSY JAKARTA IMMEDIATE
AMEMBASSY CANBERRA
INFO AMEMBASSY LISBON

STATE 194779

E.O. 11652: GDS
TAGS: PFOR, PO, PT, ID, AS

SUBJECT: INDONESIA AND PORTUGUESE TIMOR

1. REPORTS OF CONFUSED SITUATION IN PORTUGUESE TIMOR HAVE ATTRACTED ATTENTION HERE, AND WE HAVE BEEN FOLLOWING DEVELOPMENTS CLOSELY. APPEARS THAT CHANCES OF INDONESIAN INTERVENTION ARE REAL AND COULD WELL BE PRECIPITATED BY FURTHER EVOLUTION OF THE SITUATION.

2. WE ARE ANXIOUS NOT TO BECOME INVOLVED IN PORTUGUESE TIMOR. APART FROM HUMANITARIAN CONCERN FOR WELFARE OF POPULACE AND THEIR RIGHT TO SELF-DETERMINATION, OUR ONLY INTEREST IN TERRITORY'S FUTURE LIES IN POSSIBLE IMPACT THAT A CHANGE IN ITS STATUS MIGHT HAVE ON OUR RELATIONS WITH JAKARTA.

3. TERRITORY'S FUTURE STATUS SHOULD BE LEFT TO THOSE WITH A DIRECT INTEREST IN TERRITORY: INHABITANTS OF TIMOR, PORTUGAL, INDONESIA, AND AUSTRALIA. LOGIC OF SITUATION SUGGESTS THAT EVENTUAL MERGER OF TERRITORY WITH INDONESIA WOULD PROBABLY BE SOLUTION BEST CALCULATED TO INSURE REGIONAL STABILITY AND, IN LONG RUN, WOULD PROBABLY PROVE MORE BENEFICIAL TO INHABITANTS OF TIMOR. SUCH DECISION, HOWEVER, IS NOT FOR US TO MAKE, AND WE ARE DETERMINED NOT TO BECOME INVOLVED IN PROCESS.

4. SHOULD INDONESIANS DECIDE TO GO AHEAD AND OCCUPY TERRITORY BY FORCE, SEEMS APPARENT THAT PORTUGUESE FORCES WILL NOT OFFER SIGNIFICANT RESISTANCE AND THAT ARMED OPPOSITION COULD BE EXPECTED MAINLY FROM UDT SUPPORTERS (WHO SEEM TO BE IN POSITION OF POWER IN DILI) AND FROM FRETILIN PARTISANS NOW ENGAGED IN SKIRMISHING WITH UDT BUT WHO MIGHT JOIN LATTER TO RESIST INDONESIAN TAKE-OVER. GIVEN DISPARITY OF FORCES, WE ASSUME INDONESIANS COULD OCCUPY TERRITORY WITHOUT TOO MUCH TROUBLE APART FROM POSSIBILITY OF RESIDUAL GUERRILLA RESISTANCE IN INTERIOR. ANY SUCH INDONESIAN INITIATIVE WOULD HAVE SIGNIFICANT IMPACT IN AUSTRALIA, SEVERITY OF WHICH WOULD DEPEND ON DEGREE TO WHICH INDONESIAN MOVE SEEMED TO BE DISPLAY OF NAKED FORCE RATHER THAN RESPONSE TO PROVOCATION OR THREAT OF ANARCHY.

5. U.S. PUBLIC REACTION TO AN INDONESIAN TAKEOVER OF TIMOR WOULD BE SIMILAR TO THAT IN AUSTRALIA, ALTHOUGH MUTED BY LACK OF PUBLIC KNOWLEDGE OR INTEREST IN TIMOR. EXTENT AND NATURE OF US RESPONSE WOULD BE DETERMINED LARGELY BY CIRCUMSTANCES OF INDONESIAN MOVE. NON-VIOLENT OCCUPATION FOLLOWING AFTER PERIOD OF INTERNECINE CONFLICT WITHIN TIMOR SHOULD PROVOKE LITTLE DISAPPROVAL. HOWEVER, IF US-SUPPLIED EQUIPMENT WERE USED IN A MANNER CONTRARY TO THE RESTRICTIVE PROVISIONS OF SECTIONS 502, 505(A) AND 505(D) OF FAA AND SECTIONS 3(A), 3(C) AND 4 OF FMSA, WE WOULD BE OBLIGED TO TERMINATE ALL SECURITY ASSISTANCE. EVEN IF THIS WERE NOT SO, THOSE IN CONGRESS WHO NOW OPPOSE MILITARY AND ECONOMIC AID TO INDONESIA MIGHT WELL GAIN SUFFICIENT ADDITIONAL SUPPORT TO FORCE SERIOUS CURTAILMENT OR EVEN TERMINATION OF ALL OR AT LEAST MILITARY AID.

6. WE DO NOT INTEND TO INVOLVE OURSELVES IN TIMOR OR IN EFFORT TO PERSUADE OR DISSUADE GOI REGARDING ANY PARTICULAR COURSE OF ACTION IT MAY BE CONSIDERING. OUR ACTIONS AT THIS STAGE SHOULD BE CONFINED TO MAKING SURE THAT GOI HAS CORRECT UNDERSTANDING OF SECURITY ASSISTANCE RAMIFICATIONS.

7. FOR JAKARTA: WE REQUEST EMBASSY TO UNDERTAKE AN APPROACH AT A SUITABLE LEVEL DESIGNED TO INSURE THAT GOI LEADERSHIP UNDERSTANDS LEGAL AND CONGRESSIONAL PROBLEM THAT COULD ARISE IF THEY MOVED MILITARILY TO SEIZE TIMOR.

IF AMBASSADOR FEELS IT MORE APPROPRIATE THAN RAISING MATTER AT HIGHER LEVEL, APPROACH MIGHT BE MADE BY DCM TO RELATIVELY SENIOR GOI OFFICIALS WHO COULD BE COUNTED ON TO CONVEY INFORMATION ACCURATELY TO DECISION-MAKING LEVEL. WITHOUT SUGGESTING DETAILED TALKING POINTS, WE BELIEVE FOLLOWING THOUGHTS SHOULD BE CONVEYED TO GOI: (A) US INTERESTS ARE AS STATED IN PARA TWO ABOVE; USG WOULD HAVE NO OBJECTION TO MERGER OF PORTUGUESE TIMOR WITH INDONESIA, ASSUMING THIS DESIRED BY POPULACE;

(B) WE BELIEVE ISSUE SHOULD BE DETERMINED BY INHABITANTS THEMSELVES AND BY TIMOR'S NEIGHBORS;

(C) PEACEFUL MERGER WITH INDONESIA WOULD HAVE NO ADVERSE AFFECT IN U.S.; FORCEFUL SEIZURE, ON OTHER HAND, COULD RAISE DIFFICULT QUESTIONS OF KIND WE HAVE BEEN HAVING WITH TURKEY CONCERNING CONTINUATION OF MILITARY ASSISTANCE; (D) WE DO NOT WANT TO CREATE IMPRESSION THAT WE ARE ATTEMPTING TO PRESSURE GOI ON PORTUGUESE TIMOR; WE DO, HOWEVER, FEEL THAT GOI SHOULD BE AWARE OF THESE POTENTIAL PROBLEMS WHEN CONSIDERING ITS ACTIONS TOWARD TIMOR.

8. FOR CANBERRA: WE PROPOSE CONTINUING PRESENT SHARING OF INFORMATION AND ASSESSMENTS ON TIMOR AND INDONESIA'S INTENTIONS, WHILE MAKING SURE GOA UNDERSTANDS THAT WE DO NOT INTEND BECOME INVOLVED IN THE ISSUE. SUGGEST YOU INFORM AUSTRALIANS OF OUR APPROACH TO GOI. SISCO

1 Source: National Archives, Record Group 59, Central Foreign Policy Files. Secret; Immediate; Exdis. Repeated for information to Lisbon. Drafted by Ingraham; cleared by Sisco; and approved by Zurhellen.

129. Telegram 10044 From the Embassy in Indonesia to the Department of State, August 16, 1975, 0810Z. 129. Telegram 10044 From the Embassy in Indonesia to the Department of State, August 16, 1975, 0810Z.1

August 16, 1975

TELEGRAM
Department of State
JAKARTA 10044

R 160810Z AUG 75

FM AMEMBASSY JAKARTA TO SECSTATE WASHDC 9778
INFO AMEMBASSY CANBERRA
AMEMBASSY LISBON

JAKARTA 10044

EO 11652:GDS
TAGS: PFOR PO PT ID AS

SUBJ: INDONESIA AND PORTUGUESE TIMOR
REF: STATE 194779

1. WE ARE IN FULL AGREEMENT WITH DEPARTMENT'S EXCELLENT ASSESSMENT IN REFTEL OF OUR RELATIONSHIP TO PORTUGUESE TIMOR ISSUE.

2. WE HAVE INTENTIONALLY NOT TAKEN ACTIVE ROLE IN SOLICITING INFORMATION OR PROFFERING ADVISE ON TIMOR ISSUE. FROM CONVERSATIONS WE HAVE HAD AND FROM INTELLIGENCE REPORTS IT IS CLEAR APPREHENSION OVER US REACTION IS MAJOR FACTOR IN PRESIDENT'S CURRENT POSTURE OF RESTRAINT.

3. PRINCIPAL SUBSTANTIVE DISCUSSION I HAVE HAD WAS AUGUST 12 WITH GENERAL MURDANI OF ARMY INTELLIGENCE. HE SAID PRESIDENT REALIZED THAT IF INDONESIA INVADED TIMOR, RESULTS OF CAMP DAVID MEETING WOULD BE LOST. I OUTLINED TO HIM CONGRESSIONAL ACTION ON TURKEY AND REASONS THEREFORE. I SAID US NOT OPPOSED TO INCORPORATION OF TIMOR BUT HOPED PEACEFUL ALTERNATIVES COULD BE FOUND.

4. WE HAVE NOT YET SUPPLIED GOI WITH SPECIFICATIONS FROM FOREIGN ASSISTANCE ACT. (PARA 5 OF REFTEL) WE WILL DO SO AT APPROPRIATE LEVEL. GIVEN OUR KNOWLEDGE OF INDONESIAN CONCERNS, HOWEVER, AND MY TALK WITH MURDANI I BELIEVE SPECIFIC HIGH LEVEL DEMARCHE UNNECESSARY AND POSSIBLY IMPOLITIC AT THIS TIME. IN INFORMAL CONVERSATIONS WE WILL MAKE POINTS IN PARA 7 REFTEL.

5. GENERAL YOGA OF BAKIN HAS BRIEFED SEVERAL AMBASSADORS, INCLUDING ASEAN REPRESENTATIVES, AUSTRALIAN, BRITISH AND JAPANESE. HE ASKED TO SEE ME BUT THEN CANCELLED WHEN HE WAS SUMMONED TO MEETING AT PALACE. IF CALLED. I WILL LISTEN AND MAKE APPROPRIATE POINTS FROM REFTEL IN REPLY. NEWSOM

1 Source: National Archives, Record Group 59, Central Foreign Policy Files. Secret; Exdis. Repeated to Canberra and Lisbon.

130. Memorandum From John J. Taylor of the National Security Council Staff to Secretary of State Kissinger, Washington, August 25, 1975. 130. Memorandum From John J. Taylor of the National Security Council Staff to Secretary of State Kissinger, Washington, August 25, 1975.1

Washington, August 25, 1975

MEMORANDUM
NATIONAL SECURITY COUNCIL
ACTION

August 25, 1975

MEMORANDUM FOR SECRETARY KISSINGER
FROM: JOHN J. TAYLOR [JJT initialed]

SUBJECT: Directive to the Under Secretaries Committee on U.S.-Indonesian Joint Consultative Group

Prior to the meeting at Camp David on July 5, 1975 between President Suharto and President Ford, you instructed the U.S. side to come up with some sort of "joint venture" with the Indonesians. During the Presidential talks, Suharto first proposed setting up a "joint committee" to review equipment needs of the Indonesian Navy, Army, and Air Force. (Suharto may have been influenced by a paper given to the Indonesians by Guy Pauker, an Indonesian expert at the Rand Corporation. Pauker's paper, which was not a very impressive job, consisted largely of a recommendation that the U.S. finance a $1 billion expansion of the Indonesian armed forces through FMS credit and that we set up a joint commission to decide what the money should buy.)

President Ford concurred in Suharto's proposal and suggested setting up a "joint commission." You also briefly discussed this subject with Foreign Minister Malik.

In context, it was clear that both sides assumed that the consultative group or groups to be formed would cover economic as well as military issues. Nevertheless, the discussion was such as to permit considerable latitude in structuring the desired mechanism. The Indonesians apparently do not yet have very firm ideas on the structures to be created or the subjects to be discussed.

An Indonesian military team is coming to Washington on September 15 to discuss the transfer of Indochina-extracted military equipment that President Ford referred to at Camp David. We had hoped that a joint committee could be established in time to deal with this question, but it seems unlikely that we will be organized in time.

State has been drafting option papers on the subject of a joint commission. But, to move the decision ahead and to bring in other concerned departments, we believe responsibility should be given to the Under Secretaries Committee. I have discussed this with State, and they agree.

At Tab A is a memorandum for the Chairman of the Under Secretaries Committee directing the Committee to prepare a position paper by September 10, 1975 on the organization of U.S.-Indonesian joint consultative machinery.

RECOMMENDATION:
That you sign the memorandum at Tab A.

Concurrence: Mr. Hormats

1 Source: Ford Library, NSC Institutional Files (H-Files), Box H–61, NSDM 311, U.S.-Indonesian Consultative Arrangements. Confidential. Sent for action. On the first page of the memorandum, Kissinger wrote, “Change date.” Kissinger also crossed out the due date on the second page. Next to Kissinger’s marginalia on the first page, an unknown hand wrote, “Done—Oct 6, 1975.” Tab A is attached but not published.

131. Telegram 209709 From the Department of State to the Embassy in Indonesia, September 3, 1975, 2339Z. 131. Telegram 209709 From the Department of State to the Embassy in Indonesia, September 3, 1975, 2339Z.1

September 3, 1975

TELEGRAM
Department of State
209709

R 032339Z SEP 75

FM SECSTATE WASHDC TO AMEMBASSY JAKARTA
INFO AMEMBASSY LISBON
AMEMBASSY CANBERRA

STATE 209709

E.O. 11652: GDS TAGS: PFOR, ID, PO, PT

SUBJECT: INDONESIA AND PORTUGUESE TIMOR

1. PORTUGUESE TIMOR WAS DISCUSSED BRIEFLY DURING SEPTEMBER 5 CALL BY INDONESIAN AMBASSADOR RUSMIN NURYADIN ON ASSISTANT SECRETARY HABIB. RUSMIN CONFIRMED THAT INDONESIANS HAD EXPECTED PORTUGUESE SPECIAL ENVOY SANTOS TO HAVE AUTHORITY TO NEGOTIATE AGREEMENT ON THE SPOT WHILE IN JAKARTA AND HAD BEEN DISAPPOINTED TO FIND HE HAD NO SUCH POWERS. GOI CONTINUED TO HOLD THAT PORTUGUESE WERE RESPONSIBLE FOR RESTORING ORDER TO THEIR COLONY, RUSMIN SAID, BUT PORTUGUESE HAD TAKEN NO EFFECTIVE STEPS TO DO SO. DESPITE THIS, PRESIDENT SUHARTO WAS DETERMINED TO TAKE NO UNILATERAL ACTION WITHOUT PORTUGUESE ASSENT. INDONESIANS HOPED SITUATION WOULD BE CLARIFIED SOMEWHAT WHEN SANTOS RETURNED TO JAKARTA FROM CURRENT TRIP TO CANBERRA AND TIMOR.

2. MR. HABIB SAID THAT PRESIDENT SUHARTO WAS FOLLOWING VERY SENSIBLE COURSE IN THE TIMOR PROBLEM. FOR OUR PART, WE HAD BEEN CAREFUL NOT TO SAY OR DO ANYTHING THAT MIGHT COMPLICATE SITUATION FOR GOI. WE RECOGNIZED IMPORTANCE OF THIS PROBLEM FOR INDONESIA AND APPRECIATED HOW CAUTIOUSLY PRESIDENT SUHARTO WAS HANDLING IT. WE SAW NO ROLE FOR OURSELVES IN THIS PROBLEM, FEELING IT SHOULD BE LEFT ENTIRELY UP TO INDONESIA AND THE OTHER CONCERNED PARTIES, AND WE THOUGHT GOI WOULD PREFER IT THIS WAY.

3. AMBASSADOR RUSMIN SAID INDONESIANS APPRECIATED US POSITION. HE WONDERED, HOWEVER, WHAT OUR ATTITUDE WOULD BE IF ONE OF CONTENDING PARTIES IN TIMOR GAINED UPPER HAND, DECLARED IMMEDIATE INDEPENDENCE AND ASKED FOR RECOGNITION. IF INDONESIA THEN FELT THERE WAS NO ALTERNATIVE TO "DRASTIC STEP" OF UNILATERAL ACTION, WHAT WOULD US THINK? MR. HABIB REPLIED THAT HE WOULD RATHER NOT SPECULATE ABOUT HYPOTHETICAL SITUATIONS BUT WOULD PREFER TO WAIT AND SEE WHAT DEVELOPS. IN GENERAL, HE THOUGHT INDONESIA WOULD BE WISE TO ASSOCIATE THE OTHERS — AUSTRALIA, MALAYSIA, TIMORESE POPULACE AND PORTUGAL ITSELF — AS CLOSELY AS POSSIBLE WITH ANY ACTION THAT MIGHT BE TAKEN.

KISSINGER

1 Source: National Archives, Record Group 59, Central Foreign Policy Files. Secret; Exdis. Repeated to Lisbon and Canberra. Drafted by Ingraham; cleared in S/S; and approved by Habib.

132. Telegram 10849 From the Embassy in Indonesia to the Department of State, September 4, 1975, 0416Z. 132. Telegram 10849 From the Embassy in Indonesia to the Department of State, September 4, 1975, 0416Z.1

September 4, 1975

TELEGRAM
Department of State
JAKARTA 10849

R 040416Z SEP 75

FM AMEMBASSY JAKARTA TO SECSTATE WASHDC 0079

JAKARTA 10849

E.O. 11652: GDS
TAGS: PFOR PINS ID PO PT AS

SUBJECT: US AND PORTUGUESE TIMOR
REF: JAKARTA 10848

1. IN COURSE CONVERSATION WITH ACTING FOREIGN MINISTER MOCHTAR SEPTEMBER 3, HE ASKED ME HOW U.S. REGARDED CURRENT INDONESIAN APPROACH TIMOR PROBLEM.

2. I TOLD HIM THIS WAS ONE PROBLEM IN WHICH U.S. NOT DIRECTLY INVOLVED, THAT OUR PRIMARY INTEREST WAS IN SEEING THAT ISSUE DID NOT DEVELOP IN WAY WHICH WOULD CREATE PROBLEMS IN U.S.-INDONESIAN RELATIONS. WE DID NOT OBJECT INCORPORATION COLONY INTO INDONESIA PROVIDED IT WAS DONE IN WAY CONSISTENT WITH SELF-DETERMINATION AND PEACE IN AREA. I EXPLAINED U.S. LEGISLATION WITH RESPECT USE OF U.S. MILITARY EQUIPMENT OUTSIDE INDONESIA.

3. HE THEN ASKED WHAT U.S. ATTITUDE WOULD BE TOWARD USE U.S. EQUIPMENT IN RESTORATION ORDER IN TIMOR UNDER FOUR POWER JOINT AUTHORITY. I SAID LAW WAS CLEAR THAT EQUIPMENT COULD BE USED ONLY FOR INTERNAL SECURITY AND SELF-DEFENSE OF INDONESIA, BUT THAT INTERPRETATION AND APPLICATION LAWS DEPENDED ON CIRCUMSTANCES AT TIME. WHILE I COULD NOT FORESHADOW PRECISE REACTION OR INTERPRETATION IN EXECUTIVE OR CONGRESS, IT SEEMS TO ME THAT INDONESIA WAS SHOWING RESTRAINT AND THAT EFFORTS RESTORE ORDER AND PORTUGUESE RULE UNDER FOUR POWER AEGIS WITHOUT PREJUDGING FINAL POLITICAL OUTCOME APPEARED TO BE RESPONSIBLE POLICY ON INDONESIA'S PART.

NEWSOM

1 Source: National Archives, Record Group 59, Central Foreign Policy Files. Secret; Exdis.

133. Memorandum of Conversation, September 5, 1975. 133. Memorandum of Conversation, September 5, 1975.1

September 5, 1975

DEPARTMENT OF STATE
Memorandum of Conversation

September 5, 1975

SUBJECT: Secretary's Meeting with Indonesian Foreign Minister Adam Malik

PARTICIPANTS:

Indonesia

Foreign Minister Adam Malik

Anwar Sani, Permanent Representative to the UN

Rusmin Nuryadin, Indonesian Ambassador to the US

Alex Alatas, Special Assistant to the Foreign Minister

United States

The Secretary

Philip C. Habib, Assistant Secretary for East Asian and Pacific Affairs

Edward C. Ingraham, Country Director, Indonesia

DISTRIBUTION: S - Mr. Bremer, Mr. Adams, WH -Mr. Rodman, S/S

The Secretary: How are you, Mr. Minister?

Foreign Minister Malik: How are you?

The Secretary: I am glad to see you, Mr. Minister. It is good for me to be seen with non-aligned leaders these days.

(Photographs taken.)

The Secretary: Were you in Lima, Mr. Minister?

Foreign Minister Malik: Yes. I came from there last week.

The Secretary: Are you speaking Indonesian? Why? You speak perfect English.

Foreign Minister Malik: No. Not perfect. (He continues speaking Indonesian, with Mr. Alatas interpreting.) First of all, I would like to congratulate you on the results achieved in the Middle East. Although it is only one step, it is a most important one. Only a week ago it was predicted that some of the Arabs would make it impossible. The Syrians.

The Secretary: What happened was that there was a choice. Either nobody makes progress or somebody makes progress. I think now that the Syrians, after making their protests, will start to work with us.

Foreign Minister Malik: How about Jordan?

The Secretary: Jordan is an old friend. As soon as the Arabs permit Jordan to negotiate, we will push them toward negotiations.

What I would like to do is to review our relationship. We last met not too many weeks ago. What are your views on the situation in Timor?

Foreign Minister Malik: I want to assure you that we have patience. We will keep our patience even though there is pressure from certain groups — the Catholics for example — for more decisive action.

We have put some constructive proposals to the Portuguese. But they have said they are incapable of handling the situation in East Timor. We have taken the position that we are prepared to move in to restore order, but only in association with the others — Malaysia and Australia — and at the request of Portugal.

The Secretary: Do you think it will be possible to get the others to agree to this?

Foreign Minister Malik: Malaysia has already agreed. The Australians may agree. Our problem is that Santos [the Portuguese Special Envoy now visiting the area] does not have authorization from Portugal to negotiate an agreement with us.

The Secretary: If you moved in, what do you think you would do with Timor? Incorporate it into Indonesia?

Foreign Minister Malik: We are thinking along several lines. The Portuguese should replace their own authority in Timor with a joint authority that includes the others — Malaysia and Australia and Indonesia. The task would be in several fields: to restore security and then to restore political, social and economic conditions. In our observations, the supply of weapons in Portuguese Timor is not large enough for them to continue fighting each other much longer.

The Secretary: What is the population of Portuguese Timor?

Foreign Minister Malik: About 600 thousand. We believe that if Portugal will agree to a temporary restraining authority, and if within that authority Indonesian troops are used to restore order, we can do this within 24 hours. One problem for us is that it will be a financial burden to Indonesia. That is one reason why we want a joint authority with Malaysia, Australia and Portugal.

The Secretary: You mean you want them to share the financial burden?

Foreign Minister Malik: Yes, we do.

The Secretary: Only a Foreign Minister of your skill could talk them into that! You want Malaysia and Australia to join you in the authority but to use Indonesian troops, is that right?

Foreign Minister Malik: Yes, that is it.

The Secretary: How about 200 observers?

(Laughter)

Foreign Minister Malik: As we see it, the problem of Portuguese Timor is not Indonesia's responsibility but Portugal's. But we fear that if the situation continues there will be a threat to us — smuggling, infiltration.

The Secretary: I usually look at these things from the historical viewpoint. Probably a bad habit. I had always assumed that in about ten years or so Indonesia would take over Portuguese Timor — for symmetry! I will not spend any sleepless nights over it. Am I saying anything different from what you have been telling them, Mr. Habib?

Assistant Secretary Habib: No. That is what I have been telling them. I have told Ambassador Rusmin that we admire President Suharto's patience. That is what we need at this point, patience.

The Secretary: I have studied your President's way of dealing with Sukarno. It was very clever. Taking his authority away just a slice at a time. I expect you will do the same with Timor.

Foreign Minister Malik: But in Timor things are moving very quickly. We could use your help.

The Secretary: How?

Foreign Minister Malik: With the Portuguese. Maybe you could talk to them.

The Secretary: Everything depends on the political struggle in Portugal. If the communists take over, that will be a problem. You will have a problem with them in Timor, too.

Foreign Minister Malik: We hope the non-communists will come out on top.

The Secretary: If the non-communists win out, then we can talk to them.

When you were in Washington last July, we talked about a bilateral commission. We are prepared to proceed.

Foreign Minister Malik: We would also like to proceed. As we would like to see it, the commission would cover not only economic topics but would be more comprehensive, political and military as well.

The Secretary: To include political and economic topics as well? Yes, that's fine. How are we proceeding to set it up?

Assistant Secretary Habib: Economic Affairs Minister Widjojo has been designated to work on the commission for the Indonesian side. Widjojo and Ambassador Newsom will be in touch with each other in Jakarta. We have sent a message to Ambassador Newsom asking him to get in touch with Widjojo.

The Secretary: Some day I will write a book about the bureaucracy. Every bureaucratic problem that comes up can be settled in some six-hour period. I am trying to convince my colleagues to start the six-hour period tomorrow. We can proceed with the bilateral commission whenever you are ready. I will push my associates. Since Mr. Habib's heart attack, he is the only Assistant Secretary I treat well.

Assistant Secretary Habib: We hear that on the Indonesian side Minister Widjojo has been preoccupied with other duties, but that he is now ready to concentrate on the commission.

Foreign Minister Malik: There is one more thing. A military delegation from Jakarta will arrive in Washington the 11th to start talks on the 15th. We would like to ask your special attention to this. Usually civilians do not meddle with the military, but this is very important to us.

The Secretary: Who will be heading it?

Foreign Minister Malik: General Sumantri. And Bennie Murdani. I hope you can look into it.

Assistant Secretary Habib: The problem is money.

The Secretary: What about the Vietnam equipment?

Assistant Secretary Habib: I may be needing your help on that. In general things are going all right, but I may need to come to you for help on that.

The Secretary: Mr. Habib's theory is that if I don't know what is going on, all is well.

Foreign Minister Malik: The delegation will be going over our military needs and our priorities.

The Secretary: I have always been in favor of a decent military aid level for Indonesia. You can count on it. Indonesia is the most important country in Southeast Asia.

Foreign Minister Malik: But you forget about us. Why don't you come to Bali?

The Secretary: With my wife, I'll come.

Foreign Minister Malik: We would like to have the commission established by the end of the year.

The Secretary: At what level would it be?

Foreign Minister Malik: The ministerial level.

The Secretary: If it is at the ministerial level, I will have my chance to go to Bali. We can sign at the airport and go straight on to Bali.

Foreign Minister Malik: We should say something about the special session. We think your approach is wrong.

The Secretary: In what way is it wrong?

Foreign Minister Malik: You make a commitment of $200 million and then you ask the others for $2 billion. You should have asked the others for their commitment of $2 billion before you commit your $200 million.

The Secretary: A good point, but we will find some way not to give up the$200 million. We can tell them Congress won't let us have it. As to the special session, I wanted to make a conciliatory speech. We have important proposals, and we would like them to be given full consideration.

I wanted to talk to you about oil prices. I know that Indonesia does not consider itself an influential member of OPEC. But you should know that an oil price rise would have a very bad effect here. I think the effect would be out of all proportion to the benefits you would get from it.

Foreign Minister Malik: How about the Trade Act? How is Indonesia going to get away from the discrimination in the Act?

The Secretary: We will be trying to get the restrictions lifted this fall, try to have Congress exempt those OPEC countries not joining the oil embargo. That is the Green Amendment, isn't it? The trouble is that Congressman Green is holding up the Amendment because of the possibility of an OPEC oil price increase. We will try to get it through this fall. We sympathize with you, and we understand your problem.

Foreign Minister Malik: I would like to mention Law of the Sea.

The Secretary: Yes, I made a speech on that recently. I am hopeful that we can reach agreement at the next conference. Your special problem, as I remember, is the question of transit through the archipelago.

Assistant Secretary Habib: We have just discussed this. We should be holding technical talks on a bilateral basis before the next conference. Our people and Air Marshal Sudharmono will be getting together on this.

The Secretary: The issue is primarily transit through the archipelago and the air corridor, isn't it? Is it an insoluble problem? What are the positions on the air corridor?

Ambassador Rusmin: The difference is between 55,000 feet and 25,000 feet. On transit through the archipelago and the strait, we differentiate between warships and other vessels. We have no problem in transit for U.S. ships but we are considering the general aspects. The Russians will want transit rights. The Russians and then the Chinese. This is a different problem for us altogether.

The Secretary: I have not studied the compromise proposals. I will look into this before the next conference. But in the meantime, we should have the technical talks.

Foreign Minister Malik: We hope for a compromise suggestion on Korea. I have met with North Korean Foreign Minister Ho Tam and South Korean Minister Kim. The North Koreans are prepared to talk with you on this matter.

The Secretary: We cannot accept the position that we should withdraw our forces. We are willing to dissolve the UN Command as long as there is something to replace the armistice agreement. But not our troops. This is between us and South Korea. The North Korean resolution is aimed not at South Korea but at us. You can tell the North Koreans that we do not consider the presence of our troops in South Korea a matter for the UN. We are not interested in dealing with them over the heads of the South Koreans. Over a period of years we may be in touch with North Korea. But they will first have to lower the level of their rhetoric.

Foreign Minister Malik: We have told the North Koreans that they should find a compromise between the two resolutions before the UN.

The Secretary: We have to have a successful outcome here at the UN and some acceptable successor to the armistice agreement. Once that is achieved, we can improve relations with North Korea.

Foreign Minister Malik: Not necessarily. I have talked to the North Koreans and they are willing to talk with you now.

The Secretary: Let me think about it. Now, Mr. Minister, if you will forgive me, I have to swear-in our UN Delegation. Up to now they have all been illegal. It has been a pleasure talking to you.

Foreign Minister Malik: It has been a great pleasure for us as well.

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy Files, P–820123–1427. Secret; Nodis. Drafted by Ingraham; cleared by Habib; and approved by Covey.

134. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to the Chairman of the Under Secretaries Committee (Ingersoll), Washington, September 15, 1975. 134. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to the Chairman of the Under Secretaries Committee (Ingersoll), Washington, September 15, 1975.1

Washington, September 15, 1975

THE WHITE HOUSE
WASHINGTON

September 15, 1975

MEMORANDUM FOR
THE CHAIRMAN, UNDER SECRETARIES COMMITTEE

SUBJECT: U.S.-Indonesian Joint Consultative Group

The President has directed the Under Secretaries Committee to prepare a position paper on the organization of U.S. -Indonesian joint consultations on economic and military matters.

The Under Secretaries Committee, in its examination of various alternatives for such organization, need not assume that the group to be formed should necessarily be modeled on other existing bilateral commissions nor that it should necessarily be a permanent organization.

The organizational structure(s) proposed should be shaped so as to: — Make a meaningful contribution to U.S.-Indonesian cooperation,

— Take into account Indonesia's non-aligned image.

— Avoid conflict with the work of the Indonesian Aid Consortium (IGGI).

— Avoid Indonesian overexpectation.

For the purposes of this study, representatives of the Agency for International Development, as well as the Departments of Defense, State, and Treasury, should be represented on the working group under the Under Secretaries Committee. The study should set out various options with appropriate recommendations for consideration by the President. It should be submitted no later than October 6, 1975.

[signed]
Henry A. Kissinger

1 Source: Ford Library, NSC Institutional Files (H-Files), Box H–72, NSC, U/SM–158, U.S. Indonesian Joint Consultative Group. Confidential. On October 15, Wreatham E. Gathright, the Staff Director of the Under Secretaries Committee, forwarded to the President the requested paper from Ingersoll, October 14, in which the Under Secretaries Committee recommended option 1; a joint consultative commission co-chaired by the Secretary of State and an Indonesian official, and including other relevant officials for a renewable two-year term.

135. Telegram 225061 From the Department of State to the Embassy in Indonesia, September 20, 1975, 1913Z. 135. Telegram 225061 From the Department of State to the Embassy in Indonesia, September 20, 1975, 1913Z.1

September 20, 1975

TELEGRAM
Department of State
225061

R 201913Z SEP 75

FM SECSTATE WASHDC TO AMEMBASSY JAKARTA
AMEMBASSY CANBERRA
AMEMBASSY LISBON

STATE 225061

E.O. 11652: GDS
TAGS: MASS, PFOR, ID, PO, PT

SUBJ: GENERAL MOERDANI'S COMMENTS ON TIMOR

1. DURING HIS VISIT HERE IN CONNECTION WITH THE INDONESIAN MILITARY ASSISTANCE TEAM, GENERAL MOERDANI DISCUSSED INDONESIAN POLICY TOWARDS TIMOR WITH ASSISTANT SECRETARY HABIB, AS WELL AS WITH OTHER DEPARTMENT AND CIA OFFICERS. ALTHOUGH HIS STATEMENTS VARIED SLIGHTLY DEPENDING ON HIS INTERLOCUTOR, HE WAS RELATIVELY CONSISTENT ON THE FOLLOWING LINES: A. SUHARTO HAS ADOPTED A VERY PATIENT POLICY TOWARDS TIMOR, FREQUENTLY JUSTIFYING IT TO HIS COLLEAGUES IN QUITE IDEALISTIC TERMS SUCH AS THE IMPORTANCE OF BEHAVING CAUTIOUSLY WHILE INDONESIA IS POOR AND WEAK SO THAT THE RECORD WILL NOT HAUNT THEIR CHILDREN WHEN INDONESIA ACHIEVES GREATER STATUS. THE INDONESIANS ARE FULLY AWARE OF POTENTIAL CRITICISM AND DIFFICULTIES IN INTERNATIONAL QUARTERS AND IN THE US CONGRESS IF THEY SHOULD MOVE MILITARILY AGAINST THE WISHES OF THE PEOPLE OF TIMOR.

B. INDONESIA DOES NOT INTEND A MILITARY TAKE-OVER OF PORTUGUESE TIMOR AT THIS TIME, ASSUMING THERE IS NO SUDDEN DEVELOPMENT WHICH WOULD AFFECT INDONESIAN SECURITY. IF A DECISION WERE MADE TO MOVE MILITARILY, THE INDONESIANS ESTIMATE THAT THEY COULD PACIFY THE WHOLE OF PORTUGUESE TIMOR IN A WEEK TO A MONTH USING 1100 MEN. THEY COULD TAKE THE CITY OF DILI AND THE AIRPORT, AND ESTABLISH OSTENSIBLE CONTROL IN LESS THAN 24 HOURS.

C. INDONESIA HAS OFFICERS, NCO'S, AND ENLISTED MEN OPERATING IN PORTUGUESE TIMOR WHERE THEY ARE TRYING TO BEEF UP THE ACTIVITIES AND OPERATIONS OF THE UDT AND APODETI THROUGH ARMS SUPPLY, ETC. NEVERTHELESS, NEITHER OF THESE ORGANIZATIONS IS WORTH MUCH.

D. FRETILIN HAS FIVE OR SIX COMMUNIST OR STRONGLY MARXIST INDIVIDUALS IN ITS LEADERSHIP BUT ON THE WHOLE IT IS A FAIRLY REASONABLE ORGANIZATION WITH FAR MORE PROSPECT POLITICALLY THAN THE UDT OR APODETI. IF THE FRETILIN CAN BE ISOLATED FROM EXTERNAL ASSISTANCE, THEY WILL DISCOVER IN A YEAR OR SO THAT THEY HAVE NO RECOURSE EXCEPT TO DEAL WITH INDONESIA. IF THEY DO, INDONESIA MAY BE ABLE TO WORK SOMETHING OUT WITH THEM.

E. THERE IS NO MAJOR THREAT OF EXTERNAL INTERVENTION. ALTHOUGH THERE HAS BEEN A CONVINCING SIGHTING OF A SUBMARINE, WHICH BY DEDUCTION WAS SOVIET, MOERDANI IS HIGHLY SKEPTICAL OF REPORTS THAT THE SOVIETS HAVE PROVIDED A LARGE NUMBER OF GUNS. MOREOVER, HE SAID THE INDONESIANS HAVE ASSURANCES FROM THE RUSSIANS OF NONINTERVENTION. HE IS SLIGHTLY LESS SURE ABOUT THE CHINESE BECAUSE OF TRAFFIC BETWEEN THE SUBSTANTIAL CHINESE MINORITY IN TIMOR AND MACAU. IN ANY EVENT, THERE IS LITTLE LIKELIHOOD OF EFFECTIVE SOVIET OR CHINESE INVOLVEMENT.

F. AS REFLECTED IN OTHER SOURCES, MOERDANI CONSIDERS PORTUGUESE PROCRASTINATION TO HAVE BEEN UNHELPFUL AND HAS NO EXPECTATION OF AUSTRALIAN OR MALAYSIAN SUPPORT FOR MILITARY PACIFICATION.

2. MOERDANI ACKNOWLEDGED THERE WERE MANY INDONESIANS WITH A MORE ALARMIST VIEW OF THE SITUATION, AND HE DID NOT FLATLY RULE OUT A SHIFT IN SUHARTO'S POSITION. THE GENERAL IMPRESSION HE LEFT, HOWEVER, WAS OF A RATHER SKILLFUL, PATIENT STRATEGY; I.E.: (A) AVOIDANCE IF POSSIBLE OF CRUDE, LARGE-SCALE INDONESIAN MILITARY ACTIONS AGAINST PORTUGUESE TIMOR, (B) RELATIVELY DISCRETE, COVERT INDONESIAN MILITARY ACTIONS TO ISOLATE AND PRESUMABLY PENETRATE FRETILIN SO THAT IT WILL BE FORCED TO COME TO TERMS WITH INDONESIA IN ABOUT A YEAR'S TIME; AND (C) CONTINGENCY PLANS FOR A QUICK SURGICAL MILITARY ACTION TO TAKE OVER IF SITUATION NECESSITATES.

KISSINGER

1 Source: National Archives, Record Group 59, Central Foreign Policy Files. Secret; Exdis. Repeated to Lisbon and Canberra. Drafted by Gleysteen; cleared in S/S and by Shackley of the CIA; approved by Habib.

136. Minutes of the Secretary of State’s Staff Meeting, Washington, October 8, 1975. 136. Minutes of the Secretary of State’s Staff Meeting, Washington, October 8, 1975.1

Washington, October 8, 1975

In Attendance - Wed., October 8, 1975

Secretary of State Kissinger - Chairman

D Mr. Ingersoll

P Mr. Sisco

T Mr. Maw

C Mr. Sonnenfeldt

AF Mr. Davis

ARA Mr. Rogers

EA Mr. Habib

EUP Mr. Lowenstein (Acting)

NEA Mr. Atherton

INR Mr. Hyland

S/P Mr. Lord

EB Mr. Enders

S/PRS Mr. Anderson

PM Mr. Vest

IO Mr. Buffum

H Mr. McCloskey

L Mr. Leigh

S/S Mr. Springsteen

S Mr. Bremer

S Mr. Adams

[Omitted here is material unrelated to Portuguese Timor.]

MR. HABIB: It looks like the Indonesians have begun the attack on Timor — Portuguese Timor. It would seem to me clear that the Indonesian troops crossing the border would attack — the pro-Indonesian forces in the area — and have not done very well since the beginning of this thing. And this is quite something. There's an earlier case where the Indonesians are being forced to move to hold on to what they obviously are going to hold on to — that is, they are not going to let Timor become independent, sitting on the end of the Indian Archipelago.

I think what we are doing is like Jack — keeping our mouth shut about the thing.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: Is that conceivable?

MR. HABIB: We've been doing it, so I think it's quite conceivable.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: No moral —

MR. HABIB: There's not that much interest. I think they'll probably be —

SECRETARY KISSINGER: There are no moral lessons to be learned from this?

MR. HABIB: Yes. The moral lesson is that we have the guns to go in. (Laughter.)

We're getting a few requests for validations of passports to go to South Viet-Nam. I just wanted to check with you. These are coming fast —

SECRETARY KISSINGER: I'm assuming you're going to really keep your mouth shut on this subject.

MR. HABIB: On what?

SECRETARY KISSINGER: On this subject, on Indonesia.

Also, at the UN, Bill, will you make sure that the U.S. Mission doesn't make a statement on how the members of the 77 —

MR. HABIB: They might support it. (Laughter.)

MR. BUFFUM: Aren't they going to call us "murderers"? (Laughter.)

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Transcripts of Secretary of State Kissinger’s Staff Meetings, 1973–1977, E5177, Box 8. Secret. At the 8 a.m. meeting on October 31, Robert H. Miller, Acting Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian and Pacific Affairs, said, “The Indonesian Foreign Minister is expected to open talks tomorrow on Timor. The pro-Indonesian forces are gradually making progress on the ground.” Kissinger remarked, “It is going to wind up with Timor going to Indonesia.” Miller replied, “I think so. Maybe within a couple of months.” (Ibid., Box 9)

137. Memorandum of Conversation, Camp David, Maryland, October 29, 1975, 4 p.m. 137. Memorandum of Conversation, Camp David, Maryland, October 29, 1975, 4 p.m.1

Camp David, Maryland, October 29, 1975, 4 p.m.

THE WHITE HOUSE
WASHINGTON
MEMORANDUM OF CONVERSATION

PARTICIPANTS:

General Ali Moertopo, Deputy Chief of the State Intelligence Coordinating Body of Indonesia

Brigadier General Nichlany Soedardjo, Indonesian Defense Attache

Lt. General Brent Scowcroft, Deputy Assistant to President for National Security Affairs

Kenneth M. Quinn, National Security Council Staff Member

DATE, TIME & PLACE:
October 29, 1975
4 p. m.
General Scowcroft's Office

Scowcroft: It is a great pleasure to welcome you here to the White House. We are very glad you were able to visit us here. Have you had a good trip? Who have you been able to see during your visit here?

Moertopo: The trip has been very successful. We have been seeing a large number of people such as those at Cornell University and members of the Congress. We have had very good discussions, and I have become aware of information that I never knew before.

Scowcroft: Your contacts with the Congress are extremely important. And it is very good that the Congress gets to know the wonderful things that your country is doing to help its people. This will particularly help facilitate understanding of your country by the Congress. Oil prices now are so high that many members of the Congress cannot understand that you still have many problems and that you need our assistance. I believe your visit here will be very helpful in overcoming some of these beliefs.

Moertopo: We have also had some difficulties regarding the human rights issue. However, I met with Congressman Fraser and we had a very good discussion. I believe he now understands our problem more fully.

Scowcroft: Yes, Congressman Fraser is a very sincere person, although we sometimes have our differences.

Moertopo: some of the questions are difficult to answer. We also had a good discussion with members of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee and the House International Relations Committee.

Scowcroft: We will soon be sending up our proposals for security assistance. We are asking for a substantial increase in aid to your country. But you should be aware that this is going to be a very tough year with our Congress. We will do our best, however, to get everything we can for you. Your meeting with members of the Congress in this regard is particularly helpful.

Moertopo: I am sorry I missed seeing Otto Passman.

Soedardjo: Does Passman still have unworkable attitudes about us?

Moertopo: If I had just had the opportunity to discuss Indonesia with him, I am sure he would understand.

Scowcroft: Passman is very realistic. He would understand. He is a practical man. Besides, he has a very great interest in rice. We can work quite well with him. Your very helpful gesture on the recent OPEC price increase is appreciated. We will point this out when we deal with the Congress so they will be more sympathetic to your position.

Moertopo: We have been helpful to you twice. First, when we did not support the oil embargo and now when we did not go along with the recent price increase.

Scowcroft: The problem is that our Congress seems to lump all the OPEC countries together. You have been very responsible within OPEC and that has been very helpful.

Moertopo: From the outside, OPEC looks very strong. But inside it is not so strong because different members have different interests. There are three factors within OPEC which must be considered. First, is the problem of leadership in the Middle East. Second is the Israeli problem. Both of these are divisive issues within OPEC and they tend to make the organization weak. The third internal factor is oil and here you have such sub-issues as price, supply and the preservation strategy. There are differences of view on all of these and they tend to make OPEC a complex situation which is not as strong as it seems from the outside. In addition, there are external factors which influence OPEC as well, such as relationships between the Middle East countries and Venezuela and between Iran and Saudi Arabia. A final point is that internally OPEC has some radical members such as Iraq, Libya and Syria. These three countries are radical because when OPEC was being founded, they were still negotiating with foreign countries which owned the oil companies within their borders. This experience pushed them in a radical direction and so now they are the ones who are always demanding price increases. Another problem is that Iran is not satisfied with the OPEC arrangement.

Scowcroft: Who is winning the leadership struggle?

Moertopo: Venezuela, Iran and Saudi Arabia are vying for leadership now, but it is not clear who will win. Previously, the Saudis were strong because the King knew where he was going. The new King is not certain. I have known this new King from before he was King, and I don't believe he is as strong as the old King. It is very difficult to cooperate fully with the Arab societies. We ourselves are a Muslim state, but you could not turn this into profits. It is only an emotional issue which comes into play from time to time. To increase our profits we joined OPEC.

Scowcroft: It is good that you are in OPEC. You are a force for modernization and balance, and we certainly appreciate these efforts.

Moertopo: If I may ask, what is going on now regarding a Middle East settlement?

Scowcroft: The Sadat visit is going very well. The important thing is to not let things stagnate. We have to keep the momentum going. The settlement is good, but there are some problems in the Arab world, especially with the Syrians who feel they will be left out. We will try to get some movement going on the Syrian front. On the whole, we are making progress. But there are difficult times ahead. We have done the easiest steps first. The Golan Heights, the Palestinian question and the status of Jerusalem are much more difficult issues. President Sadat is a very far-sighted man. He is doing very well for his people. He has a genuine interest in achieving a settlement.

Moertopo: A settlement is also in our interests. Our burden will be lessened by a Middle East settlement.

Scowcroft: Yes, you're right. Another conflict or embargo would put very bad pressure on Indonesia.

Moertopo: I have met Sadat before. Sadat seemed serious about settling. The economic conditions will get worse. This is probably forcing him to reach a settlement.

Scowcroft: Yes, Egypt needs to devote its resources to economic development instead of to military equipment. But this isn't easy for him. He has his problems too with the settlement.

Moertopo: I have been sure that you were on the right course for some time now. We had hoped that there would be success. The emotional feeling created by your progress would help solve problems in the future. But these problems will be much more difficult. The question of Jerusalem, for instance, is a very emotional problem.

Scowcroft: I agree. Each step forward gets the two sides more used to negotiating with each other, even though they are doing it now through us. But the progress so far helps build the confidence on both sides and in the future they will be willing to make additional steps. Success with Syria is uncertain. We are exploring possibilities in this regard with Sadat. President Ford is very determined to keep this momentum going and to achieve further agreement on the remaining questions.

Moertopo: I would like to talk to you for a minute about ASEAN. Indonesia will exercise the mechanism of national resilience to control and secure its area. National resilience is a national equilibrium, an ability to solve problems. It refers to increasing the capacity of a nation and is made up of seven factors: 1. Ideology which creates the motivation of the nation.

2. Politics which involves increasing living standards, job opportunities and national development.

3. Economy which influences economic production, which means agriculture, but also attracting foreign capital. Agriculture is the base upon which we will build and which will influence the other areas of the economy.

4. The social condition which involves the status of society and change from a traditional to a moderate society and from an inward looking one to an outward looking one.

5. Cultural.

6. Military.

7. Technology.

These factors all pertain to our relations to our neighbors. If we want to control our neighbors, we must develop relationships in all areas. Now we have some agreement with our neighbors. We want to use this understanding to improve our relationship with all our neighbors. We want to use this understanding with all our neighbors to develop regional resilience. This does not mean establishing a military pact. But it does mean cooperating together in such things as joint exercises and exchanges of hardware and software.

Scowcroft: Have you discussed security then within ASEAN?

Moertopo: Yes, yes. But our final backbone is the U.S. For the next 10 to 15 years we will need U.S. presence. We must accept these conditions and use this time to develop ourselves. Everyone agrees on the U.S. presence remaining there. The U.S. is an Asian power and Pacific power and must remain. We are within the nuclear umbrella and the nations of Asia and the Pacific must accept these realities. In fact, we need it. The U.S., Russia and China are all contending in this area. We prefer that the U.S. be the controlling power in this relationship and help maintain this balance. We need this. Other states like the Australians and the Philippines must accept this reality. Our cooperating with some other states in the area is difficult. For instance, dealing with India is hard for us. They now have a security agreement with the USSR. Burma is difficult too because they are so isolated. But in this balance the Indian Ocean and the Pacific, the U.S. presence is needed. Now that you are there, we will take this opportunity to create cooperation between Indonesia, Japan, the ASEAN states and Australia Japan is very willing to increase this cooperation because it believes it will insure stability in the area. But we need your understanding and your support in this endeavor.

Scowcroft: You have it. We want to be a good and reliable friend. If President Ford has it his way, it will be like this. Some people in the Congress think that we have no further role to play in the Pacific. We think they are wrong. We will continue to be active, but we look to you for leadership in the area. We will be a good friend.

Moertopo: Leadership must be earned. It is difficult to achieve. We could not do it without the U.S. We are still too weak.

Scowcroft: You are working at it. We hope to maintain a very close relationship with you to exchange ideas and to work closely together to maintain stability.

Moertopo: Maintaining relations with China is very difficult. There is not only the governmental relations to consider but also the influence on people in society. We must prepare our people first so that they can accept the idea of China as a neighbor. Current experience of Malaysia is valuable to us in this regard because we will be able to see the consequences of relations with Peking. Communists use two strategies at the same time. First, on a government to government basis, they stress peaceful coexistence; while secondly, on a Party basis, they support liberation movements which are trying to create Communist governments. This is very dangerous for us. So we must watch very carefully to see if China is really sincere. Finally, we have a domestic problem with the Chinese people in Indonesia. Actually, there are five different facets of dealing with China. First, PRC. Second, Taiwan. Third, the Chinese in the territory of Hong and Macau. Fourth, the international Chinese population split throughout other countries in Asia. Fifth, the domestic Chinese population in Indonesia itself. This is a Chinese problem. If it could coordinate all of these elements itself, it would make it the most powerful force in the whole world. Our strategy is to block unification of these five elements.

Scowcroft: You are smart. You have problems but you should also remember that it is useful to have the Chinese as a counterbalance to the Russians.

Moertopo: Your dialogue with Peking in this regard is most important. We have taken too much of your time already. Thank you very much for receiving me here today.

Scowcroft: It is always a pleasure to receive our Indonesian friends here at the White House.

1 Source: Ford Library, National Security Adviser, Memoranda of Conversation, Box 16. Secret. The meeting was held in Scowcroft’s office. Scowcroft’s talking points are ibid., Presidential Country Files for East Asia and the Pacific, Box 6, Indonesia (3).

138. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to President Ford, Washington, October 30, 1975. 138. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to President Ford, Washington, October 30, 1975.1

Washington, October 30, 1975

MEMORANDUM
THE WHITE HOUSE
WASHINGTON
ACTION

October 30, 1975

MEMORANDUM FOR: THE PRESIDENT
FROM: HENRY A. KISSINGER [HK initialed]

SUBJECT: U.S.-Indonesia Consultative Arrangements

The NSC Under Secretaries Committee has forwarded a memorandum to you (Tab B) recommending that you approve a formal proposal to the Indonesian Government in the establishment of a Joint U.S. Consultative Commission.

You discussed establishing such a body with President Suharto during his visit to Camp David on July 5. Other Indonesian leaders have shown an interest in having such a formal mechanism as a Joint Consultative Commission to discuss periodically issues of significant concern.

I believe the establishment of such a Joint Commission is in our interests. Regular policy consultation can be expected to favorably influence Indonesian positions on international issues of importance to us, and to demonstrate high level U.S. interest in Indonesia.

The Under Secretaries' memorandum outlines two possible structures for such a consultative arrangement: — Option I: A Joint Consultative Commission co-chaired by the Secretary of State and the Indonesian Foreign Minister. This body would include on the U.S. side, sub-cabinet representatives from Defense, Treasury, State and other agencies which the agenda of the Commission dictates.

— Option II: Two separate Committees: A Joint Economic Committee and a Joint Security Affairs Committee.

The Indonesians have indicated informally that they would prefer a Joint Consultative Commission. The NSC Under Secretaries Committee also recommends that we adopt Option I as our preference. I agree. Option II would unnecessarily highlight the security aspects of our consultations, and would create needless problems of coordination between the two separate committees.

If you approve Option I, I will forward the National Security Decision Memorandum at Tab A to the Secretary of Defense and the Deputy Secretary of State informing them of your decision and instructing them to propose to the Indonesian Government the establishment of a Joint U.S.-Indonesian Consultative Commission.

RECOMMENDATION:
That you approve Option I as outlined in the NSC Under Secretaries Committee and authorize me to forward the memorandum at Tab A.
APPROVE [GRF initialed]
DISAPPROVE

1 Source: Ford Library, NSC Institutional Files (H-Files), Box H–61, NSDM 311: U.S.-Indonesian Consultative Arrangements. Confidential. Sent for action. Tab A is attached. Tab B, the recommendations from the Undersecretaries Committee, is described in the source note for Document 134. Ford initialed the“approve” option. A notation at the top of the first page reads, “Signed 10/31.”

139. National Security Decision Memorandum 311, Washington, November 1, 1975. 139. National Security Decision Memorandum 311, Washington, November 1, 1975.1

Washington, November 1, 1975

NATIONAL SECURITY COUNCIL
WASHINGTON, D.C. 20506

November 1, 1975

National Security Decision Memorandum 311

TO: The Secretary of Defense
The Deputy Secretary of State

SUBJECT: U.S.-Indonesia Consultative Arrangements

The President has decided, based on the recommendations of the NSC Under Secretaries Committee, that we will propose to the Government of Indonesia the establishment of a single Joint U.S. Indonesia Consultative Commission.

The President requests that the Department of State develop a formal proposal in conjunction with the Department of Defense and such other agencies as is deemed appropriate which we can transmit to the Indonesian Government in the near future. The President asks that you complete this proposal by November 17, 1975.

[signed]
Henry A. Kissinger

cc: The Secretary of the Treasury
The Administrator, Agency for International Development
The Chairman, Joint Chiefs of Staff
The Director of Central Intelligence

1 Source: Ford Library, NSC Institutional Files (H-Files), Box H–69, NSDM Originals (2 of 2) (1), NSDM 301–NSDM 315. Confidential. Copies were sent to the Secretary of the Treasury, the Administrator of the Agency for International Development, the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, and the Director of Central Intelligence.

140. Memorandum From Kenneth Quinn of the National Security Council staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Scowcroft), Washington, December 4, 1975. 140. Memorandum From Kenneth Quinn of the National Security Council staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Scowcroft), Washington, December 4, 1975.1

Washington, December 4, 1975

[text not declassified in time for publication]

1 Source: Ford Library, National Security Adviser, Presidential Country Files for East Asia and the Pacific, Box 6, Indonesia (4). Secret; Sensitive. Sent for action. Scowcroft wrote “Thanks” near the top of the memorandum. Tab A (background information and talking points), Tab B (responses to journalistic questions), and Tab C (Telegram 285276 to the Secretary of State while traveling, December 4) are attached, but not published.

141. Telegram 14946 From the Embassy in Indonesia to the Department of State, December 6, 1975, 1000Z. 141. Telegram 14946 From the Embassy in Indonesia to the Department of State, December 6, 1975, 1000Z.1

December 6, 1975

TELEGRAM
Department of State
JAKARTA 14945

FM AMEMBASSY JAKARTA
TO SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 1579

EO 11652: GDS EO
TAGS: OVIF (FORD GERALD R PRESIDENT)

SUBJ: FORD-SUHARTO MEETING

1. FOLLOWING IS MEMCON OF MEETING BETWEEN PRESIDENT FORD AND PRESIDENT SUHARTO IN JAKARTA DECEMBER 6. ALSO PRESENT WERE SECRETARY OF STATE KISSINGER, FOREIGN MINISTER MALIK, MINISTER OF STATE SUDHARMONO, AMBASSADOR NEWSOM, AND AN INTERPRETER.

2. SUHARTO-I WISH TO EXPRESS MY THANKS AND VERY GREAT APPRECIATION FOR YOUR WILLINGNESS, MR. PRESIDENT, TO ACCEPT MY INVITATION TO VISIT INDONESIA. ALTHOUGH THE VISIT IS VERY SHORT. I BELIEVE IT WILL BE MOST USEFUL. THE PROMOTION OF PERSONAL CONTACTS BETWEEN US IS IMPORTANT AND SIGNIFICANT FOR BOTH OF OUR COUNTRIES.

3. FORD-MY DELEGATION IS EXTREMELY GRATEFUL, MR. PRESIDENT, FOR THE SPLENDID ARRANGEMENTS FOR THE VISIT. I REGRET THAT THE TIME IS SHORT BUT AFTER ELECTIONS, I HOPE TO COME BACK AGAIN FOR A LONGER PERIOD. THE OPPORTUNITY FOR SUCH FACE TO FACE MEETINGS IS ALSO HIGHLY IMPORTANT FOR ME. THE CONFIDENCE ESTABLISHED THROUGH SUCH MEETINGS IS IMPORTANT TO THE DEVELOPMENT OF OUR POLICIES. I CONSIDERED THE MEETING AT CAMP DAVID TO BE MOST FRUITFUL AND I AM CERTAIN THAT THIS CURRENT VISIT WILL EVEN FURTHER ENHANCE OUR RELATIONSHIP. THE UNITED STATES INTENDS TO CONTINUE A STRONG INTEREST IN AND INFLUENCE IN THE PACIFIC, SOUTHEAST ASIA AND ASIA. AS A WHOLE, WE HOPE TO EXPAND THIS INFLUENCE DESPITE THE SEVERE SETBACK OF VIETNAM. OUR COUNTRY-TO-COUNTRY RELATIONSHIPS ARE VERY IMPORTANT TO THE DEVELOPMENT OF THESE POLICIES.

4. AS YOU KNOW, I HAVE JUST RETURNED FROM CHINA WHERE WE HAD DISCUSSIONS OF THE INTERNATIONAL SCENE AND AN IN DEPTH REVIEW OF OUR BILATERAL RELATIONS. WE MADE IT CLEAR THAT WE ARE OPPOSED TO THE EXPANSION OF ANY NATION OR COMBINATION OF COUNTRIES. WE HAVE NO TERRITORIAL AMBITIONS. WE VALUE OUR RELATIONSHIP WITH INDONESIA AND RESPECT YOU REGIONAL AND NON-ALIGNED RELATIONSHIPS.

5. SUHARTO-WHAT ARE YOUR IMPRESSIONS ON CHINA'S ATTITUDE TOWARD SOUTHEAST ASIA AFTER VIETNAM?

6. FORD-THEY WILL VIGOROUSLY EXPANSIONISM BY OTHERS INTO ASIA. IN THIS THEY THINK PARTICULARLY OF THE USSR. THEY DON'T APPEAR TO HAVE AMBITIONS OF THEIR OWN.

7. KISSINGER-WE BELIEVE THAT CHINA DOES NOT HAVE EXPANSIONIST AIMS NOW. WE CANNOT PREDICT WHAT THE SITUATION WILL BE IN FIVE YEARS. RIGHT NOW THEIR FIRST CONCERN IS THE SOVIET UNION AND THEIR SECOND VIETNAM.

8. FORD-I HAD THE IMPRESSION OF A RESTRAINED CHINESE FOREIGN POLICY LARGELY DIRECTED AT A MEETING THE CHALLENGE OF RUSSIA AND VIETNAM.

9. SUHARTO-AT CAMP DAVID WE DISCUSSED THE QUESTION OF UNIFICATION OF VIETNAM. THAT SEEMS NOW TO BE MOVING AHEAD. LAOS AND CAMBODIA SEEM ALREADY UNDER VIETNAMESE INFLUENCE. DOES THE UNITED STATES BELIEVE THE THREE WILL BE INCORPORATED INTO ONE COUNTRY?

10. FORD-THE UNIFICATION OF VIETNAM HAS COME MORE QUICKLY THAN WE ANTICIPATED. THERE IS, HOWEVER, RESISTANCE IN CAMBODIA TO THE INFLUENCE OF HANOI. WE ARE WILLING TO MOVE SLOWLY IN OUT RELATIONS WITH CAMBODIA, HOPING PERHAPS TO SLOW DOWN THE NORTH VIETNAMESE INFLUENCE ALTHOUGH WE FIND THE CAMBODIAN GOVERNMENT VERY DIFFICULT. THE SITUATION IN LAOS IS DISTURBING AND APPEARS TO DEMONSTRATE AN ACCELERATED INTEREST ON THE PART OF NORTH VIETNAM.

11. KISSINGER-IT IS INTERESTING THAT IN LAOS SOUVANNOVONG IS NOW IN A SUBORDINATE POSITION. THE CHINESE WANT TO USE CAMBODIA TO BALANCE OFF VIETNAM AND ARE KEEPING TROOPS IN CONNECTION WITH ROAD BUILDING IN THE NORTH. WE DON'T LIKE CAMBODIA, FOR THE GOVERNMENT IN MANY WAYS IS WORSE THAN VIETNAM, BUT WE WOULD LIKE IT TO BE INDEPENDENT. WE DON'T DISCOURAGE THAILAND OR CHINA FROM DRAWING CLOSER TO CAMBODIA.

12. SUHARTO-THE FACT REMAINS THAT SIHANOUK, DESPITE SUPPORT FROM CHINA, HAS NO AUTHORITY AND THE KHMER ROUGE LEADERSHIP IS CLOSER TO HANOI. THEY ARE GUIDED BY THE WILL OF HO CHI MINH.

13. KISSINGER-LE DOC THO USED TO TELL ME THAT THEIR AMBITION WAS ALL OF INDOCHINA AFTER WHICH THEY WOULD PROCEED TO TAKE OVER SOUTHEAST ASIA.

14. SUHARTO-IN RECENT POWER POLITICS THE THREE INDOCHINESE COUNTRIES ARE TRYING TO SEPARATE THEMSELVES FROM THE BIG POWERS AND BECOME MEMBERS OF THE NON-ALIGNED MOVEMENT. CAMBODIA AND LAOS ARE MEMBERS ALTHOUGH HANOI IS NOT YET A MEMBER. THIS CAN CAUSE NEW PROBLEMS FOR THE NON-ALIGNED MOVEMENT. SEVERAL COMMUNIST COUNTRIES NOW WANT TO BE NON-ALIGNED. YUGOSLAVIA, CUBA AND ROMANIA ARE EXAMPLES. NOW AMONG THE NON-ALIGNED COUNTRIES THERE ARE NO CONSISTENT POLICIES AND NO SOLID BLOC.

15. ONE OF INDONESIA'S MAIN CONCERNS IS THE DANGER FROM INDOCHINA WHETHER THERE IS ONE STATE OR THREE. THIS DANGER APPLIES TO ALL OF THE NON-COMMUNIST COUNTRIES IN THE AREA.

16. FORD-FROM PAST HISTORY IT IS CLEAR THAT INDOCHINA WOULD BE A DISTURBING ELEMENT IN ANY GROUP. DO THE NON-COMMUNIST COUNTRIES HAVE A VETO OVER NEW MEMBERS OF THE NON-ALIGNED GROUP?

17. SUHARTO: NO. IT IS DIFFICULT TO EXCLUDE ANYONE BECAUSE OF THE LARGE NUMBER OF AFRICAN COUNTRIES WHO ARE SO EASILY INFLUENCED. THIS IS WHAT BROUGHT ABOUT THE ADMISSION OF NORTH KOREA. PARTLY BECAUSE OF THIS SITUATION WE ARE NOW CONCENTRATING ON CONSOLIDATING OURSELVES IN SOUTH EAST ASIA. WE ARE TRYING TO FIND IDENTICAL VIEWS ON FACING THE COUNTRIES IN INDOCHINA AND ON WAYS AND MEANS TO IMPROVE SECURITY. AT THE BEGINNING WE HAD DIFFERENCES OF OPINION. THAILAND AND MALAYSIA, WITH A COMMON BORDER WITH INDOCHINA, SAW NO IMMEDIATE THREAT AND WANTED TO ESTABLISH RELATIONS WITH HANOI. INDONESIA ADVISED THEM THAT EVEN THOUGH THERE WAS NO PHYSICAL THREAT THIS DID NOT MEAN THERE WAS AN ABSENCE OF DANGER. THE LOCAL INSURGENCIES REPRESENT A GREATER DANGER THAN WOULD AN OVERT PHYSICAL THREAT. THE ASEAN LEADERS HAVE NOW CONCLUDED THAT THE INSURGENT ELEMENTS HAVE STEPPED UP THEIR ACTION IN THE FORTHCOMING ASEAN SUMMIT. THE AGENDA WILL INCLUDE ECONOMICS AND POLITICS AS WELL AS SECURITY.

18. ON THE ECONOMIC SIDE THE OBJECTIVE WILL BE TO STRENGTHEN NATIONAL RESILIENCE. IT IS IMPORTANT TO COOPERATE CLOSELY TOGETHER SO THAT NO COUNTRY IS A WEAK LINK. IN THIS CONNECTION THE ASEAN COUNTRIES WISHED TO TAKE A COMMON STAND ON TRADE RELATIONS AND AVOID COMPETITION AMONG THEMSELVES. A RELATIONSHIP NOW EXISTS WITH THE EEC AND CONSULTATIONS ARE CONDUCTED THROUGH A SPECIAL COMMITTEE CALLED SCAN. INDONESIA WOULD LIKE TO SEE THE ESTABLISHMENT OF CONSULTATIONS ON ECONOMIC MATTERS ASEAN WITH OTHER COUNTRIES AND PARTICULARLY THE UNITED STATES. HOW THIS WOULD BE DONE IS NOW BEING DISCUSSED. INDONESIA IS THE LEADER OF THE GROUP TALKING WITH THE EEC AND THE PHILIPPINES WILL BE THE LEADER OF THE GROUP IN DISCUSSIONS WITH THE UNITED STATES. (THIS POINT WAS SUBSEQUENTLY CLARIFIED WITH GENERAL SUDHARMONO.)

19. FORD-WE WOULD WELCOME SUCH DISCUSSION AND WILL WAIT UNTIL THE INITIATIVE IS TAKEN BY THE PHILIPPINES FOR THE GROUP.

20. SUHARTO-THE ASEAN COUNTRIES DO NOT WISH TO EMBARK ON OVERLY AMBITIOUS BUT WISH TO FIND PROJECTS BENEFICIAL TO ALL. PART OF THE EFFORT WILL BE IN INDUSTRIES IN WHICH PRODUCTS ARE CLEARLY IN DEMAND SUCH AS IN FERTILIZER. INDONESIA IS NOW PRODUCING UREA FERTILIZER AND THE PHILIPPINES HAS THE PROSPECT OF PRODUCING PHOSPHATES.

21. FORD-WHERE WOULD THE CAPITAL COME FROM FOR SUCH PROJECTS?

22. SUHARTO-WE ENVISAGE JOINT VENTURES WITH ALL FIVE COUNTRIES INVOLVED.

23. KISSINGER-WE WOULD WELCOME SUCH PROJECTS AND HAVE LONG SUPPORTED THE IDEA OF REGIONAL ARRANGEMENTS. WE BELIEVE THAT THESE WOULD HAVE AN IMPORTANT EFFECT.

24. SUHARTO-WE UNDOUBTEDLY WOULD BE LOOKING FOR CAPITAL FROM THE U.S. ALSO FOR SUCH PROJECTS.

25. IN DISCUSSIONS OF SECURITY ASEAN COUNTRIES, WE ARE SEEKING TO AVOID ANY OUTWARD INDICATION OF A PACT. WE INTEND TO BEGIN BY AN EXCHANGE OF INTELLIGENCE ANALYSES AND ESTIMATES. WE WILL THEN DECIDE WHAT METHODS WE SHOULD USE TO REINFORCE OUR SECURITY.

26. FORD-DO YOU CONSIDER THE INSURGENCY IN THAILAND AND MALAYSIA YOUR MOST IMMEDIATE THREAT?

27. SUHARTO-EXACTLY, IT IS THERE THAT WE ARE NOW TRYING TO ANALYZE WHAT WE SHOULD DO. WHAT WE DO MUST BE CLOSELY RELATED TO OUR CAPABILITIES, TO A DETERMINATION OF HOW STRONG WE ARE. THESE CAPABILITIES ARE CURRENTLY LIMITED. IT IS IMPORTANT, THEREFORE, THAT WE CONSOLIDATE THE STRENGTH OF THE PEOPLES IDEOLOGY, POLITICALLY, ECONOMICALLY AND MILITARILY. ALL VILLAGES SHOULD BECOME FORTRESSES. THIS REQUIRES SUBSTANTIAL SMALL ARMS. THAILAND AND INDONESIA ARE STUDYING THE MEANS OF PROVIDING SUCH ARMS. BOTH MALAYSIA AND THAILAND ARE INTERESTED IN SMALL ARMS PRODUCTION BUT FOR SECURITY REASONS WOULD BE PREPARED OT SEE THIS PRODUCTION IN INDONESIA. WE WOULD LIKE TO BUILD A PLANT TO PRODUCE M-16 RIFLES. WOULD THE UNITED STATES CONSIDER ASSISTING IN THE CONSTRUCTION OF SUCH A PLANT?

28. KISSINGER-WE WOULD FAVOR THIS AS A GOVERNMENT BECAUSE OF ITS INDICATION OF WIDER COOPERATION.

29. FORD-WE WOULD BE MORE THAN SYMPATHETIC, WE WOULD BE ENTHUSIASTIC ABOUT SUCH A CONCEPT.

30. SUHARTO-WE ARE NOW TAKING FORMAL STEPS. THE LEADERSHIP ON THE PROJECT IS LEFT TO INDONESIA.

31. FORD-WE ARE NOT ANXIOUS TO WITHDRAW FROM THAILAND AS RAPIDLY AS THE THAIS WANTED.

32. KISSINGER-WE WILL KEEP UTAPAO AIR BASE.

33. FORD-WE ARE STILL IN THAILAND, WE ALSO HAVE HAD SOME CONTACTS WITH MALAYSIA AND SINGAPORE ABOUT INCREASED MILITARY AID.

34. SUHARTO-INSURGENCY HAS NOW REACHED THE CAPITALS IN BOTH THAILAND AND MALAYSIA. IT IS BECOMING INCREASINGLY DIFFICULT TO FACE THIS INSURGENCY. FOR ONE THING, THERE ARE CONFLICTS OF INTEREST IN BOTH THAILAND AND MALAYSIA. THE RECIAL [RECENT?] PROBLEMS IN MALAYSIA ARE AN EXAMPLE. THE COMMUNISTS ARE TRYING TO SUBVERT BY CUTTING LINKS BETWEEN THE ASEAN COUNTRIES. THEY WANT TO CUT MALAYSIA FIRST.

35. FORD-WHERE ARE THE INSURGENTS COMING FROM?

36. SUHARTO-MAINLY FROM CHINA. 40 PCT OF THE POPULATION IN MALAYSIA ARE CHINESE. VIETNAM AND THE SOVIET UNION WILL NOT STAND STILL IF THEY FEEL THERE ARE OPPORTUNITIES IN MALAYSIA. WE NEED TO FORTIFY MALAYSIA BUT THIS IS NOT EASY TO DO BECAUSE OF THE CHINESE INFLUENCE IN MALAYSIA. THIS CAUSES GREAT CONCERN TO SINGAPORE WHICH WOULD BE IN DANGER IF MALAYSIA FELL. WE ARE CONCERNED BECAUSE IT WOULD BRING THE COMMUNISTS RIGHT TO OUR THRESHOLD.

37. FORD-IS THAILAND THREATENED BY VIETNAM?

38. SUHARTO-YES. THERE IS A LONG HATRED BETWEEN THAILAND AND VIETNAM.

39. I WOULD LIKE TO SPEAK TO YOU, MR. PRESIDENT, ABOUT ANOTHER PROBLEM, TIMOR. WHEN IT LOOKED AS IF THE PORTUGUESE RULE WOULD END IN TIMOR WE SOUGHT TO ENCOURAGE THE PORTUGUESE TO AN ORDERLY DECOLONIZATION PROCESS. WE HAD AGREEMENT WITH THEM ON SUCH A PROCESS AND WE RECOGNIZED THE AUTHORITY OF THEIR WISHES. INDONESIA HAS NO TERRITORIAL AMBITIONS. WE ARE CONCERNED ONLY ABOUT THE SECURITY, TRANQUILITY AND PEACE OF ASIA AND THE SOUTHERN HEMISPHERE. IN THE LATEST ROME AGREEMENT THE PORTUGUESE GOVERNMENT WANTED TO INVITE ALL PARTIES TO NEGOTIATE. SIMILAR EFFORTS WERE MADE BEFORE BUT FRETELIN DID NOT ATTEND. AFTER THE FRETELIN FORCES OCCUPIED CERTAIN POINTS AND OTHER FORCES WERE UNABLE TO CONSOLIDATE, FRETELIN HAS DECLARED ITS INDEPENDENCE UNILATERALLY. IN CONSEQUENCE OTHER PARTIES DECLARED THEIR INTENTION OF INTEGRATING WITH INDONESIA. PORTUGAL REPORTED THE SITUATION TO THE UNITED NATIONS BUT DID NOT EXTEND RECOGNITION TO FRETELIN. PORTUGAL, HOWEVER, IS UNABLE TO CONTROL THE SITUATION. IF THIS CONTINUES IT WILL PROLONG THE SUFFERING OF THE REFUGEES AND INCREASE THE INSTABILITY IN THE AREA.

40. FORD-THE FOUR OTHER PARTIES HAVE ASKED FOR INTEGRATION?

41. SUHARTO-YES. AFTER THE UDT, INDONESIA FOUND ITSELF FACING A FATE ACCOMPLI. IT IS NOW IMPORTANT TO DETERMINE WHAT WE CAN DO TO ESTABLISH PEACE AND ORDER FOR THE PRESENT AND THE FUTURE NI THE INTEREST OF THE SECURITY OF THE AREA ND INDONESIA. THESE ARE SOME OF THE CONSIDERATIONS WE ARE NOW CONTEMPLATING. WE WANT YOUR UNDERSTANDING IF WE DEEM IT NECESSARY TO TAKE RAPID OR DRASTIC ACTION.

42. FORD-WE UNDERSTAND AND WILL NOT PRESS YOU ON THE ISSUE. WE UNDERSTAND THE PROBLEM YOU HAVE AND THE INTENTIONS YOU HAVE.

43. KISSINGER-YOU APPRECIATE THAT THE USE OF US-MADE ARMS COULD CREATE PROBLEMS.

44. FORD—WE COULD HAVE TECHNICAL AND LEGAL PROBLEMS. YOU ARE FAMILIAR, MR. PRESIDENT, WITH THE PROBLEMS WE HAD ON CYPRUS ALTHOUGH THIS SITUATION IS DIFFERENT.

45. KISSINGER-IT DEPENDS ON HOW WE CONSTRUE IT. WHETHER IT IS IN SELF DEFENSE OR IS A FOREIGN OPERATION. IT IS IMPORTANT THAT WHATEVER YOU DO SUCCEEDS QUICKLY. WE WOULD BE ABLE TO INFLUENCE THE REACTION IN AMERICA IF WHATEVER HAPPENS HAPPENS AFTER WE RETURN. THIS WAY THERE WOULD BE LESS CHANCE OF PEOPLE TALKING IN AN UNAUTHORIZED WAY. THE PRESIDENT WILL BE BACK ON MONDAY AT 2:00 PM JAKARTA TIME. WE UNDERSTAND YOUR PROBLEM AND THE NEED TO MOVE QUICKLY BUT I AM ONLY SAYING THAT IT WOULD BE BETTER IF IT WERE DONE AFTER WE RETURNED.

46. FORD-IT WOULD BE MORE AUTHORITATIVE IF WE CAN DO IT IN PERSON.

47. KISSINGER-WHATEVER YOU DO, HOWEVER, WE WILL TRY TO HANDLE IN THE BEST WAY POSSIBLE.

48. FORD-WE RECOGNIZE THAT YOU HAVE A TIME FACTOR. WE HAVE MERELY EXPRESSED OUR VIEW FROM OUR PARTICULAR POINT OF VIEW.

49. KISSINGER-IF YOU HAVE MADE PLANS, WE WILL DO OUR BEST TO KEEP EVERYONE QUIET UNTIL THE PRESIDENT RETURNS HOME.

50. DO YOU ANTICIPATE A LONG GUERILLA WAR THERE?

51. SUHARTO-THERE WILL PROBABLY BE A SMALL GUERILLA WAR. THE LOCAL KINGS ARE IMPORTANT, HOWEVER, AND THEY ARE ON OUR SIDE. THE UDT REPRESENTS FORMER GOVERNMENT OFFICIALS AND FRETELIN REPRESENTS FORMER SOLDIERS. THEY ARE INFECTED THE SAME AS IS THE PORTUGUESE ARMY WITH COMMUNISM.

52. I WOULD LIKE TO SAY A WORD ABOUT TRADE RELATIONS. THERE ARE SEVERE ECONOMIC PRESSURES ON OUR COUNTRIES. WE MUST DO ALL WE CAN TO MAXIMIZE OUR INCOME. IN THIS CONNECTION THERE IS AN IMBALANCE OF PROFITS BETWEEN OIL COMPANIES OPERATING IN INDONESIA AND THOSE OPERATING IN THE MIDDLE EAST. INDONESIAN COMPANIES MAKE AS MUCH AS $2.50 A BARREL WHEREAS THE PROFITS IN THE MIDDLE EAST ARE UNDER $1.00 A BARREL.

53. FORD-ARE THEY REINVESTING AND EXPANDING OPERATIONS?

54. SUHARTO-YES, WE DON'T WANT TO INTERFERE WITH THAT BUT WE BELIEVE THEY CAN STRETCH OUR THEIR PROFITS. WHAT WE DO SHOULD NOT BE INTERPRETED AS NATIONALIZATION. WE ARE SEEKING AN UNDERSTANDING AND NEGOTIATIONS ARE UNDER WAY. PROSPECTS ARE ENCOURAGING. WE ALSO WANT THE UNDERSTANDING OF THE USG HOWEVER.

55. FORD-THEY SHOULD BE GRATEFUL THAT THEY ARE TREATED WELL HERE IN INDONESIA, MUCH BETTER THAN IN SOME OTHER COUNTRIES. I HOPE THAT YOUR NEGOTIATIONS WITH THEM WILL BE BENEFICIAL AND THAT THEY WILL SUPPORT YOUR EFFORT.

56. KISSINGER-OUR MAIN CONCERN IS THAT WHATEVER YOU DO DOES NOT CREATE A CLIMATE THAT DISCOURAGES INVESTMENT. BASICALLY THE MATTER IS BETWEEN YOU AND THE COMPANIES. WE ARE NOT INVOLVED IN SUCH PROBLEMS.

57. SUHARTO-WE HAVE TAKEN THESE VIEWS INTO ACCOUNT AND EVERYTHING THAT WE DO WILL BE BASED ON EXISTING LAWS. WE WANT TO FIND WAY OF OBTAINING REVENUE WHICH WILL NOT JEOPARDIZE FAIR PROFITS FOR THE COMPANIES.

58. KISSINGER-WE APPRECIATE YOU CLARIFICATION OF THIS MATTER.

59. FORD-LET ME ASSURE YOU THAT WE UNDERSTAND YOU SITUATION, WE HAVE NO PARTICULAR RECOMMENDATIONS.

60. SUHARTO-ONCE MORE, I THANK YOU FOR THIS VISIT. WE ARE A COUNTRY THAT HAS MANY NEEDS AND WE CONTINUE TO LOOK TO THE UNITED STATES TO HELP US.

61. FORD-WE WILL DO WHAT WE CAN. OUR PROBLEM IS TO CONVINCE CONGRESS WHERE WE HAVE GREAT DIFFICULTIES. ALTHOUGH PROSPECTS MAY BE A LITTLE BETTER THAN WE HAD THOUGHT EARLIER. ON THE ECONOMIC SIDE, WE ARE SEEKING TO OBTAIN THE MAXIMUM AMOUNT WHICH IS IN THE VICINITY OF 80 MILLION THIS YEAR. WE WILL ALSO TRY TO GET CONGRESS TO MODIFY THE TRADE ACT WHICH EXCLUDES OPEC COUNTRIES FROM GENERALIZED PREFERENCES. WE REALIZE THAT INDONESIA DID NOT PARTICIPATE IN THE OIL EMBARGO. CONGRESS HAS UNFORTUNATELY TREATED ALL OPEC COUNTRIES IN THE SAME FASHION.

62. I WOULD LIKE TO MENTION ALSO, MR. PRESIDENT, THAT I WANT TO MAINTAIN A DIRECT RELATIONSHIP. IF YOU HAVE ANYTHING SPECIAL, I HOPE YOU WILL COMMUNICATE WITH ME DIRECTLY BY WHATEVER MEANS SEEMS APPROPRIATE. NEWSOM

1 Source: Ford Library, National Security Adviser, Presidential Country Files for East Asia and the Pacific, Box 6, Indonesia, State Department Telegrams to SECSTATE, NODIS (3). Secret; Priority; Nodis. The President’s Daily Diary indicates that Ford and Suharto met from 8:05 until 9:30 on September 6. (Ford Library, Staff Secretary’s Office, President’s Daily Diary)

142. Telegram 14947 From the Embassy in Indonesia to the Department of State, December 6, 1975, 1200Z. 142. Telegram 14947 From the Embassy in Indonesia to the Department of State, December 6, 1975, 1200Z.1

December 6, 1975

TELEGRAM
Department of State
JAKARTA 14947

0 061200Z DEC 75

FH AMEMBASSY JAKARTA
TO SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 1582

JAKARTA 14947

DEPARTMENT PASS MANILA FOR THE SECRETARY

FOR S/S

EO 11652: GDS
TAGS: DVIP (KISSINGER)

SUBJ: MEETING WITH MALIK

1. FOLLOWING IS MEMCON OF CONVERSATION AT BREAKFAST IN JAKARTA DECEMBER 6. PRESENT WERE SECRETARY KISSINGER, FOREIGN MINISTER MALIK, MR SCOWCROFT, ASSISTANT SECRETARY HABIB, AMBASSADOR NEWSOM, DIRECTOR GENERAL POLITICAL AFFAIRS DJAJADININGRAT, AMBASSADOR ALATAS, AMBASSADOR RUSMIN AND DIRECTOR GENERAL ECONOMIC AFFAIRS ARIFIN. ONLY SUBSTANTIVE PORTIONS CONVERSATIONS INCLUDED.

2. MALIK-OUR FINANCIAL AND EQUIPMENT NEEDS, PARTICULARLY WITH THE PRESENT PROBLEM IN TIMOR, ARE VERY GREAT. WE WOULD LIKE TO SEE MORE ASSISTANCE FROM THE UNITED STATES.

3. KISSINGER-WE RECOGNIZE YOUR NEEDS, WE CONSIDER INDONESIA THE MOST IMPORTANT COUNTRY IN SOUTHEAST ASIA. THE ADMINISTRATION IS SEEKING TO GET MORE ASSISTANCE BUT WE WILL HAVE A DIFFICULT PROBLEM UNTIL AFTER THE ELECTIONS, WE ANTICIPATE THAT THERE WILL BE AT LEAST 45 OF THE NEW MEMBERS OF CONGRESS WHO CAME IN AFTER WATERGATE WHO WILL NOT BE REELECTED. IT IS VERY POSSIBLE THAT THE GENERAL OUTLOOK OF THE CONGRESS MAY, THEREFORE CHANGE.

4. I UNDERSTAND THAT WE HAD TO MAKE SOME CHANGES IN THE MILITARY ASSISTANCE PROGRAM AT THE LAST MINUTE. CONGRESS IS SHARPLY ANTI-COMMUNIST BUT THEY DON'T WANT TO FIGHT COMMUNISM. WE HAVE TRIED TO DO WHAT WE CAN IN THIS PRESENT SITUATION.

5. NEWSOM-I THINK IT SHOULD BE NOTED THAT EVEN THOUGH THE AMOUNT THAT WE ARE NOW PROVIDING ARE NOT AS LARGE AS INDONESIA WOULD LIKE, WE HAVE TURNED AROUND A TREND OF DECLINING AID. THERE IS A GREATER RECOGNITION OF INDONESIA'S NEEDS.

6. MALIK-I APPRECIATE THIS AND I RECENTLY RECEIVED A LETTER FROM THE AMBASSADOR GIVING ME THE DETAILS ON YOUR MILITARY ASSISTANCE PROGRAM.

7. KISSINGER-I CANNOT MAKE ANY PROMISES BUT I WILL LOOK AGAIN AT THE AID SITUATION.

8. I WOULD LIKE TO SAY JUST A WORD ON THE MOOD RELATIVE TO VOTE IN THE UN. I RECOGNIZE THAT INDONESIA BELONGS TO THE NON-ALIGNED GROUP AND THAT FREQUENTLY YOU WILL VOTE IN WAYS DIFFERENT THAN WE. I HAVE THE IMPRESSION, HOWEVER, THAT THE INDONESIAN DELEGATION IN NEW YORK IS NOT ALWAYS INSTRUCTED BY JAKARTA. FOR EXAMPLE, INDONESIA CO-SPONSORED A RECENT RESOLUTION ON GUAM WHICH IS DIRECTED AGAINST THE AMERICAN MILITARY PRESENCE ON GUAM.

9. MALIK (TO DJAJADININGRAT) - DID WE?

10. ALATAS-YES, IT LOCKED IT UP AND WE DID.

11. KISSINGER-WE WILL APPRECIATE YOUR SPECIAL ATTENTION TO THOSE RESOLUTIONS THAT HAVE SIGNIFICANCE FOR US.

12. ARIFIN-WHAT ARE THE POSSIBILITIES FOR THE PASSAGE OF THE AMENDMENT REMOVING THE RESTRICTIONS ON OPEC COUNTRIES FOR GENERALIZED PREFERENCES?

13. SCOWCR0FT-THE MEASURE HAS PASSED THE SENATE BUT IS STILL IN THE HOUSE.

14. KISSINGER-WE UNDERSTAND YOU INTEREST IN THIS BUT WE HAVE A REAL PROBLEM IN THE ATTITUDE IN THE CONGRESS TOWARD THE OPEC COUNTRIES. WE WILL KEEP TRYING TO GET THIS RESTRICTION REMOVED.

15. ARIFIN-WHAT DO YOU SEE COMING OUT OF THE INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC CONFERENCE?

16. KISSINGER-WE SEE A USEFUL REVIEW OF PROBLEMS OF ENERGY AND THEIR RELATIONSHIP TO DEVELOPMENT. WE HAVE SOME CONSTRUCTIVE IDEAS WE HOPE TO PUT FORWARD. WE DON'T EXPECT A SETTLEMENT OF ALL THE PROBLEMS ON THIS CONFERENCE.

17. I SHOULD SAY, HOWEVER, THAT IF THE OIL PRICE CONTINUES TO RISE, THERE WILL BE TROUBLE. OUR ECONOMIES ARE BEING SERIOUSLY THREATENED. JAPAN HAS SUFFERED A $2 BILLION LOSS IN ITS BALANCE OF PAYMENTS. THE UNITED STATES HAS BEEN HIT AND WE HAVE THEN BEEN ASKED TO FINANCE A BALANCE OF PAYMENTS DEFICIT WE DIDN'T CAUSE. SUCH ACTIONS CAUSE A REAL CRISIS IN FOREIGN AID.

18. MALIK-CAN'T THERE BE AGREEMENT THAT IF THE DEVELOPED COUNTRIES PROMISE NOT TO INCREASE INFLATION, THE DEVELOPING COUNTRIES WOULD GUARANTEE NOT TO INCREASE PRICES?

19. KISSINGER-THAT IS INDEXATION AND WE DON'T' FAVOR THAT SOLUTION.

20. MALIK-WHAT DO YOU INTEND TO DO ABOUT THE KOREAN RESOLUTIONS?

21. KISSINGER-IGNORE THEM.

22. MALIK-ARE YOU WILLING TO TALK TO NORTH KOREA?

23. KISSINGER-WE ARE WILLING TO TALK TO NORTH KOREA BUT NOT WITHOUT SOUTH KOREA. THE IDEA OF THE UNITED STATES DISCUSSING SOUTH KOREA WITHOUT SOUTH KOREA BEING PRESENT IS INSANE. IT WOULD DEMORALIZE SOUTH KOREA AND ACHIEVE NOTHING.

24. MALIK-WHAT DEVELOPMENTS DO YOU SEE WITH RESPECT TO TAIWAN?

25. KISSINGER-A RECENT REPORT OF AMERICAN INTENTIONS TOWARD TAIWAN WAS NONSENSE. IT CAME FROM A JAPANESE SOURCE. SOME JAPANESE HAVE A DREAM THAT THEY WILL HANDLE PEKING AND WE WILL HANDLE TAIWAN. EVENTUALLY THERE WILL BE A NORMALIZATION OF RELATIONS WITH THE PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC BUT NOT YET. THERE IS NO CHANGE IN OUR BASIC APPROACH OF A SLOW EVOLUTION TOWARD NORMAL RELATIONS.

26. DJADININGRAT-WHAT IS YOUR IMPRESSION OF CHINA'S OIL PROSPECTS?

27. MALIK-THIS IS BECOMING SOMETHING OF CONCERN TO US. WE HAVE LOST 16 PCT OF OUR JAPANESE MARKET BECAUSE OF CHINESE OIL.

28. KISSINGER-WE HAVE ENCOURAGED THE JAPANESE TO DECREASE THEIR IMPORTS FROM THE MIDDLE EAST, NOT FROM INDONESIA.

29. MALIK-WHAT IMPRESSION DID YOU GET OF THE CHINESE ATTITUDE TOWARD INDONESIA?

30. KISSINGER-THE CHINESE ARE DEFINITELY INTERESTED IN IMPROVING RELATIONS BUT CAN WAIT. THEY EXPRESSED GOODWILL TOWARD INDONESIA BUT DID NOT PRESS THE QUESTION. THEY ARE DEEPLY CONCERNED ABOUT THE SOVIETS AND HAVE A VERY LIMITED AFFECTION FOR THE VIETNAMESE. AS I TOLD THE CHINESE, THEY HAVE ACHIEVED AN IDEOLOGICAL VICTORY AND A GEOPOLITICAL DEFEAT. NEWSOM

NOTE: NOT PASSED MANILA FOR THE SECRETARY BY OC/T

1 Source: Ford Library, National Security Adviser, Presidential Country Files for East Asia and the Pacific, Box 6, Indonesia, State Department Telegrams to SECSTATE, NODIS (3). Secret; Immediate; Nodis. Kissinger and Malik met for breakfast before the 8:05 a.m. meeting between Kissinger and Suharto.

143. Memorandum From Thomas J. Barnes of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Scowcroft), Washington, December 9, 1975 143. Memorandum From Thomas J. Barnes of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Scowcroft), Washington, December 9, 1975 1

Washington, December 9, 1975

MEMORANDUM
NATIONAL SECURITY COUNCIL

URGENT ACTION

December 9, 1975

MEMORANDUM FOR: BRENT SCOWCROFT
FROM: THOMAS J. BARNES

SUBJECT: U.S. Position on Indonesian Actions in Portuguese Timor

Recommended Stance

I am concerned that we may be becoming unnecessarily involved in the multi-faceted dispute over Portuguese Timor. I recommend that we adopt the public line that the U.S. has little information about Timor and no national interest in it. While the latter statement is more accurate than the former, neither strays from truthfulness. We should simultaneously hope for an end to hostilities there and endorse self-determination for the Timorese people.

Background

The Indonesian intervention in Timor is attracting increasingly bitter attention at the UN and in the media. The UN Fourth Committee is still debating a resolution on Timor, which now includes a proposed amendment condemning Indonesia's actions. Both at the UN and in press statements, the PRC has joined in this condemnation and called for an immediate Indonesian withdrawal.

UN debate will probably become more acrimonious in the near future. The Security Council begins informal consultations on this subject December 9. Formal consideration will probably not occur until the Fourth Committee finishes its deliberations.

Some of the parties involved are already seeking to drag us into this fray. Embassy Jakarta reports that Adam Malik has told the Dutch Ambassador in Indonesia that during President Ford's visit we told the GOI that we understood its problem, and did not oppose its actions in Timor. He may have told other Ambassadors as well. I fear this statement will be translated in the re-telling into American "approval" of the invasion. In addition, the Portuguese have told Ambassador Carlucci that many people are commenting about the beginning of the operation coinciding with the President's visit.

Radio Jakarta and Fretilin sources in Australia have commented publicly on remarks about this subject that Secretary Kissinger reportedly made after the Presidents meeting with President Suharto. Radio Jakarta was ebullient because it interpreted the Secretary's comment as supporting Indonesia's position. Fretilin's statement, reported in the December 8 edition of the Washington Post, criticized the Secretary for reportedly saying "the United States understands Indonesia's position on the question." On the other hand, Fretilin President Amaral has cabled President Ford requesting assistance.

The State Department is now deciding how we should deal with this problem. The East Asia Bureau at State sent a memorandum December 7 to the Secretary's party (Tab B) stating that "U.S. interests — would appear to be best served by following Indonesia's lead on this issue, while remaining responsive and receptive to Australian and Portuguese views." Given their diametrical opposition, I do not see how we could possibly appease both Jakarta and Lisbon. The State memo also added that we should devote our efforts to getting the three parties together to work out what is essentially their problem. The Portuguese Desk and USUN are arguing for a more even handed approach.

I believe we should remain aloof. Following Indonesia's lead may prove unwise. Portugal's appeal to the UN and its overt cutting of diplomatic relations with Indonesia show that Lisbon takes events in Portuguese Timor seriously. The possibility of armed conflict between Indonesia and Portugal, while not probable, exists because there are several Portuguese warships still located off the Timor Coast. [text not declassified]

Controversial Issues

There are several other controversial issues which led me to recommending our staying out of this matter: — The Congressional issue of the use of U.S. arms in the action is surfacing in the press.

— There will be accusations about the murder of innocent civilians during the capture of Dili.

— [text not declassified]

Conclusion

I do not believe we should get further involved in any aspect of this problem. We have no real interests in Portuguese Timor and we can best serve our own interests by remaining aloof. If a vote comes in the UN in either the Fourth Committee or the Security Council condemning Indonesia's actions, I recommend we abstain.

I also recommend a noncommittal public stance. Any statements by White House or executive branch press representatives which journalists could construe as supporting the Indonesian or the Portuguese position run the risk of needlessly causing an irritant in our bilateral relations with those countries. To avoid this situation, I recommend that you discuss this matter with Ron Nessen and provide him strict guidance regarding what he might say in response to questions on the U.S. position towards Indonesian action in Timor. We sent suggested Q's and A's (Tab C) to Margi Vanderhye on December 8 for the President's use on this subject.

RECOMMENDATION;

That you discuss this issue with Secretary Kissinger and urge we not become involved.

APPROVE
DISAPPROVE

That you discuss this matter with Ron Nessen and provide him with the strict guidance (Tab A) on this subject.

APPROVE
DISAPPROVE

1 Source: Ford Library, National Security Adviser, Presidential Country Files for East Asia and the Pacific, Box 6, Indonesia (5). Secret; Sensitive. Sent for urgent action. Scowcroft wrote “Is this true?” next to a statement on the first page that“The Indonesian intervention in Timor is attracting increasingly bitter attention at the UN and in the media.” On the last page, Scowcroft check marked his approval of the first recommendation and his disapproval of the second. Tab A, undated press guidance for Ron Nessen, is attached but not published. Tab B, telegram 288596 to the Secretary, December 7, is attached but not published. Tab C, undated suggested questions and answers for Ron Nessen, is also attached but not published.

144. Memorandum From Thomas J. Barnes of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Scowcroft), Washington, December 12, 1975. 144. Memorandum From Thomas J. Barnes of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Scowcroft), Washington, December 12, 1975.1

Washington, December 12, 1975

NATIONAL SECURITY COUNCIL
MEMORANDUM

December 12, 1975

MEMORANDUM FOR BRENT SCOWCROFT
FROM: THOMAS J. BARNES [TJB initialed]

SUBJECT: Future Prospects for Indonesia in Portuguese Timor

You raised the question about the rapidity of Indonesian consolidation of control over Portuguese Timor. I asked Evelyn Colbert, the National Intelligence Officer for Japan and Pacific Asia, to prepare a memorandum on this question (Tab A). The key points which her memorandum makes are: — Indonesian forces have now established control over Timor's two principal cities, Dili and Baucau.

— Fretilin forces will not be able to obstruct a rapid and complete extension of Indonesian control over the remaining administrative centers of the colony.

— Fretilin leaders seemed to have decided to conserve men and supplies for a future guerrilla campaign.

— Fretilin forces will be able to carry on guerrilla activities for some time to come; however, their effectiveness is suspect.

— Indonesian forces already outweigh Fretilin's by 15,000 to 5,000+, and Indonesian equipment, materiel, reinforcement, and resupply capabilities are far superior to those of Fretilin.

The main conclusion is that Fretilin-led-guerrilla activities, while causing some political and military problems, will not seriously affect Indonesian control. Fretilin will also probably attempt to make maximum international effort to publicize its cause, but over the long range such actions are unlikely to seriously disturb Indonesian control or to arouse much foreign interest.

1 Source: Ford Library, National Security Adviser, Presidential Country Files for East Asia and the Pacific, Box 6, Indonesia (6). Top Secret; Sensitive. Sent for information. Tab A is attached but not published. Scowcroft wrote “Thanks” and initialed the memorandum. The same day, Granger sent Scowcroft a memorandum on Indonesian use of MAP equipment in Timor. (Ibid.)

145. Telegram 15438 From the Embassy in Indonesia to the Department of State, December 17, 1975, 0742Z. 145. Telegram 15438 From the Embassy in Indonesia to the Department of State, December 17, 1975, 0742Z.1

December 17, 1975

TELEGRAM
Department of State
JAKARTA 15438

P R 170742Z DEC 75

FM AMEMBASSY JAKARTA TO SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 1791
USMISSION USUN NEW YORK PRIORITY
INFO AMEMBASSY CANBERRA
AMEMBASSY LISBON
AMCONSUL MEDAN
AMCONSUL SURABAYA

JAKARTA 15438

FOR ASSISTANT SECRETARY HABIB FROM CHARGE RIVES

E.O. 11652: GDS
TAGS: PFOR PINS ID PO PT US

SUBJ: EFFECT OF TIMOR ON US-INDONESIAN RELATIONS
REF: A) USUN 6863; B) LISBON 7427; C) LISBON 7448, D) JAKARTA 14950, E) JAKARTA 15374

1. OUR APPROACH TO TIMOR QUESTION, AND PARTICULARLY OUR ABSTENTION ON UNGA TIMOR RESOLUTION, HAS ENABLED US SO FAR TO PRESERVE INTACT US-INDONESIAN RELATIONSHIP. INDONESIA HAD HOPED AND EXPECTED AUSTRALIA TO ABSTAIN ON UNGA RESOLUTION (AND INDEED AUSTRALIAN EMBASSY HAD SO RECOMMENDED) AND THERE IS EVERY EVIDENCE OF EXTREME GOI DISPLEASURE WITH GOA VOTE, ONLY TEMPERED BY HOPE THAT ELECTED FRASER GOVERNMENT WILL FEE MORE ABLE TO TAKE HELPFUL STANCE THAN WAS FRASER CARETAKER GOVERNMENT.

2. IN LIGHT OF ABOVE, AND IN VIEW OF OUR CONTINUING EFFORTS NOT TO BE IDENTIFIED WITH PROBLEM, WE WOULD STRONGLY RECOMMEND THAT US STANCE IN SECURITY COUNCIL BE COMPATIBLE WITH THAT IN UNGA, I.E., VOTING AGAINST OR AT LEAST ABSTAINING ON ANY RESOLUTION WHICH UNACCEPTABLE TO INDONESIA (NOTE AMBASSADOR'S RECOMMENDATION IN PARA 9 REF D). WE WOULD THEREFORE HOPE THAT USG RESPONSE TO APPROACH BY PORTUGUESE PERMREP GALVAO TELES (REF A) WOULD NOT GO BEYOND REPLY GIVEN HIM BY AMB BENNETT.

3. IN REGARD PORTUGUESE MILITARY DETAINEES HELD IN TIMOR (REFS B AND C), WE WOULD RECOMMEND AGAINST OUR MAKING APPROACH TO GOI. INDONESIANS ARE AWARE OF OUR CONCERN FOR HUMANITARIAN ASPECTS OF TIMOR PROBLEM, INCLUDING 23 DETAINEES. HOWEVER GOI WOULD ALMOST SURELY REPLY TO US APPROACH WITH SAME STATEMENT GIVEN AUSTRALIANS ON QUESTION OF ICRC MEDICAL TEAM -THAT INDONESIA NOT IN CONTROL OF EAST TIMOR AND HENCE DEMARCHE SHOULD BE DIRECTED TO APODETI UDT (REF E). ONLY RESULT OF US EFFORT WOULD BE GOI RESENTMENT THAT WE INVOLVING OURSELVES IN TIMOR QUESTION, CONTRARY TO OUR UNDERSTOOD POLICY OF NOT SO DOING.

RIVES

1 Source: National Archives, Record Group 59, Central Foreign Policy Files. Secret; Priority; Limdis. Repeated priority to USUN New York and for information to Canberra, Lisbon, Medan, Surabaya.

146. Memorandum From Secretary of State Kissinger to the Under Secretary for Security Assistance (Maw), Washington, December 19, 1975 146. Memorandum From Secretary of State Kissinger to the Under Secretary for Security Assistance (Maw), Washington, December 19, 1975 1

Washington, December 19, 1975

THE SECRETARY OF STATE
WASHINGTON

December 19, 1975

MEMORANDUM FOR T - MR. MAW

SUBJECT: Security Assistance to Indonesia

This will confirm the guidance which I gave you orally shortly before my departure for Europe on December 10. Thus, you should act quietly to suspend, by administrative action, further MAP grants and FMS Sales, Credits and Guarantees to Indonesia. I have ordered that this step be taken because the legal implications of Indonesian actions in Timor are not yet clear. This is to be considered an interim step, pending a determination as to the legal consequences, if any, of the Indonesian action.

I recognize that there may be inquiries from members of Congress as to what our policy is with respect to Indonesia. When such inquiries are received, you should advise members of Congress that we have quietly suspended further MAP Grants and FMS Sales, Credits, and Guarantees pending full legal review, but prefer not to make a public announcement pending further study.

I would like to review this situation again in January when you and the East Asian Bureau are in a position to brief me more fully.

[signed] Henry A. Kissinger

1 Source: Library of Congress, Henry Kissinger Papers, Geopolitical File, CL 151, Indonesia, 1973–75, Folder 7. Secret.

147. Minutes of the Secretary of State’s Staff Meeting, Washington, December 23, 1975, 8:12 a.m. 147. Minutes of the Secretary of State’s Staff Meeting, Washington, December 23, 1975, 8:12 a.m.1

Washington, December 23, 1975, 8:12 a.m.

In Attendance -Tues., December 23, 1975

Secretary of State Kissinger Chairman

P Mr. Sisco

E Mr. Robinson

M Mr. Maw

M Mr. Eagleburger

C Mr. Sonnenfeldt

AF Mr. Schaufele

ARA Mr. Rogers

EA Mr. Habib

EUR Mr. Hartman

NEA Mr. Sober (Acting)

INR Mr. Saunders

S/P Mr. Lord

EB Mr. Enders

S/PRS Mr. Funseth (Acting)

PM Mr. Stern (Acting)

IO Mr. Lewis

H Mr. McCloskey

L Mr. Leigh

S/S Mr. Springsteen

S Mr. Bremer

S Mr. Adams

[Omitted is material unrelated to Timor.]

Phil?

MR. HABIB: The United Nations Security Council yesterday passed a resolution unanimously on the question of Timor. The substance of it is, (1), it deplores the Indian action sending its troops in. It regrets the Portuguese ability to continue fighting and calls upon Indonesians to withdraw.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: Calls what?

MR. HABIB: Calls upon Indonesians to withdraw from Timor.

One other thing: It calls upon the Secretary-General to send a representative to Timor to protect these rights of the Timorese people. The Indonesians have accepted it and the Portuguese have accepted it. The Indonesians have said they would cooperate with the representative.

Now, I think what that cooperation will entail will probably be that the Indonesians read it that they will withdraw their forces when order and stability and the proper care of the —

SECRETARY KISSINGER: What is the military situation there?

MR. HABIB: The military situation is that there are approximately 15,000 troops on the ground in Timor. They've got the entire border area bordering on Portuguese Timor. They've got a sizable fleet offshore which is available for supply.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: What do you mean "they've got the entire border area bordering on?"

MR. HABIB: Well, East Timor is only half the island. The other half is Indonesian. So what they've done is moved across the border and they've gone about 10 or 15 miles inland. It's entirely taken over by Indonesian forces. There's also an enclave in Portuguesan Timor which is completely taken over and they've established an Indonesian-managed local government.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: What do you mean? They took over an enclave in their own territory?

MR. HABIB: There was an enclave in Portuguese Timor —

SECRETARY KISSINGER: Oh.

MR. HABIB: — which was in their own territory, which is inside the border area.

Generally speaking, the people who are opposed to it have taken to the hills where three or four groups, three or four names, who are Indonesian-organized Timorese, are beginning to sort of assume the civil administrative functions — the fighting, basically.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: What's the theory — that Timor is going to become independent?

MR. HABIB: The theory is that after a period of time, after the Timorese have decided that things are well under control, they will pull their troops out. So anybody who didn't want to join Indonesia won't be around or won't be in the hills. That is, I would say, roughly the scenario that the Indonesians plan.

So, in any event, I think this is a development which suits our general interests, suits the general interests of the area in the sense that I think this will reduce within a couple of weeks the level of fighting. By that time the Indonesians should have mopped up all the areas that are really important and will have taken all the crossroads of their enemies up in the hills The Indonesians are quite good in anti-guerrilla work there. It was not exactly the smoothest operation since Caesar cross the Rubicon — or whoever it was — but it's the level that's going on now.

There's some fighting going on between the Indonesian troops. Nobody sees anything. There's no press there. They don't allow the press in. And they've had the same kind of running battle up in Kalimantan, up in Borneo, in that area, for years. They can deal with that kind of running sore.

I'm putting it so that the best circumstances are to our interest.

Now, the worst circumstances — if you want to give it that — would be a head-on class between the UN representative — whoever he may be — and I haven't seen him — have you seen him? (Addressed Mr. Lewis.)

MR. LEWIS: No

MR. HABIB: He's supposed to get out there soon. I mean a head-on clash between him and the Indonesian authorities. Those guys are tough and mean. There are all sorts of reports, like: "Kill all the frontal leaders you can find so we can get rid of them once and for all" — things like that.

We are continuing to take a hands-off attitude. We're limiting our comments to the absolute essential — that is to say nothing —

MR. LEWIS: We made no statement in the Council at all.

MR. HABIB: We made no statement in the Security Council at all. The Chinese tried to move a few controversial amendments to the resolution, but there was nothing to it. They didn't pursue it.

The only other item, unless we have some further questions — the only other item I have is Sonny Montgomery's group—

SECRETARY KISSINGER: What should I say at my press conference today?

MR. HABIB: Well, I think the only thing you should do is call attention to the UN resolution and say that you think the matter is taken care of in the international forum and the United States will await the results of that.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: What do I say if they ask me about the use of American equipment?

MR. HABIB: I think the answer should be that you have the matter under study, at this stage.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: That's what I said on Turkish aid.

MR. HABIB: Well, they've come out with a statement saying they have captured U.S., Australian and British arms from Indonesian troops. The Indonesians have a debate among themselves whether to admit their troops should be there, with Malik and the Foreign Office wanting to continue to deny it. Everybody knows.

We have a letter from Senator Hart asking about the use of our equipment —

SECRETARY KISSINGER: So what should I say — we are studying whether their troops are there and after we have determined that we will determine whether they have any American equipment?

MR. HABIB: If they press you, you can then say there is an assumption that some American — we haven't told the Indonesians we're going to say this — we know there is some American equipment there. We know that three of the destroyers that were used to shell Dili —

SECRETARY KISSINGER: Well, let's not overdo it now.

MR. HABIB: — that we know — but are they still there? Maybe.

MR. SISCO: Maybe you could say the probability that American weapons —

SECRETARY KISSINGER: Well, I don't want to leave the implication inevitably that if U.S. equipment was used it's illegal. I don't accept that either.

MR. SISCO: That's right.

MR. HABIB: I'd stress the UN resolution. You then have a situation in which the Indonesians have committed themselves and have accepted to withdraw. And that doesn't change the validity of the other argument that there was a defense element in the action of the Indonesians. After all, there were actions across the Indonesian border into Indonesian Timor on the part of the rebels. And the idea of a chaotic situation in an archipelago — half an island —

SECRETARY KISSINGER: O.K., I get the point.

MR. HABIB: — I think would be basically undefended.

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Transcripts of Secretary of State Kissinger’s Staff Meetings, 1973–1977, E5177, Box 9. Secret. Habib referred to a letter from Gary Hart to Rumsfeld. The letter, December 16, asked whether U.S. weapons were used in the Indonesian invasion of East Timor and whether U.S. officials possessed foreknowledge of the Indonesian plans. (Ford Library, National Security Adviser, Presidential Country Files for East Asia and the Pacific, Box 6, Indonesia [6])

148. Minutes of the Secretary of State’s Staff Meeting, Washington, January 12, 1976, 8:11 a.m. 148. Minutes of the Secretary of State’s Staff Meeting, Washington, January 12, 1976, 8:11 a.m.1

Washington, January 12, 1976, 8:11 a.m.

In Attendance - Monday, 1/12/1975

Secretary of State Kissinger - Chairman

D Mr. Ingersoll

P Mr. Sisco

E Mr. Robinson

T Mr. Maw

C Mr. Sonnenfeldt

AF Mr. Schaufele

ARA Mr. Rogers

EA Mr. Habib

EUR Mr. Lowenstein (Acting)

NEA Mr. Atherton

INR Mr. Saunders

S/P Mr. Lord

EB Mr. Enders

S/PRS Mr. Funseth (Acting)

PM Mr. Vest

IO Mr. Lewis

H Mr. McCloskey

L Mr. Leigh

S/S Mr. SpringsteenMr

S Mr. Barbian

The last thing: The UN General Assembly will be meeting next week on the Timor question.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: Is Indonesia going to be this year's Turkey?

MR. HABIB: So far we have not gotten to that stage, and it Iooks as though It probably won't. The only inkling we've had of real interest open — and, even then, it was only minor — we've had a couple of Congressional delegations out that way; and the Embassy reports that they were told by people in the delegation that the solution to the problem is the absorptions of Timor into Indonesia, which is exactly what the Indonesian position is. How it comes about and what problems it may cause in the UN I'd say in about two weeks' time is another question there.

I think the best thing would be — what the Indonesians are probably pointing toward is some kind of a plebiscite under the Provisional Government of East Timor which they have set up. And, obviously, the plebiscite will opt for union.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: How is the war going?

MR. HABIB: The war — we've got a detailed memorandum that we've sent out. It gives you a capsule of the whole thing.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: Where is it?

MR. HABIB: Well, I sent it up on Saturday evening. I'm sure you'll see it today.

The Indonesians, plus their supporters, have all the major centers and a good deal of the countryside. But the opposition is showing a surprising capacity to resist. It still exists as some kind of guerrilla force. It will probably go on for quite a while, but the Indonesians are cleaning up their cities in anticipation of the UN Secretary-General's arrival. It's more than a Potemkin village; it's a Disneyworld castle to construct. (Laughter.)

MR. MAW: They've got all the major populated areas?

MR. HABIB: They've got all the major populated areas now. And that's why this fellow is going. And if that's all where he's going, that's one thing, but he's seeing some of the opposition leaders. Some of them are in this country, some of them are in Portugal.

MR. LEWIS: So far the Fretilin still has access to radio, and they keep sending these messages to the UN Secretary-General and he distributes them all over New York. As long as that goes on, it's not going to be easy for us.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: How is that a proper activity for the Secretary-General?

MR. HABIB: Remember, at the time the Secretary-General considered the matter the representatives of Fretilin and the pro-Indonesian groups were invited to the debate.

MR. LEWIS: Their representatives in New York get these radio reports and submit them for information purposes.

Mr. HABIB: Even if they did, you have a skeleton organization around, including some left wing Australian support. For example, there was in town this week Australian support lobbying for Fretilin. The Australian Government has been very cautious since they first made a statement. The new government doesn't want to stir up any trouble, but there's a traditional feeling in Australia toward the Timorese because in World War II the Timorese natives were very friendly to the Australians and there's a kind of fraternal relationship.

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Transcripts of Secretary of State Kissinger’s Staff Meetings, 1973–1977, E5177, Box 9. Secret. The minutes are incorrectly dated January 12, 1975.

149. Telegram 1151 From the Embassy in Indonesia to the Department of State, January 27, 1976, 0851Z. 149. Telegram 1151 From the Embassy in Indonesia to the Department of State, January 27, 1976, 0851Z.1

January 27, 1976, 0851Z

TELEGRAM
Department of State
JAKARTA 1151

R 270851Z JAN 76 ZFF4

FM AMEMBASSY JAKARTA TO SECSTATE WASHDC 2382

JAKARTA 1151

E.O. 11652: GDS
TAGS: PFOR, PINS, ID, PO, PT, AS

SUBJECT: AUSTRALIAN QUERY RE U.S. MILITARY ASSISTANCE
REF: JAKARTA 0886

1. IN MEETING WITH ME JANUARY 26 AUSTRALIAN AMBASSADOR WOOLCOTT REITERATED CONCERN OF FOREIGN MINISTER PEACOCK OVER ANY POSSIBLE "SUSPENSION" OF U.S. MILITARY ASSISTANCE TO INDONESIA AS RESULT OF TIMOR ACTION.

2. I TOLD AMBASSADOR WOOLCOTT THAT THERE HAD BEEN NO SUSPENSION OF AID AND THAT SECRETARY, WHO ATTACHES MAJOR SIGNIFICANCE TO OUR RELATIONS WITH INDONESIA, WAS FIRM IN DESIRE TO AVOID ANY SUCH ACTION. TIMOR ACTION DID RAISE SOME LEGAL QUESTIONS BUT IT WAS OUR HOPE THESE COULD BE RESOLVED IN A SATISFACTORY MANNER. IN THIS CONTEXT STEADY PROGRESS TOWARD AN ACT OF SELF-DETERMINATION UNDER UN AUSPICES IS IMPORTANT. THERE ARE CURRENTLY NO MAJOR MILITARY ASSISTANCE ACTIONS REQUIRING WASHINGTON DECISIONS SO QUESTION IS NOT IMMEDIATE.

3. WOOLCOTT SAID HE WAS SURE PEACOCK WOULD BE PLEASED TO LEARN OF SECRETARY'S POSITION SINCE ANY SUSPENSION OF U.S. AID WOULD PLACE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT IN AWKWARD POSITION WITH RESPECT ITS OWN PROGRAM IN INDONESIA.

4. DEPT. MAY WISH PASS CANBERRA.

NEWSOM

1 Source: National Archives, Record Group 59, Central Foreign Policy Files. Secret; Cherokee; Nodis.

150. Telegram 1239 From the Embassy in Indonesia to the Department of State, January 28, 1976, 0851Z. 150. Telegram 1239 From the Embassy in Indonesia to the Department of State, January 28, 1976, 0851Z.1

January 28, 1976, 0851Z

TELEGRAM
Department of State
JAKARTA 1239

R 280851Z JAN 76
FM AMEMBASSY JAKARTA
TO SECSTATE WASHDC 2414

FOR ASSISTANT SECRETARY HABIB
E.O. 11652: GDS
TAGS: PFOR, PINS, ID, PO, PT, AS

SUBJECT: TIMOR AND MILITARY ASSISTANCE TO INDONESIA

1. FOLLOWING MY RETURN I HAVE EXAMINED CURRENT SITUATION RELATING TIMOR AND ITS IMPLICATIONS FOR OUR MILITARY ASSISTANCE PROGRAM. FOLLOWING IS MY EVALUATION:

2 SEPTELS WILL REPORT ON MY CONVERSATIONS WITH AUSTRALIAN AMBASSADOR WOOLCOTT AND FOREIGN MINISTER MALIK. THESE TALKS AND OTHER INFORMATION SUGGEST CONSOLIDATION INDONESIAN POSITION AND FORMAL ACT OF SELF-DETERMINATION LIKELY REQUIRE SEVERAL MONTHS. SIMILARLY UN REPRESENTATIVE FEELS UNDER NO STRONG PRESSURE FILE HIS REPORT AND MAY DELAY IN ORDER PERMIT PASSIONS ON ISSUE TO SETTLE. WE CANNOT, THEREFORE, COUNT ON ANY EARLY CONSPICUOUS ACTION RESULTING IN WITHDRAWAL OF INDONESIAN FORCES AND EXPRESSION OF WILL BY PEOPLE OF PORTUGUESE TIMOR.

3. AT SAME TIME, AS SEEN FROM JAKARTA, WE HAVE SOME LEEWAY IN HANDLING MILITARY ASSISTANCE TRANSACTIONS. WE ARE UNAWARE ANY GRANT TRANSACTION LIKELY REQUIRE FORMAL WASHINGTON ACTION IN NEAR FUTURE. FIRST ISSUE LIKELY TO ARISE IS FMS CREDIT FOR SIKORSKI HELICOPTERS PURCHASE. WE UNDERSTAND FROM HANKAM THAT INDONESIAN EMBASSY WASHINGTON HAS BEEN INFORMED THAT FMS CREDIT PURCHASE POSSIBLE ON TERMS OF FIVE YEARS WITH 7.75 PERCENT INTEREST. WHILE INTEREST RATE FITS GOI GUIDELINES, PAYBACK TERMS MAY CAUSE PROBLEMS AND WILL IN ANY EVENT REQUIRE APPROVAL OF MINISTERS OF FINANCE AND ECONOMY (BAPPENAS). SIKORSKI HAS EXTENDED DEADLINE FOR SIGNING CONTRACT TO MID-MARCH. AS DEPARTMENT AWARE, GOI POSTPONING ACTION ON PSMMS AND OTHER HELICOPTERS PENDING PASSAGE SECURITY ASSISTANCE APPROPRIATIONS. OTHER FMS CASE LIKELY ARISE INVOLVES PURCHASE OF TWO LPRS. LETTER OF OFFER EXPECTED IN MARCH 1976 AFTER REQUIREMENT FOR CONGRESSIONAL NOTIFICATION SATISFIED.

4. IT IS POSSIBLE GOI COULD REPLY ON SIKORSKI HELICOPTERS THROUGH GENERAL NICHLANY AND ISSUE COULD BE JOINED SOONER THAN WE EXPECTED. THERE MAY BE OTHER TRANSACTIONS OF WHICH WE ARE NOT AWARE. AT THIS POINT, HOWEVER, IT WOULD APPEAR HERE THAT WE HAVE BREATHING SPACE BEFORE DECISIONS OR ACTIONS REQUIRED UNDER EITHER MAP OR FMS.

5. WHILE INDONESIANS (IN HANKAM AND GENERAL MURTOPO'S CENTER) AWARE OF SENATOR HART'S LETTER AND DOD REPLY, QUESTION OF POSSIBLE DELAYS IN SECURITY ASSISTANCE ACTIONS HAS NOT BEEN RAISED BY INDONESIANS. QUESTION WAS RAISED BY AUSTRALIAN DCM WITH CHARGE AND, AS REPORTED IN SEPTEL, BY AUSTRALIAN AMBASSADOR WITH ME. RUMORS OF SUSPENSION OR DELAYED ACTION COULD SPREAD BUT FOR MOMENT QUESTION APPEARS NOT TO BE ACTIVE. ACCORDINGLY, I DO NOT INTEND, UNLESS SPECIFICALLY QUERIED, TO VOLUNTEER TO INDONESIAN LEADERSHIP CURRENT SITUATION ARISING FROM USE OF U.S. ARMS IN TIMOR. SHOULD DEVELOPMENTS IN WASHINGTON CHANGE THIS, I WOULD APPRECIATE URGENT WARNING. IN SUCH CASE, I WOULD WISH INFORM SUDHARMONO OR APPROPRIATE OFFICIAL OF HANKAM OF PROBLEM WE FACE AND MANNER IN WHICH WE ARE SEEKING TO HANDLE SITUATION.

6. GIVEN LIKELIHOOD THAT WE WILL NOT HAVE CLEAR ACT OF SELF-DETERMINATION IN NEAR FUTURE, I BELIEVE WE SHOULD RESPOND ANY FURTHER CONGRESSIONAL INQUIRY BY ACKNOWLEDGING, AS WE ALREADY HAVE DONE, USE OF AMERICAN ARMS AND INDICATING THAT WE ARE STUDYING APPROPRIATE ACTION IN LIGHT THESE CIRCUMSTANCES AND IMPORTANCE OUR RELATIONS WITH INDONESIA. BELIEVE WE CAN USEFULLY USE ARGUMENT THAT INDONESIA FACED WITH DIFFICULT SITUATION ON FRONTIER, THAT PATIENCE WAS EXERCISED AND STRONG EFFORTS MADE CONTINUE PORTUGUESE INVOLVEMENT UNTIL SITUATION HAD SERIOUSLY DETERIORATED. INDONESIA IS COOPERATING WITH UNITED NATIONS TO FIND APPROPRIATE BASIS FOR FUTURE STATUS OF FORMER COLONY.

7. I HAVE INSTRUCTED LIMITED NUMBER OF MY STAFF INVOLVED IN THIS ISSUE OF EXTREMEM SENSITIVITY THIS SUBJECT AND FACT THAT COMMUNICATION CONCERNING IT SHOULD BE MADE ON LY IN THIS CHANNEL.
NEWSOM

1 Source: Ford Library, National Security Adviser, Presidential Country Files for East Asia and the Pacific, Box 6, Indonesia, State Department Telegrams to SECSTATE, NODIS (4). Secret; Cherokee; Nodis.

151. Telegram 1250 From the Embassy in Indonesia to the Department of State, January 28, 1976, 0928Z. 151. Telegram 1250 From the Embassy in Indonesia to the Department of State, January 28, 1976, 0928Z.1

January 28, 1976, 0928Z

TELEGRAM
Department of State
JAKARTA 1250

R280928Z JAN 76

FM AMEMBASSY JAKARTA
TO SECSTATE WASHDC 2421

E.O. 11652: GDS
TAGS: PFOR, PINS, ID, PO, PT, AS

SUBJECT: INDONESIA AND TIMOR
REF: A JAKARTA 1160 b JAKARTA 1157

1. IN PRIVATE MEETING WITH ME JANUARY 28 FOREIGN MINISTER MALIK ESTIMATED THAT AS MUCH AS SIX MONTHS WOULD BE REQUIRED BEFORE "INDONESIAN VOLUNTEERS" COULD BE WITHDRAWN FROM TIMOR AND ANOTHER SIX MONTHS BEFORE ACT OF SELF-DETERMINATION POSSIBLE.

2. IN RESPONSE TO MY EXPRESSION OF INTEREST IN DEVELOPMENTS FOLLOWING VISIT OF UN REPRESENTATIVE, MALIK BEGAN WITH HISTORICAL ACCOUNT. HE EMPHASIZED THAT INDONESIA HAD TRIED HARD TO KEEP PORTUGUESE INVOLVED AND TO AVOID ANY DIRECT INDONESIAN INTERVENTION. WHEN PORTUGAL APPEARED LIKELY RECOGNIZE FRETILIN AND WHEN LATTER SOUTH RECOGNITION FROM COMMUNIST COUNTRIES, INDONESIA FELT IT HAD NO CHOICE AND, ON DECEMBER 7, "WENT IN."

3. ACCORDING MALIK, UN REPRESENTATIVE WINSPEARE GUICCIARDI HAD VISITED FIVE CITIES IN TIMOR BUT DID NOT FEEL HIS MANDATE WOULD BE FULLY CARRIED OUT WITHOUT CONTACT WITH FRETILIN LEADERS INSIDE TIMOR. HE HAD DELAYED DEPARTURE AND AS OF JANUARY 28 WAS STILL IN JAKARTA. NEITHER AUSTRALIAN NOT INDONESIAN CIVILIAN AIRLINE BELIEVED IT COULD GUARANTEE SAFETY FOR FLIGHT TO SAME AS SUGGESTED BY FRETILIN REPRESENTATIVE HORTA IN NEW YORK. INDONESIANS NOT ENTHUSIASTIC ABOUT TRIP AND SUSPECTED ALSO THAT IF UN REPRESENTATIVE LANDED IN SAME, FRETILIN LEADERS WOULD TRY TO USE AIRCRAFT TO ESCAPE. MALIK SAID HE HOPED SITUATION WOULD BE SUCH SOON THAT UN COULD VISIT SAME.

4. MALIK SAID HE WAS PUSHING TO ENCOURAGE AS RAPID CONSOLIDATION OF POSITION OF PROVISIONAL GOVERNMENT AS POSSIBLE. HE EXPECTED THREE MORE KEY TOWNS WOULD BE TAKEN SOON: VIQUEGUE, LOS PALOS AND SAME. THIS WOULD COMPLETE MAJOR MILITARY ACTION BUT THREE TO SIX MONTHS WOULD BE REQUIRE BEFORE PROVISIONAL GOVERNMENT WOULD HAVE ADMINISTRATION IN PLACE AND TRAINED POLICE AND MILITIA TO STAND ON ITS OWN FEET.

5. INDONESIA THEN FELT THAT ANOTHER SIX MONTHS WOULD BE REQUIRED BEFORE SITUATION SUFFICIENTLY ORDERLY TO PERMIT ACT OF SELF-DETERMINATION IN WHATEVER FORM PROVISIONAL GOVERNMENT FELT BEST. IN THIS CONNECTION, INDONESIA WAS ENCOURAGING PROVISIONAL GOVERNMENT TO BRING AS MANY MODERATE FRETILIN PEOPLE AS POSSIBLE INTO ADMINISTRATION AND THIS WAS BEING DONE. IDEA WAS TO ISOLATE RADICAL FRETILIN LEADERS IN INTERIOR AND OUTSIDE COUNTRY.

6. IN DISCUSSING MILITARY CONSOLIDATION, MALIK EXPRESSED SOME IMPATIENCE WITH PAST OPERATION AND SAID HE READILY UNDERSTOOD DESIRABILITY OF QUICK ACTION AND EARLY WITHDRAWAL OF "VOLUNTEERS." HE SUGGESTED EMBASSY MILITARY ATTACHE SHOULD GET IN TOUCH WITH HANKAM SINCE HANKAM APPARENTLY NEEDED SOME EQUIPMENT IN ORDER TO ENABLE FASTER CONSOLIDATION. HE SAID AIR FORCE HAD NOT YET BEEN USED AND PERHAPS THIS WAS AREA WHERE EQUIPMENT NECESSARY.

7. COMMENT: INDONESIAN'S TIMETABLE OBVIOUSLY DOES NOT GIVE PROMISE OF EARLY CONCLUSION. I DOUBT THERE IS MUCH WE CAN DO TO ACCELERATE IT ALTHOUGH PERHAPS WE CAN KEEP QUIET PRESSURE ON THROUGH AUSTRALIANS AND UN. I DO NOT INTEND FOLLOW-UP ON SUGGESTED CONTACT WITH HANKAM. LAST THING WE NEED AT PRESENT MOMENT IS FURTHER COMPLICATION OF SUPPLYING EMERGENCY EQUIPMENT TO COMPLETE MOP UP OF TIMOR.
NEWSOM

1 Source: Ford Library, National Security Adviser, Presidential Country Files for East Asia and the Pacific, Box 6, Indonesia, State Department Telegrams to SECSTATE, NODIS (4). Secret; Cherokee; Nodis.

152. Telegram 2098 From the Embassy in Indonesia to the Department of State, February 17, 1976, 0541Z. 152. Telegram 2098 From the Embassy in Indonesia to the Department of State, February 17, 1976, 0541Z.1

February 17, 1976, 0541Z

TELEGRAM
Department of State
Jakarta 2058

P 170541Z

FM AMEMBASSY JAKARTA
TO SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 27

JAKARTA 2058

E.O. 11652: GDS
TAGS: PFOR, PINS, ID, PT, MASS

SUBJECT: INDONESIAN MAP AND TIMOR
REF: JAKARTA 1239

1. THIS MESSAGE RAISES QUESTION WHETHER DEVELOPMENTS REGARDING MILITARY ASSISTANCE FOR INDONESIA AND TIMOR SINCE MY EARLIER TELEGRAM NOW REQUIRE RECONSIDERATION OF DESIRABILITY DISCUSSING QUESTION WITH GOI, OPTIONAL COURSES ARE SUGGESTED FOR SUCH DISCUSSIONS.

2. FROM JAKARTA VANTAGE POINT WE SEE SEVERAL PRESSURES CONVERGING WHICH MAY MAKE SOME ACTION ON OUR PART NECESSARY. IN WEEKS IMMEDIATELY AHEAD: A. CONGRESSIONAL QUERIES: WE HAVE NOW RECEIVED COPY OF ROSENTHAL LETTER OF JANUARY 16. DEPARTMENT MAY ALREADY HAVE REPLIED. IF SO, WE PRESUME REPLY WAS NOT MARKEDLY DIFFERENT FROM REPLY TO HART LETTER. OBVIOUSLY, HOWEVER, WE WILL SOON NEED HAVE MORE PRECISE RESPONSE IF WE ARE TO AVOID OPEN CONTROVERSY WITH CONTRESS AND POSSIBLE RIDERS AFFECTING OUR WHOLE PROGRAM.

B. GOI AWARENESS: IT IS NOT IN NATURE OF INDONESIANS TO CONFRONT OTHERS WITH UNPLEASANT FACTS. WE HAVE IMPRESSION, HOWEVER, THAT THEY ARE AWARE OF PROBLEM AND MAY ALREADY BE SEEKING ALTERNATIVES. FUAD HASSAN, AMBASSADOR-DESIGNATE TO EGYPT, TOLD ME LAST WEEK WE HAD BEEN INSTRUCTED INVESTIGATE POSSIBLE ARMS SOURCES IN MIDDLE EAST. IF WE CANNOT TAKE INDONESIANS INTO OUR CONFIDENCE SOON IN POSITIVE MANNER, I FEAR WE MAY BE FACED WITH ACTIONS ON THEIR PART WHICH COULD ALTER OUR PRESENT RELATIONSHIP. WE ANTICIPATE RENEWED INTEREST ON THEIR PART AFTER THEIR CURRENT PREOCCUPATION WITH BALI ASEAN SUMMIT IS OVER (FEB. 23-25).

C. SECURITY ASSISTANCE LEGISLATION: AS SECURITY ASSISTANCE LEGISLATION MOVES FORWARD, INDONESIAN PROGRAM IS OBVIOUSLY THREATENED IF OUR RESPONSE ON TIMOR HAS BEEN DEEMED UNSATISFACTORY.

D. PROGRAM ACTIONS: WHILE WE CURRENTLY BENEFIT FROM UNSETTLED QUESTION OF CREDIT TERMS FOR SIKORSKY HELICOPTERS (CHUSDLG 123834Z FEB 76), RISING COST OF HELICOPTERS, PRESSURE FROM COMPANY, AND OBVIOUS INDONESIAN DESIRE FOR THIS EQUIPMENT COULD BRING MATTER TO HEAD. THERE IS OUTSIDE POSSIBILITY GOI WOULD ACCEPT FIVE YEAR TERMS THUS PRESENTING US WITH NEED FOR IMMEDIATE ACTION.

3. OUR BASIS OBJECTIVE MUST BE TO PRESERVE STRONG RELATIONSHIP WITH INDONESIAN LEADERSHIP; OUR MILITARY EQUIPMENT SUPPLY IS OF MAJOR IMPORTANCE TO THIS RELATIONSHIP. WE FURTHER DESIRE AVOID FORMAL SUSPENSION WHICH COULD NOT ONLY HAVE POLITICAL REPERCUSSIONS BUT COULD COMPLICATE POSSIBILITIES RESUMPTION. IN PROPOSING WHAT WE MAY SAY TO GOI, WE HAVE IN MIND THAT WE MUST SPEAK WITH SAME VOICE THAT WE DO TO CONGRESS. WHILE WE APPRECIATE DEPARTMENT SEIZED WITH QUESTION OF CORRESPONDENCE WITH CONGRESS, OUR OWN SUGGESTIONS TAKE POSSIBLE REPLIES TO CONGRESSIONAL QUERIES INTO CONSIDERATION.

4. SINCE ALL OUR INFORMATION ON ACTUAL USE U.S. EQUIPMENT IN TIMOR COMES FROM SENSITIVE SOURCES, WE MUST ACT ONLY ON "ASSUMPTION" THAT ARMS HAVE BEEN USED. INDONESIANS WOULD PROBABLY NOT CONFIRM SUCH USE IN REPLY TO DIRECT QUESTION BUT WILL PROBABLY NOT DENY OUR ASSUMPTION.

5. WE SHOULD HAVE NO ILLUSIONS REGARDING SENSITIVITIES INDONESIANS ON THIS QUESTION, NOT ONLY FROM STANDPOINT POSSIBLE EFFECT ON THEIR MILITARY PROCUREMENT, BUT, ALSO, FROM STANDPOINT RATIONAL PRIDE. RECENT DIAH ARTICLES ATTACKING GOVERNMENT AS BEING TOO CLOSE TO WESTERN POWERS MAKES PRESIDENT AND OTHERS EVEN MORE SENSITIVE THAN USUAL TO OUTSIDE WESTERN PRESSURES AND ACTIONS. INDONESIANS MAY ALSO BE AWARE THAT AUSTRALIAN PM FRASER IS WATCHING WHAT WE DO ON MILITARY ASSISTANCE AND MIGHT INCLINED SHOW EQUAL MORAL FERVOR IN EVENT WE CUT OFF OUR PROGRAM.

6. I THEREFORE PROPOSE THAT AS SOON AS POSSIBLE AFTER SUMMIT I SEE MINISTER PANGGABEAN OR MINISTER SUDHARMONO AND LAY BEFORE HIM OUR THINKING ON PROBLEM. AS I SEE IT, WE HAVE FOUR ALTERNATIVE POSITIVE APPROACHES. I WILL APPRECIATE DEPARTMENT'S ADVICE AS TO WHICH ONE HAS BEST PROSPECT IN TERMS OUR RELATIONS WITH CONGRESS, FROM STANDPOINT RELATIONS WITH INDONESIA, OPTION A BELOW OBVIOUSLY PREFERABLE. A. AS SUGGESTED IN REFTEL WE CAN BASE OUR APPROACH ON DEFENSE OF GOI ACTION AND CLAIM THAT GOL TOOK ACTION FOR PURPOSES OF INTERNAL SECURITY AND LEGITIMATE DEFENSE AND IS NOT. THEREFORE, DIS3UALIFIED UNDER FAA SECTION 322, THIS ACTION HAS DISADVANTAGE THAT "IT MAY BE" CHALLENGED BY THOSE UNSYMPATHETIC WITH INDONESIAN RATIONALE AND COULD DRAW US INTO APPEARING DEFEND INDONESIAN ACTION.

B. ON BASIS OF INDONESIAN COOPERATION WITH UNITED NATIONS REPRESENTATIVE, HIS FINAL REPORT, AND, HOPEFULLY, SOME ACT OF SELF-DETERMINATION, WE COULD CLAIM THAT INDONESIAN ACTION WAS CONSISTENT WITH CHARTER OF THE UNITED NATIONS AND FOR THIS REASON DOES NOT DISQUALIFY INDONESIA UNDER SECTION 532. DISADVANTAGES HERE ARE THAT UN REPRESENTATIVE GUICCIARDI ALMOST CERTAIN TO POINT OUT HIS DIFFICULTY IN MEETING WITH FRETILIN AND ANY ACT OF SELF-DETERMINATION LIKELY BE BOTH DELAYED AND TRANSPARENT.

C. WE COULD BASE CONTINUATION OF PROGRAM ON GROUNDS THAT EITHER SUCH AMERICAN ARMS AS WERE USED HAVE BEEN WITHDRAWN FROM TERRITORY OR THAT INDONESIAN FORCES INVOLVED HAVE BEEN WITHDRAWN. IF DEPARTMENT FELT INDONESIAN ASSURANCES ON WITHDRAWAL OR ARMS WOULD SATISFY CONGRESSIONAL PROBLEM, I BELIEVE I COULD GET SUCH ASSURANCES WITHIN NEXT FEW WEEKS. THEY HAVE ALTERNATIVES FOR SUCH ARMS AS MAY BE REQUIRED FOR INTERNAL SECURITY PURPOSES. ASSURANCES ON WITHDRAWAL OF INDONESIAN FORCES LIKELY TAKE MORE TIME.

D. FOURTH ALTERNATIVE WOULD BE AGREEMENT WITH CONGRESS ON SOME REVISION OF PROGRAM WHICH CLEARLY EXCLUDES ARMS OF TYPE WHICH MIGHT BE USED ON GROUND IN TIMOR OR WHICH LEFT FOR FUTURE QUESTION OF INDONESIAN PROGRAM. SPECIFICALLY WE HAVE IN MIND: (1) ON BASIS IMPORTANCE INDONESIA, PROCEEDING WITH ALL MAP AND FMS ACTIONS UNDER ACTIVE DISCUSSION BEFORE TIMOR CRISIS BUT UNDERTAKING NO NEW ACTIONS PENDING ACT OF SELF-DETERMINATION OR LATER REVIEW OF SITUATION.

(2) HOLD UP FURTHER GRANT ACTIONS BUT PROCEED WITH FMS GUARANTEES FOR FINANCING FOR COMMERCIAL SALES (I.E. SIKORSKII HELICOPTERS).

(3) REVISE PROGRAM TO ELIMINATE ALL SMALL ARMS AND OTHER LETHAL WEAPONS LIKELY BE USED ON TIMOR, CONCENTRATING PROGRAM ON EQUIPMENT ENTIRELY RELATED TO DEFENSE OF WESTERN APPROACHES WHERE OUR MAJOR INTERESTS LIE (I.E, SHIPS, HELICOPTERS AND SURVEILLANCE EQUIPMENT).

7. PLEASE ADVISE.

NEWSOM

1 Source: Ford Library, National Security Adviser, Presidential Country Files for East Asia and the Pacific, Box 6, Indonesia, State Department Telegrams to SECSTATE, NODIS (4). Secret; Nodis.

153. Memorandum From Thomas J. Barnes of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Scowcroft), Washington, February 18, 1976. 153. Memorandum From Thomas J. Barnes of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Scowcroft), Washington, February 18, 1976.1

Washington, February 18, 1976

MEMORANDUM
NATIONAL SECURITY COUNCIL
INFORMATION

February 18, 1976

MEMORANDUM FOR: BRENT SCOWCROFT
FROM: THOMAS J. BARNES [TJB initialed]

SUBJECT: Contingency Planning for Military Supply to Indonesia

In a February 17 cable (Tab A), Ambassador Newsom expressed concern that Congressional action could end FMS military assistance to Indonesia. He requested that State and Defense undertake a discreet survey of possible alternative measures to insure that Indonesia would still have access to American equipment. Newsom argues that should a cutoff occur, we could only avert a possible Indonesian sudden shift away from us by having a substitute program ready.

Newsom suggests that Washington consider all possible options including the following: — Increased coproduction of U.S. items in Indonesia. PR 77 radios are currently in coproduction. Helicopters and M 16 rifles are distinct possibilities for coproduction.

— Third country production.

— Third country manufacture under U.S. license.

— U.S. provision of surplus or used equipment that the Foreign Assistance Act does not regulate.

— Friendly foreign sources of compatible equipment not subject to licensing.

— Straight commercial sale.

Les Janka does not believe that there is now any ground swell with the Congress to cut off aid to Indonesia because of the East Timor incursion. A study could therefore provoke more problems than it solves.

1 Source: Ford Library, National Security Adviser, Presidential Country Files for East Asia and the Pacific, Box 6, Indonesia (7). Secret; Nodis. Sent for information. Don McDonald of the NSC staff initialed his concurrence. At the bottom of the page, in response to Barnes’ statement about the dangers of a study, Scowcroft wrote, “Should it be turned off?” Tab A, telegram 2097 from Jakarta, February 17, is in the National Archives, Record Group 59, Central Foreign Policy Files. On February 22, Scowcroft wrote a note to Barnes, “Tom—I do not believe a study is necessary but I hope some thought is being given to the question. Brent.” (Ibid.)

154. Telegram 5606 From the Embassy in Indonesia to the Department of State, April 29, 1976, 0400Z. 154. Telegram 5606 From the Embassy in Indonesia to the Department of State, April 29, 1976, 0400Z.1

April 29, 1976, 0400Z

TELEGRAM
Department of State
JAKARTA 5606

R 290400Z APR 76

FM AMEMBASSY JAKARTA TO SECSTATE WASHDC 4123

JAKARTA 5606

FOR ASSISTANT SECRETARY HABIB

E.O. 11652: GDS
TAGS: MASS, EAID, PINS, PT, IN

SUBJECT: CONGRESSIONAL INQUIRY - TIMOR
REF: STATE 101116

1. IT IS NEITHER CORRECT NOR FAIR TO INDONESIANS TO SUGGEST, AS IMPLIED IN LETTER FROM SENATOR HUMPHREY, THAT OUR REPRESENTATIONS TO THEM ON THE USE OF U.S. ARMS IN TIMOR HAVE BEEN IGNORED.

2. FROM CONVERSATIONS WITH SENIOR INDONESIAN OFFICIALS IT IS CLEAR THAT AWARENESS OF RESTRICTIONS ON USE OF U.S. EQUIPMENT WAS SIGNIFICANT FACTOR IN DELAYING DECISION TO SUPPORT MILITARY ACTION IN TIMOR. WHEN INDONESIANS CONCLUDED THEY HAD NO CHOICE, THEY HAVE ATTEMPTED MAKE MINIMUM USE OF U.S. EQUIPMENT. DESPITE SERIOUS PROBLEMS ENCOUNTERED IN USING EQUIPMENT OF OTHER ORIGINS, INCLUDING OLD YUGOSLOV WEAPONS, SUCH EQUIPMENT HAS BEEN BACKBONE OF THEIR EFFORT. I BELIEVE GENERAL MURDANI WAS SINCERE WHEN HE TOLD ME RECENTLY EVERY EFFORT HAS BEEN MADE WITHDRAW U.S. EQUIPMENT AS RAPIDLY AS POSSIBLE.

3. IF ISSUE ARISES AGAIN IN CONTACTS WITH CONGRESS, SUGGEST WE SAY THAT INDONESIANS CLEARLY AWARE OF U.S. LAW AND HAVE DEPENDED LARGELY ON EQUIPMENT OF OTHER NATIONAL ORIGINS SEEKING MINIMIZE USE OF ITEMS PROVIDED BY U.S.

NEWSOM

1 Source: National Archives, Record Group 59, Central Foreign Policy Files. Secret; Exdis. Telegram 101116 to the Secretary’s Delegation, April 30, provided the text of an April 14 letter from Senators Humphrey and Case stating that USG representations to the GOI had apparently been ignored.

155. Telegram 6442 From the Embassy in Indonesia to the Department of State, May 17, 1976, 0235Z. 155. Telegram 6442 From the Embassy in Indonesia to the Department of State, May 17, 1976, 0235Z.1

May 17, 1976, 0235Z

TELEGRAM
Department of State
JAKARTA 6442

O 170235Z MAY 76

FM AMEMBASSY JAKARTA TO SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 4434

JAKARTA 6442

FOR ASSISTANT SECRETARY HABIB

E.O. 11652: GDS
TAGS: MASS, EAID, PINS, PT, ID

SUBJECT: INDONESIAN MAP TRAINING
REF: STATE 104735

1. I BELIEVE YOU AND, POSSIBLY, SECRETARY, SHOULD BE AWARE THAT WE MAY VERY SOON BE REACHING POINT WHERE INDONESIANS MAY, FOR FIRST TIME, BE CLEARLY AWARE OF DELAYS IN MAP ACTIONS. MATTER RELATES TO TRAINING.

2. SCHEDULED TO BEGIN IN JUNE IS SENIOR-LEVEL TRAINING WHICH IF CANCELLED, WILL DIRECTLY AFFECT SEVERAL HIGH RANKING OFFICERS AND FOCUS ATTENTION OF SENIOR MILITARY ON HOLD-UP IN TRAINING AT TIME WHEN IT IS BECOMING INCREASINGLY DIFFICULT TO OFFER PLAUSIBLE EXPLANATION. THIS INVOLVES SENIOR MANAGEMENT COURSE IN MONTEREY CALIFORNIA FOR FIVE GENERAL AND FLAG OFFICERS, INCLUDING GOI DEFENSE DEPARTMENT (HANKAM) PERSONNEL CHIEF, PLUS COMMAND AND GENERAL STAFF COLLEGE ATTENDANCE FOR SIX OFFICERS WHO, IF THEY DO NOT GO TO U.S., WILL FALL A YEAR BEHIND IN THEIR CAREERS, SINCE THEY HAVE ALREADY GIVEN UP OPPORTUNITY TO ATTEND CORRESPONDING SCHOOLS IN INDONESIA.

3. WE HAVE, UNTIL NOW, BEEN ABLE EXPLAIN DELAYS IN TERMS OF LACK CONGRESSIONAL ACTION. THIS BECOMES INCREASINGLY DIFFICULT, PARTICULARLY ON TRAINING WHICH HAS NEVER PREVIOUSLY BEEN AFFECTED AND EXPLANATION WILL NO LONGER HOLD WATER ONCE THERE IS AGREED AID LEGISLATION. SINCE THERE ARE OTHER INDONESIAN OFFICERS AT MONTEREY, GOI LIKELY LEARN THAT LACK OF LEGISLATION NOT AFFECTING TRAINING FOR OTHER COUNTRIES WHOSE OFFICERS WILL BE ARRIVING FOR JUNE SENIOR MANAGEMENT COURSE.

4. GIVEN FACT THAT CONGRESS HAS GENERALLY DRAWN DISTINCTION BETWEEN EQUIPMENT AND TRAINING, WOULD IT NOT BE POSSIBLE FOR LAWYERS TO PROCEED ON BASIS OF THIS DISTINCTION OR TO GET CLEARANCE TO PROCEED WITH RAINING IN DIALOGUE WITH COMMITTEE MENTIONED REFTEL?

5. SINCE, IF DISPENSATION IS NOT POSSIBLE, WE SHOULD INFORM HANKAM THIS WEEK, WOULD APPRECIATE EARLY ADVICE.

NEWSOM

1 Source: National Archives, Record Group 59, Central Foreign Policy Files. Secret; Immediate; Nodis.

156. Memorandum From Thomas J. Barnes of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Scowcroft), Washington, May 17, 1976. 156. Memorandum From Thomas J. Barnes of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Scowcroft), Washington, May 17, 1976.1

Washington, May 17, 1976

MEMORANDUM
NATIONAL SECURITY COUNCIL
URGENT INFORMATION

May 17, 1976

MEMORANDUM FOR: BRENT SCOWCROFT
FROM: THOMAS J. BARNES [TJB initialed]

SUBJECT: Military Equipment Deliveries to Indonesia

At Secretary Kissinger's direction, State in January 1976 quietly stopped certifying to Defense the delivery of further military equipment to Indonesia. There was no formal suspension, and no publicity about the action. DOD cannot make deliveries without State certification.

Before leaving for Africa, the Secretary decided to renew certification of deliveries. Senators Hume and Case meanwhile wrote the State Department asking State to suspend further military aid to Indonesia until Assistant Secretary Habib could testify before the Humphrey Subcommittee on Foreign Assistance of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee. The issue, of course, was Indonesian use of U.S. arms and equipment in Timor. Habib therefore held up the renewal of certification until he could appear before the Subcommittee. He hopes to do so this week.

Jakarta 6442 of May 17 pointed out the urgent need for a decision on military training in the United States for Indonesian flag officers. Habib has prepared a Maw to Fish memorandum on the training program. He hopes to get the memorandum to Defense May 17. If the Defense lawyers accept it, the training will go ahead.

cc: Les Janka
Ken Quinn
Col. Granger

1 Source: Ford Library, National Security Adviser, Presidential Country Files for East Asia and the Pacific, Box 6, Indonesia (7). Secret; Sensitive. Urgent; sent for information. Scowcroft wrote on the memorandum, “Thanks. BS.” Jakarta Telegram 6442, March 17, is Document 155. Humphrey’s and Case’s April 28 letter is contained in Telegram 104735 to the Secretary’s delegation, May 1. (National Archives, Record Group 59, Central Foreign Policy Files) On May 17, at 2005Z, telegram 120825 to Jakarta gave the Department’s reply to telegram 6442 from Jakarta. The telegram, drafted by Miller and approved by Maw, stated, “The training program you cite will proceed on schedule. You can inform Indonesians accordingly.” (Ibid.)

157. Minutes of the Secretary of State’s Staff Meeting, Washington, June 1, 1976, 8:10 a.m. 157. Minutes of the Secretary of State’s Staff Meeting, Washington, June 1, 1976, 8:10 a.m. 1

Washington, June 1, 1976, 8:10 a.m.

In Attendance - Tuesday, June 1, 1976

Secretary of State Kissinger - Chairman

T Mr. Maw

M Mr. Eagleburger

C Mr. Sonnenfeldt

AF Mr. Schaufele

EA Mr. Habib

EUR Mr. Hartman

NEA Mr. Atherton

INR Mr. Saunders

S/P Mr. Lord

EB Mr. Greenwald

S/PRS Mr. Funseth

PM Mr. Stern (Acting)

IO Mr. Lewis

L Mr. Leigh

S/S Mr. Springsteen

S Mr. Aherne

S Mr. Covey

[Omitted is material unrelated to Indonesia.]

MR. HABIB: The only other thing I want to make sure you're aware of is the first act in the integration of Timor in Indonesia has taken place. There's a declaration by the Indonesian Assembly to integrate. Our guess is that the National Day will be the formal day of integration. I doubt that there will be any further difficulty. It will go very smoothly.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: Have we reopened our military-supply position?

MR. HABIB: The supply position has never been shut down.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: Come on — you know what I'm asking you.

MR. HABIB: New commitments will be made very shortly by our distinguished colleague (referring to Mr. Maw). New commitments are not being made.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: Today?

MR. HABIB: No. We've got one contract we're holding off on. We have some helicopters with Sikorsky — which should be signed this week.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: Plus we're not letting them

MR. HABIB: You end up with a case like Chile, where we cut it off.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: With the result that they cut off all the rest. There was never any question of having it cut off from Chile. There is more or less the same thing — we're cutting them off — and, eventually, the Congress will cut them off. You'll never get a letter from Humphrey that you can use.

MR. HABIB: I'll send it to you.

[Omitted is material unrelated to Indonesia.]

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Transcripts of Secretary of State Kissinger’s Staff Meetings, 1973–1977, E5177, Box 10. Secret.

158. Memorandum From Thomas J. Barnes of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Deputy Assistant for National Security Affairs (Hyland), Washington, June 2, 1976. 158. Memorandum From Thomas J. Barnes of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Deputy Assistant for National Security Affairs (Hyland), Washington, June 2, 1976.1

Washington, June 2, 1976

NATIONAL SECURITY COUNCIL

June 2, 1976

TO - BILL HYLAND
FROM - TOM BARNES [TB initialed]

You asked at the June 1 staff meeting that our Embassy in Jakarta take credit for the United States because Congress dropped its opposition to security aid to Indonesia. The opposition had arisen because of Indonesian use of U.S. equipment in Timor.

Phil Habib informs me that he intends to use the leverage on this issue in Washington toward the end of the month. At that time, Indonesian Foreign Minister Malik will lead a delegation here to initiate the joint U.S.-Indonesian consultations that Presidents Ford and Suharto agreed on last December in Jakarta. Habib specifically proposes to ask for Indonesian support at the U.N. on Korea and Puerto Rico, and at the August non-aligned conference in Colombo on these and other issues of interest to us.

1 Source: Ford Library, National Security Adviser, Presidential Country Files for East Asia and the Pacific, Box 6, Indonesia (7). Secret. Hyland wrote, “good” near the top of the memorandum.

159. Minutes of the Secretary of State’s Staff Meeting, Washington, June 17, 1976, 8:18 a.m. 159. Minutes of the Secretary of State’s Staff Meeting, Washington, June 17, 1976, 8:18 a.m. 1

Washington, June 17, 1976, 8:18 a.m.

In Attendance - Thursday, June 17, 1976

Secretary of State Kissinger - Chairman

D Mr. Robinson

P Mr. Habib

M Mr. Eagleburger

C Mr. Sonnenfeldt

AF Mr. Schaufele

ARA Mr. Rogers

Mr. Shlaudeman (Asst. Secy.-designate, ARA)

EA Mr. Miller

EUR Mr. Hartman

NEA Mr. Atherton

INR Mr. Saunders

S/P Mr. Lord

EB Mr. Greenwald

S/PRS Mr. Funseth

PM Mr. Vest

IO Mr. Lewis

H Ambassador McCloskey

L Mr. Leigh

S/S Mr. Borg (Acting)

S Mr. Aherne

Ambassador L. Dean Brown

Indonesian Parliamentary Delegation to East Timor.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: Who's going?

MR. MILLER: We.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: I mean which countries have accepted?

MR. MILLER: Well, as of now, practically no countries have accepted. All the EC 9 have turned it down. The UN Security Council President is going to turn it down; the Secretary-General of the UN will turn it down.

There will probably be a couple of ASEAN countries that will accept. Japan will probably accept if we accepted. Australia's position is not yet known. The last time, when it was a Provisional Government of East Timor invitation, the Australians decided at the last minute not to accept.

I think our general feeling here — EUR, IO, and EA have sent you a memo to continue with L and H —

SECRETARY KISSINGER: You're against it. (Laughter.)

MR. MILLER: I think the common recommendation, sir, is that we — since we would be quite isolated and since our participation would be rather high profile, that we would recommend against accepting — explaining to the Indonesians that we think we can obtain a broader base of support here in this country for, let's say, our broader objectives with respect to Indonesia — including overall support to Timor, if we don't have high-profile participation.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: Well, how about low-profile participation?

MR. MILLER: Well, we would intend, at the most, to send only the Political Counselor. We would not send an Ambassador. On the other hand, it now looks like there will be very few countries that do participate. So I think that regardless of what level of officer we send, it will be fairly high.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: Am I wrong in assuming if we don't send somebody there will be some story out of it showing its disapproval of the United States action in regard to Timor?

MR. HABIB: Some of the countries won't be going.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: Like who?

MR. HABIB: Singapore won't attend — probably Thailand.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: Why is it in our interest to? I'm just trying to understand the rationale.

MR. MILLER: Well, I don't think, sir, we think in terms of it weakening the Indonesians in Timor; but it's trying to keep, let's say, Congressional sentiment with regard to Indonesia from being rekindled which we think now is a fairly satisfactory condition.

MR. HABIB: There's no need to take this action. The Indonesians are trying to get an international — and especially U.S. and other blessing — before they've done it. Let them go ahead and do what they've been doing. We have no objection. We've not objected in UN Security Council debates. They're quite happy with the position we've taken. We've resumed, as you know, all of our normal relations with them; and there isn't any problem involved.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: Not very willingly —

MR. HABIB: Sir?

SECRETARY KISSINGER: Not very willingly. Illegally and beautifully.

MR. MILLER: There's no question that the Indonesians will participate. This will undoubtedly be mentioned in Malik's conversations with you.

MR. HABIB: If we were to go pell-mell in the absence of really anybody else, I think that that could reopen the question of whether the Indonesians are acceptable.

MR. HABIB: The Japanese didn't go last time and they're hesitant to say who's going. The Australians, I'm fairly sure, are not going to go, on the basis of what we know.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: Why don't we ask the Australians?

MR. HABIB: They'll tell us it's under consideration.

MR. MILLER: The Australians asked either the Security Council or Waldheim to send a representative, and that hasn't succeeded. So I think I would agree with Phil that they're not likely. They dropped out at the last minute the last time, and they're likely to drop out this time.

MR. HABIB: It's a political problem.

MR. MILLER: We can ask them directly.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: Well, why don't you ask them?

MR. HABIB: We will.

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Transcripts of Secretary of State Kissinger’s Staff Meetings, 1973–1977, E5177, Box 10. Secret.

160. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, June 29, 1976. 160. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, June 29, 1976.1

Washington, June 29, 1976

DEPARTMENT OF STATE
Memorandum of Conversation

DATE: June 29, 1976
TIME: 9:50 a.m.
PLACE: The Secretary's Office

SUBJECT: US-Indonesian Consultations; Aid to Indonesia; The Secretary's Travel Schedule

PARTICIPANTS:

The Secretary

Under Secretary Habib

Deputy Assistant Secretary Miller, EA

Mr. Edward C. Ingraham, Country Director for Indonesia, Malaysia & Singapore Affairs, EA

The Secretary: Good morning.

Mr. Habib, Mr. Miller, and Mr. Ingraham: Good morning.

The Secretary: What has happened to Art Hummel?

Mr. Habib: Hummel hasn't arrived in Washington yet. He is still in Ethiopia.

The Secretary: First of all, can you tell me why we cannot get decent PL–480 terms for Indonesia? Terms like those for India?

Mr. Habib: Part of the problem is that Indonesia is not as badly off as some of the other nations concerned.

Mr. Miller: Part of the problem is also Indonesia's membership in OPEC. This affects Treasury's attitude and that of Congress as well. But we intend to try to get better terms for Indonesia next time the issue comes up.

The Secretary: Better terms than what?

Mr. Miller: India and Bangladesh are getting better terms than Indonesia.

The Secretary: But do we have the discretion to offer better terms?

Mr. Habib: One of the problems here is the matter of the most seriously affected nations.

The Secretary: But that affects the amount of PL–480 doesn't it, rather than the terms?

Mr. Miller: Yes, I believe it does. The next time we negotiate a PL–480 agreement with the Indonesians we are going to try to get better terms for them. One of the problems this time was that, although the Indonesians complained, they signed the agreement on the terms offered.

The Secretary: If I have tried to get anything across in this building since I have been here, it is that there should be better treatment of Indonesia.

Mr. Habib: One difficulty is the Treasury mentality. Haven't we already raised the question of PL–480 terms with Treasury?

Mr. Ingraham: Yes we have.

The Secretary: I am afraid that within five years the Indonesians will be going back to the Russians, seeking aid from them just like the last time. What about military aid levels?

Mr. Habib: For both fiscal 76 and fiscal 77 the level is $13 million in grant and about $23 million in FMS credit. We had asked for$19 million in grant but Congress cut it to $13 million.

The Secretary: To cut Indonesia from $19 million to $13 million just when Indochina has fallen is insane.

Mr. Habib: We have done better on the economic side this year, better than the Indonesians expected of us. We have gone from about $61 million to $100 million.

The Secretary: What about the Indonesian dinner tonight? Is it formal?

Mr. Habib: No, it is informal. We asked them to make it informal.

The Secretary: How about wives? Are they invited?

Mr. Habib: Yes they are. I have one more item of business to raise at this time: the press statement. We have sent you a copy which you may have seen. It is a fairly simple one. The Indonesians have asked that we add a brief reference to the next round of consultations. We have a one-sentence addition on this that we would like to make in the draft. It would go at the end of the second paragraph.

The Secretary: That's fine. But if they ask for more than this in the statement, I want us to be accommodating. Now back to the PL–480.

Mr. Miller: They will be seeking an additional 150,000 tons of rice from us, probably around next October. At that time we will try to get better terms for them.

The Secretary: If they are to get better terms, we should be able to give them the better terms rather than making them ask for it. Why hasn't someone come to me about this? I can discuss it with Simon.

Mr. Habib: I thought we had mentioned it to you.

The Secretary: You should have brought it up with me. I want to get them what they want.

Mr. Habib: In these consultations you will be giving them what they want most. Malik is coming all the way from Manila just to meet with you. The most important thing you have to give them is the assurance of our interest.

The Secretary: On the question of arms, can we get them what (Australian Prime Minister) Fraser said in China. I think it has leaked out. It makes a good deal of sense to me.

Mr. Habib: Yes, I will get it. Also what he said in Japan.

The Secretary: I can see no sense in my going to the ANZUS meeting if Fraser will have just been here.

Mr. Habib: They will be disappointed if you go to Tehran and don't go to Australia.

The Secretary: What can we say at the ANZUS meeting if we have just met with Fraser here? It doesn't make sense.

Mr. Habib: Why don't you mention this directly to Fraser while he is here? I think he would understand.

The Secretary: And what about Manila? Maybe I can fly from Tehran to Manila.

Mr. Habib: It looks now as if the Philippine negotiations will not be finished by then. I don't think that Sullivan will be able to wrap things up by August 6.

Mr. Miller: They haven't even reached the key issues in the negotiations. They are not even talking about the money yet.

The Secretary: What about this afternoon's meeting with the Indonesians? How are we supposed to spend an hour and a half at the meeting after we have just had lunch with them?

Mr. Habib: For the lunch I suggest you handle it just as you always do. For the meeting I suggest you open it with a global review, with some emphasis on Indonesia. Then — and this is not in the briefing papers — I suggest you turn the meeting over to Malik and ask him to spell out Indonesia's views.

One thing we are anxious to avoid is to create the idea in their minds that we are once again the golden goose when it comes to military aid. The last time they came to discuss military aid they had a $400 million shopping list with them.

The Secretary: That isn't such an excessive figure for a country of Indonesia's size.

Mr. Habib: On Timor, they are not unhappy at this time. They are perfectly satisfied with the situation. They will absorb Timor on August 17 and they are now talking with the Portuguese.

The Secretary: How about the guerrillas in Timor?

Mr. Habib: They are down to about 500, and the Indonesians have them penned up in the hills. The only really unhappy ones in this situation are the Australians.

The Secretary: Why is that?

Mr. Habib: Papua New Guinea. They are afraid the Indonesians will move next on Papua New Guinea. Every Australian I have talked to — including five Parliamentarians I talked to just the other night — everyone of them is worried about having 135 million Indonesians on their northern border and about Papua New Guinea. If the Indonesians moved into Papua New Guinea, the Australians think they would have to fight.

The Secretary: They have a reason to be concerned about Indonesia. That is why they should treat them well. Now, back on military aid, how much can we get for Indonesia in the coming months?

Mr. Habib: We have the same figure for both FY 76 and 77. That is$13 million grant and $23 million FMS. They are concerned about terms. They want 8 to 10 years repayment for the FMS credit and we could offer only 7.

The Secretary: The level is far more important than the terms. Why is it so low when they asked for $400 million.

Mr. Habib: The $400 million was only their shopping list. I wanted to get them about $50 million a year but first OMB cut the figure and then Congress cut it further. I think one of the reasons for the cut in Congress was human rights.

The Secretary: You would think that in a country like ours we have enough trouble at home without taking on everyone else's trouble. What is the human rights problem in Indonesia?

Mr. Habib: They have about 35,000 people still under detention from the 1965 events. They have recently been doing fairly well. They have been trying some of them, releasing others and gradually working their way through the problem. The situation is very different from Korea. The Indonesians have also been a bit more intelligent in their handling of the issue on the Hill. They have been in touch with Fraser and the others on the Hill.

The Secretary: Fraser didn't get his Korea amendments. It seems to me he is getting worse, even more erratic.

All right, so we'll see the Indonesians this afternoon.

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy Files, P–820118–1488. Secret; Nodis. Drafted by Ingraham and approved by Collums.

161. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, June 29, 1976. 161. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, June 29, 1976.1

Washington, June 29, 1976

DEPARTMENT OF STATE
Memorandum of Conversation

DATE: June 29, 1976

SUBJECT: Working Luncheon for Indonesian Foreign Minister: Multilateral and Bilateral Issues

PARTICIPANTS:

Indonesia

Adam Malik, Foreign Minister

R.B.I.N. Djajadiningrat, Director General for Political Affairs

Rusmin Nuryadin, Indonesian Ambassador

Sumarjo Sosrowardojo, Chief, Foreign Minister's Personal Staff

Major General Soekemi Sumantri, Assistant for International Cooperation, Defense Department

Ferdy Salim, Director, Foreign Trade Policy

Adrianus Mooy, Deputy Director, BAPPENAS

United States

The Secretary

Brent Scowcroft, Special Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs

Daniel Parker, AID Administrator

Philip C. Habib, Under Secretary (designate) for Political Affairs

William D. Rogers, Under Secretary for Economic Affairs

David D. Newsom, Ambassador to Indonesia

Robert H. Miller, Acting Assistant Secretary for East Asia and Pacific Affairs

Morton I. Abramowitz, Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs

Edward C. Ingraham, EA/IMS(notetaker)

Mr. Habib: As you know, Mr. Secretary, we have been having a series of US-Indonesian meetings over the past two days.

The Secretary: How have they been going? Mr. Minister, could you tell us?

Malik: All right.

Ambassador Newsom: Both sides would have liked to do a little better, but we have generally agreed.

The Secretary: I understand you have been ill with hepatitis, Mr. Minister. Where did you get it?

Malik: In Thailand.

The Secretary: And how is the situation in Thailand?

Malik: Clearer.

The Secretary: Clearer in a good sense or in a bad sense?

Malik: Clearer in a good sense.

The Secretary: I don't know what the Thais gain by asking us to leave.

Mr. Habib: Was this discussed at the Manila ASEAN meeting?

Malik: Yes. I have just come from there. I came here directly from Manila.

The Secretary: How did you come, through Honolulu?

Malik: No, direct from Tokyo to New York. It is a very long trip.

Ambassador Newsom: Flight time from here to Jakarta is 30 hours. I am leaving for Jakarta tomorrow.

The Secretary: It used to take 16 hours just to fly to Europe.

Tell me, what has been agreed upon at your meetings so far.

Mr. Miller: We have not reached any particular agreements in the political talks, but have been exchanging views. But there was agreement in the security talks at the Defense Department on the FMS credits for FY 1976.

Ambassador Rusmin: Yes, I am going to sign the overall agreement tomorrow. We intend to review the list of equipment to be obtained under grant aid. But the credit is going through.

The Secretary: What is the problem with military aid?

General Sumantri: We want to look at our aid requirements as a whole. It is difficult to plan for just one year.

Mr. Abramowitz: Yes, it is difficult to plan for periods of less than three to four years.

The Secretary: Why can't we do that in this case?

Mr. Abramowitz: The problem is that of the uncertainty on our side. We cannot foretell the actual size of the appropriation for future years. This means we can only do advance planning within limits.

The Secretary: Can we engage in long range planning with any country?

Mr. Abramowitz: No, we cannot.

The Secretary: As long as the Indonesians understand the problem of Congressional appropriations, why cannot we engage in planning while taking that uncertainty into consideration?

I have always thought of Indonesia as the key country of Southeast Asia. We have Congressional constraints. I don't see why we must also have planning constraints.

General Sumantri: We would like to plan with you for a longer period.

The Secretary: Who is at fault in this? If it is ours, I would like to know.

Mr. Habib: There are problems on both sides. The Indonesians are also changing some of their priorities.

Ambassador Rusmin: We need some additional options in procuring equipment. We hope to get some types of equipment from other countries, for example VO-15 helicopters from West Germany.

Mr. Abramowitz: As an example of the difficulty that uncertainty over appropriations creates in the planning process, the Administration asked Congress for$19 million in grant aid for Indonesia this year. We are getting $13 million. That is a 3 percent shortfall. This makes planning difficult.

General Sumantri: We have experienced this difficulty in previous years, too. We have learned from experience not to plan more than two years ahead.

Ambassador Newsom: The long uncertainty over the security assistance legislation in the Congress added to the difficulty this year.

The Secretary: There is no question that it is hard to deal with a nation as noble as we are.

I am personally sympathetic to your problem, and will see what can be done. That is one advantage of these meetings. I am able to find out personally what has been going on. I told my colleagues this morning that $13 million in military aid was ridiculous for a country such as Indonesia after the fall of Vietnam.

We will also get better terms for PL 480 next year.

Mr. Abramowitz: There is another problem of FMS credit terms.

The Secretary: Who decides those terms?

Mr. Abramowitz: Treasury.

Ambassador Newsom: Our friends are patient with us.

The Secretary: But I'm not. If you had not come to Washington, Mr. Minister, I might never have known about this. I will talk to Treasury about PL 480 terms. And about FMS credit terms if it is not too late.

Mr. Abramowitz: It is too late for the FMS credit terms for this year. But not for next year.

Mr. Habib: We worked out with the Indonesians a program this year for $30 million in grant aid. This was cut to $19 by OMB, by switching the balance to FMS credit. And then Congress cut the figure to $13 million.

The Secretary: I didn't know anything about this.

Mr. Parker: There is an additional problem. It is only 36 hours until the end of the fiscal year and the Senate has not yet passed the appropriation. Senator Inouye agreed to pass the bill if we would tell him what our planning on Africa is.

The Secretary: (to Mr. Habib) Can you take care of this?

Ambassador Newsom: At least there is some good news for our Indonesian colleagues. This year's economic aid is well ahead of last year's.

Mr. Habib: And I have also just heard that Senator Bentsen is prepared to introduce an amendment removing the ban on GSP benefits for the OPEC countries that did not join the embargo.

Mr. Rogers: Once we get it through the Senate there will be the problem of the House. Mr. Minister, is the GSP issue of significance to you?

Malik: Yes, it is.

Ambassador Newsom: It is a very touchy issue in Jakarta, not only in substance but in feeling.

Mr. Habib: The Portuguese elections came out well.

The Secretary: Yes, very well. Eanes got over 60 percent of the vote. The next one was the leftist.

Mr. Minister, I am not going to make a speech, but I want you to know that Indonesia is very important to us. And I want you to know that you are among friends here. We look forward very much to our consultations.

Malik: We too have been looking forward to the consultations. Our country is facing a difficult time now, but we are looking to the future.

The Secretary: I appreciate the effort you made to get here. It has been a long trip. Jet travel usually doesn't affect me, but even I have troubles with trips that long.

Malik: After our meeting here I am going on to Pakistan and then to Thailand. Then I must be home for the visit of the Foreign Minister from Hanoi.

The Secretary: I met Trinh only once, in Hanoi. He didn't come to Paris for the negotiations.

There were two things that led to the collapse in Vietnam: the cut in our aid and the collapse of executive authority in the United States.

Ambassador Newsom: There was also the collapse of Congressional authority.

The Secretary: Yes, that worked against us. After the elections things will be better, with an elected President. With a Nixon undamaged by Watergate, the course of events in Vietnam would have been different.

Mr. Minister, how do they treat you in Hanoi?

Malik: As second class citizens.

The Secretary: Even in first class, they don't treat you very well. I wonder if they treat the Soviets well.

I can recall during a visit to Hanoi they put me in a place called the Grand Palace. They had things really worked out precisely to cause maximum discomfort. In the bathroom there was both hot and cold running water. But the sink had only hot water and the tub only cold water. And then there was the plug in the tub. Not an ordinary plug but one with a long wire on it that had to be fitted precisely into the fixture or it wouldn't work. It was a half-hour task just putting in the plug.

The room they gave me was a huge one, about the size of this dining room. There were about fourteen different light fixtures in it, each one with a separate switch. Some of the switches were down along the baseboard, some were high up on the wall. It took most of the night to get the lights turned out.

We were the first American non-prisoners to visit Hanoi, and they left us very much alone after they deposited us at the Palace. So the three of us went for a walk. When we returned to the Palace, the guards wouldn't let me in because I didn't have a pass. But when I asked for a pass, they said that heads of delegations didn't get passes.

I did notice during that visit that the signs of bombing were far less than had been reported. Reading the press, you would get the impression that Hanoi was in ruins from our bombing. But I saw scarcely any signs of bombing, despite the complaints of the intellectual community.

I spent many hours negotiating with the North Vietnamese. I recall that they once made a public proposal and at the same time a secret proposal to me. They told us privately that they did not want to negotiate on their public proposal. So we negotiated for six months over the secret proposal while their propaganda was blasting us for refusing to negotiate their public proposal. We finally had enough so we published both. That surprised them.

Actually, the North Vietnamese were only tractable in negotiations after we had bombed them. When we met them in Paris after they had taken Quang Tri, they were completely arrogant. But after the Christmas bombing they were far more accommodating.

Ambassador Newsom: I was greeted on my arrival in Washington by seeing my name in Jack Anderson's column.

The Secretary: For what?

Ambassador Newsom: For sending too many contraceptives to Indonesia.

The Secretary: Why did you send so many?

Ambassador Newsom: Actually, an AID cable went out over my name asking that 51 million be sent. Oddly enough, Anderson ended up praising me for resisting.

The Secretary: We have a little time before the meeting. (To Mr. Habib) Perhaps you could take the Foreign Minister to your office so that he could freshen up.

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy Files, P–820118–1495. Secret; Nodis. Drafted by Ingraham and approved by Collums.

162. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, June 29, 1976, 2:30 p.m. 162. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, June 29, 1976, 2:30 p.m. 1

Washington, June 29, 1976, 2:30 p.m.

DEPARTMENT OF STATE
Memorandum of Conversation

DATE: June 29, 1976
TIME: 2:30 p.m.
PLACE: The Secretary's Conference Room

SUBJECT: US-Indonesian Consultations: Global Issues, EA Regional Issues, US-Indonesian relations

PARTICIPANTS:

Indonesia

Adam MALIK, Foreign Minister

R.B.I.N. DJAJADININGRAT, Director General for Political Affairs

RUSMIN NURYADIN, Indonesian Ambassador

SUMARJO Sosrowardojo, Chief, Foreign Minister's Personal Staff

Suryono DARUSMAN, Special Assistant to Foreign Minister

Major General Soekemi SUMANTRI, Assistant for International Cooperation, Defense Department

Ferdy SALIM, Director, Foreign Trade Policy

Adrianus MOOY, Deputy Director, BAPPENAS

Mohamed SABIR, Director, American Directorate

Abubakar ADIWOSO, Counselor, Indonesian Embassy

United States

The Secretary

Daniel Parker, AID Administrator

Philip C. Habib, Under Secretary-designate for Political Affairs

David D. Newsom, Ambassador to Indonesia Joseph A. Greenwald, Assistant Secretary for Economic and Business Affairs

Robert H. Miller, Acting Assistant Secretary for East Asian and Pacific Affairs

Lester E. Edmond, Deputy Assistant Secretary for East Asian Economic Affairs

Morton I. Abramowitz, Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs

Kenneth M. Quinn, Staff Member, National Security Council

Edward C. Ingraham, EA/IMS, Notetaker

The Secretary: Mr. Foreign Minister, let me welcome you again to Washington. I am delighted to see you here for the consultations. I want to emphasize to you how much importance we attach to your country. There have been technical difficulties that have affected our relations in the past year but I expect them to be resolved by our elections next November. Then we will be able to continue our policy of cooperating with you. How would you like to proceed with the meeting?

Malik: How ever you like. We prefer that you discuss world issues first.

The Secretary: As I understand it, I should review world issues with some emphasis on the role of Indonesia. (To Habib) I suppose you have already prepared a text of what I am going to say and given it to the Indonesians.

Let me start by reviewing the world situation, first in a general context, then China and then Southeast Asia. Then we can hear from you. If there is any topic you wish to raise in any field, I will try to respond.

Let me start with our relations with the Soviets. Every four years we have a period of masochism during our election campaigns when we tell each other how badly things are going for us. Let me give you a somewhat more optimistic assessment. We must have a clear perception of this, because our relations with the Soviets are the central fact of the world situation today.

There is no question that as Soviet industrialization proceeds, Soviet strength is increasing. This is inevitable. But we must see it in the proper perspective and it must be related to the foreign policy context.

The Soviet Union is acquiring additional military strength. The Soviet system as a whole operates effectively in the accumulation of physical power. But the Soviet system has considerable weaknesses.

First, it is an extremely bureaucratic system. The system makes it hard for decisions to be made. I don't believe the Soviet leadership has any grand design for world domination. All in all, the leadership is of rather mediocre quality.

Secondly, they have experienced immense economic difficulties. Let me describe an example of this. Our most recent estimates show that the Soviets are spending 30 to 40 percent more on their armed forces than we had thought. But the size and composition of their armed forces remain the same as in our earlier estimates. So it seems that the Soviets have to devote a far larger share of their resources to maintaining their armed forces than we had realized.

Also in the economic field, their external indebtedness is expanding rapidly. From a few billion some years ago, it will be reaching $40 billion before long. This rate of increase cannot be tolerated much longer. They will have to cut back on their economic growth.

I do not want to suggest that the Soviet Union is not a major problem. But it is a manageable problem. Even acknowledging that Soviet power is growing and that Soviet military strength is growing, there is still a balance. Even their additional weapons do not give them military superiority.

Everyone here — especially General Scowcroft and our Indonesian military guest — knows that no military operation in history has ever really worked just as planned. As far as nuclear weapons are concerned, we have to work with purely theoretical calculations. We have fired two or three missiles from operational sites, so have the Soviets, but neither we nor the Soviets have ever fired missiles under operational conditions. Neither we nor they know just how the missiles will work under operational conditions. Let me recall the experience of Germany. Before World War I the German General Staff was the best in military history. Yet when it tried to put the Schlieffen Plan into operation, it got it all wrong. When it comes to nuclear weapons, this uncertainty is something that others don't understand.

As to the second element in Soviet power, the Soviet fleet, here there are further limitations. They have only two ports, Murmansk and Vladivostok. The third fleet, in Sebastapol, is not really a factor. Many of their vessels are minesweepers and coastal types. So while their fleet is obviously growing, we have every confidence that ours is superior. The greatest threat is their submarines. We believe that their surface fleet can be handled.

The Soviets are superior in ground forces. We remain superior in nuclear forces. The one area of where there are problems in the military balance is in Central Europe, and we are working to improve the situation there.

Nowhere can I see the United States being defeated because of lack of military strength. We were defeated in Vietnam because we either should not have gone in in the first place or because, when we did go in, we did so incompetently. If we do get into a war, it should be in a decisive way. Our problem is not military strength, but in getting domestic support for our policies.

I am for President Ford, of course, but I expect that the executive authority in our government will be much stronger after the elections whoever wins them. The winner will face the same problems we face today, and will have to react in the same way. If we look at U.S. strength today, we don't have to be defensive about it. We are still strong enough to do whatever is necessary. If we use our strength wisely, there is no reason for pessimism.

Now let me turn to China. The Chinese are terrified of the Soviet Union, and China's policies are built on the need they feel for outside support to help defend them against Soviet attack. At the same time there is chaos in China as the various forces maneuver for the succession to Mao. Is Mao functioning?

Mr. Habib: Marginally.

The Secretary: It is clear that there are rival radical and conservative factions. The radicals want to proceed with the building of a state on pure Maoist principles, regardless of the fact that it would hamper China's economic growth. The "reformists," or whatever they are called, want to build up China's strength more rapidly. Despite all the speculation, I doubt that you can find any groups to label "pro-US" or "pro-Soviet." The Chinese have no love of any foreigners. They are not "pro" anything foreign. They despise all foreigners.

Once I recall Chou saying to me that he found me "very intelligent." I replied that I assumed he meant by Western standards rather than by Chinese standards. He just laughed.

As for normalization between China and the U.S., this presents no problems for us. The Chinese did not establish ties with us to get Taiwan but to obtain our support against the Soviets. So the heart of our relationship is how we appear to them as a source of support against the Soviets. Our defeat in Vietnam did not help our position in the eyes of the Chinese. It raised doubts as to our staying power, and they also suspect that the Vietnamese are not going to make very good neighbors.

Are the Chinese going to get together with the Soviets once again, after Mao goes? I do not believe that the relationship between them will be as bad as it has been during Mao's time, but I do not think it will go all the way back to the level of the 1950s. If they go completely to the Soviet side, they would be caught defenseless if the Soviets changed their minds and attacked. So I would expect some rapprochement, but a limited one.

Over the next five years or so, the Chinese are likely to be preoccupied with their internal problems. Expansionist pressures are more likely from the Soviets and Vietnam over this period than from China. Eventually, I would expect the Chinese to become more externally active, and more of a problem.

As to Vietnam, I know the Vietnamese leaders. They are tough and they are assertive. I anticipate more active Vietnamese support for "resistance movements" in Southeast Asia — not immediately, but in a few years. I do not think the Vietnamese can be placated.

So the question for the countries of Southeast Asia is how they can develop the internal strength to stand up to external pressures.

In this regard Indonesia is especially important. I have always been a strong supporter of Indonesia, and I will certainly support more aid for you than you have been getting. Over the next five years your problem is likely to be Vietnam. After that, the problem will be China.

This is an outline of my views. Now I would be very much interested in hearing yours.

Malik (through an interpreter): I have followed with great interest your comments on your relations with the Soviets. I would like to express my satisfaction at hearing your explanation that United States power is superior to that of the Soviets and will remain so.

The Secretary: That will be recognized here in the States the day after the election.

Malik: I am especially glad to hear your explanation, because we have been hearing contrary views from others. Both Marcos and Romulo have been asking whether the United States any longer has a position of advantage. When they visited the Soviet Union, they were taken on a tour of some strategic sites and were very much impressed by what they saw.

The Secretary: When was their visit?

Malik: I believe it was early this month.

The Secretary: That was after we last saw them.

Malik: I pointed out to them that when I was Ambassador to the Soviet Union I found them very good at putting on guided tours. But their ability to use the power that they showed us was not all that great.

The Secretary: Anyone can be shown a few impressive-looking installations. There is no denying that the Soviet Union is a powerful country. But our power is greater.

Malik: I did not agree with their conclusions, but wanted to convey their thoughts to you.

I am also interested in your comment that your economic power is greater than theirs.

The Secretary: The Soviet GNP is less than half of ours. It is revealing that every time there is a confrontation between us, they back off. This must mean something.

Malik: With regard to China, we are following developments with great interest. We are interested in how the internal situation will develop, particularly after Mao. We are exercising caution in our appraisals.

One possibility that we see is that, after Mao is gone, there will be greater competition between their political and military leaders. We do think, though, that in their position toward the Soviets, the Chinese will be united.

We also think that however intensive the post-Mao struggle and whoever wins it, the cadre left behind by Chou En-lai will be in a position to administer the country. China is then likely to have a leadership which will press for industrial advance and for more normal relations with other countries. I do not believe that a rapprochement with the Soviets will come about, however. We also feel that China's interest in normalizing relations with the United States is not designed only against the Soviets but is also related to the efforts of the Chinese government to improve the economy and stabilize the situation for the future.

As to China's foreign policy, we agree that there will not be an attitude of hostility for the time being. For the next few years, China will be preoccupied with her internal affairs and is unlikely to interfere with her neighbors — even though she might like to. The present Chinese attitude is shown by what they told the Singaporeans during Prime Minister Lee's recent visit, when the Singaporeans asked about the Singapore Chinese communists: The Chinese said that if you want to kill them, that's all right with us.

If a problem of expansionism arises in Southeast Asia in the near future, it is more likely to come from Hanoi — with the Soviet Union behind it.

Our first problem is that of subversion in the countries of the area, not directly supported by China and with an attempt to appear independent of both China and Vietnam.

Therefore we regard as especially important that the US remain interested in Southeast Asia. Although you say that you consider Indonesia important, I would like to point out that there are weaknesses to be dealt with in addition to our strengths.

In the informal and close ASEAN Foreign Ministers conference that has just concluded in Manila, we discussed a number of issues. All of the Foreign Ministers agreed that in order to sustain our growth and stability, continued external assistance was still necessary.

In the same context, in discussing US-Philippine relations our Philippine friends told us that no momentum seemed to be there, in the negotiations with the US, and that a vacuum created by this situation would not be in our mutual interest.

The Secretary: I'm sorry, I don't understand that.

Malik: A vacuum will exist in the area. What the Filipinos want is a change in the formal status of the bases, not to have authority over the bases.

The Secretary: We have no intention of permitting a vacuum to develop. We are prepared to acknowledge Philippine sovereignty. We are sure that a reasonable solution can be reached. The Philippines wants our presence; we want the use of the bases.

Malik: In essence, the Filipinos want to continue cooperating with the US. They want to assume sovereignty over the bases and at the same time to continue cooperating in the use of the bases.

The Secretary: This can be done if they do not become overconfident. We will do our utmost to be fair in these negotiations, but there are limits beyond which we will not be able to go. If they are reasonable, we can find a solution. If not, there will be a stalemate. A psychology of alienation would affect the whole position in Southeast Asia.

Malik: With regard to Thailand, the new government also wants to continue cooperating with the US. But the former government made some public commitments concerning the withdrawal of US forces. The present government wants to let 200 US personnel remain.

The Secretary: We cannot give the impression that our bases in Thailand are more important to us than to the Thai. We have been good allies to them.

Mr. Habib: We were prepared to do any number of things at a moderate pace. But the Thai came up to us with a demand for evacuation of the bases. So we did just that.

The Secretary: Perhaps, Mr. Minister, you can clarify the issue to them.

Mr. Habib: It is almost too late for that. What happened was that they took positions in public and then were unable to back down.

The Secretary: If you are in touch with the Government of Thailand, would you tell them that I assured you of our basic goodwill and our willingness to cooperate with them. But what can be done in the military sphere is not at all clear at this late date. It illustrates the danger of governments taking positions for domestic reasons and then being forced to stick to them.

Mr. Habib: You can assure them we are not thinking of taking any punitive actions. We are not going to retaliate.

The Secretary: That is right. We want to have the closest possible ties. We are not cutting aid but on the military side, we may have gone too far to reverse the process. If they think differently, they should let us know what they have in mind. If you have any good ideas on this situation, we would like to hear them.

Malik: Within the ASEAN context we have agreed on a sort of mutual assistance among all five members. If one of the links is weak, this becomes the weakness of ASEAN as a whole.

The Secretary: I agree.

Malik: All of the ASEAN countries recognize that subversion is the main problem for the area in the near future. Subversion has been accelerating in Thailand and Malaysia. The question is when it will get to Indonesia.

The problem for us is that our ASEAN friends think we have the resources to deal with it and to help them. We are willing to do so, but our aid must be limited. The real problem is that if something happens to us, what will happen to them. What we can do to help our ASEAN friends is strictly limited. So ASEAN needs assistance from the U.S. and from our other friends in this.

For example, with regard to Thailand: they want us to buy more rice, beyond the 200 thousand tons planned. Maybe we can. They also seek lower prices for our oil exports to them; in effect a subsidy on oil.

These requests keep coming to us. As long as they are within our ability, we will try to meet them.

For ourselves, we would like an increase in PL 480 rice.

The Secretary: How much are you getting now?

Malik: 150 thousand tons in Fiscal year 1976.

Ambassador Newsom: We have been trying to get another 150 thousand tons for them in fiscal 1977, but we have just been informed that they have been instructed to seek more than 150 thousand.

Mr. Parker: I don't have a firm answer. Perhaps we could do it.

Malik: We need the extra rice to feed the people of East Timor, for whom we have a new responsibility.

The Secretary: I will get in touch with Secretary Butz on this. I will find out if we can do more. We certainly can manage the 150 thousand tons, and we will see about improving the terms. I think we can get some additional rice, and we can certainly do something about the terms.

Malik: And now with regard to Korea. We agreed at the Manila ASEAN meeting that the question should not be put as an issue to the General Assembly this year. At the Non-aligned conference in Colombo, however, Kim Il-sung will obviously press it.

The Secretary: Can someone explain to me how Kim Il-sung can be called non-aligned?

Malik: The criteria for being non-aligned are already being violated by Cuba and North Korea. And this will be repeated at Colombo. In Lima, observer status was denied the Philippines, and South Korea as well. The Philippines once again are asking for observer status at Colombo, as are the Romanians. The question of criteria will be a problem at Colombo, and we can look forward to an acrimonious debate on it. I fear, though, that the radicals once again will have the upper hand.

The Secretary: It would cause no problems for us if a Korean item were not entered in the UNGA this year. We would prefer postponement. But if North Korea presses a resolution, we will certainly have one of our own. We would prefer postponement, but if there is a resolution we will fight.

Malik: We agreed at the Manila meeting that we should support the maintenance of a dialogue between the two Koreas.

The Secretary: This is fine with us.

Malik: Our idea is to use this as an argument for postponing the issue.

The Secretary: Let me say a few things about the other multilateral issues that we are most interested in. First there is Puerto Rico. Puerto Rico is part of the United States, and we would regard any discussion of Puerto Rico's status as an unfriendly act. For us it would be just the same as it would be for you if they were debating the status of Sumatra. We will withdraw our delegation from the General Assembly if they debate Puerto Rico. And if the UNGA passes a Puerto Rico resolution, we will withdraw our delegation and take no further part in that Assembly. I don't care what is said at Colombo. But as far as the UNGA is concerned, that is our position.

My remarks are not directed at you. I know you have been helpful to us on these issues.

On Israel, we will take a very strong stand against any effort to expel Israel.

We wonder why the non-aligned group is so consistently pushing confrontation. The nonaligned countries need the United States if their development programs are to succeed, yet this will be destroyed by pushing confrontation tactics.

Malik: As far as we know, Puerto Rico will not be taken up at Colombo.

Mr. Habib: We have heard that Cuba may press it.

Malik: Regarding Israel, I do not believe there will be a unanimous stand against it. Even during the Istanbul meeting of the Islamic Foreign Ministers, no strong pressure to expel Israel was apparent. I do not believe it will be even taken up at Colombo.

The Secretary: Could you invite me as an observer to the non-aligned conference?

Malik: Only as a guest. The Australians have asked to be invited as guests.

The Secretary: What is the difference between observer and guest?

Malik: Observers can participate in the proceedings. Guests cannot.

I would now like to talk about Japan. We discussed Japan at the ASEAN meeting in Manila; Japan's position in Southeast Asia. We saw two possibilities: stronger Japanese cooperation could be obtained by the Southeast Asian countries. And not only economic cooperation but strategic assistance, as from the US and China.

The Secretary: I'm sorry, I don't quite understand that.

Malik: Our appreciation of China is that China is not a danger for the time being. How would you see the relationship developing between China and Japan.

The Secretary: That is hard to answer in the abstract. If China were to become aggressive, we would support the Southeast Asian countries against China. If the Soviets were to become aggressive against China, we would back China. And if Japan wanted to help the Southeast Asian countries against Chinese aggression, we would be in favor of it.

Mr. Habib: Any assistance from Japan should stay non-military. There is no sign at all that the Japanese have the slightest interest in any sort of security role in Southeast Asia.

The Secretary: If Habib had stayed in Lebanon, he could have become a Maronite monk.

Malik: I raised this because we have heard reports that Australia is looking to Japan for closer cooperation.

The Secretary: We haven't had a good talk with the new Australian leadership yet. They are coming here at the end of July.

Habib: We understand that the Australians are interested in only economic cooperation with Japan. They are not interested in security cooperation despite what you may have heard.

The Secretary: How are your relations with Australia?

Malik: There are no real problems between us. The new government is trying to continue the policies of the Labor Government toward us. Its attitude does seem to be very reactive, however. It is sometimes not clear to us just what the Australian position is. This leads to uncertainties in some cases.

The Secretary: We have not yet talked with the Australians, as I noted. But it does seem that the new government takes a great interest in the defense of Southeast Asia. More than its predecessor did.

Malik: I should note that the new government has increased its aid to Indonesia. But its position on different issues is not too clear to us. Also, the Australian government asked me to receive representatives of labor and communist unions not long ago — which I did — with the apparent objective of having us help them in explaining to the opposition the fate of the five Australian journalists who were lost in East Timor.

The Secretary: They are still inexperienced at this stage, but their interests are the same as yours. I think what most concerns them is Papua New Guinea. This is not from anything I have heard from them. It is just my own impression. The more you can reassure them on Papua New Guinea the better.

Malik: We have already done this. We have complied with Australian requests on Papua New Guinea. In fact we admitted Papua New Guinea to the ASEAN meeting as an observer.

The Secretary: If this covers the multilateral and third-country issues, shall we start on the bilateral issues?

Malik: We have already discussed the question of PL 480. We would like to discuss some other economic and trade matters. We want you to appreciate some of the regulations we are making in Jakarta. They are made more difficult by your rules.

The Secretary: I'm sorry. Would you elaborate on that?

Malik: We have problems with our exclusion from your GSP. But we understand the situation and we appreciate what you are trying to do in this.

I would also like to mention the ASEAN industrial projects and to ask about the prospects of obtaining your assistance in these projects.

Habib: That would be difficult for us. I expect that you will have to look primarily to the regional financial institutions for help.

Mr. Parker: I would not want to leave the idea that there is much prospect of our being able to assist financially. But we might be able to help with technical assistance.

The Secretary: We can look into it and discuss it with you later.

Malik: Another subject is the promotion by the US Government of increased foreign private investment in Indonesia.

And there is the matter of multilateral trade negotiations. We would like to submit a request for most favored nation treatment for certain of our commodities.

Greenwald: As you know, we are engaged in negotiations in Geneva on tropical products. If you would like to submit your list here or in Geneva, we would be happy to consider it.

Malik: And there is the question of freight. We would like to have PL 480 cargoes and AID and Export-Import Bank cargoes shipped up to 50 percent in Indonesian ships.

The Secretary: I'm sorry but I have a delegation waiting for me. Perhaps Mr. Greenwald and Mr. Parker could stay on with you to discuss the particular topics at greater length. We can give you answers on them.

Malik: There is one more topic. We are grateful to you for mentioning that Indonesia is important to the United States. But our experience has been that we are still waiting for the translation of this into reality.

The Secretary: Could you explain that a bit further? In what area?

Malik: The problem is in defense.

The Secretary: There are certain problems here. First there are people who think that plowshares are more important than swords. And then there is the problem of the attitudes of the Congress.

I personally think it is absurd to cut your military aid first to $19 million and then to $13 million. We have had a difficult year, although we have done all right in the economic aid field. After the elections there must be some understanding with the Congress on the whole question of military aid. I personally think the amount you are getting is inadequate. And we will do our best to increase it.

Now if Mr. Parker and Mr. Greenwald will stay behind to discuss the economic issues with your economic people, I suggest that we close the meeting. Is this satisfactory to you, Mr. Minister?

Malik: Yes, that is fine. Thank you.

The Secretary: One final thing. We have circulated a draft press statement. Is it all right with you?

Malik: Yes, it is fine.

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy Files, P–820118–1470. Secret; Nodis. Drafted by Ingraham and approved by Collums. A more concise version of this conversation, under the heading, “Summary of U.S.-Indonesian Joint Consultations,” is available at the Ford Library, National Security Adviser, Presidential Country Files for East Asia and the Pacific, Box 6, Indonesia (7).

163. Minutes of the Secretary of State’s Staff Meeting, Washington, August 25, 1976, 8 a.m. 163. Minutes of the Secretary of State’s Staff Meeting, Washington, August 25, 1976, 8 a.m. 1

Washington, August 25, 1976, 8 a.m.

The Secretary's 8:00 a.m. Staff Meeting
Wednesday, August 25, 1976

Participants

M - Mr. Eagleburger

AF - Mr. Seelye, Acting

ARA - Mr. Shlaudeman

EA - Mr. Hummel

EUR - Mr. Hartman

NEA - Mr. Dubs, Acting

INR - Mr. Kirk, Acting

S/P - Mr. Lord

EB - Mr. Boeker

S/PRS Mr. Funseth

PM - Mr. Ericson

IO - Mr. Lewis

H - Ambassador McCloskey

L - Mr. Aldrich, Acting

S/S - Mr. Borg Conference Reporter

[Omitted is material unrelated to Indonesia.]

MR. HUMMEL: Sir, we are going to have to disappoint the Indonesians who would like to get a brief on the standard missile system — the reason is, no one wants to do this.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: I don't know what the "standard missile system" is.

MR. HABIB: A ship-to-ship missile, which is now a sort of almost obsolescent ship-to-ship missile.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: Well, we have to do it: First, because they are friends .

But what is the second reason?

MR. HUMMEL: No, the first reason is that this thing is highly classified and the Indonesians could leak it.

And the additional reason, and perhaps the more powerful, is that this could, introduce a more powerful tool into a country where we are not introducing sophisticated weapons — it is also an area close to the Indonesians neighbors — but the Congress —

SECRETARY KISSINGER: I didn't know we were taking that position with the Congress.

MR. HUMMEL: Yes, sir, we are tied up.

MR. HABIB: Congress is taking the position with us.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: Did I mishear? Didn't somebody say something about it being obsolescent?

CHORUS: Oh, yes, obsolescent.

MR. HABIB: There is an advanced version called "Harpoon" which is what everybody really wants. The "standard" is the precedent to the Harpoon. Am I correct, Dick?

MR. ERICSON: Correct. But the Harpoon is a more sophisticated one — there is no question about that; but there are also great elements of sophistication in the standard missile.

MR. HABIB: And we have only given the standard to whom? Iran?

MR. ERICSON: Iran, Turkey, Korea — and various others.

MR. HUMMEL: Australia and NATO nations, and Japan — but we have not given them to a country like Indonesia and we would certainly have a lot of Congressional flak over it.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: Whether we have Congressional flak or not depends on how much we want to defend it.

MR. HUMMEL: Well it imparts on our non-transfer policy, now professing the intention of not contributing to the arms races, and mutual escalation.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: Whom is Indonesia racing against? What race is Indonesia engaged in?

It is a tremendous contribution of $35 million a year to a country with a population of 120 million and who wants to protect its own security — and who used to get $300 million a year from the Russians, and probably will get it again after they have approved our high moral principles and we drive them out in that direction.

What race, with whom, are we preventing by this?

MR. HUMMEL: Two neighbors, quite likely would try and both could get the money — Malaysia and Singapore and —

SECRETARY KISSINGER: I thought they are all on our side. Did I miss something?

MR. HUMMEL: No —-

MR. HABIB: No, we haven't lost them yet.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: How does it disadvantage the United States to have those countries armed, or better armed, when they are not racing against each other?

MR. HUMMEL: I can't quarrel with that. But that is not what we have said in our announced ample strength — and overstrengths —

SECRETARY KISSINGER: I don't recall that the announced: ample strength policy was cleared with me. Who announced it?

MR. HUMMEL: Where does that stand, Dick?

MR. ERICSON: I don't know it's all that clear.

We have been trying to help Indonesia — gave them grant aid — but we would simply prefer not to give this type of missile to them.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: On what grounds?

MR. ERICSON: On the grounds Mr. Hummel cited - Congressional difficulty.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: Congressional difficulties are my problem.

MR. ERICSON: And then secondly, of course, is the security question. I don't think the missile emplaced is obsolete.

MR. HABIB: I didn't say,"Obsolete," it was —

SECRETARY KISSINGER: Well, did the Pentagon raise the security question?

MR. HABIB: The Pentagon doesn't want to give it to them. They said so very flatly, that is the problem. The Pentagon argues that it is totally —

SECRETARY KISSINGER: It is hard to hear the Pentagon express themselves against the gnashing of teeth and weeping of our people here who say that you can't do that to us.

MR. HABIB: On the contrary we went to the Pentagon on it, and generally they say that we give what we can to Indonesia; but the Pentagon said, "You can't give this to them, it is too sophisticated and the security is not good in Indonesia and the missile security will be threatened."

And when I said, "Obsolescent," what I meant is "advanced version."

But the concern is that the guidance systems of the missile will not be protected. The only people we have given it to are our allies.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: Have we given it to the South Vietnamese?

MR. HABIB: No —

SECRETARY KISSINGER: Well, I will have to talk to Clements.

MR. HABIB: — but the Pentagon does feel strongly about it and that is what has tipped the balance, more than Clements — so that you would have to have a club over their heads to make them agree.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: Just wanted to find out what the people really think.

MR. LORD: Was the Pentagon against giving it in Viet-Nam?

MR. HUMMEL: The main fear was that the Indonesians would not protect the security of this thing. That is the argument. And it is probably true.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: Well, you better not send this until I have a chance to think about it.

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Transcripts of Secretary of State Kissinger’s Staff Meetings, 1973–1977, E5177, Box 11. Secret.

164. Memorandum of Conversation, October 7, 1976, 5 p.m. 164. Memorandum of Conversation, October 7, 1976, 5 p.m. 1

Washington, October 7, 1976, 5 p.m.

MEMORANDUM
THE WHITE HOUSE
WASHINGTON

MEMORANDUM OF CONVERSATION

PARTICIPANTS:

President Ford

Adam Malik, Minister of Foreign Affairs, Indonesia

Brent Scowcroft, Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs

DATE AND TIME: Thursday, October 7, 1976
5:00 p.m.
PLACE: The President's Suite
The Beverly Hilton
Los Angeles

President: We think we are on the right track and I think our relations will allies have never been better. I am glad the President is well and things are going well. I appreciate my relationship with him and I hope it will continue to develop.

Malik: Your visit was too short. You must come back.

President: I want to go to Bali.

Malik: We would like to say to the President that PL 480 has been dealt with properly and there is a chance of obtaining additional aid in the future.

On other pending matters, we would be pleased to resume them after our election.

President: That is not much longer. We consider our friendship important to us and the free world. We want to do everything possible to maximize our relationship.

Malik: We are pleased to hear that.

President: What is your reaction to this UN session?

Malik: I think it more moderate on very controversial matters. Korea was luckily pushed aside. Also Africa, thanks to Secretary Kissinger. We feel the general situation is better than previously.

President: That is our impression. There is much work to be done but it is best done in a constructive atmosphere.

Malik: There are some new countries which want to make a fuss, but nothing important.

President: It is strange to realize that a country the size of Indonesia has one vote and one with 50, 000 people also has one vote.

Malik: I think there needs to be a process of education in the UN, so there is also a sense of responsibility. There is Lebanon, which is delicate, but there is no unity among the Arabs, so not much chance for solution.

President: We are anxious for Lebanon to be settled. We want to preserve its independence and integrity. It is a terrible tragedy but we think it is moving slowly to get better.

Malik: I think it is important for us all to do what we can, but the parties in the area are crucial.

President: It was very nice to see you. Please give my very best regards to President Suharto.

1 Source: Ford Library, National Security Adviser, Memoranda of Conversation, Box 21. Secret; Nodis. Ford’s talking points from Scowcroft stated, “There are no major contentious issues in our relations with Indonesia.” The memorandum noted that the United States had increased Indonesia’s PL–480 commodity support by 200,000 extra tons of rice and its grant military aid by $9.8 million, adding, “The Indonesians have been informed of your decision and are very pleased by it.” (Ibid., Presidential Country Files for East Asia and the Pacific, Box 6, Indonesia [7]).

Chapter V: JapanChapter V: Japan

165. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, January 4, 1973, 5:40 p.m.

Washington, January 4, 1973, 5:40 p.m.

Kissinger criticized the Japanese government’s Vietnam message and discussed the state of U.S.-Japanese relations with Ambassador Ushiba.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 538, Country Files, Far East, Japan, January–June 1973, vol. 9. Secret; Sensitive. The meeting was held in Kissinger’s office. On January 3, John Holdridge provided talking points for Kissinger’s meeting with Ushiba and attached telegram 232944 to Tokyo, December 28, 1972, which contained the text of a message that Ushiba gave to U. Alexis Johnson on December 27, 1972, appealing to the United States to resume Vietnam peace negotiations as quickly as possible. (Ibid.)

166. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, January 24, 1973.

Washington, January 24, 1973

Togo and Sneider discussed U.S.-Japan Security Relations and Sino-Japanese relations.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970–1973, DEF 4 Japan-US. Secret; Noforn. Drafted by Sneider.

167. Conversation Between President Nixon and John B. Connally, Washington, January 31, 1973.

Washington, January 31, 1973

Nixon and Connally discussed Japanese politicians and relations between the United States and Japan.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, White House Tapes, Oval Office, Conversation No. 845–11. No classification marking. The editor transcribed the portions of the tape recording printed here specifically for this volume. The President’s Daily Diary indicates that this discussion occurred as part of a larger conversation between 4:52 and 6:13 p.m. (Ibid., White House Central Files, President’s Daily Diary)

168. Editorial Note

169. National Security Study Memorandum 172, Washington, March 7, 1973.

Washington, March 7, 1973

Kissinger instructed the Departments of State, Defense, Treasury, Commerce, and the CIA to review U.S. policy toward Japan.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Institutional Files (H-Files), Box H–197, NSSM Files, NSSM 172 (2 of 3). Secret. Copies were sent to the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff and the Assistant to the President for International Economic Affairs. NSSM 122, on policy toward Japan, is scheduled to be published in Foreign Relations, 1969–1976, Volume XIX, Part II, Japan, 1969–1972.

170. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, March 9, 1973, 1430–1500.

Washington, March 9, 1973, 1430–1500

Richardson and Ushiba discussed relations between the United States and Japan, especially within the context of improving relations with the People’s Republic of China.

Source: Washington National Records Center, OASD/ISA Files: FRC 330–76–117, Japan, 333, 1973 January, March 13, 1973. Secret. Prepared by Doolin and approved by Eagleburger. The conversation took place in Richardson’s office.

171. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, March 27, 1973, 10:30 a.m.

Washington, March 27, 1973, 10:30 a.m.

Kissinger, Aichi, and Ushiba discussed trade and monetary issues. Nixon joined the conversation near the end.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Country Files, Far East, Box 538, Japan, volume 9, January–June 1973. Secret; Nodis. The conversation took place in Kissinger’s office. In a briefing memorandum to Kissinger, March 26, Hormats described the“object of the meeting” as strengthening Aichi “at home” and expressing appreciation for recent Japanese measures to liberalize trade and revalue the yen. (Ibid.)

172. Memorandum From Robert Hormats of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger), Washington, April 12, 1973.

Washington, April 12, 1973

Hormats summarized economic data on trade between the United States, the European Community, and Japan.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 538, Country Files, Far East, Japan, volume 9, January–June 1973. No classification marking. Sent for information. Kissinger initialed this document. Peter Flanigan sent these trade statistics to Kissinger under a covering memorandum, March 8.

173. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, May 21, 1973, noon.

Washington, May 21, 1973, noon

Nixon and Ohira surveyed international developments, including the naming of a new U.S. Ambassador to Japan.

Source: Ford Library, National Security Adviser, Memoranda of Conversation, Box 4. Secret. The conversation took place in the Oval Office. The President’s Daily Diary indicates that the meeting lasted from 12:07 until 12:57 p.m. and included, in addition to the persons listed on the memorandum of conversation, Yasukawa, Okawara, Numata, and the Japanese and American interpreters, Sadaaki Numata and Manabu Fukada. (National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, White House Central Files, President’s Daily Diary)

174. Memorandum From John Froebe of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger), Washington, June 6, 1973.

Washington, June 6, 1973

Froebe recommended that Kissinger approve a cable instructing Embassy Tokyo to broach a U.S.-Japan Environmental Agreement.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 538, Country Files, Far East, Japan, volume 9, January–June 1973. Confidential. Sent for action. Concurred in by Elliot and Fairbanks. Kissinger initialed his approval of the recommendation on June 11, and an NSC staff member notified the Department of State by telephone on June 12.

175. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) and the President’s Assistant for International Economic Affairs (Flanigan) to President Nixon, Washington, July 2, 1973.

Washington, July 2, 1973

Kissinger and Flanigan forwarded Secretary Rogers’s memorandum about the upcoming ministerial meeting with Japan. Nixon approved the proposed agenda.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 539, Country Files, Far East, Japan, July 1973–December 31, 1974 (sic), vol. 10. Confidential. Sent for action. Nixon initialed his approval of the recommendation. Rogers’s memorandum, June 22, is attached Tab A, but is not published.

176. Memorandum From John Froebe of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger), Washington, July 5, 1973.

Washington, July 5, 1973

Froebe recommended that Kissinger ask for an interim response to NSSM 172 focusing on Japan’s regional and global role.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Institutional Files (H-Files), Box H–197, NSSM Files, NSSM 172 (2 of 3). Secret. Sent for action. Concurred in by Kennedy, Eagleburger, and Hormats. Both recommendations were marked approved with handwritten notes that read, “HAK per phone call from Jon Howe to RTK. 7/7/73.” In a memorandum to Kissinger, June 30, Froebe noted that the Department had delayed NSSM 172 by requesting Presidential affirmation of the primacy of the U.S.-Japanese alliance before considering other aspects of the study. Kissinger commented in the margin, “Stupid theological point.” (Ibid.) On July 12, Scowcroft sent a memorandum to Eliot asking the NSC Interdepartmental Group for East Asia to prepare an interim study. (Ibid.) On July 27, Richard Sneider, Chairman of the Ad Hoc Group for NSSM 172, submitted a paper titled“US-Japan Cooperation on Multilateral Problems of Mutual Concern” in response to Scowcroft’s memorandum. (Ibid., NSC Files, Box 1056, NSC Institutional Materials, NSC Institutional Papers, July 1973 [1 of 3])

177. Memorandum From Robert Hormats of the National Security Council staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger), Washington, July 19, 1973.

Washington, July 19, 1973

Hormats described the recent ministerial talks held in Tokyo between the United States and Japan.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 539, Country Files, Far East, Japan, July 1973–December 31, 1974 (sic), vol. 10. Confidential. Sent for information. Concurred in by Froebe. Kissinger initialed the memorandum on August 8.

178. Memorandum From John Froebe of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger), Washington, July 30, 1973.

Washington, July 30, 1973

Froebe asked Kissinger for guidance on conceptual aspects of the draft joint statement to be issued at the end of Tanaka’s visit.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 927, VIP Visits, Japan PM Tanaka’s Visit, July 31, 1973 [1 of 3]. Confidential. Sent for action. Concurred in by Hormats. A draft of the joint draft statement is attached as Tab A. Kissinger initialed his approval of all four recommendations on August 1.

179. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, July 31, 1973, 11 a.m..

Washington, July 31, 1973, 11 a.m.

Nixon and Tanaka talked about an exchange of state visits, U.S.-Japan trade, nuclear capabilities, educational exchanges, Sino-Soviet relations, the Soviet-American summit, superpower security relations, the New Atlantic Charter, and press guidance.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 927, VIP Visits, Japan PM Tanaka’s Visit, July 31, 1973 [1 of 3]. Secret; Sensitive. During dinner conversation on July 31, Nixon and Tanaka briefly discussed the likelihood of an Imperial visit to Washington, U.S.-Japanese joint development of Siberia, Tanaka’s planned visit to Western Europe and the Soviet Union, and the prospects for getting the Japanese government’s legislative program through the current session of the Diet. (Memorandum of Conversation, July 31, 1973, 8 p.m.; ibid.) Nixon’s talking points for his meetings with Tanaka are ibid., [2 of 3].

180. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, August 1, 1973, 9:30 a.m.

Washington, August 1, 1973, 9:30 a.m.

Nixon and Tanaka discussed the trade balance, Korean issues, Asia, Sino-Soviet relations, energy, U.S.-Japanese consultative organs, the Mutual Security Treaty, and development activities in Siberia.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 927, VIP Visits, Japan PM Tanaka’s Visit, July 31, 1973 [1 of 3]. Secret; Sensitive.

181. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, September 24, 1973, 5–5:30 p.m.

Washington, September 24, 1973, 5–5:30 p.m.

Kissinger and Ohira discussed the Declaration of Principles, future visits to Japan, technology transfers, and Japanese relations with China, the Soviet Union, and the Vietnams.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 539, Country Files, Far East, Japan, July 73–Dec. 31, 1974 (sic), Vol. 10. Secret. The meeting was held at the Waldorf Towers in New York City. During a meeting three weeks earlier, Yasukawa gave Kissinger a draft declaration of principles. Kissinger scanned it, noted that he wanted to study it more closely, but remarked, “My initial reaction, however, is that it is not concrete and not a very important document.” (Memorandum of conversation, September 4, 1973, 11:15 a.m.; ibid.)

182. Editorial Note

183. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to Secretary of State Kissinger, Washington, January 5, 1974.

Washington, January 5, 1974

Kissinger tasked the Departments of State, Defense, Treasury, Commerce, and the Central Intelligence Agency to complete the response to NSSM 172.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 1061, NSC Institutional Materials, NSC Institutional Papers, January 1974 (2 of 2). Secret. Copies were sent to the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff and the Assistant to the President for International Economic Affairs. Sent to Kissinger under a covering memorandum, December 21, 1973, from Froebe and Donald Stukel of the NSC staff, which stated, “In June a long and rather rambling draft was completed and a copy sent to the NSC Staff. At that point further work bogged down due to uncertainty among the drafters as to how current events were likely to impact on US/Japan long-term relations and due partly to our call in July for an IG special report on regional and global issues in support of Prime Minister Tanaka’s visit.” (Ibid.)

184. Minutes of the Secretary of State’s Staff Meeting, Washington, January 7, 1974.

Washington, January 7, 1974

Lord presented on U.S.-Japan planning talks. The discussion focused on energy policy and the trilateral declaration.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Transcripts of Secretary of State Kissinger’s Staff Meetings, 1973–1977, E5177, Box 2. Secret. In this meeting, Lord orally presented the contents of a paper that he had sent to Kissinger on December 22. Lord’s paper is ibid., Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Country Files, Far East, Box 539, Japan, July 1973–December 31, 1974 (sic), vol. 10.

185. Memorandum From the Director of Defense Program Analysis and Evaluation (Sullivan) to Secretary of Defense Schlesinger, Washington, January 22, 1974.

Washington, January 22, 1974

Sullivan summarized an analysis of defense related balance of payments with Japan.

Source: Washington National Records Center, OSD Files: FRC 330–78–0011, Japan, 123, 1974 January 22. Confidential. The memorandum is stamped, “Sec Def has seen. 13 Aug 1974.” The analysis is attached but not published.

186. Memorandum From W.R. Smyser of the National Security Council staff to the Secretary of State Kissinger, Washington, February 8, 1974.

Washington, February 8, 1974

Smyser informed Kissinger that Japan basically supported the U.S. position on energy matters.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 539, Country Files, Far East, Japan, Vol. 11, 1 January 1974–. Secret; Sensitive; Eyes Only. Sent for urgent information. Kissinger initialed the memorandum. On January 14, Smyser produced a similar memorandum, which Kissinger initialed, that stated, “the Japanese, though subject to some constraints, are prepared to react positively to our proposals for an Energy Action Group and for greater cooperation among the oil consuming nations. Their position arises from the general desire to work with us as well as from their awareness that they can be destroyed more quickly than anybody else if the oil producers get the upper hand.” (Smyser and Froebe to Kissinger, January 4; ibid.)

187. Memorandum of Conversation, Paris, April 7, 1974, 10:15 a.m.

Washington, April 7, 1974, 10:15 a.m.

Nixon and Tanaka discussed trade issues, Siberian development, relations with China, and the role of the United States in Asia.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 1028, Presidential/HAK Memcons, 1 March 1974–8 May 1974 [2 of 4]. Secret; Sensitive. The conversation took place in the residence of the American Ambassador. A briefing memorandum for the meeting is in the Ford Library, National Security Adviser, Brent Scowcroft Daily Work Files, 1973–1977, Box 7, Chronological File A, April 5–7, 1974 (Paris Trip).

188. Key Judgments from Research Study OPR-4 Prepared in the Central Intelligence Agency, Washington, May 1974.

Washington, May 1974

A CIA study predicted continuity in Japanese policy during the next few years, but anticipated that more dramatic changes would be possible during the 1980s.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 539, Country Files, Far East, Japan, Vol. 11, 1 January 1974–. Secret; No Foreign Dissem. A notation on the correspondence profile, August 14, reads, “No further action necessary—will be incorporated into Japan trip briefing papers for Pres.” (Ibid.) In a letter to the President, dated May 17, Colby wrote that the study was a response to Nixon’s desire for a “look ahead” into the future of Japanese policy. ( Central Intelligence Agency, OPI 10, Job 80M01048A, Box 4, Fold. 1 )

189. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, May 21, 1974, noon.

Washington, May 21, 1974, noon

Nixon and Ohira discussed the U.S.-Japan alliance, the Middle East, Sino-Soviet relations, Siberian development, and India’s nuclear test.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 1029, Presidential/HAK Memcons, 1 June 1974– [8 August 1974] [3 of 3]. Secret; Sensitive. The conversation took place in the Oval Office. On May 14, Yasukawa sent Nixon a memorandum stating the Government of Japan’s position regarding Siberian development. (Ibid., Box 1337, NSC Unfiled Material, 1974, 1 of 9) Springsteen suggested that no response to the Japanese memorandum was necessary, but recommended that Nixon refer to it during his May 21 meeting with Ohira. (Memorandum from Springsteen to Scowcroft, May 17; ibid.)

190. Study Prepared by the NSC Interdepartmental Group for East Asia and Pacific Affairs, Washington, undated.

Washington, undated

The NSC Interdepartmental Group for East Asia and Pacific Affairs prepared a paper, on U.S. policy toward Japan, in response to NSSM 172.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Institutional Files (H-Files), Box H–197, NSSM Files, NSSM 172 (2 of 3). Secret; Noforn. Scowcroft received the study under a covering letter, June 26, from Springsteen. The annexes to the report, on Japanese domestic political constraints, the policy background, traditional problem areas in U.S.-Japanese relations, and Japanese economic trends, are attached, but not published. Davis forwarded the report to interested departments and agencies on June 29. (Ibid.)

191. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, June 27, 1974, 1520–1530.

Washington, June 27, 1974, 1520–1530

Hodgson and Ellsworth discussed military issues involving the United States and Japan. Schlesinger joined the meeting for the last ten minutes.

Source: Washington National Records Center, OASD/ISA Files: FRC 330–77–0054, Japan, 333, July 5, 1974. Confidential. Prepared by Barrett and approved by Ellsworth. The conversation took place in Schlesinger’s office. Schlesinger’s talking points, dated June 26, are ibid.

192. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, July 9, 1974, noon–12:25 p.m.

Washington, July 9, 1974, noon–12:25 p.m.

Hodgson met with Nixon before assuming the position of Ambassador to Japan.

Source: Ford Library, National Security Adviser, Memoranda of Conversation, Box 4, July–September 1974. Secret; Nodis. The conversation took place in the Oval Office.

193. National Security Decision Memorandum 262, Washington, July 29, 1974.

Washington, July 29, 1974

Kissinger modified NSDM 251, relating to the use of U.S. bases in Japan in the event of aggression against South Korea.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 364, Subject Files, NSDMs, #145–264, 1972-1974. Top Secret; Sensitive. Copies were sent to the Director of Central Intelligence and to the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff. Rush’s memorandum, April 27, offered three options: “1. Negotiate a new agreement as provided in NSDM 251. 2. Let the Korean Minute formally lapse and depend on the Nixon-Sato Communique. 3. Not raise the Korean Minute issue directly with the Japanese Government and seek to leave the issue in essence unresolved.” Rush recommended option three. (Ford Library, National Security Adviser, NSC Staff for East Asia & Pacific Affairs, Convenience Files, Box 3, Japan 1974 [3])

194. National Security Study Memorandum 210, Washington, September 11, 1974.

Washington, September 11, 1974

Kissinger instructed the Arms Control and Disarmament Agency, the CIA, the Atomic Energy Commission, and the Departments of the Treasury, Defense, and State to review U.S. policy toward Japan in preparation for the President’s visit.

Source: Ford Library, NSC Institutional Files (H-Files), Box H–13, Institutional Files, Meetings (IFM), SRG Meeting, Japan, November 11, 1974 (3). Secret; Exdis. Copies were also sent to the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, the Counsellor to the President for Economic Policy, and the Executive Director of the Council on International Economic Policy. Smyser sent Kissinger the draft NSSM under a covering September 4 memorandum. (Ibid., Box H-32, NSSM 210, Review of Japan Policy for the President’s Visit to Japan [2])

195. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, September 21, 1974.

Washington, September 21, 1974

Ford and Tanaka discussed U.S.-Japanese relations and Ford’s anticipated trip to Japan.

Source: Ford Library, National Security Adviser, Memoranda of Conversation, Box 6. Secret; Nodis. The conversation took place in the Oval Office. Drafted by Wickel. As a correction, on page 2, an unknown hand wrote “Kennerly” in the margin, a reference to David Hume Kennerly, Gerald Ford’s White House photographer. A less detailed version of the same conversation, prepared by Scowcroft, is ibid. Kissinger’s briefing memorandum with talking points for Ford is ibid., Presidential Briefing Material for VIP Visits, 1974–76, Box 1, 9/21/74, Japan, Prime Minister Tanaka.

196. Memorandum From John Froebe and Robert Hormats of the NSC Staff to Secretary of State Kissinger, Washington, November 9, 1974.

Washington, November 9, 1974

Froebe and Hormats summarized the response to NSSM 210 and laid out the issues for the upcoming Senior Review Group meeting on Japan.

Source: Ford Library, NSC Institutional Files (H-Files), Box H–13, Institutional Files, Meetings (IFM), SRG Meeting, Japan, November 11, 1974 (1). Secret. Sent for action. Concurred in by Kennedy and Elliott. There are no markings indicating that Kissinger saw this memorandum. Talking points, an analytical summary of the NSSM response, and the NSSM itself are attached but not published.

197. Minutes of Senior Review Group Meeting, Washington, November 11, 1974, 11:06 a.m.–12:02 p.m.

Washington, November 11, 1974, 11:06 a.m.–12:02 p.m.

The Group discussed the response to NSSM 210 and Kissinger asked the relevant departments to prepare briefing materials for the President’s upcoming trip to Japan.

Source: Ford Library, NSC Institutional Files (H-Files), Box H–23, Institutional Files, Meetings (IFM), Meeting Minutes, SRG, Originals, November 1974–January 1975. Secret; Sensitive. The text of Colby’s briefing is attached but not published. The briefing material that the Departments of State, Defense, and Treasury produced in response to Kissinger’s tasking is ibid., Box H–13, Institutional Files, Meetings (IFM), SRG Meeting, Japan, November 11, 1974 (3).

198. Memorandum of Conversation, Tokyo, November 19, 1974, 11 a.m.

November 19, 1974, 11 a.m.

Ford and Tanaka discussed security issues, agricultural trade, aid to South Vietnam, energy, and the mutual security treaty.

Source: Ford Library, National Security Adviser, Memoranda of Conversation, Box 7. Secret. The conversation took place in the Guest House. Drafted by Wickel. For public remarks, toasts, and the joint communiqué issued during Ford’s trip, see The Department of State Bulletin, Vol. LXXI, No. 1852, December 23.

199. Memorandum of Conversation, Tokyo, November 20, 1974, 10 a.m.

November 20, 1974, 10 a.m.

Ford and Tanaka discussed Korea, South Vietnam, the Middle East, China, the Soviet Union, Siberian development, over-fishing, and the joint communiqué.

Source: Ford Library, National Security Adviser, Memoranda of Conversation, Box 7. Secret. The conversation took place in the Tokyo Guest House. Drafted by Wickel.

200. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, March 25, 1975, 1415–1440.

Washington, March 25, 1975, 1415–1440

[3 pages not declassified.]

Source: Washington National Records Center, OSD Files: FRC 330–78–0058, Japan (000.1–293), 091.112, 8 Apr 75. Top Secret; Eyes Only.

201. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, March 28, 1975.

Washington, March 28, 1975

Kissinger, Hodgson, and Habib discussed U.S. relations with Japan.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy Files, P–820123–1082. Secret; Exdis. The meeting was held in Kissinger’s office.

202. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, March 29, 1975, 11 a.m.

Washington, March 29, 1975, 11 a.m.

Ford and Hodgson discussed U.S.-Japanese relations.

Source: Ford Library, National Security Adviser, Memoranda of Conversation, Box 10. Top Secret. The conversation took place in the Oval Office. The talking points that Ford received from Kissinger are ibid., Presidential Country Files for East Asia and the Pacific, Box 7, Country File, Japan [5].

203. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, April 11, 1975.

Washington, April 11, 1975

Kissinger and Miyazawa discussed Vietnam, Japanese politics, the Middle East, and other issues touching on U.S. relations with Japan.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy Files, P–820125–0547. Secret; Nodis. Drafted by Sherman and approved by Covey. On May 27, Kissinger and Miyazawa met in Paris at the U.S. mission to the OECD and discussed Southeast Asia, China, and the Middle East. (Ibid., P–820125–0295)

204. Memorandum From Peter Rodman of the National Security Council Staff to Secretary of State Kissinger, Washington, July 25, 1975.

Washington, July 25, 1975

Rodman informed Kissinger of a Japanese proposal for a new type of communiqué.

Source: Ford Library, National Security Advisor, Presidential Briefing Material for VIP Visits, Box 12, 8/8–9/75, Japan, Prime Minister Miki [4]. Secret; Nodis. Sent for action. Kissinger initialed his approval on July 31, 1975.

205. Memorandum From Secretary of State Kissinger to President Nixon, Washington, August 2, 1975.

Washington, August 2, 1975

Kissinger sent Ford a briefing paper for his meeting with Miki.

Source: Ford Library, National Security Advisor, Presidential Briefing Material for VIP Visits, 1974-76, Box 12, 8/8/75, Japan, Prime Minister Miki [8]. Secret. A note on the first page reads, “The President has seen.”

206. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, August 5, 1975, 8:45 a.m.

Washington, August 5, 1975, 8:45 a.m.

Kissinger, Habib and Hodgson discuss the upcoming summit with Miki.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy Files, P–820123–1980. Secret; Nodis. Drafted by Sherman and approved by Covey.

207. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, August 5, 1975, 10 a.m.

Washington, August 5, 1975, 10 a.m.

Miki and Ford discussed the terrorist attack in Kuala Lumpur, the CSCE, arms control, Sino-Soviet relations, and Southeast Asia.

Source: Ford Library, National Security Adviser, Memoranda of Conversation, Box 14. Top Secret. Drafted by Wickel. According to the President’s Daily Diary, the conversation took place in the Oval Office from 10:05 until 11:25 a.m. (Ford Library, Staff Secretary’s Office, President’s Daily Diary)

208. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, August 5, 1975, 7 p.m.

Washington, August 5, 1975, 7 p.m.

Ford and Miki discussed domestic politics, economic conditions, the French proposal for a five-power economic conference, and U.S.-Japan cooperation.

Source: Ford Library, National Security Adviser, Memoranda of Conversation, Box 14. Top Secret; Exdis. Drafted by Wickel. The conversation took place in the White House. The next day, Ford told Kissinger and Scowcroft, “The private conversation wasn’t much. I think he wanted it mostly for prestige.” (Memorandum of Conversation, August 6, 9:50–10:05 a.m.; ibid.)

209. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, August 6, 1975, 10 a.m.

Washington, August 6, 1975, 10 a.m.

Miki and Ford discussed the terrorist attack in Kuala Lumpur, the Five Power Economic Summit, Korea, energy, the Middle East, mutual defense, food, and press statements.

Source: Ford Library, National Security Adviser, Memoranda of Conversation, Box 14. Top Secret. Drafted by Wickel. The conversation took place in the Oval Office. According to the President’s Daily Diary, the conversation took place in the Oval Office from 10:06 until 11:35 a.m. (Ford Library, Staff Secretary’s Office, President’s Daily Diary)

210. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, August 29, 1975, 11 a.m.

Washington, August 29, 1975, 11 a.m.

Schlesinger and Miki discussed the situation on the Korean peninsula.

Source: Washington National Records Center, OSD Files: FRC 330–78–0058, Japan, 091.112, 17 Sept 1975. Secret; Exdis. Prepared by Abramowitz. The conversation took place in the Prime Minister’s Office. A stamped message reads, “Dep. Sec. has seen.”

211. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, August 30, 1975, 1145.

Washington, August 30, 1975, 1145

Schlesinger and Miyazawa discussed the situation on the Korean peninsula.

Source: Ford Library, National Security Adviser, Presidential Country Files for East Asia and the Pacific, Box 7, Country File, Japan [9]. Secret; Exdis. The meeting was held at the Prime Minister’s residence.

212. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to President Ford, Washington, September 19, 1975.

Washington, September 19, 1975

Kissinger recommended that Ford sign a NSDM governing U.S.-Japanese space cooperation.

Source: Ford Library, NSC Institutional Files (H-Files), Box H–61, NSDM 306, U.S.-Japan Space Cooperation. Confidential. Sent for action. The President initialed the “Approve” option, and the recommendations became NSDM 306 on September 24. (ibid., Box H–69, NSDM Originals (2 of 2), NSDM 301-NSDM 315). The report of the Under Secretaries Committee is attached but not published. It arrived under a covering memorandum, May 5, by Ingersoll.

213. Memorandum From the Deputy Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs (Scowcroft) to President Ford, Washington, October 19, 1975.

Washington, October 19, 1975

Scowcroft forwarded Kissinger’s report on his October 19 meeting with Miyazawa.

Source: Ford Library, National Security Adviser, Trip Briefing Books and Cables for HAK, Kissinger Trip File, Box 15, 10/19–23/75, People’s Republic of China, TOSEC (5). Secret. Ford initialed this memorandum. A memorandum of conversation of Kissinger’s meeting is in National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy Files, P-820123–2431. Kissinger stopped in Tokyo en route to a meeting with Mao in Beijing.

214. Memorandum of Conversation, Tokyo, October 24, 1975, 8 a.m.

Tokyo, October 24, 1975, 8 a.m.

Kissinger met with Miki following his visit to the People’s Republic of China.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy Files, P–820123–2324. Secret; Nodis. The meeting was held at the Prime Minister’s Official Residence. Drafted by Gleysteen and approved by Covey. On October 23, Kissinger met in Tokyo with Miyazawa, who primarily asked Kissinger questions about his trip to Beijing; a memorandum of conversation is ibid., P–820123–2455.

215. Memorandum of Conversation, Tokyo, December 8, 1975, 8:30 a.m.

Tokyo, December 8, 1975, 8:30 a.m.

Kissinger briefed Miyazawa following Ford’s visit to the People’s Republic of China, Indonesia, and the Philippines.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy Files, P–820123–0631. Secret; Nodis. Drafted by Gleysteen and approved by Covey. The meeting was held at the Foreign Ministry Guest House.

216. Memorandum of Conversation, Tokyo, December 8, 1975, 11 a.m.

Tokyo, December 8, 1975, 11 a.m.

Kissinger and Miki discussed the international scene.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy Files, P–820123–0771. Secret; Nodis. The meeting was held at the Prime Minister’s Residence. Drafted by Gleysteen and approved by Covey.

217. Letter From President Ford to Japanese Prime Minister Miki, Washington, January 15, 1976.

Washington, January 15, 1976

Ford replied to Miki’s letter about fisheries legislation in the United States.

Source: Ford Library, National Security Adviser, Presidential Correspondence with Foreign Leaders, Box 2, Japan, Prime Minister Miki (2). No classification marking. Miki’s November 4, 1975 letter expressed concern about Congressional legislation to unilaterally establish a 200-mile exclusive fishery zone. (Ibid.) The memoranda of conversation from the meetings, November 15–17, between the leaders of the Federal Republic of Germany, France, Italy, Japan, the United Kingdom, and the United States, are ibid., Memoranda of Conversation, Box 16.

218. Letter From Japanese Prime Minister Miki to President Ford, Tokyo, February 24, 1976.

February 24, 1976

Miki asked for Ford’s assistance in disclosing the names of officials involved in the Lockheed scandal.

Source: Ford Library, National Security Adviser, Presidential Correspondence with Foreign Leaders, Box 2, Japan, Prime Minister Miki (2). No classification marking. The Subcommittee on Multi-National Corporations of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee had exposed alleged bribes by the Lockheed Corporation to high officials of the Japanese government.

219. Letter From President Ford to Japanese Prime Minister Miki, Washington, March 11, 1976.

Washington, March 11, 1976

Ford replied to Miki’s letter about the Lockheed scandal and suggested that both governments work together to reduce corruption.

Source: Ford Library, National Security Adviser, Presidential Correspondence with Foreign Leaders, Box 2, Japan, Prime Minister Miki (2). No classification marking. Ford received this letter under a covering memorandum, March 10, from Scowcroft. (Ibid.) A Japanese diplomatic note, March 12, conveyed the Japanese cabinet’s decision to accept the President’s proposal for sharing information relating to the Lockheed scandal. (Decision of the Cabinet on March 12, 1976; ibid.)

220. Memorandum From Peter Rodman of the NSC Staff to Secretary of State Kissinger, Washington, April 6, 1976.

Washington, April 6, 1976

Rodman informed Kissinger of Miki’s desire for information on whether powerful Japanese politicians were implicated in the Lockheed scandal.

Source: Ford Library, National Security Adviser, Presidential Country Files for East Asia and the Pacific, Box 7, Country File, Japan [10]. Secret. Sent for action. Kissinger did not mark either of the options.

221. Talking Points for Peter Rodman of the NSC Staff, Washington, undated.

Washington, undated

Rodman was instructed to tell Miki’s confidential adviser that Kissinger could not provide information to Miki about the Lockheed scandal outside the channel established via the Department of Justice.

Source: Ford Library, National Security Adviser, Presidential Country Files for East Asia and the Pacific, Box 7, Country File, Japan [10]. Secret; Nodis. At the end of the talking points, Kissinger wrote, “The Department of State has no access to these records + could not obtain access without upsetting all established procedures.” Written notations by unknown hands at the top of the document indicate that Kissinger approved the talking points on April 10 and Rodman received them through Kissinger’s special assistant Paul E. Barbian. They were presented to Hirasawa at 4 p.m. on the same day.

222. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, April 22, 1976.

Washington, April 22, 1976

Kissinger and Togo discussed the Lockheed scandal.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy Files, P –820117 – 1955. Confidential; Nodis. Drafted by Sherman and approved by Collums.

223. Telegram 6615 From the Embassy in Japan to the Department of State, May 6, 1976, 1015Z.

May 6, 1976, 1015Z

The embassy analyzed Japanese domestic politics.

Source: National Archives, Record Group 59, Central Foreign Policy Files. Confidential; Immediate. Repeated to the Embassies in Moscow, Seoul, Taipei, to the Consulate in Hong Kong, to the Liaison Office in Beijing, to CINCPAC in Honolulu, and to COMUS Japan in Yokota.

224. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, May 14, 1976.

Washington, May 14, 1976

Kissinger and Saito discussed the Lockheed scandal.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy Files, P –820117 – 2339. Secret; Nodis. Drafted by Sherman and approved by Collums.

225. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, June 30, 1976, 10:30 a.m.

Washington, June 30, 1976, 10:30 a.m.

Miki and Ford discussed international affairs.

Source: Ford Library, National Security Adviser, Memoranda of Conversation, Box 20. Secret; Nodis. Drafted by Wickel. The conversation took place in the Oval Office. Ford’s briefing information is ibid., Presidential Country Files for East Asia and the Pacific, Box 7, Country File, Japan [9]. Ford’s and Miki’s luncheon conversation concerned China and non-proliferation among other topics. (Ibid., Memoranda of Conversation, Box 20)

226. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, July 1, 1976, 3:30 p.m.

Washington, July 1, 1976, 3:30 p.m.

Scowcroft and Hodgson discussed U.S.-Japanese relations.

Source: Ford Library, National Security Adviser, Memoranda of Conversation, Box 20. Confidential. Eugene V. McAuliffe, the Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs, praised the Japanese Government’s Defense White Paper of June 4. (Memorandum from McAuliffe to the Secretary of Defense, June 22, 1976; Washington National Records Center, OSD Files: FRC 330–79–0049, Japan, 092, 1976 June 22)

227. Telegram 11294 From the Embassy in Japan to the Department of State, July 27, 1976, 0910Z.

July 27, 1976, 0910Z

The Embassy reported on the arrest of former Prime Minister Tanaka.

Source: National Archives, Record Group 59, Central Foreign Policy Files. Confidential; Immediate. Repeated for information to COMUS Japan in Yokota, to CINCPAC in Honolulu, to the Embassies in Manila, Seoul, Taipei, The Hague, Rome, and to the Liaison Office in Beijing.

228. Telegram 16298 From the Embassy in Japan to the Department of State, November 2, 1976, 0620Z.

November 2, 1976, 0620Z

The Embassy analyzed the handling of the defection of a Soviet pilot to Japan with his MiG-25.

Source: National Archives, Record Group 59, Central Foreign Policy Files. Confidential. Repeated for information to the Secretary of Defense in Washington, to the Embassy in Moscow, to COMUS Japan, and to CINCPAC in Honolulu. Also transmitted to CINCPAC for POLAD.

229. Telegram 19002 From the Embassy in Japan to the Department of State, December 30, 1976, 0800Z.

December 30, 1976, 0800Z

The Embassy analyzed Japanese politics.

Source: National Archives, Record Group 59, Central Foreign Policy Files. Confidential. Repeated for information to the Embassies in Bangkok, Bonn, Canberra, Jakarta, Kuala Lumpur, London, Manila, Paris, Rangoon, Rome, Seoul, Taipei, Vientiane, to the Consulate in Hong Kong, to the Liaison Office in Beijing, to CINCPAC in Honolulu, and to COMUS Japan in Yokota.

165. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, January 4, 1973, 5:40 p.m. 165. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, January 4, 1973, 5:40 p.m. 1

Washington, January 4, 1973, 5:40 p.m.

MEMORANDUM
NATIONAL SECURITY COUNCIL
MEMORANDUM OF CONVERSATION

PARTICIPANTS:

Nobuhiko Ushiba, Japanese Ambassador

Ryohei Murata, Counselor, Japanese Embassy

Henry A. Kissinger, Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs

John H. Holdridge, Senior Staff Member, NSC

DATE, TIME: January 4, 1973, 5:40 p.m.
PLACE: Mr. Kissinger's Office

SUBJECT: Discussion Between Mr. Kissinger and Ambassador Ushiba on Japanese Government Appeal to the U.S. and Hanoi on the Vietnam War

Ambassador Ushiba asked if Mr. Kissinger was going to Paris on January 7, and Mr. Kissinger confirmed that he would indeed be departing on that date. Ambassador Ushiba wished Mr. Kissinger success. Mr. Kissinger thanked the Ambassador.

Mr. Kissinger said that before going on to what the Ambassador wished to discuss, he himself wanted to convey—on the assumption that what he said would not be in the newspapers—some thoughts of the President on recent developments in U.S.-Japanese relations. What he, Mr. Kissinger, wanted to do was to express the President's irritation and almost indignation at the communication which we had received from the Japanese Government with respect to Vietnam. As a result of this communication, the President bad actually ordered him not to see the Ambassador, and the only reason the appointment was taking place was because he had told the President that the Ambassador was going back to Tokyo to report to the Japanese Cabinet. The President had asked him to tell the Ambassador that if Japan continues to treat an enemy of the U.S. on an equal basis with us, and to inform three other governments before telling us what it was doing, it could then no longer expect special relations with the White House, and we would have to deal with Japan as we would with any other government. As far as we were concerned, this was the most serious blot which had occurred in our relationship since the present Administration had been in the White House. It was to be hoped that Ambassador Ushiba's Prime Minister and Foreign Minister understood this fact.

Ambassador Ushiba wondered what it was that we objected to in the communication—was it the content or the timing? Mr. Kissinger indicated that first, we didn't appreciate the simultaneous approach. We considered that the U.S.-Japan relationship was different from the one which Japan maintained with Hanoi, but Japan had approached an enemy and a friend simultaneously. Then, the Japanese communication had also discriminated against us over the bombing. Ambassador Ushiba protested that the bombing had not been mentioned, and that the Japanese Government had wanted to avoid bringing this subject up. Mr. Kissinger emphasized in reply that the criticism of the bombing could be derived from the context of the communication.

Continuing, Mr. Kissinger said that, thirdly, we were not the ones who had broken up the talks. So, frankly, we had objected to the message itself, its content, and the fact that other governments had been informed about it. It had to be said that the President's reaction was extremely negative. Ambassador Ushiba stated that this was contrary to all expectations in Tokyo, and he would report what Mr. Kissinger had said. Mr. Kissinger cautioned that the President's reaction would be even more negative if this matter were leaked to the press; therefore, it was best that Ambassador Ushiba reported orally.

Mr. Kissinger said that calling Ambassador Ushiba's attention to this whole situation was the major thing he had wanted to accomplish in this conversation. He would not even have been permitted to see Ambassador Ushiba if the Ambassador were not going back to Tokyo—this might give some feeling for the intensity of the President's reaction.

Ambassador Ushiba declared that what Mr. Kissinger had just said was unexpected, and that he would certainly let people in Tokyo know about it.

Turning to the subject of the Paris talks, Ambassador Ushiba asked how things looked. Mr. Kissinger replied that we wouldn't know until next week. We couldn't tell in advance, and would just have to see how it goes. Ambassador Ushiba said he hoped that Mr. Kissinger would be successful "this time"—of course he had been successful through the whole period, but this might be the most important moment. Mr. Kissinger said in response that allies who had some degree of reliance on the U.S. shouldn't want us to settle the Vietnam war on any terms at all. Ambassador Ushiba agreed. Mr. Kissinger went on to say that if we could get a reasonable agreement, we were of course eager to settle. We would of course also keep the Japanese Government informed as to any developments, but at this point there had been no essential change. The only new thing was that the technical talks had been resumed.

Mr. Kissinger asked Ambassador Ushiba when the latter would be returning from Tokyo. Ambassador Ushiba stated that he would return around the 15th of January, to which Mr. Kissinger remarked that he himself hoped to be back then, too.

Ambassador Ushiba asked about the position of Saigon—had there been any change? There were many rumors going around to the effect that Saigon had altered its stand against a settlement. Mr. Kissinger cautioned that not too much credence should be given to rumors. He himself believed personally that there wouldn't be any change until there was a clear outcome arrived at in Paris.

Ambassador Ushiba wondered if, apart from the Vietnam situation, there was some message from Mr. Kissinger that he should tell his Ministers. Mr. Kissinger observed that if it hadn't been for the Japanese Government appeal on Vietnam, he would have said that U.S.-Japan relations were basically good Of course, we had the perennial problem of the trade deficit, which was still very much with us. For our part, though, we were eager for the closest relations between Japan and the U.S., and would continue along the lines laid down at the Hawaii meeting, which the President remembered with so much pleasure. Basically, our relationship was good. Ambassador Ushiba said he realized that the trade problem was very urgent, but believed that Prime Minister Tanaka would tackle it. Ambassador Ushiba asked who was in charge of the natural gas deal with the Soviet Union. Mr. Kissinger replied that this would probably be Secretary Schultz. Ambassador Ushiba asked if Mr. Kissinger could let him know for sure later on. Mr. Kissinger agreed to do so. By the time he returned from Paris he would know. For the present, Secretary Peterson was still in charge of the Committee handling this matter, but later on it would probably he handled jointly by Secretary Schultz, Mr. Flanigan, and Mr. Kissinger himself.

Ambassador Ushiba raised the question of the possibility of an energy statement—would one be forthcoming? Mr. Kissinger replied in the affirmative, but added that he expected things to go on for a time much as they were at present.

Ambassador Ushiba brought up the subject of a visit to the U.S. by the Emperor. He had already discussed this matter with Ambassador Johnson. Mr. Kissinger ascertained from Ambassador Ushiba that no specific date had yet been set, and said that we would look into this matter and set a date within the next month.

Ambassador Ushiba mentioned that former Japanese Prime Minister Sato was planning to pay a visit to the United States. Mr. Kissinger noted on this score he was certain that the President would see Mr. Sato. In response to a query from Ambassador Ushiba, he indicated that no firm date had been set as yet, but that he had recommended a meeting with Mr. Sato to the President and was certain that the President would agree. The President had great admiration for Mr. Sato, and would surely want to have a good long talk with him. Without the textile problem to interfere, there would be no problem. Ambassador Ushiba indicated his agreement.

Mr. Kissinger reiterated his belief that relations between Japan and the U.S. were on a good basis. Evidently misunderstanding this remark, Ambassador Ushiba stated that the question of U.S. bases in Japan was on the way to a solution. He had personally discussed this question with the Defense Department, and had found that people there had a good understanding of the issues.

Switching the conversation back to economics, Ambassador Ushiba said that from the remarks made earlier he surmised that Mr. Kissinger was still more-or-less concerned with Japan's economic problems with the U.S. as well as with the political ones. Mr. Kissinger replied that he was afraid so. According to Ambassador Ushiba, Mr. Kissinger's continued involvement in economics was "a good thing."

Mr. Kissinger mentioned smilingly that the U.S.'s Vietnamese friends were madder at him than were the Japanese. The Japanese had pulled ahead of us with respect to China, and therefore had no reason to be mad. Ambassador Ushiba laughed, and seized upon this remark to ask what had happened in U.S. relations with the PRC. He assumed that there would be no immediate changes, but were we leaping forward or backward? Mr. Kissinger replied that we were not in a race with the Japanese with respect to the PRC, but it was certainly fair to say that there had been no leaping backwards. Ambassador Ushiba raised the possibility of a leap forward when the Vietnam war was over, to which Mr. Kissinger commented that while this was conceivable, there were no present plans. Ambassador Ushiba wondered about U.S. recognition of the PRC, and Mr. Kissinger indicated that there was no reason to expect recognition soon.

Ambassador Ushiba asked, was there any chance that Mr. Kissinger would pay Japan a visit this year? Mr. Kissinger said in reply that his previous visit to Japan had been a good idea, and if the Japanese were interested he would be willing to make another one in late spring or early summer.

Ambassador Ushiba referred to the fact that there would be a U.S.-Japan Cabinet-level meeting in June or July; Mr. Kissinger noted in response that Secretary Rogers would go to this meeting. Ambassador Ushiba then stated that Prime Minister Tanaka was planning on paying a visit to the United States. Mr. Kissinger emphasized that the Prime Minister could count on that; there was no question about it. The visit had been agreed upon in Hawaii. It then became apparent from further remarks from Ambassador Ushiba that the Japanese wanted to be able to announce the date for the Prime Minister's visit at the time that the Emperor's visit was announced. Mr. Kissinger suggested that a specific proposal should be made, and we would get the Japanese an answer. He directed Mr. Holdridge to take care of this particular matter. He further suggested to Ambassador Ushiba that during the latter's visit to Tokyo it would be helpful if he could find out what the Prime Minister's thinking was regarding a visit to the U.S. Ambassador Ushiba agreed.

Ambassador Ushiba raised the question of a possible Presidential visit to Europe. Mr. Kissinger said that he had read about this in the newspapers, but we had no particular plan. When the war in Vietnam ended—that is, assuming it ended—then a Presidential visit to Europe might be possible.

Ambassador Ushiba asked about the SALT talks, to which Mr. Kissinger simply indicated that they were progressing, but there was nothing much to say about them at this time. He didn't have any idea as to when the CSEC might take place, but felt that there might be meetings by September on mutual force reductions.

Ambassador Ushiba observed that the President had exercised strong leadership with respect to economic and monetary questions. Would there be any opposition in Congress? Mr. Kissinger said that this seemed to have been our fate—we encountered Congressional opposition all the time, and this particular President had never had a Congress composed of a majority from his own Party. He agreed with a statement from Ambassador Ushiba that we could count on the President's strong leader ship.

Mr. Kissinger briefly mentioned that we were very much interested in developing further the relationships which the advanced countries maintained with one another. By advanced countries, he meant the Western European nations, the U.S., and Japan. Ambassador Ushiba expressed interest in this concept.

In conclusion, Mr. Kissinger suggested that Ambassador Ushiba might wish to get in touch again following his return from Japan.

(Note: following Mr. Kissinger's remarks concerning the Japanese Government's communication on Vietnam, Ambassador Ushiba appeared to be extremely embarrassed and ill at ease—manifested in typical Japanese fashion by a great deal of giggling.)

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 538, Country Files, Far East, Japan, January–June 1973, vol. 9. Secret; Sensitive. The meeting was held in Kissinger’s office. On January 3, John Holdridge provided talking points for Kissinger’s meeting with Ushiba and attached telegram 232944 to Tokyo, December 28, 1972, which contained the text of a message that Ushiba gave to U. Alexis Johnson on December 27, 1972, appealing to the United States to resume Vietnam peace negotiations as quickly as possible. (Ibid.)

166. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, January 24, 1973. 166. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, January 24, 1973.1

Washington, January 24, 1973

DEPARTMENT OF STATE
Memorandum of Conversation

DATE: January 24, 1973
PLACE: Tokyo

SUBJECT: US-Japan Security Relations; Sino-Japanese Relations

PARTICIPANTS:

Mr. Fumihiko Togo, Deputy Vice Minister, Ministry of Foreign Affairs

Deputy Assistant Secretary Richard L. Sneider, EA

COPIES TO: EA - Mr. Green

EA - Mr. Sneider

ACA

ROC

ISA - Mr. Doolin

Ambassador Ingersoll

Minister Shoesmith

Amembassy Tokyo - Pass to Lt. Gen. Pursley

Amembassy Hong Kong

CINCPAC - Admiral Gayler

CINCPAC for POLAD - Mr. Armstrong

Amembassy Taipei

1. US-Japan Security Relations

Togo expressed some concern about the forthcoming Diet session in terms of US-Japan security relations. He anticipates a more subtle line of attack on US bases in Japan, based upon local difficulties. He feels, however, that these attacks can be handled by a combination of a more positive posture on the part of the Tanaka government and efforts on both the part of the US and Japanese Governments to avoid undue local problems. He also thought that the ending of the Viet-Nam war would reduce the emotional context of anti-base attacks, and in this respect be helpful.

I mentioned to Togo the problems involved in providing for contingencies after the US consolidates and reduces its bases. He said that he had recognized this as a problem, and recalled our previous conversations on this subject. I then raised with him the question which we had discussed in the past of some form of emergency re-entry rights. He advised against any formal approach on this problem for the present and probably for the next two years. He did not think that the Japanese Government was ready to face this issue and feared that it might result in opening up all aspects of the SOFA rather than just those provisions regarding emergency re-entry. He urged that we not open up SOFA until the Japanese Government was in a position to deal with the pressures to revise only those few aspects which would permit emergency re-entry but not other aspects which it would not be desirable to open up.

2. Sino-Japanese Relations

Togo felt that at the present stage in Sino-Japanese relations it was important to organize embassies in Tokyo and Peking, and take care of the initial agreements, trade and aviation, etc. However, Japan should be prepared to use the opening of relations to raise more important substantive issues, such as Korea and Viet-Nam. There was no point in having relations with Peking, he commented, unless Japan was prepared to discuss these issues with Peking. He thought that perhaps after another six months or so, once the new Japanese Ambassador was well set up in Peking, there would be an opportunity to begin probing Peking on these more important political problems.

Togo also mentioned that the PRC had been most adamant in refusing to take over the site of the GRC embassy. Despite all the Japanese Government efforts to provide for transfer of the Chinese embassy site, the PRC has insisted upon locating their embassy in a different area. The Japanese Government was now faced with both the disposal of the former Chinese embassy and finding a new acceptable location for the PRC embassy.

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970–1973, DEF 4 Japan-US. Secret; Noforn. Drafted by Sneider.

167. Conversation Between President Nixon and John B. Connally, Washington, January 31, 1973. 167. Conversation Between President Nixon and John B. Connally, Washington, January 31, 1973.1

Washington, January 31, 1973

Nixon: John, how are you?

Connally: Hello, I'm surprised to see you. How are you?

Nixon: God, I'm sorry to keep you waiting.

Connally: Not at all. Not at all.

Nixon: You know, I haven't slept. I have these damn foreigners in here and they—

Connally: [Laughter]

Nixon: In translation, they all run you behind.

Connally: Oh, I'm sure that's right. You had Sato in here?

Nixon: Yeah. Anyway, I considered it, you know, as a courtesy call with opportunities. And he's still got respect for former Prime Ministers there, and he is our friend, on the other hand.

Connally: How's he feeling?

Nixon: I'm giving him a dinner tonight. Oh, Christ, he looks great. He must be 70 years of age, but he just looks great. And he, of course is—we were much better off when he was there than when Tanaka was there. Tanaka's a very cocky, jingoistic type, and Sato is the old-line, friendly guy, helping the U.S. like Kishi.

Connally: Right.

Nixon: So that's why we didn't deny him anything. I—just to sort of keep that Japanese inner circle well soil of mollified to a certain extent, but—but be that as it may, the—We will probably face a situation, but I don't think it's going to come while I'm here, but it will come in, certainly, in ten years, it could come in five years, with Japan, a few major problems with us. I think a major problem, not just economically, but I think the Japanese have a—I'm not referring to the Satos or the Tanakas, or people like that. There's a new breed. The Japanese, basically, are a terribly ambitious, frustrated, dynamic people, and they cannot be captive and they're going to play whoever they can, and they'll play all against us. They only thing that keeps them, you know, at the present time somewhat in our corner, is the fact that they use so much economically. We're a bell of a good customer, balance or trade deficits are good, but as time goes on, the younger elements in Japan are going to become goddamn difficult for us, so that's why, by that time, you may want to be—you may have to play the China game a little harder to keep the Japanese in. That's—that's your future. Who knows?

[Omitted here is a discussion of energy and economic issues.]

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, White House Tapes, Oval Office, Conversation No. 845–11. No classification marking. The editor transcribed the portions of the tape recording printed here specifically for this volume. The President’s Daily Diary indicates that this discussion occurred as part of a larger conversation between 4:52 and 6:13 p.m. (Ibid., White House Central Files, President’s Daily Diary)

168. Editorial Note 168. Editorial Note

On February 16, 1973, from 10:33 until 11:59 a.m., President Richard Nixon discussed international trade and monetary affairs with members of the Cabinet. Nixon described the growing share of Japanese companies in many markets: “Everybody knows the big Japanese trading companies are all directly co-owned by the Government in one way or another. So, what happens is that the Japanese, looking around the world, pick them off, loss leader, knock somebody else out of their boundaries. And every—Ten years ago, [John] Foster Dulles, in 1957– 58 expressed great concern about the possibility that the Russians would do that, because, he said, they did not have a private enterprise and the Russians might, around the world, as they became more industrialized, pick off various markets, put them—sell things in a loss leader basis, which they could well do, gobble up the market, and that we ought to have some kind of a program. Do you remember, we used to have the meeting right in this room? In ’57, about a year before he died. Now, I don’t know on the Japanese thing. We have a very delicate thing on [unclear] somebody brought in something, said I should take a few weeks and go through this. [Unclear] I have received Tanaka here, so he will come to do it some time, get the Emperor a state visit, and all the rest, so we probably could do that. But all this business of the diplomatic talk, and drinking sake, and whatever they’ll drink and so forth and so on, does not get away from the fundamental problem that Japan today, in terms of trade area, is not being a good partner, and, in fact, in terms as far as Tanaka is concerned, of our international responsibilities, is not being a good ally. Now, what do you do about this? Do you do it—just sort of brush it all over and toast the Emperor, and Tanaka and the rest? No, you have to find ways to get at that so that in our whole deliberations here, without getting to be jingoistic, do we regard the Japanese as protection in regard to the Europeans? We in this room have to understand that we’re in a tough-titty game with both Europe and Japan. Do you agree with that?”

Shortly thereafter, Nixon added, “But see that in this field, and here I always kid George [Shultz] about it, because, you know, he’s the biggest free trader we’ve got in the Cabinet next to me, but the point is that—the thing is that we must not feel right now [unclear] because of this problem so we’ll just have a currency devaluation; that’s where the Americans want their say. We’re [unclear] without a safeguard, and this, and that, and the other thing, and that’s going to go down. Even the opening up of markets, George, let’s face it, unless our companies are going to get off their tails and be competitive, unless American business is competitive—and American labor—we’re not going to solve problems. And, so, to build the kind of a world—economically—probably the U.S. could get along as a Fortress America. But if we become a Fortress America economically, we then become a fortress America militarily and politically, and that’ll destroy us. So that’s why this economic thing has got to be thrown into the political thing each time.” (National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, White House Tapes, Oval Office, Conversation No. 114–1. No classification marking. The editor transcribed the portions of the tape recording printed here specifically for this volume.)

169. National Security Study Memorandum 172, Washington, March 7, 1973. 169. National Security Study Memorandum 172, Washington, March 7, 1973.1

Washington, March 7, 1973

NATIONAL SECURITY COUNCIL
WASHINGTON, D.C. 20506

March 7, 1973

National Security Study- Memorandum 172
TO: The Secretary of State
The Secretary of Defense
The Secretary of Treasury
The Secretary of Commerce
The Director of Central Intelligence

SUBJECT: U.S. Policy Toward Japan

In view of developments since NSSM 122 and Japan's evolving view of its new role in international affairs and in its relations with other major world powers including the U.S., the President has directed a review of our policy toward Japan. Particular attention should be given to potential conflicts between U.S. and Japanese objectives and policies over the next five years, and to alternative means by which we might deal with them. The study should: — Identify basic U.S. interests toward Japan.

— Identify Japanese interests and objectives over the next five years, along with possible changes in Japan's post-Vietnam war foreign policies.

— Outline the U.S. objectives for the next five years that derive from these U.S. interests, paying particular attention to areas of divergence between our interests and Japanese interests and objectives.

— List and evaluate viable policy options pursuant to these interests and objectives.

In accomplishing the above, the study should focus on the following areas (consideration of the U.S. objectives and policy options under each should include, but not be limited to, the questions listed): 1. U.S. Japan Bilateral Relations A. Nature of the basic U.S.-Japan relationship. Is our objective of moving toward a reciprocal bilateral relationship with Japan as a full partner still valid? What are the alternatives? How could we move toward each alternative objective.

B. U.S.-Japan security relationship. Assessing prospects in Japan for continuation of the U.S.-Japan Mutual Security Treaty, what forms should our security relationship take? How should we try to help the Japanese Government obtain and sustain the necessary domestic Japanese support for its security relationship with the U.S.?

C. Japanese rearmament. What size and type of conventional defense capability do we believe Japan should develop, and for what purposes? Is Japan moving in the direction of such development? Is there anything we might do in this respect? What should be the U.S. position as regards any moves by Japan to acquire nuclear weapons?

D. Normalization of relations with PRC. How should we try to maintain the compatibility of U.S. and Japanese policies toward the PRC? (Particular attention should be given to the potential for conflict in U.S. and Japanese objectives and policies relating to normalization of relations with the PRC, especially as this will affect our respective dealings with Taiwan and the Soviet Union, as well as to U.S. and Japanese bilateral trade and political relations with the PRC.

E. U.S.-Japan bilateral economic relations. What should be the nature of a stable, long-term U.S.-Japan balance of payments equilibrium, and how should we move towards this? (The study should estimate the prospects for effective forward movement in Japan's liberalization of its investment and trade restrictions, as well as the difficulties that would result from any adverse spill-over from our bilateral economic relations into our security relationship and our relationship with Japan as regards regional and global issues.)

F. U.S.-Japan cultural, scientific, and environmental cooperation. What forms should U.S.-Japan cultural, scientific, technical, and environmental exchange and cooperation take and how should we try to give effect to them?

2. Japan's Regional and World Role A. Political-security. Are there any forms of political or security participation which we believe Japan should undertake regionally and globally? If so, should we attempt to encourage them toward such forms?

B. Trade and monetary. What role in international trade and monetary matters do we believe Japan should fill, and how can we move them toward such a role?

C. Japanese developmental assistance. What should be Japan's regional and global development assistance role, and how might the U.S. influence Japan to assume such responsibilities?

D. The effects of the internal political situation. Indicate how the internal political situation in Japan bears on foreign policy issues including U.S.-Japan relations.

The study should be prepared by the NSC Interdepartmental Group for East Asia, and should be submitted not later than April 30, 1973 for consideration by the Senior Review Group.

[signed]
Henry A. Kissinger

cc: The Chairman, Joint Chiefs of Staff
The Assistant to the President for International Economic Affairs

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Institutional Files (H-Files), Box H–197, NSSM Files, NSSM 172 (2 of 3). Secret. Copies were sent to the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff and the Assistant to the President for International Economic Affairs. NSSM 122, on policy toward Japan, is scheduled to be published in Foreign Relations, 1969–1976, Volume XIX, Part II, Japan, 1969–1972.

170. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, March 9, 1973, 1430–1500. 170. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, March 9, 1973, 1430–1500.1

Washington, March 9, 1973, 1430–1500

ASSISTANT SECRETARY OF DEFENSE
WASHINGTON D.C. 20301

In reply refer to:
1-21513/73

MEMORANDUM OF CONVERSATION

SUBJECT: Visit of Ambassador Ushiba with Secretary Richardson
TIME AND DATE: 1430-1500, Friday, 9 March 1973
LOCATION: Secretary Richardson's Office - Pentagon

PARTICIPANTS:

U.S. Side

Elliot L. Richardon- Secretary of Defense

Dennis J. Doolin -Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense (ISA)

Colonel Robert C. Taylor - Military Assistant to the Secretary of Defense

Japan Side

Nobuhiko Ushiba-Ambassador

MGen Yoshio Takenaka - Defense Attache

(U) What proved to be an extremely cordial and substantive meeting, rather than a courtesy call began with the Secretary Informing Ambassador Ushiba that he had some disquieting news which the Ambassador might wish to relay to Tokyo — viz, that, unlike Mr. Laird, he does not play golf and, therefore, will not be quite as good a guest when he visits Japan. Ambassador Ushiba appreciated the remark. The Secretary continued by noting that he had attended the Shimoda Conference in June of last year but had to return to Washington ahead of schedule because of the ongoing debate over reform.

(C) He noted our very important ties with Japan and said that he wanted to do all that he can in the Department of Defense to strengthen these ties and keep them in good repair. He told the Ambassador that we have an extremely able representative in Japan in the person of the COMUSJapan, LGen Robert Pursley.

The Ambassador replied that relations with the Department of Defense are Japan's most important overall relations with the U.S. He said we should work very closely together in Asian security matters and that the climate in Japan is much better since the base problem, primarily on Okinawa, was resolved in January.

(FOUO) The secretary said that he hopes to visit Japan in July after the bilateral US/ROK Security Consultative Conference in Seoul. In response to the Ambassador's query, Mr. Doolin said the tentative dates for the Japan visit were 12-14 July.

(C) The Secretary then returned to the subject of strengthening ties between the US and Japan. With the cessation of actual fighting and the hope for stable peace in southeast Asia, together with the moves on the part of both Tokyo and Washington to normalize relations with Peking, the US and Japan must work more closely together to maintain stability and equilibrium in Asia. The Secretary pointed out that we can make a joint contribution greater than either of our countries could make alone. Ambassador Ushiba agreed agreed, noting that the Mutual Security Treaty is not just to our mutual advantage, but rather contributes to the stability of the entire Asian area. He added that Japan must do more primarily in the economic aid and cultural fields.

(S) The Secretary said that US relations with Japan are analogous to US relations with Western Europe as a whole, in that Japan will have closer ties and more trade with Peking as is the western European case concerning the Eastern European nations. Mr. Richardson said that when the western Europeans used to tell him that Ostpolitik did not mean any lessening in their ties with the US, he believed them. The same is true with regard to Japan — normalization of Sino/Japanese relations does not require a weakening of the US/Japan security relationship. The Secretary used the analogy of someone leaning across the stream to touch someone's hand on the other side and hanging onto a tree as he leans across. The farther he leans, the tighter he grips the tree. This analogy is germane to our relationship to Japan as well as to Western Europe. Mr. Richardson said that for the foreseeable future we want the PRC poised between the Free World and the Soviet Union. We want neither Sino/Soviet rapprochement nor Sino/Soviet war. He told the Ambassador that he has argued since 1970 that the power relationship in Asia is a triangular one — the Soviet Union with its military might on one side; the PRC with its power and proximity on the second; and the US and Japan on the third side. He noted that with the US actually far removed from the Western Pacific we alone do not have the power to balance the equilateral triangle. He noted further that the very cessation of hostilities in Southeast Asia and the normalization of relations with Peking make it even more important that the US/Japan alliance be strengthened. Ambassador Ushiba agreed saying that we need to talk more with regard to military planning. The Secretary replied that possibly we could have some informal sessions here in Washington before his trip to Japan in July. He asked Mr. Doolin for comments. Mr. Doolin explained that the SSC would meet in May in Tokyo and that he and Mr. Sneider of State would attend as the US representatives. Mr. Richardson then asked that Sneider and Doolin debrief Ambassador Ushiba and himself after their return in May. The Ambassador seemed very pleased with this approach.

(C) The Secretary then turned to a discussion of military power and said that we must think of it as a defensive capability that enhances diplomacy. It is in this context that one should view US force deployments in WestPac. He added that he would not be surprised that Peking has this same perception, and Ambassador Ushiba said that, indeed, that was what Chou En-lai told Prime Minister Tanaka on the latter's visit to Peking last fall. The Secretary said that these WestPac deployments maintain equilibrium of the structure itself, and he added that the economic role of Japan can be a major stabilizing factor. He congratulated the Ambassador for Tanaka's decision to increase Japan's economic aid in JFY 74 by over $1 billion.

(C) The Secretary closed the meeting by noting that, within the triangle described earlier, a neutral SEA could develop without disturbing that structure.

(U) Upon leaving the building with Mr. Doolin, Ambassador Ushiba stated that he was extremely pleased with the tone and content of the meeting and expressed his appreciation for Secretary Richardson's offer of joint debriefing after the SSC meeting in May.

Prepared by: Dennis J. Doolin [DJD initialed]
Dep Asst Secretary
Date: 9 March 1973

Approved by: Lawrence S. Eagleburger [LSE initialed]
Acting Asst Secretary
Date: 13 Mar 1973

Distribution:
SecDef
Acting ASD (ISA)
DepAsstSec (ISA/EAPA)
AD
RC (2)
State (Mr. Sneider)

1 Source: Washington National Records Center, OASD/ISA Files: FRC 330–76–117, Japan, 333, 1973 January, March 13, 1973. Secret. Prepared by Doolin and approved by Eagleburger. The conversation took place in Richardson’s office.

171. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, March 27, 1973, 10:30 a.m. 171. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, March 27, 1973, 10:30 a.m.1

Washington, March 27, 1973, 10:30 a.m.

MEMORANDUM OF CONVERSATION
NATIONAL SECURITY COUNCIL

March 27, 1973 10:30 a.m.

PARTICIPANTS:

Finance Minister Aichi

Ambassador Ushiba

Secretary Shultz

Dr. Kissinger

Robert Hormats

The President briefly joined meeting at 10:50 a.m.

Kissinger: I am very pleased to have the pleasure of seeing you again. I know what a constructive role you have played in recent discussions.

Aichi: It is an honor to see you again and for you to give me the opportunity to visit with you. We appreciate the cooperative position the United States has taken on these matters. We appreciated Paul Volcker's coming first to Japan to convey a message from the President in February. We have done our best to cooperate with the American Government. Things are going very smoothly. Our goal is a real float although there is now some intervention. We are even selling some dollars to keep the rate moderate. The trend of Japanese exports to the US is declining. You must recognize that we have to take hard political decisions at home to deal with this, but things are moving and we think the trend will continue to decrease.

Kissinger: I know you recognize the importance of our need for a liberalization of Japanese trade. This is for economic and political reasons. It is highly important to us. Beyond that there must be long-term agreement with Europe, Japan and the US and other highly industrialized countries. We will be working on this in the latter part of this year. This will be done in direct consultation with Japan.

Aichi: We are liberalizing not only on goods but also on capital. By April we will submit legislation to the Diet on capital liberalization.

Shultz: Inflows and outflows?

Amb. Ushiba: We have already liberalized completely on outflows.

Kissinger: Strengthening our relationship with Japan is one of the chief objectives of the President's second term. We look forward to receiving the Emperor. We will submit dates in a few weeks. If these are o.k. with the Emperor, I am sure we can find an appropriate time.

Aichi: If it is o.k. with Tanaka, I will do my best to help you find a convenient time and I will convey your message to him.

At this point Dr. Kissinger briefly left the room.

Shultz: Trade liberalization is very important to us. I know you are not as optimistic about this as some, but I hope some progress can be made.

Dr. Kissinger returned.

Kissinger: If you can convey this message about the Emperor to the Prime Minister we would be very happy to welcome him. We expect the Prime Minister tentatively during the first week in August and the Emperor later in the fall. We have not announced this yet, but we have already been in contact with the Prime Minister's office. We want to restrain this in the press.

Amb. Ushiba: Oh! You have already been in contact with the Prime Minister's office?

Kissinger: Last June I met with five former Foreign Ministers; three were candidates for Prime Ministership and would say nothing. The only ones who said anything were the Finance Ministers.

Kissinger: What is your view of the international monetary situation?

Aichi: At present it is a bit quiet. But there is not yet confidence in the future. Last night there were many views on whether we should set a date for the next Ministerial meeting or not and on which dates it should be held. We are asking the Deputies to study the details. There are difficult issues including convertibility, how to make SDRs more attractive, developing countries, etc.

Kissinger: It is very important to have fundamental reform. The system is now subject to intense speculation.

Aichi: To prevent speculation we need a common idea about the future structure. For the time being things are a bit quiet.

Shultz: We are still of the view that our September proposals provide the basis for a new structure. We recognize that some issues have been raised, but the basic structure can hold up. We have yet to hear anything wrong with that approach or any strong arguments against it.

Kissinger: What issues do you see in Japanese-US relations?

Aichi: In the general election we lost seats in the Diet and the Communists gained. This was against our expectations. There was also some increase in the Socialists. They are against America and against the Us-Japanese Security Treaty. We need to persuade the general public that our opinion and position is right. There are movements in Japan against the US. Recently in the Diet I have been accused of making secret promises to the American Government.

The Russians have invited Tanaka to visit Moscow this autumn, or any time, so they say. He is thinking of autumn.

Kissinger: We think that is a good thing. Will you continue to ask for the two islands?

Aichi: Yes.

Shultz: One remarkable thing is that throughout the recent Ministerial meeting exchange rates remained calm. For this to happen during a major meeting of Finance Ministers is quite an achievement.

Kissinger: I remember our dealings while you were Foreign Minister. We faced very difficult problems and you always handled them honorably and fairly. Moreover, you understood what we were saying and we did not always understand what we were saying.

Aichi: I also want to say how pleased we are with Ambassador Ingersoll. He is very thoughtful and doing good work.

Kissinger: We in the White House have great confidence in Ingersoll. He can communicate directly with me and with the President. He is an awfully good man; and as a matter of fact Secretary Shultz recommended him for the job.

I have been three times in Japan in less than one year. I am thinking about coming for a longer visit some time this year—three days maybe.

At this point the President entered.

The President: It is so good to see you again, Mr. Finance Minister. I am glad that you had the opportunity to meet with Secretary Shultz and Henry.

Aichi: It is a great honor to see you again, Mr. President.

The President: I want you to know how strongly I feel about good relations between the US and Japan. We hear a lot about the US dealing with Europe but I want you to know that there is no deal unless Japan also is involved. Japan and the US are the two biggest economic powers. We are equals. There will be no arrangements with Europe which leave Japan out.

Henry, do we have the time for the Prime Minister's visit?

Kissinger: Yes, it is some time in early August. I think August 3.

The President: That's good. I am looking forward to seeing the Prime Minister and the Emperor too. Then perhaps a trip to Japan next year. I hope you are getting along with Secretary Shultz. He has my complete confidence, and please don't treat him too badly; be good to him.

Aichi: Thank you very much, Mr. President. I will convey this to Prime Minister Tanaka, I am sure he will be pleased to hear this.

The President: Thank you. It has been good to see you and I look forward to seeing you when the Prime Minister comes here.

Aichi: Thank you.

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Country Files, Far East, Box 538, Japan, volume 9, January–June 1973. Secret; Nodis. The conversation took place in Kissinger’s office. In a briefing memorandum to Kissinger, March 26, Hormats described the“object of the meeting” as strengthening Aichi “at home” and expressing appreciation for recent Japanese measures to liberalize trade and revalue the yen. (Ibid.)

172. Memorandum From Robert Hormats of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger), Washington, April 12, 1973. 172. Memorandum From Robert Hormats of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger), Washington, April 12, 1973.1

Washington, April 12, 1973

MEMORANDUM
NATIONAL SECURITY COUNCIL
INFORMATION

April 12, 1973

MEMORANDUM FOR: DR. KISSINGER
FROM: ROBERT HORMATS [RH initialed]
SUBJECT: US-Japan-EC Economic Data

Peter Flanigan has sent you the following data on US-EC and Japanese trade. The most salient points are: — Exports are an important share (14.2%) of US production, but are an even more important share of the production of the EC (24.2%) and Japan (34.4%).

— Neither the US nor the EC export a significant share of their production to the other (3.6% versus 3.8%); but Japan exports 10.9% to the US.

From this Flanigan concludes that: — In multilateral trade negotiations trade is important to all three parties, but considerably more important to the EC and Japan than to the US.

— In bilateral negotiations between the US and EC trade between them is relatively unimportant and neither side is particularly vulnerable to the other.

— In bilateral negotiations with Japan, Japan is clearly vulnerable to the US, as it exports eight times as much of its production to us as we export to it.

This information, however, does not take us very far. We should not conclude from it that our interests are served by bludgeoning the Japanese with a threat to restrict their imports into the US. Moreover, although percentages indicate that our reliance on trade is small in relative terms, our total exports are the largest in the world. They account for just under $50 billion and affect such key American industries as agriculture, computers, aircraft, and agricultural machinery. A substantial cut back in the production of these sectors would have disastrous economic and political effects. To fall into the intellectual argument that trade is less significant for us than others could lead to actions which, while disastrous to other nations, would have severe implications for us as well.

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 538, Country Files, Far East, Japan, volume 9, January–June 1973. No classification marking. Sent for information. Kissinger initialed this document. Peter Flanigan sent these trade statistics to Kissinger under a covering memorandum, March 8.

173. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, May 21, 1973, noon. 173. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, May 21, 1973, noon.1

Washington, May 21, 1973, noon

MEMORANDUM
THE WHITE HOUSE
WASHINGTON

MEMORANDUM OF CONVERSATION

PARTICIPANTS:

President Nixon

Masayoshi Ohira, Minister of Foreign Affairs of Japan

Lt. General Brent Scowcroft, Deputy Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs

DATE TIME: Tuesday - May 21, 1974 12: 00 noon
PLACE: The Oval Office
The White House

[The press is admitted for photographs.]

President: I had good visit with Prime Minister Tanaka in Paris [on April 7, at Pompidou funeral]. Please extend my regards to him.

Ohira: I will. Thank you.

President: Where do you go from here?

Ohira: I go to New York tomorrow night.

President: You got a degree? How many have you received?

Ohira: It's my first one.

President: Will you make a speech?

Ohira: No, I was very fortunate.

[The press leaves]

Ohira: I am most honored to have this opportunity to pay a courtesy call on you in what must be a very busy schedule. I first want to convey Prime Minister Tanaka's warmest personal wishes to you. I feel also most honored to be invited to one of the honored universities of the United States — Yale University. I consider it a great honor.

I am grateful for the opportunities I have had here to meet with American officials yesterday and this morning. Yesterday I spoke with Ambassador Rush and today I renewed my friendship with Ambassador Ingersoll and had a serious discussion with him. I missed Dr. Kissinger here in Washington, but that is abundantly compensated by the fact that his efforts for peace are succeeding under direction of the President. I am pleased not only for the success and dignity of the United States but also for the cause of world peace. I would like to emphasize that our close relationship with the United States provides a firm basis for our foreign policy and is the cornerstone of our efforts to build peace in Asia and the world. We want to build on this relationship and I feel very grateful to discuss this with you today. We feel our close ties with the United States have even greater significance and importance now during a situation in Asia where there is not yet sufficient stability — and in the whole world.

I want to take this opportunity to say that the importance we place on U.S. relationship is also the basis of Prime Minister Tanaka's foreign policy. I want to emphasize this.

President: Jim Hodgson will be my new Ambassador. Although he was Secretary of Labor, he has broader experience. He is a worthy successor to Ingersoll who has moved to broader responsibility for Asian policy.

Ohira: We are indeed looking forward to having Mr. Hodgson with us at the earliest date.

President: I totally agree that the cornerstone of peace in Asia is the U.S.-Japanese relationship. We are the strongest democratic powers in the area, and as we move into an era of peace that will become even more important. It is also important to recognize that Japan and the United States as world economic powers work closely with the European Community.

In the Middle East, I can tell you we have reached a breakthrough in the negotiation on disengagement between Israel and Syria. However, there are difficult odds ant ends to be worked out. We are hopeful they will be. This agreement, coupled with the Israeli-Egyptian agreement, while temporary, bring the possibility for broader talks for peace in the Middle East. We feel that once the momentum begins, while the going will be hard, we can succeed. As we learned last October from an economic standpoint, the impact of war on economies like the U.S. and Japan is catastrophic. That is why we believe that all should support our efforts — which are not selfish efforts — to get the parties together for a peaceful settlement.

Other areas over the long term which are of even more concern are Japanese relations with the Soviet Union and the PRC. I think the policies of the U.S. and Japan are parallel here. While the Soviet Union and the PRC don't get along too well, our joint policy is to get along with both without taking sides. I note that Japan is proceeding with discussions with the Soviet Union on developing their oil and gas reserves and with increasing trade and contact with the PRC. We think this is correct from a pragmatic point of view, for you and for the United States.

What are the Foreign Minister's ideas on changes in the PRC? Will there be a change in leadership or will it continue?

Ohira: We are trying hard to grasp what is the situation in the PRC and what are the implications. I feel, though, that we don't have an answer. Our relations with the PRC are proceeding naturally and as common sense dictates. Should there be a change in leadership, we must and can continue smooth relations.

President: I feel that whatever leadership change occurs in the Soviet Union and the PRC, while people change, interests remain the same. So, as far as we are concerned, we must be evenhanded. Both will watch us to see we don't tilt to one side or the other.

Ohira: I agree entirely with that point.

On the Siberian development projects, the Prime Minister conveyed to you the status of the projects. I wonder if you have any ideas to express.

President: We look positively on the directions in which you are moving. We think you must move carefully to protect your interests. They need the technology and the money you can bring; they must pay a price to get that cooperation.

As you know, several American companies are interested. While we can't control them, we would welcome cooperation between them and Japanese companies. Any time we can work together it is to our mutual benefit. Japan today does not speak with a big military voice but it speaks with a mighty economic voice, and we trust that in the years ahead more weight will be placed on economic factors.

In the meantime, the U.S. intends to maintain its military strength against the Soviet Union — and they will toward us. We will try to negotiate SALT at the summit; I can't predict what will happen but it will progress. We can't have unilateral reductions of strength around the world, though, because that strength maintains the balance for them as well as for us. Speaking of our mutual security agreement with you — while once the PRC strenuously objected to it three or four years ago, they seem not to object now. That is obviously for pragmatic reasons. A defenseless Japan wouldn't be in their interest, because they couldn't do anything about it — but it might be in the interest of one of the negotiators. Our policy of mutual cooperation is in the interest of keeping a balance throughout the area in the interest of deterring those who might be interested in adventures in the area. I will direct Secretary Kissinger to keep you and Prime Minister Tanaka informed of our negotiations with the Soviet Union and on the Middle East and so on, but primarily on the Soviet Union because they vitally affect you and the Europeans.

Ohira: I am most grateful to you for your remarks. As you stated, there is increasing understanding of the importance of the U.S.-Japan Security Treaty — by us, by the PRC, by the Soviet Union and by the Japanese people. We can't be complacent and we must strengthen our ties further.

I appreciate your comments on the Siberian projects, and it is essential for us two to cooperate in these projects.

President: What is the reaction in Japan to India's nuclear explosion?

Ohira: Actually I heard the news in New York and I haven't been able to digest it or get Japan's reaction. We are not shocked substantively and it is not likely to affect our policy substantively.

President: I guess the question is of a chain reaction for others to go nuclear.

Ohira: That is difficult to tell, but I can say that Japan is in no way thinking of going nuclear. Japan doesn't contemplate going nuclear. That is my responsibility and I can say Japan is not going to change its policy.

President: I would not indicate what Japan should do, but I would just point out the increasing likelihood of nuclear war as more states acquire these devices. Of course, the answer is to look to working even harder to strengthen a structure of peace — economically, politically, etc. — so that states will reject the option of force, nuclear or otherwise. It sounds idealistic but there is no other way to approach the problem.

Please convey my best wish to the Prime Minister, to Mr. Fukuda and our other friends in Japan.

Ohira: I certainly will to Prime Minister Tanaka and your other good friends. Mr. Fukuda will come on June 10 to Washington.

1 Source: Ford Library, National Security Adviser, Memoranda of Conversation, Box 4. Secret. The conversation took place in the Oval Office. The President’s Daily Diary indicates that the meeting lasted from 12:07 until 12:57 p.m. and included, in addition to the persons listed on the memorandum of conversation, Yasukawa, Okawara, Numata, and the Japanese and American interpreters, Sadaaki Numata and Manabu Fukada. (National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, White House Central Files, President’s Daily Diary)

174. Memorandum From John Froebe of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger), Washington, June 6, 1973. 174. Memorandum From John Froebe of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger), Washington, June 6, 1973.1

Washington, June 6, 1973

MEMORANDUM
NATIONAL SECURITY COUNCIL
ACTION

June 6, 1973

MEMORANDUM FOR: MR. KISSINGER
FROM: JOHN A. FROEBE, JR. [JAF initialed]

SUBJECT: Proposed Signing of U.S.-Japan Environmental Agreement During Prime Minister Tanaka's Visit

At Tab B is a draft State cable instructing Embassy Tokyo to broach with the Japanese Government the possibility of the President and Prime Minister Tanaka's signing the U.S.-Japan Environmental Agreement during Tanaka 's visit to Washington next month. As the draft cable points out, concluding the environmental agreement formally during Tanaka's visit would add to the aura of U.S.-Japan cooperation that we want the visit to produce. The cable notes that the remaining problems to be negotiated in the agreement could in all probability be wound up in time for the Tanaka visit.

If the President does not want to sign the agreement during the Tanaka visit, it could be signed during ECONCOM IX in Tokyo July 16-17.

In the event that you wish to ask the President's approval on this, a draft memorandum to him from you is at Tab A.

Mr. Elliott and Dick Fairbanks concur.

Recommendations:

That you approve the draft State cable at Tab B.
Approve [HK initialed]
Disapprove

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 538, Country Files, Far East, Japan, volume 9, January–June 1973. Confidential. Sent for action. Concurred in by Elliot and Fairbanks. Kissinger initialed his approval of the recommendation on June 11, and an NSC staff member notified the Department of State by telephone on June 12.

175. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) and the President’s Assistant for International Economic Affairs (Flanigan) to President Nixon, Washington, July 2, 1973. 175. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) and the President’s Assistant for International Economic Affairs (Flanigan) to President Nixon, Washington, July 2, 1973.1

Washington, July 2, 1973

MEMORANDUM
THE WHITE HOUSE
WASHINGTON
ACTION

July 2, 1973

MEMORANDUM FOR THE PRESIDENT
FROM: HENRY A. KISSINGER [HK initialed]
PETER M. FLANIGAN [PM initialed]

SUBJECT: Ministerial Meeting with Japanese (ECONCOM IX)

Secretary Rogers' memorandum (Tab A) informs you that the joint U.S.-Japan Committee on Trade and Economic Affairs (ECONCOM IX) will be held in Tokyo on Jul), 16. Taking place two weeks prior to your meeting in Washington with Prime Minister Tanaka, ECONCOM will provide an opportunity to discuss a wide variety of economic issues, to take note of the progress made by Japan in reducing its trade imbalance with us an in liberalizing most of its trade barriers, and to emphasize the importance of U.S.-Japanese cooperation in future multilateral endeavors such as monetary reform and trade negotiations.

On the proposed agenda specific items to be discussed will be the economic outlook in the U S. and Japan, bilateral trade and investment problems, multilateral trade negotiations and reform of the monetary system, energy problems, relations with the EC, aid and trade relations with developing countries (especially Vietnam), and environmental programs.

Under the agreement with Japan establishing ECONCOM, our delegation includes the Secretaries of State, Treasury, Interior, Agriculture, Commerce, and Labor. In the past, the delegation has also included the Secretary of Transportation, the Chairman of CEA, the Special Trade Representative, and the Chairman of the CEQ. Secretary Rogers suggests that these same agencies be represented at this meeting, but indicates that in the past you have limited the number of Cabinet members traveling abroad and determined that some agencies should be represented by Under Secretaries. He asks your wishes regarding the composition of this delegation.

Our View. These meetings provide a useful, although somewhat unwieldy, forum for discussing economic matters with the Japanese. The last ECONCOM, two years ago, allowed us to put substantial pressure on the Japanese for liberalization and for reducing their trade imbalance with us. The Kuilima Summit with Tanaka last summer, and Ambassador Eberle's dealings with the Japanese, gave further impetus to their efforts to liberalize and to reduce their surplus. Much progress has been made but we are not yet in a position to relax. Japan has had a trade deficit for the last three months, but this has resulted in part from very high prices for their grain and food imports from the U.S. Moreover, nearly all Japanese industrial quotas have been or are in the process of being eliminated over the next two years. Remaining agricultural quotas are of the highest domestic sensitivity in Japan.

We should continue to make the Japanese aware of our interest in further liberalization in both trade and investment, but our primary emphasis at this ECONCOM should be all other areas of cooperation — monetary, trade, energy, and Vietnam reconstruction.

With respect to the composition of the delegation, we have no strong feelings. It is really only essential that the Secretaries of State, Treasury, Agriculture and Commerce as well as perhaps Ambassador Eberle and Chairman Stein attend. It would certainly be appropriate for other agencies to be represented at a lower level.

RECOMMENDATION

If you agree, Secretary Rogers will be informed that: — You approve the proposed agenda for the ECONCOM meetings and the general tenor of his approach.

— You would suggest that details of bilateral trade and investment issues be handled primarily in the counterpart meetings.

— You believe it is especially important that he, Secretary Shultz, Secretary Butz, and Secretary Dent, as well as Chairman Stein and Ambassador Eberle if they feel it necessary, attend; but that it might be appropriate for other agencies including CIEP to be represented at the deputy level.

Approve [RN initialed]
Disapprove

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 539, Country Files, Far East, Japan, July 1973–December 31, 1974 (sic), vol. 10. Confidential. Sent for action. Nixon initialed his approval of the recommendation. Rogers’s memorandum, June 22, is attached Tab A, but is not published.

176. Memorandum From John Froebe of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger), Washington, July 5, 1973. 176. Memorandum From John Froebe of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger), Washington, July 5, 1973.1

Washington, July 5, 1973

MEMORANDUM
NATIONAL SECURITY COUNCIL
ACTION

July 5, 1973

MEMORANDUM FOR: MR. KISSINGER
FROM: JOHN A. FROEBE, JR. [JAF initialed]

SUBJECT: Japanese Prime Minister Tanaka's Visit: A Proposed Focus

In preparing for the Tanaka visit on July 31-August 1, the bureaucracy needs guidance as to what the substantive focus of the meetings the President will have with Tanaka should be.

We have no pressing specific bilateral U.S.-Japan problems that deserve attention at these meetings. The U.S.-Japan trade imbalance is now well on the way to solution, and, to the extent it remains a problem, will be dealt with at ECONCOM IX on July 16-17. The results of ECONCOM IX could be confirmed during the Tanaka visit.

I would recommend, therefore, that the substantive focus of the President's discussions with Prime Minister Tanaka be to explore the main theme advanced by the Japan chapter of this year's Foreign Policy Report: how can we move Japan toward a broader, less narrowly economic, approach toward her roles in Asia and the world at large. I would suggest that strengthened U.S.-Japan cooperation on specific multilateral problems in which we have a common interest offers an effective vehicle. Such specific problems include: — Regionally: Indochina rehabilitation, the Korean Peninsula, Siberian economic development, and Pacific basin economic cooperation. (China policy and a possible Japanese regional security could be reviewed briefly.)

— Globally: The Atlantic partnership, energy (which would overlap with Siberian economic development), and trade and monetary policy (reaffirming or expanding on the discussion at ECONCOM IX)

Although we have no formal indications of Tanaka's substantive preferences for his meetings with the President, CIA reporting has indicated that his inclinations are definitely in this direction. Ambassador Ingersoll has strongly (See TOHAK 361) recommended such an agenda, and the Departments are in agreement.

The specific objectives of the Presidents discussions with Tanaka could be to exchange views on the dimensions of the individual problems, to seek at least preliminary agreement on common U.S.-Japan objectives in each, and to delineate problem areas for further work by our two bureaucracies. We would agree with Tokyo in advance what multilateral issues would be taken up.

To prepare for the discussions, I recommend that we segment out of the Japan NSSM—which cannot in its present shape be ready in its entirety in time—the issue of Japan's regional and world roles. The IG paper would treat this immediate issue by describing the dimensions of these specific multilateral problems, and U.S. and Japanese interests and objectives in them, and would offer alternative sets of objectives which we could try to pursue with the Japanese. If necessary, this IG paper could be considered at an SRG meeting in about two weeks.

Recommendation:

That you approve the focus of the Presidents discussions with Prime Minister Tanaka being that of strengthened U.S.-Japan cooperation on multilateral problems of common concern, with the specific problems to be worked out with the Japanese in advance of the Tanaka visit.

Approve [HAK initialed]
Disapprove

That you authorize me to ask for an IG paper as described above.

Approve [HAK initialed]
Disapprove

Concurrences: Mr. Kennedy
Mr. Eagleburger
Mr. Hormats

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Institutional Files (H-Files), Box H–197, NSSM Files, NSSM 172 (2 of 3). Secret. Sent for action. Concurred in by Kennedy, Eagleburger, and Hormats. Both recommendations were marked approved with handwritten notes that read, “HAK per phone call from Jon Howe to RTK. 7/7/73.” In a memorandum to Kissinger, June 30, Froebe noted that the Department had delayed NSSM 172 by requesting Presidential affirmation of the primacy of the U.S.-Japanese alliance before considering other aspects of the study. Kissinger commented in the margin, “Stupid theological point.” (Ibid.) On July 12, Scowcroft sent a memorandum to Eliot asking the NSC Interdepartmental Group for East Asia to prepare an interim study. (Ibid.) On July 27, Richard Sneider, Chairman of the Ad Hoc Group for NSSM 172, submitted a paper titled“US-Japan Cooperation on Multilateral Problems of Mutual Concern” in response to Scowcroft’s memorandum. (Ibid., NSC Files, Box 1056, NSC Institutional Materials, NSC Institutional Papers, July 1973 [1 of 3])

177. Memorandum From Robert Hormats of the National Security Council staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger), Washington, July 19, 1973. 177. Memorandum From Robert Hormats of the National Security Council staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger), Washington, July 19, 1973.1

Washington, July 19, 1973

MEMORANDUM
NATIONAL SECURITY COUNCIL
INFORMATION

July 19, 1973

MEMORANDUM FOR: DR. KISSINGER
FROM: ROBERT HORMATS [RH initialed]

SUBJECT: Report on ECONCOM IX

ECONCOM IX, held in Tokyo on July 16-17, was extremely constructive. Japan was most concerned about restrictions on the export of soybeans. Under Secretary of Agriculture Campbell explained the domestic problems which gave rise to such restrictions, and these seemed to mollify the Japanese. A major discussion on energy took place, without any commitments other than to begin expert level consultations. The Japanese evinced great interest in your "Year of Europe" speech and the Atlantic Declaration.

The most useful aspect of these meetings was the opportunity it afforded me for private discussions with Japanese officials. The most important points raised in these several meetings were the following: — Ohira wants to discuss the "declaration" idea with you at the Summit. Japan has no specific suggestions at this point but is primarily interested in determining U.S. motives, in participating in the preparation and in having a security section which is general enough so that Japan can adhere. (One compromise here might be to have one paragraph of a general nature to which Japan can adhere, with following paragraphs of a more NATO-oriented nature.)

— One ranking official informed me that Japan was enthusiastic about the idea of a declaration, but that their primary reservation resulted from their doubts about the American motivation behind this. Four years ago they would have jumped at the idea because they had confidence that the U.S. saw its interest in broad terms and would utilize this declaration for constructive ends. Now, in light of America's recent chauvinistic approach to monetary and trade issues, Japan suspects that a broad charter would be used as a framework for applying greater pressure on Japan to make non-reciprocal economic concessions.

— The soybean issue has raised very real questions in Japan as to how much it can rely on the U.S. as a future supplier. The Japanese government has in the past gone out of its way to increase imports from the U.S. That policy is now coming under criticism. The government is under intense pressure to reduce reliance on the U.S. and diversify its purchases. There are those that are firmly convinced that manifestations of the unreliability of the United States as an agricultural supplier is part of an overall lack of unreliability in the political and security areas as well. They see a highly nationalistic America compromising international rules and friendships when doing so suits its purpose.

— In the energy area there is recognition that Japan and the U.S. should pursue mutually compatible objectives, but here again there is lack of confidence in the U.S., which having its own domestic resources and controlling the major companies can afford to pay insufficient attention to Japan and utilize its advantage to gain leverage over Japan. If there is one area in which we can demonstrate our reliability and desire to cooperate with Japan in the future it is energy. Joint research and development, exploration and exploitation in Siberia, equitable sharing arrangements are important to the Japanese and to us as well. Japan is interested in pursuing the possibilities of a joint uranium enrichment project and will pursue this further. On research and development Japan agreed to provide us with some concrete research suggestions in preparation for a meeting of the experts of both countries. If Japanese-U.S. cooperation is to mean anything over the coming decade, it must manifest itself in the energy area.

Comment:

Japanese lack of confidence in U.S. motives, while not a new phenomenon, in this case has considerable justification as the result of recent U.S. performance in the economic area. The best way to deal with this is to convey to Tanaka a better appreciation of what we intend to do with the "declaration." One major point worth emphasizing is that our relationship with the Japanese means more to us than merely resolving a few contentious economic issues, and that the "declaration" is designed to demonstrate the importance of an across-the-board revitalization of our relationship with Europe and Japan so that economic issues do not assume so great an importance and can be dealt with more constructively by the U.S. and its partners. It is not designed to permit us to apply additional leverage on Japan or any other country.

Concurrence: John Froebe

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 539, Country Files, Far East, Japan, July 1973–December 31, 1974 (sic), vol. 10. Confidential. Sent for information. Concurred in by Froebe. Kissinger initialed the memorandum on August 8.

178. Memorandum From John Froebe of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger), Washington, July 30, 1973. 178. Memorandum From John Froebe of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger), Washington, July 30, 1973.1

Washington, July 30, 1973

MEMORANDUM
NATIONAL SECURITY COUNCIL
ACTION

July 30, 1973

MEMORANDUM FOR: MR. KISSINGER
FROM: JOHN A. FROEBE, JR.
SUBJECT: Tanaka Visit: U.S.-Japan Joint Statement

The purpose of this memorandum is to ask your guidance on the conceptual aspects of the draft Joint Statement (Tab A) to be issued at the end of Prime Minister Tanaka's visit. I have also raised questions on a few specifics, but intend to ask your approval on a greater range of specifics after the next round.

The draft which State has worked out with the Japanese Embassy here is intended to give primary emphasis to U.S.-Japan cooperation on global and regional concerns, and secondary emphasis to bilateral issues. Thus, paragraph 2, states that "the primary focus of this meeting" was U.S.-Japan cooperation on global and regional issues, while paragraphs 3-5 describe the President and Prime Minister's review of particular issues and reaffirmation of the need for continuing U.S.-Japan consultations on these problems. However, their discussion of how the two countries might strengthen cooperation in multilateral questions is not taken up until paragraphs 7 and 11-13, which deal with the Atlantic partnership, international trade and monetary reform, energy, and uranium enrichment. The basic U.S.-Japan alliance is reaffirmed in paragraph 6 and the Mutual Security Treaty in paragraph 8.

An alternative to this means of emphasizing the new focus on multilateral cooperation would be to begin (as in the Kuilima Joint Statement) by reaffirming the basic alliance, and then turn to the emphasis on multilateral cooperation, leaving U.S.-Japan bilateral economic problems until last. (In the Kuilima Joint Statement, the bilateral questions of China policy and trade were discussed first, and then U.S.-Japan multilateral cooperation was taken up.)

This alternative approach would make clear that the new focus was not downgrading the importance that the U.S. attaches to the strength of the basic alliance — a point on which many Japanese and other are skeptical — and that the new emphasis on multilateral cooperation was being undertaken very much on the basis of and in order to help strengthen the alliance. I do not agree with State's interpretation that the President's desire to shift the emphasis of the relationship from bilateral to multilateral requires that in the Joint Statement the new multilateral focus must be introduced first, and only then can any bilateral questions be taken up. State claims, however, that the Japanese, at least at the working level, prefer the order that State has suggested just as strongly as State does.

The several specific points which I want to raise at this point are: — I would recommend that, wherever in the Joint Statement the question of U.S.-Japan multilateral cooperation is taken up, this question be treated holistically: that the specific issues be treated immediately after the general question is introduced, rather than scattered through the remainder of the statement as in the present draft, in order to make the point more forcefully and coherently.

— In dealing with the question of the Atlantic Declaration (paragraph 7) the present draft uses the term "Declaration of Principles." This reflects the Japanese preference for a term that more accurately reflects the Japanese involvement than one that identifies the Declaration largely only with the Atlantic community. I agree that a more neutral term could better reflect the basic trilateral character of the arrangement.

— I would recommend that we also include in the treatment of the U.N. (paragraph 16) a statement reiterating U.S. support in principle for a permanent U.N. Security Council seat for Japan. Secretary Rogers about a year ago made our support for this a matter of public record. Reiterating our position in the Joint Statement would please the Japanese greatly as our recognition of their global stature — the main theme of the meetings.

Recommendations:

That the Joint Statement first reaffirm the importance of the U.S.-Japan alliance, and then introduce the theme of U.S.-Japan multilateral cooperation.
Approve [HK initialed]
Disapprove

That the theme of U.S.-Japan multilateral cooperation be treated holistically, with the specific issues of multilateral cooperation following immediately after the introduction of the main theme in the Statement.
Approve [HK initialed]
Disapprove

That the term "Declaration of Principles," rather than "Atlantic Declaration" be used to describe the trilateral declaration on the new partnership between Europe, Japan, and ourselves.
Approve [HK initialed]
Disapprove

That the Joint Statement include a reiteration of our support in principle for a permanent U.N. Security Council seat for Japan.
Approve [HK initialed]
Disapprove

Concurrence:
Mr. Hormats

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 927, VIP Visits, Japan PM Tanaka’s Visit, July 31, 1973 [1 of 3]. Confidential. Sent for action. Concurred in by Hormats. A draft of the joint draft statement is attached as Tab A. Kissinger initialed his approval of all four recommendations on August 1.

179. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, July 31, 1973, 11 a.m.. 179. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, July 31, 1973, 11 a.m..1

Washington, July 31, 1973, 11 a.m.

THE WHITE HOUSE
WASHINGTON
MEMORANDUM OF CONVERSATION

PARTICIPANTS:

Kakuei Tanaka, Prime Minister of Japan

Takeshi Yasukawa, Japanese Ambassador to the United States

Hidetoshi Ukawa, Japanese Ministry of Foreign Affairs (Interpreter)

The President

Henry A. Kissinger, Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs

James J. Wickel, American Embassy, Tokyo (Interpreter)

DATE, TIME, AND PLACE: July 31, 1973, 11:00 a.m.
The White House

SUBJECTS: (1) Exchange of Visits; (2) U.S.-Japan Trade; (3) Nuclear Capabilities; (4) Educational Exchange; (5) USSR and PRC; (6) U.S.-USSR Summit; (7) USSR, PRC and U.S.-Japan Security Relations; (8) New Atlantic Charter; (9) Press Guidance

The President and the Prime Minister exchanged pleasantries while two shifts of press photographers took pictures, with the President recalling his recent high level foreign visitors. (Note: The conversation began while I was being identified to the satisfaction of the United States Secret Service. Only a portion was missed.)

Prime Minister Tanaka expressed deep appreciation for the warm welcome accorded him by the President on arrival at the White House. He commented on the healthy appearance of the President, adding that he seemed to have made a full recovery from his recent bout with pneumonia.

1. Exchange of Visits

Prime Minister Tanaka said that he had been asked by His Imperial Majesty The Emperor during his pre-departure audience to convey a personal message to the President, that is, that the Imperial Family wishes to do its best to strengthen the ties of friendship between Japan and the United States. Further, he said that Their Majesties The Emperor and Empress also asked him to convey their warmest personal regards to the President.

Recalling that it had not been possible because of their busy schedules to realize a visit to the United States this year by Their Majesties in response to the kind invitation extended last year, Prime Minister Tanaka stated with emphasis that the visit would take place sometime next year.

Prime Minister Tanaka officially extended an invitation to the President and Mrs. Nixon to visit Japan this year or next, at whatever time might be convenient for the President. He said that the people of Japan would welcome their visit.

The President expressed deep appreciation and his sense of honor in accepting the Prime Minister's invitation to visit Japan at a mutually convenient time. He assured the Prime Minister that the people of the United States would welcome a visit by Their Majesties at a mutually convenient time. Noting that he recalls with pleasure their two previous meetings, in Tokyo in 1953 and Anchorage in 1971, he asked the Prime Minister to convey his own personal regards to HIM The Emperor.

However, in view of the problems which confront the leaders of governments such as ours and Japan's, the President cautioned that it might be somewhat difficult to work out precise timing for these visits, but now that the visits have been agreed to in principle he believed that it would be possible to select a period of several months during which specific dates might be considered. Warning that any leaks about specific dates might require each of us to deny that plans have been made, the President suggested that he and the Prime Minister agree in principle at this time on the desirability of the visits, but leave to private (not diplomatic) channels the task of working out specific mutually convenient dates. (He indicated that this channel would be Ambassador Yasukawa and Dr. Kissinger.)

The President, recalling his own visits to the PRC and USSR and the Prime Minister's visit to the PRC, said that he wished to make sure that when the arrangements have been made there would be no chance for criticism that these visits had not been given the same emphasis as the visits to the PRC and USSR. Therefore, he concluded, we should take adequate time to make thorough preparations.

2. U.S.-Japan Trade

Prime Minister Tanaka recalled that the imbalance of trade between Japan and the United States was a matter of major concern when he met the President in Hawaii almost one year ago. Today, however, he was pleased to report on the favorable results of one year of effort by the GOJ in the interim to reduce this imbalance, success in which permitted him to meet the President in a more relaxed frame of mind. At Kuilima he had said that it might take three years to reduce Japan's surplus in trade with the United States by half, but this goal has now been achieved in just one year. To illustrate the trend he explained that Japan's trade with the United States during May was in deficit by some $11 million and in June even more so. In the first half of 1973, compared with 1972, Japan's exports to the United States increased only 8%, but imports from the United States increased 49%; exports to the United States were valued at $4.3 billion, and imports at $3.2 billion, which indicated a considerable reduction in Japan's surplus to about $1.2 billion over this period. Moreover, he said, the GOJ achieved this drastic reduction by stimulating Japan's economy to increase domestic demand, even though this has exposed the GOJ to mounting public pressures generated by the severe rise in prices.

The President acknowledged that one severe problem that great industrial powers like the United States and Japan must deal with is these enormous trade balances. The only worse problem of which he could conceive would be to have a total GNP only as large as our trade volume, which is the situation of 90% of the countries in the world. He added that it is also worth noting that the United States and Japan, each with a highly developed industry, are destined to compete, but the leaders of our governments, himself and the Prime Minister, have a responsibility to future generations, and should see that this competition is never allowed to get bitter, or belligerent, or grow into political confrontation. He believed that both nations could compete, and could also work out the problems which arise without causing injury to each other. This would not be easy, because Japanese and American businessmen are hard, tough and competitive. Nevertheless, he felt that the leaders of both governments could leaven this competitive spirit so that it would not drive both countries apart. The Prime Minister is sometimes called the "computerized bulldozer," he said, noting that he also has a brain. In other words, however difficult, he believed that leaders like the Prime Minister could help avoid a crisis.

Turning to the United States domestic economy, the President said that the immediate problem we face is feed-grains, including soybeans. The recent speech on the economy in which he announced the embargo on all exports of feed grains might have been good domestic politics, in relation to the poultry, pork and beef industries, but he acknowledged that it was disastrous in terms of our foreign policy, impairing our relations with Japan, particularly since we have been urging Japan to buy more of our agricultural products.

The President noted that Japan is an island. In a sense the United States is also an island, despite being a continent, but he did not believe that any major power could be an island in the world today. All are now similar to Great Britain in the 19th century, which while an island was global in terms of its interests. Therefore, he believed that today's meeting with the Prime Minister is historic, because instead of discussing only Japan and its bilateral relations with the United States they would discuss the broadest range of common interests around the world, including Southeast Asia, the Middle East and Europe, as well as how many more Toyota automobiles Japan wishes to sell in the United States.

[Prime Minister Tanaka asked whether he might smoke a cigarette, deferring to the condition of the President, who had just been released from the hospital. The President disclaimed any need to refrain from smoking on hits account.]

Prime Minister Tanaka agreed with the President's observations. To illustrate the closeness of Japan's economic relations with the United States he explained that Japan has a world-wide trade amounting to $80 billion, of which 30% is with the United States directly, and an additional 10% with American oil companies located abroad. Adding the two discloses that 40% of Japan's trade is with the United States, directly or indirectly. He expressed the hope that this trade would continue to expand, without detrimental effect on the domestic economy of the United States, and to the extent that it is rational, acceptable, and would help improve communication between both nations. For this reason he supported continuing close consultations between both governments.

The President pointed out that the problem of deepest concern to businessmen who call on him, without exception, is not trade but the opening of the investment market in Japan to American companies. He understood that this is difficult, adding that he says "ask the Prime Minister" when asked this question.

Prime Minister Tanaka interrupted to explain that the GOJ had already implemented a sweeping program of 100% liberalization of investment on May 1, 1973, with only a few exceptions. He assured the President that this was complete 100% foreign ownership, not just 49% in a joint venture.

The President suggested that further discussion of trade and economic affairs be left to his and the Prime Minister's representatives, who would present any recommendations after full discussion.

3. Nuclear Capabilities

The President asked the Prime Minister for his evaluation of the international situation, which is more important. In past meetings he said that he has only discussed U.S.-Japan bilateral relations, and perhaps Korea, except for certain confidential matters. Today, he noted that Japan lacks a nuclear capability, as we know, which it could have except for reasons of which we are fully aware. He said that Japan is a major world power because of its enormous economic productivity, which would inevitably force on it certain choices. He confided that in the awareness of many other national leaders, Japan is in fact considered to be a nuclear power. In his talks with them, he said that leaders in the PRC, USSR and the European nations express great respect for Japan, not just because it is a great economic power, but because they all realize that Japan is destined to become the second most powerful nation in the world. Citing Herman Kahn's thesis that Japan might emerge as the leading nation in the world by the end of the 20th century, he said that he believed that Japan would play a great role in the world. It was for this reason, he explained, that he spoke as he did above. He also inquired whether the Prime Minister wished to discuss, in confidence, the future of Southeast Asia, U.S.-Japan relations and our relations with Europe, Russia and China.

Prime Minister Tanaka said that he wished to do so.

The President cautioned that he would tread on sensitive political ground. He observed that a number of nations throughout the world are jealous of Japan, both for the past and the present role it plays in the world. In the United States there are a number of isolationists do not wish to see Japan play any role, but would rather see it live unto itself. However, he said that his own fundamental view is that an economic giant cannot remain a political pygmy, which is contrary to the laws of nature. An economic giant, he stressed, could never remain a political pygmy. The time for decision is now, but not in the form of a treaty or policy decisions about security forces. He said that we need to know, as a friend, what a forward-looking leader like the Prime Minister sees as the role Japan will play in the world.

Prime Minister Tanaka, by way of preface, said that the entire Japanese people appreciate the aid and assistance given by the United States over the past quarter-century, which has enabled Japan to make a rare achievement in recovering from total defeat. The basic wish of the Japanese people is to take their place forever alongside there nations, cooperating closely and in full consultation with the United States.

Prime Minister Tanaka stated that Japan would not possess nuclear weapons because of constitutional restrictions. However, as a member of the international community Japan would make whatever positive contribution it could to promote world peace in the technological, economic and other areas, Japan would also play a positive, constructive role in support of international agencies, to resolve such issues as the monetary problems, international liquidity, the new round of trade negotiations and economic assistance to the LDCs.

With respect to the newly emerging problem of energy, including petroleum, enrichment of uranium, and particularly the search for new energy resources, Prime Minister Tanaka said that Japan would positively support international cooperation, centered on the United States. However, he reiterated, Japan would not possess nuclear or military power because of its constitutional restrictions.

In pursuing its policies vis-a-vis the Soviet Union and China Prime Minister Tanaka said that Japan wished to maintain its close ties with the United States, and would not pursue for its own advantage any policy the least bit disadvantageous to the United States and the other nations of the Free World. In any case, he said, Japan wishes to develop its policy on the role it wishes to play in the world, its international actions, and its response to international situations on the basis of a full meeting of the minds with the United States.

4. Educational Exchange

Prime Minister Tanaka digressed from the subject to note that some Americans apparently misunderstand Japan's purpose. He commented that the Japanese people understand the United States, with the exception of those few who distort American motives for political purposes. While the Japanese people understand and appreciate their relationship with the United States, the United States is so large that many people who may understand Europe do not understand Japan, which is not in Japan's best interest. For that reason, he explained, the Japan Fund proposes to invite many Americans in an attempt to deepen their understanding of Japan; in fact, he added, the Japan Fund intends to devote half of its$10 million fund to invite Americans to Japan.

In addition, Prime Minister Tanaka said, he would announce at the Press Club that Japan proposes to grant $10 million to 10 leading American universities in the East, Midwest, South and West. He said that any assistance in selecting the universities to receive these grants would be appreciated.

5. USSR and PRC

Returning to the President's question, Prime Minister Tanaka explained that the GOJ has and would continue to report immediately to the United States the progress of its entire foreign policy, not just with respect to the USSR and PRC. Before taking any decision the GOJ wished to consult the views of the United States to avoid impairing Japan-U.S. relations in any way. In that sense he said that the role of Ambassador Yasukawa might be described best as working for both the United States and Japan.

Referring to his planned visit to the UK, France and West Germany in September and October, to be followed by his visit to the USSR in October, Prime Minister Tanaka recalled the President's own recent meeting with Secretary Brezhnev in Washington, and said that he would be pleased if the President could provide him any information about Secretary Brezhnev.

The President thanked the Prime Minister for giving him the benefit of his world view, and said that he wished to be more specific about some points. He asked what the Prime Minister believes is Secretary Brezhnev's over-riding concern, and what is Chou En-lai's over-riding concern. In responding he suggested that the Prime Minister might choose among such possible issues as trade, political, military or security matters. Or, he might draw on his own conversations, with Chou En-lai, or his intelligence briefs for the meeting with Secretary Brezhnev.

Prime Minister Tanaka, replying in a thoughtful manner, said that he believes that the only interest of the PRC is its common border with the USSR; the PRC seems to be devoting all its energies to the one question of how to deal with a border conflict there, should one arise. He revealed that Chou En-lai, in their conversations in Peking, had cited statistics in giving him an estimate that China would not be able to attain a standard of living comparable to Japan before the end of this century, and had assured him that China wished to move only in the direction of promoting domestic stability. He said that Chou En-lai assured him that China itself has neither the means nor the will to initiate a border conflict with the USSR, which assurance Prime Minister Tanaka said he takes at face value.

Prime Minister Tanaka believed that China has extended assistance to North Vietnam on the premise of its long friendship for Ho Chi-minh, but he does not believe that China would in the future extend positive assistance to North Vietnam for the purpose of causing a conflict.

Prime Minister Tanaka reiterated his belief that China has no aggressive intentions toward any of its neighbors, and that it is concerned only with its own domestic stability and national security. He stressed that China's only concern is the border it shares with the USSR, and the increasing presence of the Soviet Fleet in the Indian Ocean. However, he did not believe that there is any danger that China would provide assistance to this area with a view to causing a conflict.

Prime Minister Tanaka further revealed that he explained to Chou En-lai that Japan would feel threatened by Chinese assistance to North Korea, and that he suggested to Chou En-lai that China keep this in mind, as well as not attempting to liberate Taiwan by force. Chou En-lai, he said, assured him that there is no need to fear the threat of an act of aggression by China. Therefore, Prime Minister Tanaka does not believe that the growing strength of China poses a threat to Japan for the coming generation.

Prime Minister Tanaka also revealed that he gave assurances to Chou En-lai during their talks that Japan does not, and would not possess nuclear weapons, and therefore does not pose a nuclear threat to China. He said that he told Chou En-lai that Japan, even though it has the technological capability to possess nuclear weapons, does not and would not possess them. Therefore, Prime Minister Tanaka said that he believes that as long as Japan does not possess nuclear weapons China would not entertain aggressive intentions against Japan, and since Japan has no aggressive intentions toward China he concluded that there is no danger of war.

Chou En-lai assured him, Prime Minister Tanaka said, that China is preparing to deal with aggression, but has no intention of committing aggression itself. If China has any strength to spare Chou told him that it would be devoted to raising the Chinese standard of living, and assured him that Japan need not feel that there is any threat of aggression by China.

In conclusion, Prime Minister Tanaka gave his estimate that in the absence of a positive detente between the PRC and USSR, in other words, as long as they continue their confrontation, there is no need for Japan to feel threatened by China.

The President began to speak about Soviet attitudes toward China in relation to the future of Japan...

Prime Minister Tanaka, continuing energetically, noted that Soviet agriculture has failed to increase its productivity, so much so that the USSR has been forced to import 20 million tons of grain from the United States to alleviate the shortage of food. The diligence of Soviet labor also seems to be declining, and the USSR faces a difficult domestic situation. Nevertheless, the Soviets possess great military power, which he said represents a great threat to Japan; in fact, almost every day Soviet aircraft fly so-called "Tokyo Express" missions. [Note: These flights sometimes circumnavigate Japan; sometimes they fly to the edge of Japanese air space and return to base via the same general routing.]

Soviet military power, Prime Minister Tanaka said, does constitute a threat to China, and at the same time to Japan as well. Moreover, he noted that Japan has not yet concluded a peace treaty with the USSR, which would not be easy in any case because the return of the four northern islands (Etoroffu, Kunashiri, the Habomais and Shikotan) is a prerequisite condition for Japan to sign a peace treaty with the USSR.

The President said that this should be a simple problem: the USSR, like the United States, is a great power, and he suggested that the Prime Minister need only suggest to Secretary Brezhnev when they meet that the USSR take the same position with respect to the four islands that the United States took with respect to the return of Okinawa, which should serve as a helpful precedent. Of course, he realized that this might pose difficulties for the USSR, because even though the four islands have no strategic value their return would serve as a precedent elsewhere, and would generate pressures for the return of other territories, such as the half of Poland which they occupy, as well as other territories.

6. U.S.-USSR Summit

Turning to his conversations with Secretary Brezhnev at the recent summit meeting, the President said that they reviewed the whole range of bilateral issues between the United States and the USSR, including trade and wheat. He found that they both share the same concern about the Middle East, as perhaps do China and Japan. He also found that Secretary Brezhnev appears to believe what is stated in the Joint Communiqué, that is, that he sincerely wishes to follow a line of peaceful coexistence with the United States and other nations.

One important item to note, the President said, relates to the Agreement for the Prevention of Nuclear War. At United States insistence, a key provision was added, that is, that the use of force or the threat of the use of force by either, or (with emphasis) against third nations, which might threaten to lead to nuclear war would constitute a violation of the Agreement. He explained that the original Soviet position was to limit this provision to a pledge by the United States and the USSR not to use force only (with emphasis) against each other. Viewed in cold analytical terms, the Soviet proposal would render the U.S.-Japan Treaty of Mutual Security worthless, and would also make NATO worthless. Therefore, we insisted that the Agreement include the added explicit provision that the allies of either signatory, (with emphasis) meaning ours, would not be adversely affected by the Agreement.

In the broadest context the President said that he believes that Secretary Brezhnev is trying to lead the Political Bureau along the line of non-confrontation with the United States, which best serves Soviet interests at this time, by following a policy of less foreign adventurism than previously characterized Soviet policy. On the other hand, the Soviets are also aware that they have attained a nuclear capability nearly equal to the United States, although he pointed out that the United States retains a certain advantage in other fields. The Soviets also are not interested in trade for its own sake. Without questioning their motives, he noted his belief that Secretary Brezhnev and the Soviet Union appear to believe that a policy of peaceful coexistence serves their interests. However, he added the disclaimer that he would be the last one to make future projections about Soviet interests, or the use they might make of their immense power. He did not make this statement by way of criticism, but only in the same sense that the USSR also has no way of knowing what the United States might do in the future.

With respect to the PRC, the President said that he has the same clear impression as the Prime Minister, that foreign adventurism does not seem to be in the PRC interest in the foreseeable future in view of the number of domestic problems it faces. He conceded that the USSR also announces that to be its policy too, but cautioned that there is a difference between the Soviet and Chinese promises, that is, that the Soviet Union possesses great military and economic power. In terms of its leading position in the Communist world the USSR must look at the PRC and other Communist states which pose a threat to its central position. Of course, he added, this does not suggest that the Soviets would try to do something about it. Nevertheless, between the lines, the Soviets must consider what might happen in the distant future.

7. USSR, PRC and U.S.-Japan Security Relations

Finally, the President noted one point of great importance to Japan, that whereas the Chinese line over the past years has been to call for the immediate abrogation of the U.S.-Japan Mutual Security Treaty and the withdrawal of the United States from all its alliances including Europe in accordance with the traditional pure communist line, the Chinese position today has changed; while they still publicly proclaim the above line, they take another position in private.

However, the President added (with emphasis) one fact stands out in looking at the PRC, USSR, Japan and the United States: Japan stands naked among its neighbors as an economic giant but a military and political pygmy in contrast to one of its neighbors, the USSR, as well as the others. Japan occupies a tempting position. For that reason the interests of Japan and the United States require the continuation of their (his and the Prime Minister's) own personal friendship, and trade and other relations, including the present security arrangements which represent the best guarantee that the others when they see Japan hanging there like a ripe plum will not feel that it is theirs for aggressive forces to pluck.

Prime Minister Tanaka said that he shared the President's views, adding that he considers Japan's firm ties with the United States to be crucial to all its other relations, without which, he said, Japan could not have normalized relations with the PRC.

The President, making an additional point, said that Japan's productive power makes it a major power in the Free World. Confiding in the Prime Minister, he said that even if the Soviets and the Chinese follow a line of peaceful coexistence — they may still remain our enemies, but we say they are following a line of peaceful coexistence — that does not mean that we cannot improve our relations with our friends without making an enemy of the other. Ultimately, he commented, Secretary Brezhnev is watching the United States carefully, just as we are watching him carefully. However, he concluded, he believes that Secretary Brezhnev wishes to be friends.

One further point for the Prime Minister's information, he said, is that the European nations are rich and fat, and not interested in security matters. Excluding leaders like Heath and Pompidou, the other leaders, the intellectuals have little interest or appreciation of security matters. The trend in public opinion, he observed, is that the United States has entered a period of detente in its relations with the USSR and the PRC, and therefore the world is safe, peace is at hand, and NATO and all our other alliances should be dismantled. He also observed that this attitude is widespread in the United States, as in Japan. Here we have a "new isolationism" which believes that any peace is better than paying the price for defense. Should this attitude become prevalent in the United States, he cautioned, it would endanger our security relations with our friends in Japan, and with our friends in NATO, because people would no longer feel there is any need to maintain security forces there. Then there would be little we could do to persuade the Congress to maintain forces abroad. He said that he believes that, the Prime Minister, being a realist, knows what this means.

However, the President also said that he believes that Secretary Brezhnev believes in following g a policy of peaceful coexistence with the United States and other nations. Although there is little doubt that Secretary Brezhnev places the security of his country uppermost, nevertheless he reiterated his belief that Secretary Brezhnev would try to follow a peace line in a crisis. However, looking at the world, the Soviets are going forward with all their military programs — he said he does not object to this, it is their right to do so, because the only areas under treaty restriction are defensive nuclear weapons and certain offensive nuclear weapons.

The President said that he wished to look at the world as it might develop five years from now. He wondered what kind of a world we would see, with the U.S.-Japan Security Treaty abrogated — and without support for it in Japan there would be many Americans delighted to get out — and with our troops withdrawn from Korea, and viewing Europe with the nations in disarray, refusing to join in a new reassertion of the principles which bind the free nations into unity, followed by a withdrawal of all our forces from Europe. What kind of a world would we have, he asked rhetorically, replying that the United States would be weaker the Soviet Union, that Europe while united economically, would be divided and quarreling in the political and security sense, and the Japan would be economically strong, but would have no capability on the military side. Representative of the prevailing views in academic circles he cited a poll taken at the distinguished institution in which Dr. Kissinger formerly taught, which disclosed that 90% of the faculty and 60% of the students favor that kind of a world. He stressed that it would not be a safe world.

Prime Minister Tanaka said that he understood the President's views well. He too realized that pacifistic abstractions could not adequately guarantee life around the world. Therefore, he said that he believes that Japan-U.S. cooperation is indispensible in the maintenance of peace and security in Asia. In Europe, where France does not share a common border with the USSR he realized that the French might be free to speak as they will, but in divided Germany the West Germans hold the same views as the Japanese. Even though the USSR has made overtures to West Germany with a view to securing German help in the economic reconstruction of the USSR, for example, via the West German-Soviet Treaty, the Germans have not accommodated Soviet wishes.

Prime Minister Tanaka explained that some Japanese scholars advocate the strengthening of the functions of the UN, but he doubted this could be done since the USSR has come to dominate that organization. Without close cooperation, with the United States as the principle axis, the Free World could lose its balance and consequently make the maintenance of peace considerably more difficult.

8. New Atlantic Charter

In this sense, Prime Minister Tanaka said that intellectually he could understand Dr. Kissinger's call for a New Atlantic Charter. Japan, he stated, wishes to cooperate in this undertaking, in those areas in which it can.

The President commented that there could be no Atlantic relations without Japan.

Prime Minister Tanaka stressed that Japan-U.S. cooperation and U.S.-NATO cooperation are essential to the Free World.

The President explained that the kind of world he painted above is not the kind he wants to see, he simply wished to indicate the kind of problems we face. He expressed a strong desire to stand for the right, regardless of what well-intentioned people with a narrow base call for, such as disarmament, dismantling of NATO, and the withdrawal of our forces because peace is at hand. He emphasized that we would advocate what is right, not because we are interested in fighting a war but because a policy of strength and unity is essential to the preservation of peace. To do otherwise would be to turn predatory forces loose in the world.

Prime Minister Tanaka said that he wished to discuss Dr. Kissinger's thesis in detail, particularly how it relates to Japan, the United States and the NATO countries. He suggested that this grouping might be viewed as a second UN of the Free World, with the United States at the center. He reiterated his desire to consult closely on this matter, in strict confidence, and to hear the President's views.

The President suggested that this topic might be reserved for discussion tomorrow. In the meantime Dr. Kissinger suggested that one idea, following up yesterday's discussion, would be to continue to discuss with the Europeans their ideas, but it would also be helpful if at the same time we could have from Japan what the Japanese wish to have included in Declaration of Principles. It would be most helpful if we could develop our dialogue with Japan at the same time we are talking to the various Europeans.

The President endorsed this suggestion, because if our recalcitrant European friends ever decided to move forward [Note: At Dr. Kissinger's suggestion the word "recalcitrant" was not interpreted.] we would not have a European-American framework, with Japan being added later. Instead, Japan would play a role from the beginning as a mutual partner.

Prime Minister Tanaka said that the United Nations is presently an unproductive organization, which has been rendered ineffective in defense of the Free World by pacifistic abstractions; therefore it is difficult to discuss the real issues of peace there.

Prime Minister Tanaka suggested that he and the President also have frank discussions tomorrow on energy, monetary issues and economic assistance to the LDCs. He reiterated his belief in the need for an organized forum, not necessarily formalized by Treaty, in which the advanced industrialized nations could meet to discuss these and similar matters.

9. Press Guidance

Ambassador Yasukawa asked for guidance to brief the Japanese press; he assumed that someone would do the same for the American press.

The President suggested that the press be informed that he and the Prime Minister had discussed the broad range of global problems, including the Pacific and Europe, and that both nations expressed similar views.

The President also said that the press could be informed of the agreement in principle to exchange visits, with Japan prepared to receive his visit any time between now and the end of 1974, and the Emperor to visit the United States next year. He cautioned that no specific dates be given.

There was general agreement on this press line as the meeting ended.

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 927, VIP Visits, Japan PM Tanaka’s Visit, July 31, 1973 [1 of 3]. Secret; Sensitive. During dinner conversation on July 31, Nixon and Tanaka briefly discussed the likelihood of an Imperial visit to Washington, U.S.-Japanese joint development of Siberia, Tanaka’s planned visit to Western Europe and the Soviet Union, and the prospects for getting the Japanese government’s legislative program through the current session of the Diet. (Memorandum of Conversation, July 31, 1973, 8 p.m.; ibid.) Nixon’s talking points for his meetings with Tanaka are ibid., [2 of 3].

180. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, August 1, 1973, 9:30 a.m. 180. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, August 1, 1973, 9:30 a.m. 1

Washington, August 1, 1973, 9:30 a.m.

THE WHITE HOUSE
WASHINGTON
MEMORANDUM OF CONVERSATION

PARTICIPANTS:

Kakuei Tanaka, Prime Minister of Japan

Massayoshi Ohira, Foreign Minister of Japan

Takeshi Yasukawa, Japanese Ambassador to the United States

Yoshio Okawara, Director General, American Affairs Bureau, Japanese Ministry of Foreign Affairs

Hidetoshi Ukawa, American Affairs Bureau, Japanese Ministry of Foreign Affairs (Interpreter)

The President

William P. Rogers, Secretary of State

Henry A. Kissinger, Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs

Robert S. Ingersoll, United States Ambassador to Japan

James J. Wickel, American Embassy, Tokyo (Interpreter)

DATE, TIME, AND PLACE: August 1, 1973, 9:30 a.m.
The White House

SUBJECT: Second Meeting between the President and Prime Minister: (1) U.S.-Japan Trade Balance; (2) Korea-Security; (3) Korea-U.N. ; (4) Korea-Recognition of North and South; (5) Southeast Asia; (6) USSR and PRC and Rimlands of Asia; (7) U.S.-PRC Relations; (8) Energy; (9) U.S.-Japan Consultative Organs; (10) U.S.-Japan Mutual Security Treaty;(11) U.S.-Japan Joint Development, Siberia

Prime Minister Tanaka thanked the President for the dinner he hosted last evening, in particular for having Miss Roberta Peters sing afterward. He praised her voice, and expressed envy of her modulation and volume — a person with a voice like that would be an effective political campaigner.

1. U.S.-Japan Trade Balance

The President began the discussion by expressing appreciation for the progress made by Japan in reducing the great imbalance in bilateral trade which the Prime Minister promised to do at Kuilima. This indicated how much could be achieved through U.S.-Japan cooperation.

Prime Minister Tanaka said that better progress has been made than he expected last year. He forecast that by March 1974 Japan's foreign exchange reserves would be reduced to about half of their peak level earlier this year, down to about $10 billion from slightly less than $20 billion. Moreover, he expected that Japan's trade surplus with the United states would be reduced from its peak of about $4 billion by more than half.

The President recognized that this represents a difficult accomplishment, because of the strain it has placed on Japan's economy. However, in the interest of stability in international trade and monetary affairs it is essential that these two major powers put their trade into better balance.

Prime Minister Tanaka explained that the Government of Japan (GOJ) has taken a stringent policy since the Kuilima Summit to increase the rate of growth of imports and reduce the rate of growth of exports. As a result, Japan's wholesale price index has increased by some 15 percent, but Japans improvement of the imbalance in its BOP has improved twice as much as expected. Nevertheless, he expressed confidence that the GOJ could keep price increases within manageable limits. He took pleasure in thus reporting Japan's contribution to the BOP improvement, which has been given first priority, with the domestic economy next.

2. Korea - Security

The President noted that Korea had not been discussed yesterday. Prime Minister Tanaka asked whether Taiwan should also be included in this discussion; the President agreed, and added Southeast Asia.

Prime Minister Tanaka said that stability in the ROK and the Korean Peninsula is vital to peace and stability in Asia. Because North Korea should not be allowed to remain a closed inward looking society he suggested that it is desirable, and even essential, to peace in Korea to draw North Korea out, and into the U.N. as an observer at the same time as the ROK. In the meantime, his advice to the South Koreans is to keep strict guard at the 38th parallel. He also said that he promised the ROKG that Japan would cooperate in extending positive economic assistance to help industrialize and stabilize the livelihood of the people. Unless the ROK economy becomes stronger than that of North Korea he doubted whether talks between them would lead to favorable progress. In comparing the two, the ROK is slightly weaker than North Korea in steel production, but is making progress in its yearly plans to develop primary industry, particularly agriculture, by land improvements, mechanization of agriculture, and improving the quality of life in agricultural villages.

Prime Minister Tanaka explained that he and Foreign Minister Ohira in their recent talks with the ROK Prime Minister in Tokyo had explored the possibility of locating new Japanese industrial plants, particularly petrochemical plants which cause the kind of pollution no longer acceptable to the Japanese people, in areas like Korea; the ROK Prime Minister had replied that the Koreans would be willing to receive such Japanese investment. Prime Minister Tanaka said that he also suggested to the ROK Prime Minister that Japan build a refinery complex in Korea when Tyumen oil becomes available.

The President asked Prime Minister Tanaka and Foreign Minister Ohira for their views on the Korean attitudes toward Japan. During his own travels he had noted considerable Korean antagonism toward Japan about 1959 -1960 when he visited the ROK on behalf of President Eisenhower, although the situation had improved by the time of his travels in 1963-1964. Granted that there has been improvement, he asked whether the improvement is satisfactory, or whether lingering frictions remain.

Prime Minister Tanaka admitted that ROK feelings against Japan were only natural in view of previous historical facts, but said that this earlier antagonism no longer exists because Japan and the ROK share a common destiny: without ROK stability Japan cannot be stable, and without Japanese assistance the ROK has no security. If North Korea should take over South Korea some 20 million people would have no refuge except fleeing to Japan; therefore Japan must assist the ROK. He described the relationship in terms of a Japanese proverb which states that water flows freely in both directions (i.e., the Japanese and Koreans communicate easily and get along well).

With respect to the UNC, Prime Minister Tanaka assumed that we could all agree that the United States should maintain strong forces in place and not withdraw troops from the ROK, and that on the economic side Japan would give the assistance needed by the ROK to attain a higher level of economic power than North Korea.

Foreign Minister Ohira, by way of amplification, confirmed that relations between Japan and the ROK have improved considerably. With Japan extending positive economic cooperation, friendship has flowed from economic interdependence. He stressed the importance of cooperating with the ROK, to provide for its security and to improve the well-being of the Korean people. Japan must and would continue to cooperate with the ROK throughout its current five year plan for economic development, under which the ROKG is making a great effort to put the country on its own feet. However, when the ROK reaches that stage of development in which it could stand on its own feet, Japan should be prepared to shift the relationship to economic considerations.

During discussion of North Korea and the U.N. with the ROK Prime Minister, Foreign Minister Ohira said that both sides agreed to support the international position of the ROK with the cooperation of the United States; he stressed the need to do so in view of the importance of ROK stability to Japan.

Foreign Minister Ohira recalled that in the past Japan maintained two divisions of troops in South Korea, and said that under present circumstances which preclude direct military assistance Japan wishes to extend economic assistance equivalent to the cost of maintaining two divisions in Korea. This kind of positive economic cooperation has the further advantage of increasing Korean understanding of Japan.

Secretary Rogers' agreed with the above assessment of Korean attitudes toward Japan, citing the fact that he had detected a much warmer feeling toward Japan during his own recent visit to Seoul. He endorsed the desirability of Japan maintaining close ties with the ROK and explained that the United States presently maintains one division there with a total force of 42,000 men. He expressed concern, however, about North Korea's continuing military build-up, particularly the rapid build-up of its air forces. While ROK ground forces are quite strong in comparison to North Korea, its air forces lag behind those of North Korea. Up to now it has been true that both have been roughly equal, primarily in defensive air forces, but North Korea is presently building up an edge in offensive air capability.

Secretary Rogers also explained that the United States is currently modernizing ROK military forces as promised when 20,000 American troops were withdrawn. He noted frankly, however, that this modernization program is moving slowly, and that the date of completion has been set back two years. In the meantime, we have assured the ROKG that we would not withdraw any more troops before completion. Nevertheless, the present mood of the Congress is to reduce American forces not just in Korea but around the world.

In this respect Secretary Rogers called attention to the victory for the President in the House of Representatives which voted last night against any troop reductions this year and to study the subject next year. In effect this means that the Mansfield Amendment is dead for now and that the United States should be able to maintain its present troop strength in Korea through FY 74.

3. Korea - UN

Turning to the UNGA, Secretary Rogers emphasized the need for close US-Japan cooperation to avoid a "licking" on the vote on Korea. The ROK would be deeply affected by a UN vote to dismantle the UNC, which he felt would also create a domestic political problem in Japan because of the UN SOFA that also applies to our forces there. He asked Foreign Minister Ohira for his assessment of the impact of such a vote in Japan.

Foreign Minister Ohira said that Japan would be vastly relieved if the continued presence of United States Forces in Korea could be assured without impairment to their function. He noted that dismantling the UNC would not of itself destroy the basis for the continued presence of US forces in Korea, but reiterated his desire to consult fully with the United States on "ways and means" to ensure their continued presence there.

In responding to this principal question, Secretary Rogers said that the United States intends to continue its bilateral Security Treaty with the ROK. However, an adverse UN vote could create a legal problem with respect to the Armistice Commission because the Armistice was signed by the UNC. A similar question might arise about resolving DMZ dispute s in the Armistice Commission where the United States member represents the UNC. He speculated that this question might not arise, however, if both Koreas were admitted to the UN at the same time, as proposed in President Park's recent initiative.

Secretary Rogers conceded that there would be a serious problem if the Communists were successful in their efforts to have the UN vote to dissolve the UNC and also to declare all previous UN actions on Korea null and void, as proposed by Kim Il-sung. Therefore, he urged strongly that Japan also cooperate to gain support for President Park's proposal that both Koreas enter the UN at the same time. While he could foresee pressures, he stated that the United States can and will remain in Korea.

Even so, we should make a major effort to keep the UNC because it would represent a victory for Communism if it were dismantled and it appeared that just the United States is interested in the ROK. He noted his discussion of a canvass of votes on this issue yesterday with the ROK Ambassador, which showed that we could win at present by a margin of a few votes. To be 100% sure of winning he urged that we both try to secure a margin of 15 votes.

Foreign Minister Ohira replied that Japan, too, would do its best to as sure a favorable vote. He recognized that the Japan-US Mutual Security Treaty also plays a role in supporting US forces in Korea, and did not anticipate any substantive change. Nevertheless, as the Secretary pointed out, legal problems could arise depending on the outcome of the UN vote. Japan wished to study these possibilities energetically, and to discuss the results of its study with the United States. While it is only natural to believe that we would win the vote, he did not wish to appear overly optimistic.

Secretary Rogers stressed the importance of not appearing to consider this matter unimportant, and of not showing a lack of enthusiasm because we would keep our forces in Korea anyway. It would be a major defeat if we lost the vote in the UN. Fortunately, President Park's proposal gives us a good position to argue in favor of admitting both Koreas at the same time before taking any vote on changing the UNC. Many nations which were not members of the UN at the time of the Korean conflict have little direct interest in Korea, but we could have a great influence if they could see how greatly important this matter is to Japan. Otherwise, it would appear that it is just the United States which is concerned.

4. Korea - Recognition of North and South

Secretary Rogers said that many western nations are moving rapidly to establish contacts and diplomatic relations with North Korea. We are not opposed to this, if the Eastern European and Communist nations move quickly to do the same with the ROK. During his recent discussions in Seoul the ROKs expressed their concern that if the Western nations move too quickly to establish diplomatic and trade relations with North Korea the world will get the impression that there is no other side; and that the ROK would be isolated if North Korea came to be viewed by the world as the true representative of all of Korea. He stressed that we want these nations to slow down, and wait at least until after the UN vote.

Foreign Minister Ohira replied that Japan would act with extreme prudence in this respect. After all, Japan's own security would be affected if the ROK did not remain secure and stable. Moreover, Japan does not view North and South Korea as equals.

Secretary Rogers urged that we tilt in favor of the ROK whenever possible in the interest of strengthening a non-Communist Korea and preventing it from being isolated by the Communists.

Prime Minister Tanaka agreed, and said that Japan's economic assistance to the ROK should prove helpful.

The President said that this goal is important in terms of developing the support we need to continue our military efforts in the face of the increasingly loud voices in Asia and Europe calling for a total American withdrawal, which are also increasingly heard in the United States. Our purpose is to promote stability; it is not ideological. We simply wish to avoid creating a vacuum by withdrawing. He noted that he and the Prime Minister both agreed that neither the United States nor Japan have any imperialist or colonialist ambitions. However, he warned that if we all decided to go home and devote ourselves to building better sewing machines and transistor radios we would leave the world in a vacuum, which would quickly be filled by those who wish to do so in Asia and elsewhere.

5. Southeast Asia

The President said that the situation is different in Southeast Asia. Most of the American people no longer wish to play a role there, having been stung deeply by a long and debilitating war. Nevertheless, he is continuing to try to get the support of Congress necessary to continue our military assistance, because if the Communists continue their military domination of Vietnam, the future of Indonesia, the small countries like Malaysia and Singapore, as well as Thailand and others would be affected. Because of a variety of reasons including trade, we know that the biggest stake is not held by the United States, but by Japan. Therefore, it is encouraging to note that Japan is following a constructive policy of economic aid to South Vietnam, which is in our mutual interest.

6. USSR and PRC and Rimlands of Asia

Viewing the world in this sense the President said that his initiatives toward the PRC and the USSR do not necessarily mean a great increase in trade with them. Instead, in succeeding in these initiatives, the real gain is the reduction of the danger of military confrontation. In economic terms, Japan, which knows Asia better than we do, is aware of the fact that there is a much greater potential to expand trade between Japan and the United States, or other nations of the Free World.

However, setting aside trade, the President noted that Japan like the United States supports independence and freedom, but warned that if the 300 million people living around the rimland of Asia came under the domination of either Communist superpower the survival of Japan and other free nations would be placed in jeopardy, and they would find it difficult to stay out of the Communist orbit. In saying this he did not mean that we should adopt a belligerent attitude toward the PRC and USSR, but on the contrary suggested that we seek to develop contacts and negotiate with them, as the United States has done, to try to reduce the tensions which could lead to a military conflict that would involve the entire world. More than anything else he urged that we keep in mind the need to strengthen the nations around the rim of Asia in freedom and independence which in one way or another share our views and our form of government.

The President said that it takes courage to oppose, as the Prime Minister has in Japan, the left-wing forces in Asia and Europe to prevent them from succeeding in their public campaign to get the United States to go home. However, he noted that public opinion has developed in the United States in such a way that the question is being asked increasingly whether the United States alone should bear the burden of providing military aid to the small nations on the rim of the two superpowers in Asia, or whether others would share this burden. Usually, this question is asked about Japan. Therefore, the role Japan chooses to play in the ROK, its neighbor, and in Vietnam would be most important. To the extent that Japan could provide increased economic assistance, our own case before the American people would be made more persuasive. He stressed that it is in our common interest to strengthen these nations.

Secretary Rogers said that he hoped there would be some discussion of Taiwan later, noting that Taiwan's economy had its best year ever last year, and that our own relations with Taiwan also have grown through the past year.

Prime Minister Tanaka recalled meeting the American press recently in Tokyo, and telling them that it is relatively less difficult to maintain the peace in Europe, but that the most difficult problems are to be found in Asia. He also told them to be cautious lest they err in their estimates of Asian reality, and that the very foundations of the free and democratic world could begin to crumble at the base if we should fail to do all in our power to maintain peace in Asia. He said that he also tried to convey the same feeling to the influential Senators and Representatives he has met during this visit.

Prime Minister Tanaka said that Japan would do all it could to prevent the Communization of Korea, which he believes is the strong point at which to resist a Soviet advance through North Korea. Similarly, should Vietnam go Communist he feared that all the nations around it would also go Communist, or turn pink. Therefore, he agreed completely with the concerns expressed above by the President.

Warning that he could not say so publicly in Japan because of Japan's relations with the PRC, Prime Minister Tanaka said that Taiwan is also an important base. He expressed the fervent hope that the United States would continue to maintain a strong position there.

Prime Minister Tanaka expressed his view that as long as the ROK, Taiwan and South Vietnam did not go Communist Asia would not go Communist. Therefore, he concluded that it is only natural that Japan should provide strong economic cooperation to the ROK and South Vietnam, just as the United States is providing military cooperation to both.

Prime Minister Tanaka then suggested that the free nations on the fringes of Vietnam—not just Japan, but Australia, New Zealand and others—might establish a system to defend the free world nations.

[Note: This tentative overture appeared to shock Foreign Minister Ohira, who immediately changed the subject. It is somewhat typical of Prime Minister Tanaka, who is addicted to introducing the most difficult subjects with the least preparation.]

7. US-PRC Relations

Foreign Minister Ohira asked what schedule the United States has for proceeding to establish diplomatic relations with the PRC.

Prime Minister Tanaka interjected excitedly "especially leading to recognition."

The President replied that we have no schedule at this time. We believe that the present relationship is acceptable to them, as to us, and provides for all the contact we need. We would not wish to raise the Taiwan issue to a higher level, which would not be in the interest of either of us. We plan to continue to follow the policy we have followed up to now. We are not pressing them for a change, and they are not pressing us for a change. If there should be a change—and he did not anticipate there would be—we would be in touch with Japan. However, at present neither the United States nor China has any intention of seeking a change.

Secretary Rogers asked whether Japan has resolved the issue of the air route to Taiwan.

Foreign Minister Ohira replied "not yet." Although Japan wishes to conclude a Civil Air Agreement with the PRC as soon as possible, which would permit the Chinese to fly into Japan and beyond, there are about 300,000 Japanese per year flying to Taiwan. Japan hopes to gain the understanding of Peking to maintain the capability to satisfy this air travel demand. He hoped that Japan would succeed in this undertaking, otherwise Japan would face difficulties.

8. Energy

The President raised the subject of energy and said that our policies are parallel. The United States and Japan are cooperating in the development of peaceful uses of atomic energy, and other sources of energy. He felt it important to recall his discussions with the Prime Minister at dinner last evening, about the development of the Siberian pipeline, and noted that they shared the conclusion that US-Japan cooperation in the projects under discussion is essential, and in the interest of both nations. He asked for the views of the Foreign Minister.

Foreign Minister Ohira replied that he and Secretary Rogers had also discussed the energy problem in their counterpart meeting. He was pleased to note not the slightest difference in view between Japan and the United States in the broad discussions or in the review of detailed points raised by Under Secretary Casey. Both Japan and the United States have agreed to exchange information, and to engage in joint R & D projects, including cost sharing, in the expectation of active talks at the policy-making level not only about oil but also uranium enrichment. He was pleased at the agreement to include in these exchanges information on the technology necessary to abate the environmental pollution caused by the use of these energy sources. He hoped to gain "the blessings" of the President and Prime Minister on this agreement.

The President "endorsed" the agreement.

The Prime Minister explained that Japan hitherto estimated that both Japan and the United States would be 10% dependent on atomic energy by 1985, but said that this should be revised to indicate a 25% reliance on atomic energy by that year for reasons familiar to all of us. Japan has received "approaches" from many other countries with respect to the development of energy sources, but he confirmed Japan's desire to maintain its central relationship in this area with the United States.

Prime Minister Tanaka explained the Foreign Minister's statement about Japan-US exchanges of technology, pollution abatement technology, and R & D in technology. The GOJ has in mind budgetary appropriations to maintain these exchanges. In addition, private firms working with Japan's AEC and the Japan Nuclear Fuel Corporation also wish to cooperate. Moreover, Japan recently sent a mission to study Brazil's uranium ore deposits, which it wishes to develop jointly with the United States. Above and beyond academic scientific exchanges, Japan wishes to cooperate actively in R & D performed in the United States, which Japan is prepared to fund in part.

9. US -Japan Consultative Organs

Foreign Minister Ohira said that a number of organizations have grown up for regular consultations between Japan and the United States, including scientific cooperation, medical research, cultural and educational affairs, Korea, Indochina and other broad questions affecting the Pacific area, and a new body on energy has become necessary. He hoped, therefore, to consult with the Department of State on how these various consultative organizations could be sorted out, keeping those which are important and gradually phasing out those which have already served their purpose.

The President explained that he has named Governor Love as the new director of all our energy programs. He said that he would see to it that Governor Love works in close cooperation with Japan, in this area where we need more consultation and coordination, concerning energy, the very life blood of modern industrial nations such as Japan, the United States and Europe. It would not help any of the rest if one of us should fall because of a lack of energy.

The President said that it is also in the mutual interest of all of us to maintain uninterrupted access to the energy resources of the Middle East, so that none of us fall, as well as to develop energy resources not yet known. There may be new energy resources apart from atomic energy. Here we should consult, and establish joint ventures which we would welcome.

Prime Minister Tanaka agreed, and explained that the GOJ would try to budget for research on new resources, such as solar and geothermal energy. He reiterated the view that government and business in Japan wished to cooperate and engage in joint ventures with the United States and other advanced industrial nations.

10. US-Japan Mutual Security Treaty

Foreign Minister Ohira asked to report to the President on the smooth operation of the US-Japan Mutual Security Treaty. The American Embassy in Tokyo has been consulting closely with the Foreign Ministry and the Japan Defense Agency to enhance the effective operation of the MST. He believed that the GOJ has the full understanding of the United States Government on this fundamental aspect of Japan-US relations, and expressed the desire to continue to give the highest consideration to it. In particular, he wished to consider the further advantage of additional consolidation of some US bases in Japan, without derogation to their deterrent function; which would also enable the United States to reduce its defense expenditures. He regretted that Japan could not make a direct military contribution. However, he felt that making more efficient use of the bases Japan provides the United States under the MST, while reducing the costs to the United in the process would contribute to the United States purpose. He hoped the President would understand his remarks about the importance to the peace and security of Japan and the United States, as well as Asia, of maintaining the MST and a more efficient base situation.

Secretary Rogers noted that the operation of the MST has been working well, with close consultations between Ambassador Ingersoll and the Foreign Minister which DOD also appreciates.

Prime Minister Tanaka made clear that by consolidation of bases the Government of Japan wishes only to contribute to the modernization and efficiency of the US forces deterrent capability, with absolutely no impairment, at the same time the United States reduces its cost burden. He hoped the United States understood that the GOJ is prepared to budget funds for such consolidations to facilitate the process.

11. U.S.-Japan Joint Development-Siberia

Finally, Prime Minister Tanaka referred to his agreement with the President at dinner last evening which he would not make public that Japan and the United States would move forward to cooperate in the Siberian development projects they discussed, Tyumen oil and Yakutsk gas. The PRC has also requested that Japan cooperate with the United States in this undertaking, to make it safer for them. He appreciated the understanding that American firms would enter into joint venture with Japanese companies in these development projects.

The President said that he and the Prime Minister agree on this, the PRC agrees, even the Soviets agree—we all see eye-to-eye.

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 927, VIP Visits, Japan PM Tanaka’s Visit, July 31, 1973 [1 of 3]. Secret; Sensitive.

181. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, September 24, 1973, 5–5:30 p.m. 181. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, September 24, 1973, 5–5:30 p.m. 1

Washington, September 24, 1973, 5–5:30 p.m.

MEMORANDUM
THE WHITE HOUSE
WASHINGTON
MEMORANDUM OF CONVERSATION

PARTICIPANTS:

The Hon. Masayoshi Ohira, Japanese Foreign Minister

The Hon. Takeshi Yasukawa, Japanese Ambassador to the United States

Mr. Yoshio Okawara, Director-General, North American Affairs Bureau, Japanese Foreign Ministry

Mr. Sadaaki Numata, Interpreter

Dr. Henry A. Kissinger, Secretary of State

Ambassador Robert Ingersoll, US Ambassador to Japan

Mr. Richard L. Sneider, Deputy Assistant Secretary of State

Mr. Thomas C. Hubbard, Country Officer for Japan, Interpreter

Mr. Peter W. Rodman, NSC Staff

DATE AND TIME: Monday, September 24, 1973 5:00 - 5:30 p.m.
PLACE: Secretary of State's Suite, The Waldorf Towers New York City

Ohira: Let me first congratulate you on your appointment as Secretary of State. Your General Assembly speech was a great success. I must express particular appreciation for the reference to a permanent Security Council seat for Japan.

Kissinger: Mr. Foreign Minister, I can assure you that under my tenure as Secretary of State the closest cooperative relationship with Japan will remain the cornerstone of our foreign policy in Asia. The US and Japan should deal with each other with complete candor and consult fully on all important issues.

For. Min. Ohira: I share these sentiments. Japan expects to deal with the US, under your able leadership with mutual understanding and frank consultation. Japan hopes to make our relationship even closer and place it on an even stronger foundation.

Declaration of Principles

Dr. Kissinger: This will be certainly also our intention.

Your Ambassador was good enough to give us a copy of your draft declaration, which you thought we might be prepared to join. I have given him some preliminary comments.

For. Min. Ohira: Yes, and I found that your response to our draft was that it was not very specific.

Dr. Kissinger: Yes.

For. Min. Ohira: We are continuing to study it and will continue to study it seriously. We have heard since your first meeting with Ambassador Yasukawa that the European Community has firmed up its own ideas and communicated them.

Dr. Kissinger: Through the New York Times.

For. Min. Ohira: We would appreciate your detailed opinion of the draft so we can be of assistance in bringing about fruitful results.

Dr. Kissinger: First, we appreciate the attitude that Japan has taken toward the project. Because even if we have some comments on your draft, it is clear that it moves in a positive direction.

Secondly, with regard to the Europeans, we are dealing with two different issues: One is the relationship of the US to European unity, and second is the relationship with NATO. And there may be some relationship overall, as I said to the Senate Foreign Relations Committee. Since these aspects are interrelated, it is difficult to look at any one of them in isolation. The NATO declaration is only in the process of being formulated. It is only beginning to be drafted.

The two are related in this sense. If the NATO declaration is fairly specific, then the EC declaration can be fairly general and you can probably be brought in with that. Or there can be a third declaration for you to join. On the other hand, if the special role of France leads to a NATO declaration that is not satisfactory, we would have to strengthen the Common Market one. And you could, if you wish, join the Common Market one, though you may not want to. We would then need a third, more general declaration.

I am assuming this conversation is just between us, and we won't discuss it wit the press — at least the details.

So this is where we stand.

The Europeans are very optimistic that we can conclude satisfactory declarations in both in a matter of weeks. But the only European I've seen so far for a long talk is Sir Alec.

Amb. Yasukawa: May I ask for some clarification? You said that if the NATO arrangement should be satisfactory for you, then the declaration between the EC and the US may be more or less general.

Dr. Kissinger: Exactly.

Amb. Yasukawa: So Japan can participate in that.

Dr. Kissinger: And theoretically join that.

Amb. Yasukawa: In the event the NATO declaration is not satisfactory or specific enough for the US to accept, then the declaration between the EC and the US is bound to be more specific. Do you mean the EC-US declaration is bound to include security matters?

Dr. Kissinger: It is hard to conceive of a situation in which the NATO declaration would be inadequate on security matters and would be included in the EC document. The EC document might, however, have to be more specific on political cooperation than you might care to join.

Amb. Yasukawa: In the New York Times today, security matters are not yet included in the EC draft, but you think it might?

Dr. Kissinger: It is not excluded. I will be able to know that better in about three weeks. Your draft is not excessively specific. [Laughter] It just reaffirmed, really, some established things.

Amb. Yasukawa: I think a reaffirmation of established facts means something to us, and to you too. Our draft includes security matters. We would be willing to elaborate further in that area.

For. Min. Ohira: And we think it possible to include some basic principles in the joint communiqué when the President visits Japan, those points that would serve to reaffirm and strengthen Japan's relations with the US as apart from those between the US and Europe.

Dr. Kissinger: You should understand that our interest in all of these declarations is to create among American public opinion support for our traditional friendships. If they become too difficult, there is not much sense in pursuing it.

One possible way to pursue it, if the President should go to Japan before he goes to Europe, is that it is certainly possible to include in a joint declaration a specific affirmation of our ties with Japan that is more specific than one could put in a general declaration.

For. Min. Ohira: I have to ask where Canada may fit in this exercise.

Dr. Kissinger: Canada would, of course, be an integral part of the NATO declaration. It is more difficult to place it in the US-Common Market declaration, although we would have no objection to including Canada in that declaration.

For. Min. Ohira: The political-economic declaration with the EC?

Dr. Kissinger: Yes.

Amb. Yasukawa: But it is up to the EC. Canada might desire to be included in the EC declaration but be rejected by the Europeans. Japan is in the same position.

Dr. Kissinger: Theoretically the EC might refuse to associate Japan with its declaration. We think it is very important that Japan be tied into the framework of declarations in some way. Whether this should be done through a joint declaration with the EC or whether a third declaration would need to be created, that we will have to establish in further discussions, when the content of the other declarations is more firm.

For. Min. Ohira: When you commented on our draft, when you said it lacked specificity, I wonder—

Dr. Kissinger: You see I am getting more diplomatic.

Amb. Yasukawa: Don't be too diplomatic.

For. Min. Ohira: —that may be a reflection of the fact that we on our part have not grasped the full implication of your concept. We would like you to clarify any gaps in our understanding.

Dr. Kissinger: What we intended to do in this was to take account of the concerns of some of our friends that the distinction between friends and adversaries was being eroded, and secondly to take account of our domestic situation, where the generation which built our system of alliances is being replaced by a generation which has no feeling for the forces which led to their creation. This is particularly true in the Congressional pressures we are subject to. In this period of improvement in our relations with the USSR and China, we see a need to define the nature of this new world and to see where our relations with our friends are going, and create a new emotional commitment to it.

We need two things: a declaration or statement of principles which is sufficiently specific to tell us something about this new world. Secondly, we want to see that a process of discussing this concept with our allies develops that gives our allies some sense of confidence, so we can transmit this to our people.

I must say this is less difficult with Japan than with Europe, because we are moving in a good direction. But even with Japan, we must have more specificity on the political and economic issues. On security issues there is not much need to be more specific.

For. Min. Ohira: Now, I think the message is that our draft lacks specificity on the political.

Dr. Kissinger: On the economic, a little. We will be glad to discuss specifics with your Ambassador.

Amb. Yasukawa: I think that the problem is primarily one of wording and rhetoric. I think we have already achieved a general meeting of the minds, but I think you are perhaps more philosophical-minded that we are.

Dr. Kissinger: I'll supply the philosophy if you supply the specifics. [Laughter]

Mr. Foreign Minister, I have the impression your Ambassador is very cautious and that he won't tell us everything that he would say if you encouraged him. [Laughter] He is afraid of his Minister, which is not the case with my colleagues.

I think seriously, if you encourage him to work in an imaginative way, I agree that we see things in a similar way, and we can move things in a positive direction.

For. Min, Ohira: I appreciate your suggestion, aid if I can study this further... At the beginning, you suggested the importance of candor in all this, and I will encourage Yasukawa.

Mr. Okawara: When Mr. Ohira received the message from you, his reaction was that we should take the general approach of seeking a declaration which would remain valid for a ten-year period. If the declaration were too specific, its period of validity would be very short. But if we receive more precise comments, then we could consider more detail.

Dr. Kissinger: I think our discussion, and my discussions with your Ambassador, make me very hopeful. I agree we should look ten years ahead. But it should not be so vague that the declaration does not tell us anything about our relationship in those ten years. So in our Washington discussions we will try to be more specific, and we will keep you abreast of our talks with the Europeans. So you can tell where you fit. It is not impossible that we can be more specific in a communiqué with you and be satisfied with a more general EC declaration. But we very much appreciate Japan's role in this enterprise.

For. Min. Ohira: I appreciate the comments you made. As I said, we would like to study this seriously.

The Secretary's Visit to China and Japan

Dr. Kissinger: When I go to China at the end of October, my plan is to stop in Tokyo for a few days. One reason is to hold a Chiefs of Mission conference of our Ambassadors in Asia, but also to confer with you. And also, if it is agreeable with you, to stop a few hours in Tokyo to inform you about our discussions in China. And on those occasions—it will probably fit better in my schedule to stop in Japan about two days on my way to China and around an afternoon and an evening on the way back—we can work further on the declaration.

For. Min. Ohira: I look forward to having you in Tokyo.

Dr. Kissinger: Thank you. I remember my last stop there, Mr. Foreign Minister, with the greatest warmth. Mr. Ohira gave a dinner for me.

Amb. Yasukawa: Mr. Ohira told me that on the last time you visited, as an adviser, you were at a geisha house. Can you do this as a Secretary? [Laughter]

Dr. Kissinger: I want an even better one. [Laughter]

Amb. Yasukawa: Or two or three.

Mr. Sneider: Or a younger one.

Dr. Kissinger: I am so concerned with US-Japanese relations that I would not refuse any invitation, Mr. Foreign Minister. [Laughter]

Japan-Soviet Relations

For. Min. Ohira: I would like to be in close consultation with Ambassador. Ingersoll as to what red carpet reception will be most ideal.

Our Prime Minister is going to Moscow between October 7 and October 10. The background for this visit is that we have the Soviet Union as a neighbor, and our relations in the economic and other fields have progressed so that we think it would be appropriate for the Prime Minister to visit. Once he visits, the question of the Northern Territories is bound to come up. In this connection, we greatly appreciate that you told the Russians of your attitude. We would be interested in how the Russians reacted.

Dr. Kissinger: We mentioned it, as the President told your Prime Minister. Of course, their problem is that if they give up any territory they open up claims for territory all along their frontier. But they have indicated to us very recently that perhaps two of the islands could be given up. I did not pursue the subject because I did not think it...

Amb. Yasukawa: The Soviet attitude may have changed recently. They had indicated in the past that they would not consider returning two islands until a peace treaty were signed and as long as the US retained control of Okinawa. The latter obstacle has obviously been removed.

Dr. Kissinger: Well, at the summit they said they haven't definitely considered two but in no circumstances would they give up more than two. At least we expressed our view to them.

I don't want this to get general distribution—I mean the fact that we have talked to the Soviets.

Have you been there before?

For. Min. Ohira: Yes, I was there last year.

Dr. Kissinger: Of course, I remember. But the Prime Minister has never been there.

Amb. Yasukawa: He was there at the time of normalization. But not as Prime Minister. No Prime Minister has ever been there.

Japanese Relations with Vietnam

For. Min. Ohira: On September 21 we established diplomatic relations with North Vietnam, and we have been informing the American Embassy in Tokyo on this. Although we had expected this would take place earlier, we subsequently decided it would be better in timing to do it in the fall. Ambassador Ingersoll is informed on this.

Dr. Kissinger: Yes, I am familiar with it.

For. Min. Ohira: Secondly, this establishment took place on an absolutely nonpolitical basis, that is, there were no strings or conditions attached. There were stories in the press that this was in return for $20 million in grant aid. We did not have discussions along these lines with the North Vietnamese.

We have decided to give $50 million in grants and loans to South Vietnam during the Japanese fiscal year [ending March 31]. Now that we have established diplomatic relations with North Vietnam, in planning the supplementary budget to be presented to the Diet this fall, we feel we should ask the Diet to approve $20 million in grant aid to North Vietnam as well. This is a purely internal matter in formulating our plan for the supplementary budget internally in the Government. There has been no discussion of this figure with the North Vietnamese. It has nothing to do with a request of the North Vietnamese. One of our main considerations in the $20 million figure is that we would like to strike a right balance in comparison with South Vietnam. That is, we would like to give a figure smaller than South Vietnam and at the same time, in view of public opinion. And it seemed the best figure was along the lines of $20 million.

Dr. Kissinger: We understand the problem, and we discussed it with Prime Minister Tanaka in February. From our point of view, we have no objection, as long as you keep these principles. For example, a smaller sum for North Vietnam. Our one concern is the possibility that there may be North Vietnamese military action next year, and we would not want it to be financed even in part by Japanese assistance. But if they observe the armistice, we have no objection, as we discussed.

For. Min. Ohira: We are acting on the same assumption as you mentioned, that assistance is to be provided only on the assumption that the Paris Agreement is observed by North Vietnam, and by South Vietnam for that matter.

Relations with the PRC

Since September 29th is our first anniversary of the normalization of relations with China, I would like to make brief comment on the progress in the last year. It is not too remarkable progress; but it is steady progress in the field of trade, and especially in the mutual understanding fostered by these contacts. But by "mutual understanding" I mean an appreciation of social institutions, a rules of social practice, and a better understanding of what ideas we share. We are working on a number of agreements in aviation, etc.

Overall I would say our relations are progressing without too great a problem.

Dr. Kissinger: As you know, we have never objected in recent years to your normalization of relations with the People's Republic of China, especially because the People's Republic never pressed you to give up your security relations with the U.S. Our relations are progressing the same way with steady but undramatic progress. We think—and we would like your assessment—that in July and August there was some concentration on the domestic situation there, and now this is completed.

As I told your Ambassador, I will visit China in the last week of October. We are just now fixing a date, but we will confer with you before and after. This should not be mentioned publicly until it is announced. There is no particular reason for the China visit; it is simply a general periodic review of relations.

Presidential Visit to Japan

Amb. Yasukawa: With the permission of the Minister, and to save time, may I mention the question of President Nixon's visit to Japan? The Japanese press has big headlines about President Nixon's visit to Japan this year. May I emphasize that this speculation is not attributable to Japanese sources at all.

Dr. Kissinger: Is it our Embassy? When Ingersoll drinks, he doesn't know what he says.

Amb. Yasukawa; In Washington I had a press conference and this question came up, and I tried to escape from the question. I said this question would probably come up in the meeting with the Foreign Minister. I managed to escape it.

Dr. Kissinger: Now how do we escape? [Laughter]

Amb. Yasukawa: If it turns out that it didn't come up, I am a liar. I am prepared to be a liar.

Dr. Kissinger: Let's take up the subject.

Our situation is as follows: The President has not yet made a final decision on whether to take any trips this year. Second, we promised the Europeans we would go there this year. But given you serious interest in Japan, we are giving serious consideration to perhaps moving a trip to Japan up this year. But this is why we are somewhat embarrassed at the speculation. Especially because now it is very probable we will make very great progress with the Europeans.

Therefore, by the time I come to Japan, and if we have made good progress on the declarations, we can then make a determination as to whether to do it at the end of November or at the end of February, if that is possible.

Ingersoll: There is the budget discussion in the Diet until March 31.

Dr. Kissinger: Then we may have to put it off until April. We have very seriously considered a trip towards the end of November.

How many days are you thinking about?

For. Min. Ohira: For state guests, normally the visit is five days or less. It could be less.

Dr. Kissinger: It could be less. Because it may be easier for him to come for only three to four days.

Why don't we discuss this in a more concrete way when I am in Japan?

But I can tell you informally that we are very tempted by the idea, but there is a problem with the European allies because they are very eager that he come this year, as you can read in the newspapers.

Amb. Yasukawa: The Minister will have a press conference. He might say that Japan has invited the President to visit any time this year or next, that he repeated this invitation, and that the U.S. side is now considering this.

Dr. Kissinger: And we had an exchange on this.

Amb. Yasukawa: You have no definite plan yet.

Dr. Kissinger: Right.

Kissinger Visit to Japan

Amb. Yasukawa: About your visit to Japan, I made a slip of the tongue at a press conference the other day. I said I understand that he seems to want to visit Japan when he visits China.

Dr. Kissinger: Did you say you'd receive me? [Laughter]

Amb. Yasukawa: I said you had no definite plan.

Dr. Kissinger: I have no objection to your saying that if I visit China I'll certainly visit Japan in conjunction with a visit to China.

You told me some dates were bad.

Amb. Yasukawa: On the 18th we have to receive the Prime Minister of Bangladesh. The 21st is anti-war day, a bad day. The 26th is the Prime Minister of Australia.

Dr. Kissinger: So between the 23rd and the 26th is possible?

Amb. Yasukawa: Yes.

Dr. Kissinger: We will let your Ambassador know when it is set. You would prefer the 24th and 25th. But not before the 24th.

Amb. Ingersoll: The 23rd might be all right.

Amb. Yasukawa: But the antiwar demonstrators, some are associated with Peking, so they may welcome you.

Dr. Kissinger: That is right. I have my own Communist Party.

COCOM

I have one minor problem—for your confidential information.

The British are selling some jet engines to China that can be used for military aircraft, and they want COCOM to change its rule. We have opposed this. But we want you to know that if any of our allies disagree with our judgment, we are broadminded.

Amb. Yasukawa: We have the same problem. Our business men are eager to export computers to China. These are not on the COCOM list for the Russians, but are still on the list for the Chinese. Japan is still anxious to sell to the Chinese. We have such discussions with your government.

Dr. Kissinger: That I have to study.

Amb. Yasukawa: I just want to bring this to your attention.

Dr. Kissinger: [to Ohira:] If you can make him this positive on the declaration, we can make progress!

What, Mr. Foreign Minister, can we tell the press in general on this meeting? Because you are giving a press conference, and we have to say something.

For. Min. Ohira: The first point is: We have exchanged views on what we call "Dr. Kissinger's concept."

Dr. Kissinger: It coincides exactly with my description. [Laughter]

For. Min. Ohira: Secondly, we also exchanged views on the situation in Asia.

Thirdly, on the question of a Presidential visit to Japan, we will speak as we discussed a few moments ago.

Dr. Kissinger: We are prepared to say that I affirmed that friendship with Japan and a close and confidential relationship with Japan will continue to be the cornerstone of our policy in the Pacific.

We agree on the others.

Mr. Sneider: Can we say something besides "confidential?"

Dr. Kissinger: Yes,"intimate." "Confidential" implies secret. And that should be point one.

Amb. Yasukawa: And if asked, he should mention your visit to Japan.

Dr. Kissinger: Yes.

Mr. Foreign Minister, I look forward to meeting with you at the end of October.

Amb. Yasukawa: The Foreign Minister is meeting the Foreign Minister of Denmark this week, and this will be an opportunity for us to explain our views and positions.

Dr. Kissinger: And we will support your position.

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 539, Country Files, Far East, Japan, July 73–Dec. 31, 1974 (sic), Vol. 10. Secret. The meeting was held at the Waldorf Towers in New York City. During a meeting three weeks earlier, Yasukawa gave Kissinger a draft declaration of principles. Kissinger scanned it, noted that he wanted to study it more closely, but remarked, “My initial reaction, however, is that it is not concrete and not a very important document.” (Memorandum of conversation, September 4, 1973, 11:15 a.m.; ibid.)

182. Editorial Note 182. Editorial Note

On October 31, 1973, Arthur Hummel, Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian and Pacific Affairs, sent Secretary of State Henry Kissinger a briefing memorandum in anticipation of his meeting with Japanese Ambassador Takeshi Yasukawa. Hummel wrote that the Japanese Government “is under heavy pressure from the Arabs and from domestic industrial circles to abandon its long-standing neutrality in favor of a pro-Arab stance.” Hummel commented that while Japan has resisted this pressure, it “doubtless feels an immediate need for reassurance from us on prospects for a settlement of the Arab-Israeli conflict and the lifting of Arab oil production cutbacks in order to resist pressure from the Arabs and domestic opinion.” (National Archives, RG 59, Bureau of East Asian and Pacific Affairs, Office of Japanese Affairs, 1960–1975, Entry 5413, Box 9, Subject Files, POL 9–16, Middle East, 73)

During their meeting the next day, Yasukawa declared that despite the pressure and resulting problems, his government did not wish to undermine U.S. efforts to resolve the crisis, and would consult with the United States before taking any significant action. Kissinger “reiterated his appreciation for the attitude which the Japanese government had taken up to now. He continued that whether other countries permit the pressure tactics of the Arabs to succeed or whether they will join with us in helping to bring about a solution is something which they must decide for themselves.” (Memorandum of Conversation, November 1, 1973, Uncleared by Secretary; ibid., Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Country Files, Far East, Box 539, Japan, July 1973–December 31, 1974 (sic), vol. 10.)

Kissinger visited the Middle East and East Asia during November 5–16. Arriving in Tokyo near the end of his trip, he met with the U.S. Chiefs of Mission to Asian countries, and briefed Japanese officials about his talks with Middle Eastern and Chinese leaders. He met with Yasuhiro Nakasone, the Japanese Minister of International Trade and Industry, who observed that elections for Japan’s upper house would occur in June, and that a shift of 13 seats would allow the opposition to gain control, which would threaten the U.S.-Japan Mutual Security Treaty and modify Japan’s defense policies. He added that Japan felt pressure to seek its own interests. Kissinger replied that this would be acceptable if Japan received something in exchange. (Memorandum of Conversation, November 15, 1973; ibid., RG 59, Central Files 1970–1973, POL 15 Japan-US)

At a Department of State staff meeting on November 19, Kissinger discussed the trip and stated, “If we had unity in the west, I think we would be in a really excellent position to force a just settlement. Our greatest weakness is the total inability to keep the Europeans and to a lesser extent the Japanese on a line that distinguishes the short-term tactical from the long-term.” He predicted, “we will certainly find that if the oil squeeze continues, that the Japanese will move into an overtly anti-Israeli position.” Kissinger also remarked, “If they make a public move towards the Arabs, then we have to make clear that we cannot be pressured. To that extent, we have to separate from them.” (Minutes of Secretary’s Staff Meeting, November, 19, 1973, 12:05; ibid., Transcripts of Secretary of State Kissinger’s Staff Meetings, 1973–1977, E5177, Box 1)

183. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to Secretary of State Kissinger, Washington, January 5, 1974. 183. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to Secretary of State Kissinger, Washington, January 5, 1974.1

Washington, January 5, 1974

MEMORANDUM
NATIONAL SECURITY COUNCIL

January 5, 19 74

MEMORANDUM FOR
The Secretary of State
The Secretary of Defense
The Secretary of the Treasury
The Secretary of Commerce
The Director of Central Intelligence

SUBJECT: Response to NSSM 172 - Japan

It is necessary to proceed with the early completion of the interagency study of basic U.S. policy toward Japan in response to NSSM 172. The study memorandum of March 7, 1973, is still a valid definition of the questions to be addressed. The interagency study submitted by the Department of State's memorandum of July 27, 1973, covering US-Japan cooperation on multilateral problems should be updated and incorporated into the final response to NSSM 172.

The study should be submitted no later than February 28, 1974, for consideration by the Senior Review Group.

[signed]
Henry A. Kissinger

cc: The Chairman, Joint Chiefs of Staff
The Assistant to the President for International Economic Affairs

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 1061, NSC Institutional Materials, NSC Institutional Papers, January 1974 (2 of 2). Secret. Copies were sent to the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff and the Assistant to the President for International Economic Affairs. Sent to Kissinger under a covering memorandum, December 21, 1973, from Froebe and Donald Stukel of the NSC staff, which stated, “In June a long and rather rambling draft was completed and a copy sent to the NSC Staff. At that point further work bogged down due to uncertainty among the drafters as to how current events were likely to impact on US/Japan long-term relations and due partly to our call in July for an IG special report on regional and global issues in support of Prime Minister Tanaka’s visit.” (Ibid.)

184. Minutes of the Secretary of State’s Staff Meeting, Washington, January 7, 1974. 184. Minutes of the Secretary of State’s Staff Meeting, Washington, January 7, 1974.1

Washington, January 7, 1974

In Attendance, Mon., 1/7/74

Secretary of State Kissinger

Mr. Rush

Mr. Porter

Mr. Casey

Mr. Donaldson

Mr. Ingersoll

Mr. Newsom

Mr. Brown

Mr. Stoessel

Mr. Kubisch

Mr. Sisco

Mr. Weiss

Mr. Lord

Mr. Maw

Mr. Pickering

PROCEEDINGS

(The meeting convened at 12:10 p.m., Secretary Kissinger presiding as Chairman.)

SECRETARY KISSINGER: I thought it was very illuminating.

MR. RUSH: Very good.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: Ever since the Joint Chiefs had figured out that disarmament negotiations can be used to increase arms —

(Laughter.)

— we have been in never-never land in the Verification Panel meeting.

(Laughter.)

We are going to discuss a number of items — overseas bases, U.S.-Japan planning, air-to-air missiles.

We'll start with Winston on the Japanese planning.

MR. LORD: We met a couple of weeks ago, so it's a little bit dated now, but I think it's timely in light of the fact that you're going to see several Japanese in the next couple of weeks.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: I can protest! (Laughter.)

MR. INGERSOLL: I want to talk to you about that.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: Nobody should have to deal with the Israelis and the Japanese at the same time.

MR. INGERSOLL: I thought it was the South Vietnamese.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: But I don't have to deal with them anyway.

MR. LORD: In this memo, that you may have had a chance to read a couple of days ago —

SECRETARY KISSINGER: Can you avoid making snide comments when you speak?

(Laughter.)

MR. LORD: I'll avoid that.

(Discussion off the record.)

MR. LORD: That should be struck from the record!

I don't want to repeat myself: The basic thing that comes across then, I guess often with the Japanese, is the insecurity and their sense of vulnerability — even more so now because of the energy crisis. No matter where they looked around the world, whenever the subject was discussed, they obviously felt they didn't know where they were going.

For example, in Southeast Asia they feel they've got to be reserved and very well profiled because of their economic dominance, so they feel they don't know what to do in Southeast Asia.

With Russia they're extremely distrustful and disliked, I would say. They're extremely distrustful of our detente policy, and they sounded like the Chinese, when they talked about the Russians.

With China — which had great appeal domestically a few months ago, a year ago — the boom was over. They've got normalized relations now. They are getting down now to concrete problems, constructive negotiations.

There's even backlash from the government — giving away too much from Taiwan.

In Western Europe it was very clear they have had very few meaningful contacts — they had almost nothing to say about their contacts with Western Europe.

So in each of these areas they don't feel they've much of a relationship, and they still look to us as an anchor of their foreign policy. But they're wondering what we're up to in China.

All of this has been compounded, of course, by the energy crisis and the staggering implications for them.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: And, of course, their policy is so reliable and trustworthy that they have every right to make these comments!

MR. LORD: This is one of the explanations for it. They don't have a world view; they don't have a real global perspective of where they're going. And whenever they want to look at prospective areas they don't know how to proceed.

It's had an impact on the economy now; but it's an impact across the board, given their great dependency on markets. So their one long view on the economy over the last few years—that seems to be withering away from them.

So these are off-the-record, unofficial talks, but nevertheless from authoritative people — that the Japanese are a very easy situation, to say the least.

Now, the kind of topics they're going to be hitting you on when they're going to see you in the next couple of weeks — as I mentioned in the paper, is the energy situation and our initiative.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: Unless they can give something concrete, I'm not going to see them at all except for ceremonial meetings. I'm just sick and tired of being the straight man for their —

MR. INGERSOLL: Well, there's a misunderstanding, Henry, and I have some information for you. It was printed.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: We have to go by what's printed. I'm tired of that too.

MR. INGERSOLL: Well, you must realize that the Japanese newspapers are out to get that government and our Government because through getting our Government they're getting that government. They're always in opposition to our Government.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: We'll get to that in a minute.

MR. LORD: On a personal level, each time that you see them communication is getting better; and they were distressed about certain press reports which they again claimed undercut their own substantive view, and also they were embarrassed. The mood, I might say, was a very good mood for them; and I think it was a very successful three days in that respect.

On the trilateral declaration, they still want to proceed in trilateral fashion, they told the OECD; and they'll be pressing you on this.

They did float a possible compromise — namely, that we should pocket the NATO declaration — which we understand looks pretty good — keep that, drop the one — go to a bilateral one — including Japan — which we might be able to sell to the Europeans. So the tradeoff would be getting that and the trilateral one — which, of course, the Europeans have been resisting.

They are also discussing with you, I'm sure, the Presidential visits coming up. They may probe you on China in the recent trip and they may probe you on Viet-Nam, based on recent talks.

These are the basic highlights.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: Yes, but what did you accomplish in your talks? You know, you can't have paranoia as a national policy. I mean, wherever they look they're being fouled up. And yet, when you watch them in their behavior, whenever they have an opportunity they try to double cross us.

MR. LORD: Well —

SECRETARY KISSINGER: You know, there are not many areas where they have the opportunity. But certainly, in the Middle East, they're taking the public position. And in their incompetent way, privately, they're trying to get a preferred position on the Middle East. They're doing just about everything wrong. So their incompetence is our best ally. And to offer Faisal a billion dollars in order to give him an inducement later on to produce oil is just about the dumbest thing you can do. (A), he doesn't need the money. But, if he did need it, you certainly wouldn't get him to increase oil production by paying a billion dollars just to start increasing it.

MR. LORD: Well, I stressed what they said to us, thinking it would be of more interest to you. But I think we made some very useful representations to them. On the Middle East, in effect, we said they're going to undercut our efforts to get an oil boycott lifted by the policy they were pursuing. In Russia, we explained the hard-headed approach to detente. With China we saw that there was no competition between us and we could have better relations on both sides. So I think we got same useful themes across to them and we were quite hard-headed. For example, on the use of our bases in Japan and Viet-Nam, should it flare up again, we made them aware that we have certain treaty rights. So I think we took a fairly firm line on what policy to pursue.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: But our basic position vis-a-vis all of these allies has to change. They're getting us in a position where we are not selling them out. Where have we sold out any ally? Where, in each of them, haven't they the freedom of maneuver? I insist they have total freedom of maneuver. We are totally tied, and they have total freedom of maneuver—and this is just an unhealthy position.

MR. LORD: Well, we played to that theme. We tried to make clear we'd stress partnership with them for us and U.S.-Japan relations in Asia. But we tried to make sure they'd pursue a responsible policy in the Middle East, the energy group, and in China.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: Actually, on the Middle East, my view is we should tell them next to nothing because, obviously, their strategy is to present themselves to the Arabs as having made a great sacrifice about running the risk of our displeasure by adopting a more pro-Arab policy than we want. And the more we tell them they should stay in line with us, the more they would go to the Arabs. And I believe our policy is to tell them to consult their own interests, if they ask what they should do in the Middle East.

When I was there, I had to, in one way or another with the Arabs, prove that they had separated from us. Whatever interpretation you have of whatever twist was given to the Tanaka statement, that is what he was attempting to accomplish—to prove that they were separating from us, that we did not want them to pursue a pro-Arab policy. They were closer to the Arabs than we were. And if they're going to play that game, we should not give them ammunition. And I think we should tell them that they should pursue their own course. It is senseless to try to get them to follow our line. They'll simply use it to pursue their own policy.

MR. INGERSOLL: But they are following us on the consumer —

SECRETARY KISSINGER: Because that is in their own interest.

MR. INGERSOLL: Right.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: I'm not saying—obviously, we'll invite them to that consumer group—certainly—because it's suicidal for them not to.

MR. INGERSOLL: Yes, I know.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: I'm not saying we shouldn't cooperate with them where their own interest dictates they should cooperate with you. But, you know, they're making themselves the laughing stock of the Arabs, the way they're going around.

Didn't you have that impression, Joe?

MR. SISCO: Yes. They're very aware of this thing.

MR. INGERSOLL: But they didn't do anything until they were short. That's the real problem.

MR. SISCO: Yes.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: Not only that, but the manner in which they're approaching the Arabs is just about the worst possible tactic for appealing to the Arabs.

MR. INGERSOLL: Right.

S^^R^^^RY KISSINGER: But that's their problem. That strategy is, obviously, to convince the Arabs that they're more pro-Arab than we are — that they're risking their American relationship. Therefore, you have to assume that every time they ask us for advice, in part they're doing it so that they can tell the Arabs they disregarded our advice. And all the intelligence we've received has been in that direction. I know not a single instance where they followed our advice. In fact, they disregarded it. And in retrospect I made a mistake getting sucked into long discussions with them. Ever since we understood it, we've avoided it. And I think we should strictly stick to that course — let them. There's nothing we can do about their Middle East policy. I think it's extremely short-sighted. Maybe within the context of this consumer group we can get some handle on it, but otherwise it's a mistake to try to influence them.

MR. INGERSOLL: I think Ohira understands our position — your position. He's got a political problem —Tanaka and Nakasone.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: He understands it completely and would like to carry it out. Tanaka understands it but doesn't have the guts to carry it out. And Nakasone understands it and wants to use it to overthrow Tanaka in, I understand, the political lineup there. So it's a total waste of time to talk to Nakasone. I know him for a long time as a student.

Tanaka — Tanaka is so frantic because he knows we are right.

MR. INGERSOLL: I know.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: He knows it would be in his political interest if we would vote for him for four months. But he doesn't have the guts to see it through. If he had stuck with us, he'd get some political benefit out of lifting the embargo; and, as it is, we're going to get the embargo lifted.

MR. RUSH: Does the lifting of the embargo include the lifting of the 10 percent increase in production too?

SECRETARY KISSINGER: I think we'll get the 10 percent increase in production too. It depends how it is put.

MR. SISCO: We've put it in terms of both. That's very important.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: We have said we don't want them to increase the embargo unless they want to increase the production because if they don't increase the production we would have to damage some allies in order to get some additional oil.

MR. RUSH: That's the point.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: And that seems to me to be the lineup. I was very well impressed with Ohira.

MR. INGERSOLL: Right. And he has gone out of his way to —

SECRETARY KISSINGER: I have no problem with Ohira. But the basic policy — this conviction of paranoia — I mean, take the Soviet Union. They have tried a helluva lot harder for no return with the Soviet Union and with Red China and with North Viet-Nam than we have.

MR. LORD: This is the point. I think this is coming home to them. There are parallels with the Europeans, but in designing overall strategy with them I think they honestly feel they have no other choice with us — whereas the Europeans may feel they have other options.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: Our basic relationship with Japan is not unhealthy, as long as we call them; but when they step out of line —

MR. STOESSEL: Just a question on timing on this trilateral declaration. As I recall, Von Staden asked you when could we work out this trilateral. Could it be later than with the Europeans?

SECRETARY KISSINGER: I think it should be simultaneous.

MR. STOESSEL: Well, I think for the Japanese it should be because, if it's later, they miss all the fanfare and they're not treated equally.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: No, no. I think it should be simultaneous. And I think when you go over to the Directors' Meeting —

MR. STOESSEL: I won't be going.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: When your successor goes over — if we can de-Europeanize him —

(Laughter.)

— he should make a strong point.

MR. STOESSEL: Yes. As I recall, to von Staden you said slightly later.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: I think that's wrong. In fact, you might correct that.

MR. STOESSEL: I think it should be at the same time.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: Yes; I agree with you.

MR. INGERSOLL If we —

SECRETARY KISSINGER: I don't mind saying it publicly. Vest on earlier occasions said he believes Japan must be a part of this.

MR. LORD: The Japanese might say it.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: The Japanese can't tell us what to do.

MR. LORD: They might float this.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: That's not their business. They have a right to declare a trilateral negotiation simultaneously.

MR. LORD: They might say, "Keep a bilateral on the NATO."

SECRETARY KISSINGER: But that's none of their business. They have a right to participate in a trilateral declaration. They can't tell us not to make a bilateral with the Common Market — though we might at some point go to the Common Market one, if that doesn't turn out good.

MR. STOESSEL: Well then, I guess as far as the procedures are concerned, if the President were to go and sign it there in Brussels — and this would mean the Japanese Prime Minister coming and doing the same thing —

SECRETARY KISSINGER: Yes.

[Omitted here is material unrelated to Japan.]

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Transcripts of Secretary of State Kissinger’s Staff Meetings, 1973–1977, E5177, Box 2. Secret. In this meeting, Lord orally presented the contents of a paper that he had sent to Kissinger on December 22. Lord’s paper is ibid., Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Country Files, Far East, Box 539, Japan, July 1973–December 31, 1974 (sic), vol. 10.

185. Memorandum From the Director of Defense Program Analysis and Evaluation (Sullivan) to Secretary of Defense Schlesinger, Washington, January 22, 1974. 185. Memorandum From the Director of Defense Program Analysis and Evaluation (Sullivan) to Secretary of Defense Schlesinger, Washington, January 22, 1974.1

Washington, January 22, 1974

DIRECTOR OF DEFENSE PROGRAM ANALYSIS AND EVALUATION
WASHINGTON, D.C. 20301

22 Jan 1974

MEMORANDUM FOR SECRETARY OF DEFENSE

SUBJECT: U.S. Defense Related Balance of Payments with Japan (U) — INFORMATION MEMORANDUM

Attached is a summary of an ODDPA&E/ISA analysis of U.S. defense related balance of payments with Japan. It looks at criteria which have been used in our negotiations with Germany, and judges their applicability from improving our defense balance of payments with Japan.

Our study shows that applying to Japan the same rationale used in Germany is likely to produce undesirable results as: (1) U.S. defense expenditures in Japan are generally independent of our force levels there, (2) the Japanese view of the threat and the need for U.S. forces to counter the threat is significantly less than in Germany and (3) unlike Germany, U.S. forces in Japan are responsible for theater-wide operations, and not dedicated to the defense of Japan.

The study also indicates that attempts to balance the U.S. military account in isolation involve high political costs and obscure more important DOD goals. As the Japanese associate direct offsets of U.S. defense expenditures with the post-World War II occupation, it might be difficult for the Government of Japan to approve significant offsets. Also, increased purchases of U.S. arms might produce serious concern in other Asian nations, because of latent Asian hostility to Japan. Thus, even if the Japanese were willing to further increase their defense budget, such action should be carefully planned to avoid being counter-productive to Asian security.

The study suggests two feasible proposals for increasing Japanese burden sharing: (1) encourage increases in Japanese economic assistance to less developed countries, and (2) encourage increased emphasis on anti-submarine warfare and air defense capabilities in way which are likely to be non-provocative to other Asian nations.

[signed]
Leonard Sullivan

Attachment

Copy to:
ASD (C)
ASD (ISA)

1 Source: Washington National Records Center, OSD Files: FRC 330–78–0011, Japan, 123, 1974 January 22. Confidential. The memorandum is stamped, “Sec Def has seen. 13 Aug 1974.” The analysis is attached but not published.

186. Memorandum From W.R. Smyser of the National Security Council staff to the Secretary of State Kissinger, Washington, February 8, 1974. 186. Memorandum From W.R. Smyser of the National Security Council staff to the Secretary of State Kissinger, Washington, February 8, 1974.1

Washington, February 8, 1974

MEMORANDUM
NATIONAL SECURITY COUNCIL

URGENT INFORMATION

February 8, 1974

MEMORANDUM FOR SECRETARY KISSINGER
FROM: W.R. Smyser [WRS initialed]

SUBJECT: Japan at the Energy Conference

I have seen countless papers telling you and the rest of us about Japan's positions with regard to the upcoming energy conference. I hope you have not had to read all of them.

The fundamental reality is the same as it was four weeks ago, when I wrote you that Japan would be helpful in moving toward the conference.

The Japanese are fundamentally on our side in energy matters. They are nervous about the Arabs, and they are nervous about the domestic impact of the energy crisis just before an election (as we would be). But they recognize, much more clearly than the Europeans, that in energy as in other matters they really cannot play a lone hand.

Of course, the Japanese may quibble about conference format and duration. They may be wary of participating in "working groups." [text not declassified]

But in your total concept of the objectives of this conference you will find the Japanese to be with us much more often than against us, and where they do oppose us it will not be irreconcilably, for the sake of being different (like the French), but for real reasons that we can handle.

I think this means they will be easier working partners than the Europeans, that at times we can use Japan's readiness to cooperate as a lever with the Europeans.

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 539, Country Files, Far East, Japan, Vol. 11, 1 January 1974–. Secret; Sensitive; Eyes Only. Sent for urgent information. Kissinger initialed the memorandum. On January 14, Smyser produced a similar memorandum, which Kissinger initialed, that stated, “the Japanese, though subject to some constraints, are prepared to react positively to our proposals for an Energy Action Group and for greater cooperation among the oil consuming nations. Their position arises from the general desire to work with us as well as from their awareness that they can be destroyed more quickly than anybody else if the oil producers get the upper hand.” (Smyser and Froebe to Kissinger, January 4; ibid.)

187. Memorandum of Conversation, Paris, April 7, 1974, 10:15 a.m. 187. Memorandum of Conversation, Paris, April 7, 1974, 10:15 a.m. 1

Washington, April 7, 1974, 10:15 a.m.

THE WHITE HOUSE
WASHINGTON
MEMORANDUM OF CONVERSATION

PARTICIPANTS:

Kakuei Tanaka, Prime Minister of Japan

Kiyoshiko Tsurumi, Deputy Vice Minister of Foreign Affairs

Sadaki Numata, Interpreter

The President

Major General Brent Scowcroft, Deputy Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs

DATE & TIME: Sunday, April 7, 1974; 10:15 a.m.
PLACE: Residence of the American Ambassador, Paris, France

The President's meeting with Prime Minister Tanaka lasted slightly less than one hour, including a walk in the garden at the American Ambassador's residence.

Tanaka led off the meeting noting with pride that he had kept his pledge to achieve a balance of trade and by asking for stable supply of agricultural products like feed grain, wheat and soybeans. He said he now had almost no economic problems with the Nine. Kosygin had met him at the airport in Moscow and had urged the Siberian project on him. Tanaka had mentioned to Brandt the possibility of German participation, and had received a fairly neutral response. He said it would be good to have the participation of a great power like the United States. The President responded that Congress was very difficult on Soviet trade and credit but that he favored U.S. participation. The problems were enormous, though, because of the size of the project and the cost of gas, even though the recent oil crisis had altered price structures. Tanaka said he would send the United States data on seven or eight development projects the Soviets are pushing.

In response to a question about relations with the PRC, Tanaka said they were proceeding smoothly and trade, while still small, had doubled recently.

He said relations with the USSR were all right, but he told Brezhnev that until he returned the four Northern Islands, there could be no peace treaty or good relations. He opined that Soviet reluctance on the Islands related to the risk of setting a possible precedent for border changes in East Europe after World War II.

Tanaka said he appreciated our getting the oil embargo lifted and said the energy issue is a serious one, especially for the LDCs. He thought they would make strong demands in the UN session.

The President asked if Japan thought we should get out of Asia militarily. Tanaka replied strongly in the negative. He said it would be an extremely disturbing factor and that the U.S. military presence in Korea, Japan, Okinawa and the Philippines was essential. The President replied there was a strong isolationist trend in the United States but that he would maintain U.S. commitments while welcoming a greater Japanese role in Asia. Tanaka said his people were very aware of the Soviet threat and he had told Brezhnev that he should not give the Japanese too rough a time because they were quite capable of nuclear weapons.

On China, he said it is a great country but with problems. Not in this century would it develop Soviet-like power. The President responded that the Soviets thought it would take only 10-15 years. Tanaka said Russians have a pathological fear stemming from two centuries of broader disputes, but historically the Chinese motives and direction had focused on internal governing rather than on outward aggression. The West should encourage China to open up because Chinese by nature believe in value of freedom — look at the free enterprise proclivities of the overseas Chinese.

Tanaka closed with the hope of welcoming the President to Japan, to which he replied "One day, maybe later this year."

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 1028, Presidential/HAK Memcons, 1 March 1974–8 May 1974 [2 of 4]. Secret; Sensitive. The conversation took place in the residence of the American Ambassador. A briefing memorandum for the meeting is in the Ford Library, National Security Adviser, Brent Scowcroft Daily Work Files, 1973–1977, Box 7, Chronological File A, April 5–7, 1974 (Paris Trip).

188. Key Judgments from Research Study OPR-4 Prepared in the Central Intelligence Agency, Washington, May 1974. 188. Key Judgments from Research Study OPR-4 Prepared in the Central Intelligence Agency, Washington, May 1974.1

Washington, May 1974

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY DIRECTORATE OF INTELLIGENCE OFFICE OF POLITICAL RESEARCH

May 1974

JAPAN IN THE SEVENTIES—AND ON INTO THE EIGHTIES

CONTENTS

KEY JUDGMENTS

THE DISCUSSION

I. JAPAN TODAY

II. DETERMINANTS AND PARAMETERS OF THE PROCESS OF CHANGE

A. Enduring Aspects of the National Character

B. Political Factors

C. An Economic versus a Military Strategy:

Principal Considerations

D. International Constraints and Opportunities

III. PROSPECTS FOR THE NEXT FEW YEARS

A. Domestic Problems

B. Security Policies

C. Foreign Relations

IV. ON INTO THE 1980s: CONTINGENCIES AND OPTIONS IN THE NEXT TEN YEARS

A. In a Peaceful and Stable World

B. In a Harsher World Economic Environment

C. In an Increasingly Disorderly and Contentious world

FIGURES

Japanese armaments and forces (table)

Index of economic growth (chart)

Foreign trade (chart)

NOTE: The Office of Political Research consulted other components of the CIA in the preparation of this Research Study, and they are in general agreement with its judgments. Comments on the Study are welcome and should be addressed to its authors, [text not declassified]

JAPAN IN THE SEVENTIES—AND ON INTO THE EIGHTIES

KEY JUDGMENTS

After two decades of growing prosperity and comfortable security, Japan stands at a turning point in its post-war history. Recent events have shaken Japan's confidence and left it uneasily aware that: —international developments (e.g., market restrictions and increases in raw material costs) are threatening to slow its economic progress, delay sorely needed public works programs at home, and reduce Japan's economic leverage abroad, calling into question whether Japan can continue to prosper in the 1970s without access to cheap energy and raw material supplies;

—changing international political alignments are compelling it to explore potentially troublesome new external linkages, even while attempting to maintain the most essential of its ties with the US.

A number of basic factors in Japanese society will be conducive to a large measure of continuity rather than abrupt change in the years immediately ahead. Among them are: —political stability founded on the necessity to gain consensus before adopting new policies;

—devotion to an achievement ethic that enables the society to focus its energies in sustained and dynamic pursuit of national goals;

—a deeply ingrained belief that for Japan to rely on military power would be self-defeating in the nuclear age.

Over the longer run many of the decisions of the Japanese government will be conditioned—even determined—by international developments that are largely beyond its control.

During the next few years, however, world events are not likely to force major change in Japanese policy: —The search for export markets to pay for raw material imports and the assurance of arrangements for these supplies will dominate Japan's external affairs.

—Tokyo will continue to seek bilateral arrangements whereby Japanese capital and technology are used to develop natural resources which are then imported into Japan on long-term contracts.

—The same combination of national characteristics which makes the Japanese so efficient in domestic industry makes them strong, and often insensitive, competitors in international trade, a circumstance that will produce recurring frictions, even with so close and important an associate as the US.

—Neither China nor the USSR (the principal sources of worry to Japanese leaders) is soon likely to threaten Japan in ways that would destroy the faith that its salvation lies in being an economic giant and a military midget.

Japan's capability to develop and produce nuclear weapons and modest delivery systems is not questioned. The industrial and technological backup is available. But going nuclear would be a political decision; it would not be made on the basis of technological capability but on an assessment of overriding national interests.

As Japan moves into the 1980s, the range of pressures it faces and the options it considers are likely to increase sharply. The policy choices Japanese leaders actually make will depend heavily on the character of changes in world economic and political conditions: —In an international setting no more turbulent than that now prevailing, Japan would come closest to playing its preferred role of a non-military nation of traders, supporting multilateral approaches to problems of trade, monetary reform, and resource development. Continuing prosperity and the growing demands for internal social spending would ease the sense of urgency that has dominated Japanese trade in the past and would encourage the further adjustment of Japan's more aggressive trading practices.

—In a harsher world economic environment, where "beggar-thy-neighbor" attitudes prevailed, Japan would fight tooth and nail for its share of the market, even though conscious of the need to keep the international trading system from collapsing. Domestically, traditional values of frugality and fatalism would be revived to ease acceptance of a leaner life style. Difficult economic conditions would be more likely to pull the Japanese closer together than to breed the kind of chaos that could be exploited by the political extremes on either the right or left.

—An actual breakdown in major aspects of the international economic and political order—not presently foreseeable—could generate economic stress sufficient to cause dramatic shifts in Japan's views on rearmament. With their country isolated in a hostile and strife-torn world, Japan's leaders would probably see rearming as a prudent move, especially if a period of economic contention had so damaged US-Japanese relations as to make US guarantees of Japanese security appear less reliable. Internal disorder deriving from economic dislocations, combined with external threats to Japan, would make the public more prone to accept the discipline and restrictions of a more authoritarian government. Nevertheless, a rearmed Japan would be at best a second-class military power, unable to develop an assured deterrent, and aware that its ultimate security would still have to rest on alignment with one of the major powers.

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 539, Country Files, Far East, Japan, Vol. 11, 1 January 1974–. Secret; No Foreign Dissem. A notation on the correspondence profile, August 14, reads, “No further action necessary—will be incorporated into Japan trip briefing papers for Pres.” (Ibid.) In a letter to the President, dated May 17, Colby wrote that the study was a response to Nixon’s desire for a “look ahead” into the future of Japanese policy. ( Central Intelligence Agency, OPI 10, Job 80M01048A, Box 4, Fold. 1 )

189. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, May 21, 1974, noon. 189. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, May 21, 1974, noon.1

Washington, May 21, 1974, noon

THE WHITE HOUSE
WASHINGTON
MEMORANDUM OF CONVERSATION

PARTICIPANTS:

Masayoshi Ohira, Foreign Minister of Japan

Takeshi Yasukawa, Japanese Ambassador to the United States

Yoshio Okawara, Director General for American Affairs, Foreign Ministry

Sadaaki Numata, Interpreter

The President

Major General Brent Scowcroft, Deputy Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs

Manabu Fukuda, Interpreter

DATE, TIME, AND PLACE: May 21, 1974, 12:00 noon
The White House

SUBJECTS: (1) U.S.-Japan Alliance; (2) Middle East Situation; (3) Sino-Soviet Relations; (4) U.S.-Japan Cooperation on Siberian Resource Development; (5) Indian Nuclear Test; (6) Finance Minister Fukuda's Coming Visit to U.S.

Ohira Reaffirms U.S.-Japan Alliance

After an exchange of greetings, Ohira emphasized that close ties with the U.S. remain the essential element of Japan's foreign policy. The U.S. and Japan must continue their efforts to maintain close and firm ties as the basis for peace in Asia and the world. Although both nations have maintained their ties with care, they must not become complacent at this time. Continued efforts to maintain close relations are essential, since the situation in Asia and the world remains unstable. He emphasized the importance with which Tanaka personally views relations with the U.S.

The President began by discussing Mr. Hodgson's appointment. He said he has total confidence in Hodgson and thought he would be a worthy successor to Ambassador Ingersoll. He thought that Hodgson could work well with the Japanese.

The President said he totally agreed with Ohira's comments on the importance to Asia and the world of U.S.-Japan relations. The U.S. and Japan are both powerful nations, and they must make every effort to achieve an era of peace. It is also important to recognize that Japan and U.S. are major economic powers of the free world.

Middle East Situation

Turning to the Middle East, the President said there are signs of a breakthrough in our effort to achieve peace. Although a solution is still difficult — there are many odds and ends to be resolved — there is hope that something significant will come out of the current negotiations. Both Syria and Egypt are now negotiating with Israel. While a solution at this time may be temporary, we think we can lay the foundation for broader agreement later. The achievement of peace in the Middle East is in the interest of all the nations involved, and we think there is now momentum in that direction.

From an economic standpoint, the effects of the October war were quite large, especially for countries like Japan. All nations should support our efforts to achieve a solution to the energy problem. Our efforts are not selfish; others will benefit, too.

Sino-Soviet Relationship

The President said that the U.S. and Japan are pursuing parallel courses on relations with the PRC. The USSR and the PRC are still not getting along. He asked Ohira if he had any views on the possibility of a change in leadership in the PRC.

Ohira said that he is trying to digest the situation, but he could not at this time make a clear statement of future prospects. Japan and China are now pursuing a course based on common interests and have fairly smooth relations. The best course is one of natural development. Even if there is a change in leadership, Japan believes it can get along with China.

The President said that whatever change of leadership might take place in either the Soviet Union or the PRC it will not mean a drastic change in relations. He emphasized that it is essential that we continue an evenhanded treatment of both the PRC and the USSR, because both countries are watching to see how we might tilt.

U.S.-Japan Cooperation on Siberian Resource Development

Foreign Minister Ohira noted that Prime Minister Tanaka had sent a letter to the President on Siberian development. He asked for the President's comments on the Japanese position as stated in that letter.

The President said we look on this as being a positive direction to pursue. However, he cautioned Ohira to be very careful in negotiating with the Soviets. Japan must protect its interests; they need Japan's technology, but they must pay the price not in money but in diplomacy. The United States cannot control any nation, and we welcome cooperative endeavors with the Soviets or any other country. He said that Japan today does not speak from a background of military power but that it does speak from economic strength. During the years ahead, he said, we trust that Japan's power will continue to be in the economic sphere.

The President went on to say that the U.S. must maintain its military power because of the Soviet Union. He indicated that he expects the summit conference to be difficult. There will be hard negotiations ahead on strategic arms, he said, but we expect some progress to be made. This, he said, will be good for the free world, but the U.S. cannot unilaterally reduce its military strength in ether Asia or Europe. Peace must be obtained from strength.

U.S.-Japan Mutual Security Treaty

On the Security Treaty with Japan, the President noted that the Chinese objected to the Treaty three or four years ago but not today. This change obviously stems from pragmatic reasons. The maintenance of the security relationship with Japan is essential in maintaining balance in Asia and in an effort to bring about some restraint among the major nations there. He said he would have Secretary Kissinger keep the channels open for informing Japan on U.S.-Soviet negotiations on arms limitations as well as the Middle East situation.

Foreign Minister Ohira said that Japan understands the importance of the Mutual Security Treaty. He said the situation seems healthy now, but that sound development must continue. He reiterated that we must not be complacent. He thanked the President for his comments on the Siberian projects and emphasized that Japan hopes to secure U.S. cooperation in Siberia.

Indian Nuclear Test

The President asked Ohira for his views on the Indian nuclear test. Ohira said that he had had no time to consider the situation since he was away from Japan at the time of the test. He said that Japan, as a nation with a potential nuclear capability, will do nothing to cause worries in that regard. Japan will not go nuclear. Ohira said that Japan's policy on this matter is now his prime concern, but that he firmly believes that Japanese policy will not change.

The President said that he did not want to attempt to dictate to Japan on this matter but that, philosophically speaking, there will be an increasing danger of world-wide nuclear war if more and more nations acquire a nuclear capability. He said that the answer to that problem is, of course, very difficult, but that we must strengthen the structure of peace through our common interests both economic and political. Nations, whatever power they have, must reject the use of nuclear weapons.

Finance Minister Fukuda's Coming U.S. Visit

At the conclusion of the meeting, Ohira said that Finance Minister Fukuda will be in the United States around June 10 and would like to meet with the President. The President said he would be happy to meet with Fukuda, if he (the President) is here.

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 1029, Presidential/HAK Memcons, 1 June 1974– [8 August 1974] [3 of 3]. Secret; Sensitive. The conversation took place in the Oval Office. On May 14, Yasukawa sent Nixon a memorandum stating the Government of Japan’s position regarding Siberian development. (Ibid., Box 1337, NSC Unfiled Material, 1974, 1 of 9) Springsteen suggested that no response to the Japanese memorandum was necessary, but recommended that Nixon refer to it during his May 21 meeting with Ohira. (Memorandum from Springsteen to Scowcroft, May 17; ibid.)

190. Study Prepared by the NSC Interdepartmental Group for East Asia and Pacific Affairs, Washington, undated. 190. Study Prepared by the NSC Interdepartmental Group for East Asia and Pacific Affairs, Washington, undated.1

Washington, undated

NSSM 172 U.S. POLICY TOWARD JAPAN

The Question

Policy Discussion

Since 1952, US policy toward Japan has rested on the same basic economic, political and security considerations. The objective circumstances surrounding this relationship are changing. Tensions have decreased between the US and Japan on the one hand and between the US and the PRC and the USSR on the other, while increasing between the latter two.

The Nixon Doctrine, altering the nature of US involvement in Asia, is seen by Asians including the Japanese as a reflection of a relative decrease in US power and less support within the US to commit it abroad. Increasing numbers of Japanese, drawing confidence from their own achievements, no longer see the US interest as the single dominant factor in all of their foreign policy considerations, and are finding it both desirable and necessary to increase the weight of their other interests in policy formulation. Some Americans, lured by Japan's economic success, are frustrated by Japan's unwillingness to become an unquestioning complement to US global strategy. (This is discussed in Annex C.) Serious questions have arisen regarding the stability of the domestic political scene in both countries, with the ruling establishment in Japan now supported by only half of the electorate and facing a strong challenge from the rejuvenated left. (This is discussed more extensively in Annex A.) The Japanese are aware that President Kennedy was assassinated, President Johnson declined a second term nomination and the House of Representatives is formally considering the impeachment of President Nixon.

Before another decade has passed Japan's economy may produce a GNP greater than the USSR and perhaps a per capita GNP greater than our own. Japanese economic activities and requirements for raw materials and markets with concomitant economic influence are matters with global impact.

The bilateral issues which traditionally have plagued US-Japan relations—military bases and security arrangements, China policy, trade and monetary problems—have been reduced to manageable proportions, though none have disappeared. This relative absence of significant bilateral tensions give us an opportunity to re-examine the relationship to determine whether any changes are needed in our basic policies to insure continued U.S.-Japan cooperation in global and regional affairs.

In Section C we have reviewed US policy objectives to insure their relevance over the next five years and noted the constraints that Japanese needs and sensitivities impose on their attainment. We have examined existing policy guidelines to determine whether they still provide effective guidance on how we want our relations with Japan to develop globally and regionally. We have examined likely Japanese objectives and identified some potentially troublesome issues which we will continue to monitor closely.

Our consensus is that existing policy guidelines remain effective for the attainment of our objectives. We therefore recommend no change in basic US policies toward Japan.

Current Policy Guidelines

The U.S. places the highest possible value upon this partnership, and regards Japan as our major partner in Asia. We will pursue means to make the partnership equal, reciprocal, and interdependent in order to preserve its long-term viability. We will approach US-Japan multilateral cooperation from the standpoint of our overriding collective interest in a stable global environment, and will eschew short-term economic, political or other advantages in making key decisions.

Strategic/Security

We will seek to preserve the Treaty of Mutual Cooperation and Security without amendment.

We will continue to make gradual alterations in our base structure and base utilization in Japan in order to reduce major irritants while retaining essential base functions.

We will continue to encourage Japan to make moderate increases and qualitative improvements in her defense efforts, while avoiding any pressure on her to develop substantially larger forces or to play a regional military role.

Political

We will seek to sustain US-Japan cooperation on multilateral problems of common concern — especially the relationship between the advanced industrialized democracies, energy, international trade and monetary reform, Indochinese rehabilitation, and encouraging detente an the Korean Peninsula.

We will cooperate with the GOJ to support Japan's interest in permanent representation on the UN Security Council.

Economic/Commercial

We will continue to work with Japan to strengthen our bilateral economic relationship, expand US exports and trade in both directions, keep our bilateral trade deficit within manageable limits, and liberalize access to each other's market. We expect Japan to remove remaining quotas and other import restrictions which are contrary to GATT principles.

We desire periodic meetings with Japan to assist progress toward agreed-on balance of payments goals and in implementing compatible economic policies, to identify remaining or emerging trade problems, and to work out constructive, timely solutions to common economic problems.

We will cooperate with Japan in seeking liberalization of the trade policy of the European Community, and in working toward a successful multilateral trade negotiation covering both industrial and agricultural products, reducing both tariff and non-tariff barriers to trade, and defining a multilateral non-discriminatory safeguard mechanism.

We will continue to urge Japan to move towards a higher level of official assistance on more concessional terms, and to cooperate with Japan in strengthening the international financial institutions for the purpose of promoting the economic development of the developing countries.

We will seek Japanese support for international monetary reform on satisfactory terms.

We will continue to cooperate with the Japanese government in seeking a multilateral approach to the energy problem, particularly with respect to promoting a reduction and stabilization of oil prices, development of additional energy sources and improved conservation techniques, and conducting cooperative energy R&D programs.

We affirm the importance of close cooperation with Japan in securing a stable supply of enriched uranium, including cooperation in the necessary research and development.

We will continue to urge the removal of obstacles to US investment in Japan, as well as continue to facilitate Japanese investment in the US.

Science/Technology

We will seek a broader and more balanced cooperation with Japan in the fields of science and technology.

Culture/Education

We will work with Japan to devise improved programs of cultural and educational exchange, in order to improve our two countries' understanding of each other's cultural and social backgrounds.

The Framework of Relationships

The US and Japan have concluded the following basic agreements: a Peace Treaty (1951), Treaty of Mutual Cooperation and Security (1960), a Status of Forces Agreement (1960) and the Okinawa Reversion Agreement (1971), all of which remain in effect. Economic relations have been developed within the framework of the Treaty of Friendship, Commerce and Navigation (1953) and, more recently, through guidelines set forth in various bilateral communiqués, particularly those issued following periodic meetings of the Joint US-Japan Committee on Trade and Economic Affairs and the Nixon-Tanaka Summit Conferences of 1972 and 1973. Principles governing scientific relations and elaborating consultative machinery for nurturing those relations are embodied in a number of agreements, the most important of which are the US-Japan Atomic Energy Agreement (1968); US-Japan Communiqués establishing the Joint Committee on Scientific Cooperation (1961), the Joint Cooperative Medical Science Program (1965) and the Cooperative Program in Natural Resources (1974); and the exchange of messages between President Nixon and Prime Minister Sato establishing the US-Japan Ministerial Level Meeting on Environmental Cooperation (1970).

Within these guidelines and on the basis of present policy, we can continue to handle our bilateral problems. However, we do anticipate that there will be policy issues concerning Japan requiring decisions in the future. These issues will flow mainly from multilateral problems, among the most sensitive of which are:

Energy — This paper extensively reviews energy issues which are vital to Japan. Basic decisions on energy investment and broad policy, however, involve global tradeoffs which reach well beyond the area of US-Japan relations.

Siberian Development — This topic deserves consideration in the context of relations with the USSR and security. Japan is a major interested party with whom we have many common interests.

Access to Raw Materials and Foodstuffs — Supply to all industrialized economies, including Japan, is now a global issue.

Triregional Ties — This subject has been extensively studied; and is treated in this paper from the viewpoint of our relations with Japan.

International Trade, investment and Monetary Relations — Japan is a major participant in efforts to better manage these global problems.

These multilateral problems so broadly impact on the totality of our global interests that they must be dealt with functionally for the process of consideration to have integrity. To propose policy options in this Japan NSSM on issues which affect not only Japan but all other advanced industrial nations would inevitably produce unacceptable distortions in our analysis and perceptions leading to the presentation of unreal options.

[Omitted here are sections on "interests and objectives."]

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Institutional Files (H-Files), Box H–197, NSSM Files, NSSM 172 (2 of 3). Secret; Noforn. Scowcroft received the study under a covering letter, June 26, from Springsteen. The annexes to the report, on Japanese domestic political constraints, the policy background, traditional problem areas in U.S.-Japanese relations, and Japanese economic trends, are attached, but not published. Davis forwarded the report to interested departments and agencies on June 29. (Ibid.)

191. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, June 27, 1974, 1520–1530. 191. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, June 27, 1974, 1520–1530.1

Washington, June 27, 1974, 1520–1530

ASSISTANT SECRETARY OF DEFENSE
WASHINGTON, D.C. 20301

In reply refer to: 1-5940/74

MEMORANDUM OF CONVERSATION

SUBJECT: Ambassador Hodgson's Courtesy Call with the Secretary of Defense

PARTICIPANTS:

State Department

Ambassador to Japan - James D. Hodgson

Japan Desk Officer - William Piez

Defense Department

Secretary of Defense - James R. Schlesinger

Assistant Secretary of Defense (ISA) - Robert Ellsworth

Assistant for Japan (ISA/EAPR) - LTC W.R. Barrett, USAF

Time: 1520-1530, 27 June 1974
Place: Secretary Schlesinger's Office, Pentagon

I. (U) General Discussion

After opening courtesies, Ambassador Hodgson indicated that he and Mr. Ellsworth had covered several issues concerning Japan earlier (see below), and asked if Mr. Schlesinger had any further items to discuss. SecDef commented that our relations with Japan were cordial at present, but that there were relatively minor on-going issues such as homeporting and funding of U.S. consolidation in Japan. Due to other commitments, the meeting was brief, and was concluded with Ambassador Hodgson inviting Mr. Schlesinger to visit Japan at the earliest opportunity.

2. (C) Discussion between Ambassador Hodgson and Mr. Ellsworth

Prior to meeting SecDef, Ambassador Hodgson and Mr. Ellsworth discussed several current Japan issues. Mr. Ellsworth made the Ambassador aware of major GOJ construction efforts on Okinawa and in the Tokyo area concerning the consolidation of U.S. forces, and of the potential for slippage in the construction timetable. As U.S. forces budget reductions are geared to the timetable, pressure should be maintained on the GOJ to adhere to the schedule. Mr. Ellsworth also discussed the impact of Japan's current economic slowdown on the Japanese military program, and the U.S. interest in having the Japanese continue with gradual improvement of her military forces. Mr. Ellsworth then reiterated the U.S. interest in having Japan ratify the NPT, and concluded the discussion with the comment that recent problems relative to visits to Japan of U.S. nuclear-powered warships had been resolved, although the subject may surface again.

Memorandum of Conversation
Prepared by: LTC Barrett

Approved by: [signed] Robert Ellsworth
Date: 5 July 74

Distribution:
SecDef (1)
DepSecDef (1)
OSD (CCS) (1)
ASD (ISA) (1)
State Dept (EA/J) (1)
Mil Asst/SecCef (1)
R&C (2)
AD (1)

1 Source: Washington National Records Center, OASD/ISA Files: FRC 330–77–0054, Japan, 333, July 5, 1974. Confidential. Prepared by Barrett and approved by Ellsworth. The conversation took place in Schlesinger’s office. Schlesinger’s talking points, dated June 26, are ibid.

192. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, July 9, 1974, noon–12:25 p.m. 192. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, July 9, 1974, noon–12:25 p.m. 1

Washington, July 9, 1974, noon–12:25 p.m.

MEMORANDUM
THE WHITE HOUSE
WASHINGTON
MEMORANDUM OF CONVERSATION

PARTICIPANTS:

President Nixon

Ambassador James Hodgson, U.S. Ambassador

Brent Scowcroft, Deputy Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs

DATE AND TIME: Tuesday, July 9, 1974 12:00 - 12:25 p.m.
PLACE: The Oval Office

The press comes in for photos.

The President: When do you leave?

Hodgson: Thursday. I spend a couple of days at CINCPAC with Gayler and arrive Tokyo on the 15th.

[The Press Leaves]

Hodgson: My greatest acquaintance is the Labor Minister, with whom I've lost contact.

The President: It's one of the greatest posts in the world. The energy crisis has hit them hard. It is amazing that they are the world's second economic power without any energy resources.

Scowcroft: They have two things: unity, and people who work.

The President: Tanaka lost a bit but nothing dangerous.

Scowcroft: State says they may make personnel changes but no policy changes.

The President: They have never been comfortable with him.

Ikeda is our best friend.

Scowcroft: I thought so.

The President: As a matter of fact, if the Liberals change, he could still be in. You must keep contact with all of them.

You should assure the Japanese on the defense arrangements and in the economic area. We consider them partners equal to Europe. When I talk with the Europeans, I always insist the Japanese be included. The Europeans complain the Japanese have no defense expenses. The Japanese are hard bargainers — they usually get back two for one. We want the Japanese to pick up some of the economic load we have been carrying.

It's a different world — they are hard to read even though they maybe not appear so. On the other hand, they talk rather freely.

You will be asked about my visit. It has been under active consideration for some time but there's nothing specific yet. I would hope some time this year — perhaps in November. Just say we are planning for this year — then if we have to slip we could at least announce it this year.

When the Emperor and his wife can come, just say they are welcome. They planned to come once and had to postpone. I hope it will be soon.

Pay attention to the old guard — Kishi and Sato. Pay courtesy calls on them. Anyone you see I probably will have met. The problems generally should be right down your alley. They will undoubtedly get a labor push — they sure have controlled it. Their vertical structure — keeping everyone employed — is amazing.

Hodgson: On energy, can I say we hope to work with them?

The President: Absolutely. If we go into business for ourselves we will all be pushed against the wall. We must consult, cooperate and try to get prices down to a reasonable level.

In terms of our own hopes for self-sufficiency, we will share our results with them. We are sympathetic to their moves with the Soviet energy projects.

Hodgson: We have to be careful there about the Chinese attitude.

The President: My, yes.

Hodgson: Like the pipeline is so emotional. Later it may be offensive.

Another thing — are we serious about the NPT?

The President: Go through the motions. This is our position, but you have seen the country. You know our position.

On trade — we are trying to get the Trade Bill through. There is Jewish opposition.

Hodgson: Our traveling Senators!

The President: The problem is our economy is so strong. Unemployment is steady but inflation is so strong. How do you feel?

Hodgson: I am not discouraged. I thought the first half would be tough. It is amazing how employment has held up.

The President: The major concern now is the financial markets, interest rates and inflation. The country needs to cut $5-10 billion from the budget but what impact will that have in a trillion-dollar economy?

Hodgson: Businessmen bitch when it s good and when it's bad.

The President: I wouldn't trade our problems for anyone else's — Britain, France, for example.

I am sure you will like it. Hurley built the residence. It s splendid, marvelous for entertaining. Probably one of the best in the world.

Hodgson: We will ramble around in it.

The President: Don't go overboard on entertaining. Stay within your budget. You are not expected to lose money.

Hodgson: When you come, bring Pat.

1 Source: Ford Library, National Security Adviser, Memoranda of Conversation, Box 4, July–September 1974. Secret; Nodis. The conversation took place in the Oval Office.

193. National Security Decision Memorandum 262, Washington, July 29, 1974. 193. National Security Decision Memorandum 262, Washington, July 29, 1974.1

Washington, July 29, 1974

NATIONAL SECURITY COUNCIL
WASHINGTON, D.C. 20506

July 29, 1974

National Security Decision Memorandum 262

TO: The Secretary of Defense
The Deputy Secretary of State
Director, Arms Control and Disarmament Agency

SUBJECT: Use of U.S. Bases in Japan in the Event of Aggression Against South Korea

The President has reviewed the memorandum of the Deputy Secretary of State of April 27, 1974 which proposed a modification in the guidance contained in NSDM 251 concerning extension of the 1961 Kishi Minute on the Use of U.S. Bases in Japan in the Event of Aggression Against South Korea.

The President has approved the recommendation in Option 3 of the memorandum, i.e., with the purpose of retaining at least the effect of the Korean Minute without seeking an explicit, formal extension of the Minute, we should:

— Not raise the question of the Korean Minute itself directly with the Japanese Government.

— Rather, during discussion with the Japanese Government on the future of the U.N. Command, take the position that we are confident termination of the U.N. Command will not adversely affect our ability to deter a North Korean attack, even though the U.N. cover and the U.N. SOFA for Japan are terminated, and that no further formal U.S.-Japanese actions are required.

Accordingly, the guidance contained in NSDM 251 is amended in this respect.

Henry A. Kissinger [signed]

cc: Director of Central Intelligence
Chairman, Joint Chiefs of Staff

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 364, Subject Files, NSDMs, #145–264, 1972-1974. Top Secret; Sensitive. Copies were sent to the Director of Central Intelligence and to the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff. Rush’s memorandum, April 27, offered three options: “1. Negotiate a new agreement as provided in NSDM 251. 2. Let the Korean Minute formally lapse and depend on the Nixon-Sato Communique. 3. Not raise the Korean Minute issue directly with the Japanese Government and seek to leave the issue in essence unresolved.” Rush recommended option three. (Ford Library, National Security Adviser, NSC Staff for East Asia & Pacific Affairs, Convenience Files, Box 3, Japan 1974 [3])

194. National Security Study Memorandum 210, Washington, September 11, 1974. 194. National Security Study Memorandum 210, Washington, September 11, 1974.1

Washington, September 11, 1974

NATIONAL SECURITY COUNCIL
WASHINGTON, D.C. 20506

September 11, 1974

National Security Study Memorandum 210

TO: The Secretary of the Treasury
The Secretary of Defense
The Deputy Secretary of State
The Director, Arms Control and Disarmament Agency
The Director of Central Intelligence
The Chairman, Atomic Energy Commission

SUBJECT: Review of Japan Policy for the President's Visit to Japan

In anticipation of his planned visit to Japan, the President has asked for a full review and reexamination of policy issues which may arise during his meetings with Japanese leaders. The review should take as its point of departure the definition of interests and objectives contained in the response to NSSM 172. It should define and evaluate alternative policies to support these objectives.

The study should include, but not necessarily be limited to, consideration of the following:

Multilateral Issues

— U.S.-Japanese cooperation in the development of Siberian resources.

— The Japanese role in international cooperation on energy matters, including world-wide payment deficits for petroleum.

— The Japanese role in international cooperation on trade and monetary reform.

— The future Japanese role in Asia, particularly Korea and Indochina.

— The future of the trilateral relationship between the United States, Japan, and Western Europe.

— Nuclear nonproliferation.

Bilateral Issues — U.S. agricultural export guarantees or long-term contracts.

— Fisheries.

— U.S. -Japanese defense cooperation, including possible complementarity.

— Trade and investment problems.

— Japanese participation in a uranium enrichment facility in the United States, and Japanese access to U.S. uranium enrichment services.

— Technological cooperation.

The study should be prepared by the NSC Interdepartmental Group for East Asia with appropriate representation of other agencies. The study should be submitted by October 4, 1974, for review by the NSC Senior Review Group prior to its consideration by the President.

[signed] Henry A. Kissinger

cc: The Chairman, Joint Chiefs of Staff
Counsellor to the President for Economic Policy
The Executive Director, Council on International Economic Policy

1 Source: Ford Library, NSC Institutional Files (H-Files), Box H–13, Institutional Files, Meetings (IFM), SRG Meeting, Japan, November 11, 1974 (3). Secret; Exdis. Copies were also sent to the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, the Counsellor to the President for Economic Policy, and the Executive Director of the Council on International Economic Policy. Smyser sent Kissinger the draft NSSM under a covering September 4 memorandum. (Ibid., Box H-32, NSSM 210, Review of Japan Policy for the President’s Visit to Japan [2])

195. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, September 21, 1974. 195. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, September 21, 1974.1

Washington, September 21, 1974

DEPARTMENT OF STATE
Memorandum of Conversation

DATE: September 21, 1974 5:30 pm
The White House

SUBJECT: Prime Minister Tanaka Call on President Ford

PARTICIPANTS:

US

The President

The Secretary

James D. Hodgson, Ambassador to Japan

Lt. General Brent Scowcroft, NSC

James J. Wickel, Department of State (Interpreter)

JAPAN

Kakuei Tanaka, Prime Minister of Japan

Toshio Kimura, Foreign Minister

Kiyohiko Tsurumi, Deputy Vice Minister of Foreign Affairs

Takeshi Yasukawa, Ambassador to the United States

Hidetoshio Ukawa, Ministry of Foreign Affairs (Interpreter)

(Note: Press photographers took pictures during the following informal exchange.)

The President: Welcome to the White House. I wish the weather was better this afternoon. (There was a rain shower during Prime Minister Tanaka's arrival at the White House.)

Prime Minister Tanaka: Thank you Mr. President for taking this time to meet me. More than a year has passed since my last visit to the White House and I wish to come here more often. I have just completed a five-day visit to Brazil. It took nine hours and forty minutes to fly from Brazil to Andrews AFB, first over the green sea of the Matto Grosso, and then over the real sea. I plan to spend tonight in Bermuda, before flying to Canada to begin my visit there. I have come to Washington because I wished to meet you before welcoming you to Japan in November.

The Secretary: Mr. President, you will find the Japanese press amazing. On one visit to Tokyo I gave an off-the-record briefing to a non-governmental group of 30 private Japanese, and was amazed to read a verbatim transcript of it in the press the following day. On asking for the Japanese definition of an off-the-record briefing I was told that "off-the-record" meant that only one member of the group briefs the press on such a meeting.

Prime Minister Tanaka: Your White House photographer (Mr. Kennedy) accompanied me on my first visit to Peking.

The Secretary: Mr. Kennedy was then working for UPI. (Note: At this point the press photographers left the Oval Office.)

The President: It is nice to have you here. As you said, it would be good to meet more often. I look forward to seeing you again in Tokyo.

Prime Minister Tanaka: I offer my warmest congratulations to you on assuming the Presidency.

The President: Thank you.

Prime Minister Tanaka: My congratulations on the assumption of the Presidency by a veteran of the Congress are all the more heartfelt because I myself have served as an elected member of the Diet these past 28 years.

The President: We should understand each other well.

Prime Minister Tanaka: The Government and people of Japan will warmly welcome you Mr. President in November, when you make the first visit to Japan by an incumbent American President; the Japanese have long wished to have a Presidential visit.

The President: Mrs. Ford and I look forward to the visit. I visited Japan several times in the past, but it will be an honor and a privilege to be the first President in history to visit Japan.

Prime Minister Tanaka: The people of Japan are preparing to make your welcome to Japan a memorable major event in the long history of friendly relations between Japan and the United States. I myself have visited the United States once or twice each year; in the past thirteen or fourteen years I visited the White House six times, and hope to return often, at least once a year.

The President: I look forward to your return to Washington; after my own visit to Japan, plans could be made for your next visit to Washington. Your visit would be helpful, in terms of helping to maintain the excellent relations between the United States and Japan.

The Prime Minister: The United States, as the major power in the world, has diplomatic relations with a broad range of nations. However, the fundamental principle of Japan's diplomacy is the maintenance of smooth, friendly relations with the United States; the most important point to note is that this principle was true in the past, is true now and will remain true in the future.

The President: We believe our present relations with Japan are excellent. I know of no serious problems in our relations. There are some things which we could work out, but I know of no tensions or difficulties.

Prime Minister Tanaka: The Mutual Security Treaty is fundamental to Japan's relations with the United States, through which Japan wishes to contribute to peace in the world and Asia. Japan's foreign policy deals with some 147 nations, but Japan's relations with the United States are the most important of all.

The President: I share this feeling, especially in terms of the number of problems we have in common and the leadership we must both show in the Pacific.

The Prime Minister: Japan is a nation lacking in natural resources. Therefore, trade, particularly with the United States, is vital to Japan. During the thirty year's of the post-war period 25 percent of Japan's trade has been conducted with the United States directly, plus an additional 5 percent with American firms with overseas investments, for example, with American oil companies. The fact that 30 percent of Japan's trade, or nearly one-third, is with the United States underlies its importance as a trading partner to Japan. Textiles were a difficult problem, but I did my best to resolve that issue. Also, at one point there was a trade problem, but I am pleased to have fulfilled my promise to restore the trade balance to a healthy situation in a relatively brief period.

The President: Japan may lack a number of natural resources, but the Japanese people are a great resource, which makes up for the deficiencies in coal or other minerals which Japan requires. The people of Japan are a great people. We are delighted to have them as friends. Trade is also important to us. We are now in the process, and I am doing my best to get Congress to enact the necessary legislation to permit me and other members of the Executive Branch to negotiate meaningful reductions of trade barriers to the mutual benefit of all the parties. I hope we won't have any difficult problems like textiles, or difficult trade problems like the one that required us to impose soybean export controls last year. I do not expect any need to impose controls, even though this year's crop is disappointing in some areas. Our crop this year is bigger than last, but not as big as we hoped. Viewed in terms of trade, our relations have benefited both nations, and should be expanded to the further benefit of both.

Prime Minister Tanaka: Japan relies on the United States for 90 percent of its wheat, soybeans and corn. Therefore, the President's assurances that the United States would not impose restrictions on grain exports would be welcome news to the people of Japan, who wish to be assured a stable supply of food.

The President: We took off all production controls on all crops. We are still hopeful that the final crop figures for this summer would exceed the latest forecast, but the final harvest would depend on a number of factors, such as early frost which could affect the corn crop. Next year I will make the greatest effort to increase production again.

Ambassador Hodgson: The importance of this subject to Japan could be illustrated, Mr. President, by the fact that the Minister of Agriculture and Forestry told me, during my recent initial courtesy call, that the nature of the U.S. crop reports which he receives first thing every morning determine whether he has a nervous stomach all day.

Prime Minister Tanaka: I share the views you expressed in your speech at the UN, on such important world problems as inflation, food and energy, including oil. If these are allowed to slide, as up to now, there could be further increases in oil prices or a failure of the world grain crop, either of which could have a severe impact on inflation.

Such developments could pose a grave danger of reducing world trade. Therefore, these matters should be dealt with positively, as major world problems.

The President: I spoke at the UN Wednesday (September 16) stressing the interdependence of the nation's of the world, the oil producers and consumers of energy, as well as the agricultural producers. These must relate to each other, and not fight with each other. It is interesting that the editorial reaction in the United States has not been critical. I was firm, but said some things which had to be said.

The Secretary: Comments from the UN are also good. I look forward to meeting Saturday at Camp David with Foreign Minister Kimura and Finance Minister Ohira to review the energy problem. Camp David provides the same kind of wooded privacy as Karuizawa where I once met the Prime Minister. I will also see Foreign Minister Kimura at luncheon Friday (September 27).

Prime Minister Tanaka: Former Finance Minister Aichi died suddenly, the evening before he was scheduled to depart Tokyo for Paris to participate in a C-20 meeting.

The Secretary: It was a great privilege to have worked with Aichi, who had been most cooperative and constructive in dealing with problems such as energy.

Prime Minister Tanaka: The original G-10 within the IMF was expanded into the C-20, of which the five key nations, France, United Kingdom, Federal Republic of Germany, United States and Japan, comprise the Committee of Five which discusses important questions.

The Secretary: Mr. Prime Minister, you would be surprised at how many countries think they are important.

Prime Minister Tanaka: The Committee of Five could meet without opposing each other, and discuss problems in a relaxed manner, as if they were in Karuizawa.

The President: I hope that the high-level representatives of these powerful and influential countries of the west can reach some affirmative answers directly relating to the economies of the United States and Japan, and the world.

Prime Minister Tanaka: Japan wishes to cooperate in positive discussions, and hopes these talks will reach some conclusions. Having participated in such discussions myself over the past 13-14 years, concerning the IMF, World Bank, IDA, international liquidity and key currencies, I hope a positive conclusion can be reached, in terms of international political relations. The fact that Giscard d'Estaing, a strong debater, is now President of France, might offer some merit for discussion of specifics. I hope the time is now ripe for this. In my own experience, the United States, Japan and Federal Republic of Germany always see things eye-to-eye, but France disagrees. However, Giscard d'Estaing is now President of France.

The President: Henry has had many enjoyable times negotiating with France, especially with its former Foreign Minister. In fact some people say that Henry even voted for the change in France.

Prime Minister Tanaka: France, which has been critical of the proposals put forward a number of times by the United States, is now confronted with a situation in which it too must try to resolve these economic problems. Therefore, I hope the Committee of Five will be able to reach a conclusion.

The President: The Brussels Conference reached a good conclusion on the emergency program for energy, leading to good progress and success. France is not a formal participant, but I understand that it might find some way soon to take part without becoming a formal member.

The Secretary: I appreciate Japan's very strong cooperation in this effort.

The President: We have a high regard for Ambassador Yasukawa. In several discussions I have come to know the Ambassador, and consider him a fine representative of the Government and people of Japan.

Prime Minister Tanaka: The most important qualification for an official in the Foreign Ministry is to understand the importance of Japan's relations with the United States; I appointed Yasukawa Ambassador to the United States because he understands this point fully. Within the Foreign Ministry the choice of top position is between the Minister and Ambassador to the United States. Thank you, Mr. President, for your favorable evaluation of Ambassador Yasukawa.

The President: I have seen a number of Ambassadors, but Japan has one of the best.

Ambassador Hodgson: It is worth noting what the Foreign Minister and his associates have done in the past weeks to turn around a difficult and precarious situation through diplomacy and cooperation.

Ambassador Yasukawa: I briefed the Prime Minister on the constructive role played by the United States in helping resolve the Korean dispute.

Prime Minister Tanaka: I understand and appreciate the role played by the United States. The problems of the ROK and Taiwan affect peace in Asia, and are also of great importance when viewed in terms of East-West relations. Japan has historical problems in its relations with each, and I hope that the United States understands that there may be cases in the future, as in the past and present, when it should offer its cooperation and assistance to help smooth relations.

The President: We have warm and good relations with both nations. We certainly feel that we have a direct relationship with the ROK; we have an excellent relationship with Taiwan. We feel that it would be in the best interest of the United States for Japan to have the same. We are encouraged by the settlement of Japan's difficulties with the ROK. I read about this and was kept informed of developments. It would be unfortunate if relations were to be disrupted, or there were no resolution of the difficulties. We should also work together in the UNGA on the Korean items.

Foreign Minister Kimura: I plan to discuss this with the Secretary on September 27.

Prime Minister Tanaka: The "point" to consider in Japan's relations with the ROK and Taiwan is how these affect the peace in Asia. Therefore, I appreciate the friendly efforts by the United States to help Japan and the ROK settle their differences. I am certain that the Secretary and Minister Kimura will hive a good discussion of this question.

The President: I have no doubts that we have an identical approach to these problems. Some people in the United States are sour and unhappy about the United States role in the Pacific and Southeast Asia, because of the war in Vietnam, but this has been settled by the peace treaty. Thus, we are now free to deal more broadly and concentrate on a broader area of the Pacific. The American people want us to stay in the Pacific and play the same kind of cooperative role we play in the Middle East and Europe, and all areas. Our policy is global, not regional, and we will continue to play a constructive role in the Pacific and Asia.

Prime Minister Tanaka: Thank you Mr. President for these assurances. Also, thank you for the positive cooperation extended by the United States, which has the power to influence the peace of the world, in resolving Japan's difficulties with the ROK. I look forward to welcoming you to Japan in November. Japan had previously invited Presidents Eisenhower and Nixon, but neither visit could be realized. In view of the long history of diplomatic relations between Japan and the United States the entire nation would welcome the first visit by an American President.

Ambassador Hodgson: There was a special kind of drama in Japan surrounding the question of your visit, Mr. President. When you took office, there were two questions in Japan: 1) Would you continue United States foreign policy, and 2) what priority would you give to United States-Japan relations. One or your first official actions was to ask the Secretary Lo stay on, which meant there would be no policy change; and second, you met with Ambassador Yasukawa, and accepted an invitation to visit Japan. Thus, in one stroke, both questions were answered.

The President: This will be my first visit abroad. Before November I will briefly visit a border town in Mexico, but not on an official visit.

Prime Minister Tanaka: Japanese etiquette requires that I call on you before welcoming you to Tokyo. Thank you for the opportunity to do so. According to a saying in the Far East, it is easier to meet a man the second time, and by the third meeting they are like brothers. Having met you for the first time when you were in Congress, and for the second time today, I will welcome you to Japan like a brother.

The Secretary: We might tell the press that the President and the Prime Minister reviewed a broad range of bilateral and multilateral matters, including food, energy and trade, and discussed the President's forthcoming visit to Japan.

(Note: The following exchange took place during the walk to the cars.)

Prime Minister Tanaka: I would like to invite you to play golf with me during your visit to Japan.

The President: I accept.

Prime Minister Tanaka (to his aide): Include golf in the schedule and make the arrangements.

1 Source: Ford Library, National Security Adviser, Memoranda of Conversation, Box 6. Secret; Nodis. The conversation took place in the Oval Office. Drafted by Wickel. As a correction, on page 2, an unknown hand wrote “Kennerly” in the margin, a reference to David Hume Kennerly, Gerald Ford’s White House photographer. A less detailed version of the same conversation, prepared by Scowcroft, is ibid. Kissinger’s briefing memorandum with talking points for Ford is ibid., Presidential Briefing Material for VIP Visits, 1974–76, Box 1, 9/21/74, Japan, Prime Minister Tanaka.

196. Memorandum From John Froebe and Robert Hormats of the NSC Staff to Secretary of State Kissinger, Washington, November 9, 1974. 196. Memorandum From John Froebe and Robert Hormats of the NSC Staff to Secretary of State Kissinger, Washington, November 9, 1974.1

Washington, November 9, 1974

MEMORANDUM
NATIONAL SECURITY COUNCIL
ACTION

November 9, 1974

MEMORANDUM FOR: SECRETARY KISSINGER
FROM: JOHN A. FROEBE, JR. [JR initialed]
ROBERT HORMATS [RH initialed]

SUBJECT: Japan NSSM: SRG Meeting on November 11, 1974, at 11:00 a.m.

You have scheduled an SRG meeting for November 11, 1974, at 11:00 a.m. to consider the interdepartmental response to the Japan NSSM.

Issues

The EA/IG examined the range of issues in U.S.-Japan relations, but limited its development of options to those issues requiring the President's decision in advance of his visit to Japan. The study thus produced options on four is issues —Yakutsk natural gas, fisheries, U.S. agricultural exports to Japan, and U.S.-Japan defense cooperation. We believe only the first three need new Presidential guidance at this point.

As regards the other issues examined, the study concluded that either existing policy guidance remains effective, or that further in-depth functional studies are required. Such studies, in our view, are needed on U.S.-Japan cooperation in international trade and monetary reforms, the U.S.-Japan-Western Europe trilateral relationship, and Siberian resource development in general. (As you will recall, a study request on the last question has just been issued.) These questions should be studied principally in a multilateral context.

The principal deficiencies in this study are that it does not adequately explore the interrelationship between the issues, relate them to some of the potential longer-range problems in Japan's foreign policy or deal with them in terms of some of the present underlying problems in Japan's and in our own policy. However, we would note that this NSSM study is a considerable improvement over that submitted last summer. Not only does it advance options for the Presidents consideration—which the last did not—but it also does a much better job than the usual NSSM response in defining meaningful US objectives and in relating policy options to them.

We believe the SRC meeting should focus on the four basic policy issues for which the study offers options, and on identifying issues for further study. The meeting should not get bogged down in the immediate tactical problems of the visit such as nuclear weapons transit and Tanaka's political survival (which seems assured at least through the period of the visit).

The NSC meeting, if there is to be one, could focus on any policy issues left unresolved by the SRC meeting, but presumably would deal principally with the general state of our basic alliance relationship and would give the President an opportunity to make clear to department heads his basic views on policy toward Japan.

Background

The basic problem in our policy toward Japan at this juncture, as the NSSM states, is how to use this period of relative quietude in our relationship to get Japan to play a much more effective role on global and regional multilateral issues. A subordinate problem is how simultaneously to keep U.S.-Japan bilateral issues under control.

The NSSM study approaches this problem largely in terms of the individual multilateral and bilateral issues involved. At the same time, it would have us deal with these specific issues within a framework of some of the more constant needs of our alliance relationship: (1) to give Japan the confidence it needs in our commitment to the Japan alliance and in our basic intentions in Asia generally, particularly in light of the change of Administrations, and (2) to continue mindful of Japan's resources vulnerability, the long-term erosion o the LDP's domestic political base, and basic asymmetries in the U.S.-Japan relationship.

We agree that these remain the central problems in our relations with Japan. Another element which may be coming increasingly to the fore, however, is a basic dilemma in our policy—which reflects a similar dilemma in Japan's own policy and which underlies almost all of the individual issues in U.S. -Japan cultural cooperation. The dilemma is how, on the one hand, we can get Japan to take a broader approach and to play a more active political role on global multilateral problems and to more greater equality and reciprocity in our alliance relationship, while, on the other hand, we do not put intolerable strains in our relationship with Japan or on the LDP' s domestic political base, do not push Japan toward regionally destabilizing roles, and do recognize both the current Japanese preference for a low-profile role and the risks in Japan's moving beyond this role too rapidly. The dilemma has perhaps been sharpened in the past year by the emphasis we have put on U.S.-Japan cooperation on multilateral issues.

Japan has come to grips with the similar dilemma in its own policy probably more squarely than we have. As seen by Embassy Tokyo, Japan is striking the balance between the conflicting objectives by defining its world role as that of a broker—between East and West, rich and poor, socialist and democratic, colored and white. This is not always to our disadvantage. If projected over the longer term, however, a broker's role will probably not move Japan into the more active leadership role that we have in mind.

To date, we have handled the dilemma in our policy largely through a bureaucratic dialectic. Commerce, Agriculture, and Treasury on the economic side and Defense on the security side, wanting Japan to share some of our burdens multilaterally or wanting larger concessions on U.S.-Japan bilateral issues, have been restrained by State's EA Bureau, which has tended to be over-protective of the alliance relationship. The NSC Staff has at times acted as a mediator between these two groups.

The net result has been that the Japanese have been pulled in both directions at the same time by the U.S. Government, and that the basic coherence of our Japan policy has been wanting.

The Principal Immediate Issues

1. Yakutsk Natural Gas

Japan expects a U.S. response to a proposal for a $49. S million Ex-Im Bank loan for the exploration phase of the Yakutsk gas field. The paper offers three options. All three would allow private U.S. participation. They differ on whether we should (a) decide now to refuse the Japanese request for Ex-Im participation, (b) delay a decision and be noncommittal to the Japanese or (c) decide now to agree to the Japanese request.

a. Departmental Positions. State, Treasury, and Commerce favor U.S. participation in the scheme, but believe that we cannot go ahead without passage of Ex-Im legislation.

b. Our Views. We do not want to give Japan an inflated expectation of what we can provide, especially when the Ex-Im Bill is still on the Hill. A commitment to Japan made public in the U.S. would certainly provoke an adverse Congressional reaction. We can, therefore, do little but indicate that we are as yet unable to respond to the Japanese in this matter. We do, however, want to be as forthcoming as possible. We might, therefore, reaffirm our intention in principle to participate jointly with Japan, where economically feasible, in the development of Siberian resources. We might also give Japan assurance that we support the concept of U.S. firms, where they consider it appropriate, working with Japanese firms in this area.

2. U.S. Agricultural Exports to Japan

The interdepartmental paper offers three options on U.S. agricultural exports to Japan: —Do not give Japan, or anyone else, preferential access to U.S. agricultural surpluses.

—Give Japan preferential access, within the constraints of overall U.S. policy, and encourage Japan to establish stockpiles in the U.S.

—Accommodate Japan's interest within a new framework of U.S. policies on stockpiling, long-term supply arrangements, and new GATT roles.

a. Departmental Views. All agencies agree that preferential access is inappropriate at this time and could lead to numerous demands from other countries. All share the view that within the framework prepared by your Rome speech we should attempt to meet mutual U.S.-Japanese agricultural objectives. They believe that Option C is the only appropriate choice.

b. Our Views. We agree that only Option C is appropriate. At the World Food Conference you proposed an international system of nationally-held grain reserves and a number of other measures which would involve Japan. Any decision on the U.S.-Japan bilateral problem should await the outcome of the negotiations on your proposals, in which Japan will be included. We should, as Option C indicates, do what we can to accommodate Japanese interest in this process.

c. Fisheries

The NSSM response offers four options on how to get Japan to reduce its fishing catch in the Northern Pacific by 30 percent: —Raise the problem officially with Japan, relying on the likelihood of a 200 mile fishing limit—either under a Law of the Sea Agreement or through U.S. legislation—for leverage.

—Raise the issue with Prime Minister Tanaka, suggesting that Japanese cooperation would help forestall restrictive U.S. domestic legislation.

—Offer inducements to Japan such as an increase in steel scrap quotas or special cons consideration of food supplies.

—Threaten sanctions such as restrictions on exports of U.S. agricultural products or coal and on imports of Japanese goods.

a. Departmental Views. All agencies agree that the issue should be raised with Tanaka, but that special incentives and threats should be avoided. All support Option 2.

b. Our Views. We agree that this should be raised with Tanaka.

This is a major domestic issue in both countries. The President is committed to domestic constituencies—particularly Alaskan interests—to raise it, but he should avoid giving the problem great prominence in the discussions. The objective is to obtain Japan's full cooperation to reach an accommodation. Too public a posture would make this more difficult.

U.S.-Japan Defense Cooperation

The interdepartmental paper broaches three issues—further reductions in our military presence in Japan, transferring anti-submarine warfare and airborne early warning functions in Japan's defense to Japan, and shifting emphasis in Japan's defense buildup away from major new weapons systems towards strengthening the logistics base for U.S. weapons systems. The paper offers options on the second issue—whether to continue discussing this issue with Japan at the military level, or whether to bring it up at the political level on the other two issues the paper offers no options but merely suggests consultation with Japan.

a. Departmental Views. Defense seems strongly interested in approaching the Japanese on these three issues. Other departments have not voiced views.

b. Our View. These issues definitely seem not ones that the President should raise during his visit. Defense's intention in raising them at this time is somewhat unclear—the Department may only be interested in trying to interest the President in supporting this latest DOD effort to transfer part of our defense burden to Japan. This is not to say that these are not real issues, but only that the issues need to be defined much more clearly and to be worked through more thoroughly.

Consideration of the Dilemma in U.S. Policy

We believe that a systematic study of the basic dilemma in U.S. policy outlined above is warranted. Such a study would explore first the basic dilemma in Japan's policy in its historical, cultural, political, and psychological dimensions. On the basis of this, we would then be better able to consider how we might strike a balance between the conflicting objectives that make up the dilemma in our own policy, and how to apply this to our handling of particular multilateral issues. This would, of course, not be a substitute for grappling with the substantive complications in these multilateral issues. What such a study could do is give us a much clearer grasp of the character of the dilemma, and thus a better basis for judging what roles Japan might be capable of playing on which issues at what time. It would also hopefully add coherence to our dealing with Japan on the range of multilateral issues, and thus reduce the strains we are injecting into our relations with Japan and thereby into Japan's policy itself.

Objectives of the SRG Meeting —To resolve, or at least to clarify, the issues on which the NSSM study has offered options.

—To define the scope of further studies on other issues in our Japan policy needing study.

—To discuss the need for an NSC meeting and the agenda for that meeting.

Attached are your talking points and analytical summary on the NSSM response, and the NSSM response itself.

Concurrence s
Colonel Kennedy
Dr. Elliott

1 Source: Ford Library, NSC Institutional Files (H-Files), Box H–13, Institutional Files, Meetings (IFM), SRG Meeting, Japan, November 11, 1974 (1). Secret. Sent for action. Concurred in by Kennedy and Elliott. There are no markings indicating that Kissinger saw this memorandum. Talking points, an analytical summary of the NSSM response, and the NSSM itself are attached but not published.

197. Minutes of Senior Review Group Meeting, Washington, November 11, 1974, 11:06 a.m.–12:02 p.m. 197. Minutes of Senior Review Group Meeting, Washington, November 11, 1974, 11:06 a.m.–12:02 p.m. 1

Washington, November 11, 1974, 11:06 a.m.–12:02 p.m.

SENIOR REVIEW GROUP MEETING
November 11, 1974

Time and Place: 11:06 a.m. - 12:02 p.m., White House situation Room
Subject: Japan

PARTICIPANTS:

Chairman

Henry A. Kissinger

State

Joseph Sisco

Winston Lord

Philip Habib

Defense

Amos Jordan

Morton Abramowicz

JCS

Gen. George S. Brown

Lt. Gen. John W. Pauly

CIA

William Colby

Evelyn Colbert

Treasury

Jack Bennett

CIEP

Amb. William Eberle

NSC

Lt. Gen. Brent Scowcroft

Robert Hormats

John Froebe

James Barnum

Susan Schiffer

SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS

It was agreed that: —State Department would prepare a briefing paper and talking points on U.S. agricultural exports to Japan in the multilateral context of developing the institutional arrangements discussed at the recent World Food Conference;

—Defense would prepare a paper and talking points on the specifics of U.S.-Japan defense cooperation;

—Treasury would do a paper and talking points on Japan's approach to its balance of payments problems; and

—State Department would prepare a paper and talking points on ways to achieve increased Japanese economic assistance to South Vietnam.

Mr. Kissinger: Bill (Mr. Colby), would you like to brief?

Mr. Colby briefed from the attached text.

Mr. Kissinger: If he (Prime Minister Tanaka) resigns, will there have to be new elections?

Mr. Habib: No. The party (The Liberal Democratic Party) (LDP) have to choose a new prime minister. They will probably select one on a temporary basis until the party convention is held next July. Whoever they select will serve until the party convention in July.

Mr. Kissinger: Can Tanaka remain as party chief then?

Mr. Habib: No. He has to resign from both jobs.

Mr. Kissinger: Then it's not like the European system. In Germany they split the positions.

Mr. Habib That's true in Germany, but not in Japan.

Mr. Kissinger: Will there be an interim Prime Minister, or will they hold convention to pick one?

Mr. Habib: Well, it's rather confusing, but one proposal being bantered about quite prominently is that the party will pick some type of safe appointee — like Shiina. Somebody who is not controversial. That person would stay in office until the convention is held in July. Shiina would appear to be the choice, but the problem is that he is ill. He has not been very active since the early 1960s. He's the noncontroversial type. He settled the trouble with South Korea recently if you will recall, and is presently the Vice President of the Liberal Democratic Party. There is some indication that Tanaka will resign shortly after the Presidents trip, but probably not before.

Mr. Kissinger: Yes, and then we can get the credit for that, no?

Mr. Habib: We can arrange that if you want.

Mr. Kissinger: What I mean is that Tanaka's resignation will be a reflection on us, won't it?

Mr. Habib: No, not really. Tanaka is not expected to survive whether the President is to make a trip there or not. He simply has lost the confidence of the Japanese people. His government has had no coherent policy — that's our Embassy's view, anyway, and his string has simply run out. To my way of thinking, Tanaka is no great loss. Now, if Ohira comes in, that would he alright.

Mr. Kissinger: it has been my experience that Tanaka has never uttered a true word in his life. You're right, he won't be any great loss.

Mr. Habib: In my view, Tanaka's most likely successor is (Finance Minister) Fukuda. This would be Fukuda's last try. Ohira is probably the most likely successor, but I'd put my money on Fukuda.

Kissinger: Ohira is okay.

Habib: Yes, he is. He's first class.

Mr. Kissinger: Who here was at the Energy Conference? Anybody? Anyway, at the end of the conference, all the foreign ministers were sitting around — we were hung up on something, and Ohira was off to one side looking like he was asleep. He woke up long enough to utter three sentences, which emerged as the "Ohira Compromise." Well, the next day when asked to expound on his remarks, he completely turned it around — said the opposite thing. The British, in turn, completely misinterpreted Ohira's remarks. What finally came out was totally opposite from what Ohira intended. That's Ohira.

I guess it would be best to suggest that the President spend most of his time in group meetings and not with Tanaka alone.

Mr. Habib: That's going to be hard to do. It will depend on who Tanaka has with him. He's keeping (Foreign Minister) Kimura and Ohira fully informed. I think Ohira will be present for all the meetings.

Mr. Kissinger: Every meeting that I have had with Tanaka he has wanted somebody with him. Ohira should be present. It would be best to have two present at all times. Do I have Ambassador Yasukawa's views on what is to take place?

Mr. Habib: Yes, they are in your office. They were there on Saturday. The briefing books and everything are there. Yasukawa is one who we can trust.

Mr. Kissinger: Okay. Now, the basic question, is there something the President should settle while he is there?

Mr. Habib: There is not really much to settle. We have some things we think the President should speak to — the Yakutsk Natural Gas thing, for example.

Mr. Kissinger: What is the status of the Export-import legislation?

Ambassador Eberle: It's held up, that's the status.

Mr. Kissinger: Why?

Ambassador Eberle: The energy deal with the Russians.

Mr. Kissinger: What are they (Congress) trying to do?

Ambassador Eberle: Congress is insisting that any energy deal with Russia be approved by them first, it's as simple as that.

Mr. Kissinger: Does the Senate understand what it is doing?

Ambassador Eberle: They are just impossible up there. There is no one to talk to.

Mr. Kissinger: They have us pushed to the limits as it is.

Ambassador Eberle: I agree that we have to go back up there (Congress) and push.

Kissinger: Do you think we can get an increase of the ceiling?

Ambassador Eberle: I don't know. The trouble is, we don't have any carrots to offer.

Mr. Kissinger: You're right, we have no carrots. The trouble is we can't give the Japanese an answer (on Export-Import Bank financing) if we had to. Our inclination, as I understand it, is to take Option 3 (delay a decision on Export-import participation until we can formulate a basic energy policy under Project Independence, but no objection to Japanese participation in the meantime or to participation by U.S. private banks and firms) and agree to the $45 million, or whatever it is.

Mr. Habib: But that's not really an option, because we can't even consider it until after the legislation is passed.

Mr. Kissinger: Basically, we ought to provide financing for China and Russia as well.

Ambassador Eberle: If our decision (to provide Export-import financing) leaks, it will destroy what credibility we have in Congress.

Mr. Sisco: And you can bet the Japanese will blab.

Mr. Kissinger: My inclination is that the President should not discuss the question at all. We have to wait until the legislation passes anyway. It will leak, you can bet on that. If he (President) tells them that he will give them the financing after the legislation passes, this will be leaked. Even if he says he is inclined against granting the financing this would help us in Congress, but not gain us anything with the Japanese. I don't see that there is anything to be gained by talking about it before the legislation passes. The Europeans are going to want to contribute to Yakutsk. The Japanese can get any amount of financing they wart from the Europeans. The Germans are eager to contribute.

Ambassador Eberle: I concur.

Mr. Kissinger: The President ought to stay away from giving any impression that Congress isn't ready.

Ambassador Eberle: I agree.

Mr. Kissinger: Do we have anybody on the Hill to talk to about energy? Who's against the legislation?

Ambassador Eberle: Senator Stevenson is one. Senator Jackson, as you know, is a party to it. Proxmire and Byrd are all against it (Export-Import legislation). What you have is a coalition of liberals and strong conservatives. I really feel quite uncomfortable about the whole bill.

Mr. Kissinger: Alright then, we have no choice. Now, agricultural exports. You guys screwed me up this time by putting the preferred option as number three. The preferred option always used to be number two. What does Option 3 mean? (Accommodate Japans interest within a new framework, of U.S. policy on stockpiling, long-term Supply arrangements, and new GATT rules.)

Mr. Habib: Essentially, it means that we continue doing what we have been doing.

Mr. Kissinger: What would they get, preferential access?

Mr. Habib: What they would get is stockpile assurances.

Mr. Kissinger: Can we give them preferential access without letting then stockpile?

Ambassador Eberle: Technically, the Europeans and Japanese are already getting preferential access. The problem is that the Japanese want to stockpile, and that is not allowed under preferential treatment.

Mr. Kissinger: Why do they want to stockpile?

Ambassador Eberle: Basically, they are worried whether or not we are going to remain an adequate supplier.

Mr. Habib: They could go for more long-term arrangements.

Ambassador Eberle: I think we ought to encourage them into long-term agreements.

Mr. Kissinger: I agree, long-term agreements can't hurt us.

Ambassador Eberle: Unless there is a shortage.

Mr. Kissinger: Is somebody doing anything about creating those changes we talked about at the World Food Conference?

Ambassador Eberle: No, not to my knowledge.

Mr. Kissinger: Joe (Mr. Sisco), when we get back to the Department, start pushing on these institutional arrangements we talked about at the WFC. Do it out of State.

Is there anything that the President can say to the Japanese about agriculture?

Ambassador Eberle: He can thank them for being a good customer and ask them to keep following the policies they are following today. After that, there's really nothing.

Mr. Habib: About all he can do is refer to the agricultural policies of today.

Mr. Kissinger: What do we want the Japanese to do regarding the World Food Council? I'm serious about what I said in my speech.

Ambassador Eberle: We can ask them for their support of the groups you advocated.

Mr. Kissinger: Can we get somebody to do a paper on what we have in mind for them and what would happen if they don't support these groups?

Ambassador Eberle: Sure, but they don't look on these groups as the answer to their long-term supply problem.

Mr. Kissing: They can get it through cut reserves — purchase the stuff and then hold on to it. That is not excluded under the WFC.

Ambassador Eberle: Then that gets into bilateral negotiations.

Mr. Kissinger: We have to use bilateral talks as an entre into these groups. (To Mr. Sisco) Get Enders to work on a paper, and clear it with Eberle and Tack (Bennett).

Now, fisheries — is there anything the President can say to the Japanese on this issue?

Mr. Habib: Not really, but one of the problems is that he told these people up in the Northwest that he would be taking up the fisheries problem with the Japanese.

Mr. Kissinger: What would he (the President) say to the Japanese?

Mr. Habib: That we have some bilateral talks scheduled for early next month and that they should take a constructive attitude toward them. Trouble, is, the Japanese are likely to be very hard-headed on anything we say about fisheries. It's really a question of whether the issue will come up. I think it would be wise for the President to impress upon the Japanese that we are really serious about this fishing thing. Option 2 is our preferred position.

Mr. Kissinger: What is Option 2?

Mr. Habib: Just about what I just said. Have the President raise the issue at the highest level — that we're serious about Japan's reducing its present catch, and urge the Japanese to take a more constructive attitude the upcoming fishery negotiations.

Mr. Kissinger: If I know the Japanese, we'll end up with Option 3 or 4.

Mr. Habib: True, but we have to give them some signal that we take this thing seriously.

Mr. Kissinger: Okay. Defense issues. What do you have in mind (to Mr. Jordan)?

Mr. Jordan: Nothing really. We think we are on track.

Mr. Kissinger: What is it exactly that we are doing?

Jordan: You mean in the way of planning?

General Brown: Well, we want to work more with them on the air defense thing and we are continuing to talk with them about F–4 co-production, and want to consult with them more effectively on a number of things. They want to expand their air defense...

Mr. Kissinger Do they have any air defense system now?

General Brown: Yes, they have some A-4s and some radars.

Mr. Kissinger: How many?

General Brown: I don't have those figures with me.

Mr. Kissinger: What do you mean by consulting more effectively?

General Brown: It means spending more of their money for existing weapons systems — improvement.

Kissinger: What new weapons systems are they producing?

General Brown: None.

Mr. Kissinger: What does this Option mean (reading from briefing book)? I mean, what do you want out of that?

Mr. Abramowicz: What we want — what it boils down to is we want an increased level of complimentarity between U.S. and Japanese military forces. We want them to purchase our aircraft — its regally based on a maritime threat, with anti-submarine warfare (ASW) planes being the primary purchase. We are trying to work out that they will assume a larger ASW role. Little has been done so far.

Mr. Jordan: They are putting more into the ASW program.

Mr. Kissinger: I have no quarrel with these suggestions. What happens if these come up during the President's visit? Can you put your desires into some type of conceptual framework? Can you do a paper like that?

Jordan: sure.

Mr. Kissinger: Give me two or three pages on just what you visualize.

Mr. Jordan: Sure.

General Brown: What the Japanese are really concerned about is the drawdown of U.S. forces.

Mr. Kissinger: I talked to the President about that this morning, and he is firm that we will not reduce our forces in Asia. That is definitely out of consideration, and it is a subject he is not eager to discuss. There will be no drawdown of forces in Asia.

General Brown: That's helpful.

Mr. Jordan: Our basic problem in that area is the danger of a congressionally mandated 50,000-man cut.

Mr. Kissinger: I know, but there are to be no drawdowns of forces.

Mr. Abramowicz: That does not rule out minor adjustments of forces, does it?

Mr. Kissinger: No. There can he minor adjustments, but we want to keep the overall ceiling it is now.

Mr. Habib: The Japanese want us to stay, and in force,

Mr. Kissinger: Okay — on international economics. Is there anything you would want to bring up, Zack (Mr. Bennett)?

Mr. Bennett: Apart from the energy question?

Mr. Kissinger: Yes. On energy, we're all agreed.

Mr. Bennett: Well, as far as the international economic picture, I don't think the President needs to complain about a thing. I think things are going along all right.

Mr. Kissinger: What have we done about Giscard's meeting?

Mr. Bennett: This is something they are locked into, and I don't think they can get out of it.

Mr. Kissinger: I don't see how Giscard can have his conference without our participation.

Mr. Bennett: I don't either.

Mr. Habib: Neither do I.

Mr. Colby: Is all this talk of a U.S.-Japan-Western Europe trilateral relationship all that good?

Mr. Kissinger: No, it isn't. A trilateral relationship has the disadvantage of bringing in the Europeans and a repeat of last years fiasco. The Japanese will never go for it: they prefer to work on a bilateral relationship, anyway. We ought to drop the whole idea.

Mr. Bennett: One point I would like to make about the Japanese economy is that the President really has nothing to complain to them about. He might warn them about not overdoing the deflation, but that's about all.

Mr. Kissinger: What is it that we don't want them to do, then?

Mr. Bennett: Just not to overdo the domestic deflation. They have all kinds of methods to manipulate and adjust the trade balance.

Ambassador Eberle: We have an analysis that Japan will have a $20 billion trade surplus by 1930.

Mr. Kissinger: How can they do that?

Ambassador Eberle: Through export expansion and by manipulating the yen.

Mr. Kissinger: It has been my experience that the Japanese are not great conceptual thinkers. You can pretty much tell them what to do and they will follow it. Jack (Mr. Bennett), can you do a paper on what the President is to say on that point? We have to give him (the President) more to say than just,"no surpluses." And also put in the paper something on the overall economic situation.

Mr. Bennett: Sure.

Mr. Colby: Can we make a stronger pitch to the Japanese for more help for South Vietnam.

Mr. Kissinger: Yes, definitely.

Mr. Habib: We have to get the Japanese more involved in aid to South Vietnam. We are really up against it on this aid to South Vietnam.

Mr. Kissinger: (To Mr. Habib) Can you do a paper on this?

Mr. Habib: Yes, State will do it.

Mr. Kissinger: Give him (the President) some talking points.

Mr. Habib: Should we include Cambodia, Laos, and others in that?

Mr. Kissinger: Were most interested in aid to South Vietnam.

Mr. Colby: if you include Cambodia and Laos, you fuzz the South Vietnam issue. That is what we really need.

Mr. Kissinger: Right. Okay, Brent (General Scowcroft), can you collect these papers and put them in the President's briefing book? I'll talk to the President about an NSC Meeting. I'm inclined to think we don't need one, but I'll check with him.

1 Source: Ford Library, NSC Institutional Files (H-Files), Box H–23, Institutional Files, Meetings (IFM), Meeting Minutes, SRG, Originals, November 1974–January 1975. Secret; Sensitive. The text of Colby’s briefing is attached but not published. The briefing material that the Departments of State, Defense, and Treasury produced in response to Kissinger’s tasking is ibid., Box H–13, Institutional Files, Meetings (IFM), SRG Meeting, Japan, November 11, 1974 (3).

198. Memorandum of Conversation, Tokyo, November 19, 1974, 11 a.m. 198. Memorandum of Conversation, Tokyo, November 19, 1974, 11 a.m. 1

November 19, 1974, 11 a.m.

MEMORANDUM OF CONVERSATION

TIME & PLACE: 11:00 a.m., November 19, 1974
Guest House, Tokyo

PARTICIPANTS:

Prime Minister Kakuei Tanaka

Foreign Minister Toshio Kimura

Ambassador Takeshi Yasukawa

Deputy Foreign Minister Kiyohiko Tsurumi

Toshio Yamazaki, Director General, American Affairs Bureau, MOFA

Hidetoshi Ukawo, MOFA (Interpreter)

Akitane Kiuchi, Private Secretary to Prime Minister

The President

Secretary Kissinger

Ambassador Hodgson

General Scowcroft

Assistant Secretary Habib

James J. Wickel(Interpreter)

SUBJECT: President: Ford- Prime Minister - Tanaka First Meeting

PM Tanaka: It was a great honor to participate in the welcome ceremony for you this morning, Mr. President, on this first visit by an American president during the 114 years of diplomatic relations between our nations. It is a matter of particular pleasure to know that arrangements for a visit to the United States by Their Majesties are to be decided in discussions with Secretary Kissinger.

President: Thank you Mr. Prime Minister. It was a great privilege for me to meet HIM at the welcome ceremony this morning. I look forward to the discussions we are to have today and tomorrow.

PM Tanaka: I might explain that welcome ceremonies for State visitors have been conducted at the airport up to now, but this morning, for the first time, we have begun the practice of conducting them at the new Guest House. At the airport, the people could not easily get in to view the ceremony, but here they can view it through the fence, from a distance. I might add that many of the modern buildings you see in Tokyo date from the Olympics of 1954.

President: I am impressed by the appearance of this Guest House. It is beautiful to look at from the outside, and the restoration of the interior is equally beautiful. I deeply appreciate the opportunity to stay here.

PM Tanaka: The frescoes on the walls and ceilings were restored over a period of several years by many art students who were mobilized for that purpose. They too will be pleased at your visit.

President: Are the frescoes of some national significance?

PM Tanaka: No, they do not depict scenes from Japanese history. Originally, this Palace was modeled after Versailles; the paintings are not drawn from Japanese history.

President: We think this visit has great significance, as a reaffirmation of the close working relations between our two countries and as an extension of the firm relations we have developed in the past.

PM Tanaka: The Japanese people deeply appreciate the more than century-long friendly relations between Japan and the United States, and particularly appreciate the central role played by the United States in the post-war period when Japan was occupied by the Allied Powers. They know that the United States, in it central role in the Occupation, spared Japan the fate of such countries as Germany which was divided between East and West. They also appreciate Japan's good fortune in receiving a variety of assistance from the United States, including GARIOA, EROA and Marshall Plan aid, and in being exempted from reparations by the DRAPER Mission. The Japanese people fully appreciate these good relations and the fact that Japan's recovery from the war and its present prosperity are due to the cooperative role played by the United States. However, no matter how much good is done, there is bound to be some opposition in an open society, for example, when opposition forces prevented President Eisenhower's visit in 1960. I'm sure, however, that you, Mr. President, and the members of your party can see and feel for yourselves the welcome which the people of Japan are extending to you from their hearts on this occasion of the first visit to Japan by an incumbent President. Surely, this must mark the highest point in the more than a century long history of our relations.

President: We also believe this visit is most beneficial to both countries. As you have said, we have developed a remarkably close relationship since the war. We might consider this as a foundation for further development in the future. We have had relatively minor differences since the war, but these have all been overcome. As we look at the future we can be confident that we will continue to work together in dealing with energy and energy-related problems, expanding programs for peace in Asia and the world, and dealing with the many other problems we face. Our relationship provides a fine foundation for the better, more peaceful world we seek to create. And so I welcome this opportunity, today and tomorrow, to continue our open dialogue, which contributes not only to healthy relations between the United States and Japan, but also throughout the world.

PM Tanaka: The very keynote of Japan's diplomacy is the maintenance of friendly relations between Japan and the United States, and we believe it is essential to maintain the Mutual Security Treaty, not just for Japan's sake, but also to maintain peace in Japan and Asia. In that sense, we believe it essential to expand our excellent, friendly relations with the United States, including firm support for the maintenance of the MST.

With respect to bilateral problems, direct trade between Japan and the United States is expected to exceed $20 billion in 1974, and it is only natural for some unavoidable frictions to arise when contacts are this intensive. However, our experience these past two years in reducing the trade imbalance from about $4 billion in Japan's favor to near equilibrium demonstrates that we can cooperate effectively to restore normal conditions, such as prevail now; therefore, I wish to emphasize the communication between nations is essential, particularly the continuing dialog between Japan and the United States. Given the good relations between us there should be no problems which Japan and the United States cannot solve, and thereby contribute to world peace.

Secretary: Mr. President, I might point out that when the Prime Minister took office (July, 1972) he took energetic action to reduce the serious trade imbalance between us. He carried out his promise to do so, which we feel was most constructive.

PM Tanaka: One more point I wish to emphasize, Mr. President, is that the only country in Europe which would seem to be comparable to is Japan West Germany. The UK, France, Holland and other major industrial nations can cooperate with each other, to maintain their joint position, while they develop contacts with adjacent nations of East Europe and the Soviet Union: for one thing, NATO is strong. On the other hand, Japan is close to the Soviet Union, the biggest communist nation, and the cradle of communism. Nearby is another large communist nation, China. The Soviet Union, in fact, flies a reconnaissance flight, the "Tokyo Express," in the vicinity of Japan, almost daily, like a scheduled airliner. The nearby Korean peninsula is divided into two states, north and south, and Taiwan and China present another problem. In that sense, the position of the West Europeans in maintaining peace differs from Japan's, as we continue to aspire to the maintenance of peace and democracy in Asia, and we should approach this challenge from a different angle. As I have noted, the maintenance of the peace we enjoy today depends on the maintenance of the system of cooperation and understanding between Japan and the United States, centered on the MST. In comparing Asia with Europe, a number of nations have begun to move in the direction of peace, and should do so, but in my view the last area to which peace may come to Asia, which is a big, poor continent, divided by religion and race, and afflicted with population problems. If peace could be achieved in Asia, world peace could be maintained. I wish to emphasize my understanding that it is essential to maintain Japan-US cooperation for this purpose.

President: I assure you, Mr. Prime Minister, that we wish to continue that kind of relationship, with the MST, of course, as the basis for our cooperation. As we advance, we may expand cur efforts in other ways, for example, in dealing with energy and energy-related problems, and handling economic assistance to the developing countries, especially in SEA. We consider all parts of the world to have a vital importance. We recognize that problems in Europe are different from the problems in our relations elsewhere. If one looks at the record, the importance we attach to our relations in Asia and the Pacific is fully evident; we believe the record shows that they rank highest in a listing of priorities. The fact that I am making my first visit abroad to Japan indicates how strongly we feel the importance of US-Japan relations.

As we look at the Pacific, we continue to follow the path of developing good relations with the PRC. We feel the historic step we took continues to benefit all of us.

I will also visit Vladivostok, to meet with General Secretary Brezhnev, to discuss the US-Soviet detente which aims to create stability and broaden relations with a former adversary. Broader relations, I feel, would benefit not only the nations of the Pacific, but also those of Europe.

My visit to Seoul demonstrates the importance we attach to our relationship with a courageous and strong ally.

All of these visits, to the Soviet Union, China, the ROK, and of the utmost importance, to Japan, are clear evidence of the fact that the United States feels the Pacific is as important ins any other area.

Secretary: Mr. President, the fact that I have been asked to come back from Vladivostok and Japan to brief our Japanese friends on those visits also indicates the importance we attach to our relations with Japan.

President: Mr. Prime Minister, the subject of trade to which you referred is vitally important subject for us to discuss. We hope to continue to expand our trade with Japan. We wish to continue as a big supplier of an adequate food supply for Japan. We have been greatly encouraged by Japan's purchases of some $3 billion in agricultural products this year. Let me say that we are taking steps to make certain that you may continue to rely on the United States for an adequate supply of food. Four to six weeks ago we took firm action on the unexpected large purchases of grain by the Soviet Union, but this problem has been worked out. We intend to keep an adequate supply of food moving to Japan. We are also grateful for the purchases by Japan, as are our growers. This administration is not going to take arbitrary action to cut off agricultural exports; on the contrary, we hope to expand our exports.

PM Tanaka: Japan imports 90-100% of the wheat, soybeans and feed grains it consumes, almost all of it from the United States, and all of the Japanese people will appreciate your assurance of adequate fool supplies.

President: We are encouraging full production in the United States. We had some disappointments this year, with a wet spring, a hot dry summer and an early frost. But we had the biggest wheat crop in the history of the United States, and the fifth largest crop in corn, even though the corn crop was not as large as anticipated. We will make a maximum effort to expand all production in 1975. Hopefully, the weather will be more encouraging than this year; it could hardly be worse.

I have a question, Mr. Prime Minister, relating to agriculture. We wish to sell as much grain as Japan wishes to buy, but at the same time I have been under pressure in the United States by the cattle growing industry. This is one area where the prices are down because of overproduction, and we think it is important to negotiate the removal of Japan's embargo against American cattle, at the working level.

PM Tanaka: Japan's consumption of beef has been growing for ten years, but last year a tendency toward reduced consumption appeared not just in Japan, but also in the European Community. Wages have increased in Japan, and there ought to be a comparable increase in beef consumption, but instead, savings are up and beef consumption is down. We have been importing 130,000-140,000 tons to meet our needs this year, but under present circumstances have temporarily suspended imports. First of all, there has been a steep decline in consumption, and second, the cost of feed grain has risen so sharply that our cattlemen cannot afford feed to fatten their cattle. As a result, the farmers have been asking the Livestock Agency to buy up their calves. Even though we have halted beef imports, the Livestock Agency finds itself with 60,000 tons of beef on hand, all of which it bought from distressed farmers. Of course, we would like to see the people increase their beef consumption as soon as possible, to reduce this stock of beef, and thus open the way to resume our normal beef imports. Only three years ago the then Secretary Connally persuaded us to import 5,000 feeder calves, but we couldn't get more than 500 to 1,000 head. We have, incidentally, been importing about 100,000 tons of beef from Australia and 10,000 tons from New Zealand and I am aware that they are turning to the United States, as an alternative market, for the meat which Japan and the European Community no longer import because of declining consumption.

President: As I pointed out, this is an important matter, which has been raised with me by the growers in the United States. It ties in with our effort to increase agricultural sales to Japan as a whole. It is in our mutual interest to work things out in this area, too.

There is another area, Mr. Prime Minister, in which it is in our mutual interest to cooperate. As I said, the United States considers the Pacific a vital and important area for peace, as important as any other. We have, therefore, continued to help the South Vietnamese. We give them substantial economic aid, and continue to give them military assistance, within the framework of the Peace Treaty. The anticipated need for assistance in Vietnam this year is in the range of $ 1 billion in magnitude. We hope to provide substantial help, but the Congress has not been as generous as I might wish. It is important that South Vietnam be able to continue its recovery, and economic growth. We have been encouraged greatly about their prospects by reports of the discovery of significant oil deposits under the sea off the coast of South Vietnam. Let me say that we feel strongly that it is important that South Vietnam continue to rebuild and strengthen itself. We recognize that Japan has made a good contribution to South Vietnam, including a total of about$64 million in aid this year, which we applaud. We hope that Japan in its next FY will expand its contribution to the recover and rehabilitation of South Vietnam.

PM Tanaka: We fully respect the great amount of assistance the United States is providing South Vietnam. Japan's policy is to expand its economic and technical contributions to South Vietnam to the maximum extent possible, since we are unable to extend military aid. The opposition parties, in the Diet, however, strongly oppose any aid to South Vietnam. Therefore, we have to balance our aid to Vietnam within the context of economic cooperation with the five ASEAN nations, Burma and Bangladesh. However, we do wish to consider what might be possible under the AID section of the JFY 75 draft budget we must draft by December. I assure you that our aid for Vietnam will not be less than this year, and we would hope to increase it to the extent possible.

President: That would be helpful. We believe that two nations tied as closely as the United States and Japan have a mutual interest in strengthening South Vietnam. I might say I have been most interested in the encouraging reports recently about the oil potential of South Vietnam, which offers some grounds for optimism about their future.

This leads to a new subject of great mutual interest to all of us. I personally appreciate Japan's cooperation in energy, in the IEG and the IEP. Both are vitally important to the consumers throughout the world. It is vitally important for us to have a lEG and a strong IEP. We should be prepared to move strongly, not to antagonize the producers, but to make sure that we consumers don't have to assume a defensive posture in bargaining with the producers without any strength. In our judgment it is essential for Japan to support both the lEG and the IEP firmly. I can assure you, Mr. Prime Minister, that we will continue to give the kind of leadership in this area, which Secretary Kissinger has been giving. Progress up to now has been encouraging, and we feel that anything which further strengthens the consumers will benefit both the consumers and the producers in the long run.

PM Tanaka: In my view energy is the greatest problem we face. I understand Secretary Kissinger's proposal very well. Japan has a deep interest in the oil question, which is really at the root of the reason many countries around the world are eating less meat. However, I hope you understand that Japan's circumstances differ from some other countries, like the US, UK and France. For example, Japan has no coal; it is dependent on oil for most of its energy. Consuming about 300 million tons of oil per year—almost all of it imported—it is natural that Japan should try to conserve oil. However, 73% of Japan's oil is used for industrial purposes, and only 27% for private consumption. (note: Kiuchi gave PM Tanaka these figures in writing.) By comparison, the 31% of the United States consumption is for industrial purposes and 69% for private purposes. Therefore, any conservation program automatically means an immediate reduction of industrial production in Japan. I would hope that these special circumstances could be reflected in any program devised to deal with the oil question.

Secretary: May I, Mr. President, comment on two problems, consumer solidarity and the specific measures by which we hope to attain it. In preparing my Chicago speech, I linked consumption and the development of a new system because I recognize the special position of Japan. Obviously, all nations can't conserve oil to the same degree as the others, and therefore should try to compensate by increasing their reliance on alternative supplies. We would be prepared to work with Japan, within the framework of our joint agreement on uranium enrichment and other alternatives, to take into account Japan's specific requirements relating to industrial use in working out a conservation program for the consumers. I can assure you this energy program is not designed for conservation at the expense of growth, but instead is planned to achieve the conservation of energy and growth by also developing alternative sources of energy. If the consumers could achieve greater solidarity along these lines, it would improve their position to bargain for oil.

President: We are devoting a great deal of effort to R&D in potential alternative sources, such as solar and geothermal energy, and to make cool a more effective and cleaner source. We are thinking of sharing the results of these R&D programs as a part of the lEG and the IEP. The development of alternative sources lessens our dependence on oil, and thus increases our independence.

PM Tanaka: As I noted, Japan imports almost all of its oil, and our BOP cannot continue to bear the increased cost of oil. Therefore, the most serious consideration for us is the development of alternative sources of energy, including nuclear, solar and geothermal. However, Japan cannot conduct these programs alone—all of the advanced industrial democracies should combine their total efforts for this purpose.

Secretary Kissinger: We would like within a few weeks to meet quietly with a suitable official from Japan without any public dramatics to discuss this issue. Perhaps the Prime Minister could send someone to Washington, or we could send someone here to discuss our thinking on this in detail, without making any dramatic announcements. In my speech I used forthright language to express what we think must be done to meet this situation.

PM Tanaka: We could continue our fruitful discussions of energy, food and the international situation tomorrow, but if I may I would like to discuss another matter about five minutes.

President: I agree that our discussions this morning have been fruitful, and look forward to continuing them tomorrow, when there would be less pressure of time.

PM Tanaka: May I? The GOJ firmly supports the MST, which is important not just to the peace and security of Japan, but also Asia. There is one important problem, however, nuclear weapons. Japan and the United States began their discussions of this question originally in the context of strategic nuclear weapons, but now tactical nuclear weapons have proliferated, and perhaps we should discuss this matter from this new point of view. I can understand that the Americans and the Europeans think about this matter in terms of a different kind of perception, but the Japanese people have a special sensitivity to nuclear weapons, which is mobilized by certain political forces for their own political ends. The question of nuclear weapons became an urgent one for the GOJ, beginning with the homeporting of the US carrier Midway at Yokosuka. You may say that it is difficult to respond to Japan on this matter, because Japan's security is assured by the United States nuclear umbrella, but nevertheless, Japan does have a special sensitivity to nuclear weapons. I raise this issue as one for experts from both nations to examine closely; I don't raise it simply as an argument for argument's sake. It presents a political issue on which the GOJ must be responsive to the people. Therefore, following the publication of Adm. LaRocque's testimony we requested your cooperation, and I now wish to reiterate that request.

President: I do understand, the special sensitivities of the Japanese people, Mr. Prime Minister, and I am familiar with the language of the MST. We are anxious to cooperate, and we understand your political problem. Our position is that something could be worked out. Secretary Kissinger will work with your people to do so, within the context of keeping the special relationship we have already developed.

Minister Kimura: What should I tell the press in the briefing scheduled for 3:30 p.m.?

Secretary Kissinger: You might mention both their Majesties' visit to the United States; that the President and Prime Minister reconfirmed the firm relationship between both countries, including the MST; that the two leaders reconfirmed that both nations would cooperate more closely on bilateral and multinational issues, such as food; and that they discussed oil, the World Food Conference at Rome, my speech in Chicago and other world problems on which both countries could cooperate in their mutual interest.

Minister Kimura: I might say that the President gave assurance to the Prime Minister that the United States would continue to serve as a stable, long-term source of supply for food and feed grains.

Secretary Kissinger: That the President expressed his hope that Japan would remove its restrictions on beef imports.

Minister Kimura: That the Prime Minister explained Japan's circumstances, and his desire to resume beef imports at some time. But I don't plan to refer to Vietnam.

Secretary Kissinger: We won't refer to the nuclear question.

Minister Kimura: That the Prime Minister expressed Japan's wish to firmly support the MST, in the operation of which both countries ore cooperating closely. Should I say that both sides confirmed the views they have clearly stated many times, and that the United States understands Japan's special sensitivity to nuclear weapons?

Secretary Kissinger: That could lead to other questions. I plan to follow the same line as you, in my briefing at 3:30 p.m., but I would prefer to begin by describing the importance the United States attaches to its relations with Japan. I might also say that we explained our energy proposal, and expressed appreciation for Japan's cooperation in this area.

1 Source: Ford Library, National Security Adviser, Memoranda of Conversation, Box 7. Secret. The conversation took place in the Guest House. Drafted by Wickel. For public remarks, toasts, and the joint communiqué issued during Ford’s trip, see The Department of State Bulletin, Vol. LXXI, No. 1852, December 23.

199. Memorandum of Conversation, Tokyo, November 20, 1974, 10 a.m. 199. Memorandum of Conversation, Tokyo, November 20, 1974, 10 a.m. 1

November 20, 1974, 10 a.m.

MEMORANDUM OF CONVERSATION

TIME & PLACE: 10:00 a.m., November 20, 1974
Guest House

PARTICIPANTS:

Prime Minister Kikuei Tanaka

Foreign Minister Toshio Kimura

Ambassador Takeshi Yasukowa

Deputy Foreign Minister Kiyohiko Tsutumi

Toshio Yamazaki, Director General American Affairs Bureau, MOFA

Hidetoshi Ukawa, MOFA (Interpreter)

Akitane Kiuchi, Private Secretary to Prime Minister

The President

Secretary Kissinger

Ambassador Hodgson

General Scowcroft

Assistant Secretary Habib

James J Wickel(Interpreter)

SUBJECT: President Ford -Prime Minister Tanaka -Second Meeting

President: Mr. Prime Minister, our discussion yesterday impressed me as being constructive and beneficial. I know we have other subjects to discuss today. I feel that the frank constructive exchange of views we have had will make my trip worthwhile.

PM Tanaka: We also found our talks yesterday very helpful. You have probably already sensed that Japan is different from other countries in its political division: the LDP is confronted by four opposition parties, two of which might be called moderate and two which are extremely left wing, the JSP and JCP. Relations between these latter two are somewhat like U.S.-Soviet relations. Even though the leaders have changed over the years within the LDP, the party has maintained its majority for about 30 years, providing a continuity of philosophy in the GOJ.

President: Governor Minobe called to pay his respects yesterday, and tried to involve me in a discussion of a certain subject. But I respectfully said that any discussions of that subject should be conducted by our government with the GOJ.

PM Tanaka: Yes, that was reported clearly in the press this morning.

One important problem in the Far East is the Korean peninsula. The Koreans are excellent people, and like China have a history 4,000 years long. Through most of it, however, they have been under pressures from the continent and elsewhere, and as a result, in all frankness, have developed a sense of persecution. Most unfortunately, the peninsula has been divided into North and South Korea at the 38th parallel, making Korea one of the four nations divided since the war, including East and West Germany, North and South Vietnam, and China and Taiwan. It is difficult for both Koreas to talk to each other realistically. When I visited Moscow I proposed to the Soviets that they should not support one part of Korea, lying under Japan's nose, because dispute there could disrupt peace in the Far East. I also made the same suggestion to the Chinese during my visit to Peking.

President: Of course, we strongly support our courageous and strong ally, South Korea. We feel they are doing a fine job, and have strong relations with them. I am looking forward to my visit to South Korea. We appreciate the caution of our allies in dealing with North Korea, and have no desire ourselves to move closer to North Korea under the present circumstances.

Secretary Kissinger: I might: point out, Mr. President, that our position is that we will talk to North Korea only when the Soviet Union and China talk to South Korea, and will not talk to North Korea if the major communist states do not talk to South Korea.

PM Tanaka: In that sense, Mr. President, your visit not just to Japan but to South Korea as well has deep significance.

President: As you pointed out yesterday, there have been four divided nations since the Second World War We feel as strongly about another one of them, South Vietnam, as we do about South Korea, and intend to continue our support for South Vietnam. Our support is based on the need to have a strong South Vietnam, which should have the opportunity to rebuild its own nation, the opportunity to have free elections, and the opportunity to withstand pressure from North Vietnam. Therefore we intend to continue our economic and military assistance to South Vietnam. I hope the Congress would support this administration's requests for economic and military aid. At the same time, we believe it is vitally important for Japan to expand its support for South Vietnam in our mutual interest.

PM Tanaka: As I said yesterday, we hope to increase our aid to South Vietnam in JFY 75, to the extent possible, we will continue to provide assistance to both South Korea and South Vietnam at least at the same level as last year.

President: We hope you will expand your aid to the maximum extent possible, because this will be a critical year for South Vietnam—if it can get by this year, with its potential for oil development we are hearing about, South Vietnam would be well on its way toward economic and military self-sufficiency.

PM Tanaka: Are American companies drilling for oil on the South Vietnamese continental shelf?

President: Some American companies are participating in exploration, but I'm not sure which ones.

Secretary Kissinger: As far as I know, Mr. President, some American companies are involved in the search for oil, and others are engaged in discussion with the government of South Vietnam.

President: We would have no objection to broader participation in the development of these resources; we feel it would be more beneficial to have broader international participation, by American companies and even by companies from Japan.

Secretary Kissinger: We would be prepared to encourage the GVN to accept participation by others. This year, though, South Vietnam needs about $100 million more in assistance, which will help determine whether they could become self-sustaining or not. If they can get by, in a few years the anticipated oil revenues will permit South Vietnam to deal with their economic problem, which we view as a greater threat than the military threat.

President: With respect to oil, Secretary Kissinger has just concluded a long trip to the Soviet Union, the subcontinent and the Middle East. If I could summarize our reactions to it, we feel that it is of the utmost importance that progress be made toward resolving the Middle East issue.

We believe the best way to do so, is step by step. The progress achieved up to now has encouraged us, and we feel, despite the Arab Summit at Rabat, that there is a possibility of continuing to make progress in resolving the issue between Israel and the Arab nations. I assure you we will continue to push hard to make that progress because we recognize the damages that could result if no progress is made.

Secretary Kissinger: One difficulty with the step-by-step approach is the intense rivalry among the Arabs themselves, for which reason those leaders who most want to take steps must make the most noise in public. We saw an example of this at work on Sunday, when the press carried pictures of President Sadat meeting with the Egyptian War Council, but only after Syria and Israel both gave assurances that they were not going to war.

PM Tanaka: Turning to China, Japan is aware that it was able to normalize its relations with the PRC, thanks to the United States. Although China had long viewed the U.S. and the Soviet Union similarly, as imperialists, and took identical measures against them, I told the Chinese leaders I met in Peking that the United States is not an aggressor, and that it was making a strong effort on behalf of peace, which of course was demonstrated by its withdrawal of troops from Vietnam and the Ceasefire Agreement it signed in Paris. I told the Chinese that the United States returned Okinawa to Japan—after having taken it at great cost during the war—and that the United States has no desire to expand its territory. I also told the Chinese that the United States is not a threat to them.

The question of Taiwan, however, will take a long time to resolve, and I made clear to the Chinese leaders in Peking that it would not be in the interest of the United States to return to a state of confrontation with the PRC over Taiwan, nor would it be advantageous to the PRC to make Taiwan a difficult issue. While the United States does not have full formal diplomatic relations with the PRC, I pointed out to the Chinese leaders that each country maintains a liaison office in the capitol of the other, which perform the same functions as an Embassy, and that unlike the Soviet Union they could view the United States as a friend in view of the genuine friendly relations between them. The differences between the United States and the Soviet Union, I said is that the former is a force for peace. The Soviet Union acquired territory equivalent to the size of East and West Germany combined after the war, but the United States took no territory after the great sacrifices it made, which should be the best evidence that the United States is a force for peace.

President: I wish to express our appreciation for your comment on the United States' attitude after the Second World War, Mr. Prime Minister. We think our action was constructive, and a show of good faith, to restore an area to a nation formerly an enemy in the war. This is the best evidence of our good faith.

The historical breakthrough in U.S.-PRC relations, we feel, is one of the most outstanding diplomatic actions of the post-war era. President Nixon's decision has given great impetus, we feel, to the enhancement of stability and good relations in the Pacific area. Our policy continues to be predicated or the Shanghai Communiqué. Progress in improving our relations is being made, and in fact Secretary Kissinger will visit Peking after Vladivostok. We feel strongly that step-by-step progress is in the best interest, of not only the nations in the Pacific but also the world as a whole.

We do not view our relations with Peking as being aimed against the Soviet Union, nor vice versa. We believe that improving our relations with both is important to the world as a whole. A broader detente, and successful conclusion of SALT II would be beneficial to all. At the same time we feel that progress with the PRC can't help but be beneficial. It is for that reason that I am going to Vladivostok, and afterward Secretary Kissinger to Peking.

PM Tanaka: It is in the interest of the world as a whole that China and the Soviet Union, both powerful nations, have good relations.

President: Very much so.

PM Tanaka: We appreciate your efforts toward that end. However, China and the Soviet Union share a 6,000 km long border, which has been a focus of dispute for more than a century. Moreover, long stretches of that border are drawn in the center of rivers, which shift course from time to time, making the border Issue well nigh insoluble.

Secretary Kissinger: The Soviets claim that the far side of the river is their boundary.

PM Tanaka: In all frankness, Japan does not assess China as a major threat to Japan's security. However, the Soviet military forces deployed in Siberia along the Chinese border may at the same time also be viewed as a threat to Japan. Therefore Japan is most sensitive to the Soviet military build-up in Siberia. Would you be able to give me the American assessment of the Soviet forces there?

President: Of course, Mr. Prime Minister, it would serve the best interest of stability on a world-wide basis if SALT II could be negotiated. We are making an honest effort to do so, but we have no intention to move at the expense of the security of the United States and the Free World. We believe an honest give-and-take will best serve the security of both sides.

The people in the United States broadly feel that we should keep our military forces strong. There are elements in the Congress who feel that perhaps there could be reductions, but the American people would not accept any reductions below the level necessary to provide for a strong, flexible response. I intend to fight any move in the Congress which would undercut our military capability.

We feel that the strength of the United States, combined with the strength of our European allies, is adequate to main stability between East and West in Europe. There are signs, however, that some Europeans (for one reason or another) no longer wish to keep their promise in the manner we think they should. We are maximizing our efforts to keep NATO strong, so it can continue to succeed as a stabilizing force in Europe. We will continue to work for this purpose within the framework of NATO, although on occasion we have been bothered by the attitude of some of our allies, when they criticize the United States publicly. We may understand their motivation, but we don't approve. The United States, working through NATO, has helped them by maintaining stability. Therefore, we don't believe open criticism of the United States is healthy, and we don't approve. Those who speak with the loudest voice seem only to wish to take advantage of the situation.

In summary, Mr. Prime Minister, we intend to keep strong military forces in the Pacific and Western Europe. This administration will vigorously oppose any attempt in Congress to which would undercut our military capability, but on the other hand we intend to negotiate—at arms length—with the Soviets to reduce the levels of strategic weapons to help stabilize the World.

Secretary Kissinger: Mr. President, I might describe the Soviet conventional strength in Siberia, not its strategic deployments. The Soviet Union is making a major effort to strengthen its forces, and now has 42 divisions in Siberia, with half of these in the Maritime Province. They have 15,000 tanks, which are being strengthened and modernized year by year.

PM Tanaka: When I visited Moscow I commented that Soviet forces in Siberia aimed at China could also be considered as being aimed a Japan; the Soviets did not respond to me.

With respect to Siberian development programs, I have informed the Soviets that Japan would not participate in building a second trans-Siberian railroad, which would reinforce the Soviet military capability. The Soviet Union originally insisted that Siberian development could only be considered on a package basis, but we replied that we would consider only those separate projects which are economically feasible, such as coal and gas in Yakutsk, and forestry resources, and that is the basis on which we have agreed to move ahead.

President: We understand the thinking behind your decision, and believe it quite wise. To help the Soviets in economic development, but not help them upgrade their military potential is wise. What has been their reaction?

PM Tanaka: There is more to it than that. We informed the Soviet Union that we might not be able to participate in Siberian development at all if they insisted on a "one package" deal, but also said that we would hope to have United States participation in individual development projects to diminish the possibility that the Chinese might view this development as a provocation. Thereupon the Soviets noted that Europe is too far from the project sites anyway, and proposed that the resources developed in Siberia should be shipped to the Far East, for export to Japan, and with Japan as a "window" to the United States and possibly other countries which might participate, such as the FRG.

President: We, of course, are interested in Yakutsk, but there are a number of problems related to Congressional action.

This leads me to a new subject. We hope to get Congressional action during the waning days of this session to enact the Trade Bill, and the. Exim Bank Credit Authorization Bill closely related to it. I and Secretary Kissinger have been trying hard to get the Trade Bill through the Congress, and to expand the Exim Bank credit authorization without restrictive provisions. If we get both bills passed we will be in a better position to discuss this matter.

Secretary Kissinger: Let me note, Mr. President, that we have heard that Senator Long's Committee hopes to report the Trade Bill out to the Senate on December 2. (note: PM Tanaka excused himself from the room for several minutes.)

PM Tanaka: (on his return) Hearing about your visit to Vladivostok, Mr. President, reminds me that some 35 years ago, when I was in the Army, I was stationed near the Soviet-Chinese border, near Vladivostok. Once, from the top of a mountain I could barely see Vladivostok in the distance. That was between the Changkufeng Incident (1938) and the Nomonhan Incident (1939). However, I became sick and was invalided home without seeing any fighting.

Ambassador Yasukawa: In Russia the name Vladivostok means "Lord of the East"; the Chinese call it Namako, meaning "sea cucumber," which abound in the bay.

Secretary Kissinger: In 1941 the Soviets withdrew all their forces to the German front, and nothing was left in Siberia.

President: There is one other matter of deep interest, especially to our people in the Pacific Northwest, that is, the fisheries problem. Our technical people feel deeply concerned that the north Pacific is being overfished. They have studied this question, and have reported to me that restraint should be exercised in the north Pacific fishery. This ties in with an overall question of great significance, the Law of the Sea. There are in Congress many members representing districts along the Atlantic and Pacific seaboard, who feel that Congress should enact legislation to establish an exclusive economic zone of 200 miles. We feel this would be inadvisable at this time, but the pressure from the east and west coasts is substantial. Therefore, in the interest of alleviating this problem of possible legislation I would hope that Japan would exercise restraint in fishing in the north Pacific.

PM Tanaka: The north Pacific fishery problem is important in Japan-U.S. relations. Therefore it is essential that both sides discuss the problem, with good will, in the interest of seeking a mutually satisfactory solution. Japan derives about half of its protein from fish, 20% of which are taken in the North Pacific. Over the years Japan continues to discuss with the U.S., Canada and the Soviet Union such fishery problems as conservation of certain species, prevention of overfishing and even the expansion of fish cultivation. A particular problem arises from the fact that some fish (Salmon) spawn in American rivers and then migrate to sea. To avoid taking these "American fish" on the high seas Japan has agreed to refrain from fishing certain waters, which area the United States now seeks to expand. I understand that this problem is to be discussed by representatives of Japan and the United States, beginning November 25. However, we do not wish to announce to the world whatever we might decide, because it would serve as a precedent for the Soviets to bring similar pressures against us.

President: We appreciate your willingness to be forthcoming on this matter. I am encouraged by your response, and urge you to be as forthcoming as possible, because of the deep interest in this issue in the United States, which is related to political pressures which might, if they grow stronger, undermine our position on the Law of the Sea. Let us leave the specific talks to the technical people.

I understand that the Foreign Minister and Secretary Kissinger have agreed on the Joint Communiqué we are to issue, Mr. Prime Minister. The Secretary believes it is a good one. Do you think you and I should agree on the Communiqué to authenticate it?

PM Tanaka: We are in basic agreement. Earlier we were concerned that some of the language might cause us problems, but Secretary Kissinger has shown great understanding in working this out. I thank him. I also agree to this Joint Communiqué.

Secretary Kissinger: If the GOJ agrees, we plan to release the Joint Communiqué at 2:00 p.m., with an embargo until 4:30 p.m.

President: Mr. Prime Minister, I have found our talks interesting, constructive and enjoyable. Thank you for this opportunity.

PM Tanaka: These two days of talks have been an unforgettable experience for me, since you are the President of the most friendly nation of all those with which Japan has friendly relations, and also because we met before, once when you were a Congressman and again this September in Washington after you became President. Thank you for the opportunity.

1 Source: Ford Library, National Security Adviser, Memoranda of Conversation, Box 7. Secret. The conversation took place in the Tokyo Guest House. Drafted by Wickel.

200. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, March 25, 1975, 1415–1440. 200. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, March 25, 1975, 1415–1440.1

Washington, March 25, 1975, 1415–1440

[3 pages not declassified.]

1 Source: Washington National Records Center, OSD Files: FRC 330–78–0058, Japan (000.1–293), 091.112, 8 Apr 75. Top Secret; Eyes Only.

201. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, March 28, 1975. 201. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, March 28, 1975.1

Washington, March 28, 1975

DEPARTMENT OF STATE
Memorandum of Conversation

DATE: March 2, 1975

SUBJECT: US - Japan Relations

PARTICIPANTS:

The Secretary

Philip Habib, Assistant Secretary of State, East Asian and the Pacific

Ambassador James Hodgson

Rust M. Deming, LA/J (notetaker)

PLACE: The Secretary's Office

Ambassador Hodgson: I have no really major problems to discuss.

The Secretary: I am generally uneasy because Miki and Miyazawa are playing it too cute. I don't like it.

Ambassador Hodgson: On the outside this is true but not the inside. The Japanese have not handled the question of Miyazawa's visit very skillfully, but it is a weak government and acts that way.

The Secretary: This gives me a chance to sea what Habib is doing about Japan.

Ambassador Hodgson: Mr. Habib is giving us benign neglect.

The Secretary: Habib is never benign (side conversation with Mr. Habib).

The Secretary: One thing is clear, with the GOJ we have to demonstrate strength. South Vietnam is gone, don't you think so, Phil?

Mr. Habib: Within a year anyway.

The Secretary: We should resist failure beyond a certain point.

Ambassador Hodgson: The GOJ still sees us as the only game in town.

The Secretary: The GOJ should understand that it can't send its Foreign Minister to the Soviet Union and five or six other countries without coming to the US. He can certainly well come here for 24 hours. I want Miyazawa to understand that we are not amused. The Japanese have to know that they have to cultivate the US as well as China.

Mr. Habib: Is the 15th (of April) all right for a meeting with Miyazawa?

The Secretary: I am not going to Latin America. Between the tenth and the fifteenth would probably be all right but not before the tenth. I want him to know that he will not be meeting a sap.

Ambassador Hodgson: Well, Miyazawa may be one.

The Secretary: I know, he thinks he knows how to handle Americans. I want him to know that we enjoyed good relations with Ohira —

Mr. Habib: and Kimura.

The Secretary: and Kimura, and I was disappointed that he couldn't come here sooner after the President's visit.

Ambassador Hodgson: Miyazawa is not just cute with Americans but is this way with others as well.

The Secretary: I want him to be a little more respectful toward our relationship. (To Ambassador Hodgson) Will you make this point clear to him or do I tall Yasukawa?

Ambassador Hodgson: I am newly motivated. I doubt that telling Yasukawa would do much good.

The Secretary: Why? I like Yasukawa better than his predecessor.

Mr. Habib: What about the timing of a Miki visit?

The Secretary: Probably August. The European Security Conference is in July.

Ambassador Hodgson: It shouldn't be too close to the Emperor's visit.

The Secretary: Well perhaps the end of July to mid August. Where will it be? Washington?

Ambassador Hodgson: Washington is the best place.

The Secretary: He too has to understand that he will not be dealing with creeps.

Mr. Habib: (To Ambassador Hodgson) Will Miki be speaking with authority?

Ambassador Hodgson: Miki's government is gradually gaining strength and speaking with greater authority all the time.

The Secretary: Ohira told me that he wouldn't last the year.

Ambassador Hodgson: His prospects have been improved. Things have gone quite well on a passive basis, although he has taken no major initiatives.

The Secretary: How is Tanaka doing?

Ambassador Hodgson: He is out to pasture, playing a lot of golf.

The Secretary: Is there any chance that he will make a comeback?

Ambassador Hodgson: Very doubtful.

The Secretary: How is Nakasone? What is he doing?

The Ambassador: He is very busy in his post as LDP party secretary, a job that he sought.

The Secretary: It is clear that he wants to dominate the party. Tanaka was party secretary for awhile. Is Fukuda finished?

Ambassador Hodgson: No, in fact if Miki falls he might be the next Prime Minister.

The Secretary: Not Ohira?

Mr. Habib: One or the other of them.

The Secretary: How are we going to handle the Emperor's visit?

Ambassador Hodgson: The Emperor is very old and must be handled very protectively. The US public does not understand the mystique of the Emperor in Japan.

The Secretary: I didn't understand it either until the President's visit. The welcoming ceremony really made an impact didn't it? We could have gone home right after it.

Ambassador Hodgson: It was a great success.

The Secretary: Does the visit still have after effects?

Ambassador Hodgson: Yes, it makes everything we do easier.

The Secretary: We can't do that much for him.

Ambassador Hodgson: We can do enough.

The Secretary: How is the visit going to work? Will there be a substantive talk between the Emperor and the President?

Ambassador Hodgson: No, they might talk about culture, but above all the visit must be apolitical and divorced from substance. I believe that in planning the visit there are two overriding considerations: first, it must stay away from politics, and second, we must remember that the Emperor is frail and has limited energy.

Mr. Habib: What ever energy he has he will expend at Woods Hole and Scripps.

The Secretary: We will have to assign someone to go around with him. Who do you have in mind?

Mr. Habib: I haven't had time to get involved in this. Perhaps U.A. Johnson. (to Mr. Deming) Who have you been thinking of?

Mr. Deming: We have been considering the Chief of Protocol.

The Secretary: No, the Chief of Protocol won't do. We need a senior official.

Mr. Habib: If you could get him, John D. Rockefeller III might be appropriate. He is President of the Japan Society.

The Secretary: I could probably get him. We would need some senior official on the plane. Perhaps a Cabinet member. There are quite a few I'd like to get out of town for a week or two.

Mr. Habib: I recall that Henry Cabot Lodge accompanied Khrushchev when he came here.

The Secretary: How about Reischauer?

Mr. Habib: Please.

The Secretary: I love that guy. Every time I go anywhere he shows up and says something about me.

Ambassador Hodgson: He's had a stroke and won't be available in any case.

Ambassador Hodgson Vice Minister Togo says that the Chinese contend that you are the author of the "hegemony clause" in the Shanghai communiqué and wants to know if this is true.

The Secretary: Well, I am, or close enough to it.

Ambassador Hodgson: One of the greatest things for the US-Japan relationship in the last year was the Chou En-lai statement that the US-Japan bond of friendship is a great thing. I have one more thing and I'll get out of here. I met with a group of senior Japanese businessmen shortly after your "sabre rattling" remarks about the Mid East. These businessmen all agreed that your strong talk on the Mid East was beneficial in terms of resolving the energy crisis. You will not see this attitude reflected in public remarks in Japan, but I want you to know that it is nonetheless present.

The Secretary: Of course.

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy Files, P–820123–1082. Secret; Exdis. The meeting was held in Kissinger’s office.

202. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, March 29, 1975, 11 a.m. 202. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, March 29, 1975, 11 a.m. 1

Washington, March 29, 1975, 11 a.m.

MEMORANDUM
THE WHITE HOUSE
WASHINGTON

MEMORANDUM OF CONVERSATION

PARTICIPANTS:

The President

Ambassador James D. Hodgson, U.S. Ambassador to Japan

Lt. General Brent Scowcroft, Deputy Assistant to the President for National security Affairs

DATE AND TIME: Saturday, March 29, 1975
11:00 a.m. (5 minutes)
PLACE: The Oval Office

Ambassador Hodgson: I am coming from one area that is not giving you trouble.

The President: I am glad to see you, in the aftermath of my warm welcome there last fall.

Ambassador Hodgson: That is what I wanted to talk about. It is amazing what your trip did. They have come of age from your trip. The things which were edgy are now relaxed. It is really something.

The President: I get the impression that the political situation has calmed.

Ambassador Hodgson: Yes it has. Miki will want to come here in July, then the Emperor will come in October.

The President: I see he [the Emperor] is going to a lot of oceanographic places.

Ambassador Hodgson: Yes. He has to be strictly non-political. Even when he goes to the UN—probably there will be a picture of him when no one is there. He is very frail, and we have to consider that.

The President: Who is coming with him?

Ambassador Hodgson: Just the two of them. None of the rest of the family. We will keep the visit non-political and low-key in activity. They watch for you to come to a return dinner.

The President: That's no problem. Where will they stay?

Ambassador Hodgson: The Blair House. Then they will travel for two weeks. We have to stage it so TV will play the right aura back to Japan.

The President: He was very nice to me. He's kind of hard to talk to!

Ambassador Hodgson: You did, though. That is what counted with the Japanese. There was no idle looking into the distance.

When Miki comes, it requires only a lunch or dinner. Protocol requires the head of government to precede the Emperor.

[Ambassador Hodgson told a story about a Japanese Stone Lantern that was given to the embassy. The conversation then ended].

1 Source: Ford Library, National Security Adviser, Memoranda of Conversation, Box 10. Top Secret. The conversation took place in the Oval Office. The talking points that Ford received from Kissinger are ibid., Presidential Country Files for East Asia and the Pacific, Box 7, Country File, Japan [5].

203. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, April 11, 1975. 203. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, April 11, 1975.1

Washington, April 11, 1975

DEPARTMENT OF STATE
Memorandum of Conversation

DATE: April 11, 1975
SUBJECT: US-Japan Relations

PARTICIPANTS:

The Secretary

The Deputy Secretary

Ambassador Hodgson

Assistant Secretary Habib

Deputy Assistant Secretary Zurhellen

Richard Smyser, NSC

William Sherman, EA/J(Notetaker)

Kiichi Miyazawa, Foreign Minister

Takeshi Yasukawa, Ambassador

Keisuke Arita, Deputy Vice Minister

Toshio Yamazaki, Director American Affairs Bureau

Takakazu Kuriyama, Counselor Japanese Embassy

Tatsuo Arima, Private Secretary to the Foreign Minister

Ryuichiro Yamazaki, Japanese Embassy (standby interpreter)

Distribution: S/S, WH (Rodman)

SECRETARY: It used to be axiomatic among the intellectual community that Japanese-American relations were bad and we were criticized by them for making them that way. Now that we have excellent relations as far as I can see it forces our intellectuals into new lines of attack.

MR. MIYAZAWA: I made this trip primarily to get acquainted with you as you very kindly suggested shortly after I became Foreign Minister. This is the first opportunity that I have had to make the trip now that the Diet is temporarily in recess because of our local elections. I am very happy to be able to meet you and appreciate everything you have done to facilitate my visit.

THE SECRETARY: I hope we can stay in the closest contact and exchange visits reciprocally. I am prepared to visit Japan from time to time for conversations to make sure that we are thinking along parallel lines. We consider our relationship with Japan an absolutely essential element of our foreign policy as the President said yesterday. I hope this will be the first of many visits and look forward to seeing you in Tokyo. Our Ambassador in Tokyo is one of the few who is not trying to get my job.

AMBASSADOR HODGSON: How come you know so much? I find Japan very comfortably far away from Washington.

THE SECRETARY: I was in a panic when I saw on my calendar recently that I was attending the swearing-in of Eliot Richardson. I was glad to find out that I was swearing him in as Ambassador to Great Britain.

AMBASSADOR HODGSON: I see he is already complaining about the inadequacy of allowances like the rest of us. George Ball is certainly running for Secretary; he was trying hard last night.

THE SECRETARY: If every President had to come up with a totally new foreign policy, I shudder to think what state the world would be in. At least George Ball is consistent. When I see Bill Bundy on programs like that, I could strangle him. He was the one who got us into Vietnam, and throughout his tour in the State Department he was unable to get us out.

ASSISTANT SECRETARY HABIB: Bill Bundy called me one hour before he went on television. I gave him a full, clear statement of the situation and urged him to tell it the way it was. But he didn't support us. Nobody wants to support us except a few bureaucrats who are afraid of you.

AMBASSADOR HODGSON: That's as revealing as our conversation with the Senators this morning.

MR. MIYAZAWA: The Senators asked me my reaction to the President's speech. I said I was not qualified to pass on the military judgments involved, but that I had the impression that the total amount the President requested was designed not so much for military as for humanitarian purposes. I have the impression that the President was really seeking funds to provide for evacuation and humanitarian relief to Vietnam.

THE SECRETARY: Mr. Foreign Minister, the President of the United States cannot and will not after ten years of war say publicly that we are going to abandon our allies. If Congress does not wish to give us the funds necessary to do the job, that is up to them, but the President of the United States cannot do this. I don't believe that you in Japan would be pleased either with such a position on the part of the President. Whatever amount of money it costs, it is not possible to think in terms solely of evacuation or of negotiations. We had to ask for the full amount necessary to do the job. The President of the United States must make the transition as painless as possible. In this indirect sense the President's speech does represent a humanitarian effort. A year from now, when Americans begin to feel ashamed of themselves, it will be to the benefit of the President that he stood up for the right.

MR. MIYAZAWA: In many ways it seems to me that the US was involved not in a war in Vietnam, but in a cause — a cause of democracy in Vietnam. Although this has not been fully understood in Japan as a whole, there are many in Japan who did understand it, and we are sorry for the failure of the cause. It seems to me that if the people of a nation are able to help themselves and willing to fight, it will be able to withstand adversity, although of course I don't know the full situation.

THE SECRETARY: Let me be frank. In the first place no Japanese official can say what he is really thinking at the moment. I have to take with a grain of salt, not what you have said, Mr. Minister, but what public statements are made. The President and I (with the occasional support of other members of the Government) will do the best we can to rally US public opinion. Granted the Vietnamese did not fight well, but we put them in the position where they could not. An Army that has not received any spare parts in a year, that has to ration its ammunition, and which feels it may be abandoned by its principal ally, has a hard time making any kind of concerted and organized resistance. You're generous to absolve us from responsibility, but you can't do that. We must be reliable and trustworthy allies. It is certainly better for you that way. Our words must mean what they say. Both the President and I will be speaking rather sternly to the US people over the next few weeks. What was done was not right. Of course I'm sure our relations with Japan are totally different, but if we do not handle our relations properly everywhere in the world, other countries must form their own opinions. If we were to try to say something different or put a totally different face on the realities of the situation in Vietnam, it would be as if after Dunkirk Churchill had said a group of Englishmen took a boat trip last Sunday.

MR. HABIB: Mr. Secretary I think you have found a Foreign Minister who laughs at your jokes.

THE SECRETARY: I don't ask much of Habib except that he stop laughing at his own jokes.

MR. MIYAZAWA: I'm sure he's occasionally very helpful to you.

THE SECRETARY: I don't know how it is in Japan, Mr. Minister. I welcome foreign ministers here because they have to tell me what's going on. I don't always get this information from my subordinates.

MR. MIYAZAWA: I try to be a part of the Foreign Office. I don't know whether you try to be a part of the State Department.

THE SECRETARY: I have said many times that if I had tried to be a Foreign Service Officer, I would not have made it because I am not qualified.

MR. HABIB: Neither am I.

THE SECRETARY: You are an FSO.

MR. HABIB: No, I was not qualified. You at least went to Harvard.

MR. MIYAZAWA: I am not sure, but have you largely dropped the idea of "sense of mission" which you had in Vietnam?

THE SECRETARY: That's probably true. I have learned one more lesson. When you are in high office, you have two choices, you can use force or not use force, but you must use it only one way — to win. No one wins any awards for using force moderately. You must be effective. President Johnson involved the United States in two military actions abroad — the Dominican Republic and Vietnam. Most intellectuals and newspapers opposed the intervention in the Dominican Republic, and most of them at that time supported our intervention in Vietnam. We put in so much force into the Dominican Republic that it was settled within a very short time. But in Vietnam we escalated our strength so gradually that it was always too little and became a cancer. When President Nixon and I started trying to end our involvement, we were hampered in any kind of effective prosecution of the war because the public had already begun to require the US to withdraw its troops.

MR. MIYAZAWA: I believe everybody in Japan understands the difficulty of your situation in Vietnam. We hope that you can handle it in an orderly way and with dignity.

THE SECRETARY: When we came into office, there were already 550,000 us troops in Vietnam whom Bundy and others had put there,

THE SECRETARY: Let's turn to US-Japanese relations. What is our biggest problem?

MR. MIYAZAWA: I see nothing of an immediate or serious nature. We may have some problems in the Diet because of the Vietnam situation. I say so because the Foreign Minister is always subject to harsh questioning about Japanese cooperation with United States policies in Vietnam. With Vietnam ended, the opposition will lose this issue.

THE SECRETARY: Our opposition is infinitely ingenious in finding new issues when they lose one.

MR. MIYAZAWA: Exactly.

THE SECRETARY: I had a member of my staff make a study trying to find out how much peace we could buy from the New York Times if we did exactly what they advised us to do.

He consistently found that under the best circumstances we could be immune from criticism for as much as three months, but usually it was no more than three weeks.

AMBASSADOR HODGSON: We take it as a rule of thumb that when an appointment is announced, the longest the incumbent can go without press attack is three months.

MR. MIYAZAWA: Our history of democracy in Japan is so short. Our parties have not yet learned how to cooperate or work constructively together to develop bipartisan positions.

AMBASSADOR HODGSON: Your opposition is not strong enough. It is totally unprepared to do anything but oppose the policies of the government party.

MR. MIYAZAWA. The problem is also complicated by the fact that the LDP is the only party with power, and has been except for a very brief period throughout the whole post-war experience. All lines of authority and all positions both in the Parliament and in the government are controlled by the Liberal Democratic Party. All the opposition can do is collect information and attack.

AMBASSADOR YASUKAWA: You know in our Parliament we have a provision for going into what you call executive session; however, an executive session has never been held in Japan.

THE SECRETARY: You know, Mr. Ambassador, when I have executive sessions with the Senate on Middle East questions, the Israeli Ambassador calls me to register his views on what I have said before I even see the transcript myself — no, that's an exaggeration. They're usually very good about preserving executive session secrecy especially in the Senate. The House may be a little different.

AMBASSADOR HODGSON: We walked out of our meeting with the Senators on the Foreign Relations Committee this morning with stars in our eyes after a truly ringing endorsement by Senator Humphrey of the importance of Japan-US relations.

THE SECRETARY: He can do it either way; you just have to tell him in advance. No, I really love him, he is one of the great human beings in our society.

MR. MIYAZAWA: In our Parliament we are organized in such a way that nothing can be passed without the permission of the minority. Japanese democracy is still in its infantile stage; so much that there is a question of how you do it rather than what you do.

THE SECRETARY: I must tell you the Japanese decision—making process absolutely fascinates me. When you don't want to do something, you find it impossible to find a person within authority. But when you do want to do something, you have the ability to set priorities and act as rapidly as you choose. The consensus building process is not one of simply making compromises—you make good sound decisions. The way you have handled is amazing. You have been able to contain the impact without big speeches, without fanfare but in an efficient and expert way and that has been very good. When I first came to Washington, I was under the impression that you could simply go to the Prime Minister or Foreign Minister with a problem and get his agreement and rely on his decision. I didn't realize that this was not the way decisions are made in Japan.

AMBASSADOR YASUKAWA: Have you got an example?

THE SECRETARY: Well the textile problem is an example. The textile negotiations shouldn't ever have been raised.

I won't tell you what I think of our textile people. We made a mistake in thinking we should concentrate our influence on the Prime Minister or the Foreign Minister. We didn't realize that in Japan you have to make decisions from the ground up, in your normal way.

MR. MIYAZAWA: You are right. It is quite possible to develop new and even audacious decisions in Japan, but they do not come out of the leadership without careful groundwork.

THE SECRETARY: Mr. Foreign Minister, you can do that only in a society with a great sense of cohesion and shared values. This is one of the most extraordinary things about Japan.

MR. MIYAZAWA: In general you think of Orientals as very gentle and calm people and so they are, but they can be nasty once in a great while. You may be thinking of this in dealing with Vietnam.

THE SECRETARY: Yes, it could be a catastrophic situation.

THE SECRETARY: Is the Prime Minister thinking of making a visit before the Emperor comes in October?

MR. MIYAZAWA: Yes, I told Secretary Ingersoll yesterday that the Prime Minister would like to visit sometime between the end of July or early August.

THE SECRETARY: What would you think of early August. I will check with the President; we may be at the European Security Conference in July.

AMBASSADOR YASUKAWA: Will you be meeting with Brezhnev then?

THE SECRETARY: No, not at that time.

AMBASSADOR HODGSON: Mr. Secretary, I think the Minister would like very much to have a precise date that we could set the meeting.

THE SECRETARY: I'm practically certain that the first week in August — or let us say between August first and 10th — would be fine. Would the Prime Minister wish to come here or should we meet at some other location?

MR. MIYAZAWA: We would be very pleased to come here.

THE SECRETARY: That will he fine with us.

MR. MIYAZAWA: Our current Diet session is supposed to end about May 25; however, because of the pressure of business and treaties up for ratification, it will probably be extended at least a month and possibly two, so the first week in August would probably be quite satisfactory from our point of view.

THE SECRETARY: Why don't we say between the first and 10th of August. What time are you leaving tomorrow. I will call you.

MR. MIYAZAWA: A little after nine.

THE SECRETARY (rising): Mr. Foreign Minister I won't make a very long speech. First of all let me express my regrets again for my inability to meet with you yesterday and also express my great gratitude for your generous understanding of my problem. As you know I was totally tied up with the draft speech which we were preparing for the President that evening. Mr. Foreign Minister, I have rarely participated in any event in which I could sense the immediate change that I did when the President visited Japan last year. I had regarded the visit as largely a ceremonial one, because, of course, we were aware of the political situation in Japan. But the depth of feeling for peace and continued close friendship between our countries that was symbolized by the meeting of His Imperial Majesty and the President and further developed in our conversations in Tokyo led me to realize how much the visit meant in terms of our mutual relations. I have expressed my great admiration for the extraordinary achievement of Japan over the past twenty-five years, and I want to reiterate that I attach the greatest importance to the maintenance of close and friendly relations with Japan and to our mutual interests in the Pacific. Our task is to maintain this friendship with full consultation. I count very much on the close personal relationship which I have now established with you and hope to maintain a strong and lasting friendship with you. I would like to drink a toast to your visit, Mr. Minister, and to you and your party who can be with us today.

MR. MIYAZAWA: Mr. Secretary thank you very much for your hospitality and your warm words of welcome. We are very grateful for this lunch, indeed for the extraordinary luck we have had in being at this table for two days in a row. We fully understand the great problems that faced you yesterday and are grateful for the time that you have been able to devote to us today. When I went to Moscow last January, your friend Brezhnev did not ever appear during the full three days I was there. As you said, Mr. Secretary, our relations are very good. When I left Japan I had a message from the Imperial Court telling me that Their Imperial Majesties still remember with great pleasure and affection the visit of the President last year and are looking forward to seeing President and Mrs. Ford and the American people when they come to the United States later this year. We are grateful for all that your Government has been doing not only for Japan, but for peace in the world and we do appreciate this occasion to meet and discuss our mutual problems. We have jointly many world problems to solve. Happily we have few serious bilateral ones. I would like to offer my toast to the continuation of these most cordial and close relations.

THE SECRETARY: Mr. Foreign Minister, I wanted to arrange a meeting for you with the President. Is your departure flexible? For example if I could get an appointment with the President tomorrow morning would you be able to see him.

AMBASSADOR YASUKAWA: The Foreign Minister's plane leaves at 10:00 and makes connection in New York for direct flight to Tokyo.

MR. MIYAZAWA (to Ambassador Yasukawa): Don't worry about our convenience, that makes no difference. (To the Secretary) Anything can be done on my part, Mr. Secretary. But please don't try too hard. I know how busy the President is. I would of course be very grateful if I could be received; however, I don't want you to try too hard.

THE SECRETARY: I'm practically certain I can arrange it. I'll call as soon as we go to my office. I'm making a mistake to tell you. If I can't do it, you'll think I have no influence.

MR. MIYAZAWA: You've already done so much. I've had good talks with you — and pictures to prove it.

THE SECRETARY: Will that help?

MR. MIYAZAWA: Yes, in my campaign.

THE SECRETARY: Do you have to have new elections after a new Prime Minister has taken office?

MR. MIYAZAWA. Yes, definitely. We will have them but probably not for a while. One thing we can't do is have elections while the Emperor is away.

THE SECRETARY: Would you like us to keep him here?

I'm planning to give a speech in mid-June on Japan-US relations. This is the only speech I have ever given devoted to a single country. My staff told me I had to.

MR. HABIB: We only presented you with the opportunity.

THE SECRETARY: Any thing good or easy, they do. All Vietnam matters for example, are referred to me for immediate decision.

MR. MIYAZAWA: That is what Secretaries are for.

THE SECRETARY: I thought that given the importance of our relations with Japan I have sufficient reason to devote the time to make a speech solely on this subject. You must tell me whether I should be friendly or unfriendly. What would help in your election? Seriously, if there are points that would be particularly desirable to include, or points of special sensitivity or special importance, I would be happy, to include them. I'm very serious, I would greatly welcome your views and suggestions. Please pass them on to Ambassador Hodgson in Tokyo. Also I would like very much to hear from Ambassador Yasukawa here. I will probably begin working on the speech in mid-May.

THE SECRETARY (to Yasukawa): Are you coming to New York?

AMBASSADOR YASUKAWA: Yes, if I'm invited. I already have been told that I probably would be.

MR. MIYAZAWA: The Japanese will certainly look forward to hearing what you have to say. Whatever analysis you might make as a historian of the Japanese people and their role in the world today would be most welcome to us.

THE SECRETARY: You certainly turned my wife into a great fan of Japan. It was very expensive for me. I now have a house full of Japanese art — screens, prints, I like them very much.

MR. INGERSOLL: You have a Hoshi.

THE SECRETARY: What?

MR. INGERSOLL: A tree.

THE SECRETARY: Oh, the tree. Unfortunately, that was for the President. But I bought a good deal of screens and other things.

AMBASSADOR HODGSON: One of my problems is that my wife has discovered Japanese art and pottery.

MR. MIYAZAWA: Excuse me, Mr. Secretary, but how often do you have dinner at home?

THE SECRETARY: I'm afraid not more than once in two weeks.

MR. HABIB: You should ask his staff how often they eat dinner.

THE SECRETARY: Mr. Habib is a combination of self-pity and paranoia. Habib will work twenty hours a day if once in a while you will let him feel sorry for himself. You read about bad morale in the Department. They all think I oppress them.

MR. MIYAZAWA: I hear you first met Mr. Habib in Saigon?

MR. HABIB: He tells that story all the time.

THE SECRETARY: He threw me out of his office.

MR. HABIB: He has been throwing me out ever since.

THE SECRETARY: That was the beginning of the decline of everything.

MR. MIYAZAWA: I visited Saudi Arabia recently.

THE SECRETARY: While King Faisal was alive?

MR. MIYAZAWA: No, for the funeral.

THE SECRETARY: Did you see the new King?

MR. MIYAZAWA: Yes, and the Crown Prince. The atmosphere was very tense. I found the King very confused.

THE SECRETARY: I envy you your delicacy of expression. The Crown Prince is the strong man. However, we can't tell just what the political situation is. It is clear that the King can't govern by himself, but it is not clear whose influence is strong among the people around him. Prince Fahd is clearly an able man, but not necessarily the strongest.

AMBASSADOR YASUKAWA: You told me King Faisal prayed for you five times a day. Is the new King still praying?

MR. MIYAZAWA: No, the Crown Prince.

THE SECRETARY: It is not an easy thing to conduct a consecutive conversation with the new King over an extended period of time. I know the Crown Prince very well and he is a close personal friend. He is not as religious as his half-brother. I doubt whether he is praying for me. But it is a difficult problem. King Faisal was a religious mystic but he was a very intelligent man. He was absolutely reliable. A Bedouin, and very wise. He knew the weakness of Saudi Arabia and he never allowed it to over involve itself. Although he could sound like a religious nut, he was always on the side of moderation in his dealings with the United States. Fahd is easier to talk to, not so exalted, also a friend of mine and personally very close. But he does not have so much influence with his people. He may be more tempted to use the $100 billion of reserves they have accumulated for his own purposes. It is a much more problematical situation. Did you ever meet Faisal?

MR. MIYAZAWA: Yes, in Japan.

THE SECRETARY: The first time I met him I thought he was a real fanatic. The longer I knew him the more I realized that he was a truly remarkable person. I'm going to write a book about the Arabs. I really think they are the most fascinating people in the world. Everybody thinks I'm going to write my autobiography, my memoirs, but my main interest is in the Arabs.

THE SECRETARY: Do you remember Omar Saquaaf?

MR. MIYAZAWA: Yes.

THE SECRETARY: Omar Saquaaf spoke English better than I do and is a good friend with whom I had had many conversations. But one day I arrived in Saudi Arabia and he would not even speak English to me. He was surrounded by advisers. I kept saying, "Omar, come off it", but he continued to speak through an interpreter. I noticed that he had five advisers so I told him, "I'm throwing mine out of the room, so under the rules of Arab courtesy you must throw yours out too." He kept his interpreter. Finally I threw out my interpreter, and he responded. I said to him, "Now, Omar what goes on?" Then he told me that Yamani had visited the United States and had been invited to Secretary Simon's house for dinner. When Omar Saquaaf had come he had not been invited by me, and he was humiliated by Yamani's lording it over him when he returned to Saudi Arabia. But he hadn't understood I didn't even have a house then. I lived in an apartment too small to entertain anyone. When I explained, he learned English again. (At this point the lunch ended.)

After lunch the principals adjourned to the Secretary's office to continue the discussion. Present were the Secretary, the Foreign Minister, the Deputy Secretary, Ambassador Hodgson, Ambassador Yasukawa, Mr. Habib, Mr. Arita, and Mr. Yamazaki:

MIYAZAWA: Mr. Secretary, since we have covered so much in the meeting with Secretary Ingersoll yesterday, I think we can make this meeting short. The first thing I would like to bring up is the Prime Minister's visit.

THE SECRETARY: I think we can count on a visit between the first and the tenth of August. I will have to check that with the President, but I am sure it will be all right.

MIYAZAWA: I have brought with me a message for the President and will give it to him tomorrow morning when I see him.

The question of security is important for Japan and I would like to talk about that. As you know we are considering ratification of the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT). The government will try to introduce the NPT at the current Diet session. In that connection the Diet will be discussing security. Your Ambassador and our people in Tokyo have achieved a meeting of the minds on how we can phrase a statement on the general security matter. I would like you to confirm or verify your agreement to that statement.

THE SECRETARY: Yes, it is agreeable to me. I see it as press guidance. Do you want us to say it to our press?

MIYAZAWA: Yes, if you are asked.

INGERSOLL: We will give it out as press guidance.

THE SECRETARY: Let me have a word with you on oil policy and the question of the minimum oil import price. I have the impression that there is some misunderstanding about this. There really are two points: 1) the price of non-OPEC oil, and 2) the price of OPEC oil. We want to bring down the price of OPEC oil. Therefore we need to develop alternative sources of non-OPEC oil. If we don't, prices will stay up, but if we develop alternate sources, stability can be achieved. We would be happy to have other countries help develop our oil resources, and we are prepared to work jointly with other countries in developing their resources.

Each country would share in the development of their own potential supply and would join in protecting the price of new oil by mutual agreement. If Japan wants to buy oil below that level, that would be all right so long as it does not sell below that level. If you can get oil at $4 per barrel and then put a tariff on it of $3, that would be satisfactory. Then OPEC would not be able to defend its monopoly by selling below the price of oil from new sources. If OPEC could wreck new sources of supply, it could raise prices again. If the OPEC members came to us when oil prices were $10.89 per barrel and said they would reduce it to $7.50 in return for a five-year agreement, we would have to look at it, but this is not a current issue and I know of no country to whom they have made such a proposal.

MIYAZAWA: I see your rationale.

THE SECRETARY: So you see the rationale for a floor price. I don't care about the floor price, really, hut rather the development of alternate sources. When we get alternate sources, we can compete. Without floor prices we won't get alternate sources.

MIYAZAWA: How much will it cost to produce oil from alternate sources?

THE SECRETARY: We think about $7.00 per barrel. Some would cost more than$7.00. Each country can develop oil from new sources. Some might be able to do it for less.

INGERSOLL: There is some off-shore ail which might be interesting for Japan.

MIYAZAWA: Milton Friedman wrote an article recently in Newsweek on this. It seemed to be a total misconception.

THE SECRETARY: Friedman thought I was trying to protect the price of OPEC oil. Actually, I am trying to protect the price of oil from alternate sources. He totally misunderstood our proposal.

We have no interest in protecting the price of OPEC oil. If they sell it to us at $2 per barrel, we don't care, so long as we don't sell at $2. We want to protect alternate sources. The purpose is to drive down OPEC prices.

MIYAZAWA: I think you are right. The price of alternate source oil could be anything, maybe $5 or $12, but we would give them an incentive. Alternate energy prices would thus be higher.

THE SECRETARY: Just so long as it is below the present world price. The world price would not be given protection. For example, a $7 price would be below the current world price. We won't protect a world price over$10.

I would also like to talk to you about the problem of world grain reserves. I understand you have some difficulties with this concept and I would like to explain our analysis of that situation. Mr. Ingersoll mentioned to me that you are concerned that, if Japan maintained grain reserves, these would present a target for LDC's which might at some future time face food deficits. I am not sure how I can answer that concern.

INGERSOLL: There would be no call on Japan to give away reserves. The cost of maintaining grain reserves would be included in the price of grain when it is sold.

THE SECRETARY: It would be well for Japan to acquire reserves, although that won't solve the problem you have.

INGERSOLL: Japan would have full control over its reserves.

THE SECRETARY: Perhaps you would have to look at grain reserves as an aid program, if you had to make shipments to deficit countries.

MIYAZAWA: I suppose so.

I would like to have your insights on the Middle East situation.

THE SECRETARY: Certainly. The Arabs and Israelis deserve each other. If they were located anywhere else in the world, we would let them have a go at each other. Unfortunately they are located in a strategic place. I will be frank with you. The Israelis thought we were weak and that I needed a success. These factors combined to make them intractable. We are not that weak. Congress cannot conduct foreign policy. It can vote money, but it can't conduct foreign policy. Previous experience has made that clear. The fact is that no one can make peace in the Middle East except us. If we support Israel, there will be no progress. There might be war, but no progress. So we won't be pushed. The Soviets understand that and do not push us because they know we can produce results. So we are engaged in a reappraisal on our part. I think it is still possible that there will be an agreement between Egypt and Israel. If not, we will go to Geneva. With patience there will be progress. Next time we move it will succeed because we won't move unless we know that an agreement is achievable.

We have six months to make progress before the situation gets tense. We are determined to succeed. Maybe there can be some interim agreements and then an overall approach. We won't let the situation get out of control. All this is to Japan's benefit.

The last break-up of talks had benefits. First, it taught the Israelis and Egyptians that they can't get along without us. Ever the Soviets know that. Second, it forced us to initiate a domestic debate. Third, Congress is not going to fight us on this. It can't interfere with our policies in Vietnam and toward Israel both at the same time. The US Congress may look strong, but we can't operate on the basis of what they are saying. It won't make any difference what Congress does. In Geneva or in Iran or elsewhere in the Middle East we can do what we want. We arc engaged in a war of nerves now. As the President said, we will not tolerate a stalemate which would risk a new outbreak of war. We want to make progress. Sadat thinks so too or he wouldn't be so quiet. For a few weeks we will keep a low profile.

MIYAZAWA: By your absence you can let your presence be known. It is also clear that your government is strong enough to accept realities, don't you think? I would also like to ask whether Syria will let the UN units stationed in the Middle East remain until the end of May.

THE SECRETARY: Your first observation is a good one. There is certainly no doubt about our strength.

The situation of the previous Syrian government was inconceivable. Syria was tough but not reliable. Egypt announced agreement to a three-month extension of the UNEF. Syria now seems willing to extend the UN presence for two months, thus ending both groups at the same time. The real problem is at the end of July.

If has been a pleasure to meet with you, Mr. Minister.

I hope that I may see you tomorrow morning with the President.

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy Files, P–820125–0547. Secret; Nodis. Drafted by Sherman and approved by Covey. On May 27, Kissinger and Miyazawa met in Paris at the U.S. mission to the OECD and discussed Southeast Asia, China, and the Middle East. (Ibid., P–820125–0295)

204. Memorandum From Peter Rodman of the National Security Council Staff to Secretary of State Kissinger, Washington, July 25, 1975. 204. Memorandum From Peter Rodman of the National Security Council Staff to Secretary of State Kissinger, Washington, July 25, 1975.1

Washington, July 25, 1975

MEMORANDUM
THE WHITE HOUSE
WASHINGTON
ACTION

July 25, 1975

MEMORANDUM FOR: SECRETARY KISSINGER
FROM: PETER W. RODMAN

SUBJECT: Miki's Proposal for New Type of Communiqué

Mr. Kazushige Hirasawa is an independent Japanese political columnist for the Japan Times and a commentator on NHK-TV, and has been a political adviser to Prime Minister Miki for 30 years. He contacted me through Kei Wakaizumi. Since there was not time for a meeting with you, he called me from New York to pass on to you the following proposal from Miki.

Miki was impressed by your reference in your Japan speech to Japan as a "permanent friend." Therefore he feels Japan should be considered, like the UK, as having a special relationship. With the UK and our other allies we never (or rarely) have these detailed, formal Joint Communiqués, which are more suggestive of summit meetings with Communist countries, Miki also considers that his talks with the President — since we have no major bilateral problems — should be freer, more personal, more wide-ranging, less bureaucratic, etc. , and the document should reflect this.

Miki therefore suggests that the final document should be briefer, warmer, and more philosophical. It could be deeper and broader and deal with such topics as post-Vietnam Asia, the crisis of liberal democracy, the new economic order, food, etc. In other words, not an elaborate document like the Ford-Tanaka Communiqué last November in Tokyo.

Miki raises this idea through this private channel first because he "doesn't trust the bureaucracy." If you give a green light, he will broach it with his Foreign Minister and have them propose it to us in the normal way.

If this idea is acceptable to you, I will inform Kei Wakaizumi, and I will also forewarn Habib that this initiative will be forthcoming from the Japanese. (Miki does not want his Foreign Office to be aware of this private communication with you.)

Approve [HK initialed]
Disapprove

1 Source: Ford Library, National Security Advisor, Presidential Briefing Material for VIP Visits, Box 12, 8/8–9/75, Japan, Prime Minister Miki [4]. Secret; Nodis. Sent for action. Kissinger initialed his approval on July 31, 1975.

205. Memorandum From Secretary of State Kissinger to President Nixon, Washington, August 2, 1975. 205. Memorandum From Secretary of State Kissinger to President Nixon, Washington, August 2, 1975.1

Washington, August 2, 1975

THE SECRETARY OF STATE WASHINGTON

August 2, 1975

MEMORANDUM FOR: THE PRESIDENT

From: Henry A. Kissinger [HK initialed]

Subject: The Visit of Japanese Prime Minister Miki

I. The Setting — Japan in 1975

Prime Minister Miki comes to Washington at a time when our bilateral relations with Japan are in solid shape; there are no major issues to be resolved at the Summit level. The visit also occurs, however, at a critical moment in the evolution of Japan's post-war foreign policy orientation and its domestic politics. A number of relatively fixed elements in Japan's political firmament have been challenged severely in the last several years and the premises of many traditional policies have had to be reexamined. Recent developments — most notably the energy crisis, and the collapse of our own policies in Indochina — have given this process of policy review an emphatic impetus. Above all the Japanese are preoccupied with: — reconsidering their security policy in the more fluid international environment of post-Vietnam Asia;

— positioning themselves within the Major Power balance in the Far East;

— fashioning positions on multilateral economic issues which reflect their continued dependence on us and their desire to diversify their economic ties with other advanced and developing countries, as well as their need to cope with perceived vulnerabilities to disruptions of supply and manipulations of the price of energy and essential commodities;

— mobilizing public support for new foreign and domestic policies during a period of flux and transition in Japanese party politics.

A. Security: New Perspectives

Throughout the past two decades conservative governments in Japan have sought security through alignment with the United States, development of a broad industrial base, maintenance of only modest conventional defense forces, and pursuit of so-called "peace diplomacy" vis-a-vis Japan's major Communist neighbors. Security issues have rarely been the subject of detached and unemotional debate; the consensus supporting GOJ security policies did not include the opposition, and those policies have been grist for partisan attack in the Diet.

Recently Japan's security interests and policies have been the subject of an unprecedented public discussion. In part this was prompted by the tense Diet and media debate of the nuclear transit issue last summer. It was further stimulated by prolonged debate of NPT ratification this spring, but most decisively, by the failure of US policy in Indochina — a development which served to remind the Japanese that the East Asian political environment is not immutable. This has made them more attentive to other features of the landscape and raised questions in Japan about US staying power in the Pacific, and has encouraged greater public tolerance for more objective consideration of the basic issues of national security. Members of the cabinet in turn have been testing the implications of these emerging public attitudes on a variety of fronts — by asserting more forthrightly Japan's stake in the stability of South Korea, by publicly proposing increased defense cooperation with the United States, and by advocating some extension of Japan's self-defense responsibilities, such as wider maritime patrolling.

In many respects this is a hopeful development. Past constraints on our ability to discuss openly security issues of mutual concern with Japanese authorities may be relaxed. Japan's capacity for conventional defense of its own territories and its willingness to assume broader political responsibilities in Asia may grow, thereby complementing our efforts and reducing our burdens. At the same time, Japan's re-thinking of its defense role has not approached — and is unlikely to approach — a point where it might cause unease in other capitals or threaten to upset the major power equilibrium of the region. Nonetheless, there are a few areas in which Japanese attitudes and policies have given us little comfort — in part because of the new candor with which defense issues are treated. In the recent give-and-take of Diet debate on security matters, the Miki administration has been pressed by the opposition into statements that in the end may prove more restrictive than before on several key issues, including nuclear transit and the question of Japanese commitments concerning the use of bases in Japan in the event of Korean contingencies.

Beyond this, there is the question of where adjustments in Japanese defense policy, once begun, may ultimately lead. Miki is proceeding with caution, and the political environment — not to mention formal constitutional limitations — still enforces tight constraints on Japanese defense programs. At this point it is difficult to predict how far the emerging discussion of security issues may carry or how long it will take to forge a new consensus, but the process is likely to be prolonged.

B. Japan and East Asia

The Japanese recognize that peace and stability in East Asia depend upon Major Power equilibrium. The erosion of our position in Southeast Asia has had some subtle effects on Japan's diplomatic calculations. Both the Russians and Chinese — anticipating some recession of American power in the Far East — have intensified their courtship of Japan. This has crystallized a larger issue in Japan's foreign policy: how should they position themselves in relation to the Sino-Soviet rivalry. Miki is persuaded that Japan-China friendship is essential to Asian stability. Foreign Ministry specialists are equally emphatic about the importance of maintaining parallel and "balanced" relations with the Soviet Union. Yet Japan has had little success dealing with either of its major Communist neighbors; recently it has been exposed to the hard-nosed diplomatic tactics of each. China has pushed for the inclusion of an "anti-hegemony" clause with transparent anti-Soviet intent in the Peace and Friendship Treaty they are negotiating; the Soviets have been equally heavy-handed in seeking to obstruct this result.

Apart from its effects on Japan's approach to the major Communist powers, the collapse of Indochina has also heightened Japanese sensitivity to the dangers of armed conflict in Korea, and has altered the context for their own policies in Southeast Asia — eliminating their need to tailor Japanese policies to American military requirements in Indochina, but pushing them into an unaccustomed position in the foreground as a partner of the ASEAN nations and a potential interlocutor with the Communist states of Indochina.

C. Economic Problems

Into the 1970s, Japan compiled one of the world's most enviable records of economic growth. More recently, Tokyo has rediscovered the inherent vulnerabilities of its economy. A combination of factors — rising commodity prices, the sensitivities of its trading partners, accumulating environmental problems, etc. — have forced the Japanese to adjust downward their expectations of long-term growth. Today the notion of Japan as a permanently competitive world trader and perpetual economic growth machine is on its way to being outmoded.

In adjusting to new economic realities, Japan has increasingly accepted responsibility for participating in the multilateral search for more effective and more equitable guidelines for managing key international economic issues. In those negotiations — e.g. food, energy, trade, etc. — the GOJ has been attentive to our interests. At the same time, it has sought to avoid any confrontations with OPEC, and the LDCs generally, upon whom it depends for many raw materials.

D. Miki in Japan's Political Spectrum

Miki became Prime Minister last December as a compromise candidate of a deeply divided party whose popular base has been declining for some years. Within the LDP his position remains somewhat shaky. His is the smallest of the LDP's major factions. Miki is something of a maverick — a reformer in a party committed to the status quo, his own man in a party which puts a premium on playing along, a politician without strong ties with business or the bureaucracy, traditional prerequisites for post-war premiers.

Nevertheless, his rivals for the top job effectively cancel each other out, and in their divisions Miki has found a source of staying power. Miki's "clean" and "progressive" image, moreover, has given him substantial popularity with the public and with the media. Within the Diet, contrary to expectations, he has proved to be a tough, shrewd, and surprisingly successful tactician. He has championed controversial measures with a parliamentary strategy quite unorthodox for Japanese Conservatives — i.e. cooperation and dialogue with the opposition parties. Through this strategy Miki seeks both to compensate for his weakness within the LDP and to co-opt elements of the opposition — particularly the Socialists — into a more responsible role.

To date this strategy has yielded mixed results. Miki did achieve passage of several important domestic reform bills, and the Socialists have been drawn into the role of loyal opposition. However, he failed to muster the necessary support for NPT ratification, or to attain a party consensus on handling the "anti-hegemony" issue with the PRC. Moreover, his tactics have antagonized important elements within the LDP, alienated some segments of the bureaucracy and big business, and conceded somewhat greater influence over key policy matters to opposition circles which in the past have been among the more ardent critics of US-Japan relations.

Miki's ties with the US are a matter of record. During the intensely nationalist 1930's, he chose to study abroad at an American university (Southern California, 1931-35). As a young Diet member in the later 1930's he advocated improved Japan-US relations at a time when it was dangerous to do so. Since the war, he has served twice as Foreign Minister and once as Minister of International Trade and Industry with extensive and generally favorable contact among a wide variety of US officials. At the outset of his administration last December, he described the US relationship as "first and foremost" for Japan. He has continued to speak, in public as well as private, of his fundamental conviction that Japan's strong relationship with the US is essential. At the same time, however, he has appeared to feel a domestic political need to preserve an impression of some independence from the US; he refrained from Japanese-initiated top-level contact with Washington for some months after he assumed office, although this was largely interpreted at home as an effort to support his focus on domestic reforms. In part, his inclination toward independence fits with Japan's expanding international status; in part it may also reflect Miki's personal notion of how Japan should proceed in relations with us.

It is unclear how long Miki may remain in power. It is generally believed that he will convene a special Diet session in September and, following the Emperor's visit to the US, dissolve the Diet and call elections before the end of the year. With that in mind, Miki will be eager to extract political benefits from his trip to the US. Since his conservative critics have sought to brand him only lukewarm toward the US, he clearly hopes that successful consultations with you will strengthen his position within the party and enhance his image as an effective national leader.

II. Purpose, Key Issues and Strategy

A. Purpose

In making this his first foreign travel, Miki reaffirms the importance Japan places upon its relations with the United States, and emphasizes his desire to establish a personal relationship with you. Your last meeting with Miki was in January, 1974, when he visited Washington as Deputy Prime Minister. Miki has indicated that he hopes the summit discussions will be broad and conceptual, and that, in the absence of any serious bilateral problems, there can be open and candid exchanges on important issues. Miki considers Asian security issues to be a prime topic for discussion, although he will probably wish to treat them in rather generalized strategic terms. He will wish to reconfirm the importance of the US-Japan Mutual Security Treaty. Miki will of course be interested in your upcoming trip to China and Brezhnev's visit to Washington. In addition to these matters, Miki will wish to insure that Japanese views on the major multilateral economic issues — energy, food and trade — are understood in Washington, and will wish to touch on relations between developed and developing nations, a problem he believes will continue to grow in importance in coming years. Finally, Miki is hopeful that a successful visit will strengthen his political position at home.

Your purpose during this visit will be: — to establish a personal relationship with Miki and reaffirm the fundamental importance we place upon our relations with Japan;

— to affirm the steadfastness of our approach toward Asia, particularly Korea, in the aftermath of Indochina;

— to encourage Japanese policies in East Asia which support our own efforts to promote a stable equilibrium in the area.

— to deepen Japan's understanding of and elicit its support for our initiatives on energy, food and trade;

— to reach agreement on a joint communique embodying these elements and underlining our shared goals, the only document to be negotiated during the Summit.

B. The Key Issues

1. US-Japan Security Cooperation

We believe that the GOJ's efforts to develop a political consensus in Japan in favor of closer US-Japan defense cooperation is helpful to our long term interests. However, while we would welcome a modest upgrading of Japan's air and maritime defenses, we have no interest in stimulating substantial increases in the size of Japan's armed forces or their assumption of overseas security responsibilities. Given the political sensitivities on these issues in Japan, we must allow the Japanese leaders to control the scope and pace of the movement toward greater cooperation. You will wish to mention our desire to increase defense cooperation, but in order to avoid the impression that we are pressing the Japanese, we do not believe it advisable to pursue the subject in detail. We prefer to allow this rather fragile process to evolve slowly and naturally. Secretary Schlesinger will visit Japan at the end of August and Japanese Defense Agency Director Sakata may come to the US later in the year, and these visits will provide further opportunities to discuss the details and nurture the formation of a favorable consensus in Japan.

You should also be aware that a potentially serious bilateral security issue has arisen as a result of recent GOJ statements during Diet interpellations [text not declassified] This issue is discussed in detail at Tab II. A. of the accompanying briefing material.

2. Relations with the Major Communist Powers

Japan's attempts to achieve a balanced pattern of relations with China and the Soviet Union generally parallel our own. The GOJ normalized relations with Peking in 1972, and its trade with the PRC has expanded dramatically. Recent Chinese statements on the "anti-hegemony" issue, while reaffirming the need for such a clause in their treaty with Japan, have been couched in terms designed to make it more palatable to the Japanese (they have noted, for example, that the US-China Shanghai Communique included similar language) and the impasse may be broken. Japan has also broadened its relationship with the Soviet Union, especially in the economic field.

Prime Minister Miki will be interested in your views on the state of our relations with Peking and Moscow, and in particular your expectations with respect to your visit to Peking and Brezhnev's visit to Washington. You should affirm our intention to continue to pursue detente with Moscow and to develop our relationship with Peking. You should also stress our belief that the interests of both our countries will be well served by maintaining complementary policies toward the major Communist powers, and that we will continue our practice of close consultation with the GOJ to this end.

3. Korea

In the past two years, Japanese-Korean relations have been strained by a number of incidents. Recognizing that a special effort was required by Japan, Miki sent Foreign Minister Miyazawa to Seoul July 23-24 in order to get the relationship back on the track. We are hopeful that the Japanese and South Koreans may now have put their difficulties behind them. Japan has also indicated it intends to increase the level of its economic assistance to Korea, has slowed the pace of non-governmental exchanges with North Korea, and has been forthright in acknowledging its stake in ROK stability and security.

You will wish to reaffirm directly to Miki our steadfast commitment to the preservation of peace and stability on the Korean Peninsula, and express our hope that Japan-ROK relations will continue to improve. You should stress our appreciation for Japan's active cooperation in handling the Korean question at the UN, and the caution it has exercised in its limited relations with North Korea. You might also portray for Prime Minister Miki the domestic political pressures we face on Korean issues and the consequent importance to us of Japanese statements which recognize a stake in Korean security and offer support for our policies on the Peninsula.

4. Southeast Asia, post-Indochina

Japan views its interests and overall objectives in Southeast Asia as generally similar to ours. The GOJ was deeply concerned by the Communist victories in Indochina and what those events might portend for the security of other Southeast Asian nations as well as for US policies in the region. Prime Minister Miki will wish to know how we view political and security conditions in the region, and how we envisage our own future role there. The Japanese have indicated that they intend to strengthen their cooperation with the non-Communist governments of the region (and have recently sent a high-level mission to the area to assess prospects for such cooperation). They are at the same time seeking to establish formal relations with the Communist governments of Indochina, an effort with which we do not take issue. You will wish to reaffirm to Miki our intention to continue playing an active, stabilizing role in Southeast Asia, and to stress our hope that Japan and the United States will continue to pursue complementary policies toward the region, including in the area of economic assistance. You should also emphasize the desirability of continuing close consultations between us on our respective plans and policies in Southeast Asia.

5. Oil Consumer Cooperation and the IEA

Miki will assure you that Japan remains committed to consumer cooperation in the IEA. But he is skeptical that the US, given Congressional resistance, can deliver on either conservation or alternative sources. In particular he will probe you about the US proposed minimum safeguard price for imported oil (MSP). The GOJ is reluctant to take the MSP to the Diet — where it will be attacked as benefitting only the energy-rich IEA countries — and is not yet convinced that the US will not eventually drop the MSP proposal.

You should commend Japan for its constructive role in the IEA. You should describe to Miki the struggle on oil decontrol, conveying your determination to put it across as the key both to our conservation and alternative sources policy. You should add that while we must begin urgently to talk to the producers, they will never take us seriously until we have adopted serious measures to reduce our long-term dependence. That means we must complete our national energy policies in the US and Japan this summer and fall. Then we must relate them in the package deal the IEA now plans for December 1. Minimum Safeguard Price is only one part of that package deal, but it is an indispensable part.

6. Oil Price Hike/Consumer-Producer Relations

Japan is acutely concerned that an oil price increase in October will retard world economic recovery, re-stimulate inflation, and exacerbate balance of payments problems. Miki agrees with your view that any increase is unjustified and he may suggest that the US take the lead to somehow induce the producers not to raise prices. Yet, because of Japan's heavy dependence on OPEC oil, he would not support action that would appear confrontational. Miki will reconfirm Japan's desire to resume the producer-consumer dialogue and may suggest that we have a meeting with producers before the September OPEC meeting to try to head off a price rise.

While admitting that we cannot prevent new price increases, you could indicate that we have made clear to producers our opposition to further price hikes. You should note our hope that efforts to resume the producer/consumer dialogue will have a moderating influence on the OPEC price deliberations. We believe sufficient agreement can be achieved so that the scenario for the dialogue can be announced before the end of August, but the meeting itself could not take place until October.

7. The Multilateral Trade Negotiations (MTN)

Japan is a firm advocate of the current Tokyo round and believes progress in the MTN is essential to restrain worldwide protectionist pressures. The only real difference between the US and Japan is in our approaches toward negotiations on agricultural trade. The Japanese favor the European position, which would separate talks on agricultural trade from the rest of the negotiations. We, on the other hand, want agricultural and industrial products to be treated together so that we could trade US concessions on industrial items for improved access for our agricultural exports in foreign markets, including Japan.

STR Ambassador Dent visited Tokyo in late June to explain our belief that agreement between the major actors in the MTN (including the US, Japan, and the EC) on work priorities is essential if early progress is to be made. We are pleased that the MTN Negotiating Committee recently endorsed this approach in principle. We would like to see significant progress on a number of items in 1976-77, in order to stave off protectionist pressures and to minimize a final crush of business toward the end of the negotiations.

8. Grain Reserves System

Japan is prepared to go along with our policy of initiating negotiations on a Grain Reserves System through the International Wheat Council but is convinced that all agreements must subsequently be taken account of in the MTN. While agreeing to the Grain Reserves concept Japan has been concerned that the system would subject Japan to increased LDC pressure to provide additional food aid, even drawing upon the reserves intended to meet Japan's needs. It is important to continue stressing the importance of rapid agreement on the system in order to take advantage of this year's good harvests to begin establishing the reserve.

C. Strategy

We believe the visit can be most beneficial by structuring it as a relatively low-key, business-like exchange. The Japanese share this view. Symbol will take precedence later this year during the Imperial visit, and neither we nor the Japanese want the Miki visit to appear to upstage, in its ceremonial aspects, the Emperor's. (The one exception to the non-ceremonial character of the Miki visit will be the signing by Secretary Kissinger and Foreign Minister Miyazawa of a US-Japan Environmental Agreement. The Japanese asked that this be done during the visit largely because Miki was the first head of Japan's Environmental Agency and remains personally interested in environmental matters.)

A frank, forthright and friendly approach will maximize the usefulness of these consultations and establish a personal relationship and trust with Miki which will be beneficial over the longer run. While there are no specific issues to be negotiated and resolved, your meetings with Miki can serve to strengthen Japanese understanding and support for our policies in a number of important areas. In particular, you should: — stress the desirability of compatible and mutually supportive US and Japanese policies toward the major Communist powers and in East Asia generally, including Southeast Asia;

— welcome recent indications that Japan is interested in greater defense cooperation with the US, without suggesting that we favor a Japanese regional defense role;

— reaffirm the steadfastness of our commitment to South Korea and our desire for continuing close cooperation on all questions affecting the Korean Peninsula, while urging the Japanese to continue their efforts to improve relations with the ROK.

— stress the importance of effective national energy programs in consumer nations, and of consumer cooperation in the development of alternative energy sources, and seek Japanese support for a minimum safeguard price (MSP) by offering to consider ways of giving Japan access to new sources developed through adoption of an MSP.

— seek to persuade Miki that our efforts to resume the consumer-producer dialogue and forestall another OPEC price increase represent the most promising approach available to the consumers group.

— impress upon Miki the need for the major trading nations to identify priorities and to manage the MTN so that early progress can be made.

— underline the importance of reaching early agreement on the modalities of a Grain Reserves System in order to take advantage of the favorable harvest expected this year.

[Omitted here is Part III, the talking points, and Part IV, on participants and press, as well as the attached summit schedule, additional briefing papers, and biographic sketches.]

1 Source: Ford Library, National Security Advisor, Presidential Briefing Material for VIP Visits, 1974-76, Box 12, 8/8/75, Japan, Prime Minister Miki [8]. Secret. A note on the first page reads, “The President has seen.”

206. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, August 5, 1975, 8:45 a.m. 206. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, August 5, 1975, 8:45 a.m. 1

Washington, August 5, 1975, 8:45 a.m.

DEPARTMENT OF STATE
Memorandum of Conversation

DATE: August 5, 1975

SUBJECT: Prime Minister Miki's Visit

PARTICIPANTS:

The Secretary

Ambassador Hodgson

Assistant Secretary Habib

Deputy Assistant Secretary Zurhellen

EA/J- William C. Sherman

PLACE: The Secretary's Office

DISTRIBUTION: Mr. Bremer, Mr. Adams), S/S, WH (Mr. Rodman)

The Secretary: I've just expressed my happiness at the arrangements you've made for these meetings. Why couldn't they have given us a few days? The President feels very let down by this Department. He talked to me for an hour about it last night. How can anyone expect him to deal seriously with important issues when he's still full of Europe and has had no time to go over the papers.

Mr. Habib: We think this will not be a difficult meeting this morning. We expect, of course, that the Prime Minister will open by apologizing for the terrorist attack on our Embassy in Kuala Lumpur.

The Secretary: Yes, I'm sure he will. But they don't have to apologize for that; that's something we should apologize for.

Mr. Habib: Then he will want to hear from you and the President about the results of the meetings in Europe and how you view the prospects for détente. I should point out that one of the things that concerns the Japanese is whether détente in Europe will free the Soviets to exert greater pressure in Asia. They will be very interested in your analysis of the situation.

The Secretary: That's exactly what I mean. How can you expect the President to deal with a subject like that with five hours sleep?

Mr. Habib: Well, I think they will welcome your opinion, perhaps during the luncheon conversation. Secondly, they have a great interest in Korea. However, in our discussions regarding the communiqué, it is apparent that Miki wants to tone down the earlier Japanese statements regarding the security of the ROK as essential to the security of Japan, and widen it to something like the maintenance of peace on the Korean Peninsula is essential to the security and stability of Asia.

The Secretary: Why did we agree to that?

Mr. Habib: We didn't. We are still trying to get a more straightforward statement.

Mr. Habib: It is still unclear. I think Miki may be looking in the direction of some sort of great power guarantee of Korean security.

The Secretary: All that means is that once they get us out, the North moves in on the ROK. China and the Soviet Union are not going to fight for South Korea.

Mr. Habib: The Japanese understand the importance of our presence, but Miki is looking for new initiatives—perhaps tying to loosen up the framework for dealing with North Korea.

The Secretary: Look, Miki has got to understand that the reason the American people support the US troops in Korea is because of Japan. The people are not interested in the security of Asia as some abstraction.

Ambassador Hodgson: I think you should make that point strongly. They should hear it from you.

Mr. Habib: Another related question is UN membership for the ROK. We have been hung up over language on this. The Japanese don't want to say they support only ROK membership; they would like to add "and other divided countries."

The Secretary: Do you want us to support the admission of the Vietnam, only six months after the war?

Mr. Habib: How would you feel about a package deal?

The Secretary: I'm not interested in being maneuvered into a position where we wind up having to vote for the Vietnams because we cosponsor and then see the ROK defeated. That would create a situation where we're loused up for the next ten years.

Mr. Habib: No sir, the deal would be a package of all three and we would vote on all three at once not separately country by country.

The Secretary: As long as I am here, the United States is not going to be voting in the Vietnams and losing the ROK memberships — I don't care how much Moynihan agrees.

Mr. Habib: I think we need to let the UN tacticians look at it.

The Secretary: If we wind up being euchered on this there is going to be blood on the floor.

Mr. Habib: I'll make sure they are aware of your views. Another area they will wish to discuss is Southeast Asia. As you know, they are continuing their aid there, even stepping it up. They also are hoping to establish formal relations with the Communist states. They've agreed on an aid package with North Vietnam and hope to set up their Embassy in Hanoi soon.

The Secretary: What do they want from us?

Mr. Habib: They want up to maintain our aid to the region.

The Secretary: What does that mean?

Mr. Habib: To Indonesia, Malaysia — the ASEAN countries. Miki also has a vague Pacific Basin plan which he may raise. It would involve economic and political collaboration among the developed countries — the US, Japan, Canada, Australia and New Zealand — but also including some of the developing countries like the Philippines. Miki has also mentioned the possibility of an arrangement like the Lome Agreement which would serve to stabilize export earnings of LDC's with primary products resources. We've thought that these ought to be dealt with on a case-by-case basis.

The Secretary: Personally I rather like the Lome arrangement and think it might be more workable and less trouble than dealing case-by-case. But I'm the only one who feels that way and Simon would not go along.

Mr. Habib: Another thing I should explain is the nature of the communiqué. The Japanese have proposed the issuance of a relatively brief joint statement dealing in broad principles and supplementing it with a jointly worked out press release which would made a record of the specifics of the talks.

The Secretary: I believe that's not a bad idea.

Mr. Habib: The Japanese are still not decided on the format or how the two documents could be linked. We have been working out the text on an ad referendum basis and have reached general agreement with a couple of exceptions. We sent them up last night, but I don't expect you've had time to look at them.

The Secretary: No.

Mr. Habib: Our remaining problems are in the language regarding Korea — "the security of the ROK is essential to Japanese security" is language they are not yet ready to buy.

The Secretary: If they don't believe it is essential then what are we there for? We should have strong language on this.

Mr. Habib: Then there is also the support for ROK UN membership. We might have some flexibility on that with reference to the principle of universality.

The Secretary: What else?

Ambassador Hodgson: Miki will always want to be as vague as possible.

The Secretary: Why?

Ambassador Hodgson: That's just his style — avoiding being pinned down, playing the domestic political aspects.

The Secretary: Miki can go into whatever fan dance he wants to with his intellectuals. But he has to recognize the basic facts and understand why we are in Korea.

Mr. Habib: Over and above this they will be wanting to talk about the world economic issues — energy, food, and so on. But you're fully familiar with that. On energy, you've made your point with them about consumer solidarity, but they're still very leery about any confrontation. They also are very lukewarm about the minimum safeguard price.

Ambassador Hodgson: One of the reasons is the long procession of senior Americans coming through telling the top level Japanese that the MSP is not going to go through — that it's not a good way of dealing with the problem.

The Secretary: Like whom?

Ambassador Hodgson: Presidents and top officers of Esso, Caltex, Gulf. They had the International Petroleum Institute meeting there, you know. And some of the big bankers as well.

The Secretary: They're simply afraid they'll lose profits. Meanwhile we lose any motivation to develop alternative sources.

Mr. Habib: On food, the Japanese are not enthusiastic about a system of grain reserves. As Miyazawa indicated last April, they're afraid that it will open them to demands from the LDC'S for more food aid.

The Secretary: We could play that game — make a corner on the market the next time there is a shortage and drive them up against the wall. I've supported the grain reserves plan, but I'm not sure that we couldn't pursue foreign policy aims better by using food supplies as a weapon. The USSR needs our grain and can't get it anywhere else. We could drive them up against the wall. It's certainly not to the Japanese advantage to be in that kind of game. Is there anything else? I have to go.

(Here the Secretary ended the meeting.)

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy Files, P–820123–1980. Secret; Nodis. Drafted by Sherman and approved by Covey.

207. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, August 5, 1975, 10 a.m. 207. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, August 5, 1975, 10 a.m. 1

Washington, August 5, 1975, 10 a.m.

DEPARTMENT OF STATE
Memorandum of Conversation

DATE: August 5, 1975
The White House
10:00 a.m.

SUBJECT: President's First Meeting with Prime Minister Miki

PARTICIPANTS:

Prime Minister Takeo Miki

Foreign Minister Kiichi Miyazawa

Ambassador Takeshi Yasukawa

Toshiki Kaifu, House of Representatives and Deputy Cabinet Secretary

Sadaaki Numata, Ministry of Foreign Affairs (interpreter)

The President

The Secretary

Ambassador James D. Hodgson

General Brent Scowcroft, NSC

James J Wickel, Department of State (Interpreter)

President: First of all let me say that I am most grateful for the warm reception I and all of my associates received in Tokyo last fall.

Miki: I appreciate the cordial reception I, my wife and the members of my party are receiving here in Washington.

Before I left Tokyo for Washington I had an audience with the Emperor, who asked me to convey to you his warm appreciation for the thoughtful arrangements being made for his visit to the United States this fall, and for the personal consideration you have shown, Mr. President, in several areas including whales. The Emperor also asked that I convey to you his warm personal regards, and to tell you that he is looking forward to meeting you again this fall.

President: When you return to your country, Mr. Prime Minister please convey my warmest regards to the Emperor. I look forward to his visit early in October, and I am delighted to hear that the arrangements are proceeding smoothly.

KUALA LUMPUR TERRORISTS

Miki: I regret the unfortunate incident that occurred in Kuala Lumpur. I regret it particularly because the guiding principle throughout my political career has been to promote dialogue and cooperation. And I regret it especially because the terrorists who resorted to blatant violence are Japanese.

I was first informed of this unfortunate incident at 2:00 a.m. day before yesterday. I immediately called Tokyo and instructed the Acting Prime Minister to organize a Task Force to deal with it. I instructed him that respect for human life and the safety of the hostages are to be given top priority. I have been informed that a plane carrying five of the seven prisoners whose release was demanded by the terrorists left Japan about 2:00 a.m. (EDT) this morning, and arrived at Kuala Lumpur about 8:30 a.m. (EDT). The other two prisoners refused to go. No one knows yet where these terrorists and released prisoners wish to go, but I fervently hope the hostages in this regrettable incident are released without harm.

President: I know these terrorists acted totally independent. It is unfortunate that they are Japanese, but we recognize that other terrorists from other countries do the same thing. I am grateful, Mr. Prime Minister, that you are personally involved.

Our nation's view is, was, and always will be as long as I am President, that we cannot and should not respond to the demands of terrorists. I know that some may feel our policy does not respond to the lives and safety of hostages, but if it were our policy to respond to terrorist demands, the United States would become the repeated target of terrorists who operate around the world.

Our instructions to our diplomats are not to respond to terrorist demands under any circumstances. That is the only way I know to meet forthrightly those foreign terrorists who want to disrupt the world. I told the Secretary of State, and he has told the Foreign Service not to respond to terrorist demands. I appreciate that this might cause difficulty for others, but I wanted you, Mr. Prime Minister, to know what our policy is.

Miki: Mr. President, I hope to have as forthright a discussion as possible with you this morning, within the limits of the time available. Let me say that when I met you last January, when you were Vice President and I was Deputy Prime Minister, I did not expect to meet you again on such an occasion as this, with you as President and I as Prime Minister.

On my first trip abroad in 1929 the United States was the first country I visited. Later I studied for several years in a university in California, although my English has since gotten rusty. As a result of these experiences my whole life and my 38-year career in the Diet have been guided by the ideals of freedom and democracy. We have something in common, Mr. President, our long careers in our nation's legislatures, and I share with you the same strong faith in democracy.

My purpose in this visit is to discuss frankly the whole range of Japan-US relations to affirm the unshakeable friendship between our two countries. I hope you will forgive me if I happen to offend you with some of my questions, but may I ask you about several matters of interest.

President: By all means. If we could not speak frankly with each other, this meeting would not be beneficial.

EUROPE - CSCE

Miki: Turning to Europe, Mr. President, you just returned from there last night. In everyone's eyes the European Security Agreement appears to have resulted from Soviet efforts to realize their original concept of freezing the status quo in Europe. I am aware that the United States and other nations attached conditions to their acceptance of participation in the Helsinki Conference, but what I wish to ask, Mr. President, is what is your foremost diplomatic objective in the United States' Soviet policy?

President: First, let me comment on the CSCE. I believe there is a lack of sufficient background information on what the CSCE really does. In the first place, with respect to borders, it reaffirms the borders agreed to in treaties signed in 1947 and 1948, and nothing further, except in the case of Germany, where the CSCE reaffirms the borders agreed to by West Germany in 1971. Therefore, the CSCE does nothing more than reaffirm borders agreed to in 1947, 1948 and 1971. This point is not well enough understood.

Second, the CSCE Agreement adds an element of integrity and morality, in terms of the right way of doing things, so that the Soviet Union would not do again what it did in the cases of Hungary, Czechoslovakia and Poland.

The Eastern Europeans, if I may interpret what they said in the meetings and elsewhere, believe the CSCE is a document that wills prevent the kinds of action from being taken as in the instances I described. They do not say this is guaranteed, but they seem to feel they have added protection that they didn't have before. In that sense CSCE is constructive. We will have a meeting in Belgrade in 1977, to review what happens in the subsequent two years.

My endorsement of CSCE is based on the good faith of those who agreed to it, including the Soviets. I expect all 35 signatories to live up to the agreement language.

In our relations with the Soviet Union we do not agree with their system (nor do they agree with ours). We do not feel that détente between the Soviets and the United States is a solution to all the world's problems, but it can be used, End has been in some cases, to ease tensions and avoid confrontations. I expect it to continue as a vehicle for those purposes.

Détente is a two-way street; it is not all one-way for the Soviets (and won't be as long as I am President). It is a mechanism for use at a time of rising tensions and confrontation. In some cases it has been disappointing, in other cases helpful. I do not mean that it is one-sided. It is mutually beneficial, and hopefully, can help solve some of the problems facing the world.

Secretary: If I may add a word, Mr. President, the debate about CSCE is totally cynical. It is generated by those who for 20 years advocated the exact opposite of what they now say. As the President has said, there are two realities in Europe, frontiers and political influence. There bas been Yalta, and then the Paris Peace Treaties of 1947 and 1948, and the German Treaty with the Soviet Union in 1971. As a result there are no contested frontiers in Europe. To talk about frontiers is to reaffirm Treaties and legal language.

The political influence of the Soviets in Eastern Europe is not related to this conference. The Soviet Union has some 40,000 tanks between the Urals and the Elbe, and no Western nation wants to build that many tanks. Until someone does these critics are only engaging in an exercise of expressing demagogic platitudes.

I'm talking very frankly, but then I didn't have much sleep last night. I'm reading a new novel about Japan ("Shogun") and realize everything I'm doing is totally wrong.

Strategically we wish to weaken Soviet political influence in Eastern Europe, not confirm it. And we believe we can weaken it mole effectively by détente than we could by cold war. During the cold war period we could use military force, but under détente we must use diplomacy.

If the President can be welcomed by tens of thousands as he was in Warsaw, Bucharest, Kracow, and Belgrade, this weakens the Soviet Union. This could not have happened without détente.

We are under no illusions about the Soviet Union. If they have the opportunity to use pressure, they will do so. We (and you) must adopt positions that our domestic opponents can't attack if we have to resist. I used the example yesterday of the prize-ring — is it better for us to fight flatfooted in mid-ring where we can be hit easily, or to move around and make ourselves harder to hit? Then if the Soviets do something, and we can tell our people we have done all we can for peace, we will be in a stronger position to resist.

If we look at the Middle East, détente has not helped the Soviet Union. We do not aim at hegemony, and dividing the world between us, because that would be suicidal. We wish to contain the Soviet Union with modern methods, which are not those of the cold war period but are entirely new.

SALT, MBFR

Miki: Based on the outcome of the CSCE conference what prospects do you see for further progress in SALT and MBFR?

President: I had two meetings with General Secretary Brezhnev, in which we made some headway on SALT. There are some problems which are very technical, and some which are very fundamental. I believe the odds on an agreement are better than 50-50, but not certain. We will continue to negotiate. I believe that SALT is in the interest of the entire world as well as US-Soviet relations. We will continue to work at it, but we will insist that whatever materializes must be mutually beneficial.

Regarding MBFR, we recognize that the negotiations have been stalled for some time. We are working with our European allies to try to develop a position that might move the talks forward, but this depends on the reaction the Soviets have.

We believe that a MBFR that reduces military forces on an equitable basis is in the best interest of Europe, but the talks are stalemated. We hope the Soviets will be as flexible as we will. We will continue to work closely with our allies so that our efforts will lead to greater unity and not split us

When are the MBFR talks scheduled to reconvene Henry?

Secretary: September, Mr. President.

CSCE EFFECT ON ASIA

Miki: Turning to the repercussions generated in Asia by the CSCE, the Soviets extended an invitation on July 30 to (LDP Diet Member) Hirohide Ishida, Chairman of the Japan-Soviet Parliamentarians Friendship Association, to hold a meeting to discuss an Asian Security Conference.

In the long term, although it may not be visible yet except in special circumstances, what the Asians are most sensitive to is Soviet and Chinese influence in Asia. The Chinese, for example, view the Asian Security Conference proposed by the Soviets as an attempt to encircle them...

Secretary: They're right.

Miki: ...and therefore oppose any third nation hegemony. The Treaty of Peace and Friendship Japan is negotiating with China, as you know, has been stalled by opposition to the inclusion of the hegemony clause. It is obvious that the Chinese are vigilant against any increase in Soviet influence in Asia. What do you feel will be the effect of the CSCE on this trend in Asia, in the context of Soviet influence?

President: First let me speak about the United States' relations with the People's Republic. Our relations were initiated by Mr. Nixon. I fully support these relations, and believe they are of vital importance. I expect to go to the People's Republic sometime late this fall. I feel that our relations are moving along on schedule. The Shanghai document is the basis for continuing and expanding our relations. I see no serious problem developing in that regard.

We all recognize that there is competition in Asia between the Soviet Union and the People's Republic. We believe that our continuing relations with China are important in maintaining stability in Asia, and we will make every effort, in a responsible manner, to broaden our relations with the People's Republic. Secondly, we expect to maintain continued close relations with your government, Mr. Prime Minister. We feel this is vitally important for the stability and security of the Pacific. I have been encouraged by our discussions in Japan, and this morning. Tomorrow we can reaffirm the importance of our relations.

I recognize there are problems in the Pacific area, not in our relations but in peripheral areas. We should be frank in discussing those relations, as they refer to relations between the United States and Japan.

Therefore, we seek to broaden our relations with China, while maintaining and strengthening our relations with Japan. This will have an impact on the influence of the Soviet Union in the Pacific area. Henry, have you anything to add?

Secretary: I was asked in Helsinki about an Asian collective security conference, and said if there is such a meeting, it would take place without the United States. I do not think Asia can be compared with the situation in Europe.

Miki: I agree.

Secretary: We will not participate in an Asian collective security conference, or anything of that kind.

Second, we believe the Soviet Union is trying to encircle China, and in no way do we wish to participate. China has its own aspirations, and in ten years may cause trouble for all of us, including Japan, but at the present time it is not in our interest to weaken China. Therefore, we will not cooperate with the Soviets in any anti-Chinese maneuver in Asia. It was for that reason that we signed the Shanghai Communiqué, with its hegemony clause. We knew what we were doing, and made it explicit.

SINO-SOVIET COMPETITION IN ASIA

Miki: How do you view the present state of the Sino-Soviet conflict in Asia?

President: I might repeat what I heard from a number of sources in Helsinki. The Soviet Union has 44 divisions on the Chinese border. That certainly indicates to me that their relations are not better, and may even be considerably worse than before.

As the Secretary said, we do not adopt a policy of favoring one over the other, but at the same time we will keep our relations with you, Mr. Prime Minister, because of the strong influence of our relations on peace and stability in Asia.

Secretary: If there is a danger it is that Japan might over-analyze our policy, and initiate a leap-frog exercise that would be detrimental to both our interests. We are not following a parallel policy with the Soviets in Asia, bat if Japan does something to get ahead of us, we might have to do something. Thus it is very important that we coordinate our policies toward the Soviet Union and China. We should not cooperate in the Soviet efforts to isolate China.

Miki: On my part, I believe we should have a full understanding of your China policy. Therefore, I wish to as your view of the prospects for improving your relations with China, and how far you might go, Mr. President, in developing your relations during your visit to China?

Also, I would appreciate hearing a frank explanation of your long-term policy views regarding China.

President: As I said just a few minutes ago the Shanghai Communiqué is the basic document by which we are proceeding to develop our relations with China. We feel, and we believe the People's Republic feels, that our relations are within the context of the Shanghai Communiqué.

As I said, I will visit China later in the fall. There is no agenda, and no details have been worked out. The Secretary will probably go to the People's Republic before my visit, and at that time the agenda will be finalized.

We have made no commitment at this time with regard to our relations with Peking except in the context of the Shanghai Communiqué.

Secretary: Peking has told us that we need not complete the process of normalization to have a successful visit. We do not believe it desirable this year, after the tragedy in Indochina. On top of that we would not wish to bring about a political change in our relations with Taiwan, all the more so since if we did not recognize Taiwan, we could not honor our defense treaty with a part of a country. We have told the Chinese we have no desire for a change in the legal status of our relations, but we do wish to improve our relations.

Miki: I have the feeling the PRC wants to see the status quo maintained in Taiwan for the present.

Secretary: That is our impression.

President: That is an interesting observation. They have pressed us, but just enough to say they have pressed us.

Secretary: The biggest problem for us is our newsmen who go to China and plead with the Chinese to say something about Taiwan that they would never volunteer. As you know, Mr. Prime Minister, we have the Jackson Amendment relating emigration. I told Chiao Kuan-hua if China wants MFN treatment, they will have to allow free emigration. Chiao replied that we can have 30 million Chinese any time we want.

Miki: I accept your statements as authoritative, since you know the Chinese psychology best. I myself feel confident that Peking does not desire any abrupt change.

Secretary: I believe that is correct.

SOUTHEAST ASIA

Miki: In preparation for these meetings, Mr. President., I sent Saburo Okita, a well-known economist and President of Japan Overseas Economic Cooperation Fund, to the ASEAN nations as my Special Envoy to get a feel for the post-Vietnam situation. Also, our Chiefs of missions from the Southeast Asian countries met in Tokyo in July to discuss the situation.

On the basis of Okita's report and the discussions in the Chiefs of Mission Conference I have concluded that the real intent of the SEA nations is to develop a greater degree of stability. If they have learned one lesson from the Vietnam experience, it is that they must concentrate on stabilizing their own political situations and improving the livelihood of their peoples. The leaders of these nations currently are making many public statements that create a certain superficial impression, but I believe they are doing this for reasons of domestic politics. I believe what they really want is a continued American presence.

President: Do you mean the Philippines?

Miki: Yes, and Thailand too. They realize that the United States can continue to be a great force in assisting their own efforts, and as the emotions of the Vietnam War cool they are making a post-war assessment that they need the great power of the United states. Therefore, I feel that whatever the Thais say about opposing U.S. military bases, or the Philippines say about ending American extraterritoriality on military bases does not alter what they have in the back of their minds. The Prime Ministers of Thailand and the Philippines have both recently visited Peking, following which one may detect a subtle change in their statements. I believe that Peking also wants the United States to maintain its presence, or course, in the context of the Soviet threat.

I wish to make the point that it would be a mistake to argue that the SEA nations are drifting away from the United States. They believe there is a role for the United States to play, and I believe it important for the United States to maintain its interest in Asia.

Japan, of course, also has a crucial interest, and should cooperate with the United States in this area. Indeed, Japan-US cooperation is the basic premise underlying the peace and security of Asia and the Pacific. What is needed at this time is an understanding of the needs of these small, powerless countries in Asia, and the dynamics by which they function.

President: I appreciate your frank views. I respect the way you have assimilated the reports of your Special Envoy and your Ambassadors. It offers us a good insight into the problems of this area. But let me say frankly that American public opinion, rightly or wrongly, is affected by what the leaders of other countries say. All Americans are not sufficiently sophisticated to detect what is happening behind the scenes. In some cases American citizens have been dismayed by the words of one leader of another country or another around the world, not just in SEA, and this has an impact on the Congress. I and the Secretary of State and you, Mr. Prime Minister, understand there is a difference between words and actions. However, leaders in other countries should understand that the support I wish to give our friends in Europe, Asia and elsewhere depends on public opinion. I hope therefore they moderate their language as we try to continue working with them. Otherwise the Congress that I must work with won't give me the kind of support I need.

I firmly believe the United States should play a global role, in Europe and the Pacific, but to achieve this I need the backing of the Congress, and this can be affected by the words of foreign leaders, especially if Americans don't see behind the scenes. We wish to work with you, and wall, but we won't be able to do our best without the support of the American people, who have been deeply traumatized by Vietnam.

That was a great disappointment, especially for me. I believe the American people want us to be strong in the Pacific — I do — but that requires the understanding of the leaders of those countries.

Miki: As a fellow, life-long parliamentarian I can appreciate how difficult your problems are. However, Mr. President, I hope you understand that the end of the war in Vietnam is a turning point in Asia. Freed of the emotional complexities of the war the leaders there can now think of the future of their own countries. They want to stake their fate on a non-Communist future, but if they are to realize their aspirations, it will be necessary to give them some basis for confidence in the future. If not, they may become confused about their destiny. We should extend them support, otherwise if their determination wavers, they face an uncertain future. Therefore, it devolves on us, the democracies, to help them strengthen their own nations. We should try to prevent any uncertainty, by which I mean their coming under the influence of a Communist country. I hope you understand that this is a great turning point. Japan will do its part, and will keep in close touch with the United States.

President: I assure you, Mr. Prime Minister, that we will keep close contact, liaison, and working relations. I recognize the problems these nations face, and we want, and will help, because it is important for the preservation of the values and the kind of government we believe in.

Close working relations will be necessary if we are to meet the challenges presented in that part of the world.

Miki: It is in this spirit that I intend to call on the leaders of the industrial democracies of the Pacific —Canada, Australia, New Zealand — to step up their cooperation both bilaterally and multilaterally.

KOREA

Miki: Do we have time this morning to talk about Korea?

President: We could talk about it tonight, or tomorrow.

Secretary: With respect to Korea in the UN, the United States absolutely cannot vote for the admission of North and South Vietnam to the UN in the same year as the defeat in Indochina.

Miki: Foreign Minister Miyazawa will convey our views to you in detail.

Secretary: We can discuss this matter at lunch. We are not asking Japan's support on Vietnam, but we do have Japan's support for South Korea. If South Korea is admitted to the UN, we could vote for both Vietnams.

President: We would wage a vigorous fight against the admission of North and South Vietnam into the UN in 1975 without the admission of South Korea. We feel extremely strongly about this.

Secretary: We could understand if you were to vote differently on Vietnam, but we do ask your strong support on South Korea.

Miki: I understand your position, Mr. President; Miyazawa will elaborate our views at lunch.

President: I appreciate our candid, friendly exchange this morning. It has been most constructive. It is a great pleasure to see you again, Mr. Prime Minister.

Miki: I also appreciate your candor, Mr. President, and look forward to seeing you again this evening.

1 Source: Ford Library, National Security Adviser, Memoranda of Conversation, Box 14. Top Secret. Drafted by Wickel. According to the President’s Daily Diary, the conversation took place in the Oval Office from 10:05 until 11:25 a.m. (Ford Library, Staff Secretary’s Office, President’s Daily Diary)

208. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, August 5, 1975, 7 p.m. 208. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, August 5, 1975, 7 p.m. 1

Washington, August 5, 1975, 7 p.m.

DEPARTMENT OF STATE
Memorandum of Conversation

DATE: August 5, 1975
The White House
7:00 p.m.

SUBJECT: President's Tete-a-Tete with Prime Minister

PARTICIPANTS:

Prime Minister Takeo Miki

Masao Kunihiro, Advisor to Prime Minister (Interpreter)

The President

James J. Wickel, Department of State (Interpreter)

Miki: Thank you for taking the time to receive me this evening. I know you must be tired after your trip.

President: I feel good.

Miki: You're still in good shape because of your training as an athlete.

President: No, I'm a has been. But I do sleep well on a plane. I got 5 or 6 hours sleep on the plane and 4 more here last night, I feel good.

Miki: I find it easy to talk to Parliamentarians who are elected to office, like you, Mr. President.

President: I feel the same way, Mr. Prime Minister.

POLITICAL PROSPECTS: JAPAN

Miki: You and I, Mr. President, also came to our present offices under similar conditions, you after Watergate and I after Tanaka's financial scandal. However, I have led a long life as a Parliamentarian and feel that the circumstances which brought me to power were not limited to Tanaka's financial scandal. I believe it involved a deeper problem that we face, that is, that popular support for "conservative democracy" in Japan is weakening, and if the Liberal Democratic Party (LDP) wishes to remain in power, it must practice "liberal democracy."

The LDP has become increasingly a "conservative democratic" party. In each of the three elections conducted since 1967, when its share of the vote first fell below 50 percent, the LDP vote declined, to 46.9 percent in the most recent General Election in 1972. In the Upper House election last July its vote was 39.8 percent. But I believe strongly that the LDP is the only force for stability in government.

However, I have also been telling the Japan Socialist Party, the largest of the four opposition parties, that it should act more responsibly like a "shadow government." As you know the JSP and the other opposition parties differ sharply from the LDP in defense and foreign policies. The JSP is changing a bit, but we will have to wait and see how much. In the meantime, though, I can appreciate the fact that you, Mr. President, might view this situation in Japan with some uneasiness.

Like you, Mr. President, my accession to power was unexpected, and I have not yet been "baptized" by the people; and late this year, or next year I will have to seek the approval of the people for my government in an election. I believe I came to power because of the consistency of the positions I have advocated throughout my 38 years as an LDP Dietman, and I am confident that the election results will lead to a more stable government supported by the people. I am also confident that I will serve a full three-year term.

For these reasons, therefore, I wish to maintain a dialog with you in the spirit of full candor. I might add there may be some things you ask of me that I can do, and some that I cannot. If I say I can do something, I will do it, and if I can't, I will say so for I believe we can only continue to cooperate on a basis of mutual trust.

President: That is the only way to do things.

Miki: Therefore, I hope to keep in close touch with you.

President: Mr. Prime Minister, first of all let me thank you on a personal basis for the frankness and candor with which you have reviewed the Japanese situation. Your leadership is of the kind that could perpetuate strong support for the leadership in Japan. In my Congressional experience I have come to know those who can do this, and those who can't. Based on our discussions today and several months ago you seem to me to be the kind of leader we want as a working partner.

May I ask, Mr. Prime Minister, in your system do you have the capability of deciding the timing of an election?

Miki: Yes. That is my biggest prerogative — I can call an election any time it is to my advantage.

President: In our system we have no choice.

Miki: Mr. President, I wish you every success next year.

President: Thank you very much. You seem to share the views I have.

ECONOMIC CONDITIONS

President: Japan is a good ally, West Germany is a good ally, France is a very good ally which is a good development and Britain is a good ally, as are other countries. If we are to combat some of the trends that will come if we have bad economic conditions, we must try to work together. My impression of what Giscard, Wilson and Schmidt said is that if we don't improve the economic climate, the political climate could have an adverse effect on the developed industrial nations of the world. Japan has a big stake in this. Therefore we talked in general about the problem without any commitment, but we all felt that it could be disastrous for democratic government if we were to have adverse economic conditions develop in the future.

Our economic picture is improving, but we can't do it alone — we have to coordinate how we can work together to achieve a coordinated plan. We wish to work with you because your re-election is vital to Japan and the industrial nations we represent.

COALITION POLITICS

President: I apologize for not knowing much about the JSP, but I am always apprehensive about compromising with the wrong people (based on my own experience in Congress). Is the JSP responsibly led? Does it have good ideology? Would you feel confident, and do you feel I would feel confident with the JSP in a coalition?

Miki: I have no intention of forming a coalition. The LDP must continue to hold the government for a considerable period, but not permanently. Our views differ greatly from those of the JSP, but I feel we need the JSP to understand our position; in other words, to put the JSP in the position of agreeing to disagree.

The opposition parties all criticized my visit to the United States, in the public press, to spare Japan becoming subservient or overburdened. But privately the chairmen of all the opposition parties, except the Japan Communist Party (JCP) telephoned to wish me well. They are in the process of changing, and I will continue my policy of avoiding confrontation, and seeking dialog and cooperation.

President: By way of analogy, we feel very strongly that the problem in Europe is that some governments among our allies will accept the Communist Party into a coalition. We are totally opposed to such a coalition. NATO cannot be strong with a communist party in the government in Italy or elsewhere. We can't have a strong NATO on that basis. I have told the Italians this, and I believe it is equally true elsewhere.

Miki: Last year we had local elections in April, after I became Prime Minister, and while the LDP couldn't recapture the Governerships of Tokyo and Osaka held by opposition party incumbents, we won all the other governorships. The LDP also gained ever 100 seats in local assemblies, while the JCP lost some. I don't believe the JCP will continue to grow, and I won't let them.

President: May I ask a question. You are the best authority, but is the JCP internationally oriented, or domestically?

Miki: The JCP has some contact with the Soviet Union, but it is generally domestically oriented.

President: Is it oriented more to Moscow than Peking?

Miki: The JCP is at loggerheads with Peking; their relations are very bad.

President: That's very interesting.

GISCARD PROPOSAL

Miki: I agree with your remarks, Mr. President, on Giscard's proposal for a five-power economic conference, and did so publicly in the press, that is that a preliminary conference would be required to establish an agenda. I would hope that this would come as a U.S. initiative. I believe Giscard's proposal to discuss only monetary problems is too "narrow," and the five advanced industrial powers should discuss the full spectrum of economic matters.

President: I think we should proceed on an informal basis, rather than formal. I don't know your situation, but I think an informal arrangement — for discussions by a person you would name, and persons named by Giscard, Wilson and Schmidt — would be a better way to lay the groundwork. We have a great mutual interest in doing something, but the minute this becomes formal, it complicates my problems at home. What we want is results, not public acclaim. We want success, and economic success would be of the greatest importance economically and politically from the standpoint of the developed industrial nations.

Our situation looks good, but we can't go it alone. All the nations should improve their economic circumstances if we are to be successful as nations in the free world.

Miki: May I infer that you would agree to convene a five-power conference as long as preparations are made in informal talks?

President: Generally, yes, but that depends on how well the representatives of the five powers lay the foundation. It would be disastrous if we entered negotiations at the Summit with disagreements among us. We should agree in advance to coordinate our views.

Miki: I agree.

President: We would agree to hold the conference if there are adequate preparations, but if there are disagreements, we could not hold it.

U.S.-JAPAN COOPERATION

President: Mr. Prime Minister, I believe our talks this morning, and this evening man-to-man, have been constructive. It is important that the United States and Japan cooperate. You and I will do so. I wish you the best and know you will enjoy success in your election. We expect to succeed in our election, 14 months from now. All I can see for you is pluses, not minuses.

Miki: I believe mutual trust between the top leaders is the most important key to successful diplomatic relations. The leaders must know each other as human beings. With your understanding and assistance I know Japan and the United States can have that kind of successful relations. As I said earlier, I will tell you "no" in all frankness when there is something I can't do for you.

President: And the reverse of that is if I disagree, I hope we can keep the level of our rhetoric low, because a public display is not good.

Miki: Of course.

President: We should minimize any disagreement.

Miki: It is not good taste in a friendly relationship to accentuate differences publicly.

President: In the Congress (and I am a product of the Congress) there is an old saying "We can disagree without being disagreeable."

Miki: Like yourself, Mr. President, I am a product of the Diet. My government is dedicated to clean politics and reform, which meets some resistance from some sectors of the LDP, but not as much as the press reports.

President: Thank you, Mr. Prime Minister. This talk has been very constructive. May I escort you downstairs to dinner.

1 Source: Ford Library, National Security Adviser, Memoranda of Conversation, Box 14. Top Secret; Exdis. Drafted by Wickel. The conversation took place in the White House. The next day, Ford told Kissinger and Scowcroft, “The private conversation wasn’t much. I think he wanted it mostly for prestige.” (Memorandum of Conversation, August 6, 9:50–10:05 a.m.; ibid.)

209. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, August 6, 1975, 10 a.m. 209. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, August 6, 1975, 10 a.m. 1

Washington, August 6, 1975, 10 a.m.

DEPARTMENT OF STATE
Memorandum of Conversation

DATE: August 6, 1975 10:00 a.m.
The White House

SUBJECT: President's Second Meeting with Prime Minister Miki

PARTICIPANTS:

Prime Minister Takeo Miki

Foreign Minister Kiichi Miyazawa

Ambassador Takeshi Yasukawa

Toshiki Kaifu, House of Representatives and Deputy Cabinet Secretary

Bunroku Yoshino, Deputy Vice Minister of Foreign Affairs

Sadaaki Numata, Ministry of Foreign Affairs (Interpreter)

The President

The Secretary

Ambassador James D. Hodgson

General Brent Scowcroft, NSC

Assistant Secretary Philip C. Habib

James J Wickel, Department of State (Interpreter)

KUALA LUMPUR TERRORISTS

Miki: I wish to thank Secretary Kissinger for cabling Somalia last night regarding the terrorists in Kuala Lumpur.

Isn't there some way we could have an international treaty by which all nations would refuse to accept hijackers and terrorists?

Secretary: Mr. President, we learned in the middle of the night that the terrorists were ready to leave Kuala Lumpur, but no nation would agree to allow their plane to land. The GOJ had been in touch with Syria, Libya and other countries but they all refused. We took the position that we would not communicate with any government, in line with your policy, but at 3:00 a.m. we sent a cable to Somalia, with whom Japan does not have diplomatic relations, and where we represent Japan's interests. But Somalia refused to allow the terrorists' plane to land.

Miki: There should be an international treaty to deal with this sort of problem, under which all nations would agree not to accept terrorists.

President: That is our firm policy.

Secretary: I have asked the Department of State to draft such a treaty, and we might introduce it into the UN this fall. The Arab nations would probably cooperate, insofar as it would not affect Arab objectives, but if there were incidents involving Arabs, or Palestinians, they would react differently.

President: What about our Consul?

Secretary: The Japanese terrorists are holding 15 hostages in the plane on the runway, including Consul Stebbins; the others have all been released. At present two disputes are delaying their departure, (1) whether there should be an eight-man crew as the airline wishes, or a three-man crew as the terrorists demand; and (2) no country has agreed to allow them to land.

Yasukawa: Algeria remains a possibility, or Libya.

Secretary: You could appeal to Cuba.

Habib: The Government of Malaysia already did.

Miki: I believe we should seriously study a treaty to prevent this sort of thing on an urgent basis.

President: Would it be appropriate to say that as a result of this meeting we urge that something be done in the UN?

Secretary: Mr. President, I would recommend that we not make such a statement because the terrorists on board the plane may interpret it as a warning to other nations not to allow them to land, and shoot the hostages.

FIVE POWER ECONOMIC SUMMIT

Miki: If I may move on to another subject, may we announce that we agreed to move on to hold a Five-Power Economic Summit, provided the informal preliminary meeting achieves a consensus? Or that we have opened up such a possibility?

President: There are some problems, which I explained to you last evening. If preliminary talks are to be held, I would hope to send George Shultz. But I haven't had an opportunity yet to focus on this matter with all of my top advisors. Therefore I hesitate to make a final commitment, although I am leaning that way.

However, a lot of it depends on how well we could prepare. I recognize the problem that we need to integrate our policies because of the high degree of interdependence of our economies, but in deference to the rest of those in the government who have an interest and a stake in these matters we ought not to say categorically that we will do it.

Secretary: There are two problems, relating in part to Japan and Canada, Mr. President, which may be avoided, but if we announce a Five-Power Economic Summit...

President: I understand.

Mr. Prime Minister, we will be in touch when we resolve the matter here.

Miki: I understand. I will not make any public statement.

President: I haven't talked to George Shultz yet.

Secretary: He's a private citizen, he'll do what you want.

KOREA

Miki: If I may return to Korea, I think the most crucial topic is how to prevent an armed clash there. It is most important that North Korea not miscalculate. The North Koreans seem to have great hopes that a popular movement against the dictatorial Park regime will arise in South Korea, throwing that country into a state of instability.

President: Such as Vietnam.

Miki: On the other hand, the ROK seems excessively fearful of an attack by North Korea, and therefore takes excessively strong political positions, resulting in a hyper-sensitivity to whatever the United States or Japan says. Therefore, what is needed is something to relieve these excess hopes in North Korea as well as the excess fears in South Korea.

With this in mind, I sent Miyazawa to Seoul to normalize Japan's relations with the ROK before my visit to Washington, to show by this normalization that North Korea's expectations of instability in South Korea are excessive. Park does entertain genuine fears, which we must make an effort to relieve by strengthening the economic and social base of the ROK, through economic assistance projects.

At the same time I believe Park is too rigid. I understand the United States can give him advice, but not publicly. Japan cannot do so because for 36 years we ruled Korea as a colony, and the Koreans resent whatever Japan might say. Our position is therefore different, but any advice the United States could give is more likely to be listened to by South Korea.

I don't believe it likely that North Korea will invade South Korea by force, especially with American forces present there. My greatest concern is that North Korea not be able to take advantage of any abrupt change in South Korea. Therefore I feel that a continued United States presence there is absolutely essential to maintain stability.

Even though the UNC might be dissolved, you have stated that United States forces will remain in South Korea under your bilateral defense treaty. I believe the worst thing that could happen would be an abrupt change, therefore, I urge the United States to keep its presence in Korea as the best means of maintaining stability there. In my speech at the National Press Club this noon I intend to emphasize the necessity for a continued American presence.

President: We believe it is most important for Japan and the ROK to continue to maintain and improve their relations. When I visited Japan last fall, I heard about a number of unfortunate incidents that had taken place earlier, but I get the impression from what you say this morning, Mr. Prime Minister, that Japan's relations with the ROK have improved, and hopefully will get better as we move ahead.

This is important because we see a tie-in between the security of South Korea and the security of Japan. Our feeling in this regard is that this tie-in is crucial. If the security of the ROK should deteriorate, there would be an adverse impact on the security of Japan itself.

When I was in Korea last fall, the question of alleged domestic repression was raised. Some elements in Congress continue to raise it much as they did at the time of the problems in Vietnam and Cambodia. It is not now as big a problem as it was at the time of Vietnam and Cambodia, but still it is enough of a problem. I hope that President Park is cognizant of the difficulties that could develop unless there is some lessening of his present hard line.

We intend to keep our troops there. They are excellent combat forces. I visited them last fall, and saw they are well led, well equipped, and ready. There isn't a demand to get them out this year in the Congress as there was last year.

As I said, the American troop presence in South Korea is related to the overall security of Japan. We cannot look at each in isolation, we should look at them in combination. We believe it is vital that your relations with the ROK continue to improve, the more the better.

Miki: I face the same sort of problems with parliament and public opinion as you do, Mr. President. The Japanese are aware of President Park's repression, so much so that when the ROK Prime Minister Kim Chong Pil came to Japan the opposition insisted that I not even see him. We also had the unfortunate incident of the kidnapping of Kim Tae-Chung from Tokyo in broad daylight. In saying this, however, I don't wish to imply that I am not concerned with the security of the ROK. Pusan is a scant 30 kilometers from the island Tsushima...

Secretary: The Japanese sank the Russian fleet there in 1905.

Miki: ...and we all feel how closely the security of the ROK is related to our own. I had the personal experience as Foreign Minister during the Pueblo crisis of having many Japanese telephone urgently to ask me what would happen to Japan.

Having said all this, Mr. President, I can assure you that Japan wishes to have good relations with the ROK.

Secretary: As the Prime Minister suggested, we can appeal to President Park to be more lenient, but on the other hand we must understand the problems of a nation with a border not recognized by a neighbor with large forces. We could press, but if we press too hard, they could be demoralized and we would have another Vietnam situation. Therefore we have to keep our pressure below a certain threshold.

President: if a Vietnam situation were to develop in the ROK, it would invite North Korea to undertake military operations. Thus, we are on the horns of a dilemma. Maybe I'm wrong, but I have the impression that there is not the same kind of public opinion in the ROK as a year ago.

Secretary: That's because they suppress it better.

Hodgson: There does seem to be a greater degree of realism about possible adventurism on the other side.

Secretary: From the historical point of view democracy does not seem to be the normal course of governments in South Korea...

President: Or North Korea.

Secretary: South Korea has had only two years of democratic government in the post-war period, and they were chaotic. We should keep this in mind in assessing the possibilities.

Miki: Having described the fears in the ROK, Mr. President, I wish to note that your visit there showed the United States' determination and was a great help in allaying South Korean fears.

President: I wish to reassure you, Mr. President, that we will live up to our commitment.

NORTH KOREA

Miki: Turning to North Korea, I wish to say that I did not send Utsunomiya, a Diet Member, to North Korea as my Special Envoy as reported in the press. He was going to Pyongyang to discuss trace matters with North Korea, and I asked him to sound out Kim Il-sung's views, if he should meet him.

President: Is Utsunomiya a member of the LDP?

Miki: Yes.

He did meet Kim Il-sung for several hours. He said that Kim Il-sung stressed that he has no intention of invading South Korea, and North Korea wants direct talks with the United States. According to Utsunomiya, Kim Il-sung feels the continuation of the military armistice after all these years is unnatural, and he wants a peace agreement with the United States to replace the Armistice Agreement.

President: With the dividing line?

Miki: Yes.

He wants both sides to reduce their armed forces to the level of 100,000 men, to reduce the economic burden on North Korea, and also wants the United States to withdraw its forces.

There was nothing new in what he said. He repeated what he said last March, as you know, Mr. President. Kim Il-sung repeatedly told Utsunomiya (which I don't mean to accept at face value) that he did not want war, and wanted to reduce military expenditures to concentrate on nation-building.

However, I would like to ask you, Mr. President, about the feasibility of a four-power conference of the parties, North and South Korea, the United States and the PRC, to discuss the real problem of how to continue the truce after the UNC is dissolved.

President: My instinctive reaction, as you may notice, is negative. The impact would be adverse, not only in the area but in the Pacific generally. My negative reaction is intuitive, but even after study I am sure we would come to the same conclusion.

Secretary: Mr. President, we couldn't confine participation to the People's Republic but would have to include the Soviet Union because it has a common border and a great historical interest in Korea.

Second, this would amount to a four-power guarantee, and the withdrawal of the United States forces. The ROK would interpret this as abandonment because their confidence in Soviet and Chinese guarantees is not unlimited. They would construe it as a device by which the United States would disengage and discharge its responsibility, and would lead to their collapse.

President: If I may, I would recall the problem of 1950, when a line was drawn. I thought then, and I think today, that this invited aggression by North Korea. To be pragmatic, the Chinese and Russians are closer than we are, and once we withdraw it would be almost impossible for the United States to re-enter the situation in South Korea. We have forces there now that contribute to stability, involving the security of Japan. To pull out and then try to go back would be impossible.

Secretary: If we wish to abandon Korea, this would be an elegant way.

President: It would be a disastrous way. The security of Korea is important to Japan, as well as the United States. We should keep in touch.

If I should imagine a scenario for an American withdrawal, I suppose there would be great joy among some in the United States who do not understand the broad implications, or the basic aggressiveness of North Korea, or how this would weaken South Korea. The American public would never stand for the United States going back in.

ENERGY - MIDDLE EAST

Miki: Can we discuss energy?

President: I would be happy to.

Miki: Let me first review what I said at dinner last night, that Japan imports 73 percent of its oil from the Middle East.

Secretary: Does that include Iran?

Miki: Yes.

If there should be a fifth war in the Middle East, Japan's industry would likely be faced with a situation in which it would no longer be viable. For that reason, a Middle East peace settlement is absolutely vital to Japan. Any renewal of hostilities in that area would have an immediate impact on Japan's access to oil.

In this connection I wish to express my deep appreciation to the President and the Secretary of State for their continuing efforts on behalf of a peaceful settlement in the Middle East. Yu, Mr. President, and Mr. Secretary are the only two leaders who could possibly persuade Israel to accept a peaceful settlement. Viewed in realistic terms I feel that the step-by-step approach is the only one that offers any prospect for success. I sincerely hope you continue your efforts for which I offer my fullest support.

President: Thank you, Mr. Prime Minister. For many months now we have been spending a major share of our time on this problem. We feel that another step forward on the road to a peaceful settlement is essential. We do not preclude a settlement by the step we are now working, which is an integral part of an overall settlement. We do not draw any conclusion from the fact the parties have not yet reached a final answer between themselves.

This step relates to energy, because if there is no settlement, the possibility of war would be magnified. And if there is another war in the Middle East, oil would be embargoed, with the effects on Japan you have described, and on our own nation.

Hand-in-glove with our efforts to bring Egypt and Israel together, the United States, Japan and the other consuming nations should work closely together to try to develop a firm position among the consumers, as we have to meet further with the producers. It is essential that we achieve a high degree of unanimity to work out the problems of supply and price. If we go off in five different directions, we can't help but be victimized in both supply and price.

It is essential that the consumers work out definite financial arrangements, such as the proposed safety net, and exchange areas to share research.

We must prepare to meet any contingency that may arise from ill-advised actions by the producers. Your cooperation is highly essential, including the minimum or floor price. I know questions have been raised, but as a package this s essential.

Miki: To illustrate Japan's position let me explain that the price we pay for oil has increased four times this year over last, and we expect our oil bill this year to total 23 billion dollars. Because of the vital impact on Japan of another possible price rise, we wish to continue to discuss the MSP in an international forum.

In connection with the IEA decision that all members achieve a 60-day oil stockpile by the end of 1976, let me say that Japan now has a 68-day supply on hand. We wish to achieve further increase our capacity to achieve a 90-day supply within the period decided by the IEA.

President: How does this reserve compare with September, 1973?

Miyazawa: We had 58-day supply then.

President: You're better off now by ten days.

Speaking about the Middle East oil and energy, we are asking Egypt to do a great deal. It is essential that Egypt cooperate in the final step of our step-by-step approach. If we succeed, it means that Egypt will have made a considerable sacrifice, for they are under great pressure from the Soviets to refinance their obligations.

It is absolutely essential that Japan participate in the 100 million dollar arrangement as part of the whole picture. We are counting on you, Mr. Prime Minister. This involves Egypt, Israel, the Middle East and oil.

Secretary: It also strengthens the moderate forces.

Miki: In regard to this matter of 100 million dollars, I think we can provide 50 million dollars in commodity aid and 50 million dollars in project aid, which we have already pledged but not yet disbursed. Egypt is eager to have the latter 50 million dollars for projects such as water supply development. We would be prepared to participate by providing 100 million dollars on the above conditions.

Secretary: I'm not sure that breakdown is precisely what Egypt needs. Originally, the 100 million dollars we discussed (before the Ministry of Finance became active) could be used to trigger 20 million dollars from Europe, but if you give only 100 million dollars that you were going to give anyway, it will only be a bookkeeping transaction. I hope we can get back to the idea the Foreign Minister and I discussed in Paris.

Miki: Japan is in severe financial straits this year, facing a deficit equivalent to 10 billion dollars. If we were to give this aid, the Overseas Economic Cooperation Fund would have to do it out of its own pocket. I would like to be able to say "yes" but we are under some constraints. As a matter of fact, the government is thinking of floating a one hundred million dollar bond issue. With the OECF out of funds we have to attach conditions, however much we might wish to say "yes."

President: I know you understand our problems in this area. By way of thumbnail sketch we face a 60 billion dollar deficit this year at minimum, but with the actions of the Congress it may be closer to 70 billion. We have our problems too.

We must look at this from the Egyptian point of view, and you should too. They wish to free themselves from their relations with the Soviets, which would be in your benefit as well as ours. But they have a practical problem. They wish to cooperate with the United States in the situation that involves Israel, but to be very practical they need money. We and the Europeans will help Egypt, and Japan should too.

I recall talking to Prime Minister Tanaka last year about an aid commitment to South Vietnam. You don't have quite that commitment now, do you.

Miyazawa: (To Miki) We could disburse 50 million dollars in September.

President: It would be better for you to invest in Egypt than South Vietnam.

Miki: We could try to begin disbursing 50 million dollars in commodity aid in September. Depending on economic conditions as they develop later we might be able to provide the other 50 million dollars, but let us think it over.

Miyazawa: It may be less concessional.

President: On interest and payments.

Miki: Let us give it further thought.

Secretary: If you could help Egypt on an emergency basis, it would have an impact on the other Arab countries. Fifty million dollars is relatively small because if the radicals gain the upper hand in the Middle East, you will pay a lot more for oil and in other respects.

Miki: We will give this serious thought, because we recognize the need.

President: This is a very serious matter.

MUTUAL DEFENSE

Miki: I believe the Secretary of Defense plans to visit Japan toward the end of August. Perhaps we could discuss our mutual security arrangements with him then. As I said in the Diet, I believe Japan and the United States should consult on the possibility of establishing greater cooperation in defense. I believe the Secretary of Defense should discuss this matter with Defense Minister Sakata. I wish to see more consultation between our defense officials. There has been too little in the past, and I wish to see our consultations expanded within the framework of our present mutual security arrangements.

President: I share your views. I know you have certain problems domestic problems in this area. I will talk to the Secretary of Defense before he goes to Japan so he will, when he comes, reflect your desires as well as our interests. The opportunity he will have to consult on these matters will be of great importance to our participation and involvement in your security.

FOOD

Miki: We will be sending Minister of Agriculture and Forestry Shintaro Abe to Washington to discuss food matters. He will arrive August 11, and will wish to discuss food supply matters in the context of long-term contracts.

President: I would like to talk about one problem in agriculture. There is great pressure on me about your government's action to exclude American lemons (because of the fungicide we use).

Miki: This decision is under review, I understand, by the Food Hygiene Commission.

President: I would appreciate your cooperation in this matter. Our lemon growers are putting on a lot of pressure through the Congress, and whatever you do would have an impact there.

CONCLUDING REMARKS - PRESS

Miki: Within the time available I believe I have been able to raise the points of major interest to me, Mr. President...

Secretary: What should we say to the press?

Miki: (To Yasukawa and Yoshino) What do you think?

I would wish to say this has been an epoch-making Japan-US summit, which has further advanced Japan-US relations.

Yasukawa: Speaking in terms of a negative list I don't think we should mention discussing economic assistance to Egypt.

Secretary: I don't think we should mention the Four-Power Conference on Korea.

Yasukawa: We told the press yesterday that we discussed Korea. There's no need to say we discussed it again today.

President: You and I have developed a good personal rapport, Mr. Prime Minister, and we could say this will extend to the relations between the Foreign Minister and Secretary of State, and the Defense Minister and Secretary of Defense. We will remain in close contact, and will be constructive in our talks and actions. I think we should put out that kind of affirmative impression.

Miki: Put in a couple of sentences, I could say the President and I established a close personal rapport, based on mutual trust and understanding. In that sense this was an epoch-making Japan-US summit.

President: Mr. Prime Minister, I enjoyed these constructive talks, and look forward to future meetings, confident that our relations are in good shape.

Miki: I, too, have found these talks about our future relations constructive. Thank you, Mr. President.

1 Source: Ford Library, National Security Adviser, Memoranda of Conversation, Box 14. Top Secret. Drafted by Wickel. The conversation took place in the Oval Office. According to the President’s Daily Diary, the conversation took place in the Oval Office from 10:06 until 11:35 a.m. (Ford Library, Staff Secretary’s Office, President’s Daily Diary)

210. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, August 29, 1975, 11 a.m. 210. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, August 29, 1975, 11 a.m. 1

Washington, August 29, 1975, 11 a.m.

ASSISTANT SECRETARY OF DEFENSE
WASHINGTON, D.C. 20301

MEMORANDUM OF CONVERSATION
SUBJECT: SecDef Meeting with Japanese Prime Minister

Japan Participants

Prime Minister Takeo Miki

Deputy Foreign Minister, Keisuke Arita

Director General, American Affairs Bureau, Foreign Ministry, Toshio Yamazaki

Private Secretary to the Prime Minister, Hiroshi Kitamura

Director, Security Division, American Affairs Bureau, Foreign Ministry, Shintaro Yamashita

Interpreter, Sadaaki Numata

United States

Secretary of Defense, James R. Schlesinger

US Ambassador to Japan, James D. Hodgson

Principal Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense (ISA), Amos Jordan

Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense (ISA), Morton I. Abramowitz

Military Assistant to the Secretary of Defense, MG John A. Wickham, Jr., USA

Time: 1100, 29 August 1975
Place: Prime Minister's Office

Following introductions, the Prime Minister expressed his gratitude for his reception in the United States. Since the US and Japan account for 46% of the world's GNP the two countries must work together on a basis of friendship and trust to defend democracy. This theme has been the keynote of his policy. He had wanted his meetings in the United States to be candid and based on such mutual trust. On this score he was very satisfied. He concluded by asking SecDef to relay this to President Ford.

The Secretary responded that he would be delighted to do so. President Ford had welcomed Mr. Mikis August visit and felt a kinship and personal affection for Miki, in part because both of them have similar backgrounds. The August visit was very useful. With both common problems and major resources the two countries need to understand each other and better coordinate their efforts.

Mr. Miki thanked SecDef for his comments and expressed regret that his visit to Japan would be so short. In the past talks on security matters had been too infrequent; he hoped that henceforth there would be annual meetings. The Prime Minister asked for SecDef's views on the security situation on the Korean Peninsula, which was Japan's main security concern.

The Secretary agreed that we should institutionalize the security dialogue and go into greater depth. He acknowledged the understandable importance of Korea to Japan but pointed out that Korea was also important to world perceptions. Vietnam let loose many fears, especially in Korea. There was a need for the US to reiterate its commitments. This reiteration had a calming effect.

The Secretary continued by stating we need to maintain the military balance in Korea to deter the North Koreans. The South Koreans are prepared to try to deal on their own with the North Korean threat but need time to reach parity. However, they are not capable of dealing with the Soviets or Chinese; the US must provide them that assurance.

The Koreans are working hard to maintain their military preparedness. ROK equipment had become somewhat obsolete. While this is not of concern while the US remains in Korea, the ROK needs better equipment to be able to deal alone with the North. SecDef again expressed satisfaction with what he found in South Korea.

The Secretary thanked Mr. Miki for the communiqu (with President Ford in August) and its helpful and welcome reference to Korea. He said that Japanese economic assistance to the ROK — not military assistance is a continuing important contribution to stability in the ROK.

Mr. Miki announced that Japan reached the decision today (August 29) to agree to hold its ministerial meeting with the ROK on September 14th. The question of assistance will be discussed then. Mr. Miki agreed that Japan would help in fields other than military. He also felt that the strong US commitment in the SCM communiqu would greatly encourage the ROK.

The Prime Minister believed it most important in Korea both to maintain the military balance and to reduce North-South tensions and fears. While realistically no major conflict is likely, there is always, the danger of miscalculation because of the excessive fears on both sides. We need to take steps to reduce such fears; the Secretary's visit was very significant to the ROK side on this score. It is important to avoid miscalculation.

Mr. Miki continued that to promote greater trust between the US and Japan more consultation was essential. Without such trust the US-Japan security treaty could not function effectively. The Japanese people have complex feelings on security matters, but since Vietnam, people have been thinking more seriously about security problems. This welcome trend is visible in the Diet. Miki said he hoped the Secretary's discussions on security matters would be candid. Miki added that the two countries should not reach hasty conclusions but should have fresh discussions.

The Secretary agreed that we should do this and that the Prime Minister's words were welcome. SecDef assured Mr. Miki that we are well aware of the complex feelings of the Japanese people — they are understandable — and of Japan's constitutional restrictions. Because of this complexity it would be up to Japan to determine the appropriate pace of security discussions. He assured Miki that the US would assist in a quiet manner as the Japanese might want.

Mr. Miki raised the post-Vietnam situation in Asia. He understood that the US is reassessing Asian policy and hoped his observations would be useful. Asian countries are feeling the need to strengthen their internal system, stabilize their political situation, and improve the public welfare. Asian countries now recognize that their problems begin at home. Military security is important but cannot be considered in isolation. He does not feel that Asian countries are drifting away from the US and hopes the US would not make rash judgments on where they are going. He added that he hopes the US would encourage Asian countries to strengthen their internal situations. The US and Japan should act in a way to demonstrate support for Asian countries. Our cooperation is vital for Asia.

The Secretary agreed with these comments. Economic growth and public welfare are vital, but so is psychological support from outside. Korea, for example, had greatly prospered in the last 25 years but needs support from Japan and the US. Without such support Korea will be a small power in a hostile environment. This theme also applies for the rest of Asia. SecDef assured Mr. Miki we will not make rash judgments. Vietnam may have had some favorable aspects, since it brought recognition on the part of Asian countries of the need for domestic improvement and internal support. We also need to work toward improved economic conditions in Asian countries.

Mr. Miki said the Korean problem is unique given the nature of confrontation there. He reiterated that the security of the ROK and peace on the Peninsula are important to Japanese security. One can see this clearly from the map. He had pointed that out to the Opposition when they asked if he were going to Washington to reaffirm the Korea clause in the Nixon-Sato communique. Mr. Miki added that the geographic evidence is convincing, that we feel it in our bones.

The Secretary replied that there is nothing about a unified Korean state under Northern control — some 50 million plus people at the height of their revolutionary fervor — that should enhance Japan's feeling of security. SecDef said there is no question that US forces will remain in Korea and there will not be any Congressional attempts to bring about reductions before 1977. Even in the unlikely event of a change in administration, he did not expect any substantial change in our deployments or US policy. While there may be some minor changes in units, the general level of forces would be roughly the same.

The Secretary continued that Korea may be unique but there also seems to be other changes occurring in Asia. The Thai are becoming sensitive about North Vietnam intentions and appear to be changing their assessments about the US and US forces. The Philippines were also scared after Vietnam and their reaction has been somewhat of a political balancing act. SecDef said that the Philippines are not now really driven by a feeling of insecurity except for their problems in the South.

Mr. Miki responded that with respect to Korea he does not feel that the North would outright invade the South. The principal concern is to avoid domestic turmoil and dislocation in the South.

The Secretary agreed that as long as the military balance remains satisfactory, North Korea is not likely to miscalculate. The North is trying to foster internal disorder in the ROK. Internal Korean political weakness could be a danger. This is an area where the US and Japan fit in. Perhaps the ROK's greatest internal strength has been its thriving economy. The South Koreans need to prevent economic recession which in turn could affect political stability. Continued external support from Japan would help prevent such a recession.

The Secretary noted that there had been some mention of North-South rapprochement through an international conference. While detente in Korea certainly would be welcome, North Korea did not, however, accept the legitimacy of the South Korean state. As long as the North believes it has the right to take over the South, there seems little chance for improvement in North-South relations. In such circumstances it is doubtful that external forces can help bridge the gap.

Mr. Miki replied that he had discussed this matter with President Ford. He went on to note that the political system in South Korea raises problems for the Japanese Government.

SecDef said that to the extent we provide support to the ROK and reduce South Korean fears of abandonment, the pressures for domestic repression will be alleviated. The US is, like Japan, painfully aware of this problem.

Mr. Miki continued that Japan has had a problem on this score with the Korean CIA and the Kim Tae Chung case. While this had been difficult to cope with, Japan would maintain good relations with the ROK.

The Secretary closed by welcoming Mr. Mikis views and expressing appreciation for his personal welcome. He asked if there were anything specific that Mr. Miki wanted him to pursue in his talks in Japan.

Mr. Miki replied, "Be frank."

Morton I. Abramowitz [signed]
Deputy Assistant Secretary

1 Source: Washington National Records Center, OSD Files: FRC 330–78–0058, Japan, 091.112, 17 Sept 1975. Secret; Exdis. Prepared by Abramowitz. The conversation took place in the Prime Minister’s Office. A stamped message reads, “Dep. Sec. has seen.”

211. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, August 30, 1975, 1145. 211. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, August 30, 1975, 1145.1

Washington, August 30, 1975, 1145

ASSISTANT SECRETARY OF DEFENSE
WASHINGTON, D.C. 20301

17 SEP 1975

MEMORANDUM OF CONVERSATION
SUBJECT: Meeting with Japanese Minister for Foreign Affairs

Japan Participants

Minister for Foreign Affairs, Kiichi Miyazawa

Deputy Foreign Minister, Keisuke Arita

Director General, Asian Affairs Bureau, Masuo Takashima

Director General, American Affairs Bureau, Toshio Yamazaki

Private Secretary to the Foreign Minister, Tatsuo Arima

Director, Security Division, American Affairs Bureau, Shintaro Yamashita

Interpreter, Sadaaki Numata

United States

Secretary of Defense, James R. Schlesinger

US Ambassador to Japan, James D. Hodgson

Principal Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense (ISA), Amos Jordan

Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense (ISA), Morton I. Abramowitz

Deputy Assistant Secretary of State, Owen Zurhellen

Military Assistant to the Secretary of Defense, MG John A. Wickham, Jr., USA

Time: 1145, 30 August 1975
Place: Prime Minister's Residence, Likura House

Following an exchange of pleasantries and picture-taking, Foreign Minister Miyazawa asked the Secretary to discuss his visit to Korea.

The Secretary said that after Vietnam there was great trepidation in the ROK. The ROK also saw Vietnam leading to the continued growth of neo-isolationism in the US, which they believed would encourage military aggression by North Korea. SecDef thought that the basic confidence of the ROK had been restored. At the beginning of the Security Consultative Meeting the Koreans seemed a little uneasy, but at the end they became more confident and relatively relaxed.

The ROK is making a major effort to improve their armed forces. Training and morale are fairly good, but equipment is somewhat obsolete. The Koreans are trying to upgrade their forces. Although in the US the ROK is somewhat taken for granted, their self-help efforts should bring forth a good us response. SecDef concluded that he thought his trip had helped calm ROK apprehensions.

Mr. Miyazawa commented that the Secretary's statement about the possible use of tactical nuclear weapons was helpful in quieting ROK fears. When he visited Seoul in late July the Koreans were visibly relieved. The Secretary's visit also was a strong shot in the arm to ROK morale. He did not expect North Korea to take any chances.

The Secretary agreed that North Korea is not likely to start a war, the problem is that someday they expect to. Political problems in South Korea generate some loss of confidence. The ROK needs extensive support in the psychological realm. The ROK feels beleaguered and is worried about the Vietnam example. However, South Vietnam was never an effective society, while South Korea has national cohesion and will. Korea is more dynamic than Vietnam and the Koreans a different people. They should not be so obsessed about the South Vietnam example. Korea is a remarkable success story.

Mr. Miyazawa asked if SecDef knew what made Kim Il-sung run to Peking after Vietnam. The Secretary said that it appeared that Kim perceived a collapse of will on the part of the US. This generated in him hopes that it would spread to Korea. If he could receive Chinese support he might foster subversion in South Korea. Kim showed a real post-Vietnam euphoria in Peking.

Mr. Miyazawa replied that Kim should know Asians better than that. SecDef said that was probably doubtful since Kim is so isolated. We are an ogre to North Korea. North Korea is dominated by ideology and they paint the picture they would like to see. Kim is a driven Marxist who believed that after Vietnam his enemies were on the run.

Mr. Miyazawa said that if Kim is that way, this problem could occur again and we need to expose him to the real world. SecDef agreed this might be helpful but added that North Korea would not likely change while Kim runs the country. There is great room for improvement in North Korea perceptions.

Mr. Miyazawa observed that Japan and the ROK are neighbors but not really good friends. There are strains in the relationship. His visit to Seoul had some success in improving relations. Japan had moved to break the impasse between the two countries and is starting anew to try to improve relations. The ministerial meeting will take place in mid-September.

The Secretary said South Korea is a small, beleaguered country which needs external support. Its internal stability is dependent on the continuation of rapid rates OF economic growth. It would be exceedingly helpful if the Japanese Government would continue to help the ROK economically and politically. Conceivably, because of their unique relationship, Japan might give special preferences to the ROK as the Europeans had done in Africa.

The Foreign Minister said that Japan would like to spend more on Korean Infrastructure needs, but the Korean economy had already taken off. Concessional aid is not possible. Rather Korea needs business-type relationships and commercial channels. Japan would probably give Korea some official loans but economic relations will be pursued through normal commercial channels.

Mr. Schlesinger said that a stable relationship between Japan and the ROK is highly desirable in fostering political stability in South Korea. A reduction in Korean exports to Japan, leading to a fall-off in economic performance, could have repercussions on ROK political stability. Stability in the ROK is important to Japan because of obvious security considerations.

Mr. Miyazawa said the Opposition was opposed to the GOJ helping the ROK. They always asked how the GOJ could aid such a dictatorial government. Miyazawa's invariable reply was that the GOJ was trying to help the Korean people. He added that there is much confusion in Japan on this subject.

SecDef observed that this is perhaps natural and understandable but not necessarily correct. If the ROK Government lacks external support, it would be less inclined to reduce the degree of authoritarianism. If we and Japan deny external support to the Koreans, it would seriously affect the ROK's internal political situation.

Mr. Miyazawa said that depended on whether one was thinking short or long range.

The Secretary said that despite the absence of civil liberties as we knew them, South Korea still had many elements of a free society. His press conference in Seoul was pretty open, not like ones in Yugoslavia, Spain or East Germany. Korea had achieved much in a very brief time and under difficult conditions. The situation in the South is not too bad, although obviously not what we desire. Certainly conditions are not bad if we compare them with the North.

Mr. Miyazawa agreed that there is no question about greater North Korean repression.

SecDef observed that at present Japan is now the only real democracy in Asia. We need to better convey to the press realistic yardsticks in measuring Asian countries. One of America's problems in Vietnam was that the US press was looking at the situation not in the light of realistic alternatives but in abstract concepts. There was a high degree of personal freedom in South Vietnam. The press needed to be more politically realistic on this point.

Mr. Miyazawa stated that we need to avoid the collapse of the Pak government. There was no such danger (oil collapse) in the North where the concept or freedom does not exist.

The Secretary said there were dilemmas in the democratic process. We need to maintain our goals but we have to be judicious in attaining them.

Mr. Miyazawa thought that President Pak could be endangered either by a recession or prosperity. Kim Il-sung's policies, however, have certainly been a help to Pak.

The Secretary replied that it is necessary to maintain a high rate of economic growth in South Korea. He was impressed with the Korean standard of living, adding they are indeed in the takeoff period.

Mr. Miyazawa agreed that the ROK had taken off. Despite the oil crisis he was sure that economic growth would again pick up.

The Secretary observed that the threat from the North is politically helpful to Pak. The strength and imminence of the threat is exaggerated by the ROK Government. However, the ROK has day-to-day pressures we do not feel such as infiltration and tunneling, which are symptomatic and indicative of a continuing threat. Given all these things, as well as the personal tragedies he had suffered because of the North, it is no wonder that President Pak is concerned about security.

Mr. Miyazawa asked for the Secretary's thoughts on the reasons for the tunnels.

The Secretary replied that they would allow regimental size forces to get behind the ROK lines in an outright conflict. He said Korea probably exaggerates the number of men that can go through the tunnels, but units the size of regiments would certainly be disruptive to ROK defenses.

Mr. Miyazawa thought that Pak had changed from early days. He had become a victim of his own power and had grown isolated. Few dared to tell him the truth. Noting that Pak saw some US Congressmen who spoke their minds, he asked if people could get through to Pak to give him a better sense of reality.

The Secretary asked Mr. Miyazawa if he had any suggestions on this point. He noted that in this case truth would probably come largely from abroad. But Pak must have confidence in any nation telling him unpalatable things.

Mr. Miyazawa asked how the ROK compared to the North in air power.

The Secretary replied that the ROK is inferior. South Korean equipment is somewhat obsolete. The ROK also has a small defense industry, while North Korea has a substantial one which could build tanks and submarines. He cautioned, however, not to exaggerate ROK vulnerabilities although the ROK is somewhat inferior in air and naval forces. He added that if the ROK were not able to rely on the US, perhaps some of these deficiencies might be significant. At the SCM the Secretary had stressed the complementarity of US-ROK forces.

Mr. Miyazawa then turned the talk to UN resolutions, adding that the resolutions of both sides seem to have some common points: they both need Security Council approval and call for talks between the US, North Korea and other parties. Perhaps some way could be found of bringing them together, although the North Korean resolution is unrealistic.

The Secretary noted that the Japanese Government would like to promote a better dialogue between North and South. South Korea has made serious efforts to that end but with no response. North Korea claims it is the only legitimate government on the Peninsula. As long as the North maintains that attitude, there is not much chance for a genuine dialogue between the two. The Secretary suggested that direct talks between the US and North Korea would only be interpreted as undermining South Korea. Clearly we do not want this. North Korea must be willing to accept the legitimacy of South Korea or there is no basis for detente. North Korea apparently has a different notion of what detente means.

Mr. Miyazawa said that in the Military Armistice Commission there is no place for the ROK per se, the ROK not being a signatory to the Armistice. While North Korea did recognize the ROK in the 1972 talks, North Korea is the only Korean party to the Armistice. That appears to be a basis for their logic.

The Secretary continued that the logic of their position is to carefully select those points that buttress them as the only legal government in Korea. We should obviously not support them in such an effort.

Mr. Miyazawa said that he had instructed the Japanese Ambassador at the UN to find out the real intent of the North Korean resolution, adding that perhaps there is an opportunity for a genuine dialogue.

The Secretary said the Japanese could sound them out, but he would not be too surprised if they find that the North really intends what it professes. What the North apparently is now aiming for is to withdraw our legitimacy. While that will not affect our deployments in Korea, the North hopes it will weaken our underpinnings. That seems to be their simple and straight forward objective.

The group then went to lunch.

1 Source: Ford Library, National Security Adviser, Presidential Country Files for East Asia and the Pacific, Box 7, Country File, Japan [9]. Secret; Exdis. The meeting was held at the Prime Minister’s residence.

212. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to President Ford, Washington, September 19, 1975. 212. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to President Ford, Washington, September 19, 1975.1

Washington, September 19, 1975

MEMORANDUM
THE WHITE HOUSE
WASHINGTON

September 19, 1975

MEMORANDUM FOR: THE PRESIDENT
FROM: HENRY A. KISSINGER [HK initialed]
SUBJECT: U.S.-Japan Space Cooperation

NASA has expressed concern that the continuing implementation of the 1969 Space Agreement with Japan will lead to the transfer of sufficient U.S. technology to assist Japan in becoming a viable competitor with the U.S. in the space hardware and launch service market. The Under Secretaries Committee (USC) has assessed this problem and considered our objectives and obligations under the 1969 Agreement (Tab B).

The 1969 Agreement permitted U.S. industry to provide to Japan, on a commercial basis, technology for domestic production of space launching vehicles and communications and other satellites for peaceful applications. The level of launch vehicle technology to be made available was specified in the agreement as that of NASA's Thor Delta. No specific level of satellite technology was identified in the agreement.

The agreement has facilitated significant sales of hardware, technology, and related services by U.S. industry to Japan and has served cur political interests. However, as implementation of the agreement has proceeded, the Japanese have pressed for increasingly advanced levels of technology beyond what we consider required by the agreement. To accede fully to Japanese requests could speed up Japan's emergence as a very able competitor in the space market.

A moderate tapering off of the availability of U.S. hardware and technology might well be viewed by the Japanese as inevitable as the U.S. obligations under the treaty are fulfilled. The tapering off would be made more acceptable by continuing assurances that existing U.S. launch policies would provide launch support for their space programs.

The USC has made the following recommendations, which I support.

A. We should allow the 1969 agreement to run its course on the following basis: 1. As required by the agreement, we would allow export of launcher manufacturing technology up to the level of the Thor Delta which was operational at the time the 1969 agreement was concluded (the so-called Delta 58). Guidance and re-entry technology would be excluded.

2. We would seek to limit exports of satellite technology to the level of that in orbit in 1969. NASA will develop appropriate technical criteria to provide a basis for a case-by-case review of export requests.

B. Any export requests going beyond the level of technology in orbit in 1969 as defined above would be evaluated on the basis of our general policy on providing space launching and technology assistance to other countries or would become the subject of a new agreement. Minor requests would be processed through normal export licensing procedures. Restrictions would continue to be imposed on the transfer of hardware and technology by Japan to third parties, and we would require that Japan not provide launch services to third parties without our approval. Any requirement for recoupment (for example, of any U.S. investment in the research and development involved) would be determined by the U.S. policy in force at the time a contract was signed.

The requirement for prior approval of launchings for third parties would assist in safeguarding NASA's interest in providing launch services to other countries. The Japanese would probably regard this as an acceptable quid pro quo. The fact that we have not provided such extensive assistance to the space launcher program of other countries should preclude possible misinterpretation of the requirement as being discriminatory. It would, however, be important to put the matter to the Japanese in a manner which would not arouse their sensitivities. State and NASA would develop a suitable approach.

RECOMMENDATION

That you approve the above recommendations as embodied in the NSDM at Tab A.

APPROVE [GRF initialed]
DISAPPROVE

1 Source: Ford Library, NSC Institutional Files (H-Files), Box H–61, NSDM 306, U.S.-Japan Space Cooperation. Confidential. Sent for action. The President initialed the “Approve” option, and the recommendations became NSDM 306 on September 24. (ibid., Box H–69, NSDM Originals (2 of 2), NSDM 301-NSDM 315). The report of the Under Secretaries Committee is attached but not published. It arrived under a covering memorandum, May 5, by Ingersoll.

213. Memorandum From the Deputy Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs (Scowcroft) to President Ford, Washington, October 19, 1975. 213. Memorandum From the Deputy Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs (Scowcroft) to President Ford, Washington, October 19, 1975.1

Washington, October 19, 1975

THE WHITE HOUSE
WASHINGTON

October 19, 1975

MEMORANDUM FOR: THE PRESIDENT
FROM: BRENT SCOWCROFT [BS initialed]

The following is a report from Secretary Kissinger of his conversations with the Japanese: 1. I had a very productive and cordial one hour forty minute working breakfast with Japanese Foreign Minister Miyazawa this morning. The warmth and candor of the session once again demonstrated that our bilateral relations are in excellent shape, as well as reflecting greater self-assurance on the part of the Japanese and Miyazawa personally.

2. He began with effusive thanks for the American reception of the Emperor and emphasized that your personal style was a major factor. I replied that the interest and receptivity of the American public was due to their high regard for Japan and the solid state of our relationship.

3. I previewed your trip and mine to China, reiterating their desire to receive you whether or not there is progress on Taiwan. He said that they had advanced with the Chinese on their peace and friendship treaty negotiations; the Japanese were now searching for language that would oppose hegemony, as the Chinese want, without this being directed against particular countries or implying joint action. I explained our policy toward the Soviets as I have also explained it to the Chinese, namely that we must demonstrate to the American people that all peaceful routes are being explored in order to rally domestic support for resistance to Soviet pressures when required.

4. On Korea, I attempted to cool off Japanese urging of our establishing bilateral contacts with North Korea. I pointed out that reports to this effect (the Japanese press has been alive with speculation) could undermine our position at the United Nations. We compared voting estimates on the New York situation, agreeing that we probably have the votes to pass our resolution but not to defeat the hostile resolution. I urged intensified Japanese efforts on this, and we are redoubling our own. I said that after the UN vote we would explore possible forums on the Korean question and were flexible on details except the requirement that South Korea be present.

5. The Japanese agreed with us that Canada should be at the Economic Summit. I said we would go back to Giscard on this now that he has left Moscow.

6. Miyazawa was very relaxed about our impending grain deal with the Soviets, fully understanding that it was to their advantage that we control the extreme yearly fluctuations in Soviet demand on our market. I reiterated Secretary Butz's assurances to the Japanese on meeting their traditional requirements.

7. The Japanese confirmed that they would be increasing their oil imports from China in order to diversify their sources. It would remain a small percentage of their requirements, however, because of its paraffin content. It would constitute about 10 percent of China's production and the bulk of its exports.

8. We also touched briefly on the Middle East and Southeast Asia where our perceptions were largely similar.

9. On my way back from China, I will be seeing Prime Minister Miki and Miyazawa, as well as Deputy Prime Minister Fukuda and Finance Minister Ohira.

1 Source: Ford Library, National Security Adviser, Trip Briefing Books and Cables for HAK, Kissinger Trip File, Box 15, 10/19–23/75, People’s Republic of China, TOSEC (5). Secret. Ford initialed this memorandum. A memorandum of conversation of Kissinger’s meeting is in National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy Files, P-820123–2431. Kissinger stopped in Tokyo en route to a meeting with Mao in Beijing.

214. Memorandum of Conversation, Tokyo, October 24, 1975, 8 a.m. 214. Memorandum of Conversation, Tokyo, October 24, 1975, 8 a.m. 1

Tokyo, October 24, 1975, 8 a.m.

DEPARTMENT OF STATE
Memorandum of Conversation

DATE: October 24, 1975
PLACE: Prime Minister's Official Residence, Tokyo, 8:00 a.m.

SUBJECT: China Trip and Economic Summit

PARTICIPANTS:

Japanese

Takeo Miki, Prime Minister

Keosile Arita, Deputy Vice Minister

Toshio Yamazaki, Director General, American Affairs Bureau

United States

The Secretary

James D. Hodgson, American Ambassador to Japan

Helmut Sonnenfeldt, Counselor, Department of State

Winston Lord, Director, Policy Planning staff

William H. Gleysteen, Jr., Deputy Assistant Secretary, EA (notetaker)

COPIES TO: S (Adams, Bremer), S/S, WH (Rodman)

Miki: We will have to talk as we eat. I have already heard the gist of your discussion last night with Foreign Minister Miyazawa. I am interested in the leadership question in China, also the Soviet Union. I would have thought you would have seen Chou En-lai.

The Secretary: No recent visitor has seen Chou. They told me he was too ill.

Miki: There are rumors of a change in the Soviet leadership affecting Brezhnev and Kosygin. Perhaps new leaders are taking over from the old. Perhaps this will lead to changes in the Sino/Soviet situation, but not in the immediate future.

The Secretary: In China there was absolutely no sign of change in their attitude toward the Russians. Teng was as hard and violent toward the Soviets as Chou — more so. We have no idea who will come into power after Mao.

Miki: What will happen between you and the Chinese during the President's visit?

The Secretary: One of our correspondents, Mr. Growald of UPI, has said that Mao lectured me about the dangers of detente. I don't know how he would have known. Publicly, before I went to China, I said we did not expect spectacular events to come out of the President's visit. The only one that could, we don't want.

Miki: You discussed China and Korea with the Foreign Minister, and although I may come back to it, I would like to touch on other things. Concerning the summit conference, on the one hand we don't expect a great deal in the way of major results. At the same time, it should not be a failure. We wish to cooperate with the United States. How do you see the conference?

The Secretary: Quite frankly, we have just got started in our preparations. We are planning meetings next week. We have reached no final conclusion. I think the key issues for us will be energy, monetary matters, financial matters, economic recovery, North/South relations, and trade questions.

Hodgson: What subjects look most promising from Japan's viewpoint?

Miki: Japan is to lead off the trade discussion. We are also interested in monetary, energy, and economic recovery matters. I am personally greatly interested in the North/South problem.

The Secretary: Who leads off on the North/South problem?

Lord: England.

Miki: We have been studying your North/South suggestions at the Special Session of the UN General Assembly. I feel that the industrial nations should work out some kind of assistance proposals.

The Secretary: Do you think it will be possible to work out specific agreements at this meeting?

Miki: It is difficult to tell. Developed countries alone can't work out agreements. We must find a way where both the developed and underdeveloped countries work together.

The Secretary: We are somewhat torn. If we try to be too specific at the Economic Summit, we will spend all our time on the communiqué, which would be a rather difficult process.

Miki: Do you envisage an actual document?

The Secretary: What do you think?

Miki: I personally feel we might try for a declaration type of document rather than a detailed document.

The Secretary: Yes, I agree.

Miki: I would like to study North/South relations to see how we could cooperate. In Japan we are still suffering from a stagnating economy although our inflation is down. I understand the US economy is moving up.

The Secretary: That is correct. But our newspapers have a vested interest in seeing that it is down.

Miki: What is the direction of the economy?

The Secretary: There has been a big upturn, and our experts believe it will continue. Our biggest problem is psychological. But all indicators — our GNP and others — are up; unemployment is down, although still too high. Opponents of the Administration and the press have a vested interest in playing up the gap, which may in turn adversely affect the economy.

Miki: We fear a contraction in the world economy. We should seek ways to prevent this from happening.

We are trying to study ways of expanding the world economy. Are there ways the Free World or industrialized countries can cooperate?

The Secretary: I know the French and the Germans are extremely interested.

Miki: Will there by any new energy proposals?

The Secretary: I don't think so. But we are eager to get the IEA program moving.

Hodgson: Would the Summit really be a good forum for energy discussions?

The Secretary: It will only last two days, and there will be six leaders, each with an ego that is not small. They must all speak. Any energy proposals would be better at the Consumer/Producer Meeting.

Miki: Have you had any discussions with the French regarding the Consumer/Producer Meeting?

The Secretary: Yes, and it is going rather well. We should consult with you. We don't want any surprises. Mr. Yeo will be here next week from our Treasury Department.

Miki: Do you feel, all in all, that there will be no heated discussion about anything at the Summit?

The Secretary: I think it will be a harmonious Summit, unless you have different plans. (Laughter)

Miki: For our part, we will step up preparations to make it successful. We will cooperate with you. I hope you will…

The Secretary: We will start contact with you next week. Mr. Sonnenfeldt is coordinating things on our side.

Miki: Do you have any suggestions for us?

The Secretary: I am not ready at this time with any suggestions. I have asked for papers so that I could read them on my way home to Washington. Then next week we will have meetings. Since we are trying to work by consensus, (laughter) we must use consensus.

Miki: I would appreciate any suggestions.

Did you come across any issues during your China visit where you found that the Chinese and your positions differed strongly?

The Secretary: They have stated publicly that they oppose our Soviet policy but it is a fact that most of our agreements with the Soviet Union were reached from 1971 to 1973, when our relations with the Chinese were best. Since there have been few agreements with the Soviets since that time, it is possible the Chinese would be less vocal now if they were more concerned about the state of our relations with the USSR. But Peking can't determine with whom we will have relations. The same thing is true with Moscow.

Miki: Your comment about the role of third countries in determining your policy reminds me of our problem with the Chinese regarding hegemony. My feeling is that so long as hegemony means imposing one's will by preponderance of power or blackmail, it is universally agreed that it goes against peace. At the same time, opposition to hegemony should not be directed at any third country. We also should not be asked to take joint action against it.

The Secretary: As you know, in the Shanghai Communiqué we had a clause on hegemony, but it did not call for joint action with China. We would not participate in any arrangement that called for joint action with China.

Miki: Miyazawa discussed this with Foreign Minister Chiao in New York. Both sides are studying the matter; we hope to resolve it.

Is the situation in China difficult for major decisions?

The Secretary: That is our impression. The Chinese are not in a position to make major new departures.

Miki: Is Teng the heir apparent?

The Secretary: He is the dominant personality and heir to Chou. Chou no longer plays a significant role. After Mao dies, nobody knows, including the Chinese, what will happen. If there are people ambitious to succeed him, they would be wise to hide their ambitions while Mao is still alive. For example, while Khrushchev was around, Brezhnev did not reveal his ambitions. Of course, there could be a coup. These days we are always being criticized for our inability to predict coups.

Miki: You have a very active US intelligence organization.

The Secretary: We did until Congress got hold of it. Now we have total confession.

Miki: On Korea, is there any way to bring the North Koreans into the framework of our concerted efforts?

The Secretary: As soon as the South Koreans are included. It would be dangerous to include North Korea in talks without the South Koreans. It would give the South Koreans second-class status. I explained to the Foreign Minister that we would accept any forum three, four, six, or even eight countries to participate. We are open-minded.

Miki: Three years ago, the North/South talks took place in Korea. Is there any way we can encourage this again?

The Secretary: We favor such talks.

Miki: Did you talk to the Chinese about the Korean problem?

The Secretary: Yes, I did. The Chinese did not accept or reject my views. They didn't seem to wish to be actively involved in Korean matters. I found them more moderate than in some of our previous meetings. They seemed to take the position that it was a problem to be settled by the Koreans themselves, or by the United States and the Koreans, or by anybody else and the Koreans.

Miki: Because they want to maintain the status quo?

The Secretary: My impression is that they want the status quo, but not the responsibility of maintaining it, and above all they don't want the responsibility for bringing about a new status quo. They made no mention really of the UN Command. Incidentally, I told Miyazawa that I tried to get the Chinese to vote against the Algerian Resolution. (Laughter)

Miki: Then we can't expect a Chinese initiative?

The Secretary: The Chinese are quite willing to continue the status quo. They want no responsibility for it or for changing it. They seem to have little passion about the Korean problem. We took the initiative. They say we are too nervous.

Miki: What about Chinese/North Korean relations?

The Secretary: They didn't talk with affection. They didn't say anything. I told them that ideological victories can cause political setbacks. They didn't argue.

Miki: Now about Hanoi?

The Secretary: Their relations are very cool. They never contradict you when you criticize Hanoi. They seem eager to strengthen their relations with Cambodia.

Miki: How about trade progress?

The Secretary: It will be very marginal, if at all.

Miki: Thank you so much for this talk. I wish to convey to President Ford my thanks for the warm reception given to the Emperor and Empress. Their visit was the highest possible tribute to our friendship.

The Secretary: I agree. I will pass on your appreciation to the President.

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy Files, P–820123–2324. Secret; Nodis. The meeting was held at the Prime Minister’s Official Residence. Drafted by Gleysteen and approved by Covey. On October 23, Kissinger met in Tokyo with Miyazawa, who primarily asked Kissinger questions about his trip to Beijing; a memorandum of conversation is ibid., P–820123–2455.

215. Memorandum of Conversation, Tokyo, December 8, 1975, 8:30 a.m. 215. Memorandum of Conversation, Tokyo, December 8, 1975, 8:30 a.m. 1

Tokyo, December 8, 1975, 8:30 a.m.

DEPARTMENT OF STATE
Memorandum of Conversation

DATE: December 8, 1975
PLACE: Foreign Ministry
Guest House, Tokyo
Time: 8:30 A.M.

SUBJECT: President Ford's Visit to China, Indonesia, and the Philippines

PARTICIPANTS:

Japan

Kiichi MIYAZAWA, Foreign Minister

Shoji SATO, Vice Foreign Minister

Keisuke ARITA, Deputy Vice Minister

Hiroshi UCHIDA, Chief of Protocol

Toshio YAMAZAKI, Director General, American Affairs

Yosuke NAKAE, Deputy Director General

Hiroaki FUJII, Director, First North American Affairs Div.

Tatsuo ARIMA, Foreign Minister's Private Secretary

Sadaaki NUMATA, Deputy Director, First North American Affairs Division (Notetaker)

United States

The Secretary

Joseph J. Sisco, Under Secretary for Political Affairs

James D. Hodgson, American Ambassador to Japan

Philip C. Habib, Assistant Secretary, EA

Winston Lord, Director, Policy Planning Staff, S/P

William H. Gleysteen, Jr., Deputy Assistant Secretary, EA (Notetaker)

COPIES TO: S (Barbian), S/S, WH(Rodman)

The Secretary: (Responding to a comment by the Foreign Minister that it was sensible to include Indonesia and the Philippines on the itinerary of the President) The Chinese like to give the impression of being a central kingdom with people coming from all over the world to pay tribute. The President's stopovers in Jakarta and Manila helped offset this.

Miyazawa: I assume Marcos and Suharto posed no real problems for you. It's nice to see Mr. Sisco. I didn't know he was along.

The Secretary: I brought Sisco along because I didn't dare leave him at home. If I left him at home, I might have found him in my office when I got back. You may not know it, but he is always in my office measuring the rug. (Laughter)

I want to say Mr. Foreign Minister that our special relations with Japan are reflected by the fact that you are the only country that our distinguished Ambassador to the United Nations has failed to attack so far.

Miyazawa: On the question of the recent racist resolution in the General Assembly, I should note that it did not have the same significance for us that it did for the United States and Europe so we decided — perhaps this did not please you to abstain. There is no intensity of feeling on the issue here in Japan.

The Secretary: We didn't like the resolution as you know. But, it hasn't affected our relationship.

Miyazawa: In the preparatory talks in London before our meetings in Rambouillet, I discovered that the Europeans have very strong feelings about the matter.

The Secretary: We are continuing to work with the Arabs.

(The group moved to the breakfast room.)

Are you going to Paris? After I get back to Washington, I will only stay there about 40 hours; then I will go to the NATO Meeting; then to London for a Chiefs of Mission Meeting; and then to the CIEC in Paris.

Habib: This is such a hard schedule that we offered the Secretary a way of easing the pressure by having someone else come to Japan to brief you. But he insisted he should come himself.

The Secretary: I never really thought seriously about skipping this stopover in Japan. My real problem is that I can't afford to bring Nancy here. She has fallen in love with Japan and if she continues to come, it will be a financial disaster for me. She has redecorated our house so that it is entirely filled with Japanese objects except for one Chinese piece. Seriously though, I am extremely fond of Japanese art. I like it better than Chinese. It is more subtle; it has such an economy of strokes, and it makes such Effective use of space.

Mr. Minister, given my own problems in Washington, I have been admiring your skill in handling the Diet.

Miyazawa: Actually I have had real problems in the Diet. There has been a rather serious complaint about my handling of Korean matters. The left wing of the Japan Socialist Party has attacked me concerning our dealings with the Korean Government over disposition of the man who allegedly abducted Kim Dae Jung. They have brought what amounts to a sort of contempt of Congress charge against me.

Habib: If the Koreans jail Kim, will it reopen the issue in Japan?

Miyazawa: There are two aspects to the Kim matter. The Korean Government and the Japanese Government accept the official line concerning the Kim affair, but the opposition here in Japan does not.

Habib: What will be the effect if Kim is jailed?

The Secretary: Habib, do you want to run Korean internal affairs?

Miyazawa: Has Kim been invited to visit the United States?

Habib: He has invitations but can't accept them.

Miyazawa: Is it that he doesn't want to go, or that he can't go?

Habib: The problem has fluctuated; sometimes Kim doesn't want to go, other times he can't go. He can't go while he's on trial.

The Secretary: Habib brought up this issue because the EA Bureau likes to change the forms of governments.

Habib: This is an issue we will leave with Japan.

Miyazawa: There is a peculiar complex in Japan regarding South Koreans, and Koreans generally. I am ashamed of it. It reflects a mutual distrust. It makes relations somewhat difficult.

The Secretary: Does this problem also extend to the North Koreans?

Miyazawa: Yes. But not as much, perhaps because the North Koreans are not so close to us. The difficulty with the South Koreans is obviously affected by the intimacy of our relations. The South Koreans get news about Japan at almost the same time as we Japanese. They make judgments on the same basis as we do. On the other hand, we do not get their news. In any case, we don't pay any attention to it and it causes problems.

Regarding the trip to China, our basic understanding is that you adopted a reasonable position in Peking, that the Chinese seem to have responded in a reasonable way, and that the trip went well.

The Secretary: That is substantially correct. One of our greatest problems is our difficulty with the press in the United States. It is so bad that it reminds me of something I told someone else the other day. I said that if the press were discussing the 1901 Russo/German alliance, they would have reported it as a failure because no exchange of paper took place. (Laughter on the American side)

On the whole, our discussions in Peking this time were more detailed than President Nixon's discussions in 1972. There was no spectacular development, but the only possible spectacular issue is Taiwan. I told you the last time I was here that we have exhausted our quota of countries we can give up this year. We indicated our need to be cautious toward normalization to the Chinese and they understood.

The Chinese want us to follow the Japanese model for normalization of our relations. This may not be entirely satisfactory for us. All in all, relatively little time was spent on Taiwan and the discussion was non-contentious. Most of the time was spent on international issues. We also touched on some US/PRC bilateral matters in addition to normalization. I think you must have seen the formula I used in Peking to describe our relations; that our relations are good and will be gradually getting better. I used this with the approval of the Chinese. Eighty percent of the discussions were international. The atmosphere was cordial; there was less discussion of detente than the press reported. In fact, there was little talk of detente beyond the exchanges in the toasts.

Lord: Even the toast was less pointed than last time.

Miyazawa: Of course the Chinese had already discussed detente with you in October and perhaps with President Ford they wished to avoid an ideological dispute. I think the President's personality may also have encouraged them to avoid arguments.

The Secretary: You mean to say that my personality encourages arguments?(Laughter) I am reminded of Gregory Peck in the movie "Gunfighter." Have you seen this movie?

Miyazawa: I know Gregory Peck but...

The Secretary: The movie is about a hero who is forced to fight on even when he doesn't want to because his rivals force him to. Finally, one of them shoots him in the back. When I get shot in the back, I am sure it will be by an American.

Miyazawa: Will it be with two or three bullets? (Laughter)

We have had an overdose of shocking news in recent years. No news is now good news referring to the lack of a communiqué and drama from the President's trip to China.

The Secretary: I think we have developed a clear understanding with the Chinese of our respective positions and what we can do in parallel. We had fairly cool discussions regarding our policies toward the Soviet Union. We made clear we will resist any massive Soviet moves to expand their influence. If the Chinese are right in their view of detente, it will be all right because we are prepared to resist. If the Chinese are wrong, then the only loss will be that lots of words were exchanged between us and the Chinese. If a conflict proves inevitable, a Soviet attack on Europe is less likely than an attack on China. Moreover, I don't think any attack is likely, at least for the next three or four years. After that, there will be new leaders in China and the Soviet Union, and I don't know what the prospect will be. This leadership referring to the Soviets won't go to war easily. The Chinese are trying to create a balance of power around the Soviet Union. We don't disagree with them; we agree.

Miyazawa: Is the Chinese goal still world revolution?

The Secretary: They are very determined people, but they don't have the means. They don't necessarily believe they should attack other countries with 50 divisions. They think that being Chinese they are morally superior and that as revolutionaries the world will radiate Chinese influence. Their sense of superiority allows them to relax and wait for others to be drawn in. The Russians are quite different. The Russian style has never attracted others. They know they are not lovable. Thus, the Russians require force for expansion. Yet even in Russia one has to balance the thrust of ideology against force. For example, Stalin was very ideological but he was weak and thus cautious. The present group is less ideological but they are strong. They will get more aggressive when they complete their growth.

Miyazawa: How about the Chinese?

The Secretary: The Chinese will also.

Miyazawa: Then detente will have to be revised.

The Secretary: Detente is misunderstood. We are trying to avoid a repetition of the impact of our Viet-Nam experience. We are trying to position ourselves on the left so we are in a position to fight the Communists. The fools who attack our policy of detente create domestic weakness. Senator Jackson is a fool. If we followed his policy, we would he attacked within a year for not pursuing peace.

Miyazawa: We understand correctly about detente. Do you think "basket three" is an essential part of detente? Might it help undermine Soviet strength in Eastern Europe? Some people don't.

The Secretary: Do you believe it will?

Miyazawa: I am skeptical

The Secretary: It is childish to think you can undermine a government without that government noticing it. This is especially true of Bolsheviks who specialize in seizing and holding power. The Chinese are cautious about cultural contacts. Did I tell you what I told them about cultural contacts? I told them that China had managed to survive for several thousand years without cultural contact with the United States and I thought that they could go on somewhat longer without help from us in this field. (Laughter)

Miyazawa: Our trade and other contacts with the Communist countries may help discourage war."Basket three" is another matter.

The Secretary: Trade, including grain sales, gives us leverage against the soviets. We can stop it in times of crisis. "Basket three" is good domestically bit it is without foreign policy significance.

Miyazawa: Giscard said that we should not deceive the world again the way we did in Helsinki.

The Secretary: "Basket three" is a posture for governments to strike with their own populations. It has no foreign policy significance. People forget that in Hitler's Germany there were still liberal newspapers. Totalitarian regimes can control their societies despite contact with the outside. I remember going down to buy newspapers in Germany. That's the way I learned my English. Don't make the expected remark!

Hodgson: That explains a lot. (Laughter)

The Secretary: I do not read English with a German accent. (More laughter)

Miyazawa: Are there any hints of Chinese movements toward revisionism? Can you see it in the way they dress, for example?

The Secretary: Except for Mrs. Chiao Kuan-hua, there is no sign. They are interested in increasing oil exports, but I don't think it revisionism can happen wile Mao is alive.

Miyazawa: Does Mao still have that type of grip?

The Secretary: I don't understand how he does it but his control is still there. Physically he seemed in better shape this time than last time.

Miyazawa: Recently the Chinese proposed to buy steel for oil. Such an arrangement cannot be concluded unless the payments in oil are spread over a number of years. In effect, the Chinese are asking for credit. They say they object to loans out credit seems acceptable. I think the Chinese are bound to become engaged to some extent in the capitalist structure.

The Secretary: Good point. I agree they are thinking a little more about the world economy. They did raise with us certain international economic issues, unlike in the past.

Miyazawa: Did you see Li Hsien-nien?

The Secretary: Yes.

Miyazawa: Where does Teng get his power?

The Secretary: I don't know. He strikes me as more secure. He is quite able and skillful. I was really impressed by him this time. He seemed quite independent; even when Mao was present he demonstrated some independence. He talked mare than before in the presence of Mao. I don't know if you noticed, but the Communiqué mentioned that in the conversation between Mao and Ford, Teng and I participated. This is an unusual mention.

Miyazawa: Teng's position as heir apparent seems to be consolidating.

The Secretary: I am not so sure. Teng has control now. But, nobody knows who will eventually emerge.

Miyazawa: It is probably even beyond the control of Mao.

The Secretary: That would be my reading of history. One cannot clearly foresee now who will be the successor. In these circumstances, in the Soviet Union or China, the Siscos hide their ambition. I keep a balance of power among the applicants for my job. I agree that today in China the successor seems likely to be Teng. Yet, it is not self-evident that he will be the successor. It was interesting that Madame Mao came to shake hands but did not stay at the welcoming banquet.

Miyazawa: Was there any cultural entertainment?

The Secretary: The press focused on my sleeping during the entertainment during the Nixon visit. (Laughter) Schmidt told me that he also slept during the cultural entertainment and to make himself more comfortable, he loosened his belt. After it was all over, he stood up and his pants fell down (Laughter)

Miyazawa: Schmidt told me quite a bit about his visit to China, about Mao's mumbling, and so on.

The Secretary: This time his articulation was better.

Miyazawa: Did Lord or Gleysteen understand Mao?

The secretary: Gleysteen was not there. Only the President, myself, Scowcroft, and Lord were there.

Miyazawa: Have the disturbances around Shanghai settled down?

The Secretary: I don't know.

The Chinese wanted the Ford visit badly. After my October trip we made it clear to them that we were going to Asia, not just China, and that we wanted the visit in Peking shortened. This provided them the opportunity to delay, but they didn't. Clearly they thought it important to go ahead. The importance of the trip was very obvious from what they said. For example, they must have wanted me to say what I said about our relations in Peking. They fear the Soviets.

Miyazawa: But the US/Soviet SALT agreement may be coming anyway.

The Secretary I told them that I would go to Moscow in four to six weeks. I told them good US/Soviet relations don't mean bad US/Chinese relations. I said in Peking that I was going to Moscow...

Miyazawa: Do they agree?

The Secretary: I said in Peking that I was going to Moscow. I can assure you that if we had bad relations with the Soviet Union, we would have worse relations than we do now in Peking.

Miyazawa: Maybe even the Chinese agree you should go to Moscow.

The Secretary: They treated me personally with enormous politeness. Did you see the television coverage of the Mao meeting?

Miyazawa: They didn't want to embarrass the President.

After this visit, you will have to reaffirm your friendship for China from time-to-time. It is perhaps foolish but protocol requires that the Chinese should go to Washington. But it is necessary for you to continue to go to China if they can't go to the United States.

The Secretary: We will continue to maintain contact. I plan to go about once a year.

Miyazawa: Is there any commitment?

The Secretary: It is sort of expected. We meet at the United Nations in the fall and then I go to Peking once a year. I am sure we will continue the practice.

Miyazawa: Even before 1980, there will be changes.

The Secretary: I had 1980 in mind as the time when there would be changes in the Soviet Union. In the case of China, they will be earlier.

In any event, you will not be confronted by any surprising developments in US/PRC relations.

Miyazawa: There is nothing particularly new on our side. We have established relations with Hanoi and they will open an embassy here. It is interesting that they are willing to use the former PRG office. We are discussing sending an economic team to Hanoi, but they are very suspicious of everything. They refuse to speak any language except Vietnamese, which makes our conversations very slow.

The Secretary: The Vietnamese are among the most obnoxious people in the world. However, we will improve our relations with them. They have taken some tiny steps. They will release three bodies.

Yamazaki: Was there any discussion of Korea?

The Secretary: Yes. We have the impression that Chinese policy will be in the direction of restraint. Their views are unchanged, but…

Miyazawa: Do the Chinese welcome your forces in Korea?

The Secretary: They wish us to be strong. At least they didn't twist our arm to get our forces out of Korea.

Miyazawa: I think Korea can be taken care of along the lines of our last conversation. The Chinese will not object and the United States will stay in Korea. However, the UN business is very foolish, all the head counts and everything.

The Secretary: Yet if it comes out the same way, so what. Maybe we can avoid the UN debate.

Miyazawa: By all means.

The Secretary: The objective conditions don't exist today for radical changes in Korea. We cannot put together negotiations at this time.

Miyazawa: The Japanese Government is interested in dialogue. We lave tried not to give the impression here in Japan that the United States is opposed to dialogue. Rather it is the North that is unrealistic.

The Secretary: As I said the other day, if we agree to separate talks with the North Koreans, it would make the ROK a puppet regime. At the beginning of any US/North Korean talks, the North Koreans might be friendly, but in the course of the discussion, South Korea would be undermined. The Chinese don't want to be present in any US negotiations on Korea.

Miyazawa: Will Kim Dae Jung be jailed, Mr. Habib?

Habib: We haven't talked to the Koreans. Have you?

Miyazawa: I think the Koreans may trust you more.

Habib: If Kissinger allows me, I will ask about Kim.

The Secretary: Phil, why don't you ask the Koreans about Kim?

Miyazawa: Just once.

The Secretary: The State Department is full of missionaries.

Miyazawa: Please ask for us. If Park is gentle, it will help with our domestic situation.

The Secretary: (To Habib) Make the point to Park about the impact on domestic opinion.

Habib: Park talks frankly and I think he will understand.

Miyazawa: He also talks frankly to Dick Sneider.

On balance, I think the Ford visits to Indonesia and the Philippines were significant.

The Secretary: They were very significant. They showed that we are still in East Asia, despite events in Viet-Nam. The Indonesians are worried about reduced oil purchases by Japan.

Miyazawa: These reductions are connected with our purchases of oil from China.

The Secretary: I don't care one way or another. However, the Indonesians are concerned.

Miyazawa: Lately the Indonesians have seized some of our fishing boats. I think this is a kind of retaliation.

The Secretary: I didn't know there had already been a reduction in Japanese oil purchases.

Miyazawa: Yes. There has been. Mostly it reflects our economic conditions and reduced consumption, not a policy change. But, it is a fact that the Chinese and Indonesians are competing in the oil area. The Chinese price is slightly lower. However, I think we should reassure the Indonesians.

The Secretary: I only mention this for your information.

Our talks in Indonesia went very well. Our presence gives them reassurance.

Miyazawa: Is the consortium going to help Pertamina? There are, I think, two installments of assistance. Can we believe the Indonesians concerning Pertamina?

Habib: I think so. They sound serious about reform of Pertamina.

Miyazawa: Mr. Robinson and our Japanese delegates will meet in Paris to work out our positions for the CIEC. I know that you prefer to do this in Washington, but we appreciate your willingness to do it in Europe.

The Secretary: We will take a conciliatory approach in principle. However, we will say that high oil prices are a mortgage against future development of economies.

Miyazawa: know. I am embarrassed by the softness of our position when you take a tough position which Japan privately appreciates.

The Secretary: We understand; we only ask for your benevolence.

(End)

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy Files, P–820123–0631. Secret; Nodis. Drafted by Gleysteen and approved by Covey. The meeting was held at the Foreign Ministry Guest House.

216. Memorandum of Conversation, Tokyo, December 8, 1975, 11 a.m. 216. Memorandum of Conversation, Tokyo, December 8, 1975, 11 a.m. 1

Tokyo, December 8, 1975, 11 a.m.

DEPARTMENT OF STATE
Memorandum of Conversation

DATE: December 8, 1975
PLACE: Prime Minister's Residence, Tokyo
Time: 11:00 A.M.

SUBJECT: President Ford's Visit to China and Miscellaneous Economic Subjects

PARTICIPANTS

Japan

Takeo MIKI, Prime Minister

Toshio YAMAZAKI, Director General, American Affairs Bureau

Hiroshi KITAMURA, Private Secretary, Foreign Office

Sadaaki NUMATA, Deputy Director, First North American

Affairs Division (Interpreter)

United States

The Secretary

Joseph J Sisco, Under Secretary for Political Affairs

James L. Hodgson, American Ambassador to Japan

Philip C. Habib, Assistant Secretary, EA

William H. Gleysteen, Jr., Deputy Assistant Secretary, EA (Notetaker)

COPIES TO: S (Barbian), S/S, WH(Rodman)

Miki: Thank you for coming. I amazed at your energy.

The Secretary: I will go down in history as an athlete. Nancy has — fallen in love with Japan; if your economy improves it will be because of her purchases.

Miki: I understand that in Peking you spent much time with Vice Premier Teng. Since neither Mao nor Chou is likely to live very long, we wonder how well established Teng is and what sort of changes you foresee after Mao and Chou?

The Secretary: Chou seems totally out of things He was never mentioned. He is too sick politically or physically — we think physically. Most of our talks were with Teng. I must say we were very impressed with him. He becomes more impressive with every successive meeting we have. He is in apparent control. Mao said so and made the point that there would be no policy changes in China so long as Teng was in charge. Nevertheless, we don't know what will happen after Mao. If it is like the case of the Soviet Union after Stalin and Khrushchev, then the ambitious persons who want to succeed Mao may be hiding their intention. Teng seems to be the successor but our information is unreliable.

Chinese policy will be determined by China's strength. As long as they are weak, they need against the Soviets. After they are stronger, we will all have trouble. I don't think this will be for 10 or 15 years.

Miki: I think I agree regarding your point that major changes in China are not likely for about ten years. Policy changes will take time.

Did you touch on Japan in your discussions with the Chinese?

The Secretary: Yes. The Chinese said US/Japan relations are most important while Sino/Japanese relations are at best only second most important. They are a little worried that some time — not under you — there may be a more military orientation in Japan. In any event, they will not compete with us in our relations with Japan, and this is helpful.

Miki: Did you talk about the Sino/Japanese friendship treaty?

The Secretary: Yes. We said that you cannot accept their definitions. They said that they can wait, meaning that they will not change their basic position. But they said this in a not-very unfriendly way.

Miki: What impressed you most?

The Secretary: The self-confidence and ability of Teng and their geopolitical interest in containment of the USSR. If I ever teach again, I must get some help from the Chinese. They have no sentiment. For example, they show no concern about the fate of other Communist parties. Because of the impact in Moscow the Chinese were eager that I say in Peking that US/PRC relations are improving. We also sensed that we are witnessing the beginning of more normal economic relations between China and other countries.

Miki: Regarding Taiwan, how long do you intend to preserve the status quo?

The Secretary: Certainly beyond November. (Laughter) I am assuming this is a private conversation. Seriously, the Chinese did not press us very hard on Taiwan and we have more trouble with our own press over this issue. The Chinese are realists. However, I assume that over the next three or four years some progress on Taiwan will have to be made. We will decide the timing after our elections.

Miki: The Philippines and Indonesians, which the President visited, are important anti-Communist members of ASEAN. How can the Japanese and the United States cooperate to preserve ASEAN as an anti-Communist grouping?

The Secretary: The President's visit to these countries was most important because it showed we continue to support the freedom and integrity of countries despite the impact of Viet-Nam. The visits gave us an opportunity to express our support. We are encouraging development of the economies of ASEAN countries and we want to work with Japan We have parallel interests.

As I said repeatedly in Peking, we have parallel interests with the PRC. This is true, but our parallel interests with Japan are deeper and have more meaning. There is more candor and friendship. This is totally different from the parallelism of our relations with China. The US/PRC relationship is a marriage of convenience. In Djakarta the Indonesians raised with us the problem of diminished oil purchases by Japan. Of course, it is no tragedy for us that anyone would worry over oil sales. However, we the United States and Japan should cooperate regarding Indonesian economic development. The Indonesians want weapons and training. You cannot be so helpful in this respect. In the Philippines the situation is similar but less acute. We have solved, in principle, our base issues in the Philippines. We will find some face-saving formula to meet the Philippine concern about sovereignty without complicating operational control. We will begin meeting with the Philippines in November — I mean March. I seem to have November on my mind.

Miki: When I visited Washington you remember what I said about my impression that ASEAN was not drifting away from the United States. Did you confirm my impression?

The Secretary: Yes, exactly. We find that they want a new relationship.

Miki: I feel confident that if this trend continues, the ASEAN countries won't draw nearer to the Communists.

The Secretary: In Indonesia there are no relations with the Chinese. In the Philippines they are flirting with the Chinese which would be dangerous if we were not giving them protection.

Miki: It is important that we give them ASEAN further confidence.

The Secretary: I agree. We have achieved an arrangement in Indonesia for consultations of our foreign ministers. We are making a major effort in this respect in East Asia. No one meets as regularly as Miyazawa and I. Our meeting next week will be the tenth in only a few months.

Miki: In the Soviet Union there is speculation that Brezhnev is under fire from the hawks regarding detente and he may be challenged at the Communist Party Congress in February.

The Secretary: There are also rumors that I am under attack from the hawks. We will both survive. Brezhnev's position is weaker — partially because of health — but he will survive the Party Congress. There is no precedent of a leader giving a report at the Congress and then leaving. Within a measurable time, however, I believe Brezhnev will go largely because of his health.

Miki: What about the Middle East? There has been pessimistic speculation.

The Secretary: Just one more point on the Soviet Union. We do expect some changes at the Congress in February but not Brezhnev.

As for the Middle East, we have a complex situation. There is the dispute between Egypt and Syria as well as the problems of Lebanon. We have a Sisco plan, that is our failures are Sisco's and our successes are mine. (Laughter) I have Sisco with me to keep an eye on him. (More laughter) There are a number of complications in the Middle East. First, the problems are basically difficult. Second, Israel is not very cooperative. Third, we have a domestic situation in tie United States. Fourth, the Arabs have great difficulty distinguishing between epic poetry and foreign policy. (Miki's translator had great difficulty with this.) We must distinguish between appearance and reality. We got a six-month extension of the UN Force in the Golan Heights; even the Israelis will not be able to transform this victory into defeat (laughter on the American side), but they are trying. The Syrians can now present the UN debate in January as an achievement even though any member can bring about a debate. The end of the debate will more or less coincide with the full implementation of the Sinai agreements. Thus, the Syrians won't need to object to these any longer. Objective conditions exist in the Middle East for being optimistic — barring, of course, some unpredictable event.

Miki: What steps, what scenario do you see for peace?

The Secretary: There will be the debate in the Security Council in January and then subsequent discussions will lead to Geneva or a Geneva substitute. Once the debate begins, it must be brought to a conclusion.

Miki: In the near future?

The Secretary: No, but over a period of time, two years, we can envisage very concrete progress.

Miki: I would like to touch on the North/South problem which we talked about in Rambouillet. You made certain proposals; others did also. We need to adjust and make further efforts. What should we do first?

The Secretary: Incidentally, I thought your intervention at Rambouillet was very effective, both in spirit and approach. Naturally the United States takes a stronger position than Japan. We accept the need for this. We must make clear on oil that we can't accept a situation whereby with one stroke the Japanese balance of payments is wiped out for a three-year period or where inflation surpasses our aid programs. We only ask that you not make our lives more difficult. I will say in Paris that we can't ask for aid to meet deficits not made by us. This is the negative side. On the positive side, we are ready to work out new formulas, such as borrowing from the IMF. There will be many proposals in Paris or later. Nowadays we have to work by consensus in the United States and it is taking us a little longer to reach our positions. (Laughter) However, we will achieve consensus. We are prepared on other issues, such as investment easement. We should study an international code for foreign investment. There simply is not enough government capital available. If people could only overcome their ideological blinders, they would discover there is less danger from private as opposed to government capital. Of course I don't need to argue this in front of Ambassador Hodgson. I remember an extreme case of how far a company will go to avoid being offensive — a foolish American company executive in Saudi Arabia called on Faisal to congratulate him when the oil embargo was imposed. The idea was to improve the company's relations with Saudi Arabia but the move was ridiculous. We will also have proposals on food and alternative sources of energy. We intend to follow a constructive approach. However, it is not healthy to let the less developed countries think that the developed countries can be panicked into making all the concessions.

Miki: Let me revert to Korea. Did the Chinese show any positive interest in simultaneous North Korea/South Korea participation in the United Nations?

The Secretary: The Chinese don't seem to want any involvement in this aspect of the Korean problem. However, they exercise restraint in Korea.

Miki: Would you characterize the Russian positive as similar?

The Secretary: The Russians have a greater propensity for brutality and stupidity. They have a greater interest in embarrassing us but I don't believe the Russians would pick Korea because the danger is too great.

Miki: Is Chinese influence greater?

The Secretary: We can't judge. The Russians are trying to come back in Korea. One of the dangers is that globally the Russians may adopt more radical and aggressive policies because of the Chinese. On the other hand, I don't think they will in Korea as long as we have our forces there. I stated previously that we are willing to talk with North Korea as long as South Koreans are present. If we do otherwise and begin to deal with the North Koreans without the South Koreans, South Korea will be seen as a puppet.

Miki: I understand that the North Koreans are anxious to talk to you.

The Secretary: True, and we don't object to the idea as long as the South Koreans are present. What do you think?

Miki: The time is not opportune for US/North Korean direct contacts. At some point in the future, there will be need for direct US/North Korean discussions

The Secretary: We don't want to diminish South Korea's status.

We are prepared to talk to the North in the presence of the South Koreans. The North Koreans can talk to the South Koreans about Korea, in which-case we would be prepared to talk to the North Koreans about matters other than South Korea, for example, bilateral problems. But this would only be possible if there were North/South talks; otherwise it would be misunderstood.

Miki: Your position is clear.

I see signs of U.S. economic recovery. I think your rise in GNP for the third quarter is around 13 percent. Will this continue?

The Secretary: No. But we expect about a six or seven percent rate of growth next year which is not bad.

Miki: The recovery of the US economy is the best sign in the world today.

The Secretary: How is your recovery?

Miki: Our present situation is reflected in a minus .6% growth rate for 1975. We have a political difficulty in adjusting public expectations. Having been accustomed to a 10-12 percent rate of growth since 1964, it is hard for our people to think in terms of 5-6 percent as being satisfactory.

The Secretary: You appoint people for life, promote them by seniority, and make decisions by consensus. How you succeed is really a mystery to me.

Miki: These methods do create difficulty for us. There is a feeling of bad times which is hard to overcome. It is difficult to create incentives.

The Secretary: But you have less sense of panic about the ups and downs because more people have been involved in your decisions. Consensus at least has the advantage that the participants know and have more confidence.

Miki: I have been focusing only on the negative aspects of the Japanese attitude. Our firms are under great pressures. What is the focal point in US/Japan relations?

The Secretary: I think we have richer relations with Japan than with any other single country. On our side, we are prepared to consult so that there will be no surprises and so we will have a common understanding. Perhaps the focal point will be the problems of the Western Pacific and North/South issues. But in all relations there must be coordination. An economically strong Japan is essential for the stability of the western Pacific and this is a fundamental premise of US policy. We understand that on some issues you have to pursue your own necessities. We do also, but we can do this in ways that do not strain our relationship.

Miki: I agree. We have differences but in full understanding of each other.

The Secretary: You have been very generous of your time.

Miki: A great deal of my time is consumed in the Diet. I will face that reducing my preoccupation with the Diet after the elections. I think we need elections next year. The demands on a Japanese Prime Minister require patience.

The Secretary: And endurance, and sainthood.

Miki: Please give my regards to President Ford. Please tell President Ford that there is no change in the matter that I discussed with him in private.

The Secretary: I will do so.

(END)

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy Files, P–820123–0771. Secret; Nodis. The meeting was held at the Prime Minister’s Residence. Drafted by Gleysteen and approved by Covey.

217. Letter From President Ford to Japanese Prime Minister Miki, Washington, January 15, 1976. 217. Letter From President Ford to Japanese Prime Minister Miki, Washington, January 15, 1976.1

Washington, January 15, 1976

THE WHITE HOUSE
WASHINGTON

His Excellency
Takeo Miki
Prime Minister of Japan
Tokyo

January 15, 1976

Dear Mr. Prime Minister:

Thank you for your letter expressing concern over the fisheries legislation now before the United States Congress.

The United States is participating with Japan in the Third United Nations Law of the Sea Conference. These negotiations deal with the broad range of oceans issues of importance to our countries and the world community, including the question of a fair and equitable fisheries regime. International agreement coming from the law of the sea negotiations — agreement concluded on terms acceptable to all and in reasonable time — offers the best prospects for safeguarding our fisheries interests.

Until there is a comprehensive Law of the Sea treaty, we look forward to continued negotiations of bilateral and regional agreements with nations fishing off our coasts. The mutually beneficial United States-Japanese negotiations concluded in Tokyo in December 1974, were an important step in this regard.

I very much welcomed our meetings at Rambouillet in November.

Sincerely,
[signed]
Gerald R. Ford

1 Source: Ford Library, National Security Adviser, Presidential Correspondence with Foreign Leaders, Box 2, Japan, Prime Minister Miki (2). No classification marking. Miki’s November 4, 1975 letter expressed concern about Congressional legislation to unilaterally establish a 200-mile exclusive fishery zone. (Ibid.) The memoranda of conversation from the meetings, November 15–17, between the leaders of the Federal Republic of Germany, France, Italy, Japan, the United Kingdom, and the United States, are ibid., Memoranda of Conversation, Box 16.

218. Letter From Japanese Prime Minister Miki to President Ford, Tokyo, February 24, 1976. 218. Letter From Japanese Prime Minister Miki to President Ford, Tokyo, February 24, 1976.1

February 24, 1976

OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER
TOKYO

February 2, 1976

Dear Mr. President,

As you may recall, we agreed last summer to cooperate with each other for the protection of democracy and for the furtherance of amicable relations between the United States and Japan, affirming the permanent friendship between the two countries. We also promised to exchange our frank views with full confidence in each other.

As both the United States and Japan are now confronted with the unpleasant problem concerning Lockheed, it is with this confidence that I wish to convey to you my concern about this problem.

Yesterday, both Houses of the Japanese Diet adopted important resolutions on this matter, the copies of which are enclosed herewith for transmittal to your Government. That the Japanese Diet, the highest organ of state power under the Constitution, adopted such resolutions is a matter of great note and indicates the importance the Diet attaches to the clarification of the problem.

The Japanese political circle has been profoundly shaken by the reported allegation made at the public hearings of the Senate Sub-Committee on Multinational Corporations that Japanese government officials received payments from Lockheed. A grave concern is spread throughout Japan at present that, if the whole issue is kept unsolved with the names of the officials involved remaining in doubt, democracy in Japan may suffer a fatal blow. I share this concern. The disclosure of all the relevant materials including the names of the officials involved, if any, would serve better the interest of Japanese politics and of the everlasting friendship between the United States and Japan.

Mr. President, the utmost efforts are being made here to unveil the truth, and I hope that the United States will continue to cooperate with us for the further clarification of the problem. I am convinced that Japanese democracy is strong enough to stand the test. The truth must be sought with courage and we have the confidence to face up to its consequences.

I also share your view of the need to make new international rules on the behavior of multinational enterprises. I look forward to our close consultation to this end.

Mr. President, at this moment when you are otherwise heavily engaged in your immediate duties, it is my earnest hope that you will understand my genuine concern in this matter. I would appreciate your consideration in securing continued cooperation by the United States Congress and Administration in clarifying the whole matter, in response to the request by the Diet and the Government of Japan.

Sincerely yours,
[signed]
Takeo Miki
Prime Minister of Japan

1 Source: Ford Library, National Security Adviser, Presidential Correspondence with Foreign Leaders, Box 2, Japan, Prime Minister Miki (2). No classification marking. The Subcommittee on Multi-National Corporations of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee had exposed alleged bribes by the Lockheed Corporation to high officials of the Japanese government.

219. Letter From President Ford to Japanese Prime Minister Miki, Washington, March 11, 1976. 219. Letter From President Ford to Japanese Prime Minister Miki, Washington, March 11, 1976.1

Washington, March 11, 1976

THE WHITE HOUSE
WASHINGTON

His Excellency
Takeo Miki
Prime Minister of Japan

March 11, 1976

Dear Mr. Prime Minister:

I have received your letter on February 24. I wish to assure you that I share fully your desire that the allegations concerning Lockheed activities in Japan be clarified without delay. The United States Government will continue to support your efforts to pursue further an investigation of this matter.

The Department of State has forwarded to the Senate and the Securities and Exchange Commission your requests for all available in their possession pertinent to Japan. I believe that much of the material that your government has requested from the Senate Subcommittee on Multinational Corporations has been provided. We are prepared to make arrangements to share with your government the information developed by the SEC, in the course of its inquiry.

I suggest that officials of our two governments meet without delay to work out such arrangements. These procedures would permit law enforcement officials from Japan to work in close cooperation with their counterparts here, with access, on a confidential basis, to relevant information held by United States investigating agencies. The legal and administrative practice of the SEC is not to make public any material relating to an investigation until the investigation is completed. Premature disclosure of such information could well prejudice the law enforcement actions which may ultimately be taken in the United States. It could also prejudice the rights of individuals, whether or not they may ultimately become defendants in criminal actions. These basic requirements of United States law arid practice must be respected, as of course must those of Japan. If these principles are protected, I am sure we can work together effectively.

Arrangements such as I am describing would allow your government's inquiry into this matter to go forward without hindrance. I hope that such arrangements will prove satisfactory to you.

I agree completely, Mr. Prime Minister, that it is in the interest of both our countries that this matter be cleared up as soon as possible. I also welcome your expression of die need to develop new rules covering corrupt practices, and I hope the Government of Japan can support the United States proposal for an international agreement to curtail such practices. Finally, Mr. Prime Minister, I am confident, as I know you are, that this unfortunate affair will not damage the fundamental and permanent friendship between our countries, which continues to be of crucial importance to the cause of peace and progress in Asia and in the world

Sincerely,
[signed]
Gerald R. Ford

1 Source: Ford Library, National Security Adviser, Presidential Correspondence with Foreign Leaders, Box 2, Japan, Prime Minister Miki (2). No classification marking. Ford received this letter under a covering memorandum, March 10, from Scowcroft. (Ibid.) A Japanese diplomatic note, March 12, conveyed the Japanese cabinet’s decision to accept the President’s proposal for sharing information relating to the Lockheed scandal. (Decision of the Cabinet on March 12, 1976; ibid.)

220. Memorandum From Peter Rodman of the NSC Staff to Secretary of State Kissinger, Washington, April 6, 1976. 220. Memorandum From Peter Rodman of the NSC Staff to Secretary of State Kissinger, Washington, April 6, 1976.1

Washington, April 6, 1976

THE WHITE HOUSE
WASHINGTON
ACTION

April 6, 1976

MEMORANDUM FOR: SECRETARY KISSINGER
FROM: PETER RODMAN [PR initialed]
SUBJECT: Message from Miki through his Confidential Adviser

Mr. Kazushige Hirasawa, Miki's confidential adviser whom you saw on March 5, called me from New York. He is in this country through Thursday April 15th but will not be coming to Washington. He read me the following personal message for you:

"The Prime Minister has asked me to convey his deep appreciation of the present understanding and cooperation on the Lockheed affair. The arrangement for the exchange of materials is proceeding in a satisfactory manner. The Prime Minister also asked me to communicate to the President through Dr. Kissinger with the utmost confidentiality his grave concern that despite these arrangements, the Lockheed and more recent CIA allegations are now being used politically in Japan to poison Japanese-American relations and to paralyze the political process in Japan. It is not too strong to state that the Prime Minister fears that the mounting political crisis in Japan, unless it is resolved decisively and soon, may do irreparable harm to the alliance and lasting injury to Japanese democracy.

"The Prime Minister therefore asked me to convey to the Secretary with a sense of utmost urgency that before taking decisive political action in this matter, he [the Prime Minister] must know in advance in trusted confidence whether still-secret Lockheed allegations directly implicate (a) the former Prime Minister, (b) any member of the present Cabinet, or (c) the Secretary General of the governing party. Depending on the answers to these questions, the Prime Minister may decide to exercise the unprecedented option of going to the people, independently of the Cabinet and party leadership, with non-partisan reform proposals intended to resolve the political crisis strengthen multiparty democracy and protect the Japanese-American relationship of friendly cooperation. It is the Prime Minister's sincere hope that the Secretary will fully appreciate the dangers to the alliance and to Japanese democracy which the present crisis holds, and that he will find it possible to accede to the Prime Minister's urgent personal request.

"The manner of communicating this privileged information should be at the discretion of the Secretary, perhaps by sending an appropriate U.S. Cabinet officer to Tokyo or by inviting a Cabinet level representative of the Prime Minister to Washington. In either case, the Prime Minister will personally guard the information and will be privately guided by it in choosing the course which will best preserve Japanese democracy and strengthen Japanese-American friendship and understanding.

Hirasawa added: "However, because of the urgency of the situation, I wonder whether I could convey to the Prime Minister any implications regarding his personal request."

Hirasawa says that the Prime Minister would hope for a reply by April 10th, because that is a crucial date in the Diet debate over the budget. (Miki must decide by then whether to ask for another 40-day extension of the budget, if no budget is yet passed.) Hirasawa plans call me again Thursday afternoon from Atlanta to see if I have any further information.

RECOMMENDATION:

You may want to convene your experts again (Leigh, Habib, Ingersoll).
Approve
Disapprove

You will have to decide how to communicate back to Miki. If you choose to do it through Hodgson or an emissary, I can simply tell Hirasawa we are going directly to Miki. We could invite Hirasawa to stop in Washington, but he is worried about being spotted by the Japanese press.

1 Source: Ford Library, National Security Adviser, Presidential Country Files for East Asia and the Pacific, Box 7, Country File, Japan [10]. Secret. Sent for action. Kissinger did not mark either of the options.

221. Talking Points for Peter Rodman of the NSC Staff, Washington, undated. 221. Talking Points for Peter Rodman of the NSC Staff, Washington, undated.1

Washington, undated

Talking Point for Rodman to Use with Hirasawa

The following is a proposed message which Peter Rodman should read to Kazushige Hirasawa:

I conveyed Prime Minister Miki's message to Secretary Kissinger who has asked that you transmit the following reply to the Prime Minister: Secretary Kissinger understands Prime Minister Miki's concern that recent events might be used politically in Japan to poison Japanese-American relations and damage the political process. He also appreciates the Prime Minister's willingness to share his thoughts about the possibility of taking unprecedented actions to strengthen multi-party democracy in Japan and protect relations with the U.S. After careful consideration, however, Secretary Kissinger has found we are not in a position to respond to the Prime Minister's questions on the basis of information available to us. In developing any information on these matters, we must rely on procedures we have recently agreed with the Government of Japan which provide for the transmittal of all information via our respective Departments of Justice.

1 Source: Ford Library, National Security Adviser, Presidential Country Files for East Asia and the Pacific, Box 7, Country File, Japan [10]. Secret; Nodis. At the end of the talking points, Kissinger wrote, “The Department of State has no access to these records + could not obtain access without upsetting all established procedures.” Written notations by unknown hands at the top of the document indicate that Kissinger approved the talking points on April 10 and Rodman received them through Kissinger’s special assistant Paul E. Barbian. They were presented to Hirasawa at 4 p.m. on the same day.

222. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, April 22, 1976. 222. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, April 22, 1976.1

Washington, April 22, 1976

DEPARTMENT OF STATE
Memorandum of Conversation

Date: April 22, 1976

SUBJECT: Secretary's Meeting with Ambassador Togo

PARTICIPANTS:

Ambassador Fumihiko Togo

The Secretary

Assistant Secretary Habib

William Sherman, EA/J(notetaker)

DISTRIBUTION: S (Aherne, S/S, WH (Rodman)

Ambassador Togo: I greatly appreciate your taking the time to receive me. You must be terribly busy immediately before your trip to Africa.

The Secretary: No, I've wanted to see you very much. Unfortunately my brilliant staff has arranged your call on a day when I have next to no time at all. We cannot have an extended conversation today, but I will see you again the week I come back from this trip. I want to tell you the great importance which we attach to our relations with Japan. I remember our meetings in Tokyo with great warmth and I want to assure you that you can see me at any time. We will certainly have a good talk on my return.

Ambassador Togo: I appreciate that very much. I want you to know, Mr. Secretary, that we are very happy with the good, friendly and effective communication between our Embassy and the Department. When Mr. Ingersoll was here, we felt we had a real Japan expert and friend, and with Mr. Habib moving up we look forward to continuing a close relationship. Your own willingness to see my predecessors and me on frequent occasions has been very comforting.

The Secretary: We consider Japan to be the keystone of our foreign policy in the Pacific. You can be sure our attention will remain very close. Although we have had some unfortunate issues arise recently, they have had nothing to do with governmental decisions. I am confident that we can handle them in a way that will not harm our basic relationship.

Ambassador Togo: The agreement worked out between us for transfer of information is a good one. However, the political temper in Japan is still high, and you may have heard that the Diet deliberations have been stalled. In order to get them going and conduct essential business it was necessary to make a compromise and agree to the despatch of a special envoy to Washington. My guess is that it will be Mr. Miyazawa.

The Secretary: He will always be warmly received. When is he coming?

Ambassador Togo: He hasn't been designated yet. I know how busy you are.

Mr. Habib: I've been telling the Ambassador how crowded your schedule is in May.

The Secretary: We will always be able to see Mr. Miyazawa. (to Mr. Habib) As a practical matter, I have only ten days; have you determined what lunches are available?

Mr. Habib: We don't know yet whether he will be named or when the Diet will allow him to come.

The Secretary: I want to give a lunch or a dinner for him.

Mr. Habit: We'll strike for a lunch.

The Secretary: (to Ambassador Togo) You tell Minister Miyazawa I intend to have a lunch for him. We will rearrange other things.

Ambassador Togo: He hasn't yet been appointed, Mr. Secretary.

Mr. Habib: Thank you, Mr. Ambassador. If you hadn't said that, the Secretary would believe that I was preventing him from seeing the Foreign Minister.

The Secretary: What will he wish to discuss if he comes — Lockheed?

Ambassador Togo: The trip comes because of the Lockheed controversy. But he will wish to raise other matters.

The Secretary: As you know, I have kept myself out of the Lockheed matter. I can tell him no more than anyone else. We have to follow our judicial procedures; it is not a foreign policy matter.

Mr. Habib: Your government understands and expects that, doesn't it Mr. Ambassador.

The Secretary: I have no discretion in this. Although I'll be glad to speak to Mr. Miyazawa, I am bound by our judicial procedures.

Ambassador Togo: Prime Minister Miki has made it absolutely clear that he will not seek to renegotiate the agreement for exchange of Lockheed materials as the opposition has insisted. He is fully aware of the legal constraints here.

The Secretary: You can be assured that we'll do our best to handle the issue in the way most beneficial to our relationship. You understand our problems and we understand yours.

Ambassador Togo: I'm happy to see that although foreign policy has come up as an issue in the campaign, there has been no criticism of US policy toward Japan.

The Secretary: They're attacking us about Hanoi now. But, seriously, the basis of our Pacific policy is our friendship with Japan. That is not an issue.

Ambassador Togo: Once more, Mr. Secretary, I would like to thank your Department for the fine communication you maintain with my Embassy.

The Secretary: I will have a meeting set up for the week I get back. Mr. Ambassador, you are always welcome here. Anything the Department can do, or I personally can do for you, you need only ask.

Ambassador Togo: Thank you. I wish you a pleasant trip to Africa. You'll be seeing Mr. Kimura there. He was a good Foreign Minister.

The Secretary: He was an excellent Foreign Minister and we were close friends. I look forward greatly to seeing him again.

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy Files, P –820117 – 1955. Confidential; Nodis. Drafted by Sherman and approved by Collums.

223. Telegram 6615 From the Embassy in Japan to the Department of State, May 6, 1976, 1015Z. 223. Telegram 6615 From the Embassy in Japan to the Department of State, May 6, 1976, 1015Z.1

May 6, 1976, 1015Z

TELEGRAM
Department of State
TOKYO 6615

O R 061015Z MAY 76

FM AMEMBASSY TOKYO
TO SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 8965
INFO AMEMBASSY MOSCOW
AMEMBASSY SEOUL
AMEMBASSY TAIPEI
AMCONSUL HONG KONG
USLO PEKING
CINCPAC HONOLULU
COMUSJAPAN YOKOTA

TOKYO 6615

CINCPAC FOR POLAD

E.O. 11652: GDS
TAGS: PINT, PFOR, JA

SUBJ: MIKI NOW VULNERABLE

SUMMARY. THE CONSERVATIVE POWER STANDOFF, WHICH BROUGHT MIKI TO POWER AND WHICH HAS BEEN INSTRUMENTAL IN PRESERVING HIM, IS NOW CRUMBLING. FOR A VARIETY OF REASONS STEMMING FROM LOCKHEED, THE INFLUENCE OF FORMER PRIMIN TANAKA HAS DECLINED MARKEDLY DURING THE PAST THREE MONTHS. AS A RESULT, DEPUTY PRIMIN FUKUDA IS NOW WIDELY VIEWED AS MIKI'S ALMOST CERTAIN SUCCESSOR, FINMIN OHIRA APPEARS TO BE MOVING TOWARD SUPPORT OF FUKUDA AND TANAKA HIMSELF REPORTEDLY HAS BOWED TO A FUKUDA CANDIDACY. THE UPSHOT OF ALL THIS IS THAT MIKI IS NOW VULNERABLE IN A NEW AND FUNDAMENTAL WAY. BUT THERE IS NO AGREEMENT ON HOW MIKI MIGHT BE TOPPLED. SEVERAL SCENARIOS FOR POSSIBLE MIKI OUSTER SEEM TO US PLAUSIBLE, BUT NOT CONVINCING. ONE POSSIBLE EXCEPTION WOULD BE THE NAMING OF A CURRENT CABINET MEMBER OR LDP FACTION LEADER IN CONNECTION WITH LOCKHEED BRIBES.) THERE ARE ALSO IMPORTANT FACTORS WHICH WORK IN FAVOR OF MIKI'S CONTINUANCE IN OFFICE. NO ONE WANTS HIS JOB UNTIL LOCKHEED IS SOMEHOW "RESOLVED," HE IS IN POSITION TO ORCHESTRATE THE IMPACT OF LOCKHEED DISCLOSURES, AND HIS "CLEAN" IMAGE IS LIKELY TO BE MORE IMPORTANT THAN EVER TO CONSERVATIVES IN THE WAKE OF LOCKHEED. THE MEDIA STILL, BY AND LARGE, SUPPORTS MIKI AND THERE IS NO INDICATION THAT FUKUDA HAS THE STOMACH FOR AN OPEN SHOWDOWN WITH MIKI — AND THAT MAY WELL BE CRUCIAL. FINALLY, MIKI HAS SHOWN HIMSELF TO HAVE UNUSUAL TENACITY AND SKILL AS A POLITICAL INFIGHTER, IN ADDITION TO HIS ADVANTAGES AS INCUMBENT. THUS, WHILE MIKI IS NOW VULNERABLE AND HIS REPLACEMENT BY FUKUDA COULD COME SUDDENLY, WE BELIEVE HIS CHANCES ARE BETTER THAN EVER OF SURVIVING UNTIL THE LOWER HOUSE ELECTION—NOW WIDELY EXPECTED IN THE FALL— AND, IF THE LDP PERFORMS REASONABLY WELL, FOR SOMETIME BEYOND. END SUMMARY.

1. IT WAS A POWER STANDOFF WITHIN THE RULING CONSERVATIVE PARTY (LDP) WHICH FIRST BROUGHT PRIMIN MIKI TO POWER. MORE THAN ANY OTHER FACTOR, IT WAS THAT SAME ROUGH EQUILIBRIUM BETWEEN DEPUTY PRIMIN FUKUDA'S FORCES, ON THE ONE HAND, AND FORMER PRIMIN TANAKA'S FORCES SUPPORTING FINMIN OHIRA, ON THE OTHER, THAT HAS ASSURED MIKI'S CONTINUANCE IN POWER. EACH SIDE HAS FRUSTRATED THE STRATEGIES OF THE OTHER AS THEY SOUGHT IN DIFFERENT WAYS AND AT DIFFERENT TIMES TO TOPPLE MIKI. THE CONTINUING STALEMATE ALSO FOCUSED ATTENTION ON A HANDFUL OF OLDER "COMPROMISE" CANDIDATES (EG, SHIINA) AS POSSIBLE MIKI SUCCESSORS. IT ALSO GAVE RISE TO RECURRENT POTENTIAL "CRISES" OF THE MIKI ADMINISTRATION WHICH, IN RETROSPECT, MIKI ALWAYS SURVIVED WITH REMARKABLE EASE. IN SHORT, IT WAS THIS STANDOFF WHICH, IN THE JAPANESE PHRASE, HAS PROVIDED MIKI'S "STABILITY BASED ON INSTABILITY."

2. BUT THE POLITICAL DYNAMICS WITHIN THE LDP ARE NOW CHANGING: THE STANDOFF IS CRUMBLING. EARLY THIS YEAR, TANAKA'S POWER WAS CLEARLY RISING AND FUKUDA'S PRIME MINISTERIAL PROSPECTS APPEARED DIM INDEED. BUT THREE MONTHS AGO THE UNEXPECTED ERUPTION OF THE LOCKHEED AFFAIR HERE REVERSED THE TABLES. THE EARLY APPEARANCE OF TANAKA-INTIMATE KENJI OSANO'S NAME, THE STILL UNANSWERED QUESTIONS SURROUNDING TANAKA'S FINANCES WHICH OCCASIONED HIS 1974 FALL FROM POWER, AND THE FACT THAT TANAKA AND TANAKA MEN WHEREIN POWER AT THE TIME OF THE TRI-STAR DECISION, ALL COMBINED TO CONCENTRATE SUSPICION — SOME WOULD SAY CERTAIN KNOWLEDGE — QUESTION HAS BEEN ONLY WHETHER "THEY" WOULD BE CAUGHT THIS TIME. BUT WHETHER OR NOT THESE SUSPICIONS ARE JUSTIFIED, THEIR WIDESPREAD CURRENCY AND RESULTING POLITICAL EFFECT HAVE UNEXPECTEDLY AND DRAMATICALLY ALTERED TANAKA'S INFLUENCE WITHIN THE LDP DURING THE PAST THREE MONTHS. THIS, IN TURN, HAS PROFOUNDLY CHANGED CONSERVATIVE DYNAMICS WITH THESE IMPORTANT RESULTS: —FUKUDA IS NOW WIDELY VIEWED THROUGHOUT THE LDP AND BUSINESS COMMUNITY AS THE ALMOST CERTAIN SUCCESSOR TO PRIMIN MIKI. IN ADDITION, WE WERE TOLD BY A FUKUDA-INTIMATE THAT FUKUDA IS NOW THINKING (OF THE TONE TO SET FOR HIS ADMINISTRATION) AND TALKING (CABINET PERSONNEL) LIKE A PRIME MINISTER — THIS FOR THE FIRST TIME TO OUR KNOWLEDGE.

—AFTER MONTHS OF FALSE RUMORS, OHIRA APPEARS NOW TO BE MOVING TOWARD SUPPORT OF THE FUKUDA CANDIDACY. THE DIET SECRETARY OF ONE OF THE PRINCIPALS INVOLVED, TOLD US THAT THE FIRST INFORMAL NEGOTIATIONS BETWEEN TOP LIEUTENANTS OF THE TWO FACTIONS TOOK PLACE APRIL 30. INTERESTINGLY, THE FUKUDA MAN'S OPENING LINE WAS REPORTEDLY, " DOES OHIRA WANT TO COMMIT DOUBLE SUICIDE WITH TANAKA?"

—THE CANDIDACIES OF SENIOR LDP POLITICOS ACCEPTABLE TO BOTH FUKUDA AND TANAKA, SUCH AS SHIINA, HORI, MAEO, ET AL. — BADLY FLAWED IN ANY EVENT — ARE NOW NO LONGER MATTERS OF SERIOUS DISCUSSION. MOST EXPECT THESE MEN TO DRIFT TOWARD FUKUDA SOONER OR LATER.

—AND AS THE DEPARTMENT IS AWARE FROM OTHER SOURCES, TANKA HIMSELF IS REPORTED TO HAVE BOWED TO A FUKUDA CANDIDACY. WE HAVE ALSO INDIRECTLY CONFIRMED THIS. IT MAKES GOOD SENSE, OF COURSE, FOR TANAKA TO USE HIS RAPIDLY WANING INFLUENCE TO HELP HIS FRIENDS (EG, OHIRA) — AND PROTECT HIMSELF.

—THE UPSHOT OF ALL THIS IS THAT MIKI IS NOW VULNERABLE IN A NEW AND FUNDAMENTAL WAY.

3. THERE IS NO AGREEMENT, HOWEVER, ON THE CRUCIAL QUESTIONS OF WHEN AND HOW MIKI MIGHT BE OUSTED. THOSE CLOSE TO FUKUDA NOW SAY THE FUNDAMENTAL ISSUE IS WHETHER MIKI SHOULD BE REPLACED BY THEIR MAN BEFORE OR AFTER THE LOWER HOUSE ELECTION. THERE ARE MANY WHO FEEL IT SHOULD DEFINITELY BE BEFORE, AND SOME EVEN EXPECT IT TO OCCUR WITHIN THE NEXT FEW WEEKS. THEY POSIT SCENARIOS LIKE THESE: —INEVITABLE — AND NECESSARY— DISCLOSURE OF THE NAMES OF LOCKHEED CULPRITS (EXPECTED IN LATE MAY-EARLY JUNE) WILL RESULT IN A CABINET CRISIS AND MIKI'S DOWNFALL.(POSSIBLE IN OUR VIEW ONLY IN THE UNLIKELY EVENT THAT A CURRENT CABINET MEMBER AND/OR LDP FACTION LEADER IS NAMES.)

—TO PROTEST (ALMOST CERTAIN) DIET FAILURE OF BUDGET-RELATED LEGISLATION, FINMIN OHIRA WILL RESIGN FROM THE CABINET, PROVOKING A CABINET CRISIS AND A MIKI DOWNFALL. (IN VIRTUALLY THE SAME CIRCUMSTANCES LAST YEAR, HE DIDN'T.)

— AN EFFORT TO REPLACE LDP SECGEN NAKASONE, NOW ALMOST UNIVERSALLY THOUGHT DESIRABLE WITHIN THE LDP, WILL RESULT IN A CABINET CRISIS AND A MIKI DOWNFALL,(NAKASONE AND MIKI WOULD FIND COMMON CAUSE IN OPPOSING THIS.)

—THERE ARE ALSO THOSE WHO BELIEVE THAT THE PARTY ELDERS CAN, ON THE BASIS ON THE NEW POLITICAL CONSTELLATION, FORCE MIKI TO RESIGN AT ANY TIME OF THEIR CHOOSING. BUT IN THE ABSENCE OF STRONG MEDIA CRITICISM OR A "LOST" ELECTION, IT IS DOUBTFUL WHETHER THE ELDERS NOW HAVE THIS POWER—IF THEY EVER DID.

4. MOREOVER, A NUMBER OF FACTORS CONTINUE TO WORK IN MIKI'S FAVOR. FOR EXAMPLE. —NOW ONE WISHES TO EASE HIM OUT BEFORE LOCKHEED IS SOMEHOW "RESOLVED," A PROCESS WHICH MAY TAKE SOME TIME. (FUKUDA-OHIRA DISCUSSIONS ARE ALSO UNLIKELY TO SURFACE PUBLICLY BEFORE A LOCKHEED RESOLUTION, SINCE FUKUDA REPORTEDLY FEARS POSSIBLE GUILT BY ASSOCIATION AND CLEMENCY REQUESTS FROM THE TANAKA-OHIRA CAMP.)

—MORE THAN ANYONE ELSE, MIKI IS IN POSITION TO ORCHESTRATE THE TIMING AND IMPACT OF LOCKHEED DISCLOSURES TO HIS ADVANTAGE.

—ASSUMING, AS EVERYONE DOES, THAT MIKI HIMSELF IS NOT INVOLVED, HIS "CLEAN" IMAGE IS LIKELY TO BE MORE IMPORTANT THAN EVER TO CONSERVATIVES FACING AN ELECTION ON THE HEELS OF SCANDAL. (WE HAVE IT ONE GOOD AUTHORITY THAT EVEN LONGTIME MIKI CRITIC, LDP EXECUTIVE COUNCIL CHAIRMAN NADAO, BELIEVES MIKI MUST BE SUPPORTED UNTIL AFTER THE ELECTION.)

—IN THE PAST, WIDESPREAD MEDIA CRITICISM HAS BEEN A CUSTOMARY PRELUDE TO OUSTER OF A PRIME MINISTER. ALTHOUGH WE HAVE ONE HINT OF POSSIBLE CHANGE, MIKI CONTINUES TO ENJOY SUBSTANTIAL MEDIA SUPPORT.

—AN OPEN CHALLENGE MAY WELL BE NECESSARY TO OUST HIM. FUKUDA HAS PERSISTENTLY REFUSED TO DO SO AND IT CAN BE ARGUES PLAUSIBLY THAT HE WILL CONTINUE TO SHY AWAY.

—FINALLY, THERE IS THE NOT INCONSIDERABLE POWER OF INCUMBENCY AND MIKI'S DEMONSTRATED TENACITY AND REMARKABLE SKILL IN MANEUVERING AMONG HIS ENEMIES. IN SUM, WHILE CONDITIONS NOW EXIST FOR A SUCCESSFUL CHALLENGE TO MIKI, THERE IS NO ASSURANCE THAT A CHALLENGE WILL BE SUCCESSFUL.

5. ALL OF THIS LEADS TO OUR ASSESSMENT THAT MIKI'S CHANCES OF SURVIVING UNTIL THE LOWER HOUSE ELECTION — NOW WIDELY EXPECTED IN THE FALL — AR BETTER THAN EVEN, AND, IF HE MAKES IT THAT FAR, A REASONABLE SUCCESSFUL LDP ELECTION PERFORMANCE (IE, MAINTAINING MORE OR LESS ITS PRESENT 274 SEATS) WOULD GIVE MIKI A NEW AND SOMEWHAT LONGER LEASE ON POLITICAL LIFE. BUT IT WON'T BE EASY. HE IS NOW A MARKED MAN, VULNERABLE AS NEVER BEFORE AND HIS REPLACEMENT BY FUKUDA COULD COME QUITE SUDDENLY. A MISTAKE THAT PREVIOUSLY WAS MERELY COSTLY COULD NOW PROVE FATAL.

HODGSON

1 Source: National Archives, Record Group 59, Central Foreign Policy Files. Confidential; Immediate. Repeated to the Embassies in Moscow, Seoul, Taipei, to the Consulate in Hong Kong, to the Liaison Office in Beijing, to CINCPAC in Honolulu, and to COMUS Japan in Yokota.

224. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, May 14, 1976. 224. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, May 14, 1976.1

Washington, May 14, 1976

DEPARTMENT OF STATE
Memorandum of Conversation

DATE: May 14, 1976

SUBJECT: Lockheed Affair

PARTICIPANTS:

Japanese Ambassador Fumihiko Togo

Ambassador Shizuo Saito, Special Envoy

Shinichiro Asao, Ministry of Foreign Affairs, North American Bureau

The Secretary

Assistant Secretary Habib

Monroe Leigh, Legal Advisor

William C. Sherman, Director for Japanese Affairs (Notetaker)

DISTRIBUTION: WH (Rodman)

Amb. Saito: Mr. Secretary, I would like to extend my thanks to you for receiving me and to convey, on behalf of Prime Minister Miki and Foreign Minister Miyazawa, our gratitude to you and to the President for the help which the United States has provide in dealing with the Lockheed affair. I believe you are aware of the circumstances which caused my trip to the United States at this time — the compromise between the opposition and government parties in the Diet which permitted deliberations there to resume on the condition that a special envoy he sent to the United States. I am that special envoy. My mission is under no circumstances to ask for any renegotiation of the agreement on exchange of Lockheed information. I want, however, to explain the current political situation in Japan, to bespeak continuing US Government efforts to provide us with as much information as possible on the Lockheed matter, and finally to exchange views with authorities here on the ways in which we can better regulate and control the international behavior of multinational corporations Finally, I would also like to say that we are very happy with the fine arrangements Mr. Habib and his staff have made to enable me to meet with senior leaders in the United States Government.

The Secretary: Whom have you seen?

Amb. Saito: So far I have seen Attorney General Levi and SEC Chairman Hills. I will be seeing Secretary Richardson this afternoon and also hope to see Senator Percy.

The Secretary: (to Mr. Habib) Has Richardson left on his trip yet?

Mr. Habib: No, he will be leaving in a few days.

Amb. Saito: The Prime Minister asked me to stress the extremely political nature of the Lockheed question in Japan. I have the impression that in the United States it is more a matter of the morals of one individual firm, but in Japan it has much larger dimensions. Unfortunately, we have had a number of cases in the past where politics and money have been connected. Moreover, in this case there is a suspicion of involvement of members of the extreme right-wing who are looked on with distaste by much of the Japanese populace. In addition there are allegations that bribes were exchanged in order to influence the procurement of military aircraft by official agencies of the Japanese government, and this is another aspect which makes the political situation a delicate one. The Prime Minister asked me to emphasize these points and to ask for your cooperation in expediting the Investigation.

The Secretary: As you know, Mr. Ambassador, the investigation is being conducted by the SEC and the Justice Department. Under our system it is not appropriate for the Secretary of State to be involved in what is essentially a criminal or administrative investigation. I will, of course, point out to Chairman Hills that a rapid solution of the case would be desirable, but I obviously cannot tell him how to conduct his business. We look forward to seeing justice done, but it would not be appropriate for the Department to be involved in a criminal investigation. We certainly hope for the fullest and most effective investigation, and we hope at the same time to avoid any foreign policy embarrassment. However, regardless of our wishes in the matter, there is no way in which we can interfere in the process itself. We will do everything in our power to expedite the exchange of documents under the procedures which we have agreed upon. I saw Chairman Hills the other evening and he knows how important the investigation is. However, he must be extremely careful to make sure that every step he takes is appropriate under our laws.

Amb. Saito: When I saw the Attorney General I told him I was, of course, not a representative of the Ministry of Justice but that I simply wished to ask him to extend his cooperation to Japanese Ministry if Justice officials in continuing our investigation. He said he would do this to the fullest.

The Secretary: I'm sure he will. For that matter, if the Government of Japan has any specific concerns, I'm sure that both the Attorney General and Chairman Hills will be happy to look at them with the greatest of care.

Amb. Saito: We have no complaints about the passage of information and we are hoping that it will continue. As you know we have elections this year in my country....

The Secretary: There is some activity here also.

Amb. Saito: (continuing) And our government is trying to clarify this Lockheed situation as soon as possible. It. would be very helpful to have the matter clarified well in advance of our elections.

The Secretary: Are you saying that we should conclude our investigations before your elections or wait until after they are over?

Mr. Leigh: Rod Hills has said that under the consent order he expects to have a finished report on Lockheed within the next six months.

The Secretary: But that won't be in time for the Japanese elections.

Mr. Habib: The material on Lockheed is being transmitted to the Japanese in a continuous stream.

Mr. Leigh: It's my personal view that the whole subject of Lockheed is so extremely complex that a report cannot be completed within six months.

Amb. Togo: The Japanese desire simply to keep the material coming and, hopefully, to be able to interview or question witnesses here in the United States.

Amb. Saito: Yes, our investigations have proceeded to the stage where we need to have direct access to witnesses here, and we will hope that the US legal authorities will assist in this under our Judicial Assistance Agreement.

The Secretary: Can we do this?

Mr. Leigh: Yes, we will do our best. Attorney General Levi fully agrees.

The Secretary: We will do everything possible within the limits of our law and provide whatever information there may be. We don't get it or see it as far as I know.

Mr. Leigh: No, neither I nor Mr. Habib has seen it.

Mr. Habib: We don't want to see it.

Amb. Saito: As you know the Japanese desire to get the names of possibly implicated government officials is unusually strong. If there is no solution to this case, we are going to have a serious public reaction and great criticism of the government. That is another reason we are in such a hurry.

The Secretary: We have been through some similar problems.

Mr. Habib: Ambassador Saito will be meeting the press later this afternoon. Can we agree on a press line.

The Secretary: (to Amb. Saito) What would you like to say?

Amb. Saito: I will say that I explained the political situation in Japan to you, that you showed great understanding and sympathy, and that the United States will continue to extend its cooperation to the Japanese government.

Mr. Habib: Did you want to say also that you agreed that this matter would not have any adverse affect on US-Japanese relations?

The Secretary: No, I want to be more positive than that. I want to say that our relations have never been better, and there is no doubt of that on our side. I don't want to give the impression that a matter like Lockheed could have an adverse affect on our relations.

Mr. Habib: We will make sure that it is stated in a positive manner.

Amb. Saito: I would like to add a few points that the Prime Minister and Foreign Minister asked me to make. The first of these is that, although this problem has given rise to serious unrest in Japanese politics, there will be in the wider view no major changes in the Japanese political structure. Secondly, the Prime Minister asked me to tell you that he is confident in his ability to tide over this critical moment. Finally, Mr. Miyazawa asked me to tell you he believes at the present time you can assume there will be an extraordinary session of the Diet held in the fall and then Diet dissolution and general elections late in the year.

The Secretary: But they must be held this year, isn't that correct?

Amb. Saito: Yes, but the government would prefer to have them as late as possible in the fall. I would like to make the point again that there should he a substantial interval between a clarification of the Lockheed problem and our elections.

The Secretary: My instinct is that it will be unlikely that our bureaucracy will complete its investigation before elections in Japan.

Amb. Saito: Let me give you this letter of introduction from Prime Minister Miki, Mr. Secretary.

The Secretary: (after reading the letter) This is a very courteous and warm letter which I appreciate very much. Please extend my warmest personal regards to the Prime Minister who deserves a great deal of the credit for the warm relations which now exist between our two countries. We fully understand your requirements in continuing this investigation and we hope that you also understand ours. Thank you very much for your visit.

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy Files, P –820117 – 2339. Secret; Nodis. Drafted by Sherman and approved by Collums.

225. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, June 30, 1976, 10:30 a.m. 225. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, June 30, 1976, 10:30 a.m. 1

Washington, June 30, 1976, 10:30 a.m.

DEPARTMENT OF STATE
Memorandum of Conversation

DATE: June 30, 1976
Oval Office
10:30 a.m.

SUBJECT: Prime Minister Miki Call on President Ford

PARTICIPANTS:

President Gerald Ford

Secretary Henry A. Kissinger

Mr. Brent Scowcroft

Under Secretary Habib

Ambassador James Hodgson

James J. Wickel(Interpreter)

Prime Minister Takeo Miki

Foreign Minister Kiichi Miyazawa

Deputy Chief Cabinet Secretary Toshiki Kaifu

Deputy Vice-Minister Bunrokur Yoshino

Ambassador Fumihiko Togo

Ryu Yamazaki (Interpreter)

President: Mr. Prime Minister it gives me great pleasure to welcome you to the United States again. We believe that Japan's participation was a helpful contribution to the Puerto Rico conference. Have the press been favorable in Japan?

Miki: Thank you for your kind remarks, Mr. President. The reaction in Japan has been good. Originally, there was some feeling that the conference would be a political show, but the importance of the conference gradually came to be realized. The press reports were favorable.

This conference, held in Puerto Rico at your initiative, was more relaxed than Rambouillet. Its significance was that it provided us an opportunity to identify and discuss the problem we face , and thus deepen our mutual understanding I appreciated your initiative in calling this conference and the considerate arrangements you made in hosting it. I supported your suggestion that we take the opportunity to discuss, in advance, the kinds of problems that might affect our societies, not in the near-term, but in the future.

President: We are grateful for your invitation to hold the next conference in the Pacific.

Miki: We will need your support to bring it about.

President: Right.

Miki: It is a deep honor for me to take this opportunity to reiterate the heartfelt congratulations of the Government and people of Japan to you and through you, Mr. President, to the people of the United States on the occasion of your Bicentennial. The ideals of the founding fathers are unique, and represent an asset not only for the people of the United States but for all mankind. The celebration of your Bicentennial serves to remind us all of those ideals, which have had such a great influence on strengthening democracy around the world.

President: An elaborate number of significant events have boon planned to celebrate the Bicentennial between July 2 and July 5, in Philadelphia, Valley Forge, Monticello, and many here in Washington. We believe these will provide psychological uplift for us all. I understand there are 30,000 individual projects in the United States, which have been planned and are being carried out in 13,000 communities. Our Bicentennial is a great event, and I think it is significant that so many celebrations have been planned in so many of our local communities.

Miki: The whole world should celebrate your Bicentennial, as welt as the United states. As this great nation, the United States, moves into its third century I hope it will continue to contribute to the peace and prosperity of the world. As you may have heard, we, too, have planned some Bicentennial celebrations in Japan.

Hodgson: Mr. President, the Prime Minister is being entirely too modest. I have been participating in one event each day for the past two months, and on July 4 and 5 I will be kept busy from morning until 11:00 p.m., participating in one event each hour. There is an enormous outpouring of enthusiasm for the Bicentennial in Japan.

Miki: I hope that you will continue to place equal emphasis at home and abroad on the founding principles of equality and liberty, to help meet the aspirations of the people of the world for peace and a better standard of living. Democracy faces many challenges, from the left and from the right, but I believe we share common political ideals and a deep commitment to preserve liberal democracy. We also share a number of problems, at home and abroad, which we can resolve by putting our heads together.

President: Think you for your kind words about our nation, and the points you made about our basic dedication to the ideals of the founding fathers. These principles have survived well in the United States, and will continue to be fundamental to our future. Japan, and other nations, have helped spread them throughout the world.

I was glad to hear that Ambassador Hodgson Keeps busy. We believe he is doing a good job. He works hard. We think he represents the United States to Japan well. Thank you, Jim, and please keep up the good work.

Mr. Prime Minister, may I ask for your comments? We had a unique opportunity last year to bring our two nations together with my visit to Japan and the visit to the United States by Their Majesties the Emperor and Empress. We believe the relations between our two countries are good. Please take the initiative to raise any points you believe we should discuss, to help us try to understand each other better.

Miki: I had an audience with Their Majesties, the Emperor and Empress, a few days before departing for the United States. Both Their Majesties spoke repeatedly of the unforgettable memories of their memorable visit to the United States, and both asked that I convey their warmest regards to you.

President: Please express to Their Majesties the gratitude of Mrs. Ford and me for their coming to the United States. The American people enjoyed having them, not just in Washington, but in many other communities across the United States.

Miki: I will be pleased to convey your regards to Their Majesties.

As you noted there are few problems between Japan and the United States. None of them are major.

However, there are some I wish to take up.

First, may I express my appreciation for your cooperation on the Lockheed problem. With your cooperation, the Japanese prosecutors have come to Los Angeles, to have their rogatories presented to American witnesses. The United States judicial authorities are making an effort to conduct the rogatory as soon as possible, but we have only reached the starting point of this procedure, and have not yet been able to get any statements from the American witnesses.

I believe there are two points to keep in mind in resolving the Lockheed affair. First, this would provide an opportunity to restore the faith of the people in politics in Japan. Second, in dealing with this unfortunate problem, we should not allow any harm, real or imagined, to affect Japan-United States relations. With these two goals in mind, we are doing our very best to resolve this problem, but there are many points on which we must request the cooperation of the United State.

President: We share your concern. We also hope that this problem does not destroy the good relations we have built between the United States and Japan. We will continue to cooperate, as we have. But there are in the United States certain legal and judicial procedure we must follow. We must make certain these are adhered to. Within those restrictions we will maximize our cooperation.

Miki: In Japan, too, we do not intend to delay the resolution of this affair. In the near future I hope to bring this period to an end. I cannot say when, precisely, but it will be in the not too distant future. It will be difficult. As Ambassador Hodgson knows this problem is of the greatest concern to the Japanese people.

President: We hope that with the cooperation we can give that a fair and equitable solution can be reached.

Miki: Our investigative authorities are doing their best, but since this case originated in the United States we must rely on information the United States furnishes . We are satisfied with the cooperation the United States has already extended, and hope that it will continue.

I also hope that Secretary Richardson's Committee, in its study of the conduct of American multi-national corporations abroad, will draft a code of behavior that would require the MNC's to adhere to the laws of the other nations in which they operate.

President: The focus of Secretary Richardson's Cabinet Committee is on collecting all the data, and analyzing what has happened. It will recommend regulations, or laws, but this is a hard problem. Secretary Richardson is not investigating for criminal actions. The work of his committee is far broader, and focused on the future. The net result, we hope, will be not only a recommendation for full disclosure, but also other means to prevent the same sort of thing tram arising in the future.

Miki: I know about the Code of conduct drafted by the OECD, but Japan would also favor the adoption of an international code by the UN. We fully support such efforts in the UN. It would be very helpful if the UN could also do something. Do you think the UN could agree on something by the end of next session?

Kissinger: On the Multi-national corporations? I doubt it. In the OECD we have agreed on a code, but in the UN I doubt it.

Miki: There are two areas I wish to discuss, fisheries and civil aviation. I understand civil aviation negotiations between our two countries are about to begin in August. With respect to fisheries, Japan relies on the sea for half its food protein. Japan has recorded a traditional catch of 1.5 million tons in the waters over which the United States recently extended its control, which represents about 15 percent of its total fish catch. Our catch within 200 miles of the United States is important to us. It consists mostly of Alaskan pollack, which is processed into fish paste. The new law enacted by Congress extends stringent controls over fisheries to 200 miles, but we wish to maintain our traditional access to these food resources.

In the past, Japan has cooperated in negotiating and observing a number of fisheries agreements, and our annual catch remains constant, on a stable basis. I hope that the United States will take this into consideration in enforcing its new law.

President: We in the White House did not take the initiative to establish the 200-mile economic zone. It was legislated by the Congress. We tried to slow it down, to improve the draft as much as possible. For example, we were able to delay the date of enforcement until March 1, 1977. Our basis for doing so was that the Law of the Sea Conference will meet again in February and March, and again in August. It is our hope that a new LOS Treaty will be approved. If it is, then the 200-mile law will become ineffective, because we assume our needs will be covered.

Kissinger: The treaty would provide for a 200-mile economic zone under U.S. jurisdiction, but it would not be as severe as the new law, and would give us some latitude in our bilateral relations.

President: It would provide us more flexibility. How do you view the prospects for the completion of a new Law of the Sea Treaty, and is the government of Japan pushing for it?

Miki: Japan is actively trying to push the LOS through to a conclusion. Because of the large number of Soviet ships off our own coast there is strong pressure in Japan to extend the territorial sea from three to twelve miles. We hope all of these issues can be handled, in one package, at the LOS conference. We hope the United States would take the initiative, and we would support you in pushing for a speedy conclusion.

President: We are anxious to bring this conference to a conclusion, but I assure you we are not going to capitulate on our principles as some others are pushing us to do. We vigorously oppose any limitation on our right to explore and develop the sea bed.

Kissinger: We have put forward a proposal that seeks to reconcile the desire of other nations for international exploration of the sea bed with the need posed by development on a national basis. We believe this is sensible. Does Japan agree?

Miyazawa: Yes, provided some of the fruits of development are contributed to the LDC's.

Kissinger: We have put forward a complex proposal, under which for each site developed on a national basis, another would be set aside for international development, and royalties would be paid into an international fund from national developments. We believe that is fair. If our proposal is accepted in the next session we will move close to concluding a new treaty. This is the key issue. It would be absurd for some countries to block our proposal and end up with nothing for the international community, because we have the technology to go it alone, without international legal prohibitions. But it is being said in some international circles that the United States will capitulate in August. That is wrong, and we won't. We will continue to try to reach legitimate and equitable solutions, but we will not capitulate.

Miki: With respect to civil aviation, there are unequal aspects to our present bilateral agreement, which we hope can be negotiated.

President: I understand we are in the process of negotiation. It is my hope that a reasonable and equitable solution can be achieved. I am cognizant of the fact that our government people are negotiating with yours, and I trust that a proper compromise can be accomplished

Miki: With respect to Asian problems, I believe Foreign Minister Miyazawa and Secretary Kissinger have discussed in detail the Korean issue in the forthcoming UN General Assembly. I have nothing new to add here.

President: It's in good hands.

Miki: In another area, the ASEAN nations are not certain about Vietnam's intentions, and Vietnam's foreign policy is not yet clear. The ASEAN nations are watching closely to see how Vietnam's policy develops, but without the United States they would be unable to take a positive position vis-a-vis Vietnam. In our view, ASEAN should not be considered as a potential anti-communist bloc aimed at Vietnam. We wish to conceive of ASEAN as being more flexible. Japan has relations with Vietnam, and, as we observe it, we believe Vietnam is most concerned with domestic construction. We do not foresee Vietnam undertaking an adventurous foreign policy, but this could depend on how relations develop between Vietnam and the ASEAN nations, as well as developments within the region. We believe it would be best to promote domestic development within the ASEAN nations, and regional developments, without aggravating the relations between the ASEAN nations and Vietnam. At present we see no danger signs that Vietnam will take an aggressive policy.

President: I would like to ask Secretary Kissinger for his views of Vietnam, now that it has been unified in a literal way.

Kissinger: Our assessment is that Vietnam will continue through the coming years to conduct a rather aggressive foreign policy. Excessive humility is not a Vietnamese trait. I met with the Foreign Minister of Indonesia yesterday, which is why I could not call on you, Mr. Prime Minister. He told me they assess Vietnam as a great danger to the stability of Southeast Asia, by encouraging subversive movements. However, on the other hand, they also need economic aid. If they get it for free, they will do both, take aid, and encourage subversion. If we attach conditions...they won't get aid from us, it is safe to say. We will continue to support the ASEAN nations, and anything Japan can do would be greatly appreciated, in helping to promote internal economic developments which would enable these nations to resist subversion. We are now negotiating a new base agreement with the Philippines, and will do what we can with Indonesia. We are not trying to create an anti-communist bloc, but the dangers all come from the communist world.

Miki: In our view, the best way for the ASEAN nations to resist subversion is to build sturdy and stable domestic situations. We understand the ASEAN Foreign Ministers, in their recent meeting in Manila, believed they should, instead of forming a bloc, try to coordinate their development projects to move in the direction of internal development in which Japan would wish to assist.

President: That coincides with our view. As Secretary Kissinger has said we are working with the Philippines on new arrangements for our military installations, and economic as well as military assistance. I also feel my own visit to Indonesia last December was most productive, and in our view has led to considerable achievements.

Mr. Prime Minister, what are your views on Korea?

Miki: We see the confrontation between North and South Korea continuing, but no conflict as such. The excessive fear each holds for the other hinders them from initiating a dialogue. Under these circumstances, the ROK relies greatly on its relations with the United States, and Japan, but is uneasy about its relations with the United States, and should be encouraged not to lose its cool.

Since the end of the Vietnam War the Japanese have begun to criticize President Park's domestic policy rather severely, but we continue to maintain a policy of friendly relations with the ROK, as does the United States. However, President Park's internal policies do present a great problem for us. To summarize, we see relations between North and South Korea continuing in their present form.

President: We have excellent relations with South Korea. We too have a domestic problem with President Park's domestic policies, but we will continue to support the ROK as we promised. But not our prospective Democratic opponent, who indicated in his recent foreign policy speech that he would move more rapidly to withdraw United States forces.

Kissinger: He does that in every foreign policy speech.

President: This administration is different: we believe a withdrawal would be harmful to the stability of the Asian area.

Mr. Prime Minister, there is one problem I would like to raise. Ever since I became President, and even before, we have been trying to find an answer in the Middle East, to move toward a broad settlement. We have followed a step-by-step policy so far, and the Sinai Agreement is working very well. It is being adhered to by Egypt and the Israelis. But Lebanon has been a great tragedy, slowing down our efforts. Without it the movement toward a settlement might have kept going. But Egypt is the very key. Last year after our governments got together we provided 50 million dollars in economic aid for Egypt, and we will continue our financial contribution. We will provide more than 100 million dollars in what we call the transition quarter, and 700 million dollars in FY 77. We hope that Japan will agree to continue its support, and contribute 100 million dollars this year, because the stability of this region, with Egypt as key, is vital on a global as well-as regional basis. Japan's contribution has been most helpful in the past, and I urge you, if you can, to go from 50 to 100 million dollars next year.

Miyazawa: That is 100 million dollars for whatever purposes they wish? I believe you said, Mr. President, that we should formalize an agreement between the two nations, but Egypt is not pushing for a formal agreement. If they wish, Japan should be ready.

Miki: Our desires coincide with what you have described.

President: We provided 800 million dollars last year. We will provide another 100 million dollars in the three-month period beginning July 1, and 700 million dollars in the next FY beginning September 1. The combined efforts of the United States and Japan, and some of the Arab nations, should be sufficient to keep Egypt strong, and help Egypt break away from the Soviet Union as well as continue to negotiate for a permanent settlement in the Middle East.

Miki: I agree that Egypt is the key nation in the Middle East, but what is your view of Syrian relations?

President: They are not what we would call 100 percent. The Israelis are on the Golan Heights, which is a basic difficulty that has existed for a long, time. But now Syria is preoccupied with its actions in Lebanon. I might ask the Secretary for his views.

Kissinger: We have a high regard for President Assad, who is the most moderate Syrian leader conceivable. Israel has moved so far forward on Golan, and is inflexible, but Assad is willing to negotiate with Israel. The Syrians are in an unbelievable mess in Lebanon. They are proving that half-hearted military efforts are not the monopoly of the United States. They got in, and now they can't leave. If they leave, they will find themselves squeezed between two radical governments, Lebanon and Iraq, but if they stay, their whole diplomacy is placed in jeopardy. We ate concerned. A settlement would have to be part of a negotiating process. This could be possible after the election.

Miki: In your view is there a danger of armed conflict in the Middle East?

President: With the exception of Lebanon the situation there seems to be one of stability. But the question of which supports which makes for a volatile situation. Once Lebanon is settled, if we are not mistaken, we could continuo to push for a broader settlement on a more permanent basis.

Miki: As we have both noted, there are no hot issues in our bilateral relations. I have mentioned some bilateral problems, but I wonder if you wish to raise any on your side?

President: We believe our relations are good. It was good and wholesome to discuss the issues you raised. I know of no others; do you, Henry?

Kissinger: No, I don't believe so.

Miki: Mr. President, I wish you every success in the election.

President: Thank you. I believe we are scheduled to go to the Rose Garden, where you will present Japan's generous gift of three million dollars to complete the experimental theater at the Kennedy Center, for which we are very grateful.

Secretary: What shall we tell the press?

Miyazawa: Whatever you like.

Secretary: Shall we just say that the President and the Prime Minister reviewed the world situation and bilateral matters?

Miyazawa: That sounds good.

1 Source: Ford Library, National Security Adviser, Memoranda of Conversation, Box 20. Secret; Nodis. Drafted by Wickel. The conversation took place in the Oval Office. Ford’s briefing information is ibid., Presidential Country Files for East Asia and the Pacific, Box 7, Country File, Japan [9]. Ford’s and Miki’s luncheon conversation concerned China and non-proliferation among other topics. (Ibid., Memoranda of Conversation, Box 20)

226. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, July 1, 1976, 3:30 p.m. 226. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, July 1, 1976, 3:30 p.m. 1

Washington, July 1, 1976, 3:30 p.m.

THE WHITE HOUSE
WASHINGTON
MEMORANDUM OF CONVERSATION

PARTICIPANTS:

James D. Hodgson, Ambassador to Japan

Brent Scowcroft, Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs

John J. Taylor, Staff Member, NSC

DATE, TIME AND PLACE: July 1, 1976, 3:30 p.m.
The White House

SUBJECT: U.S.-Japan Relations

General Scowcroft said that he thought the Miki visit had gone very well. Miki had exploited the visit for his own purposes but this was expected. The Ambassador said that after the Lockheed affair Miki and the Japanese felt that the United States owed Japan some special consideration. Because we responded appropriately, there will be a widespread feeling in Japan that the United States has a good appreciation of Japanese culture.

The Ambassador said that since Bob Ingersoll is no longer around, he has no one with whom he can talk on a personal basis about Japanese-U.S. relations and his own role. He hoped to be able to carry on this sort of personal communication with the General. General Scowcroft welcomed more personal contact with the Ambassador. The Ambassador hoped that if there were ever any question in the White House concerning U.S. relations with Japan or the conduct of his job, that the General would communicate directly with him. General Scowcroft said that the President in his talks with Miki had on his own initiative praised Ambassador Hodgson's performance. In part, the President had wanted to lay to rest any thought that because of the Ambassador's previous association with Lockheed Corporation there was any question about the President's confidence in Kim.

The Ambassador raised the question about a pardon for Tokyo Rose. He said that he has the feeling that the Japanese Government is reluctant to raise the issue and that some persons are indirectly floating stories in order to bring the subject to attention. The Ambassador said a pardon would be viewed in Japan as a very gracious act and as underscoring the President's pronouncement in his Pacific Doctrine speech that World War II is behind us. If a pardon could be issued after the August convention, the Ambassador thought that it would have a good effect. General Scowcroft said he had not heard anything on the subject but that we would look into it.

The Ambassador asked if we could arrange for an inscribed photo of the President to be sent to the Japanese Chief of Protocol. The General asked Mr. Taylor if he would take care of this.

The Ambassador said that on security matters there is some interesting rethinking going on in Japanese circles. Some officials and politicians, as well as some academicians, believe that Japans security situation is markedly different from that of a year or two ago. Factors affecting this change have been the U.S. withdrawal from mainland Southeast Asia, the Congressional Executive Branch standoff, Americas "pulling in its horns" in Angola, and the buildup of the Russian fleet, which now has a two to one ton advantage over the U.S. Navy. The Japanese have noted that the Soviets term themselves not only an "Asian" but a "Pacific power." Some Japanese seem to realize that their previous policy of 100 percent reliance on the U.S. for security is no longer possible.

At the same time the public is opposed to an increase in defense spending, and the present government is too weak to take any important initiatives in this field.

The Ambassador thought there was an opportunity for us in this developing situation and that we should be working closely with those that share this concern. We should tell them that we also perceive the danger, and that our concern is reflected in an increased defense budget and an expansion of our naval forces. At the same time, we recognize that the U.S. dominance of the 1950s and 1960s will never return, and that Japan should realistically assess the situation. We should be very careful, however, not to try to push the Japanese into an expansion of their defense efforts, but should let them do it at their own pace. The danger was that elements in the Pentagon might over-react and attempt to move things too quickly.

General Scowcroft said he agreed that we should move very slowly. One thing that we could do was to rebuild Japanese confidence in us. The General said he would keep Defense under control.

General Scowcroft said he thought we had underestimated Miki all along. The Ambassador said that he believed that Miki would hang on through the elections although the Embassy Political officers thought Miki had only a fifty-fifty chance. The Ambassador said there was a new factor in politics in Japan, the public was much more critical of power playing and corruption.

General Scowcroft said he liked Miki personally and found him easier to communicate with than Tanaka. Ambassador Hodgson agreed and said Tanaka was cagey and did not conceptualize.

1 Source: Ford Library, National Security Adviser, Memoranda of Conversation, Box 20. Confidential. Eugene V. McAuliffe, the Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs, praised the Japanese Government’s Defense White Paper of June 4. (Memorandum from McAuliffe to the Secretary of Defense, June 22, 1976; Washington National Records Center, OSD Files: FRC 330–79–0049, Japan, 092, 1976 June 22)

227. Telegram 11294 From the Embassy in Japan to the Department of State, July 27, 1976, 0910Z. 227. Telegram 11294 From the Embassy in Japan to the Department of State, July 27, 1976, 0910Z.1

July 27, 1976, 0910Z

TELEGRAM
Department of State
TOKYO 11294

O R 270910Z JUL 76

FM AMEMBASSY TOKYO
TO SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 1138
INFO COMUSJAPAN YOKOTA AB JAP
CINCPAC HONOLULU HI
AMEMBASSY MANILA
AMEMBASSY SEOUL
AMEMBASSY TAIPEI
AMEMBASSY THE HAGUE
AMEMBASSY ROME
USLO PEKING

TOKYO 11294

CINCPAC FOR POLAD

E.O. 11652: GDS
TAGS: PINT, JA

SUBJECT: ARREST OF FORMER PRIME MINISTER TANAKA

SUMMARY: KAKUEI TANAKA, JAPAN'S PRIME MINISTER FROM 1972 TO 1974, WAS ARRESTED ON JULY 27 ON CHARGES OF VIOLATING THE FOREIGN EXCHANGE LAW BY TAKING SOME FIVE HUNDRED MILLION YEN ($1.7 MILLION) IN FUNDS SUPPLIED BY THE LOCKHEED CORPORATION. THIS IS THE BIGGEST POLITICAL SCANDAL FOR JAPAN'S RULING LIBERAL DEMOCRATIC PARTY SINCE ITS FORMATION TWENTY-ONE YEARS AGO. THE ARREST DOES NOT MEAN THE END OF JAPAN'S LOCKHEED SCANDAL BUT RATHER OPENS POSSIBILITY THAT ANY AND ALL OF THE OTHER POLITICIANS WHO RECEIVED LOCKHEED MONEY COULD BE ARRESTED AS WELL. WE EXPECT MIKI TO RECEIVE SOME POPULAR AND MEDIA CREDIT FOR "ALLOWING" THE TANAKA ARREST. PARADOXICALLY, HOWEVER, THE ARREST HAS ALSO DESTROYED THE INTRA-LDP STANDOFF WHICH HAS SUSTAINED MIKI IN POWER. WE EXPECT THAT THE ARREST WILL ALSO SHARPLY REDUCE ANY LINGERING SUSPICION THAT THE U.S. AND GOJ WERE SEEKING TO COVER UP THE LOCKHEED SCANDAL. END SUMMARY.

1. AT 7:28 IN THE MORNING OF JULY 27 FORMER PRIME MINISTER KAKUEI TANAKA WAS BROUGHT TO THE OFFICE OF THE TOKYO PROSECUTOR FOR "VOLUNTARY" QUESTIONING IN CONNECTION WITH THE ONGOING LOCKHEED INVESTIGATION AND WAS ARRESTED AT 8:40 OF THE SAME MORNING. TANAKA IS CHARGED WITH VIOLATION OF THE FOREIGN EXCHANGE AND FOREIGN TRADE CONTROL LAW. HE IS SAID TO HAVE RECEIVED FIVE HUNDRED MILLION YEN ($1.7 MILLION) THROUGH MARUBENI CORPORATION OFFICIALS FROM THE LOCKHEED AIRCRAFT CORPORATION. TANAKA IS BEING HELD FOR QUESTIONING IN THE PROSECUTOR'S TOKYO DETENTION HOUSE. FROM THERE TANAKA HAS SENT IN HIS RESIGNATION FROM THE LDP. THE LAW SAYS HE CAN BE DETAINED FOR A MAXIMUM OF 22 DAYS. CHIEF RIOJI TAKASE OF THE TOKYO DISTRICT PUBLIC PROSECUTOR'S OFFICE TOLD REPORTERS THAT TANAKA IS SUSPECTED OF, BUT HAS NOT BEEN CHARGED WITH RECEIVING BRIBES BETWEEN AUGUST 9, 1973 AND FEBRUARY 28, 1974 FROM HIRO HIYAMA, THE FORMER CHAIRMAN OF MARUBENI WHO WAS ARRESTED ON JULY 13, 1976. TANAKA'S PRIVATE SECRETARY HAS ALSO BEEN ARRESTED.

2. PROSECUTOR TAKASE TOLD THE PRESS THAT TANAKA IS SUSPECTED OF HAVING RECEIVED LOCKHEED BRIBES IN CONNECTION WITH ALL NIPPON AIRWAYS' (ANA) PURCHASE OF TRI-STAR AIRBUSES AND ALSO THE GOVERNMENT'S PRELIMINARY DECISION IN FAVOR OF P3C "ORION" ANTI-SUBMARINE PLANES INSTEAD OF DOMESTICALLY PRODUCED ONES. HE NOTED THAT TANAKA MET WITH NIXON IN HONOLULU FROM AUGUST 31 TO SEPTEMBER 1, 1972, THAT TANAKA THEN MET WITH HIYAMA ON OCTOBER 14, 1972 AND WITH ANA PRESIDENT WAKASE (ARRESTED JULY 8) ON OCTOBER 24. THE LATTER MEETING WAS FOLLOWED BY ANA'S DECISION TO PURCHASE SIX TRI-STARS ON OCTOBER 30. IN ANNOUNCING THE ARREST, TAKASE SAID HE EXPECTED A NUMBER OF OTHER HIGH OFFICIALS WOULD SOON BE ARRESTED.

3. NEWS OF THE ARREST BROUGHT EXPRESSIONS OF SURPRISE FROM ALL QUARTERS. PRIME MINISTER MIKI SAID AT A MEETING OF CABINET MINISTERS ON THE MORNING OF THE 27TH THAT THE LDP IS FACING ITS GREATEST CRISIS. HE TOLD THE PRESS AFTER THAT MEETING THAT HE WOULD DO HIS UTMOST TO UNRAVEL ALL THE FACTS OF THE SCANDAL IN ORDER TO RESTORE THE PEOPLE'S TRUST IN THE LDP. HE ALSO SAID HE WOULD NOT DISSOLVE THE LOWER HOUSE FOR ELECTIONS UNTIL THE LOCKHEED SCANDAL HAD BEEN CLEARED UP. FORMER LDP SECGEN, TANAKA CABINET MINISTER OF TRANSPORTATION AND TANAKA FACTION LIEUTENANT TOMISABURO HASHIMOTO, WHO HIMSELF HAS BEEN MENTIONED IN THE PRESS AS A PROBABLE BRIBE RECIPIENT, GREETED NEWS OF TANAKA'S ARREST WITH "UNBELIEVABLE, UNBELIEVABLE. I TRUST TANAKA." THERE WILL APPARENTLY BE A SUMMIT MEETING OF CABINET AND LDP LEADERS LATER TODAY.

4. SPOKESMAN FOR ALL FOUR OPPOSITION PARTIES ALSO EXPRESSED SURPRISE AT THE ARREST AND URGED THE PROSECUTORS TO CONTINUE THEIR INVESTIGATIONS UNTIL ALL GUILTY PARTIES WERE UNDER ARREST. SIMILARLY, THE CHAIRMAN OF THE JAPAN CHAMBER OF COMMERCE AND THE PRESIDENT OF THE FEDERATION OF ECONOMIC ORGANIZATIONS (KEIDANREN) CALLED FOR THE LDP TO TAKE WHATEVER MEASURES WERE NECESSARY TO CLEAN HOUSE. APPARENTLY REACTING TO NEWS OF THE ARREST, THE TOKYO STOCK EXCHANGE BEGAN THE DAY WITH A LARGE DECLINE IN PRICES AND VOLUME OF SALES.

5. COMMENT: THE TANAKA ARREST IS QUITE OBVIOUSLY THE BIGGEST SHOCK THE LDP HAS EVER RECEIVED. THE SURPRISE, AND TO A CERTAIN EXTENT DISMAYED SHOCK, WITH WHICH IT WAS MET WILL BE FOLLOWED, WE FEEL, BY SEVERAL DAYS OR PERHAPS WEEKS OF CONFUSION IN PARTY AND GOVERNMENT RANKS. IF A TANAKA CAN BE ARRESTED, THE POSSIBILITY OF ARRESTING OTHER POLITICIANS IS WIDE OPEN.

6. FOR PRIME MINISTER MIKI THE TANAKA ARREST CUTS BOTH WAYS. AS WE SAW IN HIS PRESS CONFERENCE JUST AFTER THE ARREST, MIKI HASTENED TO CAST HIMSELF IN THE ROLE OF THE LEADER WHO IS FULFILLING HIS PROMISE TO THE PEOPLE TO CLEAR UP THE SCANDAL. ON THIS SCORE HE WILL RECEIVE, RIGHTLY OR WRONGLY, BOTH CREDIT AND ANY BLAME FOR WHAT THE PROSECUTORS DO. FOR THE PRESENT WE EXPECT MIKI WILL GET CREDIT IN POPULAR AND MEDIA CIRCLES FOR "PERMITTING" THE INVESTIGATIONS TO GO AS FAR AS TANAKA HIMSELF. AT THE SAME TIME, THE ARREST OF TANAKA HAS PARADOXICALLY DESTROYED THE INTRA-LDP STANDOFF (BETWEEN FUKUDA AND TANAKA) WHICH HAS BEEN THE MAJOR FACTOR BOTH IN BRINGING MIKI INTO POWER AND IN MAINTAINING HIM THERE. MOREOVER, WE EXPECT THAT THE TANAKA ARREST WILL GO FAR TO ELIMINATE ANY LINGERING SUSPICION AMONG JAPANESE PEOPLE OF COLLUSION TO COVER UP THE LOCKHEED SCANDAL BY THE U.S. AND GOJ. THESE ASSESSMENTS, OF COURSE ARE PRELIMINARY. THE FULL IMPACT OF LOCKHEED ON JAPAN'S BODY POLITIC HAS YET TO BE FELT OR WEIGHED.

SHOESMITH

1 Source: National Archives, Record Group 59, Central Foreign Policy Files. Confidential; Immediate. Repeated for information to COMUS Japan in Yokota, to CINCPAC in Honolulu, to the Embassies in Manila, Seoul, Taipei, The Hague, Rome, and to the Liaison Office in Beijing.

228. Telegram 16298 From the Embassy in Japan to the Department of State, November 2, 1976, 0620Z. 228. Telegram 16298 From the Embassy in Japan to the Department of State, November 2, 1976, 0620Z.1

November 2, 1976, 0620Z

TELEGRAM
Department of State
TOKYO 16298

R 020620Z NOV 76

FM AMEMBASSY TOKYO TO SECSTATE WASHDC 3319
INFO SECDEF WASHDC
AMEMBASSY MOSCOW
COMUSJAPAN
CINCPAC HONOLULU HI

TOKYO 16298

CINCPAC FOR POLAD ALSO

E.O. 11652: GDS
TAGS: PINR, MPOL, MARR, JA

SUBJECT: REFLECTIONS ON THE MIG-25 INCIDENT

SUMMARY: PROCESS OF SORTING OUT PROBLEMS ATTENDANT UPON DISPOSITION OF DEFECTING MIG-25 AFTER ITS LANDING SEPTEMBER 6 AND ITS SUBSEQUENT EXPLOITATION WAS USEFUL IN ADUMBRATING WORKINGS OF JAPANESE BUREAUCRACY AND ILLUSTRATING JAPANESE ATTITUDES SIGNIFICANT FOR CONDUCT OF JAPANESE-U.S. RELATIONS IN SECURITY AND OTHER FIELDS. LEGITIMACY OF SELF-DEFENSE FORCE (JSDF) ROLE WAS PUBLICLY ACCEPTED EARLY IN GAME AND INDICATED EXTENT TO WHICH SECURITY QUESTIONS HAVE BEEN DESENSITIZED OVER PAST FEW YEARS. GOJ, NONETHELESS, FACED DELICATE TASK IN CONDITIONING OPINION TO NEED TO HOLD PLANE FOR THOROUGH EXPLOITATION, IN WHICH THERE WOULD BE U.S. PARTICIPATION. WHILE CONFLICTING SIGNALS SEEMED TO RESULT, REFLECTING IN PART NARROW CONCERNS OF SOME SEGMENTS OF BUREAUCRACY, TOP GOJ LEADERSHIP HAVING GIVEN US COMMITMENT ON PARTICIPATION KEPT ITS WORD. IN ORDER TO MAKE GOOD ON PROMISES, HOWEVER, IT WAS NECESSARY THROUGHOUT AFFAIR FOR GOJ TO MAINTAIN OFFICIAL POSITION OF BEING FULLY IN CHARGE, WITH ANY U.S. ASSISTANCE FURNISHED ON JAPANESE TERMS AND AT JAPANESE REQUEST. SOME OF JAPANESE RATIONALE AND PROCEDURES WERE CUMBERSOME AND LED TO FRUSTRATIONS CAUSING OUTSIDERS TO SEE GOJ AS VACILLATING, BUT IN THIS INSTANCE, AS IN MANY OTHERS, WE FOUND IT NECESSARY TO ACCEPT GOJ RITUAL OR AIRING CONTRARY LEGAL POSITIONS WHILE CONTINUING TO COOPERATE TO MEET U.S. DESIDERATA. HEAVY-HANDED SOVIET BEHAVIOR MADE SUCH COOPERATION EASIER. JAPANESE HAVE BEEN DRAWING OWN LESSONS FROM INCIDENT, INCLUDING NEED TO ENGAGE SDF AT EARLIER STAGE AND REQUIREMENT FOR MORE RAPID COMMUNICATION. SHOULD SIMILAR AFFAIR OCCUR IN FUTURE, WE WOULD ANTICIPATE SMOOTHER GOJ APPROACH, BUT EVEN SO, THERE IS A CERTAIN PACE TO GOJ DECISION-MAKING THAT CANNOT BE FORCED. ON U.S. SIDE, IT SOON BECAME CLEAR THAT CENTRALIZED COORDINATION WAS ABSOLUTELY ESSENTIAL BOTH IN REGARD TO EXPLOITATION ITSELF AND TO BE CERTAIN RECOMMENDATIONS TO WASHINGTON, APPROACHES TO GOJ, AND ENSUING U.S.-GENERATED PUBLICITY WERE NOT IN CONFLICT. END SUMMARY.

1. NOW THAT THE MOG-25 IS CRATED AND AWAITING RETURN TO ITS OWNERS, APPROXIMATELY TWO MONTHS AFTER ITS UNEXPECTED LANDING AT HAKODATE, IT MAY BE WORTH REFLECTING ON THE MANNER IN WHICH THE AFFAIR WAS TREATED BY GOJ, BOTH FOR LESSONS TO BE LEARNED IN REGARD TO MACHINATIONS OF JAPANESE BUREAUCRACY AND FOR ADDITIONAL LIGHT SHED ON SOME CURRENT JAPANESE ATTITUDES.

2. DESENSITIZATION OF SECURITY QUESTIONS. ALTHOUGH, AS ADDRESSEES AWARE, MANNER IN WHICH GOJ EXERCISED CONTROL OVER AIRCRAFT AND ITS SUBSEQUENT EXPLOITATION WAS SUBJECT OF PROLONGED INTER-MINISTERIAL DISCUSSION AS WELL AS DIET HEARINGS, JAPANESE SELF-DEFENSE FORCE (JSDF) ROLE ONCE ASSUMED WAS NEVER SERIOUSLY QUESTIONED, AND MEDIA, THROUGH ABSENCE OF CRITICISM OF SELF-DEFENSE FORCES, TACITLY ACCEPTED LEGITIMACY OF JSDF ACTIONS. IN PART, THIS HAPPY RESULT WAS ATTRIBUTABLE TO JUDICIOUS DEALINGS WITH PRESS BY JAPAN DEFENSE AGENCY (JDA) ITSELF. JDA USED STAGED PRESS LEAKS TO MAXIMUM ADVANTAGE IN CONDITIONING PUBLIC OPINION TO ACCEPT LEGITIMACY OF JDA EXERCISE OF JURISDICTION; NEED TO HOLD PLANE FOR LONGER PERIOD THAN AT FIRST PUBLICLY ACKNOWLEDGED; AND IMPORTANCE OF U.S. COOPERATION IN JAPANESE EXPLOITATION OF AIRCRAFT. WHILE GOJ, ESPECIALLY MOFA, EXHIBITED CONSIDERABLE NERVOUSNESS ABOUT ITS PUBLIC POSTURE — REFLECTING BOTH KNOWN AND ASSUMED ATTITUDES OF PRIME MINISTER AS WELL AS DELICATE POLITICAL MANEUVERING IN DIET — GOVERNMENT EXPERIENCED NO SIGNIFICANT PUBLIC RELATIONS MISHAPS. ACCEPTANCE OF GOJ POSITIONS RE MIG FIT PATTERN OF INCREASED EQUANIMITY WITH WHICH SECURITY QUESTIONS SUCH AS PROCUREMENT, LEVEL OF DEFENSE BUDGET, AND U.S.-JAPAN DEFENSE COOPERATION HAVE COME TO BE DISCUSSED. A FEW YEARS AGO, MIG DISPOSITION WOULD HAVE BEEN FOCUS OF MUCH SHARPER DEBATE—THIS TIME THERE WERE NO "YES, BUT..." EDITORIALS.

3. A MUTUAL SECURITY MATTER. WHILE THERE WAS DISINCLINATION TO MAKE PUBLIC STATEMENTS TO EFFECT THAT EXPLOITATION OF MIG WOULD BE TREATED AS A MATTER OF MUTUAL U.S.A.-JAPAN SECURITY INTEREST, THIS WAS PREMISE ON WHICH TOP JAPANESE LEVELS OF BOTH MOFA AND JDA OPERATED FROM START. EMBASSY RECEIVED PRIVATE ASSURANCES EARLY IN GAME THAT GOJ WOULD SEE TO IT THAT ARRANGEMENTS WOULD BE MADE FOR U.S. TO HAVE NECESSARY ACCESS TO PLANE. PROCESS OF CONDITIONING PUBLIC OPINION LED TO SOME DELAYS AND WAS PARTLY RESPONSIBLE FOR WHAT MAY HAVE SEEMED TO BE CONFLICTING SIGNALS, BUT EARLY COMMITMENTS TO US WERE FULLY HONORED — NOT BECAUSE THEY MET A U.S. INTEREST OR U.S. HAD ANY SPECIAL RIGHTS, BUT BECAUSE JAPANESE WERE CONVINCED IT WAS IN OUR MUTUAL INTEREST.

4. WITHIN MOFA, HOWEVER, CERTAIN AMOUNT OF CLIENTITIS DEVELOPED, WITH AMERICAN AFFAIRS BUREAU SUPPORTING U.S. ROLE IN EXPLOITATION FOR SOME REASONABLE PERIOD WHILE EUROPEAN AFFAIRS BUREAU FAVORED EARLY RETURN OF AIRCRAFT SO AS NOT TO MUDDY JAPAN'S RELATIONS WITH SOVIET UNION. JDA, IN TURN, FAVORED MORE AGGRESSIVE EXPLOITATION THAN MOFA. IN THIS SITUATION, AND IN ABSENCE OF FORTHRIGHT GUIDANCE FROM MIKI, DECISIONS COULD NOT BE MADE WITHOUT TIME-CONSUMING INTER-MINISTERIAL MEETINGS AND REFERRAL TO PRIMIN. LESSON, HOWEVER, WHICH APPLIES IN MANY AREAS, IS THAT ONCE COMMITMENT HAS BEEN MADE AT SENIOR LEVEL, IN THIS INSTANCE BY FOREIGN MINISTER AND VICE MINISTER, AND JDA MINISTER AND VICE MINISTER. EVENTUAL DECISIONS ALL WORK OUT TO OUR SATISFACTION DESPITE FRUSTRATIONS ALONG THE WAY. EXPRESSION OF TOP-LEVEL US INTEREST IN HAVING FULL ACCESS TO MIG WAS ALSO OF GREAT ASSISTANCE.

5. JAPANESE MAINTAINED CONTROL. OTHER SIDE OF MUTUAL-SECURITY-INTEREST COIN WAS GOJ IMPERATIVE TO REMAIN IN CHARGE. THIS WAS POLITICALLY NECESSARY IN TERMS OF PUBLIC OPINION AND TO AVOID PROVOKING POLITICAL OPPOSITION, BUT IT ALSO REFLECTED GENUINE NATIONAL SENSITIVITY. THUS GOJ WAS AT PAINS TO HAVE SCENARIO INDICATE AT ALL STAGES THAT JDA WAS IN FULL CONTROL OF AIRCRAFT INVESTIGATION, THAT U.S. PERSONNEL HAD BEEN MADE AVAILABLE IN A SUBORDINATE ADVISORY ROLE, AND THAT DISPOSITION OF INTELLIGENCE GAINED WAS A JAPANESE PREROGATIVE. IT WAS ALSO REASON WHY GOJ HAS INSISTED ON REIMBURSING U.S. FOR TRANSPORTATION AND EXPLOITATION COSTS, AND WHY GOJ HAS BEEN SO ULTRA-SENSITIVE ABOUT OFFICIAL STATEMENTS ON MIG EVALUATION EMANATING FROM U.S. SIDE, EVEN WHILE MUCH INFORMATION WAS BEING LEAKED BY JAPANESE.

6. PROCEDURES EVOLVED MAY HAVE BEEN CUMBERSOME AND COULD IMPRESS OUTSIDERS AS SO THINLY VEILED A SUBTERFUGE AS TO BE MEANINGLESS. MOREOVER, ELABORATE JAPANESE RITUAL FOR MEETING DIET INTERPELLATION AND CONDITIONING PUBLIC OPINION RUNS RISK OF CONTRADICTORY SIGNALS WHICH CAUSE SOME OUTSIDERS TO SEE GOJ AS VACILLATING OR "UNTRUSTWORTHY." IT IS NECESSARY, HOWEVER, TO UNDERSTAND IMPORTANCE GOJ ATTACHES TO PLAYING GAME BY THEIR RULES, AND DISTINCTION BETWEEN OFFICIAL PUBLIC JAPANESE POSITIONS AND ACTUAL SITUATION. WE WERE UNABLE TO ACCEPT GOJ VIEW THAT U.S. PERSONNEL DETAILED TO JDA RELINQUISHED THEIR SOFA STATUS (FORTUNATELY NO INCIDENTS AROSE THAT WOULD HAVE SURFACED OUR AGREEMENT TO DISAGREE), BUT OTHERWISE PRICE OF PLAYING BY JAPANESE RULES WAS NOT ONEROUS AND GAVE RESULTS WE NEEDED. EMBASSY FINDS IT ROUTINELY FACES SITUATIONS IN WHICH MOFA, HAVING POINTED UP CONTRARY LEGAL POSITIONS, FINDS A WAY OF COOPERATING TO MEET US DESIDERATA, PARTICULARLY IN SECURITY FIELD. IT CANNOT ALWAYS COMPLY WITH OUR REQUESTS, BUT ONCE WORD IS GIVEN, WE CAN ALMOST ALWAYS RELY ON IT. THIS WAS SO IN CASE OF THE MIG-25.

7. SOVIETS HELPED MAKE IT EASY. JAPANESE CASE THAT AN AIRCRAFT LANDED BY DEFECTOR CONSTITUTED SOVIET INTRUSION OF SOVEREIGN AIR SPACE AND TERRITORY IN VIOLATION OF THE INTERNATIONAL LAW MIGHT NOT HAVE BEEN OVERLY LOGICAL, BUT IT GAINED CREDIBILITY AS RESULT OF APPALLING SOVIET INSENSITIVITY TO JAPANESE SENTIMENT. THERE HAS NEVER BEEN ANY LOVE FOR RUSSIANS IN JAPAN, BUT SOVIET INABILITY TO COUPLE DEMARCHES FOR RETURN OF PILOT AND PLANE WITH APOLOGY FOR INCIDENT, EVEN IN FACE OF DAILY PRESS INVITATIONS TO DO SO, STRUCK BOTH JAPANESE OFFICIALS AND MAN-IN-THE-STREET AS CALLOUS DISREGARD FOR INTERNATIONAL PROPRIETY. GROMYKO'S COLD TREATMENT OF KOSAKA IN NEW YORK — "HE DIDN'T EVEN OFFER ME A GLASS OF WATER" — COMPOUNDED ANTI-SOVIET FEELING. IN VIEW OF CONCERN IN SOME GOJ CIRCLES ABOUT EFFECT OF INCIDENT ON JAPAN-SOVIET RELATIONS, WE WOULD GUESS THAT PRESSURE FOR EARLY RETURN OF MIG-25 WOULD HAVE BUILT UP RAPIDLY HAD SOVIETS DONE "THE RIGHT THING." (IN CONTRAST, PROMPT EXPRESSION OF U.S. REGRET ABOUT RE-ENACTMENT OF HIROSHIMA BOMBING COOLED WHAT MIGHT HAVE BEEN A RANKLING IRRITANT IN OUR RELATIONS).

8. MINIMAL IMPACT ON LONG-TERM SOVIET RELATIONS. AS IT SEEMS TO BE TURNING OUT, JAPANESE HAVE FOUND THAT IT WILL PROBABLY BE POSSIBLE TO ISOLATE AFFAIR FROM MAIN COURSE OF JAPANESE-SOVIET RELATIONS. DIRECT SOVIET THREATS AGAINST JAPAN CAN ONLY FURTHER ANTAGONIZE ALL SEGMENTS OF PUBLIC ALREADY ANNOYED BY ADAMANT RUSSIAN STAND ON NORTHERN TERRITORIES AND CONTINUED SEIZURE OF JAPANESE FISHING VESSELS; IT MEANS LITTLE TO SLOW DOWN ECONOMIC COOPERATION THAT HAS NOT BEEN MOVING AT MUCH OF A PACE IN THE FIRST PLACE; AND OTHER SOVIET RETALIATORY TOOLS SEEM LIMITED. MAINTENANCE OF FAIRLY NORMAL RELATIONS, APART FROM POSTPONEMENT OF A VISIT OR TWO, SEEM TO INDICATE SOVIET AWARENESS OF THEIR DILEMMA.

9. JAPANESE CAPACITY FOR BUREAUCRATIZATION. IN ABSENCE OF PRE-EXISTING GUIDELINES OR IMMEDIATE TOP-LEVEL DECISION OF DISPOSITION OF AIRCRAFT AFTER ITS LANDING, JAPANESE POLICE TOOK TEMPORARY CHARGE OF SITUATION AND INCIDENT WAS TREATED AS CRIMINAL ACTION TO BE PURSUED BY OFFICE OF PUBLIC PROCURATOR. WHILE THIS PROVIDED INGENIOUS RATIONALE FOR HOLDING PLANE AND PILOT LONG ENOUGH TO GIVE GOJ TIME TO SORT OUT AFFAIR — INVESTIGATION OF ILLEGAL ENTRY, ILLEGAL IMPORTATION OF FIREARMS, ETC. — IT COMPLICATED EARLY TRANSFER OF JURISDICTION TO JDA. WE HAVE BEEN INFORMED THAT IF SIMILAR INCIDENT OCCURRED IN FUTURE, JDA WOULD ASSUME CONTROL FROM THE START, AND PRESS REPORTS TO THIS EFFECT HAVE NOT BEEN CHALLENGED. INCIDENT INDICATED DIFFICULTY OF IMPROVISATION IN COUNTRY ACCUSTOMED TO TRUST MAJOR DECISIONS TO BUREAUCRACY, AND WHILE LATTER ARE LIKELY TO FIND A RULE FOR EVERY CIRCUMSTANCE, IT MAY NOT ALWAYS BE THE ONE MOST DESIRED. (CUSTOMS OFFICIALS AT ONE POINT WISHED TO ASSESS DUTY ON AIRCRAFT.) AS RESULT OF EXPERIENCE WITH MIG, INTERNAL JAPANESE PROCEDURES FOR FUTURE AFFAIRS OF THIS ORDER WOULD DOUBTLESS WORK MORE SMOOTHLY, BUT PERHAPS NO MORE RAPIDLY. THERE IS A CERTAIN PACE TO GOJ DECISION-MAKING, EVEN UNDER PRESSURE, WHICH CANNOT BE FORCED.

10. ONE BUREAUCRATIC LESSON FOR JAPANESE SIDE WAS NEED FOR MORE RAPID, RELIABLE COMMUNICATION TO TOP LEADERSHIP WHEN UNEXPECTED INCIDENT OCCURS. THERE WAS DELAY OF TWO OR THREE HOURS AFTER MIG LANDED BEFORE TOP JDA OFFICIALS, INCLUDING MINISTER, WERE NOTIFIED, AND BY THAT TIME IT WAS PROBABLY TOO LATE FOR THEM TO HAVE TAKEN CONTROL OF SITUATION HAD THEY BEEN PREPARED TO DO SO.

11. ENHANCED CONSCIOUSNESS OF JAPAN'S VULNERABILITY. DIET INTERPELLATIONS AND MEDIA HAVE DWELT AT SOME LENGTH ON ABILITY OF MIG-25 DEEPLY TO PENETRATE JAPANESE AIR SPACE UNOBSERVED. APART FROM DIFFICULTY OF SPOTTING LOW-FLYING AIRCRAFT, IMPRESSION LEFT WITH PUBLIC IS THAT THERE IS NEED TO STRENGTHEN JDA DETECTION AND AIR-DEFENSE CAPABILITIES, A CONCLUSION NOT ALTOGETHER DISPLEASING TO OFFICIALS FACED WITH PRESENTATION OF BUDGET COVERING FX PROCUREMENT. SECOND DEFENSE ISSUE HIGHLIGHTED BY INCIDENT IS RESTRICTIVE NATURE OF CURRENT RULES OF ENGAGEMENT. THESE HAVE DEEP CONSTITUTIONAL ROOTS, BUT IN EFFECT ENJOIN MEANINGFUL AIR DEFENSE UNTIL AFTER SOME DAMAGE HAS BEEN SUFFERED, E.G., "DO NOT FIRE UNTIL FIRED UPON."

12. CENTRALIZED U.S. CONTROL OF EXPLOITATION. IT IS OUR IMPRESSION THAT ARRANGEMENTS FOR SHARING DATA ON MIG WITH GOJ ARE WORKING OUT SATISFACTORILY AND NO EFFORT IS MADE HERE TO DRAW ANY LESSONS FROM EXPERIENCE IN JOINT EXPLOITATION. IT BECAME CLEAR VERY EARLY IN GAME, HOWEVER, THAT WITH SEVERAL U.S. GOVERNMENT AGENCIES AND SERVICE COMPONENTS VITALLY INTERESTED IN MIG INTELLIGENCE PRIZE, CENTRALIZED COORDINATION WAS ABSOLUTELY ESSENTIAL, NOT ONLY TO ASSURE COORDINATED TECHNICAL APPROACH, BUT TO BE CERTAIN THAT RECOMMENDATIONS TO WASHINGTON, APPROACHES TO GOJ AND ENSUING U.S. GENERATED PUBLICITY WERE NOT IN CONFLICT. MECHANISM FOR THIS PURPOSE EVOLVED OVER FIRST FEW DAYS AFTER MIG LANDING. THEREAFTER IT WAS LARGELY SATISFACTORY. HODGSON

1 Source: National Archives, Record Group 59, Central Foreign Policy Files. Confidential. Repeated for information to the Secretary of Defense in Washington, to the Embassy in Moscow, to COMUS Japan, and to CINCPAC in Honolulu. Also transmitted to CINCPAC for POLAD.

229. Telegram 19002 From the Embassy in Japan to the Department of State, December 30, 1976, 0800Z. 229. Telegram 19002 From the Embassy in Japan to the Department of State, December 30, 1976, 0800Z.1

December 30, 1976, 0800Z

TELEGRAM
Department of State
TOKYO 19002

R 300800Z DEC 76

FM AMEMBASSY TOKYO TO SECSTATE WASHDC 4490
INFO AMEMBASSY BANGKOK
AMEMBASSY BONN
AMEMBASSY CANBERRA
AMEMBASSY JAKARTA
AMEMBASSY KUALA LUMPUR
AMEMBASSY LONDON
AMEMBASSY MANILA
AMEMBASSY PARIS
AMEMBASSY RANGOON
AMEMBASSY ROME
AMEMBASSY SEOUL
AMEMBASSY TAIPEI
AMEMBASSY VIENTIANE
AMCONSUL HONG KONG
USLO PEKING
CINCPAC HONOLULU HI
COMUSJAPAN YOKOTA

TOKYO 19002

CINCPAC FOR POLAD

E.O. 11652: GDS
TAGS: PINT, PFOR, JA

SUBJECT: YEAR-END POLITICAL MOOD

1. EXTENDED NEW YEAR'S HOLIDAY IN JAPAN TRADITIONALLY LEAVES NATION AND ITS OBSERVERS WITH EUPHORIC PERCEPTION THAT NATION'S POLITICAL PROBLEMS HAVE DISSIPATED, EVEN IF ONLY MOMENTARILY. NEW YEAR'S 1977 IS NO EXCEPTION, BUT CONTRARY TO MOST YEARS, WHEN POLITICAL LULL TURNS OUT TO HAVE BEEN NO MORE THAN THAT, WE SENSE THAT COINCIDENCE OF DECEMBER ELECTIONS AND FORMATION OF NEW FUKUDA CABINET HAVE MADE THIS YEAR-END MORE OF GENUINE TURNING POINT IN POLITICAL CLIMATE THAN USUAL.

2. WHEN LOCKHEED INVESTIGATIONS BUILT UP STEAM STARTING IN FEBRUARY 1976, COMMON WISDOM HAD IT THAT SCANDAL, LIKE A RUMOR, WOULD GO AWAY IN TRADITIONAL 75 DAYS, GIVE OR TAKE A FEW WEEKS. THIS, OF COURSE, TURNED OUT TO BE FAR FROM THE CASE. AT PRESENT JUNCTURE, HOWEVER, ALMOST EVERYBODY CONCERNED FEELS THEY HAVE HAD ABOUT ENOUGH. TO EXTENT WE CAN ASSESS PUBLIC MOOD, IT SEEMS TO HOLD THAT LDP TOOK ITS PUNISHMENT IN GENERAL ELECTION AND LITTLE IS TO BE GAINED BY BELABORING LOCKHEED OR BROADER QUESTIONS OF GOVERNMENT AND BIG-BUSINESS CORRUPTION. THIS IS NOT TO SAY THAT FURTHER DISCLOSURES WILL FAIL TO REVIVE MEDIA AND PUBLIC INTEREST, OR THAT OPPOSITION PARTIES WOULD NOT PURSUE ANY NEW LEADS OR NEW SCANDALS — THERE IS MUCH SPECULATION ABOUT WHETHER THE TWIN SPECTRES OF BOEING OPERATIONS ABROAD AND KCIA MACHINATIONS WILL HAUNT JAPAN IN 1977. SHOULD THEY DO SO, AND PARTICULARLY SHOULD THEY AFFECT MEMBERS OF NEW TEAM, CONSEQUENCES COULD BE FAR-REACHING. BUT UNLESS THEY DO, BURDEN SEEMS TO BE ON LDP TO GET ON WITH NATION'S BUSINESS, PRINCIPALLY ECONOMIC, WHILE PUTTING ITS OWN HOUSE IN ORDER.

3. INCENTIVES FOR LDP ARE CONSIDERABLE. ELECTION SETBACK CAME AS REAL SHOCK TO ALL FACTIONS. WHILE A GOOD DEAL OF BACKBITING PERSISTS ON PART OF BOTH MIKI FACTION AND ANTI-MIKI COALITION AS TO HOW OUTCOME COULD HAVE BEEN PREVENTED, AT THIS JUNCTURE OVERRIDING CONCERN IS TO REUNIFY PARTY SO AS TO CONFIRM IMPRESSION THAT ONLY LDP IS CAPABLE OF GOVERNING JAPAN AND REPRESENTING IT IN WORLD FORUMS. UPPER HOUSE ELECTIONS IN JUNE WOULD HAVE PRESENTED FORMIDABLE CHALLENGE FOR LDP IN ANY EVENT, WITH BETTER THAN EVEN CHANCE PARTY WILL LOSE ITS MAJORITY, BUT AGAINST BACKGROUND OF LOWER HOUSE ELECTION RESULTS CONCERN OF PARTY LEADERSHIP HAS BEEN COMPOUNDED. WHILE FUKUDA CAN BE EXPECTED ACTIVELY TO ASSERT LEADERSHIP OF HIS CABINET — HE WILL BE UNIMPEDED BY PRESENCE OF OTHER FACTIONAL LEADERS — WE ALSO ANTICIPATE THAT TACTICS EVIDENT IN FIRST DAYS OF HIS ADMINISTRATION OF CONCILIATION AND STUDIED EFFORT TO APPEAR RESPONSIBLE IN RELATIONS WITH OPPOSITION AS WELL AS WITH OWN PARTY WILL PERSIST IN WEEKS AHEAD. IN PRACTICAL TERMS THIS COULD MEAN AVOIDANCE OF SHOWDOWNS ON CONTROVERSIAL ISSUES, AND PERHAPS MORE THAN LIP SERVICE TO WILLINGNESS TO ENTERTAIN OPPOSITION PROPOSALS FOR COMPROMISE. DESIRE TO AVOID CONFLICT ON DOMESTIC FRONT MAY BE ADDITIONAL STIMULUS FOR FUKUDA TO SEEK INITIATIVES ON INTERNATIONAL SCENE THAT MIGHT BE EXPECTED TO ACCRUE LARGE MEASURE OF POPULAR SUPPORT — LIKELY CANDIDATES ARE RENEWED EFFORT TO REACH AGREEMENT ON PEACE TREATY WITH PRC AND POSITIVE ATTITUDE TOWARD EARLY ADVANCED-NATION SUMMIT.

4. OPPOSITION PARTIES FIND THEMSELVES IN SOMEWHAT UNEASY POSITION OF ENHANCED INFLUENCE. IT IS NOT IN NATURE OF SOCIALISTS (JSP) TO AVOID TROUBLE, BUT THEY ARE CONSTRAINED BY NEW-FOUND SUCCESS OF MORE MODERATE OPPOSITION FORCES, I.E., KOMEITO, DEMOCRATIC SOCIALISTS (DSP) AND NEW LIBERAL CLUB (NLC), WHICH APPEAR TO HAVE STRUCK RESPONSIVE CORD WITH ELECTORATE. FUNDAMENTAL DILEMMA JSP WILL FACE AS MAJOR OPPOSITION PARTY IS WHETHER, DESPITE PREVAILING MOOD OF MODERATION, IT SHOULD ASSUME MORE RADICAL POSTURE IN ORDER TO REESTABLISH ITSELF AS PARTY WITH DISTINCTIVE POLITICAL COLORATION, OR WHETHER IT SHOULD EXPLORE POSSIBILITIES OF OPPOSITION COALITION. IN PRACTICE IT IS LIKELY TO TACK IN BOTH DIRECTIONS: STRIKE INTERMITTENT MILITARNT JPOSES ON ISSUES OF PARTICULAR CONCERN, E.G., RIGHT TO STRIKE, BUT AVOID PROLONGED PARLIAMENTARY FACTIONALISM THAT WOULD LABEL PARTY AS UNRECONSTRUCTED.

5. IF ELECTION SHOCKED LDP, IT PROBABLY EQUALLY SHOCKED ALL PARTI OF LEFT WING, WHICH REALIZED IT WAS AS ILL-PREPARED AS EVER TO OFFER NATION ALTERNATIVE LEADERSHIP, AND THAT EVEN IF LDP HAD LOST ITS MAJORITY, JAPAN WAS YEARS FROM POINT WHERE ANYTHING SHORT OF LDP-DOMINATED ADMINISTRATION WOULD BE IN POSITION TO GOVERN. WHILE MUCH WILL DEPEND ON UNFORESEEN EVENTS, WE WOULD GUESS THAT MONTHS AHEAD WILL SEE ALL OPPOSITION PARTIES, INCLUDING JSP, VIE WITH EACH OTHER IN TAKING "RESPONSIBLE" POSTURES. WE WILL ALSO SEE MUCH COMING AND GOING BETWEEN THE OPPOSITION PARTIES, BUT WE DOUBT WHETHER THE END-PRODUCT WILL GO MUCH BEYOND HIGH-SOUNDING AGREEMENTS FOR TACTICAL COOPERATION IN DIET, AND LIMITED ARRANGEMENTS TO WORK TOGETHER IN PARTICULAR ELECTION SITUATIONS.

6. ON BALANCE THEN, WE BELIEVE THAT EVEN AFTER JAPAN RETURNS TO WORK NEXT YEAR, ALMOST ALL POLITICAL CIRCLES AS WELL AS PUBLIC WILL BE PREDISPOSED TO A PERIOD OF RELATIVE POLITICAL CALM, WITH ATTENTION BEING FOCUSED ON BUDGET DEBATE AND MEASURES DESIGNED TO STEP UP ECONOMIC ACTIVITY. SHOULD LOCKHEED-LIKE DEVELOPMENTS OCCUR, THE POLITICAL WATERS WILL QUICKLY BECOME ROILED ONCE MORE, BUT NO DESIRE TO SEE THIS HAPPEN IS EVIDENT.

HODGSON

NOTE BY OC/T: PARAGRAPH 4. AS RECEIVED. CORRECTION TO FOLLOW.

1 Source: National Archives, Record Group 59, Central Foreign Policy Files. Confidential. Repeated for information to the Embassies in Bangkok, Bonn, Canberra, Jakarta, Kuala Lumpur, London, Manila, Paris, Rangoon, Rome, Seoul, Taipei, Vientiane, to the Consulate in Hong Kong, to the Liaison Office in Beijing, to CINCPAC in Honolulu, and to COMUS Japan in Yokota.

Chapter VI: Korean PeninsulaChapter VI: Korean Peninsula

230. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, January 5, 1973, 2:30 p.m.

Washington, January 5, 1973, 2:30 p.m.

Nixon and Prime Minister Kim discussed Korean affairs.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 1026, Presidential/HAK Memcons, January–March 1973. Secret; Nodis. The conversation took place in the Oval Office. Prime Minister Kim and Foreign Minister Kim visited Washington to represent the Republic of Korea at the memorial service for Harry Truman on January 5. According to the President’s Daily Diary, the memorandum of conversation lists an incorrect date for the meeting, which occurred on January 5, 1973, from 2:31 until 3. (National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, White House Central Files, President’s Daily Diary)

231. Memorandum From Richard Kennedy of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger), Washington, January 16, 1973.

Washington, January 16, 1973

Kennedy recommended that Kissinger approve a cable informing Habib of U.S. policy toward Korean security and development issues.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 544, Country Files, Far East, Korea, Volume 6, January 1973–October 1973. Secret; Sensitive. Sent for action. A notation near the bottom reads, “John Holdridge concurs.” Kissinger initialed his approval of the recommendation. Habib’s proposed policy paper enclosed in A–432 from Seoul, December 10, 1972 and the draft backchannel telegram are attached but not published. Backchannel telegram 30190 from Kissinger to Habib, January 24, is ibid., Box 411, Backchannel Messages, Southeast Asia, vol. 1.

232. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, February 24, 1973, 10:10 a.m.

Washington, February 24, 1973, 10:10 a.m.

Kissinger and Foreign Minister Kim discussed U.S.-ROK relations.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Country Files, Far East, Box 544, Korea, Volume 6, January 1973–October 1973. Secret; Sensitive. The conversation took place in Kissinger’s office.

233. Memorandum From John Holdridge of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger), Washington, March 1, 1973.

Washington, March 1, 1973

Holdridge informed Kissinger about the Department of State’s discussions with South Korea.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Country Files, Far East, Box 544, Korea, Volume 6, January 1973–October 1973. Secret; Sensitive. Sent for information. Kissinger initialed the memorandum on March 20.

234. Memorandum From John Holdridge of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger), Washington, March 15, 1973.

Washington, March 15, 1973

Holdridge recommended that Kissinger approve a backchannel message to Habib concerning UNCURK.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Country Files, Far East, Box 544, Korea, Volume 6, January 1973–October 1973. Secret; Sensitive; Exclusively Eyes Only; Entirely Outside System. In the top right hand corner Kissinger wrote, “Where is the extra paper by Rush?” A response in an unknown hand wrote “Tab C,” referring to the March 8 Department of State paper. At the top of the first page, an unknown hand indicated that the situation room received the telegram for dispatch on the morning of March 19, 1973. Attached but not published is Tab A, the draft backchannel telegram from Kissinger to Habib, which was sent as backchannel telegram 30768 to Habib, March 19. (ibid., Box 411, Backchannel Messages, Southeast Asia, Volume II, 1973, Part 1) Tab B, a February 24 memorandum of conversation, is Document 232. Tab C, a paper prepared in the Department of State, March 8, is attached but not published.

235. Summary and Options From a Study Prepared by the Interdepartmental Group for East Asia and the Pacific, Washington, undated.

Washington, undated

The Interdepartmental Group for East Asia and the Pacific prepared a paper on U.S. policy toward the Korean Peninsula in response to NSSM 154.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Institutional Files (H-Files), Box H–191, NSSM 155 (sic) [1 of 2]. Secret. NSSM 154 is scheduled to be published in see Foreign Relations, 1969–1976, Volume XIX, Part I, Korea, 1969-1972. Richard Sneider, Acting Chairman of the Interdepartmental Group that prepared the NSSM 154 paper, sent it to Kissinger under a covering letter dated April 3. (Ibid.) On May 4, Davis forwarded the study to the Deputy Secretaries of the Departments of State, Defense, and Treasury, to the Acting Director of the Arms Control and Disarmament Agency, to the Director of Central Intelligence, and to the Assistant to the President for International Economic Affairs. The Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff also received a copy. (Ibid.)

236. Transcript of Telephone Conversation Between the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) and Deputy Secretary of State Rush, Washington, April 9, 1973, 5:58 p.m.

Washington, April 9, 1973, 5:58 p.m.

Kissinger and Rush discussed whether UNCURK should be abolished.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, Henry Kissinger Telephone Conversation Transcripts, Box 19–2 [March–April 1973]. No classification marking. Kissinger was in Washington. A transcript of Kissinger’s and Rush’s earlier conversation about UNCURK, April 7, is ibid.

237. Memorandum From the Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs (Porter) to President Nixon, Washington, June 15, 1973.

Washington, June 15, 1973

Porter reported on the recommendations of the Korea Force Modernization Steering Group.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Institutional Files (H-Files), Box H–241, NSDMs, NSDM 227, folder 6. Secret; Norforn. Attached but not published are the December 27, 1972 memorandum of U. Alexis Johnson, Acting Chairman of the NSC Under Secretaries Committee; the February 7 memorandum from Kissinger to the Chairman of the Under Secretaries Committee; and the May 31 Report of the Korea Force Modernization Interagency Steering Group. The memorandum from Clements, 13 June, and the June 13 response of the Department of Defense and the Joint Chiefs of Staff to the paper are ibid., H–68, SRG Meetings, NSSM 154, 6/15/73 [4 of 4].

238. Minutes of Senior Review Group Meeting, Washington, June 15, 1973, 3:03 p.m.–3:45 p.m.

Washington, June 15, 1973, 3:03 p.m.–3:45 p.m.

The Senior Review Group gathered to discuss U.S. policy toward Korea.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Institutional Files (H-Files), Box H–113, SRG Minutes (Originals) 1972–3 [2 of 4]. Secret. The meeting was held in the White House Situation Room. The June 18 meeting of the SRG was subsequently cancelled. On May 25, Habib reported that South Korea’s “new policy is acceptance of a two-Korea policy for an indefinite period while maintaining the ultimate objective of reunification.” (Telegram 3353 from Seoul; ibid., Record Group 59, Central Foreign Policy Files.) Habib provided the Embassy’s recommendations on South Korea’s “Two Koreas” policy shift. (Telegram 3438 from Seoul, May 30; ibid.)

239. National Intelligence Estimate 42/14.2–73, Washington, June 18, 1973.

Washington, June 18, 1973

The estimate assessed implications of South Korea’s diplomatic initiative.

Source: Central Intelligence Agency, OPI 122 (National Intelligence Council), Job 79R01012A, Box 467, NIE 42/14.2–73, Folder 6. Secret. All members of the U.S. Intelligence Board concurred in the estimate except the representatives of the FBI and the Department of Treasury, who abstained because the subject was outside of their jurisdiction. On June 18, Colby sent this NIE to Kissinger, as requested. Colby added, “The analysis in the NIE basically supports the approach advocated by State.” (Ibid.) [secret] On June 19, the Department sent instructions to Habib in telegram 118917 to Seoul. (National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Country Files, Far East, Box 544, Korea, Volume 6, January 1973–October 1973.)

240. Memorandum From Lawrence Eagleburger of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger), Washington, July 13, 1973.

Washington, July 13, 1973

Eagleburger recommended that Kissinger issue Habib instructions relating to UNCURK.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 544, Country Files, Far East, Korea, Volume 6, January 1973–October 1973. Secret. Sent for action. Kissinger initialed his approval of the recommendation. Attached to the memorandum is a note from Scowcroft that reads, “Henry—I am inclined to think Larry is right. Brent.” Froebe gave Kissinger a memorandum, June 23, summarizing Park’s speech. (Ibid.) The backchannel telegram, 31859, from the White House to Habib, July 18, is ibid., Box 411, Backchannel Messages, Southeast Asia, vol. II, 1973, Part 1.

241. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to Secretary of State Rogers and Secretary of Defense Schlesinger, Washington, July 18, 1973.

Washington, July 18, 1973

Kissinger conveyed interim guidance on U.S. policy toward the Korean Peninsula.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 544, Country Files, Far East, Korea, Volume 6, January 1973–October 1973. Secret. According to an attached undated note by Scowcroft to Kissinger, Rogers would probably ignore this guidance, but Clements might be more sympathetic. Scowcroft also believed there was “no need” to send this memorandum to Nixon.

242. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to President Nixon, Washington, July 25, 1973.

Washington, July 25, 1973

Kissinger recommended that Nixon approve the issuance of a NSDM on Korean Force modernization.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Institutional Files (H-Files), Box H–241, NSDMs, NSDM 227, Folder 6. Secret. Sent for action. Nixon initialed the “approve” option.

243. National Security Decision Memorandum 227, Washington, July 27, 1973.

Washington, July 27, 1973

Kissinger issued NSDM 227 concerning the Korean Force Modernization Plan.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Institutional Files (H-Files), Box H–241, NSDMs, NSDM 227, Folder 6. Secret. Copies were sent to the Director of the Office of Management and Budget, the Director of Central Intelligence, and the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff.

244. Telegram 5409 From the Embassy in the Republic of Korea to the Department of State, August 15, 1973, 0326Z.

August 15, 1973, 0326Z

The embassy analyzed the circumstances and consequences of the abduction of Kim Dae-jung.

Source: National Archives, Record Group 59, Central Foreign Policy Files. Secret; Priority; Exdis. Repeated for information to Tokyo. On August 8, Republic of Korea intelligence agents kidnapped opposition politician Kim Dae-jung from a hotel in Tokyo, allegedly with plans to assassinate him.

245. Backchannel Message 0818 From the Ambassador to the Republic of Korea (Habib) to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger), Seoul, August 24, 1973, 0615Z.

August 24, 1973, 0615Z

Habib reported on a meeting with Park and a proposed meeting with North Korean officials in Beijing.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 527, Country Files, Far East, PRC, Volume 8, July 10, 1973–December 31, 1973. Secret; Sensitive; Exclusively Eyes Only. Habib’s backchannel telegram was Tab C of a memorandum, August 24, from Richard Solomon to Kissinger. (Ibid.) The meeting between the North Korean Chargé and members of the USLO in Bejing is described ibid., HAK Office Files, Box 95, Country Files, Far East, Folder 4 [2 of 2], China Exchange, 7/10/73–10/31/73.

246. Memorandum of Conversation, Seoul, November 16, 1973.

Seoul, November 16, 1973

Kissinger and Park discussed U.S.-Korean relations and U.S. negotiations with China.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970–1973 (TS Files), Box 24, Misc Refiles [No Folder Title], POL 7 US/Kissinger. Top Secret; Nodis. Drafted by Hummel. The meeting was held in the Blue House.

247. Minutes of Washington Special Actions Group Meeting, Washington, December 4, 1973, 10:40 a.m.–12:02 p.m.

Washington, December 4, 1973, 10:40 a.m.–12:02 p.m.

A WSAG meeting considered North Korean maritime demands.

Source: Ford Library, National Security Adviser, NSC Staff for East Asia and Pacific Affairs, Convenience Files, Box 24, WSAG Working Group, Dec. 4, 1973[Korea]. Top Secret; Nodis. The minutes were attached to a covering memorandum, December 5, from Davis to Kissinger, explaining that the WSAG met “to discuss North Korea’s demand that UN Command naval and merchant ships obtain prior permission to navigate the waters contiguous to five UNC-controlled islands off the west coast of Korea.” On December 22, Scowcroft approved draft State-Defense cables to the Embassy in Seoul giving guidance for the upcoming Military Armistice Commission meeting and commenting on a South Korean memorandum on the island dispute. (National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 544, Country Files, Far East, Korea, Volume 7, November 1973–)

248. National Security Study Memorandum 190, Washington, December 31, 1973.

Washington, December 31, 1973

Kissinger asked the Department of State, the Department of Defense, and the Central Intelligence Agency to study potential diplomatic initiatives regarding security arrangements on the Korean peninsula.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Institutional Files (H-Files), Box H–201, NSSMs, NSSM 190 (1 of 3). Top Secret; Nodis. Coped to the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff. On December 20, Kissinger received a memorandum from Solomon and Froebe recommending that he sign a NSSM on diplomatic initiatives in Korea. On the first page of this memorandum, Kissinger wrote, “I want NSSM sent.” (Ibid.) The NSSM 190 issues were eventually referred to the President for decision without a prior meeting of the SRG.

249. Minutes of the Secretary of State’s Staff Meeting, Washington, January 25, 1974.

Washington, January 25, 1974

Habib and Kissinger led a discussion of U.S. policy toward the Korean peninsula.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Transcripts of Secretary of State Kissinger’s Staff Meetings, 1973–1977, Entry 5177, Box 2. Secret; Nodis. In telegram 22538 to Seoul, February 2, Hummel informed Habib, “The Secretary has asked that we reiterate to you his disinclination to have us pressing the Koreans, either privately or publicly, on their domestic situation. You will recall his remarks on this subject during the discussion at your meeting January 25. This reiteration stems from that discussion, rather than from any new developments; we have not seen evidence of such pressing in your recent reporting.” (Ibid, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 544, Country Files, Far East, Korea, Volume 7, November 1973–)

250. Intelligence Memorandum Prepared in the Central Intelligence Agency, Washington, February 1, 1974.

Washington, February 1, 1974

The authors predicted that Park’s regime would remain in power in the short run, but domestic opposition to it would grow.

Source: Central Intelligence Agency, OPI 16 (Office of Current Intelligence), Job 79T00863A, Box 31, Folder 22, Intelligence Memorandum [unnumbered]. Secret; No Foreign Dissem. The Office of Current Intelligence at the CIA prepared this report in response to a January 19 request from Scowcroft, on behalf of Kissinger, that “an assessment be made of the current South Korean internal political situation, accompanied by a projection of the prospects for the next two to three months.” (National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 544, Country Files, Far East, Korea, Volume 7, November 1973–)

251. Memorandum From Richard Smyser and John Froebe of the National Security Council Staff to Secretary of State Kissinger, Washington, February 11, 1974.

Washington, February 11, 1974

Smyser and Froebe recommended that Kissinger ask Sisco to urge the British Ambassador to delay an expansion of relations with North Korea.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Country Files, Far East, Box 544, Korea, Volume 7, November 1973–. Secret; Sensitive. Sent for action. Concurred in by Soloman. Kissinger initialed his approval of the recommendation. Attached but not published is the table of states.

252. Memorandum From Secretary of State Kissinger to President Nixon, Washington, March 25, 1974.

Washington, March 25, 1974

Kissinger presented his own and agency views about negotiations on terminating the UN Command in Korea, and recommended that Nixon approve the issuance of a NSDM on this subject.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Institutional Files (H-Files), Box H–202, NSSMs, NSSM 190 [2 of 3]. Top Secret; Sensitive. The President approved the NSDM recommendation, and, next to section 4b, he wrote, “K—Vital to highlight this.” On February 7, Acting Chairman Hummel of the IG for East Asia and the Pacific sent Scowcroft its response to NSSM 190. (Ibid.) On February 24, Kissinger request comments from the Departments of Defense, State, the Central Intelligence Agency, the Joint Chiefs of Staff, and the Arms Control and Disarmament Agency, noting that there would be no SRG meeting on Korea before the President made decisions on issues in NSSM 190. (Ibid., Box H–311, Miscellaneous Institutional Files of the Nixon Administration, NSC Subject, [Korea] [1 of 2])

253. National Security Decision Memorandum 251, Washington, March 29, 1974.

Washington, March 29, 1974

Kissinger issued NSDM 251 concerning the termination of the UN Command in Korea.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Institutional Files (H-Files), Box H–246, NSDMs, NSDM 251. Top Secret; Sensitive. Copies were sent to the Director of Central Intelligence and the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff.

254. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, May 28, 1974, 2:05–3:05 p.m.

Washington, May 28, 1974, 2:05–3:05 p.m.

Habib briefed Clements on U.S. relations with Korea.

Source: Washington National Records Center, OASD/ISA Files: FRC 330–77–0054, Korea, 333, 1974, June 20. Secret. Prepared by Vandegrift and approved by Jordan. The conversation took place in Clements’s office. Clements’s talking points for the meeting, dated May 28, are ibid.

255. National Intelligence Analytical Memorandum 14.2–1–74, Washington, July 15, 1974.

Washington, July 15, 1974

The memorandum assessed North Korea’s military and strategic intentions.

Source: Central Intelligence Agency, OPI 122 (National Intelligence Council), Job 79R01012A, Box 480, NIAM 14.2–1–74, Folder 3. Top Secret. The memorandum was prepared by the CIA and the intelligence organizations of the Departments of State, Defense, Treasury, and the National Security Agency. Concurred in by members from the CIA, INR, DIA, NSA; representatives from the AEC, FBI, and the Department of Treasury abstained. Representatives of the Departments of the Army, Navy, and Air Force also participated.

256. Memorandum From Richard Smyser of the National Security Council Staff to Secretary of State Kissinger, Washington, undated.

Washington, undated

Smyser sent Kissinger a memorandum about informing the South Korean government of U.S. aid plans.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Institutional Files (H-Files), Box H–241, NSDMs, NSDM 227, folder 6. Secret. Sent for urgent action. Concurred in by Kennedy. Attached but not published are Tab A the undated draft memorandum from Kissinger to the Secretary of Defense and the Deputy Secretary of State; and Tab B, the memorandum from Clements to Kissinger. Tab C, NSDM 227, is attached and published as Document 243. Kissinger did not sign Tab A. An attached note from Scowcroft indicates that the matter was instead handled by phone on September 23.

257. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to Secretary of Defense Schlesinger, Washington, October 8, 1974.

Washington, October 8, 1974

Kissinger asked the Department of Defense, the Department of State, and the CIA to produce a study of the U.S. security assistance program to the Republic of Korea.

Source: Ford Library, NSC Institutional Files (H-Files), Box H–32, NSSM 211, Review of U.S. Security Assistance to the Republic of Korea (2). Top Secret. A copy was sent to the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff.

258. Memorandum of Conversation, Seoul, November 22, 1974, 3 p.m.

Seoul, November 22, 1974, 3 p.m.

Park, Ford, and Kissinger discussed U.S. support for South Korea, the North Korean threat, North-South dialogue, Japan, the Soviet Union, China, and economic issues.

Source: Ford Library, National Security Adviser, Memoranda of Conversation, Box 7. Secret; Nodis. The conversation took place in the Blue House. Ford visited South Korea November 21–22; his arrival speech, dinner toast, and the joint communiqué he issued with Park are in The Department of State Bulletin, Vol. LXXI, No. 1852, December 23, pp. 875–878.

259. Memorandum of Conversation, Seoul, November 1974.

Seoul, November 1974

Park, Ford, and Kissinger briefly discussed issues in U.S.-South Korean relations.

Source: Ford Library, National Security Adviser, Memoranda of Conversation, Box 7. Secret; Nodis. The conversation took place in the Blue House. The exact date and time of this conversation is not indicated.

260. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to President Ford, Washington, January 3, 1975.

Washington, January 3, 1975

Kissinger recommended that Ford approve the issuance of a NSDM on future U.S. military assistance to South Korea.

Source: Ford Library, NSC Institutional Files (H-Files), Box H–57, NSDM 282, Review of ROK Air Defense Requirements (10). Top Secret; Nodis. Ford initialed the approve option. The response to NSSM 211, an undated IG paper, is ibid., Box H–32, NSSM 211, Review of U.S. Security Assistance to the Republic of Korea (1).

261. Minutes of the Secretary of State’s Staff Meeting, Washington, January 6, 1975, 8 a.m..

Washington, January 6, 1975, 8 a.m.

Habib and Kissinger discussed weapons sales to South Korea.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Transcripts of Secretary of State Kissinger’s Staff Meetings, 1973–1977, E5177, Box 5. Secret.

262. National Security Decision Memorandum 282, Washington, January 9, 1975.

Washington, January 9, 1975

Kissinger issued NSDM 282 concerning the Korean force modernization plan.

Source: Ford Library, NSC Institutional Files (H-Files), Box H–69, NSDM Originals (1 of 2), NSDM 281–NSDM 300. Top Secret; Nodis. Copies were sent to the Director of Central Intelligence, the Director of the Office of Management and Budget, and to the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff.

263. Key Judgments From an Interagency Intelligence Memorandum DCI/NIO 165–75, Washington, January 24, 1975.

Washington, January 24, 1975

[1 page not declassified.]

Source: Central Intelligence Agency, OPI 122 (National Intelligence Council), Job 79R01142A, Box 1, Folder 10. Secret.

264. Memorandum From Richard Smyser and David Elliott of the National Security Council Staff to Secretary of State Kissinger, Washington, February 28, 1975.

Washington, February 28, 1975

Smyser and Elliott recommended that Kissinger approve a Department of State cable addressing the development of nuclear weapons in South Korea.

Source: Ford Library, National Security Adviser, Presidential Country Files for East Asia and the Pacific, Box 9, Korea [4]. Secret; Sensitive. On behalf of Kissinger, Scowcroft initialed his approval of the draft State cable. Tab A is attached but not published. Tab B, not attached, is likely telegram 8023 from Seoul, referenced in Document 263. The Department sent the cable on March 4 as telegram 048673 to Seoul. (Ibid., Box 11, Korea, DOS Cables, NODIS from SECSTATE [3])

265. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, March 27, 1975, 5 p.m.

Washington, March 27, 1975, 5 p.m.

Sneider informed Scowcroft about developments in U.S.-South Korean relations.

Source: Ford Library, National Security Adviser, Memoranda of Conversation, Box 10. Secret. The conversation took place in the White House. The March 26 talking points that Smyser gave Scowcroft, are ibid., Presidential Country Files for East Asia and the Pacific, Box 9, Korea [5].

266. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, March 28, 1975, 11 a.m.

Washington, March 28, 1975, 11 a.m.

Kissinger and Foreign Minister Kim discussed South Korea’s international position.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy Files, P820123–1061. Secret; Nodis. Drafted by Smyser and approved by Gompert.

267. Telegram 2685 From the Embassy in the Republic of Korea to the Department of State, April 18, 1975, 0933Z.

April 18, 1975, 0933Z

The Embassy analyzed the South Korean view of the U.S. security commitment in the light of developments in Indochina.

Source: National Archives, Record Group 59, Central Foreign Policy Files. Secret; Exdis. The Embassy in Seoul sent a telegram of policy recommendations to bolster ROK security on April 22. (Telegram 2807 from Seoul; Ford Library, National Security Adviser, Presidential Country Files for East Asia and the Pacific, Box 11, Korea, State Department Telegrams to SECSTATE, NODIS [5])

268. National Security Study Memorandum 226, Washington, May 27, 1975.

Washington, May 27, 1975

Kissinger asked the Department of Defense, the Department of State, and the CIA to review U.S. policy toward the Korean peninsula.

Source: Ford Library, NSC Institutional Files (H-Files), Box H–36, NSSM 226, Review of U.S. Policy Toward the Korean Peninsula. Secret; Nodis. A copy was sent to the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff.

269. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, June 12, 1975, 4 p.m.

Washington, June 12, 1975, 4 p.m.

Kissinger and Habib discussed U.S.-ROK relations.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy Files, P820123–1364. Secret; Nodis. Drafted by O’Donohue and approved by Covey.

270. Memorandum of Conversation, Seoul, August 27, 1975.

Seoul, August 27, 1975

Park and Schlesinger discussed Japan, human rights, and anti-submarine warfare.

Source: Ford Library, National Security Adviser, Presidential Country Files for East Asia and the Pacific, Box 9, Korea (11). Secret; Sensitive; Nodis. The conversation took place in President Park’s Office. The discussion occurred before and during lunch. Howard Graves, Military Assistant in the Office of the Secretary of Defense, sent this memcon to Scowcroft on September 9.

271. Memorandum of Conversation, Seoul, August 27, 1975.

Seoul, August 27, 1975

Park and Schlesinger discussed the North Korean threat, ROK force improvement, and the military situation on the Korean Peninsula.

Source: Ford Library, National Security Adviser, Presidential Country Files for East Asia and the Pacific, Box 9, Korea (11). Secret; Sensitive; Nodis. The conversation took place in President Park’s Office. Howard Graves, Military Assistant in the Office of the Secretary of Defense, sent this memcon to Scowcroft on September 9.

272. Memorandum of Conversation, Seoul, August 27, 1975.

Seoul, August 27, 1975

Park and Schlesinger discussed nuclear matters, the U.S. commitment to Korea, and U.S. military commanders in South Korea.

Source: Ford Library, National Security Adviser, Presidential Country Files for East Asia and the Pacific, Box 9, Korea (11). Secret; Nodis. The conversation took place in President Park’s Office. The meeting time is unrecorded. Howard Graves, Military Assistant in the Office of the Secretary of Defense, sent this memcon to Scowcroft on September 9.

273. Memorandum From Thomas J. Barnes of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Deputy Assistant for National Security Affairs (Scowcroft), Washington, September 29, 1975.

Washington, September 29, 1975

Barnes recommended that Scowcroft investigate Schlesinger’s discussions in Korea and the proposal for a short-war strategy.

Source: Ford Library, National Security Adviser, Presidential Country Files for East Asia and the Pacific, Box 9, Korea (12). Secret. Sent for action. The memorandum notes Granger’s concurrence, next to which is written “strongly concur.” Attached but not published are Tab A, undated comments on Schlesinger’s discussions in Seoul; Tab B, Schlesinger’s conversations with Park and Suh, which the NSC received under a covering memorandum, September 9, from Schlesinger’s Military Assistant Howard Graves to Scowcroft, and which are published as Documents 270–272; Tab C, an undated outline of Schlesinger’s anticipated discussions with Park. Tabs D and E are not attached, but refer to telegram 226183 to Seoul, September 23, and telegram 7547 from Seoul, September 25, both at the National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy Files. In response to telegram 7547, the Department sent telegram 234236 to Seoul, October 1; ibid. Scowcroft initialed his approval of the recommendation.

274. Study Prepared by the Office of International Security Affairs in the Department of Defense, Washington, undated.

Washington, undated

The Bureau of International Security Affairs in the Department of Defense examined the problems facing the United States in Korea.

Source: Washington National Records Center, OSD Files: FRC 330–79–0049, Korea, 092, 1976, January 16. Secret. Amos Jordan sent the study to the Secretary of Defense under a covering memorandum, January 15, on which was noted: “Sec Def has seen. 19 Jan 1976.”

275. Information Memorandum From the Acting Assistant Secretary for International Security Affairs in the Department of Defense (Bergold) to Secretary of Defense Rumsfeld, Washington, March 16, 1976.

Washington, March 16, 1976

Bergold warned that increasing repression by Park’s government was diminishing Congressional support for South Korea.

Source: Washington National Records Center, OSD Files: FRC 330–79–0049, Korea, 092, 1976, 1976 March 16. Confidential; Eyes Only. A notation on the memorandum reads, “22 Mar 1976. Sec Def has seen.” For NSSM 235, see Document 23.

276. Memorandum From Jeanne Davis of the National Security Council Staff to the Chairman of the National Security Council Interdepartmental Group for East Asia (Habib), Washington, April 19, 1976.

Washington, April 19, 1976

Davis asked the NSC Interdepartmental Group for East Asia to resume work on NSSM 226.

Source: Ford Library, NSC Institutional Files (H-Files), Box H–36, NSSM 226, Review of U.S. Policy Toward the Korean Peninsula. Secret; Nodis.

277. Memorandum from Jay Taylor of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Scowcroft), Washington, April 22, 1976.

Washington, April 22, 1976

Taylor summarized a CIA report on possible North Korean initiatives during 1976.

Source: Ford Library, National Security Adviser, Presidential Country Files for East Asia and the Pacific, Box 10, Korea (15). Secret; Sensitive. Sent for information. Scowcroft initialed the memorandum and wrote, “Good idea.” Tab A, April 8, 1976, is not attached. It is in the Central Intelligence Agency, OPI 122 (National Intelligence Council), Job 91R00884R, Box 31, Intelligence Memorandum: Possible North Korean Initiatives During 1976, NIO M 76–010 C. The Defense papers on the vulnerabilities of the Northwest Islands to attack and on options for their defense are in the Ford Library, National Security Adviser, Presidential Country Files for East Asia and the Pacific, Box 10, Korea (17).

278. Memorandum From Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affair Abramowitz to William Hyland of the NSC Staff, Washington, April 22, 1976.

Washington, April 22, 1976

Abramowitz asked that the request for NSSM 226 be withdrawn.

Source: Ford Library, NSC Institutional Files (H-Files), Box H–36, NSSM 226, Review of U.S. Policy Toward the Korean Peninsula. Secret.

279. Memorandum From Thomas J. Barnes of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Scowcroft), Washington, May 19, 1976.

Washington, May 19, 1976

Barnes asked Scowcroft to decide the future of the NSSM 226 study.

Source: Ford Library, NSC Institutional Files (H-Files), Box H–36, NSSM 226, Review of U.S. Policy Toward the Korean Peninsula. Secret; Sensitive. Sent for Action. The tabs are attached but not published. On the first page of the memorandum, Scowcroft wrote, “a mistake” next to the passage: “We originally issued NSSM 226 in May 1975 but delayed action pending the broad review of U.S. interests and security objectives in the Asia-Pacific area.” On the third page, Scowcroft underlined, “informally inform the departments concerned” and initialed his approval of option A. He also wrote, “Our basic mistake was stopping work on the NSSM last spring when we could have used it.”

280. Memorandum From Thomas J. Barnes of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Scowcroft), Washington, May 28, 1976.

Washington, May 28, 1976

Barnes informed Scowcroft of North Korean threats and of accusations of South Korean provocations.

Source: Ford Library, National Security Adviser, Presidential Country Files for East Asia and the Pacific, Box 10, Korea (16). Confidential. Sent for information. Concurred in by Granger. According to the correspondence profile, Scowcroft saw this document on June 1. (Ibid.) North Korean news accounts of enemy provocations are ibid.

281. Transcript of Telephone Conversation Between Secretary of State Kissinger and the Undersecretary of State for Political Affairs (Habib), Washington, August 18, 1976, 10:05 a.m.

Washington, August 18, 1976, 10:05 a.m.

Kissinger and Habib discussed a North Korean attack on South Korean and U.S. soldiers who were pruning a tree in the demilitarized zone.

Source: Department of State, Electronic Reading Room, Transcripts of Kissinger Telephone Conversations. Unclassified.

282. Minutes of Washington Special Actions Group Meeting, Washington, August 18, 1976, 3:47–4:43 p.m.

Washington, August 18, 1976, 3:47–4:43 p.m.

WSAG received a CIA briefing on the DMZ attack and then discussed policy options.

Source: Ford Library, National Security Adviser, NSC Staff for East Asia and Pacific Affairs, Convenience Files, Box 27, WSAG Meeting, Korean Incident, August 18, 1976. Secret. The meeting was held in the White House Situation Room.

283. Telegram 206084 From the Department of State to the Embassy in the Republic of Korea, August 19, 1976, 0110Z.

August 19, 1976, 0110Z

The Department sent instructions to the U.S. political and military representatives in Korea on the response to the North Korean attack in the DMZ.

Source: Ford Library, National Security Adviser, Presidential Country Files for East Asia and the Pacific, Box 10, Korea, North Korean Tree Incident, August 18, 1976, Telegrams (1). Secret; Flash; Nodis. Drafted by Hurwitz and approved by Kissinger.

284. Telegram 190720Z From the Commander in Chief of the United Nations Command (Stillwell) to the Joint Chiefs of Staff, Secretary of State Kissinger, and Secretary of Defense Rumsfeld, August 19, 1976, 0720Z.

August 19, 1976, 0720Z

Stilwell described his meeting with Park on the response to the North Korean attack.

Source: Ford Library, National Security Adviser, Presidential Country Files for East Asia and the Pacific, Box 10, Korea, North Korean Tree Incident, August 18, 1976, Telegrams (3). Secret.

285. Minutes of Washington Special Actions Group Meeting, Washington, August 19, 1976, 8:12-9:15 a.m.

Washington, August 19, 1976, 8:12-9:15 a.m.

WSAG discussed how to respond to the North Korean DMZ attack.

Source: Ford Library, National Security Adviser, NSC Staff for East Asia and Pacific Affairs, Convenience Files, Box 27, WSAG Meeting, Korean Incident, August 18, 1976. Secret. The meeting occurred in the White House Situation Room. The briefing by the Director of Central Intelligence is attached but not published. Hyland’s draft telegram to Scowcroft, August 19, reported on proposed responses to the attack. (Ibid., Presidential Country Files for East Asia and the Pacific, Box 10, Korea, North Korean Tree Incident, August 18, 1976 [2]) On the morning of August 21, UNC forces felled the disputed tree.

286. Minutes of Washington Special Actions Group Meeting, Washington, August 25, 1976, 10:30 a.m..

Washington, August 25, 1976, 10:30 a.m.

WSAG met to discuss the Korean situation.

Source: Ford Library, National Security Adviser, NSC Staff for East Asia and Pacific Affairs, Convenience Files, Box 27, WSAG Meeting, Korean Incident, August 18, 1976. Top Secret; Sensitive. The minutes contain handwritten revisions by Gleysteen. The meeting occurred in the White House Situation Room. Gleysteen sent these minutes to Hyland under an undated memorandum.

287. Telegram 213541 From the Department of State to the Embassy in the Republic of Korea, August 27, 1976, 2010Z.

August 27, 1976, 2010Z

The Department of State sent Sneider instructions for his meeting with Park.

Source: National Archives, Record Group 59, Central Foreign Policy Files. Secret; Niact Immediate; Nodis. Drafted by Director of the Korea desk Edward Hurwitz; cleared by Hummel, Habib, and Deputy Executive Secretary Peter Sebastian; and approved by Kissinger. On August 28, Sneider reported that he had met with Park and had carried out his instructions. (Telegram 6748 from Seoul; ibid.)

288. Memorandum From the Deputy Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs (Hyland) to President Ford, Washington, September 5, 1976.

Washington, September 5, 1976

Hyland informed Ford of a revision to the Korean DMZ agreement.

Source: Ford Library, National Security Adviser, Presidential Country Files for East Asia and the Pacific, Box 10, Korea (19). Confidential. Ford initialed the first page of the memorandum.

289. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, September 15, 1976, 2:30 p.m.

Washington, September 15, 1976, 2:30 p.m.

Scowcroft, Sneider, and Gleysteen discussed U.S. policy toward Korea.

Source: Ford Library, National Security Adviser, Presidential Country Files for East Asia and the Pacific, Box 10, Korea (19). Secret; Sensitive. Gleysteen sent the memorandum of conversation to Scowcroft under a covering memorandum, September 17, recommending his approval, which Scowcroft initialed. The talking points that Gleysteen prepared for Scowcroft, September 14, are ibid.

290. Telegram 9567 From Embassy in the Republic of Korea to the Department of State, December 3, 1976, 0835Z.

December 3, 1976, 0835Z

Sneider reported on the U.S.-South Korean relationship.

Source: National Archives, Record Group 59, Central Foreign Policy Files. Secret; Immediate; Nodis.

230. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, January 5, 1973, 2:30 p.m. 230. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, January 5, 1973, 2:30 p.m. 1

Washington, January 5, 1973, 2:30 p.m.

MEMORANDUM
THE WHITE HOUSE
WASHINGTON

MEMORANDUM OF CONVERSATION

PARTICIPANTS:

President Nixon

Kim Chong-pil, Prime Minister of the Republic of Korea

Kim Yong-sik, Minister of Foreign Affairs

Carl Han, Special Assistant to the Prime Minister (Interpreter)

Richard T. Kennedy, Acting Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs

Henry Sullivan, Department of State (Interpreter)

DATE AND TIME: Friday, January 3, 1973
2:30 p.m.
PLACE: The Oval Office

Kim: I first wish to extend on behalf of President Park our congratulations on your landslide election and my personal congratulations. President Park had planned to attend the Truman Memorial services himself but unfortunately his schedule would not permit. Therefore I am representing him to extend our condolences.

The President: I know it is a long journey for you. I appreciate this expression of sympathy for President Truman and his family. He made a very difficult decision to commit U.S. troops to the defense of South Korea. I remember, I was a member of the U.S. Congress at the time. Many people wondered whether the Republic of Korea could survive, and you have proved to be one of the strongest countries in Asia militarily and economically. You can count on the continued support of the United States and our alliance.

I know you now have these difficult negotiations with North Korea. The world would welcome a lessening of tension in that area, but we recognize you must move cautiously. We will watch closely and be as helpful as we can, knowing always that it is important to keep Korea a strong and free non-Communist country.

Please tell President Park I recall our meeting in San Francisco. Now that the election is over, I hope we can meet again sometime in the new term. Meanwhile we will be in closest contact with the Ambassador. Meanwhile many people will visit Seoul from the Administration. I always advise government and business people to go to Korea when they go to Japan. I promise that if I go to Japan I will go to Korea too. I have great respect for the courage of your people and we value your friendship.

Kim: Thank you for your kind remarks. We are doing our best under our President's leadership. If we have made any progress in development, it is because of your help, and we express our appreciation. As you aware, we have new internal arrangements in our country. We may have been simple in dealing with the Communists and we had to solidify our position at home to maximize our strength. We have changed our constitution to be able to accomplish our mission in East Asia, and better able to repay our debt of gratitude to the United States. Korea cannot survive if it is separated from the United States. We want to contribute to your efforts and be less of a burden and to express our appreciation.

We are continuing our dialogue with North Korea. There is no substantial progress thus far. No one believes we will achieve much through dialogue alone. We hope not to see a new armed aggression. We will pursue the dialogue with this in mind. While we continue the dialogue we can gain time, to keep strong so that the Communists will not try armed aggression. And we will keep you informed.

At the New Year Kim Il-sung said he will continue the four main objectives of the revolution. The dialogue is one thing; his ambition is another. We will keep strong, with your help, against this view from the North.

We need to modernize our forces as best we can do. What should we do with our forces in South Vietnam? How best can we be of assistance to your efforts?

The President: It would be best to delay a reply until after the next round of the negotiations. Then we'll be in touch. As you know — we have constantly consulted with you and will do so in the future in any negotiations — until we see what kind of settlement can be reached I can't say what role the Republic of Korea can play in the future in South Vietnam. I will have your thoughts in mind and will be in touch.

Our main goal to honorably end the war as soon as it is possible. As long as it goes on, the willingness of Congress to give funds for our friends in Korea and other countries is reduced. Thus we will appreciate your support of a reasonable settlement — one which protects the rights of the people of South Vietnam to determine their own future.

You have dealt with Communists. I know of no really satisfactory settlement unless all the Communists are gone, but this is not possible in South Vietnam or in Korea. We oppose some in the Congress who have the idea we should bug out. We will still work for a settlement of the war, for unless we do, U.S. foreign policy all over the world is jeopardized.

Kim: President Park willing and ready to give whatever support you need that he can give to help you reach a settlement.

The President: I am sorry our time is so short, but with so many visitors today it's just not possible.

Kim: I just want to add: We are restoring our national assembly and will have elections in March.

The President: I won't lecture you like some do on your internal affairs. Some people here were disturbed but that's your decision. I understand your problem.

I have these trinkets. He gave each a golf ball and ashtrays.

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 1026, Presidential/HAK Memcons, January–March 1973. Secret; Nodis. The conversation took place in the Oval Office. Prime Minister Kim and Foreign Minister Kim visited Washington to represent the Republic of Korea at the memorial service for Harry Truman on January 5. According to the President’s Daily Diary, the memorandum of conversation lists an incorrect date for the meeting, which occurred on January 5, 1973, from 2:31 until 3. (National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, White House Central Files, President’s Daily Diary)

231. Memorandum From Richard Kennedy of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger), Washington, January 16, 1973. 231. Memorandum From Richard Kennedy of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger), Washington, January 16, 1973.1

Washington, January 16, 1973

MEMORANDUM
THE WHITE HOUSE
WASHINGTON
ACTION

January 16, 1973

Henry:

Much to our amazement, Habib has drafted a proposed policy paper which, among other things, proposes that we be planning a reduction of U.S. forces in FY 1974 and an internal study looking to their total withdrawal in the FY 75-76 period (Tab B). He also wants to consider seriously phasing out all grant assistance in the FY 76-77 period.

We think this should be turned off firmly now before it leaks out (which it most certainly will — given the wishful thinking on the part of some elements in State). Otherwise, we are headed for a disaster in our relations with the ROK at this critical juncture. We will be handling this firmly in the bureaucracy but believe that the attached backchannel to Habib (Tab A) can put things in focus and get him personally lined up.

Recommend you approve the attached message.
Approve [HK initialed]
Disapprove

[signed]
R.T. Kennedy

Attachments

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 544, Country Files, Far East, Korea, Volume 6, January 1973–October 1973. Secret; Sensitive. Sent for action. A notation near the bottom reads, “John Holdridge concurs.” Kissinger initialed his approval of the recommendation. Habib’s proposed policy paper enclosed in A–432 from Seoul, December 10, 1972 and the draft backchannel telegram are attached but not published. Backchannel telegram 30190 from Kissinger to Habib, January 24, is ibid., Box 411, Backchannel Messages, Southeast Asia, vol. 1.

232. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, February 24, 1973, 10:10 a.m. 232. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, February 24, 1973, 10:10 a.m. 1

Washington, February 24, 1973, 10:10 a.m.

MEMORANDUM OF CONVERSATION

PARTICIPANTS:

Kim Yong-sik, Foreign Minister of the Republic of Korea

Kim Dong Jo, Ambassador, Korean Embassy

Henry A. Kissinger, Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs

John H. Holdridge, Senior Staff Member, NSC

DATE, TIME, PLACE: February 24, 1973, 10:10 a.m., Mr. Kissinger's Office

SUBJECT: Mr. Kissinger's Discussion with Kim Yong-sik of U.S.-ROK Relations

Foreign Minister Kim remarked that it had been more than a year since he had last met Mr. Kissinger, and many things had happened in this time. The most recent thing had been Mr. Kissinger's visit to Peking. He, Foreign Minister Kim, had read the Joint Communiqué and Mr. Kissinger's press conference, and wanted to extend his congratulations for this new step forward in U.S.-PRC relations.

Mr. Kissinger noted that we had wanted to send somebody to Seoul to brief President Park about the Peking trip, but President Park wouldn't accept this so we had no choice but to proceed without giving the ROK advance warning. The man we had wanted to send was one who had been in China, but President Park had informed us that he wouldn't be able to see him until after the Joint Communiqué was issued. Mr. Kissinger said that this was something he wanted to explain to Foreign Minister Kim.

Foreign Minister Kim indicated that he had not heard of this proposal, probably because he had been in Germany at the time that Mr. Kissinger had stopped in Peking and Tokyo. On the ROK side, he said, they were trying hard to reduce tensions and were talking to the North Koreans to this end. This had brought about a new situation in the Korean Peninsula. The talks would resume in March. The Foreign Minister indicated that while he did not know if the talks would actually succeed in reducing tensions, the ROK would keep them up. Mr. Kissinger commented at this point that the ROKs were pretty tough, and it was not so easy to have a military confrontation with them. Foreign Minister Kim reiterated that the talks would be continued, although he did not know whether this would be at the official level or not. Meanwhile, the ROKs would continue discussions with the U.S. on the level of military assistance. Mr. Kissinger stated that the ROKs could count on us to do our part.

Foreign Minister Kim turned the conversation to his experiences in Germany, noting that he had discussed the problems of Korea as a divided state with Minister without Portfolio Bahr, among others. They had agreed that it was the U.S. posture in Europe which made it possible for the Germans to talk to the Russians. The same thing was true for the ROKs, the Foreign Minister observed. Mr. Kissinger said to this that we had every intention of continuing our defense posture.

Foreign Minister Kim went on to say that the ROK foreign policy was one of peace. His country wanted to maintain peace, so therefore it wanted good relations with Communist countries. In reply to a question from Mr. Kissinger as to what countries the Foreign Minister had in mind, Foreign Minister Kim said—apparently misunderstanding the question somewhat—that the ROK as yet had not established relations with any Communist country, but had made an open statement on improving relations and establishing trade ties. The Communist attitude which they had gained here and there in contacts had not been so hostile, but it was not clear whether the Communists really wanted an improvement in relations. The ROK, though, had made its stand clear, but the task before it was not easy. If there were an improvement in the talks with the North Koreans, the ROKs could see from this how things might go. They were not so sure about the results of these talks, but would continue them.

Foreign Minister Kim asked Mr. Kissinger if he had gained any impression of what the PRC attitude might be toward the Korean situation. Mr. Kissinger stated in response that he had the impression from the talks that the Chinese were not going to exacerbate tensions there.

Foreign Minister Kim mentioned that a number of problems had to be settled first before both Koreas could be represented in the UN. UN Secretary General Waldhein had not been for two Koreas for some time. Mr. Kissinger then asked the Foreign Minister for the ROKs position on UNCURK. Foreign Minister Kim went into the background of UNCURK, noting that it had been set up after the Korean War for the purpose of facilitating the unification of Korea as the result of a UN resolution to help settle the Korean question on a permanent basis. Under the present circumstances, however, since no formula had ever been arrived at—(the Foreign Minister did not finish his statement but appeared to indicate here that UNCURK's role may have diminished). He went on to say that the organization should be kept on, at least for the sake of putting pressure on the other side.

Changing the subject, Foreign Minister Kim asked if it was Mr. Kissinger's impression that the Chinese were in favor of the continuation of the Korean talks. Mr. Kissinger said that this was, in fact, his impression. The Foreign Minister next asked if the Chinese appeared optimistic about the outcome of these talks, to which Mr. Kissinger replied that he thought they were pretty realistic, and were not looking for rapid progress. The Foreign Minister wanted to know if anything else about Korea had come out of what the Chinese had said to Mr. Kissinger. Mr. Kissinger replied that there had been nothing other than their favoring talks between the two sides. Foreign Minister Kim wondered why the Chinese had not appeared to be too optimistic. He pointed out that the North Koreans were engaging in a diplomatic offensive in Africa and in northern Europe, which he believed was costing them much more money than their people could afford. What was behind this, and what did the Chinese think? Mr. Kissinger expressed the belief that the Chinese were generally in favor of the unification of Korea, but not immediately. Confederation could come first. The subject of Korea had been mentioned very briefly, though.

Foreign Minister Kim observed that a round of talks had taken place between the two sides—there had been three meetings, but with no substantive results. Mr. Kissinger asked: Why were the ROKs against confederation? He could under stand the federation question, but confederation meant that both states would remain. In reply, Foreign Minister Kim stated that North Korea was a very aggressive regime militarily and economically, and in the light of this outside threat which it was facing the ROK had to keep its people strong internally. If they made a mistake, they had to consider not only the results of this mistake, but the question of history. What was the U.S. position? Mr. Kissinger declared that we had no position on this matter and didn't need to take one. We were in favor of what the ROKs wanted in the negotiations. He was just trying to understand the ROK reasoning.

Foreign Minister Kim emphasized that the ROKs wanted to keep in close touch with the U.S. on the talks. They were trying to do their best, and were quite successful on the economic side. They were also trying to do their best with respect to defense, and in this regard relied on the alliance with the U.S. Mr. Kissinger asserted that we intended to maintain this alliance. Foreign Minister Kim referred to U.S. troop levels in connection with the U.S. alliance, and Mr. Kissinger stated that we also intended to maintain our troop levels. They might fluctuate a few thousand one way or another, but would remain essentially the same.

Foreign Minister Kim spoke of the ROK troops coming home from Vietnam. He personally had the impression that the Vietnam cease-fire was working out satisfactorily, but what was Mr. Kissinger's impression? Mr. Kissinger agreed. Foreign Minister Kim added that he had had talks with the Vietnamese leaders who, with the exception of the Cambodian situation, also shared this opinion. What were Mr. Kissinger's thoughts (about Cambodia)? Mr. Kissinger pointed out that there were so many different opposition parties, it would be very hard to bring them all together.

Foreign Minister Kim asked if Mr. Kissinger thought that the Chinese and the Soviets were less aggressive than before. Mr. Kissinger commented that he would say they were more restrained, but not less aggressive. The Chinese had not changed their ideology, but had internal problems. The Soviets were also quiet for the time being, but were building a big military machine.

Foreign Minister Kim asked, what should Korea do? Mr. Kissinger suggested that the Koreans should build up their own military machine, but maintain their talks with North Korea. If they could get in contact with the Communists, this would be all right. Basically, however, they had to rely on their own strength, and on their ties with the U.S.

At this point, Foreign Minister Kim thanked Mr. Kissinger for taking the time to see him and expressed his appreciation for the exchange of views.

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Country Files, Far East, Box 544, Korea, Volume 6, January 1973–October 1973. Secret; Sensitive. The conversation took place in Kissinger’s office.

233. Memorandum From John Holdridge of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger), Washington, March 1, 1973. 233. Memorandum From John Holdridge of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger), Washington, March 1, 1973.1

Washington, March 1, 1973

MEMORANDUM
NATIONAL SECURITY COUNCIL
INFORMATION

March 1, 1973

MEMORANDUM FOR: MR. KISSINGER
FROM: JOHN H. HOLDRIDGE [JHH initialed]

SUBJECT: Secretary Rogers Gets Out in Front on U.S. Korea Policy

During South Korean Foreign Minister Kim Yong-shik's call on Secretary Rogers on February 22, the Secretary told Kim that, while the U.S. does not plan any major changes in policy toward North Korea, South Korea should not take offense at such changes as do occur. He noted that it has become more difficult in the past year as North Korea has moderated its hostility to continue to tell other countries to desist from contacts with North Korea. He said that in consequence the USG no longer discourages U.S. citizens from travelling to North Korea, and that we now believe that the more exchange and trade the better.

Assistant Secretary Marshall Green in a subsequent discussion with Kim suggested that South Korea reconsider whether it should continue to spend so much political capital trying to dissuade other governments from opening contacts with North Korea. He argued that third country contacts with North Korea could help modify North Korean behavior and would be consistent with South Korea's own intention to expand contacts with the North. Green asserted, however, that the U.S. believed that recognition of Pyongyang by other governments at this time would be unhelpful, and that the U.S. was trying to discourage others such as Sweden from going this far.

Comment

State is once again getting out in front on our Korean policy, and this can only be unsettling to Seoul. It comes at a time when Australian Prime Minister Whitlam has said he is going to expand contacts with North Korea, a number of others such as Sweden are exploring diplomatic recognition of Pyongyang, and Japan is continuing its slow development of non-political contacts with North Korea. It also prejudices our own policy review — we now have an honest, coherent draft on NSSM 154 after almost a year's effort to secure such a product, and it should be ready for an SRG meeting in two to three weeks.

The Korean Question in the U.N.

Of related interest, Ambassador Scali on February 26 told the South Korea U.N. Permanent Representative that we believe that the chances for securing postponement of debate on the Korean question in next fall's General Assembly are doubtful at best, unless there is a breakthrough in the South-North talks.

We are unaware that a basis for such pessimism exists, although USUN has in the past been gloomier in such prognostications than almost anyone else.

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Country Files, Far East, Box 544, Korea, Volume 6, January 1973–October 1973. Secret; Sensitive. Sent for information. Kissinger initialed the memorandum on March 20.

234. Memorandum From John Holdridge of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger), Washington, March 15, 1973. 234. Memorandum From John Holdridge of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger), Washington, March 15, 1973.1

Washington, March 15, 1973

MEMORANDUM
NATIONAL SECURITY COUNCIL
ACTION

March 15, 1973

MEMORANDUM FOR: MR. KISSINGER
FROM: JOHN H. HOLDRIDGE [JHH initialed]
SUBJECT: UNCURK and the Korean Item in the UN

You will recall that in discussing the Korean situation with Chou En-lai, he indicated that if we can secure the abolition of UNCURK the Chinese would be willing to "keep the issue quiet." By this we assume he meant the whole Korean question in the UN next fall. You told Chou that you believed it would be possible to obtain the abolition of UNCURK by the second half of this year, and that you had talked this matter over with the President and had received his agreement. You said that you would see if you could get the South Koreans to agree and, if possible, to have them propose UNCURK's abolition. If not, you would consult with the other members (we believe that you meant the other members of UNCURK). Chou said that it would be best if the South Koreans took the initiative. You told Chou that you would have the answer for the Chinese on this by mid-March.

To begin sorting this issue out, it might be useful to ask Ambassador Habib for his views on how the South Koreans might react to offering to abolish UNCURK if some arrangement can be worked out with the other side to keep the Korean issue quiet in the next UN session. He might also be asked about South Korean willingness to take the initiative. At Tab A is a draft back-channel message from you to Habib which sets forth this proposition. It is put in terms of its occurring to you following your talks with the Chinese, and makes no mention of the subject having been discussed with them.

Your recent conversation with ROK Foreign Minister Kim Yong-sik provides some insight into current South Korean thinking on this issue (Tab B). When you asked Kim about UNCURK, he seemed to suggest that its terms of reference were no longer germane, but added that the organization should be maintained in order to put pressure on the North Koreans. It would thus appear from Kim's words that we might have some difficulty in persuading the South Koreans to go along.

However, there are a number of factors which might be used to persuade the South Koreans to go along. First, the quid pro quo we would be proposing in itself constitutes some pressure on North Korea, and the ROKs themselves—if they had some confidence in the outcome of the deal—might be glad to get the Korean issue cooled in the UN next fall. Second, UNCURK may be in the process of falling apart anyway. Two of its member nations (Chile and Pakistan) have already withdrawn; both the Netherlands and Australia have indicated that they believe it no longer has any utility; the Thai and the Turks appear disinterested. The logic of trading a fading asset for a tangible gain might appeal to the ROKs if the proposition is presented to them in this form.

There is one major hitch to the outright abolition of UNCURK, however. A State paper (Tab C) points out that the outright abolition of UNCURK would require formal action by the UNGA—which almost inevitably would lead to the acrimonious UN debate that both we and the PRC want to avoid. In addition, such a debate could result in others attacking the UNC, and the ensuing UNGA action formally abolishing UNCURK could be read as a North Korea victory and could suggest a repudiation of UNCURK's past actions in Korea.

The State paper therefore suggests several alternatives, the most preferable of which, in my opinion, Gould be that of having the UNCURK reach an informal understanding to adjourn sine die, and to inform the UNGA of their decision, explaining that in light of the South-North talks UNCURK's efforts to secure Korean reunification were no longer necessary. The organization would still remain on the books, thereby preserving the fiction of its existence, but to all intents and purposes cease to be a factor on the Korean scene. As with the first alternative, the ROK's taking the initiative with the UNCURK members toward this end would have a number of advantages for Seoul and ourselves: it would help avoid an appearance that the move had been forced on the ROK, would help the ROK steal a march on the North, would spike any North Korean claim of victory, and would give the PRC and other Communist nations leverage to try to persuade North Korea to acquiesce in deferral of a UNGA debate.

In the case of either alternative, however, we would want to have some idea of the ROK attitude.

Recommendation:

That you approve the draft back-channel message to Ambassador Habib at Tab A.

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Country Files, Far East, Box 544, Korea, Volume 6, January 1973–October 1973. Secret; Sensitive; Exclusively Eyes Only; Entirely Outside System. In the top right hand corner Kissinger wrote, “Where is the extra paper by Rush?” A response in an unknown hand wrote “Tab C,” referring to the March 8 Department of State paper. At the top of the first page, an unknown hand indicated that the situation room received the telegram for dispatch on the morning of March 19, 1973. Attached but not published is Tab A, the draft backchannel telegram from Kissinger to Habib, which was sent as backchannel telegram 30768 to Habib, March 19. (ibid., Box 411, Backchannel Messages, Southeast Asia, Volume II, 1973, Part 1) Tab B, a February 24 memorandum of conversation, is Document 232. Tab C, a paper prepared in the Department of State, March 8, is attached but not published.

235. Summary and Options From a Study Prepared by the Interdepartmental Group for East Asia and the Pacific, Washington, undated. 235. Summary and Options From a Study Prepared by the Interdepartmental Group for East Asia and the Pacific, Washington, undated.1

Washington, undated

SUMMARY AND OPTIONS

After two decades of rigid military confrontation there is a possibility of a genuine detente on the Korean peninsula. Unification remains an issue for the distant future but the present trend — and at this stage it is a trend rather than a certain direction — is toward a growing accommodation between the two parts of Korea.

United States participation in the Korean War and subsequent support for the Republic of Korea have created a special United States-Republic of Korea relationship, but our basic interests in the Korean peninsula are strategic: we do not want the peninsula to become the cause of conflict among the United States, Japan, the Soviet Union, or the People's Republic of China; and we do not want the peninsula controlled by a government hostile to the United States and Japan.

Given the state of U.S. relations with the USSR and PRC in the 1959s and 1960s, the North-South military confrontation was probably inevitable and could be accepted as long as it did not lead to open warfare. Today, even confrontation short of war can inhibit development of our relations with Peking and Moscow, while accommodation between the two parts of Korea, in the right circumstances, could protect U.S. interests. There may be dangers if the United States moves too quickly to encourage an accommodation, but not to move at all risks losing an opportunity to normalize great power interaction in the former area of conflict. In any event, the momentum generated by the two Koreas themselves has passed the point where it could be easily stopped.

There are minimum criteria for the kind of Korean settlement — whether full or partial — which would be acceptable to us; — a stable relationship between North and South Korea at reduced levels of tension;

— a stable framework for peaceful competition among the major powers;

— political stability and opportunity for economic growth in the ROK;

— adequate military security for the ROK including U.S. military access;

— protection for U.S. financial and commercial interests in the ROK;

— a role for North Korea consistent with stability in the area.

The Options

There are four general ways of orienting U.S. policy: 1. Let the ROK take the lead, with the U.S. taking only initiatives acceptable to and agreed by the ROK. This is a policy which assumes accommodation is primarily a North-South matter. It would make difficult any change in the U.S. approach to such matters as our orientation in the UN, military deployments, relations with the North. If events in Korea threatened to impede detente in the area, the U.S. would consider more active influence with the ROK and action with the major powers.

2. Retarding the pace, a policy which we would follow if we believed North Korea was not seriously interested in detente, or if the USSR or PRC were not prepared to continue to cooperate over the long term in normalizing relations in the area.

3. Encourage accommodation, with the U.S. playing an active role concerted with but separate from ROK actions. The degree of United States activity would vary with specific circumstances.

4. Major power negotiations, based on the assumption that an active great power role was essential to development of an accommodation between the two Korea. We would therefore be prepared to judge initiatives and responses in light of their effect on great power relationships as well as on the ROK.

Involved in each of these methods of approach are a series of specific policy choices. Decisions on these specific sub-options should be coordinated with our choice among the four broad avenues of approach.

Military Force Levels

Maintain current United States force levels OR gradually reduce United States forces as accommodation proceeds.

— Regardless of the Option chosen, we would not wish to reduce forces at this point in time. If we elect to let the ROK take the lead and want to reassure them, we would maintain current force levels for an indefinite period. If we wished to preserve fully the option of retarding the pace, we might maintain current force levels for the leverage they provide with the ROK, using the threat of reduction to induce concessions or movement. If we wished to encourage or accelerate accommodation, we could decide unilaterally on reduction if we thought this step would force the pace, or use the force levels as a bargaining chip.

Security Assistance to the ROK

Following completion of the modernization program, decide on further security assistance on the basis of progress toward accommodation and ROK capabilities to assume responsibility for its own defense OR decide on further security assistance on the basis of our assessment of the threat and ROK capabilities.

Arms Control Measures

There are a series of steps which can be taken individually or in various combinations if in the evolution of events it is determined that arms limitation proposals could promote North-South accommodation. These could include confidence-building measures initiated by the two Korean parties, which would decrease tension but not address the military balance; a range of bilateral arms control measures and agreement among the major powers on such issues as limitation on military assistance, a nuclear free zone or security guarantees.

United Nations Command

Continue the United Nations Command in its present form; OR dissolve it completely; OR make piecemeal changes in its authority and functioning.

— Though useful to us, the UNC is not an essential element in our military posture in the ROK. If we wished to force the pace of accommodation we could use it as a bargaining counter in discussion of great power guarantees, or we could attempt to persuade the ROK to use it in discussions with the North (which would be consistent with letting the ROK take the lead). We could also use it to retard the pace by refusing to allow its dissolution. Piecemeal changes in the UNC organization or responsibilities and functions might be adopted as part of a step by step strategy or as part of a determination that this would assist us in the UN.

UNCURK

Try to preserve UNCURK in its present form; OR modify its present mandate and composition; OR suspend its operations without formal termination; OR terminate it altogether.

— UNCURK is a wasting asset. Even modification of its present mandate or composition is unlikely to be acceptable to a majority in the General Assembly. But the ROK fears that ending UNCURK might be the beginning of an unraveling process which would end with the loss of the ROK's special UN position. Thus, if we let the ROK set the pace on this particular issue, we may well find ourselves facing a UN defeat. Therefore, we may wish ourselves to decide to remove UNCURK from Korea.

UN Debate

Seek postponement OR if this is not feasible or desirable: debate the Korean Item, recognizing that changes in the long standing U.S. positions on North Korea attendance at the debate and UNCURK may be necessary to avoid defeat in the General Assembly.

— Postponement would be a largely neutral factor insofar as it left the UN role unchallenged and unchanged. Our decision to support postponement could be used with the ROKG to accelerate North-South talks, but insofar as it freezes the UN status quo it would be inconsistent with accelerated detente among all powers in the area.

— The invitation to North Korea to participate in a debate is a key issue. Support for the old unconditional resolution would be consistent only with a policy of retarding the pace and would probably fail. A modified or unconditional invitation would be consistent with the other options.

Relations with North Korea

We can continue the present policy of refusing all official contact with the North in support of the ROK position OR move on a step by step basis toward improvement of bilateral relations; OR offer favorable actions to the North in return for North Korean concessions on issues important to us.

— As a result of the steps in the accommodation process already taken, Pyongyang has acquired somewhat more international acceptance. This process almost inevitably will increase with further progress toward detente. Although favorable actions toward the North by the U.S. could be used to reward Pyongyang and thus encourage conduct we find acceptable, Seoul probably would prefer to reserve U.S.-North Korean contact as a bargaining counter for much later stages in the accommodation process. The optional choice is whether we would do so with or without ROK agreement.

Great Power Relations

The optional choice is how far we believe we should leave the accommodation process to the two Koreas as opposed to actively engaging the great powers. We may want to intervene actively only in exceptional cases (letting the ROK take the lead or retarding the pace); we may believe we must be actively involved with the ROK on a continuous basis (encouraging accommodation) or we may wish to act in concert with the other major powers to guide or compel accommodation (major power negotiations).

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Institutional Files (H-Files), Box H–191, NSSM 155 (sic) [1 of 2]. Secret. NSSM 154 is scheduled to be published in see Foreign Relations, 1969–1976, Volume XIX, Part I, Korea, 1969-1972. Richard Sneider, Acting Chairman of the Interdepartmental Group that prepared the NSSM 154 paper, sent it to Kissinger under a covering letter dated April 3. (Ibid.) On May 4, Davis forwarded the study to the Deputy Secretaries of the Departments of State, Defense, and Treasury, to the Acting Director of the Arms Control and Disarmament Agency, to the Director of Central Intelligence, and to the Assistant to the President for International Economic Affairs. The Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff also received a copy. (Ibid.)

236. Transcript of Telephone Conversation Between the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) and Deputy Secretary of State Rush, Washington, April 9, 1973, 5:58 p.m. 236. Transcript of Telephone Conversation Between the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) and Deputy Secretary of State Rush, Washington, April 9, 1973, 5:58 p.m. 1

Washington, April 9, 1973, 5:58 p.m.

TELCON
Secretary Rush/Mr. Kissinger
5:58 p.m., April 9, 1973

K: Hello.

R: Hello, Henry.

K: Yes.

R: I've gone into this UNCURK thing in considerable depth. The thing is undoubtedly an anachronism and we would certainly like to avoid a UN debate.

K: Right.

R: The problems that we have in doing away with it are one, the South Koreans. We would have to work up a scenario where they would take — where it was to their benefit to do away with UNCURK and then you have to work up a scenario on how to do away with it and keep away from a UN debate which we all want to keep away from. Now as you know this thing out of the UN debate involves not only the Chinese but the Russians. And of course also North Korea has had the Algerians present their resolution and we have to keep them out of it too.

K: Oh, no, we have to have an understanding with North Korea that it won't be pursued.

R: Exactly. Now the easiest way to do it would be to have, and maybe this would not satisfy the Chinese, but if UNCURK just passed a resolution dissolving themselves never to meet again, that would be

K: [Omission in the original] themselves or dissolving themselves?

R: They would disband or they would adjourn sine die — not to mean again and then all the individual countries in UNCURK would pull out. This would effectively do away with it but I suppose

K: No, that's not good enough for them.

R: The Chinese would want to have the UN formally dissolved. Now if the UN's formally dissolved, then how do you avoid a debate? This is a problem.

K: Well, unless UNCURK dissolves itself.

R: They can't legally do that anymore; they could disband themselves or do away with themselves and let it go at that. And if no one says anything about it that would be it. Just disband and individual countries could just withdraw.

K: Yeh.

R: We have to work up what would be acceptable from that standpoint. What I can do over here is have our people, have our own ideas, to see how can we legally disband them without anything going before the UN and work up a scenario from that standpoint, not bringing in of course anything about the Chinese or dealing with the Chinese because if the South Koreans think we are doing this to get something on the outside or having agreed to the Chinese behind their back so to speak, we'll run into the same sort of thing.

K: Now can we tell the Chinese that when we said adjourn sine die that this is all that UNCURK can do and that then the countries — we would cooperate with the countries concerned in pulling out.

R: We can do that. If they adjourn sine die and we cooperate with the countries to pull out, they might not even disband sine die. But this, Henry, is what we could try to do. I would have to really study the legalities of that more to be sure that it would stand up, but we could tell the Chinese that that, we think, is the best way of doing it. If it stands up legally and frankly I think they should accept it and we could go ahead on that basis. Now we'd also have to evidence (?) then with the Russians and with the North Koreans.

K: We'll let the Chinese deliver the North Koreans and then we'll worry about the Russians.

R: Well, we could do that, but the Russians could still, as you know, cause trouble and you'd have your UN debate.

K: Yeh.

R: In addition to UNCURK, as you know, we also have the UN command there and the South Koreans I understand, would be very upset if the UN Command were liquidated.

K: That I understand.

R: And the feeling is that the only way you get the South Koreans to go along with this would be to give them our assurances that we would certainly try to see that the UN Command was not dissolved and that there would not be an unraveling of the entire UN picture in South Korea.

K: Well the fact is that last year I was told by Alex Johnson that I could tell them that UNCURK would be abolished if they avoided the UN debate.

R: I think we can do that.

K: Now if you can give me something I can tell them — that accomplishes that — I can say that I've met my commitment to them.

R: Right.

K: Do you see what I mean?

R: Yes, well why don't I get at the paper for you?

K: Good.

R: In essence it would be just what we say, but I'll get at the paper saying that we would adjourn sine die and that this is what it would be.

K: But that they won't accept.

R: Then they would have to — we could vote to disband and withdraw — and the members withdraw. Whether we can get that — well the members themselves I think would do it.

K: We could say that all UNCURK can do is adjourn sine die and that then if they want a UN resolution abandoning it — abolishing it we won't oppose it.

R: We would certainly say that.

K: OK, that might be a way of doing it.

R: If we can avoid a debate on that; we want to avoid a debate of course. But if we can have a resolution of the UN abolishing it that would be fine. If we can avoid a debate and do that.

K: Right. Can you look at it again and let me know tomorrow.

R: Yes, Henry, that really is the answer. Now we are willing, if the Koreans will go along, and we'd sell this to the Koreans, we would approach the Koreans and tell them that we think UNCURK has served its purpose and tell the Koreans that we do not intend to touch the UN Command; that we want to avoid a debate in the UN; that we think a way that could accomplish this would be for UNCURK to adjourn sine die and then it might be that there would be a resolution in the UN agreed to by everyone abolishing UNCURK with no debate. And this is what we would try to do.

K: OK.

R: That would be our approach.

K: Good. Excellent.

R: OK, Henry.

K: Thank you.

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, Henry Kissinger Telephone Conversation Transcripts, Box 19–2 [March–April 1973]. No classification marking. Kissinger was in Washington. A transcript of Kissinger’s and Rush’s earlier conversation about UNCURK, April 7, is ibid.

237. Memorandum From the Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs (Porter) to President Nixon, Washington, June 15, 1973. 237. Memorandum From the Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs (Porter) to President Nixon, Washington, June 15, 1973.1

Washington, June 15, 1973

UNDER SECRETARY OF STATE FOR POLITICAL AFFAIRS
WASHINGTON
NSC UNDER SECRETARIES COMMITTEE

June 15, 1973
NSC-U/DM 105

MEMORANDUM FOR THE PRESIDENT
SUBJECT: Reexamination of the Korea Force Modernization Plan

In his memorandum to you of December 27, 1972, the Acting Chairman of the NSC Under Secretaries Committee reported that he had directed the Korea Force Modernization Steering Group to undertake a comprehensive reexamination of the Korea Force Modernization Plan. Mr. Kissinger's memorandum of February 7 conveyed your request that the NSC Under Secretaries Committee develop policy alternatives and recommendations based on this reexamination on how to fulfill our modernization commitments to the ROKG.

The Interagency Steering Group on Korea Force Modernization has completed the required reexamination of the Korea Force Modernization Plan; results are reflected in the attached report. (The Department of Defense and Joint Chiefs of Staff have provided a modified concurrence which is appended to this memorandum.)

Recommendations

The Steering Group has recommended that: 1. The United States should continue to strive to provide a total of $1.5 billion in security assistance to the Republic of Korea, with a maximum of $1.25 billion in grant and FMS.

2. The emphasis in modernizing ROK forces should be shifted from ground forces to air defense. First priority should be to develop an adequate active and passive air defense capability and provide fighter aircraft in accordance with the original Plan. Provision of additional aircraft would be determined by subsequent threat developments, U.S. force deployments, possible arms limitations, etc.

3. Negotiations with the ROKG should commence as early as possible. Our objectives should include having the Koreans agree to increase their defense spending sufficiently to assume a greater share of their own defense responsibilities in a move toward increasing their military self-sufficiency.

4. We should inform the ROKG of our intent to assist in the modernization of a 16 division ground force, but should in no way pressure it to reduce the size of its forces. Should the ROKG decide that it will reduce its forces rather than bear the expense of supporting the existing larger force of 19 divisions, we should begin discussions with them on whether and how a reduction can be related to the current South-North talks.

5. Funding of the modernization commitment should be stretched out through FY 1977, with a steep increase in substituting FMS for Grant funds.

6. Every effort be made to provide excess defense articles to meet our modernization commitment.

Negotiating Considerations

The Steering Group identified several difficult and sensitive problems that can be anticipated in negotiating the above with the ROKG. These include discussions related to a cut in the size of the ROK Army, which has a great deal of influence within the ROKG, and the cumulative effect of negotiating not only the above policy changes, but others relating to Korea including those dealing with the issues in NSSM 154. The Steering Group believes that all the preceding should be addressed together, and that decisions regarding negotiations related to the Korea Force Modernization Plan should be reached after consideration of all factors involved with our general policy toward Korea.

Exceptions

The Steering Group was unable to reach unanimous agreement on several points. These exceptions are indicated by footnotes in the report and may be summarized as follows: — The Department of Defense believes that the Government of Japan should be solicited to assist in the modernization of ROK forces by providing non-lethal items of equipment.

— The NSC member believes that we should not tell the ROKG that the U.S. will assist in modernizing a ROK ground force of not more than 16 divisions; he believes instead that U.S. assistance for the three additional ROK divisions currently in existence should be given lowest priority.

— The NSC member believes that the shift from grant aid to FMS credit for Korea's modernization requirements should be much slower than the comparatively rapid shift recommended by the Steering Group.

[signed]
William J. Porter
Acting Chairman

Attachments:
1. Memorandum from Acting Secretary Clements.
2. Report.

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Institutional Files (H-Files), Box H–241, NSDMs, NSDM 227, folder 6. Secret; Norforn. Attached but not published are the December 27, 1972 memorandum of U. Alexis Johnson, Acting Chairman of the NSC Under Secretaries Committee; the February 7 memorandum from Kissinger to the Chairman of the Under Secretaries Committee; and the May 31 Report of the Korea Force Modernization Interagency Steering Group. The memorandum from Clements, 13 June, and the June 13 response of the Department of Defense and the Joint Chiefs of Staff to the paper are ibid., H–68, SRG Meetings, NSSM 154, 6/15/73 [4 of 4].

238. Minutes of Senior Review Group Meeting, Washington, June 15, 1973, 3:03 p.m.–3:45 p.m. 238. Minutes of Senior Review Group Meeting, Washington, June 15, 1973, 3:03 p.m.–3:45 p.m. 1

Washington, June 15, 1973, 3:03 p.m.–3:45 p.m.

SENIOR REVIEW GROUP MEETING
June 15, 1973

Time and Place: 3:03 p. m. - 3:45 p. m., White House Situation Room

Subject: U.S. Policy Toward Korea (NSSM 154) and the Korean Force Modernization Program

PARTICIPANTS:

Chairman

Henry Kissinger

State

William Porter

Richard Sneider

Donald Ranard

Martin Herz

Defense

William Clements

Robert Hill

Dennis Doolin

R /Adm. Charles Tesh

JCS

Adm. Thomas Moorer

V /Adm. John Weinel

CIA

William Colby

Theodore Shockley

OMB

Dolf Bridgewater

NSC

B/Gen. Brent Scowcroft

Richard Kennedy

John Froebe

Richard Solomon

Philip Odeen

James Hackett

SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS

It was agreed that: — The State Department will hold its draft cable to Embassy Seoul giving the U.S. view of the proposed South Korean foreign policy initiatives until it has been carefully reviewed by the members of the SRG. The Department may inform Embassy Seoul that instructions will be provided by June 19 for Ambassador Habib to follow in his discussions with the South Koreans on their proposed initiatives. Another SRG meeting will be held on June 18 to determine the nature of the instructions.

— CIA will prepare a National Intelligence Estimate on where the proposed policy changes are likely to lead, for consideration at the June 18 meeting.

— Defense will prepare a paper for the June 18 meeting which will consider the ramifications of a possible termination of the United Nations Command in Korea, including the effects this would have on the U.N. Status of Forces Agreement for U.S. base, in Japan, the US/ROK force relationship in Korea and the Korean Force Modernization Program.

Mr. Kissinger: We've got two problems here, the evolution of our political relations with Korea and the question of the Korean force structure. We also have to consider how we should respond to (Ambassador) Habib's request for guidance in his discussions with the ROKs on their proposed foreign policy initiatives, and what we should do about UNCURK this year.

Mr. Porter: Habib is under pressure to talk with the Koreans tomorrow and we want to get a cable out to him tonight.

Mr. Kissinger: I can't believe that our relations with the South Koreans depend on Habib talking with them tomorrow. Why does he have to talk with them tomorrow?

Mr. Porter: They think every day counts. They are afraid the North Koreans may do something that will steal the initiative from them. They have developed a new policy and they want to complete consultations on it and announce it. We have put the issues into this telegram and we'd like the group to look at it and discuss it point by point.

Mr. Kissinger: I hate to think that our relations with Korea are such that Habib's conversation can't be put off for a few days. We just received the cable.

Mr. Porter: The Koreans are insisting that we get started with them. They are pressing for our advice.

Mr. Kissinger: One of the concerns I have about this is that we have complicated discussions with the Chinese and we make points with them when we tell them about something we plan to do anyway. Do we have to cover all of these issues with the Koreans right at the beginning?

Mr. Porter: No, this is just the beginning of a dialogue. We are just responding to their request for comments on their proposed initiatives. We will be fleshing all this out later.

Mr. Kissinger: You have the abolition of the U.N. Command in here!

Mr. Porter: But we would get something for it. We would get guarantees from the North Koreans. It's all explained in the cable.

Mr. Kissinger: I understand very well what you are saying; I would just like to prepare a more measured response. I understand what Habib wants. He doesn't want any recognition of North Korea unless the PRC and USSR are prepared to recognize South Korea. Before getting into the details of the cable, I would like to discuss where we are going and what we are trying to accomplish. Then we can discuss the cable.

Porter: We'll do it any way you like, but if we don't get the cable out soon we may not be able to reach you again for awhile.

Mr. Kissinger: I want to see where all of this leaves us with the Soviets and the PRC. That's very important. We'll be seeing the Soviet leadership next week. I don't care about North Korea.

Mr. Porter: (President) Park wants to make his policy statement June 23. He's afraid it will be pre-empted by the North. We can consult with the USSR and PRC concerning any adjustment we may want to agree to in the U.N. in return for adequate guarantees.

Mr. Kissinger: Such as?

Mr. Porter: North Korean recognition of the DMZ and armistice line and a guarantee to honor them.

Mr. Kissinger: I'm more interested in the views of the PRC and the Soviets than those of Pyongyang. The idea is that the U.S. would approach the PRC and the Soviets and ask them to endorse-the guarantees?

Mr. Porter: Yes, on matters concerning the security of the Korean Peninsula.

Mr. Kissinger: When would we make these arrangements on the security of Korea?

Mr. Porter: During the debate in the U.N. this fall. We see the possibility of stating our willingness to support a change in the U.N. Command providing they are prepared to accept an agreement guaranteeing the security of the peninsula. We want to establish the principle first and fill in the details later.

Mr. Kissinger: What's the principle?

Mr. Porter: Just that. They agree to accept and preserve the armistice line and DMZ.

Mr. Kissinger: And what do we accept, a statement by North Korea?

Mr. Porter: Essentially that.

Mr. Kissinger: We would say that we are prepared to disband the U.N. Command in return for a verbal statement by North Korea?

Mr. Porter: We are not being that specific. We are just giving an indication that we may be prepared to do so. We want to be prepared for the U.N. resolution on Korea.

Mr. Kissinger: What U.N. resolution?

Mr. Porter: There's one every year.

Mr. Kissinger: There wasn't one last year because we stopped it.

Mr. Porter: We can't stop it this year.

Mr. Kissinger: We can't or we don't want to?

Mr. Porter: The South Koreans don't want to.

Mr. Kissinger: For their own policy reasons they may not want to, but what about our policy reasons?

Mr. Herz: The situation has changed substantially since last year. North Korea has just been admitted to the World Health Organization by a large margin and it looks as though we would be severely beaten on UNCURK if it came to a vote. The South Koreans appreciate that and want to modify their policy accordingly.

Mr. Kissinger: Do the South Koreans want merely to suspend UNCURK?

Mr. Porter: No, they're prepared to dissolve it.

Mr. Ranard: The ROKs know they can't keep UNCURK. The question of whether it is dissolved, suspended, terminated or whatever is just a matter of terminology.

Mr. Kissinger: What do you think, Bill (Colby)?

Mr. Colby: I think we're giving away a lot for a mere declaration by the North Koreans.

Mr. Kissinger: (to Mr. Clements) What do you think?

Mr. Clements: Frankly, I'm taken by surprise by this cable. Do I understand correctly that the ROKs want us to support their new moves?

Mr. Porter: They want to take a number of initiatives, but before they do they want to consult with a number of governments, including the U.S.

Mr. Sneider: They have already consulted with the British and French.

Mr. Clements: I'm surprised that President Park would put us in this situation, with such a short fuse.

Mr. Porter: The U.N. problem always looms large for the Koreans at this time of the year. Park has decided to take these steps and wants to move ahead with them before the North Koreans pre-empt the initiative.

Mr. Kissinger: He wants suggestions from us?

Mr. Porter: Not especially from us, he is discussing his proposals with various countries.

Mr. Kissinger: We don't have to give a blanket endorsement to all of these proposals. We have interests that are more important to us than what Habib says to the South Koreans tomorrow.

Mr. Porter: We wish to make clear that any changes in the status of the United Nations Command would have no effect on the maintenance of U.S. troops in Korea under our mutual security arrangement. We also have special arrangements for bases in Japan as a result of the U.N. Command structure in Korea. If we can get the guarantees we want from the Soviets and the PRC concerning the stabilization of the Korean peninsula, we will then want to consider revisions in the U.N. Command, but not anything that will affect the status of U.S. troops. We want to be sure that is completely clear.

Adm. Moorer: What about our bases in Japan?

Mr. Porter: We understand the Japanese will be sympathetic to changes that will permit us to keep the bases.

Adm. Moorer: That means we will have to renegotiate our treaty with the Japanese.

Mr. Sneider: No, we won't. There are two separate agreements with the Japanese. Regardless of what happens to the U.N. Command, any resumption of hostilities in Korea would be a violation of the U.N. Charter. We have an agreement with the Japanese aside from the U.N. Command, which was confirmed just recently in the Nixon/Sato communiqué. There is a general statement by the Japanese on the public record that they will support us in any hostilities that may break out in Korea.

Mr. Kissinger: How much can you rely on that?

Mr. Clements: The Japanese are vitally affected by this proposed change of policy by the ROKs, and so are the PRC and the Soviets. They all have to be consulted.

Kissinger: When you consult the Japanese it's the same as putting it in the newspapers.

Mr. Sneider: That's not true. We consulted them on the Korean North-South talks and there were no leaks at all.

Porter: If you want to consider the issues addressed in the cable at greater length, we can give some interim guidance to Habib.

Adm. Moorer: The instructions to the Ambassador should not conflict with what we intend to do this fall in the U.N.

Mr. Porter: That's understood.

Adm. Moorer: We at Defense would like to look at this message for a few hours before commenting on it.

Mr. Porter: We're not trying to present you with a fait accompli.

Mr. Kissinger: But you've managed to do so anyway. Park is not going to announce the new policy before June 23rd in any case, so we do have some time to consider the ramifications of these steps.

Mr. Herz: The South Koreans have to consult with the members of UNCURK. It's essential for them to do so. We should get our comments to them in time for them to be able to do that before the announcement.

Mr. Ranard: They've asked our views on these various things they plan to propose. We should respond to them.

Mr. Kissinger: Has CIA made an assessment of this?

Mr. Colby: We prepared a National Intelligence Estimate a few weeks ago, but not on these specific proposals.

Mr. Kissinger: Can you get us an assessment quickly?

Mr. Colby: I can have you one by Monday (June 18).

Mr. Kissinger: O.K., do that in any case, regardless of what we decide to do about this cable.

Mr. Clements: We (DOD) want to take a look at the cable.

Mr. Kissinger: What I want to know is where is this process leading us. What do we want to encourage Park to do? What process in Korea do we want to encourage? One could argue that to spill our views of the whole package at one time, before other countries have shown their hand, could back us into a position we may not want to be in.

Mr. Sneider: This is not a proposal to abolish the U.N. Command. The ROKs merely want to have discussions about it.

Mr. Kissinger: Has anyone else seen this cable?

Mr. Clements: I'm reading it now.

Mr. Kissinger: That's no way to clear a cable.

Mr. Clements: I know that, but I hadn't seen it before.

Mr. Porter: We can tell Habib that we are not prepared to give him instructions right now, but that we will try to get them to him by June 23rd.

Mr. Kissinger: It's not necessary to do that. You can tell him he will have his guidance on Tuesday (June 19); that will give us the weekend to think about it.

Mr. Porter: That's O.K. with me. I have no aversion to keeping Park waiting a bit. That will meet my requirements.

Mr. Kissinger: I want to get the views of the Joint Chiefs on the bases in Japan. We may also want to say something in the cable about the U.N. Command. I'd like to have another meeting on this subject before we decide on the cable. Monday is bad because of the Brezhnev visit.

Mr. Sneider: What about Sunday?

Mr. Kissinger: No, I have to be in Key Biscayne. Let's try for 2:30 p.m. on Monday.

Mr. Porter: What would you like to have for that meeting?

Mr. Kissinger I want the National Intelligence Estimate we discussed. It should address the question of where all this will lead us.

Mr. Porter: What about the U.N. Command?

Mr. Kissinger: I have no strong feelings about retaining the Command.

I have thought for some time that the U.N. Command might be dispensable, providing our security agreement is retained.

Mr. Clements: What do you want from Defense?

Mr. Kissinger: I'd like your views on the base problem.

Mr. Clements: Do you want something on military assistance?

Mr. Kissinger: No, we can discuss that in connection with the Force Modernization Program on Monday.

Adm. Moorer: We have a forthcoming meeting with the South Koreans. We should give our people some guidance.

Mr. Kissinger: I don't want our people getting carried away by the enthusiasm of the South Koreans and going off topping their offers by 20%. O.K., we'll meet again on Monday (June 18) at 2:30 p.m.

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Institutional Files (H-Files), Box H–113, SRG Minutes (Originals) 1972–3 [2 of 4]. Secret. The meeting was held in the White House Situation Room. The June 18 meeting of the SRG was subsequently cancelled. On May 25, Habib reported that South Korea’s “new policy is acceptance of a two-Korea policy for an indefinite period while maintaining the ultimate objective of reunification.” (Telegram 3353 from Seoul; ibid., Record Group 59, Central Foreign Policy Files.) Habib provided the Embassy’s recommendations on South Korea’s “Two Koreas” policy shift. (Telegram 3438 from Seoul, May 30; ibid.)

239. National Intelligence Estimate 42/14.2–73, Washington, June 18, 1973. 239. National Intelligence Estimate 42/14.2–73, Washington, June 18, 1973.1

Washington, June 18, 1973

NATIONAL INTELLIGENCE ESTIMATE

18 June 1973

SUBJECT: NIE 42/14.2-73: IMPLICATIONS OF A ROK FOREIGN POLICY INITIATIVE

PRECIS

The proposed South Korean initiative is designed to forestall a diplomatic setback at the United Nations this fall. In substance, it would bow to pressure in the UN for a debate with North Korea participating and would anticipate possible change in the UN role. In a more positive sense, it would open a longer range effort to achieve a modus vivendi on the Korean Peninsula based on new understandings among the powers concerned.

If ROK leaders do not proceed with the initiative, and if a further effort is made to postpone a General Assembly debate on Korea, the attempt would probably fail. There would be negative political consequences for the US as well as South Korea.

If the ROKs do proceed as planned, their initiative could lead to an eventual phasing out of the UN role in Korea, but this process need not endanger peace and stability there.

Prospects for obtaining new, formal international guarantees to keep the peace in Korea would not be good. However, there would be scope for certain more limited moves by the powers that would reflect their interests and would contribute to stability — diplomatic recognition of the two Koreas by the great powers, endorsement of the Korean DMZ as a de facto boundary, and bilateral understandings to limit arms supplies to the peninsula. In the main, however, peace and stability would tend to rest — as it does today — on the interests of the powers in avoiding conflict and in the actions they took on a bilateral basis to limit adventurous or provocative actions by their Korean clients.

If the UN machinery, particularly the UN Command, were phased out before the achievement of some new international undertakings, the ROK Government would become somewhat more demanding in its security relationships with the US. Seoul would want reaffirmation of the bilateral security treaty. It would be less complacent than before when talk of US force reductions in Korea was broached. It might be less receptive to the idea of reducing ROK ground forces. It would be increasingly sensitive to any move to cut promised ROK force modernization outlays, and it might even request new and larger modernization packages.

[Omitted here is the body of the paper.]

1 Source: Central Intelligence Agency, OPI 122 (National Intelligence Council), Job 79R01012A, Box 467, NIE 42/14.2–73, Folder 6. Secret. All members of the U.S. Intelligence Board concurred in the estimate except the representatives of the FBI and the Department of Treasury, who abstained because the subject was outside of their jurisdiction. On June 18, Colby sent this NIE to Kissinger, as requested. Colby added, “The analysis in the NIE basically supports the approach advocated by State.” (Ibid.) [secret] On June 19, the Department sent instructions to Habib in telegram 118917 to Seoul. (National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Country Files, Far East, Box 544, Korea, Volume 6, January 1973–October 1973.)

240. Memorandum From Lawrence Eagleburger of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger), Washington, July 13, 1973. 240. Memorandum From Lawrence Eagleburger of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger), Washington, July 13, 1973.1

Washington, July 13, 1973

MEMORANDUM
NATIONAL SECURITY COUNCIL
ACTION

July 13, 1973

MEMORANDUM FOR: HENRY A. KISSINGER
FROM: L.S. EAGLEBURGER [LSE initialed]
SUBJECT: UNCURK

I understand that you have decided not to send any instructions to Habib on how to proceed with UNCURK until after your Peking trip. I assume this decision was based on a desire to keep as many options open as possible for your meetings in Peking, particularly in light of the PRC's support of Kim Il Sung's five points (though it has been relatively moderate).

I wonder, however, if it is possible to sell this horse twice. Park's speech of June 23, plus what you have already told the Chinese privately, probably has already convinced Peking that we will move on UNCURK (and that failure to do so would cause us real problems in the UN this fall).

My own view is that it would be better to let Froebe's proposed telegram go. Otherwise, we risk: — Convincing the ROK, by our silence, that we are retreating from our earlier statements of support for their new initiatives.

— Leaving the UNCURK members largely rudderless and without any indication of US views.

— Leaving Bill Rogers a policy hole big enough to drive a truck through; one I have no doubt he will take full advantage of (encouraged by Bill Porter).

— As matters now stand the UNCURK report will go forward under any circumstances. It is scheduled to be forwarded to the UN Secretary General in late July or early August. In order to assure that the UNCURK termination language is satisfactory to us, we will need to move before you return from Peking.

Froebe's cable offers the minimum possible guidance to Habib, It assures the ROK that we still support their initiatives; it also will permit us, following consultation with the ROK, to let the UNCURK members know our general views. At the same time, it keeps other options open, i.e., it says nothing about the UNG, it waffles the question of a UNGA resolution on UNCURK, it takes no position on our stance during the UNGA debate on Korea, and it is mute on UN membership for the two Korea's.

Thus I recommend you authorize the release of Froebe's draft telegram.

Approve [HK initialed]
Disapprove

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 544, Country Files, Far East, Korea, Volume 6, January 1973–October 1973. Secret. Sent for action. Kissinger initialed his approval of the recommendation. Attached to the memorandum is a note from Scowcroft that reads, “Henry—I am inclined to think Larry is right. Brent.” Froebe gave Kissinger a memorandum, June 23, summarizing Park’s speech. (Ibid.) The backchannel telegram, 31859, from the White House to Habib, July 18, is ibid., Box 411, Backchannel Messages, Southeast Asia, vol. II, 1973, Part 1.

241. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to Secretary of State Rogers and Secretary of Defense Schlesinger, Washington, July 18, 1973. 241. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to Secretary of State Rogers and Secretary of Defense Schlesinger, Washington, July 18, 1973.1

Washington, July 18, 1973

THE WHITE HOUSE
WASHINGTON

July 18, 1973

MEMORANDUM FOR
THE SECRETARY OF STATE
THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE

SUBJECT: U.S. Policy Toward the Korean Peninsula

The President has approved the following as interim guidance on our basic policy toward the Korean Peninsula: — We shall continue to reassure the ROK of U.S. support for its timely and constructive foreign policy initiative announced in President Park's speech of June 23.

— The U.S. will make no further adjustments in its present force levels in the ROK except in the context of the overall security situation on the Peninsula. We will consult with the ROK well in advance of any further force reductions.

— The U.S. will continue military assistance to the ROK, and in particular will complete the Five Year Modernization Plan, although Congressional funding limitations will require that U.S. assistance on this plan be stretched out through FY 1977. We also believe that the emphasis in the plan should be shifted from ground farces to air defense. The other recommendations of the Under Secretaries Committee on the plan are presently under consideration; pending decision we should avoid further detailed discussion of U.S. military assistance.

— We are keenly aware of President Park's desire that we discuss the Korean question with the PRC and the Soviet Union, and can assure the ROK that we have that desire very much in mind. We will do nothing that will harm South Korean vital interests, and will consult with the ROK to the maximum extent possible.

— We should avoid attempting to force the pace of the South-North talks — either by suggesting a reduction of our support for the ROK, or by pressing on the ROK a series of initiatives that it might take up with Pyongyang. Beyond lending every encouragement to the ROK to persist in the talks, and assuring the ROK of continued support, U.S. direct intervention with Seoul should be limited to averting any threatened break-down in the talks.

— We accept the proposition that the termination of UNCURK would be a very useful step in helping avoid a confrontation at next fall's UNGA. Any termination of UNCURK, however, should be without prejudice to its past activities. We should seek to persuade the members of UNCURK to recommend termination in their annual report. A decision on whether to seek a UNGA resolution formally accepting the report, however, will not be made until we have more certain indication of the intentions of the other side.

— We are reviewing the status of the UNC and will consider the possibility of terminating this body, provided that the related aspects of existing security arrangements can be adjusted in a way that will not diminish the security of the ROK. Since this is a delicate and complex undertaking, we should proceed with caution and are confident that we can defend the UNC against a possible hostile resolution in the next UNGA.

— As to U.N. membership for the two Koreas, we support the position taken by President Park in his June 23 speech. We will continue to consult closely with the ROK and other friendly nations on the tactics we will adopt on the Korean question in next fall's UNGA.

The President has asked that you use the above interim guidance in your contacts with ROK officials and others, and that you not go beyond this position pending further guidance from him.

[signed]
Henry A. Kissinger

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 544, Country Files, Far East, Korea, Volume 6, January 1973–October 1973. Secret. According to an attached undated note by Scowcroft to Kissinger, Rogers would probably ignore this guidance, but Clements might be more sympathetic. Scowcroft also believed there was “no need” to send this memorandum to Nixon.

242. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to President Nixon, Washington, July 25, 1973. 242. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to President Nixon, Washington, July 25, 1973.1

Washington, July 25, 1973

MEMORANDUM
THE WHITE HOUSE
WASHINGTON
ACTION

July 25, 1973

MEMORANDUM FOR: THE PRESIDENT
FROM: HENRY A. KISSINGER [HK initialed]
SUBJECT: Korean Force Modernization

Three years ago, you approved a five-year, $1.5 billion modernization program for the South Korean armed forces. This program has made major progress, although Congressional reductions in our security Assistance funds have slowed the program. To date, we have provided $735 million compared to a plan of approximately $1 billion for the first three years of the program. Nonetheless, marked progress has been made in modernizing and improving the South Korean forces.

Earlier this year you directed a study of the modernization program to evaluate progress and ensure that the goals and priorities set three years ago were still valid. This study has now been completed and some shifts in the program have been recommended.

The study concludes that the ROK has a more than adequate ground force capability (ROK army is about 50 percent larger than the North Korean army). Most of the critical ground force equipment items, artillery, tanks, and communications, have been provided and training and leadership are good. The study found, however, that South Korean air defenses were seriously deficient, and it is recommended that this area receive greater emphasis. The most pressing need is for additional ground-based, air defenses (anti-aircraft guns, radars, and surface-to-air missiles) and F–5E aircraft to replace obsolete F-86s. It may also be necessary to provide additional fighter aircraft in the later 1970s. However, a final decision on this can be deferred for two or three years when we can better judge the nature and pace of North Korea's air force modernization.

There is general agreement among all of the agencies involved, State, Defense, and CIA, that the above reorientation of the modernization program should be made. The only disagreements were on two fairly minor points. Defense would like to press the Koreans to demobilize three of their existing divisions to save money which would permit a rapid reduction in our assistance program. State would also like to reduce our assistance program by rapidly switching from grant aid to FMS credit. Both agencies would also like to set a terminal date for our security assistance beyond which the ROK would fully fund its defense effort.

Such precipitous cuts, however, pose a serious risk. With political events moving rapidly on the Korean peninsula, sharp reductions in our requests for Korean assistance could be interpreted by either or both the North and the South as calling into question our basic support for South Korea.

Pressures to cut back on the size of the ROK army would also cause strains in our relations and in any event would likely fail. However, if we give the "excess" divisions low priority for modernization funds, we can avoid misallocating our aid money without raising a problem with the Koreans.

RECOMMENDATION

If you approve, I shall issue the NSDM at Tab A approving the recommendations of the military study but directing only a gradual reduction in grant assistance and no direct pressure on the Koreans to reduce their forces.

Approve [RN initialed]
Disapprove

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Institutional Files (H-Files), Box H–241, NSDMs, NSDM 227, Folder 6. Secret. Sent for action. Nixon initialed the “approve” option.

243. National Security Decision Memorandum 227, Washington, July 27, 1973. 243. National Security Decision Memorandum 227, Washington, July 27, 1973.1

Washington, July 27, 1973

NATIONAL SECURITY COUNCIL
WASHINGTON, D.C. 20506

July 27, 1973

National Security Decision Memorandum 227

TO: The Secretary of State
The Secretary of Defense

SUBJECT: Korean Force Modernization Plan

The President has reviewed the Under Secretaries' memorandum on Re-examination of the Korean Force Modernization Plan and has decided: — Air defense should be emphasized in modernizing ROK forces in order to assist the ROK in moving toward combat self-sufficiency for defense against the North Korean threat.

— Modernization of ROK divisions beyond the 16 active and three ready reserve divisions recommended in the military study should receive low priority but the ROK should not be told the U.S. will not support modernization of additional divisions.

— NSDM 129 continues in effect but no termination date should be established for grant MAP assistance.

— Planning for grant MAP and requests to Congress should not be precipitously reduced nor should assistance be switched rapidly to FMS (Option Two of the Steering Group's Report is approved).

— Before high performance aircraft beyond replacement aircraft in the original modernization plan are funded, a complete review of the threat and air defense requirement should be undertaken and recommendations submitted to the President.

Subject to the foregoing the recommendations of the Under Secretaries' Committee are approved and the Korean Force Requirements Study should be the general basis for military assistance planning.

[signed]
Henry A. Kissinger

cc: The Director, Office of Management and Budget
The Acting Director of Central Intelligence
The Chairman, Joint Chiefs of Staff

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Institutional Files (H-Files), Box H–241, NSDMs, NSDM 227, Folder 6. Secret. Copies were sent to the Director of the Office of Management and Budget, the Director of Central Intelligence, and the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff.

244. Telegram 5409 From the Embassy in the Republic of Korea to the Department of State, August 15, 1973, 0326Z. 244. Telegram 5409 From the Embassy in the Republic of Korea to the Department of State, August 15, 1973, 0326Z.1

August 15, 1973, 0326Z

TELEGRAM
Department of State
SEOUL 5409

P 150326Z AUG 73

FM AMEMBASSY SEOUL
TO SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 9498
INFO AMEMBASSY TOKYO

SEOUL 5409

E.O. 11652: GDS
TAGS: PINT, PFOR, KS, JA

SUBJECT: KIM TAE CHUNG CASE

1. AS CIRCUMSTANCES SURROUNDING THE ABDUCTION OF KIM TAE CHUNG CONTINUE TO EMERGE, MY EARLIER OPINION THAT THIS WAS PROBABLY AN ROKG-MANAGED OPERATION IS INCREASINGLY CONFIRMED. I NOW VIEW IT AS A PRIME EXAMPLE OF STUPID GOVERNMENTAL THUGGERY.

2. FULL CONSEQUENCES WILL PROBABLY EMERGE SEQUENTIALLY OVER TIME. THERE WILL BE DOMESTIC REVERBERATIONS AS WELL AS INTERNATIONAL CONSEQUENCES. AT THIS STAGE KIM HAS WIDESPREAD SYMPATHY AND SUPPORT IN KOREAN CIRCLES FOR THE EXPERIENCE HE UNDERWENT. GOVERNMENT HAS IN EFFECT INCREASED THE STATURE OF ITS ONLY SERIOUS POLITICAL OPPONENT. WE BELIEVE THAT NO ONE WITH ANY SENSE OF INDEPENDENT THOUGHT ACCEPTS THE GOVERNMENT'S EXPLANATIONS OF ITS INNOCENCE. THE SO-CALLED QUOTE SAVE THE NATION UNION UNQUOTE AND QUOTE PATRIOTIC YOUTH FEDERATION UNQUOTE WHICH ALLEGEDLY CARRIED OUT THE OPERATION ARE TYPICAL OF THE SORT OF APPARATUS CONTRIVED BY THE ROK/CIA.

3. WE DEFER TO EMBASSY TOKYO'S APPRAISAL OF THE REACTION IN JAPANESE GOVERNMENT, DIET AND PRESS CIRCLES. ROKG APPARENTLY INTENDS TO STICK BY ITS DECISION NOT TO LET KIM RETURN TO JAPAN FOR INVESTIGATIVE PURPOSES. TO DO SO WOULD ONLY TURN HIM LOOSE WITH GREATLY HEIGHTENED PRESTIGE TO CONTINUE HIS ATTACKS ABROAD AGAINST THE PARK GOVERNMENT.

4. AT THE PRESENT TIME THE GOVERNMENT IS ALLOWING EXTENSIVE COVERAGE OF THE CASE IN LOCAL PRESS AND INVESTIGATIVE AGENCIES ARE MAKING A GREAT SHOW OF TRYING TO GET TO THE BOTTOM OF THE AFFAIR. I WOULD NOT BE SURPRISED IF THEY WERE FORCED TO TURN UP SOME OF THE GUILTY PARTIES WHO WILL GO TO JAIL PROTESTING THEIR PATRIOTISM AND THE FACT THEY ACTED ON THEIR OWN AND NOT ON BEHALF OF THE GOVERNMENT. THIS HAS OCCURRED BEFORE IN KOREAN HISTORY WITH ABOUT THE SAME AMOUNT VALIDITY.

5. KIM TAE CHUNG WILL NOW SEEK TO TAKE ADVANTAGE OF HIS POSITION, TRY TO GO ABROAD, AND MAY EVEN BE BOLD ENOUGH TO TRY TO MOUNT SOME DIRECT CRITICISM OF THE GOVERNMENT. AT THAT POINT I SUSPECT THE PRESS COVERAGE IN KOREA WILL DIMINISH SHARPLY AND HIS ACTIVITIES WOULD BE RESTRICTED. THERE STILL HANGS OVER HIM AN OLD CHARGE OF VIOLATING ELECTION LAWS IN 1968 AND SUBSEQUENTLY, BUT IT IS HARD TO IMAGINE THAT THE GOVERNMENT WOULD RESURRECT THEM EXCEPT IN THE MOST DESPERATE CIRCUMSTANCES. I DO NOT, HOWEVER, EXCLUDE THIS POSSIBILITY.

HABIB

1 Source: National Archives, Record Group 59, Central Foreign Policy Files. Secret; Priority; Exdis. Repeated for information to Tokyo. On August 8, Republic of Korea intelligence agents kidnapped opposition politician Kim Dae-jung from a hotel in Tokyo, allegedly with plans to assassinate him.

245. Backchannel Message 0818 From the Ambassador to the Republic of Korea (Habib) to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger), Seoul, August 24, 1973, 0615Z. 245. Backchannel Message 0818 From the Ambassador to the Republic of Korea (Habib) to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger), Seoul, August 24, 1973, 0615Z.1

August 24, 1973, 0615Z

0 240615Z AUG 73 ZYH

FM SEOUL
TO THE WHITE HOUSE
FM AMBASSADOR HABIB SEOUL 818

TO THE WHITE HOUSE - IMMEDIATE - EYES ONLY DR. KISSINGER

REF: WH 31940

1. I SPOKE TO PRESIDENT PARK ABOUT PEKING CONTACT WITH NORTH KOREANS IN ACCORDANCE WITH INSTRUCTIONS REFTEL. PRESIDENT PARK AGREES TO THE FIRST MEETING AS YOU PROPOSED. HE ALSO AGREES WITH YOUR BELIEF THAT WE SHOULD NOT ACCEPT A SECOND MEETING UNLESS THE PRC IS PREPARED TO RESPOND TO ROK APPROACHES FOR CONTACT. HE IS HOPEFUL THAT WE WILL BE SUCCESSFUL IN THIS LATTER REGARD.

2. PRESIDENT PARK SAID HE WISHES TO STRESS THAT THE MEETING WITH THE NORTH KOREANS SHOULD NOT BE MADE PUBLIC. HE FEARS THAT NORTH KOREANS MIGHT WISH TO PUBLICIZE SUCH A MEETING IN ORDER TO EMBARRASS HIS GOVERNMENT BY MAKING IT APPEAR THAT THE U.S. IS GOING OVER ROKG HEAD TO DEAL DIRECTLY WITH NORTH KOREANS. HE APPRECIATED THAT WE COULD NOT GUARANTEE SECRECY ON THE PART OF THE OTHER SIDE BUT WAS HOPEFUL WE WOULD MAKE EVERY EFFORT TO AVOID PUBLIC DISCLOSURE.

3. THE PRESIDENT DID NOT GIVE ANY INDICATION AS TO THE LEVEL AT WHICH HE PREFERS WE MAKE THE CONTACT. I GAVE HIM THE OPPORTUNITY TO DO SO BUT DID NOT ACTIVELY SOLICIT A RESPONSE FROM HIM SO AS TO LEAVE YOU WITH A FREE HAND. SIMILARLY, HE DID NOT EXPRESS ANY PREFERENCE AS TO THE PLACE AT WHICH CONTACT SHOULD BE MADE. HE DID ASK THAT WE KEEP HIM INFORMED OF THE RESULTS AND I PROMISED TO DO SO.

4. AS TO MY VIEWS WHICH YOU REQUESTED, I FAVOR PROCEEDING AS PROPOSED, BUT WOULD SUGGEST WE MAKE FIRST CONTACT AT LEVEL JUST BELOW USLO CHIEF AND MEET SOMEWHERE OTHER THAN USLO. I AGREE WITH PARK THAT IT WOULD CREATE SOME PROBLEMS FOR HIM IF MEETING IS PUBLICIZED. HOWEVER, WE CAN LIVE WITH PUBLIC KNOWLEDGE IF IT COMES OUT THAT WAY, PARTICULARLY IF MEETING IS AT SECOND LEVEL AND IN INFORMAL SURROUNDINGS.

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 527, Country Files, Far East, PRC, Volume 8, July 10, 1973–December 31, 1973. Secret; Sensitive; Exclusively Eyes Only. Habib’s backchannel telegram was Tab C of a memorandum, August 24, from Richard Solomon to Kissinger. (Ibid.) The meeting between the North Korean Chargé and members of the USLO in Bejing is described ibid., HAK Office Files, Box 95, Country Files, Far East, Folder 4 [2 of 2], China Exchange, 7/10/73–10/31/73.

246. Memorandum of Conversation, Seoul, November 16, 1973. 246. Memorandum of Conversation, Seoul, November 16, 1973.1

Seoul, November 16, 1973

MEMORANDUM OF CONVERSATION

DATE: November 16, 1973
PLACE: Blue House, Seoul, Korea

SUBJECT: Secretary Kissinger's Discussion with President Park

PARTICIPANTS:

President Park Chung Hee

Presidential Secretary General Kim Chong Yom

Acting Foreign Minister Yun Suk Heun

Special Assistant to the President for Foreign Affairs Choi Kyu Hah

Interpreter Cho Sang Ho

Secretary Kissinger

Ambassador Philip Habib

Acting Assistant Secretary Hummel

The following Korean officials joined the discussions during the lunch:

Prime Minister Kim Jong Pil

National Assembly Speaker Chung Il Kwon

President Park: You must be very tired from your journey.

Secretary Kissinger: No, I am not tired yet but it will probably catch up with me later.

Park: I want to offer to you our wholehearted welcome. I know you have had a very busy schedule and we very much appreciate your taking the time to visit Korea.

Secretary: I have always had a very warm feeling for Korea. I visited Korea during the war and I have acquired the highest admiration for the Korean people. It is amazing and admirable what has been accomplished here.

Park: It is 22 years since your last visit?

Secretary: Yes, it has been too long.

Park: I would like to congratulate you on your glorious and successful efforts in bringing peace in the Middle East.

Secretary: The Middle East is still a long way from peace but we have been successful in relieving the immediate tension.

Park: Concerning your recent visit to Peking, I would appreciate your giving me your impressions.

Secretary: First in general—whenever I go to Peking and then visit other countries I find that they expect that I will have solved all their problems. I have not talked to you before so I don't know if you have this expectation.

I will make some general comments first and then to the Peking visit. You can count on the fact that we will not make any prior decisions without consulting you. Therefore whenever I go to Peking—and I expect such trips to be frequent—if we have not told you in advance you can count on the fact that Korea will not be an item on the agenda. That was the case this time. On each of my visits the Chinese make their standard speech on Korea but we do not pursue the subject. You know the sort of speech they made yesterday in the UN. On this occasion on my visit to Peking they didn't even make their standard speech. The only context in which Korea came up was in connection with the compromise we are trying to develop in the UN, and it came up because I have the impression that the Chinese are having difficulty in arranging with their co-sponsors the achievement of a compromise. The Soviets may very well be playing a role in these difficulties. So we had to spend time just discussing the technical situation in New York and how to give them more time to consult their co-sponsors. Except for that the issue of Korea never came up.

I have seen press stories that the withdrawal of US troops from Korea was discussed in Peking, but the fact is that the presence of US troops was not discussed in any form.

Park: On your visit to Peking, I would appreciate your own assessment of Peking's position toward a settlement in Korea. Of course they must give support to North Korea and on the basis of your previous visits and your knowledge of their previous position what assessment can you make of the Chinese attitude toward the Korean question?

Secretary: You know I talked to Chiao Kuan-hua in New York about the fact that we are willing to talk to the North Koreans if the Chinese are prepared to talk to you. They said they could not talk to you in New York because the North Koreans would find out and they also said they could not talk in Washington for other reasons that are not clear to me, but they never absolutely said that the principle was unacceptable. The Chinese position has many elements. On the one hand they must be sure that Pyongyang does not come under the influence of Moscow. On this trip Chou En-lai made a special point of this. Peking has the dominant influence in Pyongyang.

Before going further, I assume that this conversation is on a very confidential basis and it will not be spread to other parts of your government. The Chinese are very sensitive. In fact, I am very sensitive.

On the other hand quite candidly—although I can't prove this—the Chinese are not eager to have any powerful unified countries on their borders. So I do not believe that the unification of Korea has the same priority for the Chinese that it has for Pyongyang or for you. I think the Chinese, strangely, do not mind the US presence in Korea, particularly if they think that Japanese influence would rise if ours declined. I think the Chinese would be violently opposed to any military aggression by North Korea at this point, because they would be afraid if we become involved with North Korea it would isolate them from Pyongyang because the Soviet Union would support North Korea. Also if China supported North Korea in a military confrontation, that would drive Japan away from China. If the North Koreans attack and the Japanese supported the South Koreans then the Chinese would become more and more isolated. I personally think that the greater likelihood—in terms of outside support—for an attack by North Korea would come from the Soviets rather than from the Chinese, but this could change in five years or so.

Park: That is the prevailing opinion on Korean affairs and on the international and internal situation on the Korean Peninsula. We share the same view, that the overall Korean situation is related to Moscow and Peking. However more recently it seems possible that North Korea may try the same tactics as in the Middle East, influenced by the notion that it can do the same thing on the Korean Peninsula. If they find the opportune moment they may take military action and then they could claim that unification is an established fact. The big powers would come in to stop the fighting, but the North Koreans would be in a better negotiating position because of their territorial gains. What is your opinion?

Secretary: Although I have been given the Nobel Prize for peace, I assure you our policy is not characterized by an excess of sentimentality. I want to characterize the situation in the Middle East. Mr. President, you should watch our actions and not our statements. What do we expect to happen? After Egypt and Syria made their attacks our strategy has been to demonstrate that the side that is supported with Soviet arms could not win. And since it is impossible for Israel with a population of only 3 million to destroy the Arabs who have populations totaling 100 million, it was always necessary for the war to end in a negotiation. So what we wanted was a defeat for the Arabs so severe that they would turn to us, but not so severe as to drive them to the Soviets. And this is exactly what we brought about. In terms of the positions on the map rather than in rhetoric, Syria has been badly hurt and Egypt has had one army trapped and has suffered total defeat. Perfectly frankly—and we need to keep this very secret—it was on a Friday when I went to Moscow. If a ceasefire resolution had been offered at that time in the Security Council we would have had to accept. There would have been no way of avoiding a ceasefire. My going to Moscow permitted military operations to continue for 48 more hours. By that point both Syria and Egypt had been defeated. We didn't want the war to continue beyond that because the dangers would have been too great. For one thing the more moderate Arab leaders would have been thrown out by extremists. So the lesson of the Middle East is not that one can gain territory and get the UN to approve it. The best you can say is that the UN prevented a complete catastrophe. So the lesson of counter attack in such a war is that the international environment might permit you to take Wonsan but not to take Pyongyang. And a second lesson is that if the action goes as it did in Bangladesh the whole matter is finished. The temporary defeat can be handled, but a basic and near-total defeat could be used by North Korea to solidify its gains. Another thing to remember is that we got 22,000 tons of supplies into Israel by air in 48 hours. Here in Korea such supplies would be easier because in Israel we had only one intermediate base we could use, in the Azores.

Park: I consider your remarks are common sense among peace-loving people, but the leaders in Pyongyang are not common-sense people or peace-loving either.

Secretary: I agree you should guard yourself and keep your position strong for a quick counter-attack, and don't panic. As long as this Administration is in office we would give you strong support so as to return to the status quo ante.

Park: You must have received a report on the North Korean's one and a half hour speech in New York, claiming that the Korean War was instigated by South Korea with U.S. inspiration. Before over 100 members of the UN they made this brazen claim without any sense of guilt. What they are trying to do is re-write history that is known to everybody in the world. They think they can do anything and get away with it. Kim Il Sung is still pretending.

Secretary: I did not say you should not keep yourself alert and cautious. My assessment is that the Chinese will try to prevent a North Korean attack but if it happens anyway Kim Il Song would run a very major risk. We strongly believe that in a few years you will be able to defend yourself. The Korean soldiers I have seen so far look very good to me.

Park: During your Peking visit the North Koreans intensified their propaganda offense against the ROK.

Secretary: Possibly they don't need much encouragement, and probably the Chinese cannot restrain them, at least as far as propaganda is concerned. Also it is possible that the North Koreans are as suspicious of the Chinese as some of our friends are of Washington and therefore they make a big noise so as not to be overlooked.

Park: In reviewing past Korean history the 1950 attack occurred with the support of the Soviets. We believe that Soviet support of the invasion was based on an assessment that the U.S. would not enter in and support us. That was a miscalculation. In fact we must be very cautious and prudent. I am very pleased and am made more confident by hearing your remarks and by your keen interest and detailed knowledge. However we are very close to the problem and we know the history. We are trying to be alert to cope with any changing situation. As I understand your statements, it is that we should take measures to cope with a reckless attack and should stay alert so as to demonstrate strength so that the North Koreans convince themselves that aggression would not be prudent.

Secretary: I agree.

Park: Mr. Secretary, in meeting with Chou En-lai and talking about our proposal for the admission of two Koreas—we know that they are ostensibly against this but what is their true attitude? Is it possible that under certain conditions the Chinese would not oppose the proposal? I would appreciate your assessment.

Secretary: My strong impression is that their attitude on dual admission is significantly affected because of Taiwan. They are genuinely not in favor. You will see in the Peking Communiqué an interesting evolution in their position on normalization. In the past the Chinese demanded that we break with Taiwan. However the Communiqué says only that we must recognize the principle of one China. This might open the possibility of normalization without our breaking with Taiwan. If something is accomplished along these lines, the Chinese could begin to think of a similar thing in the Korean case but I don't think they can consider that now.

Park: However we understand that in the case of dual admission of East and West Germany the Chinese were in favor. Is that true?

Secretary: Yes, but in that case both Germanys were in agreement. In this case both Koreas do not agree. My experience with the Chinese is that they move very slow and supplely. My impression is they have a mortal fear of making a proposal and being rejected. First they make a general statement and the maybe repeat it if I have not understood them the first time. Then when I do understand, and if I indicate approval, they actually make the proposal. You know the Chinese think they are cleverer than anyone else in the world, and that maybe true. I was once asked by Chou if Americans consider me to be clever. I said I hoped that the Chinese would consider me to be only average clever, for a Chinese, which would be the highest compliment anyone could pay. (laughter)

Park: It has been our constant position that in the present atmosphere unification of Korea is difficult or impossible. So at the present stage there can be no early unification. So our belief is we should put our efforts on a durable peace. First we should bring peace, then unification. Therefore for some time we do not foresee the possibility of reunification. This summer I made a statement on unification. Presently the North Koreans advocate a peace treaty but they propose that US forces should get out and that we should reduce our military strength to 100,000. In reality they are trying to achieve a goal of weakening our defense capability and neutralizing the US Defense Pact. The North continues to try to make propaganda capital by pushing a peace treaty, and some countries feel that the North is proposing peace and the South is not willing to respond. We have been thinking of this and we have a certain proposal to try to deal with it. Our proposal would first be a matter of careful consultation with the US, but I will now give you the rough idea of it to get your reaction. The essence of our proposition would be to offer a nonaggression pact between North and South to try to make sure there is no aggressive action by either party. We would also jointly assert the validity of the armistice agreement. The other side might demand that the UNC be abolished and we would then reply that the UNC authorizes should be handed over to the South Korean Armed Forces. What do you think?

Secretary: First in terms of overall strategy, I was very impressed with your June proposal. I did not believe it had the slightest chance of being effective but it put the other side on the defensive. I think, and this is the strategy we used in our Viet-Nam negotiations, we made many proposals some knowing they had no chance of acceptance. We made them so that there was always a US proposal on the table that the North Vietnamese would have to reject, so that the North Vietnamese could not fully develop a propaganda line since we would constantly make proposals that forced them to redevelop their lines. Occasionally we would make proposals in secret and then they could not be sure whether we would make them public. This was a difficult problem for them. I know those negotiations are not exactly parallel to your situation but there are some similarities.

The strategy you proposed is to make a proposal that keeps the initiative in your hands or at a minimum keeps the other side off balance. Such initiatives should always be proposals that you could live with. They should be serious, and not just maneuvers, and that of course was the case in your June proposal. My first impression is favorable, in that you could afford to have it accepted.

We must study together how to dissolve the UNC. This is certainly the initiative they will take next year and we should pre-empt the subject. It would be good if you took the initiative whether your proposal is best, or some other might be better, with your permission I want to think this over for a couple of weeks and then reply. I have no better idea now, I just want to think it over. We should think about what counter-proposal they could make, so that we have thought the results through. But your basic approach I like very much.

Park: This is just a thought, and not fully formed, and requires serious study. We know the North would not accept it. As to whom and when it would be presented needs more careful study between us. It would be possible to announce as a South Korean initiative. Another way would be to consult the Soviets, the Chinese and Japanese to see if we could jointly come up with a formula that the North Koreans could be asked to accept, and then our other friends could consider. The way of doing this needs further consideration.

Secretary: My instinct is whatever proposal is agreed, it would be better to come from your government. If we discuss it, with the Chinese and the Soviets the Soviets have a vested interest in embarrassing the Chinese and they might not agree to it. What might work is that after we have worked out a proposal you let me announce it to the Chinese about two weeks in advance as a message from you and ask their help with the North Koreans. This would be a contact from you to the Chinese. The risk would be slight because they are too afraid of breaking a confidence from me to leak it out.

Park: I certainly appreciate your valuable advice on such proposals and there will be thorough discussions between our Foreign Ministry and Ambassador Habib.

Secretary: I will personally pay close attention to this matter.

(The meeting then broke up and was resumed again at the lunch table, where the Prime Minister and the Speaker joined the group.)

(There was some discussion of the flight route of the Secretary's aircraft from Peking to Tokyo, in which the PRC insisted that the flight had to go over Shanghai rather than on the direct route over Korea. The Secretary discussed the fact that his former colleagues at Harvard disagree strongly with his policies. President Park mentioned that he had been in China for about five years during the Pacific War.)

Secretary: I think the Chinese do not have a completely closed mind to relations with South Korea. Also I think they are so afraid of the Soviets that they will not challenge the United States during the next few years.

Park: What about the realities of the Sino-Soviet confrontation?

Secretary: There is very real hostility. In the first place the Chinese do not like the Soviets as people—but of course the Chinese don't really like anyone. In the second place the Chinese are very worried that the Soviets might attack them. Thirdly, the Soviets are concerned that if the Chinese are this aggressive while still weak, how will they behave when they have a secure nuclear capability?

Park: It seems to me that it would suit the Soviet style to strike when the opponent is weak.

Secretary: I think there is a 50-50 chance that the Soviets may seriously consider an attack before the Chinese are fully nuclear capable.

Park: When I saw President Nixon in 1969 in San Francisco I asked him the same question and got the same 50-50 answer. May I ask whether your estimate is a guess or whether there is evidence.

Secretary: It is now based on some evidence. In 1969 we knew nothing at all about the Chinese.

(There was some banter about rumors there are many Kissingers flying to many different capitals simultaneously. The Secretary then told the story of the time when Ambassador Habib kicked him out of his office in Saigon when the Secretary, at that time not in government, was visiting Viet-Nam for the first time. There were also ironic complaints by the Secretary that State Department officers refuse to show him interesting telegrams, and have a secret desire to handle everything in the regional bureaus.)

Park: Do you think there will be a North Viet-Nam offensive this dry season?

Secretary: I have the greatest respect for President Thieu. He has done a remarkable job. A North Viet-Nam offensive depends upon being sure of getting the same flow of equipment from the USSR and China. We have the impression it is unlikely the Chinese are maintaining the same flow. There will be attacks in the dry season but the chance is about 55-45 against an all out offensive. We have recently sent a message to the North Vietnamese—this has not been made pubic—that an offensive would have very serious consequences, and we pointed out they have miscalculated us on other occasions. We have recently sent reconnaissance aircraft over North Viet-Nam and recently a carrier has moved into the Tonkin Gulf—this is only for your private information. We take the position that the recent war powers legislation by the U.S. Congress lifts the restrictions on our acts in Indochina so we would have 60 days in which to conduct military operations including mining their harbors again.

Park: How is Mao's health?

Secretary: Of course he is very old, I believe he is 79, and he could die anytime regardless of health factors. When I first saw him two years ago I thought he couldn't last very long. In February 1972 it was hard for him to walk without people holding him. Then in February 1973 he was much better and could walk without help. On this visit he was even better than February 1973, conducting a conversation for nearly three hours, covering every topic in US-China relations and many other subjects, without referring to any notes. In the past this is the sort of conversation that Chou En-lai has undertaken. This time he put on a very impressive performance intellectually. Still, he is an old man. Chou En-lai himself is very active at the age of 74.

Park: I saw a picture of your discussions with Chou and it seemed that Chou was taking a very vigorous attitude.

Secretary: Yes, he has made it a point to identify himself with China's policy toward the United States. Of course Mao has also identified himself with it.

Park: Will you go to Norway to receive the Nobel Prize?

Secretary: No I do not plan to go but I will have the American Ambassador there accept it for me. Le Duc Tho refused the prize, possibly because he wants to maintain the freedom to attack South Viet-Nam and also probably because he does not want to associate with me. He did send me a nice letter in connection with the Nobel Prize. You might be interested that once during our negotiations he looked me squarely in the eye and he said,"Let me say frankly, open-heartedly, sincerely and with the best intentions, you are a liar." (laughter)

Park: We have some appreciation of the difficulties of negotiations with Communists.

Secretary: I may say that the Israelis are about as tough as the Communists. The Arabs are relatively UN-disciplined. A problem with the Arabs is that they will proceed from one unjustified assumption to another. They will begin by hoping you have accepted something, and then pretend you have accepted, and then assume that there has been a firm agreement, and will later on claim that you have gone back on some understanding. However, up to now the Arabs have not been as nasty in negotiations as has been my experience with the Communists. For four years I negotiated with Le Duc Tho, without achieving any progress whatsoever.

Ambassador Habib: In your North/South talks you should keep in mind our experience in the Viet-Nam negotiations. The other side will continue over a long period to say "absolutely no." Then suddenly they may change their minds. I advise you to keep on with the discussions, not be discouraged, and wait for a shift in their position.

Secretary: Every time you make a proposal it will take a few months for them to analyze it.

Park: Despite the fact that we have a common Korean language to use in our negotiations there are very significant differences of meaning that they attach to Korean words. For instance, they insist that the word "freedom" must include their freedom to conduct espionage and subversion in South Korea.

Secretary: We had similar problems of terminology when U.S. Congressmen visited Hanoi. Time after time North Vietnamese officials would use language in talking to the Congressmen that would give them the impression that there had been a major change in Hanoi's positions. Then the Congressmen would talk to our newspapers and the Administration would be accused of failing to respond to the shift. In 1971 the North Vietnamese made public seven points but proposed nine points to us secretly for negotiation. Every week they publicly demanded an answer to their seven points that they had said privately to us they did not wish to discuss. After two months of this we gave them some secret counter proposals to their secret nine points. Then we published the whole thing and demanded a reply. We never heard from them for seven months after that.

Park: Last year we agreed with the North to stop all slander and abuse between us. The North at first honored this, then they started some slander over their central broadcasting. We taxed them with this and at first they said it was only a certain political party making the broadcast. But later they tried to claim that the broadcast came from a clandestine radio in South Korea. Of course we used direction finding and found out they were lying.

Ambassador Habib: What is the status of your proposal to the North?

Park: There was a Secretaries meeting at 10:00 a.m. today at Panmunjom. We propose that the next Red Cross meeting should be in Seoul. As for the coordinating committee, the other side has called it off, refusing to deal with certain members of our side. We are contacting them to find out if those talks could be restarted if there are changes of personnel on both sides.

Ambassador Habib: I have not been impressed up to now with North Korean diplomacy. The North Vietnamese are much more skillful.

Park: The North Vietnamese perhaps have adopted some elements of their style from the French. On the other hand the North Koreans are unique, and one could call it a Kim Il Sung style.

Secretary: I want you to know we will be making it increasingly costly for the third world to be freely in opposition to us. In the case of Yugoslavia we have cancelled their Foreign Minister's visit and we have cancelled other visits by Americans to them. We will make sure it is no longer free and easy to oppose the United States. I suppose that the North Koreans are probably the most difficult country in the world now. I expected that there might be a North Korean approach to us in New York but there has not been one. Of course if there is one we will tell you about it before we do anything.

Park: Mr. Secretary, you should meet with them to get your own assessment.

Secretary: I meet with them myself?

Park: Well perhaps not necessarily.

Secretary: We will not take the initiative. If they suggest it, we will get your advice. If we were to initiate contact they would think they could deal with us, excluding you. I can assure you there will be no meetings with North Koreans that are kept secret from you.

Park: Newspapers have reported that if the Chinese make contacts with us, the United States similarly will contact North Korea.

Secretary: We thought this was your position. We have no overwhelming desire to contact the North Koreans. For instance, we are in contact with the Soviets and the Chinese for entirely cold-blooded reasons. Thus any contacts we have with the North Koreans that we jointly agree upon would be for equally cold-blooded purposes.

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970–1973 (TS Files), Box 24, Misc Refiles [No Folder Title], POL 7 US/Kissinger. Top Secret; Nodis. Drafted by Hummel. The meeting was held in the Blue House.

247. Minutes of Washington Special Actions Group Meeting, Washington, December 4, 1973, 10:40 a.m.–12:02 p.m. 247. Minutes of Washington Special Actions Group Meeting, Washington, December 4, 1973, 10:40 a.m.–12:02 p.m. 1

Washington, December 4, 1973, 10:40 a.m.–12:02 p.m.

WASHINGTON SPECIAL ACTIONS GROUP WORKING GROUP MEETING

December 4, 1973

Time and Place: 10:40 a.m. - 12:02 p.m., White House Situation Room

Subject: North Korea

PARTICIPANTS:

Chairman: William R. Smyser

State: Ambassador Habib

Richard Sneider

Donald Ranard

Wesley Kriebal

Edward Kelley

Chip Roe

Elizabeth G. Verville

Defense: Colonel Ralph E. Adams

Capt. James Baker

Robert L. Yandergrift

CIA James Graham

NSC Jack Froebe

Richard Solomon

Col. Don Stukel

William Hyland

Maj. Robert McFarlane

Jim Barnum

SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS

It was agreed that:

... the ferry boat scheduled to leave on December 5 depart as usual but that a final decision be rendered by Secretary Kissinger;

... a joint State, Defense, NSC cable be sent Embassy Seoul immediately informing them of our view of the situation, instructing the Embassy to call for a meeting of the Military Armistice Commission as soon as possible, and that the ROK be urged to open the "hot-line" with Pyongyang;

... the Soviet Union and the People's Republic of China will be informed of our concern and the steps we are taking to prevent an incident;

... State will inform the Japanese of the situation and what we are doing;

... the leadership of both Houses of Congress be informed immediately of the situation and what steps are being taken by the US.

1. Organization and Purpose

Mr. Smyser opened the meeting with the explanation that the meeting had been called in order to formulate a consensus on what our policy should be in regard to North Korea's demands. If there was no agreement on what we should do, the issues would be clarified and justified and then forwarded for decision at a higher level. Mr. Smyser expressed the hope that two papers would emerge from the meeting: (1) a memorandum to Secretary Kissinger defining the issues and options; and (2) a cable to Embassy Seoul, giving our views of the situation and what steps ought to be taken. Mr. Smyser also identified five issues to be addressed: (1) how to proceed with the regular supply convoys; (2) how to talk to the North Koreans (through the Military Armistice Commission (MAC) or "hot-line"); (3) how to-tell the Soviets and Chinese of our concern; (4) how the situation relates to the UN Command (UNC); and (5) what do we do about the Japanese and the Congress.

2. CIA View of the Current Situation

Mr. Graham gave a brief run-down on the current situation, adding little to what was already known. The ferry that was scheduled to leave for one of the islands today turned back because of bad weather. The North Korean Navy continues to patrol along what is termed the Northern Limit Line. North Korean Army units appear to be on alert, and there is some evidence that reserve forces are also on alert, but this is uncertain. The joint service exercises have not begun. This is only the second time that this has not happened, and there is no clear explanation for this. On the political front, the North Koreans have made no further claims beyond jurisdiction over the islands. The South Koreans still plan to re-supply the islands. Their naval units are to escort the supply convoys and have orders to fire only if fired upon. There are no installations on any of the islands, and no US personnel. [text not declassified]

It was Mr. Graham's opinion that North Korea's reasons for provoking the issue at this time are basically threefold: (1) a method to get the UNC phased out; (2) to unsettle the ROK; and (3) to weaken South Korea's confidence in the US at the time when the Korean question is about to come up before the United Nations. Mr. Graham explained that this assessment is only conjecture, but that the timing in relation to the UN is just too close to be coincidental.

3. Status of the South Korean Ships

Mr. Froebe reported from a just-concluded telephone conversation with the UN Command that a ferry is scheduled to depart at 0900 (Seoul time) on December 5. It will not be escorted. Three ROK vessels will be maneuvering off the coast. The ROK Air Force is also on strip alert. The departure of the next re-supply convoy to Paengnyong-do is uncertain; cover plans are now being developed.

4. The Military Situation

Colonel Adams of Defense reported that there is a heavy concentration of North Korean troops near Saigon-ni conducting exercises. Traditionally, these exercises maneuver from the west toward the east. Defense is currently working up the North Korean order of battle in the area, and will have a rundown by the afternoon of 4 December. No US vessels are in the area.

5. The Legal Situation

Mrs. Verville of State reported that it is State's preliminary view that North Korea's claim that the five islands fall within its territorial waters is not legally valid. Under Article 15 of the Armistice Agreement, North Korean jurisdiction over contiguous waters applies only to the mainland—not the islands. State prefers not to get into the argument over territorial waters as this opens a whole Pandora's Box of issues. State will draw up a text to be used as legal justification.

6. Discussion of the Actions to be Taken

A lengthy discussion followed regarding what actions the US might take in response to North Korea's "challenge" and what North Korea and the ROK might do in response to the actions discussed. There was no agreement as to whether North Korea will or will not attempt to seize the ferry boat on the morning of December 5. There are strong arguments that the North Koreans want an incident and thus will try something, and strong arguments that Pyongyang will do nothing. A discussion of whether it would be in our interest to escalate the matter ended with the agreement that it would not be at this time. There was considerable discussion over the advisability of requesting that the ferry postpone its voyage on the 5th of December; it was decided to leave the decision to Secretary Kissinger. It was Ambassador Habib's view that nothing could be done since the ship was due to leave in less than eight hours and the South Koreans probably would not accede to our request, anyway.

On the diplomatic questions, there was a great deal of discussion on whether to inform the Soviet Union and Peking of our concern, whether we should urge the ROK to communicate it's concerns to Pyongyang over the "hot-line", and whether a meeting of the Military Armistice Commission (MAC) should be called. It was decided that Moscow and Peking should be informed of our concern, but in a low-key manner. Embassy Seoul would be instructed to urge South Korea to open the "hot-line".

7. Informing our Allies and Congress

It was decided that State would inform the Japanese of our concern over the situation and what we are doing to prevent an incident. It was also decided that the leaders of Congress should be told immediately of the gravity of the situation. The method for informing the leaders is to be determined later. Congressional leaders will be informed of our demarches to the Russians and Chinese on an "if asked only" basis.

1 Source: Ford Library, National Security Adviser, NSC Staff for East Asia and Pacific Affairs, Convenience Files, Box 24, WSAG Working Group, Dec. 4, 1973[Korea]. Top Secret; Nodis. The minutes were attached to a covering memorandum, December 5, from Davis to Kissinger, explaining that the WSAG met “to discuss North Korea’s demand that UN Command naval and merchant ships obtain prior permission to navigate the waters contiguous to five UNC-controlled islands off the west coast of Korea.” On December 22, Scowcroft approved draft State-Defense cables to the Embassy in Seoul giving guidance for the upcoming Military Armistice Commission meeting and commenting on a South Korean memorandum on the island dispute. (National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 544, Country Files, Far East, Korea, Volume 7, November 1973–)

248. National Security Study Memorandum 190, Washington, December 31, 1973. 248. National Security Study Memorandum 190, Washington, December 31, 1973.1

Washington, December 31, 1973

NATIONAL SECURITY COUNCIL

December 31, 1973

National Security Study Memorandum 190

TO:
The Secretary of State
The Secretary of Defense
The Director of Central Intelligence

SUBJECT: Diplomatic Initiatives in Korea

The President has directed that a study be made of potential US/Korean diplomatic initiatives regarding security arrangements on the Korean Peninsula, The study should: — review prospects for continuation of the United Nations Command in its present form;

— propose alternative institutional arrangements which will insure stability in the military balance and political relationships on the peninsula;

— for the proposed institutional arrangements, develop a diplomatic strategy and a negotiating package that includes proposals for an alternative armistice arrangement, a basis for dialogue between the two Koreas directed toward the improvement of their relations, and a concept for developing UN backing for the new political and military arrangements. The diplomatic scenario should deal with the participation of the four major powers as well as the two Koreas.

— address the question of the future command relationships between US and ROK forces, related base rights in Japan, and the implications of the proposed arrangements for United Nations Status of Forces Agreement with Japan.

In developing the study it should be assumed that there will be no substantial changes in the US military presence or levels of aid to South Korea.

This study should be prepared on a priority basis by an ad hoc group chaired by a representative of the Secretary of State and including representatives of the addressees and the National Security Council Staff. Because of the sensitivity of the subject, knowledge of the paper and participation in its preparation should be kept oh a strict need-to-know basis. The study should be submitted no later than January 11 for consideration by the Senior Review Group.

[signed]
Henry A. Kissinger

cc: The Chairman, Joint Chiefs of Staff

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Institutional Files (H-Files), Box H–201, NSSMs, NSSM 190 (1 of 3). Top Secret; Nodis. Coped to the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff. On December 20, Kissinger received a memorandum from Solomon and Froebe recommending that he sign a NSSM on diplomatic initiatives in Korea. On the first page of this memorandum, Kissinger wrote, “I want NSSM sent.” (Ibid.) The NSSM 190 issues were eventually referred to the President for decision without a prior meeting of the SRG.

249. Minutes of the Secretary of State’s Staff Meeting, Washington, January 25, 1974. 249. Minutes of the Secretary of State’s Staff Meeting, Washington, January 25, 1974.1

Washington, January 25, 1974

DEPARTMENT OF STATE
WASHINGTON D.C. 20520

January 28, 1974

Secretary's Staff Meeting, January 25, 1974

SUMMARY OF DECISIONS

The Secretary decided that: p. 14-15 1. Concerning Korean internal political structure, the basic need is to determine our interest in Korea rather than to push our views regarding democracy and its merits.

p. 30 2. Instructions be prepared for Embassy Seoul promptly after the SRG meeting on Korea (Feb. concerning how we propose to proceed

p. 32 regarding the UN Command and the successor situation we desire to see created regarding security arrangements.

p. 33 3. The question of force levels the US maintains in Korea be addressed in the NSSM response for the Friday February 1st SRG meeting.

p. 34-35 4. The US strategy on the Korean Peninsula over a 5 year period be addressed in the NSSM response.

p. 36 5. Any U.S. movement in regard to relations with North Korea be first be discussed with the ROK Government and that the pace of U.S.

p. 41 movement in relation with North Korea be kept in balance with Soviet and PRC movement toward relations with the ROK.

p. 43 6. S/PC should develop the North-South portion of S/S 7400714 in relation to objectives we should try to accomplish in relation to North Korea-South Korea contacts and most importantly in relation to U.S.-North Korean contacts.

[Samual R. Gamma signed for]
Thomas R. Pickering
Executive Secretary

In Attendance

Secretary of State Kissinger

D - Mr. Rush

P - Mr. Porter

T - Mr. Donaldson

C - Mr. Sonnenfeldt

EA - Mr. Sneider

PM - Mr. S. Weiss

M - Mr. Brown

Amb. - Korea - Mr. Habib

EA - Mr. Ranard

S/PC - Mr. Finn

S/PC - Mr. Lord

S - Mr. Eagleburger

S/S - Mr. Pickering

(The meeting was convened at 3:07 p.m., Secretary Kissinger presiding as Chairman.)

SECRETARY KISSINGER: This is going to be a rough session. The only way to avoid an argument is to say nothing!

(Laughter.)

Who's an expert? Who wants to lead off?

MR. HABIB: I think the plot involves my leading off. And I'd like to take five minutes, Mr. Secretary.

I think when we consider Korea, I'd like to restate what I've always understood to be our fundamental objective in the country in terms of our own interest — of defining it in terms of our own interest —- and that is the prevention of the outbreak of hostilities on the Korean Peninsula.

I think if you state that as simply as I've stated it, everything flows from it. It's an objective, it's an interest, that we've pursued for 20-odd years successfully. And it's one which continues to preoccupy anybody that has anything to do with Korea — how do you prevent the outbreak of hostilities on the Korean Peninsula — because unless you prevent the outbreak of hostilities on the Korean Peninsula, everything else begins to go wrong. Given the nature of our commitment and the historical relationship, the deep involvement — the very deep involvement, both physical and financial, that we actually have in the country, and all the other ties that are involved — if you get an outbreak of hostilities, you would immediately involve the United States in terms of its historical and security commitments.

As things have been changing in Asia and in Northeast Asia —

SECRETARY KISSINGER: Who actually wrote this paper?

MR. HABIB: He's not here. The principal drafter was Wes Kriebel and the second was Don Ranard, and they had some help from Dick Finn.

MR. FINN: I think we did — we three.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: It's a good job.

MR. HABIB: In my own opinion, the other drafter ought to be here also; the principal drafter ought to be at the meeting. Why do you limit this thing?

SECRETARY KISSINGER: We're only five minutes into the meeting! Do you want to comment on the art in this room too?

(Laughter.)

MR. HABIB: If we pursue the objective and the interest that I defined, then what we do is take a look at the present situation. And what I've been trying to do is to take a look and where we want to be in regard to our own interest and that definition of our objective in some foreseeable period. And I would define a "foreseeable period" in Korea as not more than about two or three years, very frankly. I think if you start looking much beyond that you come into such a degree of uncertainty that for planning purposes you begin to lose sight of what you can do to affect your own interests and your own objectives.

Now, in terms of that objective then and in terms of the foreseeable future — and I defined it — I think that it's rather serious that at this very time we should be examining our policy toward Korea and what we might or might not wish to change. I think there's no question that there are certain issues in which if we could get, some guidance from you, Mr. Secretary, and from the others around here, it would help me tremendously in my daily dealings with the Koreans. And it would help the people who send me instructions from time to time, when they dare to keep those instructions within a consciously devised framework that fulfills the objectives we set out.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: They haven't sent the instructions because of the reaction they might get?

MR. HABIB: Sometimes!

(Laughter.)

Also, sometimes, because they know I know better than they do about the situation and, unless I tell them they better do something about the situation, they might as well forget about it. It's been successful!

(Laughter.)

My eminent predecessor operated under the same privileges, and I considered them a privilege. It's a privilege that most Ambassadors should have.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: To disregard instructions?

(Laughter.)

MR. HABIB: I think we've been successful in Korea because we haven't tried to run the show from a distance and to manipulate it an a daily basis. But what we want is some guidelines. That we do need from Washington. And there are certain issues right now, at this time.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: What — to enable you to do what you've decided?

(Laughter.)

MR. HABIB: To provide the framework in which all the elements of the United States Government and all agencies would operate in some cohesive fashion. And the issues which I think that our discussion should settle today would be the question of the relationship between North and South Korea — what that might or might not be — the question of our own involvement in Korea, a question which I think we've bust taken for granted over the last 20 years; it's been working pretty well, so why not just keep on working the same way, or has the time come to re-think it? — the resources we devote, the manner and the disposition in which we support our commitments to Korea.

I think we'd also like some guidance on — and we should have some discussion on — the question of the possibility of arrangements or understandings or dealings between the major powers affecting Korea and the manner in which they would suit our own interests and our objectives, as we pursue them on even a larger screen than just the bilateral Korean-American screen.

And then, finally, I think the time has come again — as it comes every few years for us in Korea to take a look at the internal political situation in Korea as it affects our interests and our commitments and determine again what our reaction should be to that internal situation.

The reason I think it's important right now to take another look at it is because the authoritarian nature of the Korean Government has now been expanded, strengthened, and has reached a stage where it is generating a degree of opposition within Korea which is serious.

There's always been a Korea of opposition; there's always been an authoritarian government; there's always been a degree of oppression. But the situation is now reaching a stage where I think it is serious from the standpoint of our own interests.

I'm not thinking of it simply from the standpoint of whether or not the Koreans have individual freedom of liberty or not. I'm thinking in terms of if the political situation in Korea deteriorates and continues to move in the direction in which it has been moving in the last year or so — which is increasingly authoritarian, increasingly oppressive, and generating a greater degree of opposition in Korea to the government than has been true for, I would say, a minimum of eight years, and closer to 10 years. Pak faces a serious problem of maintaining power, and that affects our interests because if you get political instability you can logically presume the possibility of North Korean adventurism and you can largely perceive the possibility of internal disarray in such a manner as it affects the military structure — which even overrides on to our own force presence and our own disposition — although I don't think it could get that far.

Those are the questions, Mr. Secretary.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: What threatens this authority — civil unrest?

MR. HABIB: Yes, civil unrest.

What Pak did is he took an already strong government in which his power was relatively unchallenged and assured his continuation in power for an indefinite period of time. That's the first thing. He removed the possibility of change. Previously, he had to be elected and there was a limit on the number of times he could be elected. He's removed that.

Secondly, he's reduced the opportunities for dissent so that there is no way of opposing policy.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: But why did he do it?

MR. HABIB: He did it in part because he himself believes that he's coming into a difficult period in which he must have a tight control on the society and because he wants to deal with the North; he's got the uncertainties of what the big powers are doing around him. He logically perceives a difficult period for the country. So he decides he has to take the reins in close control himself because only he himself knows what to do. But, secondly, he did it because he was running out of time. Under the old constitution he would no longer be President from '75 on, so he had to make his move early to assure his own succession.

The opposition that has developed in Korea is an intellectually based opposition with a strong thrusting point in the student body, with a minor assist from the legitimate political opposition.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: Yes, but students have no staying power.

MR. HABIB: Students have mass capability.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: In any one crisis.

MR. HABIB: In Korea, the student mass capability is exercised not only in any one crisis but over a period of time, and it's built up over a period of time. For example, it has not yet occurred in the current crisis. All you've had, despite the way the American newspaper correspondents write it, is the first murmuring of mass demonstrations. You've never had more than a thousand students on the streets last fall, and they really got on the streets only twice. Usually they were confined on the campus. But even that forced them to close the universities and led to the current imposition of a degree of martial — it's not martial law but a degree of martial control, which is beyond anything they've had previously. There are the military and the students that form a mass base sufficient to create problems for the government; and what's happening is with the decline of political activity as an outlet for dissent or the disposition to oppose, you've got only one thing — and that is a mass movement. So you're beginning to get an alignment between the intellectuals, the Christian social action groups — very important, very significant — partly because of the way it affects us because their relationship to the American Christian church is very strong. And I think you'll discover, as we were predicting and as Don got his first telegram today from the — what? — Methodist Society — or from somewhere in the United States. You get Christian pressure, the Christian social activists and the students, as a mass force in attempting to bring about a change in the Pak government.

Pak recognizes the threat is to his continuation in power. That's why the situation is as serious, and that's why it affects us. If it weren't so serious it wouldn't affect us and it wouldn't affect the basic commitment.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: Well, as long as we're on that, what should we do?

MR. HABIB: Well, the line we've taken so far, of course, is publicly we've said nothing to condemn. Privately, it has generally been the line to counsel moderation. Everybody does. You yourself instinctively would counsel moderation when a subject comes up.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: I don't know.

MR. HABIB: What?

SECRETARY KISSINGER: I'm not so sure I would.

MR. HABIB: I'm sure you would. If you're involved, your intention would lead you to that.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: I might decide to counsel nothing. It's a hard thing for us to do.

MR. HABIB: We have, in effect, counseled nothing while counseling moderation —

(Laughter.)

— because counseling moderation — that's what we mean. Now, why have we done it? It's not been unconscious. (A) — because I think it's important that we maintain a degree of — not aloofness, but at least separation — that we not be part of the process of oppression.

I think it's very important because if anything happens to overturn it, we still have our interests and we still have our commitments in the area; we still have our general desires in the area. Therefore, I think we've got to maintain a certain degree of objectivity or aloofness from it.

Secondly, I think what I don't want to see happen is where issues opposing the government in Korea become issues of being anti-American. We've not had that problem in Korea. I don't foresee that we will get it. The opposition is not anti-American. The opposition doesn't call for a reduction of United States commitment, presence, influence in Korea. They call for a reduction of Japanese influence, Japanese presence — but not American.

Now, I think also what we should do when the situation gets individually serious — and as it may — then I think there are things we can do quietly to moderate it.

For example, I think Kim Tae Jung was not killed partly because of the reaction of the United States and the reaction of Japan. I think Kim Tae Jung was released partly because of it. I think that was wise. I think Christian ministers have not been persecuted because of the reaction of the United States. You get to a point where the United States has to be true to something.

Now, that doesn't mean we involve ourselves in seeing that it's brought about in that country. But when faced with the reality of oppression, I think the United States has to make clear that it's not on the side of oppression — that it doesn't condone. In a place like Korea, where we have 42,000 troops, and where we've put almost 11 billion dollars in almost 11 years, we're still putting substantial numbers in. The line where you have to walk so as not to become a part of an oppressive mechanism is as important as being able to say that you're not involving yourselves in the internal affairs of another country.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: I would think this: First, in general, I've tried to abolish the political science department in the State Department which tries to restructure the domestic situation of other countries — especially allies — because either we're involved because we have American foreign-policy interests or we shouldn't be involved at all. I don't think it is worth our investment to democratize Korea or Turkey — where we've recently, also, given political advice — and so forth.

MR. HABIB: We can't.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: So, to my mind, the basic objective — the basic need — is to determine what is our interest in Korea.

MR. HABIB: All right.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: Part of it — partly it's produced by history; partly it's produced by security considerations.

Now, can we be part of a repressive situation? Quite clearly, we shouldn't join in the repression. That I have no trouble with.

Beyond that, it would seem to me we have to make an analysis of the consequences of governmental change as against the consequences of the continuation of the government before we can make a realistic judgment as to what we should do in terms of a domestic situation.

Another problem is that it's one thing for us to take a posture that we're not involved in the repression. It's another thing for all our people to run loose there, conveying an attitude of disapproval. I'm not saying they're doing that.

MR. HABIB: They're not, I can assure you.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: So before I could be clear in my own mind about whether we should disassociate it to what extent — I'd have to understand what it is we're trying to accomplish.

MR. HABIB: All right. That's exactly the way I think we've been approaching it — in precisely those terms.

Let's take a look first at what would be the consequences of change. I don't think, as I hinted earlier, that the consequences of change would be disastrous to our basic purposes if they were to occur by virtue of internal Korean forces alone — in other words, if the students got enough on the streets that the power of play was such that the government had to change — which is not to be discounted as a possibility. Now, that's the first time in years —

SECRETARY KISSINGER: Students?

MR. HABIB: Intellectual leadership of a long-standing political role and ethic.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: What sort of government would they form?

MR. HABIB: For example, Don just mentioned — let me just point out that, for example, they've been running a signature campaign to get a million signatures calling for a return to the original constitution. Nobody knows how many they actually got; they claim they got a half million. But if you look at some of the people who were associated, you find very respectable people of all ilks.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: But can they govern?

MR. HABIB: Now, nobody can govern unless they bring together the power of forces. They've got to get the military support; otherwise you get guys on horseback in and out. We've had enough experience with that situation in other places. In my opinion, you can still get constitutional change.

In many ways it's unfortunate Pak moved the way he has in recent years, because he was the one man who could have assured constitutional change in a most stable fashion. He probably still could if he had to — maybe not.

What would you get? I don't know for sure what you'd get if you didn't get constitutional changed. If you didn't get constitutional change, you'd probably get something in which your former student, the Prime Minister, might appear as the leader with a military backing — and with a willingness of the intellectual minority — to see what he could do. That would be the best possible alternative that I could see at the moment.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: But my estimate of my former student is that his degree of moral sensitivity is no greater than that of the incumbent.

MR. HABIB: Whether it was the effect of having sat at your feet or the effect of exile in contemplation of his navel for a while, he's matured substantially and he's developed some sense of ability — some ability if not sense — of how to meet those individual requirements of an intellectual opposition which his mentor has not developed. His mentor's reaction to the intellectual is: "Hit him on the head with a club." Your student's reaction is: "Well, I'll talk to him before I hit him on the head with a club."

(Laughter.)

Now, there's a big difference. As a matter of fact, the intellectual opposition has made it quite clear that your former student is not quite in the same camp as the others as they look upon him differently. I think they may be hedging.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: Yes, but one has to look at the evolution of where we started by such a process.

MR. HABIB: Yes. The evolution is not good if we started by such a process. That's why I said sometime we have to take a look at the internal political situation — and I haven't finished: What do we do about it? One of the things we should do about it, and begin to seriously contemplate, is the reduction of our involvement. I think that we're over involved for the needs of our own interests. And if we are so over involved, we then are automatically drawn into these damn political machinations; we're automatically drawn into a whole wide range of things which could happen in Korea which should not be so automatic.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: Now, what do you mean by "automatic?"

MR. HABIB: I think that involves forces — the disposition of those forces — and the relationship that we enjoy with the Koreans as a result of our military and economic involvement.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: So you think we have too many forces?

MR. HABIB: Do I think we have too many in Korea? Yes.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: How many do you think we should have?

MR. HABIB: I wouldn't approach the question this way: I would give you my judgment. And I think I've persuaded the drafters of these papers to include it this way: I would say, for the time being — for FY 75 — I would say we have no plans for changing our forces. But I would then put our military minds to work — first, to determine what kind of military disposition is required in Korea for the achievement of our military objectives in Korea.

Now, I have some ideas, but I'd hesitate to state them because I'm not competent to state them. In the first place, I don't think you ought to look at military disposition just strictly from the standpoint of Korea. I think you ought to look at it from the standpoint of disposition of forces elsewhere in the world and how it fits in with what you're trying to do generally.

Secondly, I'd try to see how and when you play that card.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: What card?

MR. HABIB: The reduction of forces, whether it's not a chip in the sense of getting it.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: And from whom.

MR. HABIB: And from whom — right.

Then I would decide what kind of disposition and what remaining forces you might decide to have and where would you put them — what kind of command relationships should you have that might be different from the existing command relationships which have nominal operation control of all forces.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: Well, let's just take an off number. We've now got 40,000.

MR. HABIB: 42,000.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: 42,000. Supposing we cut it to 20-. That's a sizable chunk.

MR. HABIB: Yes. Over what period of time?

SECRETARY KISSINGER: For two years.

MR. HABIB: Beginning in a year's time — that's conceivable, yes.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: Let me ask, because this isn't the figure I thought about — I'm just picking a big figure: Will that reduce our involvement in the political situation?

MR. HABIB: Yes, because if you do the next thing I said — take a look at the nature of your disposition of forces — you have to decide what it is. For example, the reason I said that's conceivable is because if you went that far you would automatically consider the reduction of ground forces. I would probably, on the basis of my present thinking, and until I get better judgment, think in terms of our interest in the commitment, the deterrent capability and so on. I would be most reluctant to reduce the air forces. We have about 9,000 in the air force now. We have one full division — about 15-, 17,000; it depends upon how you count it. We have a missile command. Then we have all these ancillary units, and then we've got headquarters on top of headquarters — all sorts of them.

MR. SONNENFELDT: How destabilizing domestically would it be to cut forces?

MR. HABIB: In the first place, the answer to that is the Koreans, including President Pak, have already assumed that we are going to reduce forces beginning about '75. And they have not only assumed it; they have made statements publicly.

Secondly it depends on how you do it and when you do it. If we were to do it, it would raise holy hob. That's why I'm not in favor of doing it. As a matter of fact, I would be in favor of not doing it for about a period of one year, after we talk to them and make the necessary adjustments with them.

We can now see, on the basis of the money we got this year out of Congress, the possibility that we can fundamentally meet, substantially meet, the commitment that we made on modernization with some stretch-out. If we get any luck with the Congress next year, the year after that, I think we could — probably with a stretch-out — substantially meet the commitment that the President feels he promised and which he has repeated to President Pak. We could meet that by about'77.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: He feels that because he made the promise.

MR. HABIB: Yes. I say that — nobody argues that, Mr. Secretary. That's why I keep thinking:"How do we meet it?" — not "How do we get away from it?"

MR. S. WEISS: Let me make one comment on Phil's presentation, something we've talked about on a number of occasions — that is, I myself feel we're in a very tricky situation in terms of the vulnerability of our interests there, and that will really increase as those forces go down. In other words, there's going to be a real tricky period because as long as you've got U.S. forces — and nuclear forces — one of the very few places where we do have them on foreign soil — if there should be a conflagration and you've got a lot of irrationality on that side of that border, you know, your question of can we reduce our involvement in terms of the political scene is obviously a pertinent one. I'm even more concerned whether that wouldn't gloss into a kind of conflagration that we really don't want to get into or might not as we get down the line. It might have these implications. In the first place, it might involve a redeployment of the forces which I know Phil has talked about.

MR. HABIB: We've got 500 yards on the line. That's easy to take care of. I think they're badly disposed, but I'm not a strategist and a tactician. I don't know whether you should have a battalion here or a battalion there. It looks lousy from my lieutenant's point of view. And I've talked to a few generals who think it looks lousy too.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: Well, why don't they change it?

MR. HABIB: Well, they have vested interests.

MR. S. WEISS: First, you have to talk about nuclear weapons —

MR. HABIB: No question about it.

MR. S. WEISS: — and, secondly, you have to talk to the Japanese, because you have this problem of constantly reassuring them that the U.S. isn't pulling out of this dagger-to-their-heart business that they always talk about.

MR. HABIB: It's got to be carefully worked out over a time. All of those are simply supporting the thesis that you can't do it suddenly. They don't argue that you can't do it.

MR. S. WEISS: I think the point is: Right now we are in command of those forces.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: Yes, but we have to do something about it before the next —

MR. S. WEISS: That's right, Mr. Secretary.

MR. LORD: On the issue of troops, you would define our major interest as reducing the tension. That gets into the North-South relationship. The question is reduction of troops — particularly, a large reduction in this period is not going to affect or upset a North-South dialogue. As you proceed reducing troops it's how you play it.

MR. HABIB: Remember, I said how you play the chips was very important; and I think you're right.

MR. LORD: Just like the Israelis. You manage to make concessions without undercutting their confidence.

MR. HABIB: That's right. The internal difficulties in Korea — one of the problems they've created, in my opinion, is that they've made the North Koreans more reluctant to this North-South dialogue — at least, until they see whether or not they're going to have a better atmosphere in the sense of a more unsettled atmosphere in the South which they can take advantage of. So what you may find is that what might have been possible a year ago is no longer possible or may not be possible for another six months or so. I think you should keep it in mind.

I would say that, generally speaking, I would argue that when the North and the South begin to talk again that the questions of force disposition will have come to the discussion table sooner than later. Last year the South was unwilling to talk about those things with the North. They wanted to talk about non-political, non-military factors. But they're going to have to talk about them. One reason they're going to have to talk about them is because of the question of UN Command, and that element of the security package has to be dealt with this year.

Now, there is a NSSM on that, and I think the questions posed in the NSSM and the replies that I have seen that are in the draft stage address the problem very thoroughly. My only request of you, Mr. Secretary, is that when you get through with the consideration of this in the SRG that you get presumably then a NSSM; that I be given as soon as possible some guidelines for discussion immediately with Pak. I would like to be able do to that within a month — within a month — preferably within two weeks.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: Where does this damn thing stand?

MR. HABIB: I think there's an SRG meeting next week, is that correct?

MR. FINN: Yes.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: Are you going to be here still?

MR. HABIB: No, no. I've got to get back to my post. For one reason, I'm planning to leave on Sunday. I want to go around and test the water; the students come back — the main body — by the first of March. Some of them are back already.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: Well, that gives you a month?

MR. HABIB: Well, it gives me two or three weeks to test the water — find out what's going on — and talk to some Koreans.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: Then you'll decide whether to change the government!

(Laughter.)

MR. HABIB: No, no, no! I don't know what makes you think that I want to change the government. I don't want to change the government. I think our interests are served by a continuation of the existing institutions.

Now, I would leave that to the Koreans to change the institutions because, very frankly, the Koreans are embarked on a sort of — there's an inevitable political clash in Korea, and it's going to inevitably bring about political change in one way or another. In my opinion, it's that serious that the lines are sharply drawn.

Now, Pak has behind him the power of the military, and he intends to exercise it. But there are limits to the use of the power of the military in a country like Korea.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: Why in a country like Korea? It's particularly suited for it?

MR. HABIB: Because of the character of the people — their past experience, because of their exposure — and partly because of their relationship —

SECRETARY KISSINGER: But you can't run a country after a student.

MR. HABIB: Nobody did. And the military, by the say, stepped aside and didn't fire on Pak students at that time — something which most people in Korea predict now.

My prediction is: If the students did, the regular army would balk.

MR. PORTER: What do you want to say about this now?

MR. HABIB: First of all, I want to talk about this question of the shifting security pattern which we have to have in Korea. I think we have to talk about what we do about the command of the UN. These are our interests that I want to talk to them about.

For example, I don't think we can go to the UN again and fight this futile fight.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: We have a commitment to the Chinese, more or less, to have an idea in the UN.

MR. HABIB: Not only that but, as I recall, you have a signal from Pak to "Please tell them how you would like to do it with the Chinese" and "Would you please do it with the Chinese?"

That's what I'd Like to be able to talk to them about.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: But what do we have on that?

MR. HABIB: Well, the paper that we have I think spells that out. It presents the alternatives.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: O.K. Then we don't have to deal with the UN. We've dealt with the security situation.

MR. HABIB: I hope I've gotten a commitment out of you that you'll get me the instructions sooner than later on that question because I think we have to move on it in some reasonable period of time. Otherwise, we'll get preempted, if we get close to the summer, and we'll get resolutions we have to present.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: You should see, Phil, if they got him on drugs — right?

(Laughter.)

MR. HABIB: Well, I say this for the staff, because I figure you're not going to be the one to push the papers here. But it is important to get that done.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: On the UN Command.

MR. HABIB: On the UN Command.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: I agree. You have to get instructions fast, because we have to start moving on it.

There's no reason why we can't do it after the SRG meeting. Why don't you stay for the SRG meeting?

MR. HABIB: Because I've been away. I think the papers present the issues.

I have no question on where you're going to come down on that one. You're going to come on the side of the angels, as always, and I think we'll just move ahead.

The only thing I ask is: Don't come down exactly on one line. "This is the way it's going to be." Leave a little flexibility for this reason: because I'll get that flexibility from Pak; and that will allow you, when you talk to the Chinese, to maneuver a little bit — a combination of agreements and understandings and what have you. If I go to Pak with something too positive, then he'll think that's what we're going to get for him. To give you an example, I wouldn't say, "The succession to the armistice agreement has to be an agreement which involves South Korea, North Korea, the United States and the PRC." I think it has to involve North Korea and South Korea, but whether it has to involve us directly or indirectly or whether there's kind of a vague UN residual role — I think these things have to be left a little bit for maneuverability. And I think that's written into the paper in the present draft that I've seen.

MR. PORTER: Do you think you can go through this present exercise with Pak, Phil, and cause him not to be more repressive as a result of fears that would arise in his mind? He's a very suspicious man.

MR. HABIB: No: I would say to him "This is in response to the point you raise with us as to the needs" — because when the Secretary saw Pak, Pak took the initiative with him to say, "We've got to change our ways." so it isn't as if we're saying to Pak: "We're going to present you something unpalatable." On the contrary, we saw something from his own Ambassador to the UN just yesterday in which the guy lays out the alternatives just the way we do.

MR. PORTER: Well, you're the judge of that. I'm just asking you.

MR. HABIB: No. My feeling is he would not consider it disquieting and he would not consider it something that creates uncertainty. On the contrary, I think, he would consider it as something that would strengthen his position, because it's going to remove the possibility of a defeat in the UN which would be disturbing to him.

MR. RANARD: Koreans are talking, Phil, about alternative arrangements.

MR. HABIB: There's no question that that's what they want. They believe it's their idea — as Don says — which is the best way to have it.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: So on security arrangements, what we need is a decision of where we want to go — not the UN Command that's in the mill.

MR. LORD: There's a broadness of one Korean policy that's in this system now.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: Where is that?

MR. LORD: Where is that, Dick?

MR. FINN: I thought that was NSSM 154.

MR. HABIB: That's a repetition of outworn policy decisions that were very good when they were made, but they need to be reviewed. For example, I don't accept the conclusion that, you know, we don't have to think about the question of force levels for the time being.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: I want to think about the question of force levels.

MR. HABIB: I might say, from what I understand — from my own, sort of, private sources — the wise heads in the army are thinking of the same thing.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: In whose army?

MR. HABIB: Our army. The wise heads are beginning to think about the same thing because they look at those things over there. They realize it's over headquarters, over generals.

For example, I had a conversation with General Abrams, because Freddy Weyand had told me that Abrams was impressed with the fact that they had too many goddamn headquarters and too many goddamn generals and they didn't know what the hell they were doing in Korea. And he was right. Freddy Weyand told me that at dinner. And I nabbed Abe last night and he said, "I understand you're thinking of the force levels."

He's thinking about it over the whole world. He's got a team out there right now looking at the question of force levels and disposition. And he said to me last night: "Now, don't come to any conclusions without consulting me." And he promised me, when he gets some conclusions, he'll send them to Stillwell and Stillwell will be instructed to show them to me for political input.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: Who's Stillwell?

MR. HABIB: Stillwell is Commander-in-Chief of the U.S. Forces in Korea.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: Oh.

Have we got a NSSM out on this, Win?

MR. LORD: Well, the paper is finished now. You think it doesn't help?

SECRETARY KISSINGER: Look, I want an examination of the strategy on the Korean Peninsula over a five-year period. Can you get that done, Larry, with Brent?

MR. EAGLEBURGER: Yes.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: I mean that's the only way we're going to get the force disposition settled.

MR. HABIB: I say three to five years. Don't go beyond that, you know. I think all of that has been done, but it's in pieces.

MR. LORD: I think the initiative has been studied to death over years.

MR. HABIB: You don't need a major study; you need a synthesis. This paper (indicating) begins to touch some of the fundamentals.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: Which paper?

HABIB: This paper which was the basis for discussion today — because it raises the issues. All the issues are in there. It's a good paper. You don't need force levels in Korea.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: We need a discussion on it though, and that's included in the SRG meeting next week. I want, you know — let's have a briefing on what their plans are and what the strategic choices are. They can put that together fairly quickly. All right?

Now, on North-South contacts, unfortunately I have a bunch of NATO Ambassadors coming in, and I have to call Waldheim.

MR. HABIB: Well, I've had more time than I thought we'd have here today, and we've got a number of decisions.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: Did I make a decision?

MR. HABIB: You made a number of them!

(Laughter.)

I'll go back and, if I have any more to say, I'll send it in cables.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: North-South — speak for four or five minutes on the North-South.

MR. HABIB: Yes. I think we're in the doldrums on the North-South, Mr. Secretary. And whatever discussion of possible moves, as far as we're concerned, with the North that are in this paper — I have no objection that they be considered, but with the proviso, which is in the paper, that everything be discussed in advance with the Koreans.

Do you remember? You made a commitment to the President.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: Absolutely.

MR. HABIB: That's right. He knows it. He trusts us. The trouble is: Right now, dialogue between the South and the North is stymied. And, in my opinion, it's going to take a little while for it to open up. Partly because of the situation in the South, it's just too natural for the North to want to sit back and see what kind of trouble is going to develop.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: Is there any American interest to speed up relations with North Korea?

MR. HABIB: The basic American interest in getting whatever degree of accommodation that develops at a natural Korean pace between North and South — because that, in itself —

SECRETARY KISSINGER: That's different. The North Koreans can deal with us, but they have lesser incentive to deal with the South.

MR. HABIB: There is no incentive for us to deal with the North Koreans at this time, in my opinion. To assist the South Koreans, as they move in the general direction of trying to entice them, it's in our interest —

SECRETARY KISSINGER: Like what?

MR. HABIB: Well, certainly I think we ought to carry on what they asked us to do. Whenever we talk to the Communists and they talk about their relations with North Korea, we talk with them about South Korea. I don't see why we don't talk to them as other countries begin relations with North Korea they don't become too excited about it.

Now, the Australians might delay for a month or two and that will resolve the question, but we shouldn't let too excited about it. Let the Australians play around a little bit if they want to. I don't see that opposed to our long-term interests.

MR. PORTER: But you're advocating it as a long-term approach.

MR. HABIB: No. I'm not stating it as long as there's the proviso that nothing is done because we want to do it — because these are the sorts of things we talk to the North Koreans about.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: But why talk to them about it?

MR. HABIB: Because it's worthwhile to talk to the South Koreans long in advance when you're planning to do anything.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: But when are you going to plan on doing it?

MR. HABIB: Well, I think we might eventually plan on doing it.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: If you start talking to them now, we get the disadvantage of the conversation without the advantage of the action.

MR. HABIB: Talking to whom?

SECRETARY KISSINGER: Talking to the South Koreans about what we might do with the North Koreans.

MR. HABIB: No. I put it another way: You get the advantage of not having to act. And, at the same time, you get the advantage —

SECRETARY KISSINGER: There's no pressure on us to act. .

MR. HABIB: No, there isn't. It's true; there is no pressure on us to act. But when you consider what it is that you might want to do in the area of fostering the accommodation, you automatically have to consider these things and you'll say, "Well, that's just a bureaucratic exercise."

Maybe it's just a bureaucratic exercise.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: I have an aversion to palaver just for palaver if we are not planning to talk to the South Koreans.

MR. HABIB: They talk about dealing with everybody. The South Koreans talk with us about the North Koreans.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: But we can go as far with the North Koreans as the South Koreans have gone. We can go as far with the North Koreans as other Communist countries have gone with the South Koreans.

MR. HABIB: Major Communist countries.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: Major Communist countries have gone with the South Koreans.

MR. HABIB: Right.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: If the Soviet Union and the PRC are prepared to form whatever relations they might with the South, we can follow their route in the North; and we can use relations with the North, in fact, as an incentive to get the PRC and the Soviet Union engaged with the South.

MR. HABIB: Right — provided that you don't say you're going to take the lead because you hope then that it will stimulate action. I don't believe in that; I don't believe in that —

SECRETARY KISSINGER: No.

MR. HABIB: — especially when you're dealing with the North Koreans.

MR. RANARD: Mr. Secretary, in half a dozen matterrs already, the Soviets have shown an interest in the (North) South Koreans.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: I'm strongly in favor of that.

MR. RANARD: Now, we're at this moment being asked by the University of Hawaii whether we would approve of five North Korean scholars coming there for a seminar lasting a week, in which they would discuss with them North Korean economy.

MR. HABIB: You got a couple of South Korean guys in Moscow last year. They didn't do much, but they got there. The ROK may say, "Not right now" because he doesn't want it right now. I would say, "Fine. O.K."

You see, we're under no pressure. That's the beauty of being under no pressure. .

SECRETARY KISSINGER: It depends upon how you put it to them.

MR. HABIB: Well, most forcefully, most brilliantly, most persuasively! What other way would I put it to them?

SECRETARY KISSINGER: I would lean in the direction that if the North Koreans want something from us, let them pay something first. If they let South Koreans into North Korea, then —

MR. HABIB: No, but they let Americans into North Korea. That's not the same thing you're bargaining for. You see, they've already let some South Koreans into the Soviet Union for the first time.

MR. SNEIDER: But it's not clear in this instance that the North Koreans want to come to Hawaii.

MR. HABIB: Yes, it is clear. There's been some contact that the North Koreans might welcome the invitation.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: What the North Koreans might undoubtedly want to do is get into positions similar to that of the Chinese, in which we then begin losing interests in the South Koreans — and that's a far goal. To the extent that the North Koreans are interested and have a contact with us, we ought to use them to encourage their patrons to have contact with the South Koreans.

MR. HABIB: The North Koreans would love to have contact with either the South Koreans or the Russians or any other Eastern European country. As a matter of fact, they're seeking it on their own at all times.

MR. FINN: Mr. Secretary, isn't there a category in here that's slightly different though — trying to get North Korea more opened up, or to recognize a two-Korea policy — to get them into the international organization activity, for example — the idea being that if North Korea accepts the existence of South Korea, accepts a two-Korea policy, this will have a benefit ultimately of reducing tensions and reducing pressure from the North on the South?

That is a direct gain, I think, for us.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: I must leave. I must make the phone call before we have that meeting with the NATO Ambassadors — whose feelings get hurt easily.

Are you going to come to this (addressing Mr. Rush).

MR. RUSH: Yes, I will.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: Win, could you take this section of the North-South paper — which is more or less now a list of things which we can do — and relate it to what we ought to try to accomplish?

MR. LORD: Yes.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: One, in relation to North-South Korea contacts. But, most importantly, in relation to U.S.-North Korean contacts. And take these various categories.

MR. HABIB: I'm not much in favor of UN North-South Korean contact at this time.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: You're not in favor of it, on the one hand, but that we don't do so many unofficial ones that it amounts to the same thing.

I have no great difficulty, in my own mind, right now on how to assess those five professors that you want to have in Hawaii. I'm just not clear — can we do that fairly soon?

MR. LORD: Yes.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: O.K. Thank you.

MR. HABIB: Well, I'm going to leave on Sunday — if I have your permission.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: I'm not committing myself!

(Laughter.)

(Whereupon, at 3:58 p.m., the meeting was concluded.)

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Transcripts of Secretary of State Kissinger’s Staff Meetings, 1973–1977, Entry 5177, Box 2. Secret; Nodis. In telegram 22538 to Seoul, February 2, Hummel informed Habib, “The Secretary has asked that we reiterate to you his disinclination to have us pressing the Koreans, either privately or publicly, on their domestic situation. You will recall his remarks on this subject during the discussion at your meeting January 25. This reiteration stems from that discussion, rather than from any new developments; we have not seen evidence of such pressing in your recent reporting.” (Ibid, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 544, Country Files, Far East, Korea, Volume 7, November 1973–)

250. Intelligence Memorandum Prepared in the Central Intelligence Agency, Washington, February 1, 1974. 250. Intelligence Memorandum Prepared in the Central Intelligence Agency, Washington, February 1, 1974.1

Washington, February 1, 1974

February 1, 1974
Intelligence Memorandum

Subject: South Korea: Can Pak Hold On?

Precis

For over three months, President Pak Chong-hui has been under attack by domestic critics demanding liberalization of the authoritarian constitutional system he instituted in late 1972. The protests, though narrower in scope and less intense than those of the mid-1960s, represent a more significant threat to Pak's leadership in three basic ways: — the criticism is focused on the President himself and the type of government he has established, rather than on the particular policies of his regime;

— the opposition for the first time under Pak's rule represents significant numbers of students, intellectuals, clergy and politicians who in various ways are articulating the political and economic grievances of a growing number of South Koreans;

— the protests are occurring at a time when the effectiveness of Pak's traditional devices for diverting or stifling criticism (including perhaps even the use of force) is eroding.

Pak is relying on a combination of coercion and some conciliation to contain and isolate his critics. His efforts will probably be successful in the short term. The opposition, though widespread and determined, is not highly organized.

Resentment against Pak's authoritarian policies is sure to grow nonetheless. He is hoping to prevent the students in Seoul from igniting the sparks set elsewhere in East Asia recently. But there is a continuing potential for serious political instabilities in this modernizing society where political safety valves are lacking. And Pak cannot count on maintaining tight control indefinitely.

[Omitted here is the body of the paper.]

1 Source: Central Intelligence Agency, OPI 16 (Office of Current Intelligence), Job 79T00863A, Box 31, Folder 22, Intelligence Memorandum [unnumbered]. Secret; No Foreign Dissem. The Office of Current Intelligence at the CIA prepared this report in response to a January 19 request from Scowcroft, on behalf of Kissinger, that “an assessment be made of the current South Korean internal political situation, accompanied by a projection of the prospects for the next two to three months.” (National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 544, Country Files, Far East, Korea, Volume 7, November 1973–)

251. Memorandum From Richard Smyser and John Froebe of the National Security Council Staff to Secretary of State Kissinger, Washington, February 11, 1974. 251. Memorandum From Richard Smyser and John Froebe of the National Security Council Staff to Secretary of State Kissinger, Washington, February 11, 1974.1

Washington, February 11, 1974

MEMORANDUM
NATIONAL SECURITY COUNCIL
ACTION

February 11, 1974

MEMORANDUM FOR: SECRETARY KISSINGER
FROM: W.R. SMYSER [WRS initialed]
JOHN A. FROEBE, JR. [JAF initialed]

SUBJECT: U.S. Plans to Expand Relations with North Korea

The U.S. Embassy here has informed the State Department (at the Korean Desk level) that it is prepared to recognize North Korea, but will not do so until after next fall's U.N. General Assembly. The U.K. does intend, however, within the next few weeks to tell Pyongyang that they can open a trade office in London; the U.K. for its own part does not plan to open one in Pyongyang in the near future. London has informed Seoul of its contemplated move; the ROK reaction was strongly negative.

We are concerned over the potential consequences of the planned U.K. move, particularly since this would come on the heels of Australia's recognition of North Korea, which will probably take place within the coming month: — Others will be encouraged to follow suit, so as to be among the first and not the last to climb on board. The attached table (Tab A) of Asian and Western European states having diplomatic and consular relations with either or both Koreas makes clear that there are several states in Asia and perhaps half a dozen in Western Europe that would be stimulated to establish diplomatic relations with North Korea. (Tokyo would hopefully do no more than accelerate its expansion of trade and cultural relations with Pyongyang.) Our concern, of course, is that this would happen in the absence of any reciprocal movement from the Communist states toward South Korea. This is likely to be the outcome, given Australia's intention to go ahead despite the unresponsiveness of the East European states it has approached on this score.

— North Korea will be encouraged toward intransigence, which will be particularly important to us as it may affect our upcoming negotiations over the termination of the U.N. Command.

— North Korea's success will add to the Park Government's problems as it grapples with the recently intensified political criticism at home.

State (EA) does not believe that the U.K. move, any more than Australian recognition of North Korea, will impact adversely on our upcoming negotiations on the UNC. We disagree. While we cannot positively assert that their moves will have a substantial impact, we believe this to be a risk that we should not take.

We believe it would be useful if Under Secretary Sisco would call in the U.K. Ambassador and ask that the U.K. delay any approach to North Korea on a trade office or otherwise expanded relations until after next fall's UNGA. The U.K. may be somewhat reluctant since it has already informed Seoul of its intended move — although London's proceeding in this manner seems to be something short of the sort of consultations we might hope for on this problem.

Recommendation:

That you ask Under Secretary Sisco to call in the U.K. Ambassador to urge him strongly to delay any approach to North Korea on a trade office or otherwise expanded relations until after next fall's UNGA.

Approach [HK initialed]
Disapprove

Concurrences: Mr. Solomon

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Country Files, Far East, Box 544, Korea, Volume 7, November 1973–. Secret; Sensitive. Sent for action. Concurred in by Soloman. Kissinger initialed his approval of the recommendation. Attached but not published is the table of states.

252. Memorandum From Secretary of State Kissinger to President Nixon, Washington, March 25, 1974. 252. Memorandum From Secretary of State Kissinger to President Nixon, Washington, March 25, 1974.1

Washington, March 25, 1974

MEMORANDUM
THE WHITE HOUSE
WASHINGTON

March 25, 1974

MEMORANDUM FOR: THE PRESIDENT
FROM: HENRY A. KISSINGER [HK initialed]
SUBJECT: Negotiations on Terminating the United Nations Command in Korea

We and the Republic of Korea (ROK) should begin negotiations soon with the PRC and North Korea concerning the status of the United Nations Command (UNC) in view of the certain UNGA debate this fall on the subject. We agreed last year with the PRC to reconsider the future of the UNC in return for PRC help in avoiding a contentious debate in the UN General Assembly (UNGA) when UNCURK was dissolved. Our aim in the negotiations will be to seek substitute arrangements which will not only preserve ROK security but also move the Peninsula toward greater stability.

The principal issues requiring decision are: (1) the content of a negotiating proposal; (2) a strategy for the negotiations; (3) some corollary bilateral issues between ourselves and Korea and Japan; and (4) the level of and roles for our forces in South Korea.

1. The Negotiating Package

If the UNC is ended, we want to keep ourselves and the PRC effectively involved in implementing the 1953 Korean Armistice Agreement. At present the Commander-in-Chief of the UNC (CINCUNC) is our side's signatory to the Agreement; both the PRC and North Korean military commanders also signed. We expect North Korea to try to exclude us from further involvement in implementing the Agreement.

The inter-departmental study offers three package options of substitute arrangements for the UNC:

Option 1

- CINCUNC as our side's signatory of the Agreement would be replaced by U.S. and ROK military commanders. The Military Armistice Commission (MAC) would continue to implement the Agreement with the military representatives of the two Koreas as the principal members of the MAC, and the U.S. and the PRC as additional members.

- Tacit acceptance by the other side of a continued U.S. troop presence in South Korea for at least the short term in the context of Shanghai Communiqué-like statements offering to reduce and ultimately withdraw U.S. forces.

- A non-aggression pact between the two Koreas.

- UN Security Council endorsement of the agreed-on package of substitute arrangements.

Option 2

- As in Option 1, CINCUNC would be replaced by U.S. and ROK military commanders as our side's signatory, and the two Korean representatives would be the MAC's principal members. But the MAC, which implements the Armistice, would be transferred into a bilateral forum (the South-North Coordinating Committee). In the SNCC the U.S. and the PRC representatives would only monitor North and South Korean actions.

- We would try to induce expanded contacts by the four powers (the PRC, the Soviet Union, Japan, and U.S.) with both Koreas.

- The last three elements of Option 1 (continued U.S. force presence in South Korea, a non-aggression pact, and Security Council endorsement).

Option 3

- Option 2, supplemented by confidence-building measures on armaments together with arms limitation and reduction proposals.

In essence, Options 2 and 3 would greatly reduce U.S. and PRC roles in implementing the Agreement.

Agency Views. State and Defense recommend Option 1. They believe a continued effective U.S. and PRC role in implementing the Armistice is the most effective check on DPRK aggression against South Korea. ACDA prefers Option 2, pointing out it puts responsibility for Peninsula security into Korean hands. CIA gives the ACDA view oblique support, as CIA doubts that North Korea will negotiate on the basis of Option 1 and believes that the PRC will not be able to induce it to do so.

My View. I agree with State and Defense on Option 1. I doubt that Peking's influence in Pyongyang has declined so much as to make an approach along the lines of Option 1 futile. Even if it has, we should still open with our preferred proposal.

2. Negotiating Strategy

All agencies agree that we should carefully coordinate with the ROK first and then pursue a two-track negotiating strategy; we will talk with the PRC and the ROK will talk with North Korea. Everyone also agrees that we should keep the Soviets as well as the Japanese and other concerned allies informed of progress in the negotiations.

My View. I agree, although the major burden in the negotiations should not be on us and the PRC. It should rather be placed on the two Koreas, leaving us and the PRC to backstop and restrain our Korean allies as necessary. We also must consult with other nations which have contributed troops to the UNC in the past and with Japan.

3. Corollary Issues

There are three corollary issues: a. U.S. operational control of ROK forces. The alternatives to UNC control of ROK forces are: (a) control by the Commander of U.S. Forces Korea; (b) control by a new U.S.-ROK combined command (which would be headed by the U.S. senior officer); or (c) peacetime control by the ROK with a combined U.S.-ROK command in any hostilities. There is a consensus — with which I agree — that Option (b) is the most practical and, for the South Koreans, the most reassuring replacement for the UNC.

b. U.S. use of Japanese bases for the defense of South Korea. By virtue of a secret 1961 arrangement with Japan we do not have to consult to use Japanese bases to respond to an attack on South Korea. Although this right attaches to the UNC, State and Defense recommend that we not seek from Japan an explicit extension of this secret arrangement. Both agencies think Japan would agree whenever asked, and want to avoid leaks. I agree with the JCS, however, that such an important right should be unambiguous, and see no reason why an explicit extension of the agreement cannot remain secret.

c. UN Status of Forces Agreement (SOFA) with Japan. All agencies agree that when the UNC lapses, this SOFA, which grants basing rights to third country UN forces defending the ROK, can lapse too.

4. U.S. Force Presence in South Korea

a. Regional contingency role for the U.S. Army division in Korea. Defense has proposed that we assign the Army division in South Korea the additional role of a regional contingency reserve. State objects to any formal regional role for the division, but concurs with Defense's desire to bring the division up to full strength (it now has only 80% of its authorized personnel). State points out that the additional role would imply a longer stay for our forces in Korea, reduced flexibility for U.S. force reductions there, and provoke strongly adverse reactions in Pyongyang, Peking, and Moscow.

I agree with State and the NSDM so provides.

b. Future U.S. force reductions in South Korea. The proposed NSDM at Tab I includes a reiteration of your decision not to reduce our forces in South Korea at least until we have assured ourselves of substitute security arrangements.

Recommendation:

That you authorize me to issue the NSDM at Tab I.
Approve [RN initialed]
Disapprove

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Institutional Files (H-Files), Box H–202, NSSMs, NSSM 190 [2 of 3]. Top Secret; Sensitive. The President approved the NSDM recommendation, and, next to section 4b, he wrote, “K—Vital to highlight this.” On February 7, Acting Chairman Hummel of the IG for East Asia and the Pacific sent Scowcroft its response to NSSM 190. (Ibid.) On February 24, Kissinger request comments from the Departments of Defense, State, the Central Intelligence Agency, the Joint Chiefs of Staff, and the Arms Control and Disarmament Agency, noting that there would be no SRG meeting on Korea before the President made decisions on issues in NSSM 190. (Ibid., Box H–311, Miscellaneous Institutional Files of the Nixon Administration, NSC Subject, [Korea] [1 of 2])

253. National Security Decision Memorandum 251, Washington, March 29, 1974. 253. National Security Decision Memorandum 251, Washington, March 29, 1974.1

Washington, March 29, 1974

NATIONAL SECURITY COUNCIL
WASHINGTON D.C. 20506

March 29, 1974

National Security Decision Memorandum 251

TO: The Secretary of Defense
The Deputy Secretary of State
Director, Arms Control and Disarmament Agency

SUBJECT: Termination of the U.N. Command in Korea

The President has reviewed the response to NSSM 190 and agency comments thereon, and has made the following decisions:

1. Negotiating Packages

To maintain and improve ROK security the United States should seek: — Substitution of U.S. and ROK military commanders for the Commander-in-Chief United Nations Command as our side's signatory to the 1953 Korean Armistice Agreement. The ROK and North Korean representatives should then become the principal members of the Military Armistice Commission.

— Tacit acceptance by the other side of a continued U.S. force presence in South Korea for at least the short term, in return for a Shanghai-type communiqué committing ourselves to reduce and ultimately withdraw U.S. forces as the security situation on the Peninsula is stabilized.

— A non-aggression pact between the two Koreas.

— U.N. Security Council endorsement of the agreed-upon package of substitute security arrangements.

— Avoidance of other changes in the Armistice Agreement.

2. Negotiating Strategy

A two-track negotiating strategy should be pursued, with the Seoul-Pyongyang track being primary. In the second track, the U.S. should make parallel approaches to the major powers involved — the PRC, Soviet Union, and Japan. Specifically, we should: — Consult with the ROK before making proposals to any of the major powers. We should also seek ROK agreement to transfer operational control of ROK forces from CINCUNC, upon its termination, to a new U.S.-ROK combined command under a senior U.S. military officer.

— Keep the Soviets generally informed but discourage any spoiling role or direct Soviet involvement.

— After contacts with the PRC, inform other members of the UNC Liaison Group, as well as allies which contributed forces to the UNC.

— Keep Japan continuously informed. In addition, (a) seek an explicit agreement from the Japanese Government which would extend the secret 1961 Kishi Minute to the U.S.-Japan Mutual Security Treaty following termination of the UNC, but (b) not seek any extension in Japan of third country basing rights under the U.N. Status of Forces Agreement following termination of the UNC.

The minimum objective of the United States in this negotiating approach is to place ourselves by early summer in a defensible position for possible debate of the Korean issue in the U.N. General Assembly this coming fall.

3. U.S. Force Presence in South Korea

There should be no substantial changes in the level or missions of our forces in the ROK during the period of transition to new security arrangements following termination of the UNC.

[signed]
Henry A. Kissinger

cc: Director of Central Intelligence
Chairman, Joint Chiefs of Staff

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Institutional Files (H-Files), Box H–246, NSDMs, NSDM 251. Top Secret; Sensitive. Copies were sent to the Director of Central Intelligence and the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff.

254. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, May 28, 1974, 2:05–3:05 p.m. 254. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, May 28, 1974, 2:05–3:05 p.m. 1

Washington, May 28, 1974, 2:05–3:05 p.m.

ASSISTANT SECRETARY OF DEFENSE
WASHINGTON D.C. 20301

In reply refer to:
I-22802/74

MEMORANDUM OF CONVERSATION
SUBJECT: US Ambassador to Korea Visit with DEPSECDEF

PARTICIPANTS:

State Department

US Ambassador to Korea - Philip C. Habib

Country Director for Korea - Donald L. Ranard

Defense Department

Deputy Secretary of Defense - William P. Clements, Jr.

Assistant Secretary of Defense (ISA) - Amos A. Jordan

Director, Defense Security Assistance Agency - VADM Ray Peet

Director, East Asia Pacific Region (ISA) - RADM Thomas J. Bigley

Military Assistant to the DepSecDef - BGen John G. Jones

Assistant for Korea (ISA/EAPR) - Robert L. Vandegrift

Time: 1405-1505, Tuesday 28 May 1974
Place: Office of the Deputy Secretary of Defense, Pentagon

1. (S) US Force Levels in Korea

Ambassador Habib opened the discussion by stating that the ROKG had been informed that there will be no change in the level of US forces in Korea through FY75. During the following discussions, Mr. Clements made it clear that OSD and the JCS had no present plans for reducing our forces in Korea, and that any other suggestions were nothing but loose talk. It was pointed out that the ROK Government expects at least a one-year notice of any future changes in our force levels.

2. (S) US ROK Combined Command Replacing the UN Command

Ambassador Habib opened the discussion by saying that this subject could be handled at any time because of its bilateral US-ROK nature, and that a delay in completing the final arrangements should not adversely influence other NSDM 251 actions. It was mentioned that I Corps, Combined Command and the removal of the Company from the DMZ were presently under review by the JCS as a package arrangement. Ambassador Habib mentioned that he had turned down a suggestion by Foreign Minister Kim Dong-jo that a ROK officer be appointed as the senior MAC member now because it was the USG's intention to present all of the security changes as a single package for the mutual benefit of our two countries. Concerning OPCON of the new Combined Command, Ambassador Habib recommended that DOD closely scrutinize the ROK proposal to insure that the ROKG NATO-type formalized structure would not tie DOD's hands and reduce our security options in the future. He was informed that the JCS were now addressing this issue. Ambassador Habib said that the major problem confronting the US Government was what the North Koreans wanted to attain from the anticipated negotiations. Diplomatic initiatives on the part of the State Department are presently behind schedule but are expected to resume as soon as the Secretary of State can address the issues and proceed with contacts with the PRC and others. Ambassador Habib suggested that the PRC may again be useful in obtaining an agreement concerning the Korean question. The PRC can argue that by following their lead at the 28th UNGA last year, North Korea eliminated UNCURK and that the possibility of the elimination of the UNC itself may be a possibility in the 29th UNGA if North Korea is willing to bide its time and work with the PRC toward attaining its long-term goal. Ambassador Habib reiterated that this would not be contrary to US national interests since it would not enhance the possibilities of hostilities on the peninsula and would therefore present no loss to USG interests. In answer to Mr. Clements' question concerning the notification of Japan, Ambassador Habib said that Japan would be informed at the appropriate time after all major arrangements had been made, primarily because the ROKG did not trust the GOJ and the Japanese press to keep it a secret.

3. (S) ROK Force Five-Year MOD Plan

Ambassador Habib stressed the urgent need for an immediate USG decision on the ROK MAP for FY74 in order that the ROKG can plan and budget its own resources. It was mentioned that a suggested increase of $20 million in FMS to the ROKG in FY74 would assist the Koreans. Mr. Clements reminded Ambassador Habib that the split of the MAP pie was a State decision and that he should present his arguments forcefully with the proper officials at State. Ambassador Habib explained that President Nixon felt the completion of the Modernization Program was a personal commitment to the ROKG for the close support and assistance the USG received from Korea in supplying ROK troops to assist our efforts in South Vietnam and for their immediate unquestioned response for F5As under the ENHANCE PLUS agreement. However, the situation has changed both here and in Korea and Ambassador Habib believes that new initiatives are required by the White House with Congress in order to fulfill our commitment. Discussion followed on the possibilities of a supplemental budget or special legislation for Korea in order to gain Congressional support for USG policy. It was mutually agreed that a new package must be presented, stressing FMS over grant assistance in order to quickly finish the funding of the major priority items of the MOD Plan. The White House should seek credit dollars and a Congressional commitment to complete the MOD Plan. It was mutually agreed that there would be insufficient funds for any future ROK O&M. Mr. Clements stated that Defense believed that an Undersecretary's meeting to change the present policy was required as soon as possible in order to reach a decision prior to the September SCM.

4. (S) Security Consultative Meeting

Ambassador Habib said he believed that the MAP for FY75 would definitely be brought up by the Minister of Defense. He again stressed that large amounts of grant assistance were a fiction, stress should be placed on quickly increasing FMS and clarifying our policy and goals and then working speedily to attain them. He stated that the ROKG should be told our new policy at the SCM so that it can then take the appropriate action. It was agreed that DOD and State have long felt this was the proper way to complete the MOD Plan but that the White House had made decisions preventing speedy transition to FMS funding.

5. (S) ROK Domestic Situation

Ambassador Habib described the domestic Korean situation as "lousy" and politically repressive. President Pak has initiated these policies because he believes the North Korean threat requires complete unity with no dissent. The Ambassador mentioned he had advised President Pak not to execute any of the violators of the emergency measures because it would be a "stupid" step to take. He does not expect any major domestic upheaval in South Korea during the next few months. In response to Mr. Clements' question on the ROK economy, Ambassador Habib described it as a deficit capital economy. He estimated that if there was no recession in the US, Japan, and Europe, that the Korean economy should successfully ride out the present economic crisis by maintaining its export levels and thereby its ability to maintain its industrial and defense budgets in the foreseeable future. Again in response to Mr. Clements' question, he said that the ROK MND had given no indication that it believed the sharp cuts in the MAP were deliberate or connected with South Korean domestic policy. The ROKG fully understood the difficult funding problems we are having in Congress. Ambassador Habib did not anticipate that the presently stalled South/North negotiations would produce any concrete results until after the UNGA decision on the Korean question this fall. Regarding North Korea, Ambassador Habib stated that the Northwest Islands were a potential hotspot and he believed the recent North Koreans' actions in this area reflected their anticipation that the UNC would eventually leave the Korean peninsula and that their recent position on territorial waters was a step toward a legal claim to the islands when the UNC is dissolved. He reminded everyone that the ROKG was increasingly taking independent actions to prepare for its own defense, and that this trend should be guided and supported by US policy.

6. (S) ROK-US Joint Ventures

In answer to Mr. Clements' inquiry on joint ventures, Ambassador Habib presented a run down of US joint venture projects now underway and in the discussion stages. As a precautionary note, the Ambassador said that the ROKG was acquiring "big ideas" on exporting armaments t produces in the future to earn additional foreign exchange and that the USG should be aware of this possibility.

Memorandum of Conversation
Prepared by: Mr. Vandegrift

Approved by:
Date:

Distribution: SecDef (1)
DepSecDef (1)
OSD (CCS) (1)
ASD (ISA) (1)
DASD(ISA) (1)
COMUS Korea (1)
CINCPAC (1)
MAAG-Korea (1)
State Dept (1)
DSAA (1 )
Mil Asst, DepSecDef (1)
R&C (2)
AD (1)
OJCS (J-5)

1 Source: Washington National Records Center, OASD/ISA Files: FRC 330–77–0054, Korea, 333, 1974, June 20. Secret. Prepared by Vandegrift and approved by Jordan. The conversation took place in Clements’s office. Clements’s talking points for the meeting, dated May 28, are ibid.

255. National Intelligence Analytical Memorandum 14.2–1–74, Washington, July 15, 1974. 255. National Intelligence Analytical Memorandum 14.2–1–74, Washington, July 15, 1974.1

Washington, July 15, 1974

NORTH KOREA'S MILITARY AND STRATEGIC INTENTIONS

KEY JUDGMENTS

A. North Korea's military strategy remains primarily defensive although its military buildup over the past several years has given the armed forces a significant offensive capability. North Korean strategy appears designed to maintain a military balance on the peninsula while providing flexibility to conduct a wide range of offensive as well as defensive operations.

B. The strategy provides for strong forward defenses on both coasts and along the Demilitarized Zone (DMZ) and for distributing rather than concentrating firepower. Optimal use of North Korean forces for offensive purposes accordingly would require major redeployments of ground forces. An all-out offensive from present deployment probably would occur only if P'yongyang discerned a breakdown in South Korean internal stability or if a South Korean attack had failed. Intelligence sources can provide some warning that the North Koreans are making preparations for an attack and could probably detect preparations for any all-out offensive in time to provide at least a few hours warning.

C. The western islands will continue to be a special source of friction. The risk of an incident involving air or naval forces in the area remains, but any clash is not likely to lead to a major conflict.

D. The South Korean armed forces now appear strong enough to withstand a North Korean attack without the help of US ground forces, but would require US air and naval assistance and substantial logistical support. North Korea would also need substantial logistical support from its allies in any prolonged conflict.

[Omitted here is the body of the paper.]

1 Source: Central Intelligence Agency, OPI 122 (National Intelligence Council), Job 79R01012A, Box 480, NIAM 14.2–1–74, Folder 3. Top Secret. The memorandum was prepared by the CIA and the intelligence organizations of the Departments of State, Defense, Treasury, and the National Security Agency. Concurred in by members from the CIA, INR, DIA, NSA; representatives from the AEC, FBI, and the Department of Treasury abstained. Representatives of the Departments of the Army, Navy, and Air Force also participated.

256. Memorandum From Richard Smyser of the National Security Council Staff to Secretary of State Kissinger, Washington, undated. 256. Memorandum From Richard Smyser of the National Security Council Staff to Secretary of State Kissinger, Washington, undated.1

Washington, undated

MEMORANDUM
NATIONAL SECURITY COUNCIL
URGENT ACTION

MEMORANDUM FOR: SECRETARY KISSINGER
FROM: W.R. Smyser [WRS initialed]
SUBJECT: Telling the Koreans our Aid Plans

Deputy Secretary Clements will meet with South Korean representatives at the US-ROK Security Consultative Meeting next month in Hawaii. He has sent you a memorandum (Tab B) proposing certain things he wishes to tell the Koreans at that time. They are: — That we are planning to phase out grant aid with the exception of training and some minor programs by the end of FY 1976 and that we will compensate by trying to expand FMS, but that they should plan to move rapidly to cash and commercial sales arrangements. Secretary Clements says the Koreans recognize that our grant aid will continue to decline and that this will help their planning.

— That, as the Koreans become more self-sufficient and acquire improved weapon systems, elements of the U.S. military presence can be expected to decline.

Secretary Clements knows that any terminal date for grant aid goes against the prohibition in NSDM 227 of July, 1973 (Tab C).

We do not yet have State's views but Ambassador Habib has told me that he opposes telling the Koreans we will reduce our forces as the Koreans improve theirs. He opposes telling the Koreans that we will phase out grant aid by the end of FY 1976; he prefers giving the end of FY 1977 as the terminal date, adding the provision that this depends on the levels of aid before that date. He also believes it would be useful to give the Koreans a date because it would make it easier for them to conduct their planning if they know when our aid will stop.

As for the date, I am reluctant to change a NSDM without more thorough consideration than we have been able to give this problem in time for Mr. Clements' meeting. I would also like to get Korean views and the judgments of some other agencies before we decide.

Like Habib, I think we should not create a disincentive for the Koreans by telling them that we will pull out our forces as they improve their own.

We also need to calculate the possible impact of these changes on the President's visit. Ambassador Habib says that the changes in aid plans will have no effect: the Koreans even expect them. He says that the troop presence is much more sensitive.

RECOMMENDATION:

That you sign the attached memorandum (Tab A).

Concurrence:
Richard T. Kennedy [RTK initialed]

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Institutional Files (H-Files), Box H–241, NSDMs, NSDM 227, folder 6. Secret. Sent for urgent action. Concurred in by Kennedy. Attached but not published are Tab A the undated draft memorandum from Kissinger to the Secretary of Defense and the Deputy Secretary of State; and Tab B, the memorandum from Clements to Kissinger. Tab C, NSDM 227, is attached and published as Document 243. Kissinger did not sign Tab A. An attached note from Scowcroft indicates that the matter was instead handled by phone on September 23.

257. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to Secretary of Defense Schlesinger, Washington, October 8, 1974. 257. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to Secretary of Defense Schlesinger, Washington, October 8, 1974.1

Washington, October 8, 1974

NATIONAL SECURITY COUNCIL
WASHINGTON D.C. 20506

October 8, 1974

National Security Study Memorandum 211

TO: The Secretary of Defense
The Deputy Secretary of State
The Director of Central Intelligence

SUBJECT: U.S. Security Assistance to the Republic of Korea

The President has requested a study of our Security Assistance Program for the Republic of Korea. The study should define basic U.S. objectives as regards our security assistance to South Korea, and should then set forth the policy options that will give effect to these objectives.

The study should assume no significant changes in the level or missions of U.S. forces in the Republic of Korea during the period of transition to new security arrangements following the termination of the United Nations Command.

The study should include, but not necessarily be limited to, consideration of the following issues: — Should a termination date be set for grant military assistance, and if so, what should that date be?

— Should the rate of shift from grant military assistance to FMS credits, defined in NSDM 227, be accelerated and, if so, what should the new rate be?

— What types and numbers of high performance aircraft should be included in the Korean Force Modernization Program?

— What modifications, if any, should be made in the five-year Modernization Program for the Republic of Korea prescribed in NSDM 129?

The study should be prepared by the NSC Interdepartmental Group for East Asia. The study should be submitted no later than November 1, 1974, for review by the NSC Senior Review Group prior to its consideration by the President.

[signed]
Henry A. Kissinger

cc: Chairman, Joint Chiefs of Staff

1 Source: Ford Library, NSC Institutional Files (H-Files), Box H–32, NSSM 211, Review of U.S. Security Assistance to the Republic of Korea (2). Top Secret. A copy was sent to the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff.

258. Memorandum of Conversation, Seoul, November 22, 1974, 3 p.m. 258. Memorandum of Conversation, Seoul, November 22, 1974, 3 p.m. 1

Seoul, November 22, 1974, 3 p.m.

THE WHITE HOUSE
WASHINGTON

MEMORANDUM OF CONVERSATION

PARTICIPANTS:

Park Chung-Hee, President of the Republic of Korea (ROK)

Kim Chong-Pil, ROK Prime Minister

Kim Dong-Jo, ROK Foreign Minister

Hahm Pyung-Chun, Korean Ambassador to the United States

Kim Chung-Yom, Chief Presidential Secretary

Gerald R. Ford, President of the United States of America

Henry A. Kissinger, Secretary of State

Philip C. Habib, Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian and Pacific Affairs

Richard L. Sneider, United States Ambassador to the ROK

Brent Scowcroft, Lieutenant General, USAF, Deputy Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs

DATE, TIME, AND PLACE: November 22, 1974, 3:00 p.m.
The Blue House, Seoul, Korea

SUBJECTS: South Korean Dependence on U.S. Support; North Korean Threat; North Korean Tunneling Under the DMZ; North-South Dialogue; Need to Negotiate from a Position of Strength; Japan's Expanding Contacts with North Korea; Park Requests U.S. Intervention with Moscow and Peking on Korean Problem; South Korea's Economic Problems; Continuing U.S. Support for South Korea; World Economic Outlook; U.S. Will Take Korean Question Up with PRC and Soviet Leaders

After the opening greeting, President Park began his presentation.

South Korean Dependence on U.S. Support

President Park: I would like to make a few comments. First, on behalf of the government and people of Korea, I extend to you a heartfelt welcome for visiting our country on your first overseas trip since becoming President. The Korean people vividly remember with profound gratitude that American youth came to their aid and shed blood for a common cause. A source of constant assurance to Korea is the stationing of U.S. troops here, who play an important role in defense of Korea.

I also wish to express admiration and respect for the leading world role played by you, President Ford, in easing world tensions, in building a structure of world peace, and in seeking to solve the worldwide economic difficulties. There is no doubt about the enormous difficulties you face today.

North Korean Threat

I would like now to discuss briefly the Korean situation. Since you have been fully briefed, there is no need to go into detail. I would like to point out one fact which concerns us the most. The North Koreans are the most militant, radical Communists of all Communist Party nations in the world. They could easily resort to reckless and adventurous acts, which ordinary people could not predict.

One example of North Korean recklessness occurred only a week ago, when we discovered a tunnel designed to penetrate large forces behind our line for attack and aggression. This tunnel proves that the North Koreans are prepared to resort to reckless, unpredictable acts. I am convening a Military Command Conference to consider the underground approach tunnels. The purpose of these tunnels is not infiltration or small-scale guerrilla attacks. Given their size, the fundamental purpose for building the tunnels — the number of which we do not know — is to bring large-scale military forces into our rear areas. We therefore have to reassess our strategy.

In this connection, I recall several articles written last year by American journalists after visiting North Korea. They described North Korea as one huge military camp or garrison state. There are 2,700,000 armed troops in North Korea. The North Koreans are inculcated with the peculiar Communist dogma of Kim Il-sung. In North Korea there is military rule, military drills for school children beginning in the fifth or sixth grades. We therefore have to be watchful.

North Korea has openly stated that its political objective and basic strategy is to communize the South by force.

In fact, their excessively large military forces overburden the North Korean economy leading to deterioration in their economic situation. There is dissatisfaction and dissension in the North, and Kim Il-sung is uneasy and uncertain. Feeling time is against him, Kim Il-sung has often committed reckless acts.

Since North Korea is equipped with excessively large military forces, the ROK must consider the possibility of armed invasion. My assessment is that, without support by Communist China and the Soviet Union, North Korea is not capable of launching a long-term, large-scale, all-out invasion. The possibility of such an invasion is slim if American troops remain here. However, North Korea is able to mount a limited offensive if it is combined with infiltration and serious unrest politically in the South and if government control is weakened. Such a limited offensive could easily escalate into full-scale hostilities, with the tunnels used to penetrate large-scale forces.

North Korean Tunneling Under the DMZ

President Ford: General Stillwell showed me diagrams of the tunnel during our trip to Camp Casey. Large -scale troops behind the line does pose an ominous possibility.

At this point, President Park showed President Ford a small-scale model of the tunnel which had been brought into the room. In describing the tunnel, President Park said there was no way to check whether the tunnel goes to the northern boundary of the DMZ, but he thinks so. When completed, the tunnel would be capable of sending one regiment per hour behind the southern boundary of the DMZ, thus penetrating large-scale forces into the rear areas. This would disorganize the front-line troops on the DMZ boundary.

Secretary Kissinger: Would they be capable of bringing heavy equipment with them?

President Park: No. They could bring crew-served weapons. North Koreans have light-armed divisions with light weapons.

President Ford: How far below the surface was the tunnel dug?

President Park: (President Park, misunderstanding the question, replied as follows): From the center line of the DMZ to the south the tunnel runs about 1,200 meters.

Secretary Kissinger: The President was asking about the depth of the tunnel.

President Park: The depth of the tunnel depends on the terrain. In some places it's one to two meters deep. Where it was discovered, it was only one foot deep. One of our patrols saw steam or condensed air coming from the ground and that was how the tunnel was discovered.

Military sources also believe that there are four to five such tunnels elsewhere because sentries have heard knocking sounds underground.

President Ford: Was the tunnel discovery by search or happenstance?

President Park: A patrol saw steam or smoke purely accidentally. They suspected and dug, and found the tunnel. At that point, an enemy sentry fired on the patrol.

We have ordered the latest type of detectors, which are expected next month. We are utilizing all types of sound detectors, including mine detectors, to determine more about the tunnels. Even oil drills are being used to find the tunnels.

Secretary Kissinger: You will probably end up finding oil.

President Park: That would be fortunate. If we find it, we will not have to spend time with the Arabs.

President Ford: This has been interesting and helpful.

President Park: The North Koreans might try a blitzkrieg offensive, taking their cue from the Middle East war. They would try to occupy certain areas and then ask for a ceasefire. This possibility is high.

North-South Dialogue

President Park: Last, I would like to speak briefly about keeping the peace consistent with U.S. detente efforts. The North-South dialogue was initiated by us, but the dialogue has been suspended due to the North Koreans' obstructionist tactics. The North Koreans unilaterally notified us that they would not keep the dialogue going at the highest levels. It has been kept going only at a working level. Thus, the North Koreans' ulterior motive in responding to our proposal was not to ease tensions or to establish peace. Rather it was to gain a prompt U.S. withdrawal by using the dialogue for political propaganda purposes.

Even though the North-South dialogue is not working and was suspended last August, we do not intend to let it break down, given world public opinion.

Considering relevant factors in the Korean situation, we recognize that we will not realize our goal of national unification in the foreseeable future. However, we have no choice but to coexist in peace until conditions for unification are right. To establish peace, therefore, is our most desirable interim goal. And we are seeking a peaceful coexistence similar to that which exists now in East-West Germany.

In considering how to act in the interim, I have repeatedly urged North Korea to agree to a nonaggression pact and to entry of both North and South Korea into the United Nations. But North Korea has turned deaf ears. Nevertheless, we will continue our effort to have a dialogue with North Korea and to seek a response to our call.

Need to Negotiate from a Position of Strength

I am sure that you, Mr. President, and Secretary Kissinger agree with me that a position of strength is an absolute necessity for negotiations with the Communists. We must build up our national strength and mobilize our total energies to the degree that we can surpass North Korea. When the North Koreans accept the superiority of strength of South Korea, then they will come to the table for negotiations.

The next three or four years will be the most important period for bringing about a shift in the climate. South Korea during this period will become self-reliant so that when North Korea attacks us without help from the Soviet Union or Communist China we will be able to defend ourselves with our own forces. To carry out this task positively, we must maintain political and social stability in the ROK. To attain stability, I believe strong leadership is necessary. Although some of our people complain, we need to develop prosperity and security to deal with the peculiar North Korean type of Communism.

Strong leadership will contribute to peace and stability in Korea, in Northeast Asia and in the world as a whole.

I believe that the Republic of Korea and the United States have a common interest in deterring hostilities and blocking the North Korean scheme to bring Communist rule to the South. My efforts to establish peace are based on close cooperation with the United States. Accordingly, I honestly hope for a continued U.S. military presence, in the interim, at the same level as today. Such a presence will discourage miscalculation, encourage peace in Korea, and maintain the current balance of power as a deterrence.

Of course, we do not expect the U.S. presence to remain indefinitely, given the mounting U.S. public opinion and pressure in Congress. However, Korean self-reliance must be insured before U.S. troop reductions take place. Therefore, I hope for implementation of the Five-Year Modernization Plan with its completion as soon as possible. I also desire help for ROK defense industries, which will build our self-reliance.

Japan's Expanding Contacts with North Korea

I would now like to turn briefly to the Japan problem. The general trend in Japan is towards the left. The left-wing press and political circles are pressuring the Japanese Government, and the Japanese Government is making hasty approaches to North Korea. I hope the U.S. will use its influence to discourage these approaches. While maintenance of the military balance in Korea is important, maintenance of the political balance is just as important. Communist China and the Soviet Union are our neighbors. If Japan approaches North Korea, this would break the political balance, since, though we try hard to correct this situation, the Soviet Union and Communist China respond negatively to our approaches. We therefore urge the U.S. to discourage hasty Japanese approaches to the North.

I heard today, for example, that the Japanese Export-Import Bank is planning to loan North Korea a certain amount. This will help North Korean industry. Before, the Japanese Government found it difficult to check private contacts (contracts?) on a cash basis when receiving requests from the North. It said it would stop other official contacts (contracts?), however. But now the Japanese are opening up cooperation funds through Export-Import Bank loans. Apparently the Liberal Democratic Party cannot sustain its policies against the mounting pressures of the Socialist Party.

Park Requests U.S. Intervention with Moscow and Peking on Korean Problem

One other problem is how to get North Korea to change its militant policies. We need pressure on North Korea because, if they are left alone, problems will erupt on the Korean Peninsula, given the adventurous attitude of North Korea. We will try to continue our dialogue with the North, but that is not enough. Persuasion needs to be applied to the North, but it would be awkward for the U.S. to do this.

However, the North Koreans could be persuaded through Communist China or the Soviet Union. It would be better to have them do this.

When you, Mr. President, meet with the Russians at Vladivostok and when Secretary Kissinger meets with the Chinese, I hope the sincere efforts of South Korea to establish peace will be brought to the Soviet and Chinese attention and they will be urged to exercise influence over North Korea.

South Korea's Economic Problems

Next, I would like to turn to economic problems. Because of the current world economic situation, we have been having difficulties. We depend on others for our primary resources, but increases in prices threaten our international payments position, and it is difficult to expand exports. We are faced with lay-offs in our industries, increasing unemployment, and many other problems. I renew my tribute to your efforts to overcome the worldwide economic problems, since these will contribute to Korea's economy. I particularly appreciate Secretary Kissinger's speech in Chicago, in particular the favorable consideration given to Korea and other developing countries in solving their economic difficulties.

I have taken too much time in talking about our problems. Our people are keenly aware of the need to repay our debts to the United States. The best way is self-reliance through a more vigorous effort so that Korea can live without reliance on the U.S. in the future. But we will remain, as in the past, true allies and trustworthy partners.

Continuing U.S. Support for South Korea

President Ford: My purpose in coming to Korea is twofold. First, I wish to establish a personal relationship with the leader of a great country whom I have greatly admired and with the people of this country whom I have respected and admired over the years. My second purpose was to indicate clearly the continuity of U.S. policy in its relationship to Korea, and to indicate to the North Koreans that under no circumstances should they miscalculate and take actions based on the fact that a new administration has taken over in Washington. If the North Koreans will study my record in Congress, they will find that I supported President Truman in his response to North Korean aggression in 1950, and that I supported subsequent administrations, whether Democratic or Republican, that took firm stands on Korea. My record in Congress is one of strength. I supported actions to oppose aggression in Vietnam as I did in Korea.

When I return home, I will report to the American people and Congress that in my opinion it is vitally important for peace and stability throughout the whole world to support Korea and other like-minded nations seeking to build their countries economically and militarily so that they can become self-sufficient.

I will continue to urge Congress to support allies like South Korea because such actions are constructive in seeking a stable world. Frankly, however, Congress is not as cooperative as I would have hoped. We have some problems convincing Congress that adequate military and economic aid are in the best interests of peace, of our allies, and of the United States. But I will continue my efforts to urge Congress to do so.

The modernization plan will be continued and hopefully speeded up. But, I have problems with Congress. Some members have asked me to speak to you. Their attitude is to seek to give advice to sovereign nations. This attitude does have an adverse effect in trying to convince Congress to provide sufficient funds.

I should like to make several points. We reaffirm the modernization program. Next, we have no intention of withdrawing U.S. personnel from Korea. The joint efforts of the U.S. and Korean military are in the best interests of peace and stability in the Korean Peninsula. Further, I urge that the dialogue between the North and South continue, since peaceful coexistence is essential.

Our relations with the Soviet Union and the Peoples Republic of China are based on urging restraint in all parts of the world. Therefore, we will continue to urge both to have a continuing influence with their allies in restraining precipitous actions which would destroy regional or world stability.

Your continued strong leadership, Mr. President, is important for the North-South dialogue. It is our intention to have sufficient strength to negotiate from strength, not weakness.

In our discussions with the Japanese, we recommended a cautious, slow, and very deliberate relationship with North Korea. We told them that it would not be helpful to expand Japanese-North Korean relations on a rapid basis since that will destroy the balance necessary for constructive solutions of problems between the North and South. In our discussions over the last several days with Japan, we urged them not to expand relations with the North unless and until the Peoples Republic of China and the Soviet Union establish relations with the Republic of Korea.

The announcement this morning of the Export-Import Bank loan was opposed by the United States Government, since we did not think it in the best interests of the Republic of Korea.

Secretary Kissinger: Mr. President, I believe this was not announced as a firm decision, but probably leaked as being under consideration. They did not tell us about it in advance, and I am astonished by the announcement in view of the present political situation in Japan.

President Ford: Let me rephrase my remarks. We have in the past opposed such actions and we will certainly do so in the future.

World Economic Outlook

With respect to the economic situation, we recognize the difficulties faced by the Republic of Korea as a result of the serious increase in oil prices and the unfortunate actions taken by the oil-producing countries. These actions are not in the best interests of a world so interdependent economically. Secretary Kissinger is trying to organize the oil consumers so that we will be better able to negotiate with the oil-producing nations. We have made substantial headway and already taken steps beneficial and helpful to the U.S. and others, like South Korea. We will maximize our efforts. The oil-consuming nations cannot afford the economic impact of the cost of oil. We face inflation and the great world monetary problems. Secretary Kissinger's efforts are designed to develop a strong position vis-a-vis the oil producers and for dealing with the monetary distortions

At the present time, the United States faces difficult economic problems. The trend in the cost-of-living has been substantial increases, but it is now moderating. In 1974, the increase will be 11 to 12 percent; by the middle of next year, we expect the increase to be down to 6 or 7 percent, which is still too high but substantially improved.

We also face a serious recession or downturn in our economic situation, but this should be reversed by the middle of 1975. The analysis by my economic experts is that a short-term economic downturn will be followed by encouraging increases in growth by late 1975.

The program I have sent to the Congress is aimed at both moderating inflation and also providing remedies for the softening of sales in certain industries and increases in unemployment. It is a fine-honed program to meet inflation and recession. While Congress must make its own judgment, I hope to work out with Congress an agreed plan. Our economic plans also take into consideration the interdependence of the United States with the rest of the world. The difficulties faced are not only American problems but involve our relations with other countries of the world. I think our program will be successful.

U.S. Bill Take Korean Question Up with PRC and Soviet Leaders

I would like to make two final points. First, during my visit with General Secretary Brezhnev I will urge him to exercise restraint on North Korea. I will ask Secretary Kissinger to do the same with the Peoples Republic of China. Second, even though we have been approached on contacts or negotiations with North Korea, we will not do so unless or until the Peoples Republic of China and the Soviet Union do the same with the Republic of Korea. There must be a comparable effort by them.

I want to thank you, Mr. President, for the opportunity for this frank and broad discussion. It has been very helpful to me, and I hope it has been likewise helpful to you. Finally, I will send you a report, through our Embassy, on my contacts and those of Secretary Kissinger with the Soviet Union and China.

Secretary Kissinger: When the Foreign Minister is in New York, I will ask Assistant Secretary Habib to see him there and fill in any gaps on our conversations with the Russians and the Chinese.

President Park: I reciprocate with my own deep appreciation for your frank and kind remarks, President Ford. They have been of great help to me.

Secretary Kissing: We should now agree with the President on the joint communiqué.

President Park: Yes, it is agreeable.

(After a brief exchange, it was agreed that the press briefing would be based upon the joint communiqué with some elaboration and that we would list the topics discussed and make very general comments. There would be no discussion of the efforts to urge restraint on the Chinese and Russians.)

Secretary Kissinger: We wish to note in our press briefing the warmth and pride in the reception given President Ford, which has cemented solidarity between the American and Korean people.

President Ford: The reception in Korea was the warmest, friendliest and largest I have received.

1 Source: Ford Library, National Security Adviser, Memoranda of Conversation, Box 7. Secret; Nodis. The conversation took place in the Blue House. Ford visited South Korea November 21–22; his arrival speech, dinner toast, and the joint communiqué he issued with Park are in The Department of State Bulletin, Vol. LXXI, No. 1852, December 23, pp. 875–878.

259. Memorandum of Conversation, Seoul, November 1974. 259. Memorandum of Conversation, Seoul, November 1974.1

Seoul, November 1974

MEMORANDUM
THE WHITE HOUSE
WASHINGTON

MEMORANDUM OF CONVERSATION

PARTICIPANTS:

Park Chung-hee, President of the Republic of Korea

Ch'oe Kyu-ha, Prime Minister

President Ford

Dr. Henry A. Kissinger, Secretary of State and Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs

Lt. General Brent Scowcroft, Deputy Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs

DATE AND TIME: November 1974
PLACE: Seoul, Republic of Korea

Park: I hope that American strength will be maintained at current levels for a considerable time into the future. We don't expect American troops to continue into the indefinite future, but Korean troops must be brought up to the latest standards and Korean defense industries must get American help.

Japan is making a hasty approach to North Korea. I hope you will dissuade Japan from such a hasty initiative.

Rising prices have seriously unbalanced our payments, together with the world recession which has closed many of our factories.

President: Mr. President, I had two purposes in coming here. First, I want to establish a personal relationship with you. Second, I want to reaffirm the continuity of American policy.

We reaffirm the modernization program. There is no intention to withdraw American personnel.

The North-South dialogue I hope will continue.

I agree that Japan should not expand relations with North Korea on too rapid a basis. Japan's announcement of export-import credits for North Korea has been opposed by us.

I will ask Brezhnev to urge restraint on North Korea and Secretary Kissinger will do the same with China. We will not approach North Korea until the Soviet Union and the People's Republic of China do the same for you.

We will send you a report on my trip to Vladivostok and Secretary Kissinger's trip to Peking.

What shall we say to the press?

Prime Minister: Let's just elaborate on the communiqué.

Kissinger: Yes, but let's both do it the same way. We could list the topics that were discussed and note some general comments about each. We could say the subject of the Soviet Union, China, and North Korea was discussed, but not that the President will intervene. He can do that better if the Soviet Union is not put on record.

1 Source: Ford Library, National Security Adviser, Memoranda of Conversation, Box 7. Secret; Nodis. The conversation took place in the Blue House. The exact date and time of this conversation is not indicated.

260. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to President Ford, Washington, January 3, 1975. 260. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to President Ford, Washington, January 3, 1975.1

Washington, January 3, 1975

MEMORANDUM
THE WHITE HOUSE
WASHINGTON

January 3, 1975

MEMORANDUM FOR: THE PRESIDENT
FROM: HENRY A. KISSINGER [HK initialed]
SUBJECT: Future U.S. Military Assistance to South Korea

As part of the preparations for your recent visit to South Korea, the departments completed a policy study on future U.S. military assistance to the Republic of Korea (ROK). The specific issues they took up in this study included (1) whether the rate of shift from grant military assistance (MAP) to FMS credit should be accelerated, (2) whether a termination date should be set now, and (3) whether additional high-performance aircraft should be transferred to the Republic of Korea.

During your meeting with President Park, you discussed our military assistance in general terms. You reaffirmed U.S. support for the Five-Year ROK Force Modernization Plan, and said that we hoped to speed up completion of our assistance to that plan. You also assured Park that we had no intention to withdraw U.S. forces from South Korea.

We now need your guidance on the specific issues listed above. The inter-departmental paper presents the following options on these issues:

A. Rate of Shift from Grant MAP to FMS Credit. The Modernization Plan, to which we committed $1.5 billion in 1971 at the time we withdrew the first of our two divisions from Korea, was to have been finished in FY 75. By the end of FY 74, however, we were still $500 million short due to budget limitations. The ROK places considerable store by our rounding out, in some credible fashion, our contribution to the Modernization Plan. From the beginning, we have made clear that we would fulfill our obligation through a combination of grant MAP, FMS credit, and excess defense articles. In the last year or so, we have begun shifting to larger amounts of FMS credit, both because of tightening Congressional constraints on grant MAP and because the ROK has been able to pick up more of the burden. On the other hand, we do not want to shift too rapidly. We do not want to give the wrong signal to Pyongyang and its allies or to undercut confidence in Seoul.

Distaste in Congress for Park's handling of his domestic political situation did not in the end reduce our military assistance to South Korea by as much as earlier seemed likely. For FY 75, Congress has authorized a total of $145 million, plus another $20 million if you certify that Park is making substantial progress on human rights. Congress has left to your decision how this total is to be divided between grant MAP and FMS credits. This figure compares favorably with the FY 74 appropriation of $100 million grant MAP and $57 million FMS credit. For FY 76, we are requesting $75 million in grant MAP and $100 million in FMS credit.

FY 76 FY 77

Grant FMS Grant FMS

OPTION 1 147 65 96 90

OPTION 2 75 100 50 150

OPTION 3 50 125 25 175

OPTION 4 10 175 10 250

Departmental Views. State supports Option 2 while Defense wants Option 3. State stresses the political importance of an Executive Branch request for a higher level of grant MAP. Defense emphasizes Congressional constraints and the reputed ROK desire for increased FMS credits.

My View. The real choice is between Options 2 and 3. Option 1 and Option 4 would not likely be considered seriously by Congress. I support Option 2. I believe it important in light of the present political and strategic situation on the Korean Peninsula that the Executive Branch show continuing solid support for ROK needs. Moreover, I believe that this combination of grant MAP and FMS credits is a figure that would have a chance with Congress and reflects Korean ability to assume a growing share of the defense burden. Option 2 also reflects the level that Congress has authorized for FY 75 and that we are requesting for FY 76.

B. A Possible Termination Date for Grant MAP. The Presidential guidance of mid-1973 did not give a termination date for grant MAP. The inter-departmental paper presents two options:

Option 1: After FY 77, continue a low level of grant MAP for minor investment programs.

Option 2: After FY 77, terminate grant MAP except for a level of training assistance at about $1 million annually.

Departmental Views. Defense wants Option 1. State also supports Option 1, but with a difference: if Congress does not support enough grant MAP and FMS credit to complete our contribution to the Modernization Plan by FY 77, State would have us request both of these in subsequent years until the Plan were completed. State would terminate grant MAP, except for training (at about $2 million a year), after the Plan is finished. OMB would make no decision on terminating grant MAP until after Congress completes action an the FY 76 bill.

My View. I favor Option 1. At this point, we do not want to indicate a termination of grant MAP. In terms of military and budgetary planning, it is not necessary that we do so now, since either Option 2 or 3 on the rate of shift from grant MAP to FMS credits indicates the downward trend in grant MAP. Projecting beyond FY 77, if you choose Option 2 on the rate of shift from grant MAP to FMS credits, I recommend that we then think in terms of about $25 million in grant MAP for FY 78, and thereafter taper off to a level of not more than $10 million annually.

C. Additional High-Performance Aircraft for the ROK. At this point the only real question is whether to transfer to the ROK the one F-4D squadron which has been bailed to the ROK under the Enhance Plus Agreement since late 1972. Before we consider other ROK requests for additional high-performance aircraft, we want to look at a basic reassessment of the North Korean threat and of ROK air defense needs. Defense is now completing this study.

As regards the F-4D bailed squadron, State and Defense agree that we should transfer this squadron to the ROK by sale. The ROK already owns one F–4 squadron outright. The transfer of this second F–4 squadron to ROK ownership at this time should not stimulate arms competition on the Korean Peninsula, since this second squadron has in reality been in the ROK Air Force inventory for two years already although it remained our property.

Defense wants to attach a condition to the sale of this F-4D squadron: that the ROK be asked to pay the $3.3 million cost for rehabilitating the two F-5A squadrons being returned to South Korea from South Vietnam under the Enhance Plus Agreement. Defense wants to use the $3.3 million for its sorely-pressed Vietnam budget. I think we can ask the ROK to pick up this $3.3 million (on top of the $43 million price tag we have put on the bailed squadron itself), but believe we should not press the ROK to pay this additional cost if it raises serious objections.

At Tab A is a draft NSDM which embodies my recommendations above.

RECOMMENDATION:

That you approve my signing in your name, the draft NSDM at Tab A.
Approve [GRF initialed]
Disapprove

1 Source: Ford Library, NSC Institutional Files (H-Files), Box H–57, NSDM 282, Review of ROK Air Defense Requirements (10). Top Secret; Nodis. Ford initialed the approve option. The response to NSSM 211, an undated IG paper, is ibid., Box H–32, NSSM 211, Review of U.S. Security Assistance to the Republic of Korea (1).

261. Minutes of the Secretary of State’s Staff Meeting, Washington, January 6, 1975, 8 a.m.. 261. Minutes of the Secretary of State’s Staff Meeting, Washington, January 6, 1975, 8 a.m..1

Washington, January 6, 1975, 8 a.m.

In Attendance (Mon., 1/6/75)

Secretary of State Kissinger (presiding as Chairman)

D - Mr. Ingersoll

P - Mr. Sisco

E - Mr. Robinson

M - Mr. Brown

C - Mr. Sonnenfeldt

AF - Mr. Mulcahy (Acting)

ARA - Mr. Rogers

EA - Mr. Habib

EUR - Mr. Hartman

NEA - Mr. Atherton

INR - Mr. Hyland

S/P - Mr. Lord

EB - Mr. Enders

S/PRS - Mr. Anderson

PM - Mr. Stern (Acting)

IO - Mr. Buffum

H - Mr. Holton

L - Mr. Feldman (Acting)

S/S - Mr. Springsteen

S - Mr. Borg

[Omitted is material unrelated to Korea.]

Mr. HABIB: We have an interesting problem with respect to Korea which I thought has brought some significance — which I would like to get some of your views on.

Korea is looking toward three countries for arms purchases because they can't get what they like in the way of sophisticated weaponry. In this case, the immediate problem involves their desire to purchase advanced ground to surface missiles — and which we're not ready to supply them yet.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: Why not?

MR. HABIB: This concerns a missile that is ship-mounted, called the Harpoon, which our assembly line is not ready to provide them yet.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: Yes, but why are we really not giving them the assembly-line argument?

MR. HARTMAN: It's a fairly known inventory.

MR. HABIB: It's been known for some time that they want to buy French missiles — which we think they shouldn't buy.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: That's their problem.

MR. HABIB: Well, there's another reason too. That is, it goes completely contrary to the priority arrangements made on weapons supply. Now, if they've got money to buy weapons and they want to buy weapons, they can buy them from us. They don't have to have these French missiles.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: But they can't buy them from us if we won't sell them to them.

MR. HABIB: We'll sell them to them at the right time.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: What's the right time?

MR. HABIB: Well, there's an interim missile that's good for them.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: Well, we don't, obviously, think so.

MR. HABIB: Second, the French are pushing arms on them.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: But why is it in our interest to be the sole supplier of Korean arms? — all the more so, as we are demonstrably totally unreliable.

MR. HABIB: It is in our interest that Korea should get the arms that they need in their priority and not take other arms. If we're short on MAP money — as we are — we have priority requirements that have been set jointly between ourselves and the Koreans as to what arms they need. Why don't they spend their money on those things instead of buying things like submarines?

Let me give you the next item they want to buy. They want to buy British submarines

SECRETARY KISSINGER: Before four or five years are over, we'll be grateful for any strength Korea has, because you know goddamn well what's going to happen. You and I know they're going to go the way of Chile sooner or later. Sooner or later you put a democratic administration in here and they'll pull the Second Division out. I don't see that it's against our interest that Korea has some other source of arms.

MR. HABIB: It is against our interest if we decide what kind of an armament we require jointly —

SECRETARY KISSINGER: We're not the bloody pro-consuls.

MR. HABIB: It's not a question of pro-consuls; it's a question of rational arms procurement policy.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: Well, what is a rational arms procurement policy? Why does Korea not get American airplanes? For the reason that the Air Force wants to have an excuse to keep two wings there.

MR. HABIB: No. Korea is going to get American wings. As a matter of fact, they buy American airplanes than buy British submarines. They obviously need American airplanes.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: They also need the assurance of not being totally dependent on us. And I can only applaud anything that comes to this conclusion.

MR. HABIB: Well, you're producing a situation where they supply x-dollars; they support the bulk of their military needs themselves. And they proceed then to take their own resources and buy things which, all the while, we are, unfortunately, unable to supply within the terms of our limits — Congressional appropriation limits. We can't supply the things that are required.

MR. ENDERS: Will the French and the British give them credit?

MR. HABIB: Of course. That's the whole idea.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: Then why not?

MR. HABIB: It's a simple question of whether or not that's the best use of resources at a time when you're spending 125-135 million dollars of our own money in grant aid.

Now, we supply grant aid — 145 million this year. And then they turn around and take foreign exchange and buy advanced weaponry that is not particularly within priority-list desirability.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: But the priority-list desirability, you know as well as I know, is total nonsense.

MR. HABIB: No, it's not.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: Oh, come on! You know how they're done in the Pentagon.

MR. HABIB: No; they're not done in the Pentagon. Our military sit down with them.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: Our military, first, decides what they're going to give them.

MR. STERN: No, no.

MR. HABIB: I was involved in the process, and I didn't allow it to happen that way. You went through a rational system of determining how do you modernize Korean armed forces? And you produced such things as airplanes — airplanes they need. They have to get rid of the -86s and get something that's worth buying.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: There's no reason why they should be inferior in airpower to the North Koreans, except our Air Force ought to have them in a position where we must have some wings there.

That has been the case all along. I have just seen too many military instances —

MR. HABIB: It's a matter of money. Airplanes are expensive, and the number of aircraft needed are.

As it turns out, this year, for example, about the only thing we could purchase from our MAP funds are the scheduled airplanes —

SECRETARY KISSINGER: Why?

MR. HABIB: — because we don't have enough funds and the numbers as well. I'm talking in addition to some other priority items. But when you figure up the cost of shipping, what you can do is beat your FY purchase order for this year by five million dollars. And, meanwhile, instead of buying the other things you need, these fellows are going to go off and contract for submarines and missiles they don't require.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: To establish some other foreign interest in their country, which is not a bad idea. That's how I look at it.

MR. HABIB: Well, if I were a Congressman and I discovered that I appropriated 145 million dollars to a country which spent another hundred million dollars for weaponry front another country, I don't think I'd appropriate 145 million dollars.

MR. STERN: That's exactly what would happen. It serves them right. It would force the Koreans to go to a third country.

MR. HABIB: Oh, come on! We're not out to prove to Congress a point like that.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: But we are. I am.

MR. HABIB: We have a rational modernization program for Korea I think we're going to be able to beat it, but Congressman Fraser doesn't realize that the amount of money he has provided is sufficient to meet the real needs — for example, for modern aircraft.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: There are two problems. One is —

MR. HABIB: It's a question that involves a number of countries. Arms sales now are a big item. It's going to happen elsewhere.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: Well, it's going to happen, as sure as anything. If we are going to be the only country that is adopting these purist policies, then it is indeed going to happen that other countries are going to pre-empt the arms market. And there's absolutely something. If the Congress takes the position that when we do something for other countries we do it in their interest and they can turn it off and on — this is exactly what will happen.

No country in its right mind is going to make itself dependent entirely on American arms any more.

M. HABIB: Do you want to give them missile-propellant capabilities so they can produce long-range missiles that can carry nuclear warheads? Do you want that promise from them too?

SECRETARY KISSINGER: Look, I cannot decide individual items.

I would say that South Korea, within five years, would be substantially left alone by us.

MR. HABIB: But they said, "If you cannot provide the missile propellant, we'll buy it from the French."

SECRETARY KISSINGER: That's not the idea. Any country that is totally dependent on America, in its present state of domestic situation, is in deep trouble. And I think it is politically important for them to have other connections.

How do you know whether next year or in '76 Congress isn't going to legislate the same sort of restrictions on Korea that it done on Chile? You go through the list of restrictions that have been legislated, and the sanity is no greater in Korea than in Turkey.

Now, if we do it once more with another extension, we might just as well cut it off, because if they feel they're living on a six-weeks margin each time, they're going to look for alternative sources too. Then they're going to look for great lectures about how unwise this is — but that's going to be the fact.

At any rate, what do you want to do — beef them up a bit?

MR. HABIB: No, no, no First of all, I'll try to speed up the schedule of our own missiles procurement so we can satisfy, if we can, the requirement. I think it's a waste of money. I'd like to prevent the French-buying.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: The waste of money doesn't bother me.

MR. HABIB: Secondly, they want the British submarines. These are World War II-vintage submarines, the same general class.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: Look, there are two general problems. One is the difficulty we may have with Congress; they're unwilling to listen.

The second is, within some rational limits, if a country wants to assure its own defense with its own conception of what it needs for defense, I'm not offended for that — even if they buy one or two weapons it's idiotic. After all, we're spending 70 million dollars on a P-1, for which no one has yet described to me any conceivable mission. You tell me why we need a supersonic airplane going around the Soviet Union in a general war. Either we have knocked out the missiles — and it doesn't have to be supersonic — well, it isn't going to fly supersonic there, in any case. Anyway, let's not get into that.

I mean, we are the last country in the world to tell people that they can not do crazy things.

MR. HABIB: But you're going to have that kind of problem with Congress.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: I don't know whether I'm going to have that kind of problem. That's why I'd like an opinion.

MR. HABIB: For example, they're talking in Thailand about building up defense industries. They're talking about providing their own.

Korea has already started on that. We've urged them to do that; that makes sense.

I think we'll find the Philippines are buying elsewhere, the next thing you know.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: Well, you tell me how far Congress is passing restrictions, with the dictator in the Philippines, on that.

MR. HABIB: I think he's next after Korea. I think Korea they'll take care of first.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: So what are you talking about?

MR. HABIB: That's why I raised the subject, because it's not an easy one.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: Look, when I say I think this is going to happen, I think it's a national disgrace. To conduct the foreign policy of a great power that senselessly reduces its own influence and weakness itself and acquires by legislative action a reputation for unreliability is not an elevated thing to do. But you have to say that that's what's happening.

MR. HABIB: Now we're dealing with a country in which we have 38,000 troops — one of the few countries in the world in which we can be engaged in combat without even knowing it.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: Yes, but I also have to say that it is not against the interests of Korea to have some emotional interest in something else That's how I look at it.

MR. HABIB: That's exactly why they're doing it. There's some skullduggery involved also with the French.

That's all right. We've got a lot of skullduggery on other things well. On that one there's less justification.

All right, we're thinking about this now. I just wanted to —

SECRETARY KISSINGER: Raise it again.

[Omitted is material unrelated to Korea.]

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Transcripts of Secretary of State Kissinger’s Staff Meetings, 1973–1977, E5177, Box 5. Secret.

262. National Security Decision Memorandum 282, Washington, January 9, 1975. 262. National Security Decision Memorandum 282, Washington, January 9, 1975.1

Washington, January 9, 1975

NATIONAL SECURITY COUNCIL
WASHINGTON D.C. 20506

January 9, 1975

National Security Decision Memorandum 282

TO: The Secretary of Defense
The Deputy Secretary of State
SUBJECT: Korean Force Modernization Plan

The President has reviewed the response to NSSM 211, together with the departmental and agency views thereon, and has decided the following: — The United States will complete its obligation to the Republic of Korea Force Modernization Plan at an early date, in order to demonstrate the United States commitment to the security of the Republic of Korea.

— The shift from grant military assistance to FMS credits should be accelerated to the rate defined in Option 2 in the NSSM response.

— No termination date should be set for grant military assistance to the Republic of Korea. The downward trend in grant military assistance defined in Option 2 should be continued beyond FY 77, but should look toward the maintenance of a modest investment and training program with an annual ceiling of $10 million.

— The F-4D squadron now on bailment to the Republic of Korea should be transferred to the Republic of Korea by sale. The Republic of Korea should be asked to pay the $3.3 million cost for rehabilitating the two F-5A squadrons being returned to South Korea under the Enhance Plus Agreement, but this should not be a condition for the sale of the F-4D squadron if the Republic of Korea raises serious and persistent objections.

— The review of the North Korean threat and the Republic of Korea air defense requirement contemplated by NSDM 227 should be forwarded with recommendations to the President no later than March 3, 1975.

[signed]
Henry A. Kissinger

cc: The Director of Central Intelligence
Director, Office of Management and Budget
The Chairman, Joint Chiefs of Staff

1 Source: Ford Library, NSC Institutional Files (H-Files), Box H–69, NSDM Originals (1 of 2), NSDM 281–NSDM 300. Top Secret; Nodis. Copies were sent to the Director of Central Intelligence, the Director of the Office of Management and Budget, and to the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff.

263. Key Judgments From an Interagency Intelligence Memorandum DCI/NIO 165–75, Washington, January 24, 1975. 263. Key Judgments From an Interagency Intelligence Memorandum DCI/NIO 165–75, Washington, January 24, 1975.1

Washington, January 24, 1975

[1 page not declassified.]

1 Source: Central Intelligence Agency, OPI 122 (National Intelligence Council), Job 79R01142A, Box 1, Folder 10. Secret.

264. Memorandum From Richard Smyser and David Elliott of the National Security Council Staff to Secretary of State Kissinger, Washington, February 28, 1975. 264. Memorandum From Richard Smyser and David Elliott of the National Security Council Staff to Secretary of State Kissinger, Washington, February 28, 1975.1

Washington, February 28, 1975

MEMORANDUM
NATIONAL SECURITY COUNCIL

ACTION

February 28, 1975

MEMORANDUM FOR: SECRETARY KISSINGER
FROM: W.R. SMYSER [WRS initialed]
DAVID D. ELLIOTT [DDE initialed]

Development of U.S. Policy Toward South Korean Development of Nuclear Weapons

At Tab A is a draft State cable to Embassy Seoul informing the Embassy of the approach we are using to formulate a policy toward South Korea's development of the nuclear capability. The cable also responds to Ambassador Sneider's recommendations on this question (Tab B); we are in essential agreement with Sneider.

Specifically, the draft State cable: — Agrees that the ROK has entered the initial stage of nuclear weapons development.

— Affirms that ROK continuation on this course would have a decidedly a stabilizing effect in Northeast Asia.

— Defines our basic objective as (1) to discourage and (2) to inhibit the ROK effort to develop a nuclear explosive capability or delivery system.

— Stresses the need to develop our policy toward Korea on this issue within the multilateral framework which we are using for global policy on the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons.

— States that, in consonance with this multilateral approach, we are at present considering the following courses toward the ROK: * Inhibit ROK access to sensitive technology and equipment both through unilateral U.S. action and through the development of common supplier nation policies.

* Press the ROK to ratify the NPT. (The ROK has told us recently that it intends to proceed to ratify the NPT in the near future.)

* [text not declassified] increase our information on the current state of ROK technical development in this area.

We have no objection to the draft State cable.

RECOMMENDATION:

That you approve the draft State cable to Embassy Seoul at Tab A.

APPROVE [initialed]

DISAPPROVE

1 Source: Ford Library, National Security Adviser, Presidential Country Files for East Asia and the Pacific, Box 9, Korea [4]. Secret; Sensitive. On behalf of Kissinger, Scowcroft initialed his approval of the draft State cable. Tab A is attached but not published. Tab B, not attached, is likely telegram 8023 from Seoul, referenced in Document 263. The Department sent the cable on March 4 as telegram 048673 to Seoul. (Ibid., Box 11, Korea, DOS Cables, NODIS from SECSTATE [3])

265. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, March 27, 1975, 5 p.m. 265. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, March 27, 1975, 5 p.m. 1

Washington, March 27, 1975, 5 p.m.

THE WHITE HOUSE
WASHINGTON

MEMORANDUM OF CONVERSATION

PARTICIPANTS:

Mr. Richard L. Sneider, U.S. Ambassador to the Republic of Korea

Lt. General Brent Scowcroft, Deputy Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs

Mr. W.R. Smyser, National Security Council Staff Member

DATE, TIME & PLACE: March 27, 1975
5 p.m.
White House

Sneider: The President's trip to Korea was very useful. The crucial question in Korea is our credibility, and that trip did much to boost it.

Things are going well in Korea. The country is becoming a middle size power, though we do not realize it. It is too large an economy to be a client state. In ten years it will be a significant military power. It will also have a per capita income of $2,000 or more. It has energy, intelligence and leadership.

Right now Korea is in a real box of rising oil prices and declining export markets.

President Park has been developing his second option, the "what if" option. He says it in terms of a 2 to 3 year period. He wants to accelerate independence. He knows we do not like it, so he does it in a clandestine way.

Park knows that the Administration wants to keep a U.S. presence in Korea but he does not know if we can deliver the goods. Vietnam made it worse. We can no longer tell him what to do.

Scowcroft: Will he go in this direction no matter what we do?

Sneider: We have to go to Park with an honest package that will tell him how we will help him and what we do not want him to do — such as move toward nuclear weapons. Once it gets out that South Korea is developing nuclear weapons, I do not know what the Russians or the Chinese or the North Korean reaction would be.

I do not just want to go in and beat him over the head. I want to give him a package, perhaps a broad energy agreement with ERDA. We are making a lot of ad hoc decisions but none are coordinated.

Scowcroft: That makes good sense. Maybe the debacle in Southeast Asia will help us with other aid bills in time.

Sneider: It may go the other way.

Scowcroft: We fight a constant eroding action from DOD. Schlesinger wants to pull out.

Sneider: I have him interested. He may come out to Korea.

Scowcroft: In response to Congressional pressures, he wants to pull out from other places than Korea as well.

What do you think about I Corps?

Sneider: I think we should hold off until the end of the year and then do it as part of the UNC rearrangement.

I am concerned about coordination. I did not learn of the Yellow Sea incident until several hours after the event.

Scowcroft: We were worried about the scramble.

Sneider: We should have put aircraft over our assets, but not to deter the North Koreans.

On Lockheed, I do not want the French to get this contract. We should draw a line on where we will not give them stuff. We should be in bed with them so as to have access. We should talk to Park about this in the next six months or so.

I have the Department looking at the thing and I have talked to Schlesinger. I have asked for a science attaché. But I do not want to talk to Park without the President's or the Secretary's instructions.

Park knows that we are holding back. We have to talk to him promptly. Every time he is worried, he tends to be erratic and he plays silly games.

The President's visit was a boost to Park. He now wants to come here. I don't know what a good time is.

Scowcroft: Not now. It may change after Southeast Asian events.

What about the UNC?

Sneider: We have talked to the Koreans on the basis of Kissinger's decision. We will go to the Security Council and then to the General Assembly. The Non-Aligned Bloc has decided to make North Korea a full member. That means a few more votes for them.

I have told the Koreans they have to fight their own battles with the Non-Aligned. I have told Park to visit some of those countries that will show the initiative and they will take him seriously. All this UNC stuff will force us to sort out Opcon. I think we should keep this. We can exercise caution in a situation. Our commanders have to be able to say "no" to Park. On the air side, we have good control. I also think that, with 40,000 men, Congress won't be comfortable unless we cannot be dragged into things. If we do not have Opcon, we may need to reduce.

Smyser: Habib says we do not really have Opcon.

Sneider: In the Yellow Sea incident, we gave the orders.

Scowcroft: It turned out okay. We were lucky.

Sneider: They will get a lick in somewhere. They have lost three ships.

Scowcroft: I think it is better not to clobber them in international water. That was our concern.

Sneider: Would we be prepared to do anything with the Chinese and the Russians on Korea? We cannot wait forever. We can live with the present situation, but it is not a good one. I think North Korea will need more Russian economic aid.

Scowcroft: The Sino-Soviet split is a factor.

Sneider: Maybe there would be a payoff for Moscow or Peking. Can you think about it?

In Korea, we should prove that we have a negotiating process. I hope that Schlesinger comes for this security consultants meeting in August.

It was good to see you.

Scowcroft: It was good to see you. Please stop by any time.

1 Source: Ford Library, National Security Adviser, Memoranda of Conversation, Box 10. Secret. The conversation took place in the White House. The March 26 talking points that Smyser gave Scowcroft, are ibid., Presidential Country Files for East Asia and the Pacific, Box 9, Korea [5].

266. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, March 28, 1975, 11 a.m. 266. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, March 28, 1975, 11 a.m. 1

Washington, March 28, 1975, 11 a.m.

DEPARTMENT OF STATE
Memorandum of Conversation

DATE: March 28, 1975
Time: 11:00 A.M.

SUBJECT: U.S.-Korean Relations

PARTICIPANTS:

Kim Dong-Jo, Minister of Korea

Pyong-choon Hahm, Korean Ambassador to the U.S.

The Secretary

Richard L. Sneider, U.S. Ambassador to South Korea

Philip C. Habib, Assistant Secretary of State for East Asia

W.R. Smyser, Senior Staff Member, NSC

Kim Dong-Jo: I have had a good talk with Mr. Buffum. We exchanged views on the UNC problem at the upcoming United Nations General Assembly and on UNC reorganization. I told him it was necessary to deal with the presence of others, like the French. We are worried about the United Nations General Assembly prospects, especially because of the non-aligned.

Secretary Kissinger: We are going to take a tougher line at the United Nations this year with the group of 77.

Habib: You started last year. It helped in Cambodia.

Secretary Kissinger: We will be tougher. The constellation of events is not to our advantage, but we will do all we can. We may lose on the Korean resolution. We should keep in touch and coordinate.

I think the American people have been pushed around enough. The President will make a major-speech in two weeks.

Kim Dong-Jo: It is necessary to fix the UNC issue and the arrangements for operational power in the joint command. It can be done in about two months.

Secretary Kissinger: (Turning to Habib) Is that a good idea?

Habib: I'm not sure. We should consult with the Defense Departments and get their judgments.

We may have a better position in the UN General Assembly if we have a small command.

Secretary Kissinger: But our opponents are fighting the principle of the UN Command. It does not matter whether that Command is large or small.

Habib: A small Command puts us in a better posture.

Ambassador Hahm: That was why we talked to Buffum. We need a contingency plan on what to do if we lose.

Secretary Kissinger: We will not withdraw our troops just because there is a vote against the UNC.

Habib: Only the Security Council can end the UN Command.

Secretary Kissinger: We do not want to abolish the Command.

Ambassador Hahm: Maybe we can make our position stronger if we say that we are willing to have the UNC abolished in exchange for other arrangements.

Secretary Kissinger: That was our position last year.

Kim Dong-Jo: But it can make a difference. Maybe we can reorganize the joint command. We need to think about what we do if we lose.

Habib: (To the Secretary) You should know that the Republic of Korea has offered to help on Cambodia and Vietnam. We have just received a telegram offering LST's.

Secretary Kissinger: That is very good.

Kim Dong-Jo: One problem at the United Nations is that North Korea is now trying to become part of the non-aligned group. That could hurt us.

Secretary Kissinger: We have to do something about the nonaligned. If Cuba and North Korea are both in the non-aligned group, we will have to make clear to that group that we do not regard them as non-aligned.

Kim Dong-Jo: They have to have a consensus. Maybe we can tell them what we think.

Secretary Kissinger: We should get out a message to some of the non-aligned that North Korea is not a non-aligned power.

Kim Dong-Jo: It would be disastrous to our UN policy if the Lima conference says that North Korea is non-aligned.

Secretary Kissinger: Let's send a cable to some of them saying that we regard it as totally inappropriate.

Kim Dong-Jo: We would like to improve relations with the Soviet Union.

Secretary Kissinger: I will mention it to them again.

Kim Dong-Jo: The Chinese ignore us completely, as if there were no North and South Korea.

Ambassador Hahm: Domestically, we are worried that North Korea gets more relations with other countries whereas we do not. This has a serious impact on the people of South Korea. There is a fear that we will be surpassed.

Secretary Kissinger: Do we say anything about this to our allies?

Habib: Yes, we do. We have spoken to the Japanese, with some effect. The West Europeans, however, have gone ahead. So has Australia, despite our effort.

Kim Dong-Jo: Thailand is going ahead also. I spoke to their Ambassador last night.

Habib: That is related to China.

Secretary Kissinger: It is also related to Indochina.

Ambassador Hahm: What about Pakistan?

Secretary Kissinger: We have talked to them many times. I have done it myself. We have had no luck.

Ambassador Hahm: Now Sri Lanka is doing it.

Habib: They had a bad experience earlier.

Ambassador Hahm: They are still going ahead.

Kim Dong-Jo: We need a contingency plan for the UN matter.

Secretary Kissinger: Can I get one?

Habib: We will get you one.

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy Files, P820123–1061. Secret; Nodis. Drafted by Smyser and approved by Gompert.

267. Telegram 2685 From the Embassy in the Republic of Korea to the Department of State, April 18, 1975, 0933Z. 267. Telegram 2685 From the Embassy in the Republic of Korea to the Department of State, April 18, 1975, 0933Z.1

April 18, 1975, 0933Z

TELEGRAM
Department of State
SEOUL 2685

R 180933Z APR 75

FM AMEMBASSY SEOUL TO SECSTATE WASHDC 9529

SEOUL 2685

DEPARTMENT PASS CINCPAC FOR POLAD

EO 11652: GDS
TAGS: PINT, PFOR, KS

SUBJECT: ROK VIEWS OF US SECURITY COMMITMENT

1. EMBASSY REPORTING OF PAST TWO WEEKS HAS PROVIDED CONSIDERABLE DETAIL ON THE SHOCK EFFECT ON KOREA OF RECENT DEVELOPMENTS RELATED TO INDOCHINA. ALL OF US HAVE BEEN OUT ON THE HUSTINGS AND I PERSONALLY HAVE MET WITH MOST OF THE TOP LEVELS IN ROK ESTABLISHMENT, IN ACTIVE EFFORT TO COUNTERACT TO EXTENT POSSIBLE ADVERSE IMPACT HERE OF THESE DEVELOPMENTS. WHILE I HAVE NOT SEEN PRESIDENT PARK, I AM CONFIDENT THAT OUR WORDS ARE GETTING THROUGH TO HIM AND I AM RECEIVING A FAIRLY ACCURATE PLAYBACK ON HIS MOOD FROM OTHERS IN CLOSE CONTACT WITH HIM.

2. THE APPROACH WE HAVE TAKEN WITH THE KOREANS IS ESSENTIALLY THREEFOLD: A. CONFIDENCE-BUILDING — UTILIZING THE VERY HELPFUL STATEMENT BY THE PRESIDENT APRIL 10 PLUS OTHER SIMILAR HIGH LEVEL US PUBLIC AND PRIVATE REASSURANCES, WE HAVE STRESSED THE FIRMNESS OF OUR COMMITMENT TO KOREA BASED UPON TREATY, A VERY SUBSTANTIAL US MILITARY PRESENCE, AND AN UNDERLYING US STRATEGIC INTEREST IN DEFENSE OF NORTHEAST ASIA WITH KOREA AS THE CRUCIAL FLANK OF JAPAN.

B. KOREA-VIETNAM DIFFERENCES — WE HAVE GOVE INTO SOME DETAIL IN POINTING UP THE DIFFERENCES BETWEEN VIETNAM AND KOREA, WITH RESPECT TO THE INTERNAL SITUATIONS IN BOTH COUNTRIES THE NATURE OF THE US COMMITMENTS, AND THEIR DIFFERENT STRATEGIC POSITIONS.

C. DOMESTIC POLITICAL POLICIES — WE HAVE POINTED OUT IMPACT OF ROKG DOMESTIC POLITICAL ACTIONS ON CONGRESSIONAL AND PUBLIC SUPPORT FOR US COMMITMENTS TO KOREA AND URGED THE ROKG TO VIEW TREATY RELATIONSHIP AS TWO-WAY STREET IMPOSING OBLIGATIONS ON ITS PART AND TO RECOGNIZE THE CONTINUED POTENTIAL FOR INFLUENCING US OPINION POSITIVELY.

3. OUR JUDGMENT IS THAT THESE EFFORTS, COMBINED WITH LESS EMOTIONAL SECOND THOUGHTS ON PART OF MANY ROK OFFICIALS, HAVE SOFTENED THE ALMOST PANICKY INITIAL REACTION HERE. IN PARTICULAR, KOREANS ARE NOW FAR LESS PRONE TO DRAW INVIDIOUS PARALLELS BETWEEN KOREA AND VIETNAM AND ARE WRITING OFF VIETNAM WITHOUT TOTALLY LOSING CONFIDENCE IN THEIR OWN SURVIVABILITY. NEVERTHELESS THERE REMAINS A SERIOUS CONFIDENCE-GAP AND MANY ASPECTS OF A "SIEGE MENTALITY", PARTICULARLY IN THE BLUE HOUSE. WITHOUT MAKING ANY BROAD PUBLIC ANNOUNCEMENTS IN FASHION OF MARCOS, KOREAN LEADERSHIP IS MAKING ITS OWN PAINFUL POLICY REASSESSMENT, IN LIGHT OF FEARS KOREA MAY BE NEXT TARGET OF COMMUNISTS AND NEXT TEST OF US RESOLVE.

4. DEPENDING ON LEVEL OF KOREAN GOVERNMENT AND BASIC PREJUDICE OF INDIVIDUALS, THERE IS CONSIDERABLE VARIANCE IN REACTION TO CURRENT DEVELOPMENTS. WHAT FOLLOWS REFLECTS ESSENTIALLY OUR PERCEPTION OF VIEWS HELD BY PRESIDENT AND HIS MORE HARD NOSED MILITARY AND OTHER ADVISORS — WHO HAVE DOMINANT VOICE IN KOREAN POLICY.

5. KEY ASPECTS OF TOP LEVEL KOREAN ATTITUDES MAY BE SUMMARIZED AS FOLLOWS: A. THERE IS NO PRESENT ALTERNATIVE TO CONTINUED DEPENDENCE ON US. IN SHORT RUN, KOREA HAS NO OTHER POLICY OPTIONS, WITH ANY DEPENDENCE ON JAPAN PARTICULARLY OUT OF QUESTION. B. US COMMITMENT TO KOREA IS SUSPECT. WHILE ROKG BOLSTERED BY ADMINISTRATION STATEMENTS, FOCAL POINT OF CONCERN IS CONGRESSIONAL ATTITUDES AND FEAR THAT IN CONFLICT SITUATION CONGRESS (AND AMERICAN PUBLIC) MAY — AS IN CASE VIETNAM — DENY FUNDS AND USE OF US FORCES NEEDED TO DEFEND KOREA AND EVEN FORCE US TROOP WITHDRAWALS BEFORE THEN.

C. KOREA MUST THEREFORE MOVE RAPIDLY AS POSSIBLE TO SELF-RELIANCE. OVER LONGER RUN, KOREA'S ONLY ALTERNATIVE IS TO ACHIEVE A DEGREE OF SELF-RELIANCE THAT WILL CUSHION POSSIBLE LOSS OF US SUPPORT BEFORE OR DURING CONFLICT.

D. DESPITE HIGH LEVEL US PRONOUNCEMENTS OF SUPPORT US ADMIN-IS THWARTING SELF-RELIANCE PROGRAM. ROKG IS INCREASINGLY CONVINCED THAT SERIES OF DECISIONS TO DENY IT ACCESS TO HIGHER LEVELS OF MILITARY-ORIENTED TECHNOLOGY AMOUNT TO DELIBERATE US POLICY OF HOLDING IT ON TIGHT LEASH, WILL RESULT IN LEAVING IT IN WEAKENED VIS-A VIS NORTH KOREA SHOULD US FORCES PULL OUT. AMBASSADOR HAHM, RIGHT AFTER MEETING WITH PRESIDENT PARK, POSED THIS ISSUE IN EVEN STARKER TERMS BY ASKING ME WHAT WOULD THE ROK DO IF NORTH KOREA DEVELOPED NUCLEAR CAPABILITY SHOULD THE US LEAVE KOREA.

E. IN PRESENT CRISIS AND WITH HEIGHTENED THREAT FROM NORTH, DOMESTIC DISCIPLINE AND CONTROL MUST BE GIVEN HIGHEST PRIORITY. ROKG HAS UTILIZED PRESENT CRISIS AS FURTHER RATIONALE FOR ADOPTING WHAT COMES NATURALLY — TIGHTER AUTHORITARIAN REGIME INTOLERANT OF OPPOSITION.

F. US FAILS TO UNDERSTAND NEED FOR INTERNAL DISCIPLINE AND IN FACT ENCOURAGES OPPOSITION. THERE IS GNAWING SUSPICION THAT VIEWS OF AMERICAN PRESS AND CONGRESSIONAL CRITICS MAY WELL BE SHARED BY ADMINISTRATION AND THAT SUPPORT IN US FOR OPPOSITION MAY BE AIMED AT UNDERMINING POSITION OF PRESIDENT PARK, PERSONALLY. FURTHERMORE, ROKG QUESTIONS WHETHER IT CAN SATISFY US CRITICS WITHOUT OPENING COUNTRY TO SUCH UNREST AS TO INVITE NORTH KOREAN OPERATIONS IN SOUTH.

G. US DOES NOT APPRECIATE SERIOUSNESS OF NORTH KOREAN THREAT. US UNWILLINGNESS TO SHARE EXAGGERATED FEARS OF ROKG OR TO CONDONE TIGHT INTERNAL DISCIPLINE ADD UP TO LACK OF ADEQUATE US SUPPORT FOR ROK DEFENSE.

5. IT IS SELF-EVIDENT THAT SOME OF THE MORE EXTREME CONCERNS ABOUT US ATTITUDES ARE BASED UPON AN EMOTIONAL AND EVEN TO SOME EXTENT IRRATIONAL REACTION TO RECENT DEVELOPMENTS. IN FACT, THE MOST WORRISOME ASPECT OF THE CURRENT SITUATION IN KOREA IS THE DANGER OF EMOTIONALLY STIMULATED ROK DECISIONS IN AN ATMOSPHERE OF INCREASING SUSPICION AND CONCERN THAT NORTH KOREA MIGHT BE EMBOLDENED TO TEST THE US COMMITMENT AND THE STRENGTH OF ROK INTERNAL SUPPORT BY PROVOCATIVE MEASURES. KOREAN FEARS WILL CONTINUE TO BE FED BY ADVERSE DEVELOPMENTS IN VIETNAM AND KIM IL-SUNG VISIT TO PEKING.

6. ON THE OTHER HAND, WE MUST RECOGNIZE THAT SOME OF THESE VIEWS ARE BASED UPON LEGITIMATE CONCERNS ABOUT DIRECTION OF US POLICY. OUR RECOMMENDATIONS ON POLICY WILL BE SENT SEPTEL.

SNEIDER

NOTE BY OC/T: NOT PASSED

1 Source: National Archives, Record Group 59, Central Foreign Policy Files. Secret; Exdis. The Embassy in Seoul sent a telegram of policy recommendations to bolster ROK security on April 22. (Telegram 2807 from Seoul; Ford Library, National Security Adviser, Presidential Country Files for East Asia and the Pacific, Box 11, Korea, State Department Telegrams to SECSTATE, NODIS [5])

268. National Security Study Memorandum 226, Washington, May 27, 1975. 268. National Security Study Memorandum 226, Washington, May 27, 1975.1

Washington, May 27, 1975

NATIONAL SECURITY COUNCIL
WASHINGTON D.C. 20506

May 27, 1975

National Security Study Memorandum 226

TO: The Secretary of Defense
The Deputy Secretary of State
The Director of Central Intelligence

SUBJECT: Review of U.S. Policy Toward the Korean Peninsula

The President has directed an assessment of U.S. policy toward the Korean Peninsula. The study should examine U.S. interests and objectives toward the Korean Peninsula, and the combined political and military strategy that would flow from these interests and objectives over the next three to five years.

The study should assume a continuation of the alliance between the United States and the Republic of Korea.

The study's consideration of factors bearing on U.S. interests and objectives should include, but not necessarily be limited to, the following: — The threat from North Korea, and the extent of support that North Korea is likely to get from the Peoples Republic of China, the Soviet Union, and Third World countries.

— The impact of Indochina developments on North Korean and South Korean policies.

— The arms competition between the two Koreas.

— The diplomatic competition between the two Koreas, including the role of U.N. actions on the United Nations Command.

— The North-South dialogue.

— Japan's orientation toward North and South Korea and toward the U.S. security role in South Korea.

The study's examination of policy issues should include, but should not necessarily be limited to, the following: — The U.S. force presence in South Korea, and the termination of the United Nations Command.

— The U.S. response to North Korean aggression.

— U.S. military assistance, including the transfer of advanced weapons and technology and the South Korean interest in nuclear weapons development.

— The U.S. position toward the relative international standing of the two Koreas and toward great power relations with the Peninsula.

— The North-South dialogue, and how the major powers might relate to the process between the two Koreas.

— South Korea's future regional role in Northeast Asia.

— The U.S. position towards South Korea's internal political developments.

The study should be prepared by the NSC Inter-Departmental Group for East Asia, and should be submitted no later than June 30, 1975, for consideration by the Senior Review Group.

[Brent Scowcroft signed for]
Henry A. Kissinger

cc: The Chairman, Joint Chiefs of Staff

1 Source: Ford Library, NSC Institutional Files (H-Files), Box H–36, NSSM 226, Review of U.S. Policy Toward the Korean Peninsula. Secret; Nodis. A copy was sent to the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff.

269. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, June 12, 1975, 4 p.m. 269. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, June 12, 1975, 4 p.m. 1

Washington, June 12, 1975, 4 p.m.

DEPARTMENT OF STATE
Memorandum of Conversation

DATE: June 12, 1975
Time: 4:00 p.m.

SUBJECT: Korean and other Subjects

PARTICIPANTS:

The Secretary

The Deputy Secretary

Philip C. Habib, Assistant Secretary for East Asia and Pacific Affairs

Robert Blake, Acting Assistant Secretary for International Relations

Winston Lord, Director Policy Planning Staff

Daniel O’Donohue, Country Director for Korea Affairs, Notetaker

Copies to: S; LPB; WH-Mr. Rodman; S/S

The Secretary: Phil, can you write your report in a way the President will understand it?

Mr. Habib: You have my report. We would have to do a separate report.

The Secretary: Don't always argue with me. Do a report with the main themes and a few individual vignettes. Do it by tomorrow for my signature. I read your report. It is a good report.

Mr. Habib: First, we thought we would give you a report on the Korean Question and the UN. Bob, do you want to?

Mr. Blake: Tomorrow we are meeting with the Vice Minister of Foreign Affairs to go over detailed planning for the UN. The first step is a letter to the Security Council —

The Secretary: Phil, can you tell me why the State Department is recommending that we cut military assistance to Korea? Schlesinger called me and said that State wants to cut $50 million from Korea's aid. I want you to know my job is not to resolve disputes between the Agencies.

Mr. Habib: We asked for $176 million?

The Secretary: Defense wants $200 million.

The Deputy Secretary: Aren't there special circumstances? Defense wants to spread the Cambodian Aid money over several countries.

The Secretary: Why wasn't I given an opportunity to approve this? Why wasn't I informed there were differences between State and Defense. There is a great skill in this Department in not bringing these matters to my attention.

The Deputy Secretary: We are considering increasing funds in Indonesia and the Philippines.

The Secretary: Even if every Bureau in this Department agrees, I may not want to agree. However, I am totally defenseless if I don't know these issues. If Defense is willing to carry the ball, why can't we agree to asking for more money?

The Deputy Secretary: The big problem is that we can't get a bill through Congress.

The Secretary: I would like to hear the arguments for increasing aid.

Mr. Habib: We could add to the Indonesian and Thai programs.

The Secretary: I object to situations when the Bureaus agree but I don't even know what is going on.

The Deputy Secretary: I thought that Carl had informed you of the figures.

The Secretary: I have to know what the issues are. They shouldn't just run figures by me. I certainly did not know Defense disagreed.

The Deputy Secretary: We will look into this.

The Secretary: All right, but for bureaucratic reasons as well as policy I want to move our position closer to Defense.

Mr. Blake: We have general agreement with the Koreans on the letter. We hope to consult next week with the principal allies.

Mr. Habib: Tell the Secretary the principal elements of our letter.

Mr. Blake: First of all, we state our willingness to terminate the U.N. Command, subject to agreement by the other side, in January. Second, we indicate our readiness to reduce the U.N. Command profile.

The Secretary: Why reduce the profile before we terminate the Command?

Mr. Blake: To get votes in the United Nations.

The Secretary: Where would we reduce?

Phil, you can't fall asleep in the Secretary's office.

Mr. Lord: He woke up at 4 this morning.

The Secretary: Why did you get up then? Did you get in this morning?

Mr. Habib: No, I got in yesterday. With regard to the U.N. Command we plan to reduce the flags, and other manifestations of the UN presence.

The Secretary: Why?

Mr. Habib: You have the UN flag and other UN symbols flying over every base and used by every soldier in the country.

The Secretary: Who is the UN Commander?

Mr. Habib: General Stilwell.

The Secretary: Why do we have the separate military commands?

Mr. Habib: They need to trim the headquarters.

The Secretary: What is U.S. forces in Korea? Does it include the air force?

Mr. Habib Yes, the air force and the navy. 8th Army is the army headquarters and for logistics. The situation is not as bad now as it was. They have brought the two headquarters together. Last year — wasn't it, Dan?

The Secretary: Where are the headquarters located?

Mr. Habib: Seoul. The air force headquarters is at Osan. The navy is divided between Chinhae and Seoul. The navy has no American ships but the American Commander runs the ROK navy.

The Secretary: If the UN Command goes, we won't need that admiral in charge.

Mr. Habib: No, not necessarily so. If the UN Command goes, you can have another kind of structure to handle this.

Let's presume North Koreans and Chinese agree to our proposal on UN Command termination — I don't expect it — we would then have to work out another arrangement with the Koreans. We have started talking.

The Secretary: You don't think the Chinese and North Koreans will agree?

Mr. Habib: No.

The Secretary: Why not?

Mr. Habib: The North Koreans will continue to press for the UN Command dissolution and U.S. forces withdrawal.

Mr. Lord: Peking has cooled the North Koreans down militarily but is strongly supporting their UN efforts.

Mr. Habib: By lowering our profile, we would gain votes.

The Secretary: How is New York going to turn out?

Mr. Habib: We have a tough fight on our hands. Remember the Cambodian issue where everyone thought we were going to lose the vote.

The Secretary: We lost the country.

Mr. Blake: The next step is inscription and priority of our item.

The Secretary: You better make clear to Moynihan that we want a bloody fight on this issue.

Mr. Blake: We have talked to him on this issue. He knows.

The Koreans agree with us on our approach — in fact, they are out in front of us.

Mr. Habib: They are willing to consider dismantling the UN Command to avoid a defeat.

The Secretary: This would be OK except for the US forces withdrawal part.

Mr. Habib: On that point we could clearly defeat a resolution against the U.S. forces if it was without the reference to the UN Command. I don't think we would lose on that. It's the UN part that makes it difficult.

Mr. Blake: I agree.

The Secretary: What would the Chinese and North Koreans do if we drop the UN Command?

Mr. Habib: They would continue to press for the US forces removal in New York but that is not the problem. I believe they would continue the Armistice Agreement tacitly, but interpret it to their purposes. For instance, they could make an argument that the Northwest Islands are within their territorial waters and, without the UN Command, their territory.

Mr. Lord: There is the Japanese base problem.

Mr. Habib: We would lose the bases. This is a straw-man. If the Japanese did not want us to use the bases, we could not use them anyhow.

Mr. Lord: I know, but they are under the UN umbrella. I don't object but we should pin the Japanese down on this. We should talk to the Japanese.

Mr. Habib: We will, after we have talked to the Koreans.

The Secretary: You have discussed all this with the Koreans? What have I got to agree with?

Mr. Habib: You agreed with this approach.

The Secretary: Don't give me that baloney. Do you think that I understand all of these issues?

Mr. Habib: Of course.

Mr. Lord: Phil, there is one difference — the January one termination date. That is new.

Mr. Blake: You are right.

The Secretary: The Koreans agree?

Mr. Habib: Yes.

Mr. Blake: Yes, but they are doubtful about the success of even what we propose. They are very pessimistic. If things don't go well, we expect them to again propose we terminate the UN Command.

Mr. Habib: The Koreans are more pessimistic than we are. We believe we should proceed on our present course for now and look at the question again closer to the UNGA. We don't have to make any final decision on the UN Command future at this time. We may have to look at this again closer to the UNGA.

The Secretary: Of course. What else?

Mr. Habib: The Fraser hearings.

The Secretary: What are they about? Fraser wants a letter to Park?

Mr. Habib: No, you indicated that you wanted to see us about the Fraser letter to McCloskey. Fraser wants to see you, too. Fraser has a series of hearings on human rights. He is interested in Korea, the Philippines, and Indonesia.

The Secretary: He is out of his mind. We don't have that kind of bargaining position.

Mr. Habib: On the Philippines and Indonesia, I agree. Korea is different. If we don't approach Park, Fraser might try to end MAP or cut US forces. I believe he hasn't got the votes for this. However, he can raise hob. He can cut the MAP levels and embarrass us greatly. Under Emergency Measure 9 Park has eliminated almost every guarantee to free speech. He is trying the Secretary General of the Korean Council of Churches and the country's most distinguished poet — every soft-headed person here, PEN —

The Secretary: Why is he doing this?

Mr. Habib: Because the poet writes nasty things about Park. He calls the government corrupt. Park doesn't like this.

The Secretary: Why does Park face opposition?

Mr. Habib: Park is determined to avoid any opportunity for his opposition to get control. The opposition can overthrow Park by unleashing the mob. I mean by the mob, the students. He doesn't want to give them a chance to do this.

The Secretary: That is understandable.

Mr. Habib: It is in our interest to get Park to moderate his actions. Did you see the Evans/Novak column?

The Secretary: What did it say?

Mr. Habib: Park explained the basis for his policy. He indicated he is not prepared to lose control over the situation because of the external threat from the North.

The Secretary: I did read the Political Science lecture sent up to me by EA.

Mr. Habib: I read it for the first time today.

Such an approach will not change Park. However, Park will understand an approach. He told you once if there was anything he was doing which caused us problems, to let him know. I think he will interpret an approach this way.

The Secretary: Let me see a rewrite. The first sentence needs changing. We are concerned about the impact on our policy but —

The Deputy Secretary: Fraser has modified his position. He is concerned about stability in the area. He has softened his position on public actions which would...

Mr. Habib: Fraser is trying to build a record first on Korea — then the Philippines and then Indonesia.

Mr. Lord: What if we approach Park and he doesn't do anything?

Mr. Habib: Fraser will...

The Secretary: Fraser will insist that even Kissinger could not get Park to change and then lower the boom.

Mr. Lord: What about the impact of Park's policies on the domestic situation.

The Secretary: If there is an overthrow, we would have another strongman, except probably Leftist.

Mr. Habib: There was a democratic government for about 8 months. It was chaotic although just when it was settling down, Park then ran a coup.

The Secretary: As a nation our competence seems to be in undermining our friends.

Mr. Habib: The problem is not to replace Park, but how to get him to moderate.

The Secretary: Re-do the telegram. I will look at it.

Mr. Lord: I am concerned that the human rights problem might erode the ROK domestic cohesion.

Mr. Habib: President Park is creating a situation for North Korea to exploit.

The Secretary: I would not recommend what he is doing. I do know that to monkey around with Marcos on this is a disaster.

Mr. Habib: Marcos is a buzz saw on this. He will tell us he has the situation under control and that he has faced insurgents, an assassination plot. Moreover, Marcos succeeded to chaos. In Park's case he did not need the suppression. Park's suppression has succeeded moderation. For many years he followed a moderate policy.

The Secretary: I don't mind doing something. I am not opposed to a telegram.

Mr. Habib: We will re-do it.

[Omitted is material unrelated to Korea.]

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy Files, P820123–1364. Secret; Nodis. Drafted by O’Donohue and approved by Covey.

270. Memorandum of Conversation, Seoul, August 27, 1975. 270. Memorandum of Conversation, Seoul, August 27, 1975.1

Seoul, August 27, 1975

MEMORANDUM OF CONVERSATION

PARTICIPANTS

President Park Chung Hee

Minister of Defense Suh Jyong-chul

ROK Chairman of JCS Ro Jae -hyun

Secretary General, Kim Chong-yom

Senior Protocol Secretary, Choi Kwan-soo

Secretary of Defense James R. Schlesinger

Ambassador Richard L. Sneider

General Richard G. Stilwell

Chairman, JCS, General George S. Brown

CINCPAC, Admiral Noel A.M. Gaylen

Military Assistant to Secretary of Defense, Maj Gen John A. Wickham

TIME & PLACE: President Park's Office, August 27, 1975

During the pre-lunch and luncheon conversation, three areas of particular interest were covered.

1. JAPAN

President Park discussed his concerns about the Japanese attitude toward Korea, particularly his fears about the leftward drift in the Japanese political scene when the younger generation takes over and the diminution of Japanese economic assistance to Korea. During the discussion, Secretary Schlesinger said that he proposed to discuss with Prime Minister Miki the need for greater Japanese economic assistance to Korea.

2. HUMAN RIGHTS

In the course of discussing recent Congressional visits to Korea, Secretary Schlesinger noted that President Park, as a result of these visits, must be aware of Congressional attitudes on human rights and the problems it has caused the Administration.

3. ASW

President Park described his rationale for acquisition of submarines. He said that, in order to deal with the North Korean submarine threat both during a period of conflict and to present infiltration and subversive efforts, he wished to acquire a comparable capability. He felt that, if the ROK had similar capability, North Korea would not utilize its submarines. Secretary Schlesinger suggested that there are probably more cost-effective ways for dealing with the North Korean submarine threat than purchasing or building submarines in the South. He mentioned use of P–3's and sensors for the detection and if necessary destruction of the submarines. He also stressed the vulnerability of the North Korean ports to mining and other techniques to close these ports. It was agreed that the U.S. would provide experts to review the options available to deal with the North Korean submarine threat. In addition, the Secretary asked General Brown and Admiral Gayler to look into P–3 operations in the Korean area.

1 Source: Ford Library, National Security Adviser, Presidential Country Files for East Asia and the Pacific, Box 9, Korea (11). Secret; Sensitive; Nodis. The conversation took place in President Park’s Office. The discussion occurred before and during lunch. Howard Graves, Military Assistant in the Office of the Secretary of Defense, sent this memcon to Scowcroft on September 9.

271. Memorandum of Conversation, Seoul, August 27, 1975. 271. Memorandum of Conversation, Seoul, August 27, 1975.1

Seoul, August 27, 1975

MEMORANDUM OF CONVERSATION

PARTICIPANTS:

President Park Chung Hee

Minister of Defense Suh Jyong-chul

Ro Jae-hyun, ROK Chairman of Joint Chiefs of Staff

Kim Chong-yam, Secretary General

Choi Kwan-soo Senior Protocol Secretary

Secretary of Defense James R Schlesinger

Ambassador Richard L. Sneider

General Richard G. Stilwell

Admiral Noel A.M. Gayler, CINCPAC

General George S. Brown, Chairman, JCS

Major General John A. Wickham, Military Assistant to SecDef

TINE & PLACE: President Park's Office, August 27, 1975

NORTH KOREAN THREAT

After an exchange of initial greetings, President Park made a lengthy presentation focusing on his current assessment of the North Korean threat and the ROKG Force Improvements Requirement Plane.

After the collapse of Vietnam, there was a high degree of tension in Korea with the South Korean people anxious and the North Koreans encouraged to launch an attack against the South. The situation in Korea, however, has now stabilized due to two major factors: (1) U.S. statements on reaffirming U.S. commitments and issuing public warnings to North Korea; and (2) the unity and determination demonstrated in the Republic of Korea. North Korea is now frustrated and no longer encouraged to launch an attack. It has changed its tactics and is pressing a "peace offensive."

Secretary Schlesinger agreed that the North Korean moves were tactical and suggested that the counter-strategy is to keep North Korea engaged in a "peace offensive."

President Park stressed that war on the Korean peninsula will be due to miscalculation on the part of Kim Il-sung. If Kim thinks that the ROK can not cope with an attack, then he will attack even though North Korea will not succeed militarily. There is always a danger that Kim might miscalculate and therefore the outbreak of war depends on Kim's assessment of the situation in the South. To prevent miscalculation, President Park suggested that we must make our intent and determination to resist aggression known and back these words by deeds, specifically by building up ROK military capabilities. In this connection, Secretary Schlesinger's visit is a very significant demonstration of U.S. resolve to meet its commitment and a clear warning to North Korea. The President said that he had been briefed on the Secretary's talks with Minister Suh and was pleased by the unity and friendship demonstrated therein and the common resolve to defend against a North Korean attack.

ROK FORCE IMPROVEMENT

President Park went on to describe his plans for strengthening the ROK armed forces, thanking Secretary Schlesinger for his understanding attitude. He said that in the past the ROK had been too dependant on the United States and relied too much on the United States. It is now determined to defend itself and lessen the U.S. burden. It has, therefore, adapted a plan for self-reliant defense "YOLKUK." This plan contemplates upgrading the combat capabilities of the ROK so that it can defend itself alone against a North Korean attack which does not have substantial help from the USSR or PRC. President Park hopes to accomplish this goal in five years. A large sum will be needed to fund the plan and as much as possible of these funds will come from ROK resources, specifically from the new defense tax levied over the next five years. Under the plan, naval and air force capabilities, now inferior to the North, will be upgraded and the mobility and fire power of the ground forces will likewise be improved. In addition, the homeland reserve will be armed with new equipment.

President Park said that the new plan needs American understanding, support, and cooperation. He also urged expediting completion of the modernization plan which is now behind schedule. Finally, he requested U.S. assistance in building up Korea's defense industry.

President Park asked that the level of U.S. forces be maintained until the five year plan is accomplished. He had met and explained his plan to a number of members of the U.S. Congress. They asked whether after five years the United States would be able to withdraw. President Park said that we must keep in mind that, even though the South would be able to deal alone with the North, North Korea is allied to the USSR and the PRC which need only cross a river to support North Korea. The role of the United States is to prevent war and to maintain the delicate balance of power in Northeast Asia. Therefore, even after the five year plan is completed a substantial level of U.S. forces will be needed in South Korea. President Park said that most Congressmen agreed with his views.

COMMENTS BY SECRETARY SCHLESINGER

The Secretary said that he concurred with the basic structure of President Park's planning, but had several comments. With respect to the level of U.S. forces, he foresees no basic changes over the next five years. The overall strength of the U.S. forces will not be affected, but there will be adjustments in detail to enhance the common defense structure of the United States in Korea. Furthermore, for the foreseeable future, we will have to maintain the overall complementarity of the U.S.-ROK forces. The principal deficiencies in the ROK forces are close air support, armor, and logistics, and these will have to be shored-up.

The Secretary said that he anticipated South Korea will make progress with regard to its capability for dealing with the North, but he does not believe it is necessary for the South to hold the ring against the USSR and the PRC should they be inclined to support North Korea. That role will be played by the U.S. Therefore, it is an illusion to view South Korea as entirely dependant and self-reliant. The U.S. must maintain forces in Northeast Asia and in the Western Pacific to deal with these super powers. In order to enhance the U.S. image in this respect, we plan in the immediate future to rotate into South Korea assets which will be most visible against the Chinese and Soviet threat, such as F-111's.

Secretary Schlesinger urged even close joint defense planning for both military and political reasons. He explained that one problem in the U.S. is the view that South Korea is not doing enough in its own defense. The new Korean force improvement plan helps very much in this respect. Secretary Schlesinger then urged that the improvement in the ROK force structure not be implemented in such a way as to damage Korea's international economic position, given its current balance of payments problem. He suggested that the ROK assure that off-shore acquisition of weapons be carefully considered on a cost effective basis so as to limit its impact on the balance of payments deficit. He also suggested that, given Korea's need to maintain its credit worthiness with commercial banks, it avoid publicly making war appear likely, which could have a very bad effect on the banks. He urges that Korea build its economy and defense for the long-term and not take short-term actions impairing its economic future.

Secretary Schlesinger said that the U.S. would be willing to assist in the development of Korea's defense industry and to review the most effective areas for assistance. He suggested logistics, armor, and artillery as the areas with the most serious deficiencies.

The Secretary then discussed Korea's position in relation to international politics. In the wake of the Vietnam debacle, there had been understandable concerns. He wished, however, to stress that U.S. adversaries should gain no comfort from Vietnam. The American public had been bewildered by the Vietnam War. There will be no more Vietnams. This means that we will not permit ourselves to be engaged in another unsuccessful, long war. Instead, we will deal with conflict with adequate determination and force. A North Korea miscalculation would be tragic for the North.

Korea is an important element in the global balance of power. Soviet tactical ploys at the present time do not portend any change in the fundamental Soviet objective to expand its power and influence. The PRC is apprehensive. Detente is misunderstood. For detente to be successful, we need to maintain the balance of power without any expansion of Soviet influence. What happens in Korea affects the balance of power elsewhere and vice versa. Europe is affected by the expansion of Soviet power in Korea while flabbiness in Europe has its effect on Korea.

President Park expressed his strong appreciation for the Secretary's remarks, particularly the comments on balance of payments problems, defense industry development, and the relationship of Korea to the security of the rest of the world. He recognized that, while Korea improves its defense capabilities, it must at the same time develop its economy.

1 Source: Ford Library, National Security Adviser, Presidential Country Files for East Asia and the Pacific, Box 9, Korea (11). Secret; Sensitive; Nodis. The conversation took place in President Park’s Office. Howard Graves, Military Assistant in the Office of the Secretary of Defense, sent this memcon to Scowcroft on September 9.

272. Memorandum of Conversation, Seoul, August 27, 1975. 272. Memorandum of Conversation, Seoul, August 27, 1975.1

Seoul, August 27, 1975

MEMORANDUM OF CONVERSATION

PARTICIPANTS:

President Park Chung Hee

Senior Protocol Secretary, Choi Kwan-soo

Secretary of Defense James R. Schlesinger

Ambassador Richard L. Sneider

NUCLEAR MATTERS

Noting that he had discussed the problem with President Ford, Secretary Schlesinger said that the U.S. attached extreme importance to the NPT. This entirely underscored the wisdom of the ROK adherence to the treaty which we warmly welcomed. The ROK action avoided a very serious political problem in the U.S. where major elements attached particular importance to NPT. The Secretary stressed that the only thing that could undermine the political relationship between the U.S. and the ROK would be the Korean effort to acquire its own nuclear weapons.

The Secretary added that substantively the ROK adherence to the NPT is a sound policy. The problem is not only in the U.S., but elsewhere. We wish to preclude [text not declassified] ambitions to acquire nuclear weapons. [text not declassified] Furthermore, in the complementarity between the U.S. and ROK forces, the U.S. is best suited to provide nuclear deterrence on behalf of its allies. We can deal with nuclear threats against a central power in a way that smaller nuclear powers cannot. We can deter Soviet nuclear threats while the ROK could not and a ROK effort to develop its own nuclear weapons would end up providing the Soviets with justification for threatening the ROK with nuclear weapons. In conclusion, the Secretary offered to explain the logic to nuclear deterrence policy in the next SCM.

President Park assured the Secretary that ROK had every intention of living up to the NPT. He explained the comments reported by Bob Novak. Novak had questioned him on what the ROK would do in case the U.S. nuclear protection was removed. Park had replied that he did not think the U.S. would remove its nuclear umbrella. But Novak persisted and asked whether in such a case the ROK would give consideration to developing nuclear weapons. Park had responded that the ROK did have the capabilities to start research but had no intention to do so under the present circumstances. Park said that his comments to Novak had been misinterpreted, and there had been misunderstanding on the part of the Canadian Government during negotiations for a nuclear reactor. On the other hand if he said nothing, it would be a blow to the morale of the Korean people. He again assured the Secretary that the ROK would live up to its Treaty obligations.

Secretary Schlesinger commented that it would be best if nuclear weapons were not involved in Korea. If a weapon were used against Pyongyang perhaps 20-30,000 people would be killed. On the other hand, if the Soviets launched a nuclear attack on Seoul 3 million people would be killed since Seoul's vulnerability is far greater than Pyongyang. While the U.S. is prepared to view the Soviet nuclear threat, we would plan to be exceedingly cautious on employment of nuclear weapons due to the vulnerability of South Korea.

President Park expressed agreement with the Secretary's views. The Secretary's statements on tactical nuclear weapons had boosted Korean morale, but we should cope with a North Korean attack without the use of nuclear weapons.

[text not declassified]

U.S. COMMITMENT

Secretary Schlesinger said that President Ford is unequivocal in his support of Korea. This view goes back to 1950 when President Ford was angered by the previous withdrawal of U.S. forces. In fact, pressures to reduce the U.S. overseas deployment in Congress have weakened. There was no effort during the 1975 Congress nor is one expected in 1976. The next effort to legislate reduction of overseas deployment, he expects, would be in 1977. The secretary said he is not concerned either about such efforts. He expects President Ford to be re-elected, but if not the Democrats are not likely to eliminate U.S. support for South Korea. As an example of the change of opinion in the left of the U.S., he cited Senator Eagleton's recent statement.

One of the lessons of Vietnam is that the left now understands the illusion of U.S. withdrawal and that the Paris Peace Accords would bring peace. They now understand that if the balance of power shifts the Communists will act aggressively. This lesson is specifically relevant to Korea.

U.S. COMMANDERS

President Park asked as a special personal favor from President Ford that General Stilwell and General Hollingsworth be retained for another year in Korea. He praised their contribution to Korea's defense and urged that they not be shifted during the next year which could be critical. Secretary Schlesinger said we have no intention of moving General Stilwell until his age of retirement at sixty and took note of the President's request with respect to General Hollingsworth.

NUCLEAR REPROCESSING

The Secretary, referring to the Ambassador's approaches on this question, said acquisition of a nuclear reprocessing plant also affects the efficiency of the broader nuclear issue he had discussed previously. As a former Chairman of the AEC, he could tell President Park that the economics of Plutonium reprocessing are difficult and involve high risk. General Electric has abandoned its plant and the cost of the Barnwell Plant have gone out of sight.

In his closing remarks, Secretary Schlesinger praised the political will he had found in Korea for defense of its country. This will was needed in Vietnam and Europe, but there is no need to instill it in Koreans. It is the ultimate source of strength for the Republic of Korea.

1 Source: Ford Library, National Security Adviser, Presidential Country Files for East Asia and the Pacific, Box 9, Korea (11). Secret; Nodis. The conversation took place in President Park’s Office. The meeting time is unrecorded. Howard Graves, Military Assistant in the Office of the Secretary of Defense, sent this memcon to Scowcroft on September 9.

273. Memorandum From Thomas J. Barnes of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Deputy Assistant for National Security Affairs (Scowcroft), Washington, September 29, 1975. 273. Memorandum From Thomas J. Barnes of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Deputy Assistant for National Security Affairs (Scowcroft), Washington, September 29, 1975.1

Washington, September 29, 1975

MEMORANDUM
NATIONAL SECURITY COUNCIL
ACTION

September 29, 1975

MEMORANDUM FOR GENERAL SCOWCROFT
FROM: THOMAS J. BARNES [TJB initialed]
SUBJECT: Secretary Schlesinger's Discussions in Seoul

Secretary Schlesinger sent an outline through you to the President on the principal issues that he intended to discuss with the Koreans during his trip to Seoul last month (Tab C). Attached at Tab B are three memoranda reporting his conversations in Seoul with President Park and Defense Minister Suh. There is no doubt Secretary Schlesinger's trip was highly successful in manifesting our commitment to our South Korean allies and in furthering our close alliance with Japan. On several points, however, Secretary Schlesinger went beyond the position set out in the outline. Some of his comments in Seoul also differed from the briefing papers that the Department of Defense prepared for the trip and go beyond the commitments the President made in his conversation with President Park on November 22, 1974. Secretary Schlesinger's comments appear to preempt several basic policy issues being considered in the Korean NSSM.

One basic issue is Secretary Schlesinger's commitment of automatic involvement by U.S. forces in the event of a North Korean attack. On this issue he went beyond any previous comment that I am aware of by high U.S. officials. Also on the question of U.S. involvement in the defense of the Northwest Islands, the Secretary initially kept to his brief but departed from it significantly later on. In a related matter, we are concerned about the manner in which General Stilwell has bored ahead without formal Washington approval with his "short-war strategy" for the defense of the ROK. In addition, Secretary Schlesinger informed the Koreans that U.S. force levels in Korea would remain unchanged for the next five years. A discussion of these points is at Tab A. I raised some of them with Mort Abramowitz and Bill Crowe on September 11.

In regard to the U.S. commitments to react to a North Korean attack, Mort explained that the President reportedly instructed Secretary Schlesinger to be as positive as possible with the South Koreans. I do not know what the President said, but I wonder whether he intended Secretary Schlesinger to go as far as he did. Mort acknowledges that Secretary Schlesinger came close to committing the U.S. to defend the Northwest Islands.

There has recently been an exchange of STADIS messages with Embassy Seoul on the question of the "short-war strategy" (Tabs D and E). Ambassador Sneider notes that State officials and others have been orally briefed, and he claims, incorrectly, that the JCS has approved the plan. He maintains that the concept is only a revision of the present defense plan and therefore not new. The concept of winning the war in "nine days," however, has serious implications. They include no planning for evacuation to the south, almost immediate U.S. air intervention, and possible use of tactical nuclear weapons.

RECOMMENDATION:

That you discuss these points with Secretary Kissinger and the President. That you ask General Wickham for information on the status of the "short-war strategy," as well as on DOD plans for seeking White House concurrence in any commitments that have implications for the nature of the U.S. role in the event of hostilities on the Korean Peninsula.

APPROVE [BS initialed]
DISAPPROVE

Concurrence:
Col Granger

1 Source: Ford Library, National Security Adviser, Presidential Country Files for East Asia and the Pacific, Box 9, Korea (12). Secret. Sent for action. The memorandum notes Granger’s concurrence, next to which is written “strongly concur.” Attached but not published are Tab A, undated comments on Schlesinger’s discussions in Seoul; Tab B, Schlesinger’s conversations with Park and Suh, which the NSC received under a covering memorandum, September 9, from Schlesinger’s Military Assistant Howard Graves to Scowcroft, and which are published as Documents 270–272; Tab C, an undated outline of Schlesinger’s anticipated discussions with Park. Tabs D and E are not attached, but refer to telegram 226183 to Seoul, September 23, and telegram 7547 from Seoul, September 25, both at the National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy Files. In response to telegram 7547, the Department sent telegram 234236 to Seoul, October 1; ibid. Scowcroft initialed his approval of the recommendation.

274. Study Prepared by the Office of International Security Affairs in the Department of Defense, Washington, undated. 274. Study Prepared by the Office of International Security Affairs in the Department of Defense, Washington, undated.1

Washington, undated

POLICY PROBLEMS IN KOREA

1. Present Situation. The military balance on the Peninsula is reasonably satisfactory. Both Koreas have powerful military machines, but it is unlikely that the somewhat better equipped North could conquer the South as long as the South receives U.S. materiel support. Hostility between the two Koreas remains as strong as ever and, despite intermittent direct talks commencing in 1972, shows no signs of abating. While both countries have dynamic economies, we think the long term edge is with the South. Given the virulent nature of North-South hostility and the heavy degree of armaments, we believe that our force presence has been an essential element in avoiding misperceptions and preserving the peace. As long as that presence continues, we do not think the North Koreans will initiate full scale hostilities. The lack of support for North Korean military adventures by the PRC and USSR reinforces such a judgment.

2. The Offshore Islands. While general hostilities are unlikely, we remain concerned about the possibility of military probes by the North Koreans, particularly in an election year and in an atmosphere where there is public doubt about the constancy of U.S. policy. Where we are most exposed and the obvious place for a probe are the five small islands in the Yellow Sea. Assigned under the 1953 armistice agreement to the jurisdiction of the UN Commander, they are regarded by the U.S. and the ROK as part of South Korea. The islands, however, lie well within the claimed territorial waters of North Korea (map attached at Tab B). President Park will never agree to abandon the islands peacefully. While not strategically or tactically important, their military loss would be severely damaging psychologically to the nation as a whole, erode President Park's personal stature, and, in turn, discredit the U.S.-South Korean relationship.

An attempt by Pyongyang to attack one or more of the islands would present us with a major crisis. Because of their location, the islands are exceedingly difficult to defend against a determined attack from North Korea. Given these difficulties and the ambiguous legal status of the islands, we are concerned that any military response to a North Korean effort would be met with less than wholehearted support in the Congress and the U.S. public at large. Faced with this possibility, we believe there is no choice but to encourage Seoul to defend the islands vigorously and by doing so hope to purchase enough time to determine how the USG wishes to respond. General Stilwell has worked with the Koreans over the past year to formulate plans for defense of the islands and has encouraged the ROKs to improve the islands' physical defenses in order to make any North Korea effort exceedingly costly. Simultaneously, we have taken steps to increase our intelligence alert so that we can have maximum prior warning of a Northern attempt.

3. Declining Public and Congressional Support. Our Korean policy and our defense presence on the Peninsula appear to be losing support of both the U.S. public and the Congress. In part, this is due to the backlash of Vietnam and the fear of another military venture in East Asia. In part, it is due to the increasingly repressive nature of the Park government which has caught the attention of the Hill and certain articulate elements of the American public including the churches. As a result, we have witnessed Congressional efforts to remove our troops from Korea and to pressure Park to liberalize his administration by denying aid and threatening a U.S. withdrawal. There is also Congressional concern both among liberals and conservatives, that our current troop posture — a U.S. division in reserve but north of Seoul — would automatically involve us in hostilities should the North invade the ROK and that, at a minimum, the division should be moved south of Seoul.

While we cannot be certain, we doubt that Congress would try to remove troops from Korea in an election year. On the other hand, there is no doubt that increasing dissatisfaction with Park will lead to continued questioning of various aspects of our Korean policy and to more legislative efforts to limit or decrease our involvement in Korea. We shall have to counter these efforts as best we can. It would be dangerous, particularly in an election year, to take any steps which North Korea might interpret as a sign of weakness. Therefore, moving the division south at this time would be ill advised. The North would most likely view such a step as a weakening of our resolve, reducing the deterrent value of our presence. At the same time, it is unlikely that merely moving the division south of Seoul would significantly reduce the likelihood of the U.S. becoming involved in a contingency.

4. The United Nations Command. The support for our traditional position on Korea in the General Assembly has also eroded with the change in the composition of the UN. For the first time two resolutions on the Korean question — one friendly, one hostile — were passed by the General Assembly last year. Our resolution called for dissolution of the UN Command, provided that adequate assurances were given for maintaining the armistice arrangements. The hostile resolution linked the presence of U.S. troops to the United Nations Command and called for the dissolution of the UNC. This development is indicative of the growing pressure on us, even from our allies, to unilaterally abolish the UNC.

The UNC, however, has provided a mechanism through which the ROK, without losing face, can place its forces under the operational control (OPCON) of an American commander. Elimination of the UNC would require new command arrangements if we are to retain OPCON. General Stilwell has been discussing with the Koreans the establishment of a combined command, at the insistence of the South Koreans, with the commander being an American and reporting to both national command authorities. There are a number of conflicting views about the exact nature of this prospective organization and the forces which should be committed to it. From ISA's perspective, we see great Congressional problems with a combined command because of the Park regime's repressive character. We would have to explain the new command arrangements and Congress could well reject the suggestion that an American commander also report to President Park or, as our presence decreases, a Korean would command U.S. Forces. Permitting this issue to precipitate a major debate on U.S. policy toward Korea strikes us as completely counterproductive. We are searching for appropriate command arrangements and for the moment should not acquiesce in the dissolution of the UNC until acceptable arrangements have been developed.

5. Military Assistance. The fantastic growth of the Korean economy has led to the ROK's now assuming 90% of the financing of its military expenditures (the U.S. used to pay 90%). Recent defense taxes will increase the portion of Korean resources devoted to GNP from 4.5% to 6.5%, a truly impressive measure. South Korea is basically now able to do without grant aid. The ROK has developed a new five year program of modernization — the Force Improvement Program — which should bring their forces into rough parity with North Korea's. Except for a few items, we believe their plans are sound. The Koreans project expenditures of some $3B in foreign exchange, hoping for half of it in credits from the U.S. over a five year period. We have assured the ROK that we support their objectives and will do our best to provide credit as required. It is not intended, however, to commit the U.S. Government to any total amount of support or any annual level of aid, as under the previous Modernization Program. The Congress should be generally sympathetic to an effort to make the ROK self-sufficient and we should do our best to obtain Congressional support. Congress will, however, probably relate future aid commitments to the U.S. force presence in Korea. We should attempt to insure that Congressional perceptions of our presence are tied to increases in South Korean capabilities rather than U.S. security assistance levels per se.

6. ROK Nuclear Weapons Efforts. President Park's fears of isolation and the possible withdrawal of U.S. forces have led him to embark on a secret program to develop nuclear weapons and a long range surface-to-surface missile to deliver the weapons. Korea could probably achieve this capability within 5-10 years. We plan to send in April or May a high level team consisting of missile experts to discuss the ROK requirement for missiles and other conventional advanced technology weapons systems in an effort to demonstrate to Park that it is both uneconomical and unnecessary for him to utilize his resources in that manner. The ROK has been negotiating an agreement with France to purchase a nuclear fuel reprocessing plant to produce enriched plutonium which, in turn, could be utilized to build fission weapons. We think the acquisition by the ROK of a nuclear capability would be completely destabilizing in Northeast Asia and undermine public support for Korea in the U.S. We have strongly indicated to the Koreans that we will not support this effort and that acquisition of such a plant could affect our fundamental relationship. We have told the ROKs in the firmest terms that we will withdraw U.S. support for their nuclear energy programs if they continue ahead with plans to acquire the reprocessing plant. There are signs that the Koreans will change their position. It is essential to persist.

7. Reassurances to the ROK. The Koreans are somewhat paranoid, but not without reason. Their security situation is precarious. Two of the major powers of the area, the USSR and the PRC, have contiguous borders with the North and are allied with Kim Il-sung. On the other hand, South Korea's only reliable ally, the U.S., is 10,000 miles away and increasing Korean doubts about our constancy are reinforced by the continuing debates within the U.S. over our foreign policy and Korean policy in particular. It is therefore necessary to hold their hands frequently. We believe you should find an early occasion to publicly express your support for our commitment to South Korea and for South Korea's impressive self-defense efforts. Such a statement will also be a helpful reminder to the North Koreans.

1 Source: Washington National Records Center, OSD Files: FRC 330–79–0049, Korea, 092, 1976, January 16. Secret. Amos Jordan sent the study to the Secretary of Defense under a covering memorandum, January 15, on which was noted: “Sec Def has seen. 19 Jan 1976.”

275. Information Memorandum From the Acting Assistant Secretary for International Security Affairs in the Department of Defense (Bergold) to Secretary of Defense Rumsfeld, Washington, March 16, 1976. 275. Information Memorandum From the Acting Assistant Secretary for International Security Affairs in the Department of Defense (Bergold) to Secretary of Defense Rumsfeld, Washington, March 16, 1976.1

Washington, March 16, 1976

ASSISTANT SECRETARY OF DEFENSE
WASHINGTON D.C. 20301

In reply refer to: I-2808/76

MEMORANDUM FOR THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE
SUBJECT: Impact of Recent Korean Political Developments - INFORMATION MEMORANDUM

(C) We are deeply concerned by the increasing repression in Korea and its impact on Congressional support for Korea. In the short term, the political arrests of opposition political figures on March 1 may endanger the FY 1976 Security Assistance authorization bill, which is currently under consideration by a House-Senate Conference Committee. It will certainly make our whole Korean effort on the Hill this year more difficult.

(C) The Korean Situation. On March 1, a declaration calling for the restoration of normal democratic rights and the resignation of President Park was issued at an ecumenical prayer service held in Seoul Cathedral. The declaration was signed by prominent opposition political leaders and clerical and intellectual critics of the government's repressive action. Although reporting is not complete, it is clear that the government reacted to this challenge by detaining and interrogating those associated with the declaration. Eleven, including former opposition presidential candidate Kim Tae Chung, four Catholic priests, three Protestant ministers, and three former university professors, have now been arrested and publicly accused of plotting to overthrow the government. A well publicized trial of some or all of them is highly likely. We understand that Kim Tae Chung has "confessed."

(C) Congressional React ion. Park's action has stirred the anti-Park forces on the Hill to greater efforts with the religious element very prominent. Congressman Fraser is preparing a letter to Secretary Kissinger for signature by a small number of Congressmen requesting the Executive Branch to report on the human rights situation in Korea. He is also soliciting signatures in the House and Senate to a letter to the President which will probably ask that the U.S. in some way disassociate its security policies in Korea from President Park's domestic policies. Congressman Udall has issued a critical statement and called for a re-examination of our assistance programs to Korea. Senators Kennedy and Cranston have issued a joint statement calling for a review of U.S. assistance to Korea. They make clear that they would seek to exercise that provision in the FY 1976 legislation which requires the Executive to justify assistance programs in relation to the human rights practices in a recipient country and permits the Congress by concurrent resolution to modify or terminate security assistance if they choose to reject the Executive Branch report.

(C) Congressional concern threatens our carefully worked out strategy to assure that the Conference Committee reports out an acceptable security assistance bill for FY 1976. Specific testimony on Korea and the human rights question had been promised in connection with the FY 1977 hearings. This testimony is scheduled for 2 April for the Senate and could be requested as early as 29 March for the House. The Conference Committee as a ready acted to satisfy the Executive Branch's concerns regarding storage of War Reserve Materiel in Korea. It is hoped that a compromise establishing a reasonable ceiling on grant aid for Korea, while not as high as requested, can be worked out. If sentiment mounts high enough, amendments from the floor could be proposed, nullifying our efforts.

(C) Our Posture. While we may get by with our programs in the short term, clearly we will have more trouble in the longer run, over both our security assistance program and the presence of troops. Executive Branch witnesses will have difficulty testifying, since they will perforce have to admit that human rights in Korea are systematically violated while justifying substantial amounts of MAP. In FY 1977, we are seeking $275.0M in FMS credit guarantees and $8.3M to deliver equipment under previous year grant aid programs.

(C) To date the public stance of the Administration has been that we are concerned over the human rights situation in Korea and have made the Korean Government well aware of our concern. We have stressed that the continuation of peace on the Peninsula is our major objective and that MAP is above all related to combined U.S.-South Korean efforts to deter North Korean aggression. Our concern with repression in Korea cannot override or diminish our efforts to preserve the peace.

(C) Park knows well our concern and the dilemma we are in. Scores of U.S. Congressmen have told him so this year. But that has not been sufficient to get him to relax a little. Conceivably, it may become necessary for us to lean heavily on the Park regime in order to mollify U.S. Congressional and public criticism and retain support for our Korean posture. Such pressure could be exerted in a variety of ways, and the Park regime is extremely vulnerable in the area of defense. There are obvious dangers going this way. We could decrease the effectiveness of our readiness, invite misinterpretation of our intentions by the North Koreans, and, by increasing Park's sense of insecurity, cause imposition of even stricter internal controls. We will have to play the situation by ear. Dr. Kissinger is strongly opposed to any "leaning" on Park.

(C) You may wish to discuss with Dr. Kissinger our Korean problem. Further, you should take into account domestic turbulence here in our relations with the ROK in making future public statements and in determining to what extent you personally wish to become involved in Korean affairs such as the upcoming Security Consultative Meeting. We will be shortly offering you some options on that meeting.

[signed]
Harry E. Bergold
Acting Assistant Secretary

1 Source: Washington National Records Center, OSD Files: FRC 330–79–0049, Korea, 092, 1976, 1976 March 16. Confidential; Eyes Only. A notation on the memorandum reads, “22 Mar 1976. Sec Def has seen.” For NSSM 235, see Document 23.

276. Memorandum From Jeanne Davis of the National Security Council Staff to the Chairman of the National Security Council Interdepartmental Group for East Asia (Habib), Washington, April 19, 1976. 276. Memorandum From Jeanne Davis of the National Security Council Staff to the Chairman of the National Security Council Interdepartmental Group for East Asia (Habib), Washington, April 19, 1976.1

Washington, April 19, 1976

NATIONAL SECURITY COUNCIL
WASHINGTON D.C. 20506

April 19, 1976

MEMORANDUM FOR
The Chairman
NSC Interdepartmental Group for East Asia
Department of State

SUBJECT: Review of U.S. Security Policy Toward the Korean Peninsula: NSSM 226

NSSM 226 of May 27, 1975 called for a review of U.S. policy toward the Korean Peninsula. The NSSM response was delayed pending the broad review of U.S. interests and security objectives in the Asia-Pacific area (NSSM 235), which has now been completed.

The NSC Interdepartmental Group for East Asia should now resume work on NSSM 226, focusing on the question of the U.S. security role in the Republic of Korea over the next three to five years. The review should concentrate on the following specific issues: — the level of U.S. military presence in Korea.

— the extent of military assistance to the ROK.

— U.S. policy on ROK military self-sufficiency, including advanced weapons and technology transfers.

— operational control of U.S., Korean and other U.N. forces to include alternatives to the present U.N. Command structure.

The NSSM response should be submitted to the Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs no later than June 10.

[signed]
Jeanne W. Davis
Staff Secretary

1 Source: Ford Library, NSC Institutional Files (H-Files), Box H–36, NSSM 226, Review of U.S. Policy Toward the Korean Peninsula. Secret; Nodis.

277. Memorandum from Jay Taylor of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Scowcroft), Washington, April 22, 1976. 277. Memorandum from Jay Taylor of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Scowcroft), Washington, April 22, 1976.1

Washington, April 22, 1976

NATIONAL SECURITY COUNCIL
INFORMATION

April 22, 1976

MEMORANDUM FOR BRENT SCOWCROFT
FROM: JAY TAYLOR [JT initialed]
SUBJECT: Possible North Korean Initiatives During 1976

At our request, CIA has prepared a memorandum assessing possible North Korean initiatives this year (Tab A). The assessment speculates that Kim Il-sung may feel that longer-term trends are running against his aspirations to unify the country under communist control. At the same time, Kim may sense special opportunities this year to alter these trends because of the continuing lack of a foreign policy consensus in the U.S., the impact of the human rights issue in the Congress, and the complications introduced into the conduct of U.S. foreign policy in a Presidential election year. The CIA assessment makes no attempt to assign orders of probability to possible North Korean actions, but attempts to analyze the possibilities as they must appear from Pyongyang.

The author lists several new political initiatives that North Korea might take, but he believes that limited military actions designed for political and economic effect while more risky are at present possibly more tempting to Kim Il-sung. The evidence for this case rests partly on the interest that North Korea has shown in assessing the lessons of the wars in Indochina and the Middle East. Pyongyang's studies may have suggested some general conclusions: — There is great reluctance in the U.S. to become involved in further conflicts in Asia.

— Surprise military action can produce a shock effect which brings the issue of noninvolvement to a head within the U.S. Congress and the population at large and forces a review of long-standing commitments.

— It is possible in areas where great power interests converge to undertake limited military action in the reasonable expectation that the powers will intervene to halt the fighting before it gets out of hand.

— Until the fighting is stopped, integrated modern air defense systems and well-prepared ground defenses can limit damage from reprisal attacks to forces in the field and fixed installations in the rear.

— It is possible for a small communist nation to plot its own military and political course while playing on Sino-Soviet rivalries to command essential support from both countries, occasionally against their respective individual interests and desires.

Given these assumptions, Pyongyang could calculate that limited military action against the South, taken in an ambiguous circumstance, could be controlled by the North, would not preclude continued Soviet and Chinese assistance, would provoke fear in the U.S. of another Korean war, would involve the U.S. and the ROK in debate and argument over the proper response, and in the end could cause changes in U.S. policy favorable to North Korea. The author believes that the Northwest Islands are the most vulnerable targets, both militarily and politically.

Pyongyang could reasonably expect that the ROK, rather than attempt to recapture the islands if they were taken by the North, would favor a reprisal directly across the DMZ. This response is in fact the basis of present ROK contingency planning. In this event, we would be faced with an immediate dilemma of whether or not to authorize in our capacity as U.N. Commander such an ROK counterstrike. If ROK forces did move into the DMZ with or without our sanction, the action would be far more visible and would create a much greater stir than the original attack by the North Koreans against the Northwest Islands. Pyongyang could then counterattack in some areas and exploit the pressure of U.S. domestic and world opinion to force a ceasefire in a favorable situation, and to press for direct North Korean-U.S. negotiations.

Planning for the Future

In the event of a North Korean attack on the Northwest Islands, our options would be constrained by the fact that under the War Powers Act it would be difficult for the President to justify direct employment of U.S. forces as no American personnel would be directly threatened. If ROK forces counterattacked elsewhere along the DMZ and North Korea subsequently retaliated, we would encounter serious domestic and Congressional opposition to U.S. involvement. In this hypothetical situation, Japanese public opinion would also probably be least supportive of the involvement of U.S. support bases in Japan.

The political risks for the North in even limited military moves as described above would be serious. The major concern would be that the end result could be the opposite of that intended — the chances of an early U.S. military withdrawal could be reduced. Consequently, it is highly uncertain whether Kim Il-sung will decide to take this course anytime in the near future.

We believe, however, that we should begin looking now at the alternative policies open to us in the event of a limited North Korean military attack as envisioned in the CIA study. We do not believe we should make a decision now on how we would react. But, given the mainly political objectives of such an attack in the near term, we should be prepared with a range of imaginative and flexible responses that could effectively counter Pyongyang's moves. We should also consider ways to discourage the North from such a strategy.

We have asked Defense to provide us a paper on DOD's assessment of the vulnerability of the islands and plans for their defense. We intend to follow this up with a request for a State-Defense contingency paper.

Concurrence:
Clint Granger

1 Source: Ford Library, National Security Adviser, Presidential Country Files for East Asia and the Pacific, Box 10, Korea (15). Secret; Sensitive. Sent for information. Scowcroft initialed the memorandum and wrote, “Good idea.” Tab A, April 8, 1976, is not attached. It is in the Central Intelligence Agency, OPI 122 (National Intelligence Council), Job 91R00884R, Box 31, Intelligence Memorandum: Possible North Korean Initiatives During 1976, NIO M 76–010 C. The Defense papers on the vulnerabilities of the Northwest Islands to attack and on options for their defense are in the Ford Library, National Security Adviser, Presidential Country Files for East Asia and the Pacific, Box 10, Korea (17).

278. Memorandum From Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affair Abramowitz to William Hyland of the NSC Staff, Washington, April 22, 1976. 278. Memorandum From Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affair Abramowitz to William Hyland of the NSC Staff, Washington, April 22, 1976.1

Washington, April 22, 1976

ASSISTANT SECRETARY OF DEFENSE
WASHINGTON D.C. 20301

April 22, 1976

MEMORANDUM FOR MR. WILLIAM HYLAND, NSC

Bill:

This is a personal memo.

I think the quasi-NSSM on Korea, with certain exceptions, serves no useful purpose and should be withdrawn. I feel this particularly so since my people are going to be tied up in the next month preparing for ministerial meetings with the Koreans and do not have time to participate in what is essentially a paper exercise.

The NSC memorandum asks us, for example, to study the level of assistance to the ROK. This is not going to be decided by us. It is going to be decided by the Congress. We want as much FMS credits as possible, and we will get far less than we need. There is no question and no dispute among anybody on this point.

Similarly the question on the level of US military presence in Korea. Nobody in the Executive Branch wants to move our forces out and we can only define in general terms when that might be possible. We should stop screwing around for papers' sake.

There are two subjects in the paper which do deserve attention. The first is the question of advanced technology transfer to Korea, particularly in the missile field. Although I think I know where I stand, an interagency study on this problem could be very helpful. I suggest you put a date of May 15 on this problem.

Also the question of an alternate command structure in Korea sooner or later has got to be addressed in an interagency forum. There is no urgency on the matter, however, and I would recommend a due date on that problem of July 15.

I would appreciate your consideration of the modification of the NSC memorandum.

[signed]
Morton I. Abramowitz
Deputy Assistant Secretary

1 Source: Ford Library, NSC Institutional Files (H-Files), Box H–36, NSSM 226, Review of U.S. Policy Toward the Korean Peninsula. Secret.

279. Memorandum From Thomas J. Barnes of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Scowcroft), Washington, May 19, 1976. 279. Memorandum From Thomas J. Barnes of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Scowcroft), Washington, May 19, 1976.1

Washington, May 19, 1976

MEMORANDUM
NATIONAL SECURITY COUNCIL

ACTION

May 19, 1976

MEMORANDUM FOR BRENT SCOWCROFT
FROM: THOMAS J. BARNES [TJB initialed]

SUBJECT: State Recommendation on Suspension of NSSM 226

Issue

Philip Habib, in his capacity as Chairman of the East Asian Interdepartmental Group, has written you a memorandum (Tab C) suggesting that NSSM 226, "U.S. Security Policy Toward the Korean Peninsula," (Tab D) be suspended for the present with a view toward reinstating the study later in the year. Habib had discussed this issue earlier with Mr. Hyland by phone. Following the negative decisions on the withdrawal of the U.S. unit in the DMZ [text not declassified] Habib apparently felt that the White House would also prefer to delay-decisions on the issues that NSSM 226 posed. Morton Abramowitz, in DOD/ISA, strongly supports Habib's recommendation.

Background

We originally issued NSSM 226 in May 1975 but delayed action pending the broad review of U.S. interests and security objectives in the Asia-Pacific area. On April 19, 1976, with your approval, we called for a resumption of work on NSSM 226 with a focus on the following specific issues: (Tab E)

— The level of U.S. military presence in Korea.

— The level of U.S. military assistance to the ROK.

— U.S. policy on ROK military self-sufficiency, including advance weapons and technology transfers.

— Operational control of U.S., Korean, and other U.N. forces, to include alternatives to the present U.N. Command structure.

The working group has held one meeting, and drafting has begun on the text and the annexes. In deciding whether to approve Habib's recommendation for another suspension, you should consider the following factors: — The first two issues involve long-term policy; decisions on either would not be manifest for some time.

— There could be leaks regarding the existence of the renewed study as there were last summer following initial work on the original NSSM.

— The question of advance weapons and technology transfers could be handled on a case-by-case basis, although a general policy guideline would be more helpful.

— The question of OPCON and alternatives to the present UNC structure could also be handled separately as an inter-agency project.

Options

We offer four basic options: Option A. Accept Habib's recommendations that we suspend work on the NSSM and plan to resume it in the fall.

Option B. Cancel the NSSM and plan to issue a new NSSM later in the year.

Option C. Direct the Inter-departmental group for East Asia to proceed with the study providing a mid-July date for completion, and plan for issuance of the NSDM sometime in the fall.

Option D. Exclude the first two issues that involve long-term policy, and restrict the NSSM to the questions of advance weapons and technology transfers, and OPCON alternatives.

My View

Since we can delay issuance of the NSDM until a more propitious time and the implementation of any decision on U.S. military presence and assistance to South Korea would be long-term, I believe that we should continue with the NSSM study but provide a new due date in mid-July. The present due date is June 10.

Another long delay or cancellation would compromise the credibility of the NSSM system. In addition, on the questions of weapons and technology transfer and OPCON, I believe we need thorough studies, that we could best obtain in a NSSM format.

RECOMMENDATION:

That you approve Option C and the proposed memorandum at Tab A to Habib turning down his suggestion for a postponement but extending the due date to July 15.

APPROVE
DISAPPROVE

Alternatively, that you approve Option D and the memorandum at Tab B directing that NSSM 226 focus only on the question of weapons and technology transfer and OPCON.

APPROVE
DISAPPROVE

Or that you approve either Options A or B and authorize us to informally inform the departments concerned. 11

Approve Option A (suspend the NSSM) [initialed]
Approve Option B (cancel the NSSM)

Col. Granger concurs.

1 Source: Ford Library, NSC Institutional Files (H-Files), Box H–36, NSSM 226, Review of U.S. Policy Toward the Korean Peninsula. Secret; Sensitive. Sent for Action. The tabs are attached but not published. On the first page of the memorandum, Scowcroft wrote, “a mistake” next to the passage: “We originally issued NSSM 226 in May 1975 but delayed action pending the broad review of U.S. interests and security objectives in the Asia-Pacific area.” On the third page, Scowcroft underlined, “informally inform the departments concerned” and initialed his approval of option A. He also wrote, “Our basic mistake was stopping work on the NSSM last spring when we could have used it.”

280. Memorandum From Thomas J. Barnes of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Scowcroft), Washington, May 28, 1976. 280. Memorandum From Thomas J. Barnes of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Scowcroft), Washington, May 28, 1976.1

Washington, May 28, 1976

MEMORANDUM
NATIONAL SECURITY COUNCIL
INFORMATION

May 28, 1976

MEMORANDUM FOR BRENT SCOWCROFT
FROM: THOMAS J. BARNES [TJB initialed]
SUBJECT: North Koreans Charge ROK Provocations and Threaten Possible Retaliation

North Korea accused South Korea May 25 of firing a .57 millimeter recoilless rifle at a North Korean guard post in the Demilitarized Zone. The North Koreans called the alleged act "a grave military provocation." The official Korean Central News Agency accused South Korea of trying to increase tension in Korea and start another war. The North Korean statement warned that if the U.S. and South Korea "persisted in such provocations the sentries of the Korean people's army will take a strong retaliatory measure and make the provocateurs pay properly for this."

Another incident almost occurred on May 27 when two North Korean motor gunboats came within three nautical miles of one of the UN Controlled Northwest Islands. During this apparently rare approach, the ROK commander on the island requested permission to fire a warning shot. The UNC naval forces commander, a U.S. Navy flag officer, denied the request.

Comment

Pyongyang's charge against South Korea follows strong North Korean protests about a U.S. military reconnaissance flight over a North Korean merchant ship on May 6. Pyongyang charged that the U.S. had engaged in a reckless maneuver "to invent a pretext for provoking a new war in Korea" and that the incident constituted a "dangerous military adventure which may lead to an unforeseeable consequence."

We checked with the North Korean watcher in INR at State. He agreed that current North Korean language regarding such incidents appeared to be a few degrees more threatening than normal. Specifically, the warning that the North Korean Army would take “a strong retaliatory measure” in the event of future provocations seemed to be a new formulation. We asked the analyst to prepare a brief paper on North Korean treatment of these latest incidents.

If North Korea wished to excite tension in the Korean Peninsula by striking out in some limited action against U.S.-ROK forces — such as shooting down a U.S. patrol plane reconnoitering a North Korean merchantman — it would presumably begin to set the stage by escalating charges of U.S.-ROK provocations.

After we discussed the subject with the EA Bureau, the State Department sent a written request that the NSC direct the Department of Defense to devise procedures that would assure adequate control and early information in the event of untoward incidents resulting from U.S. surveillance of North Korean vessels. We also believe DOD should caution U.S. commanders to be on the alert to North Korean attacks during such reconnaissance. (This State recommendation is part of a recent State memorandum recommending the NSC direct DOD to assure particular care and discretion in the surveillance of PRC vessels. Dick Solomon is waiting for an opportunity to talk to you about how you wish to pursue the recommendations concerning our surveillance of North Korean as well as Chinese shipping.)

Clint Granger concurs

1 Source: Ford Library, National Security Adviser, Presidential Country Files for East Asia and the Pacific, Box 10, Korea (16). Confidential. Sent for information. Concurred in by Granger. According to the correspondence profile, Scowcroft saw this document on June 1. (Ibid.) North Korean news accounts of enemy provocations are ibid.

281. Transcript of Telephone Conversation Between Secretary of State Kissinger and the Undersecretary of State for Political Affairs (Habib), Washington, August 18, 1976, 10:05 a.m. 281. Transcript of Telephone Conversation Between Secretary of State Kissinger and the Undersecretary of State for Political Affairs (Habib), Washington, August 18, 1976, 10:05 a.m. 1

Washington, August 18, 1976, 10:05 a.m.

TELCON
PHIL HABIB
SEC. KISSINGER
AUGUST 18, 1976

10:05 a.m.

K: When EA returns from the toilet will you tell them...

H: I have already told them.

K: I want retaliatory action.

H: They understand.

K: What is their definition of retaliatory action.

H: They were told to consider what military actions there could be.

K: Are there fishing boats we could shoot-up or capture.

H: Yes there are fishing boats. There are things that we or the South Koreans could do. There are means of retaliating along the DMZ itself. All of these though are facing two very strong arms of camps along the line. Fishing ships are vulnerable, because there are more South Korean fishing boats. There are not so many military vessels.

K: We cannot have Americans killed. I hope that is clear.

H: I have made that very clear to them. I have impressed on them the seriousness of these and that you want to impress this on them.

K: How could it happen that there were no Americans there.

H: I have many suspicions about that. The account from the Embassy has gaps. For example say when they went there they talked to the North Korean who said O.K. trim the trees. Then he told them to stop. A while later 30 North Koreans came. How much later; why are they not talking about it; where was our action team.

K: Why trim trees there at all.

H: These things go on all the time there. Tourists go there, press go there. Meetings are held there. It is the only spot where the two sides are sort of face to face. It is supposed to be a special demilitarized area. The only things to be carried are small arms but where were our action teams. We have a whole team trained the minute anything looks like it is going to happen. Where were they; why weren't they called.

K: Are they getting me answers by 12:00.

H: Yes. All the answers and a clear map of the area showing where each incident happened.

K: I may move it up to 11.

H: I will tell them to hurry up. You may move it to 11:00.

K: O.K.

1 Source: Department of State, Electronic Reading Room, Transcripts of Kissinger Telephone Conversations. Unclassified.

282. Minutes of Washington Special Actions Group Meeting, Washington, August 18, 1976, 3:47–4:43 p.m. 282. Minutes of Washington Special Actions Group Meeting, Washington, August 18, 1976, 3:47–4:43 p.m. 1

Washington, August 18, 1976, 3:47–4:43 p.m.

WASHINGTON SPECIAL ACTIONS GROUP MEETING

August 18, 1976

Time and Place: 3:47 pm - 4:43 pm White House Situation Room

Subject: Korea

PARTICIPANTS:

Chairman: Henry A. Kissinger

State: Charles Robinson

Philip Habib

Defense: William Clements

Morton Abramowitz

JCS: Adm. James L. Holloway

Lt. Gen. William Y. Smith

CIA: Enna Knoche

Evelyn Colbert

NSC: William G. Hyland

William Gleysteen

Michael Hornblow

Secretary Kissinger: There is a practical problem I would like to point out. The attack occurred at 9:43 last night and I was not notified until 9:00 this morning.

Mr. Knoche: That was poor performance on our part and we will take the blame.

Mr. Clements: There is no reason for CIA to take the blame — why not DOD and State who also received messages in these channels.

Mr. Habib: The information came in at midnight last night but I did not learn about it till this morning.

Secretary Kissinger: It was in my take this morning along with some fifty other cables.

Mr. Habib: It was 8:30 this morning when I first knew about it.

Mr. Abramowitz: ISA did not learn about it until 9:30 this morning.

Mr. Knoche: There was discussion between the operation centers but nobody alerted the principals.

Secretary Kissinger: Wasn't there another incident where this sort of thing happened recently? Of course, there was the Mayaguez.

Mr. Habib: We should have been informed at 12:01 am. The machinery did not work properly.

Mr. Knoche: The various operation centers talked with each other but did not send it up to the principals.

Secretary Kissinger: I am not blaming CIA. Each department should be organized to inform its principals. Let's begin the briefing.

(Knoche begins briefing. Attached)

Secretary Kissinger: Were photographers taking pictures? Why don't we see any North Koreans' dead bodies?

Adm. Holloway: Stilwell doesn't believe that there were any North Korean casualties.

Mr. Robinson: Did the North Koreans report on the incident?

Mr. Knoche: Yes, but there was no mention of casualties. (Knoche continues and finishes briefing.)

Secretary Kissinger: What does the South have in terms of manpower?

Mr. Knoche: They have 523,000 men in their army, 280 jet fighters, 175 patrol craft and no submarines. In our judgment a military action by the North to be effective would have to be a surprise attack. We, therefore, do not believe that the North had a major attack in mind.

Secretary Kissinger: Can somebody provide me with an analysis of how the two sides' forces balance?

Adm. Holloway: The North Korean ground forces have good hitting power, but the South Korean army is well led and backed by the U.S. The North Korean air force is larger, but the South Koreans are better trained. There is also the confidence factor. The South Koreans are confident because the U.S. backs them up. The North Korean submarines are not worth very much. Each country has a military force which is well designed to support its own strategy and position. In my judgment, it is a military stand-off. I do not think that at the present time the North Koreans could mount an effective military invasion.

Mrs. Colbert: Were you factoring in the U.S. forces?

Mrs. Knoche: That is a key judgment. We believe there are two key elements. One is the U.S.-South Korean Mutual Defense Treaty and the other is the presence of U.S. forces. If the U.S. forces withdraw, then the North Koreans would have the military advantage.

Secretary Kissinger: Why was the reaction force so late in getting into the area?

Adm. Holloway: Stilwell has avoided answering that.

Secretary Kissinger: He sure mentioned the photo coverage. Why was it necessary to prune that tree?

Adm. Holloway: It obstructed the line of view between the observation post and the tower. On this chart I can only find one of the two positions cited.

Mr. Clements: Wasn't that a routine operation — keeping the area clear?

Secretary Kissinger: This cable which was just handed to me makes it sound as though there was a lot of backing and forthing about this.

Mr. Hyland: They told us not to do it. (The North Koreans)

Adm. Holloway: Stilwell's report says that the original plan was to cut the tree down but the North Koreans said no. We then decided to prune it. An eyewitness account says that when the North Korean officer arrived on the scene he asked what they were doing. He was told "pruning" and answered "good."

Mr. Habib: There are some differences in the reporting of that.

Secretary Kissinger: Why do the North Koreans have the right to object to our cutting down or pruning a tree?

Mr. Habib: The whole area is a joint area.

Secretary Kissinger: If the North Koreans decide to prune a tree do they ask our permission?

Mr. Habib: No. We don't care. Each side has its own area within the joint area.

Secretary Kissinger: Can each side order the other side around?

Mr. Habib: They can't force each other but there is a lot of argumentation.

Secretary Kissinger: Well there are two problems as I see it. The first problem is that two American officers have been beaten to death. The second problem is to review the procedures we are following in the DMZ. Now, regarding the first issue, I agree with the CIA analysis. My impression is that it was a premeditated attack. There were some fifty other things they could have done to stop us from pruning the tree.

Now this letter Stilwell wants to send to Kim. Why should he send a letter to Kim? What standing does he have?

Mr. Habib: Well Stilwell is the Commander of the UN Forces and Kim is the Commander of the North Korean Army. Kim also signed the original peace agreement.

Secretary Kissinger: There have already been White House and State Department statements deploring these murders. Why do we now also need a Stilwell statement? Does he have the authority to make a statement?

Mr. Abramowitz: No. He needs Washington approval.

Secretary Kissinger: Well lets put that in abeyance. I have talked to the President today about this. He feels that some sort of strong action is necessary but does not know precisely what it should be. Now there are two things that come to my mind. A few weeks ago we turned off a B-52 exercise because it would be provocative to the Chinese. We might resurrect that exercise. The second possibility would be to alert all forces in Korea.

Adm. Holloway: We could go from DEFCON 4 to DEFCON 3.

Secretary Kissinger: What would that do?

Adm. Holloway: Unless we had a specific plan in mind or the North Koreans felt we had a specific plan in mind they probably would not react at all.

Secretary Kissinger: Well on that basis you could not threaten anything.

Mr. Abramowitz: Stilwell recommends that we finish pruning the tree.

Mr. Clements: I am in complete accord with that and think we should cut the God damn thing down.

Secretary Kissinger: I am in favor of that too but I don't think we should do anything about the tree until after we do something with our forces. What is the meaning of the DEFCON alert stages?

Adm. Holloway: 5 is normal and 1 is war. Stage 2 means that war is inevitable and stage 1 is when the shooting starts.

Mrs. Colbert: If the alert were moved up to 3 how would the media and the U.S. people react to that in this campaign year.

Secretary Kissinger: That has nothing to do with it. The important thing is that they beat two Americans to death and must pay the price.

Mrs. Colbert: The North Koreans are looking for indications that they can create another Vietnam type mentality in this country. Therefore to disabuse them of this it is important to have the right kinds of expressions of support from the media and opinion makers.

Secretary Kissinger: What about resurrecting the B-52 exercise? The State Department hereby withdraws its objections to it. This is tow the best time in the world to run it.

Mr. Habib: It was a training exercise.

Mr. Abramowitz: Would it scare the Americans or the Koreans?

Mr. Gleysteen: There is another exercise planned.

Secretary Kissinger: But everybody already knows about that one.

Mr. Clements: Is it true that in the exercise we would fly the B-52s over Korea and then go back?

Adm. Holloway: Yes.

Secretary Kissinger: How long would it take?

Lt. Gen. Smith: We could get it going in 72 hours possibly less.

Secretary Kissinger: The quicker the better.

Mr. Clements: Do we wish to drop live bombs?

Secretary Kissinger: If that is part of the program, do it. If not then don't do it.

Mr. Clements: Well let me play Devil's Advocate. Why not drop live bombs?

Secretary Kissinger: If it is part of the plan do it.

Mr. Clements: I can make it part of the plan.

Mr. Abramowitz: The exercise would be well below Nightmare Range and they were not scheduled to drop live ordinance.

Mr. Habib: Those planes will come within easy range of North Korea. Distances there are close.

Secretary Kissinger: Okay. That will be a good lesson for them. What I would like to do now is to go over possible courses of actions and meet again tomorrow at 8:00 a.m. to discuss them. The President wants to explore the possibility of taking one military step. What can we do? You may wish to think about it overnight. Whatever we do must be commensurate.

Adm. Holloway: There are several possibilities: we could lay mines, we could seize a North Korean flag vessel or a fishing boat. But seizing a fishing boat might be beneath our dignity. The North Koreans have 34 commercial flag vessels. None of them are in our ports or allied ports. We have only been able to locate 9 of them so the remainder are probably in North Korean waters.

There is also the possibility of a combined exercise with the South Koreans. It would take a minimum of four days to set this up. We could also send in a carrier task group. The Midway could be there between 48-72 hours. It is in Yokosuka now. They could have a missile-shoot off the coast.

Secretary Kissinger: I like the idea of cutting the tree down. We should generate our forces first and then cut it down. We should also go on a higher alert. Let's put our forces on DEFCON 3 tonight and get a plan for cutting down the tree from Stilwell. (to Adm. Holloway) Can you start gearing up the B-52 run?

Adm. Holloway: Yes.

Secretary Kissinger: We need to know what forces Stilwell needs to cut the tree down.

Adm. Holloway: There are two difficult decisions before us. At what point do we stop putting in reinforcements? In the past when we have moved in men they have acted reciprocally and vice versa. At what point would we stop? The next question is the use of firearms. In this recent incident both sides had firearms that were not used.

Secretary Kissinger: If I had been one of those men and was being beaten to death, I would have used a firearm.

Mr. Habib: They were attacked from behind and had no chance.

Adm. Holloway: Most of these men are Vietnam veterans. They were taught there to die before violating the rules of engagement.

Mr. Habib: Stilwell knows the estimated forces and that we can't move men without violating the agreement. If there was a fight there would be a need for reinforcements from outside of the zone.

Mr. Hyland: Should we reinforce the company?

Mr. Habib: The Koreans are the main force in the Zone. Stilwell will have to tell us what to do.

Secretary Kissinger: Who consults with the South Koreans?

Mr. Habib: Stilwell.

Hyland: We need to send a message to Stilwell telling him not to go ahead with the letter and to prepare a plan for cutting down the tree.

Mr. Habib: The troops could be prepositioned and he could bring them up the road and have them move in as he requires them.

Secretary Kissinger: It will be useful for us to generate enough activity so that the North Koreans begin to wonder what those crazy American bastards are doing or are capable of doing in this election year.

Mr. Abramowitz: We should consider putting more U.S. forces into Korea.

Secretary Kissinger: That might be desirable.

Mr. Habib: There is also the question of the Northwest Islands. They are highly vulnerable.

Secretary Kissinger: How about our forces? Should they go on alert tonight? We should also get that training exercise laid on. I would like for tomorrow morning to have a list of U.S. forces which could be moved into Korea. We should consider moving F-111s and F-4s in. Then on Friday morning we can move to cut that tree.

Perhaps we should decide now to move the F-4s and decide on the F-111s tomorrow.

Lt. Gen. Smith: We can do it from scratch in twelve hours.

M. Habib: We have to consult with the Japanese.

Secretary Kissinger: Well then do it. Get the process started.

Abramowitz: To temporarily move our aircraft does not require us to consult with the Japanese.

Mr. Habib: We do have to advise them.

Secretary Kissinger: I would like to get a working group started. Phil will you set one up?

Mr. Habib: Yes — we will need representatives from State, Defense, JCS and the CIA.

Secretary Kissinger: Who will inform Park?

Mr. Habib: The Charge and Stilwell should go jointly.

Mr. Gleysteen: A lot of this will soon become public knowledge.

Secretary Kissinger: Yes. We have to decide on press guidance. It should be low key. We can admit to going onto DEFCON 3 because of the premeditated murders.

Mr. Clements: Do we have to notify the UN?

Habib: No. We have gone to DEFCON 3 before without notifying them.

Adm. Holloway: Stilwell takes his orders from the JCS, not the UN.

Mr. Habib: I think there is a procedure for the JCS to inform the UN.

Secretary Kissinger: For tomorrow's meeting there should be a chart prepared of what everybody has to do.

Mr. Abramowitz: What about the War Powers Act?

Secretary Kissinger: That is a valid point. There should be one central plan for consulting with Congress.

Adm. Holloway: We will look at it. I have it right here.

Mr. Habib: Your lawyers and our lawyers can study it.

Secretary Kissinger: By early this evening we should have: 1. What we want to do about the War Powers Act

2. Press Guidance — "we are taking these precautionary moves because of the premeditated murder of American soldiers" which raised the question of what the North Koreans might be up to.

3. Consultations with South Korea, Japan

Mr. Abramowitz: What about the North Korean allies?

Secretary Kissinger: I am seeing the Chinese at 5:00.

Mr. Habib: The North Koreans have already come out with their version of the story. They have not agreed to a meeting tonight. Eventually they must come to a meeting.

Mr. Hyland: The proposed statement is not very strong.

Mr. Habib: Stilwell must be told not to submit a letter at the meeting.

Secretary Kissinger: For the 8:00 meeting tomorrow I want a spread sheet. We should also alert the task force to the possibility they may need to move. Tomorrow we can concentrate on four things: 1. Additional military deployments to Korea

2. What military action we might take

3. Possible Diplomatic actions; whom we should notify and brief.

4. Congressional activity

The meeting ended at 4:43 p. m.

18 August 1976

DDCI BRIEFING FOR

18 AUGUST WSAG MEETING

NORTH KOREA

I. We are virtually certain that the violent incident in the Joint Security Area this morning was a deliberate provocation. We believe it was primarily intended to agitate American public opinion over the issue of our troops in Korea in the context of the U.S. election campaign.

II. Since early this spring, North Korean propaganda has charged almost daily that the U.S. is introducing new weapons into the South, conducting provocative military exercises, and keeping South Korean armed forces on a war footing. — Pyongyang has warned that these developments have created a "grave situation" in which war may break out at any time.

— On August 5 — only a few hours after an exchange of fire between ROK and North Korean troops on the DMZ — North Korea, in an unusually high level statement, alleged that the U.S. and South Korea have now "completed" war preparations. The statement was the first issued at this level since 1969 that was directed specifically at U.S. actions in the South.

III. North Korea's efforts have most recently been focused on the Non-Aligned Conference in Colombo, now drawing to a close. — Their efforts in Colombo, in turn, were intended to affect favorably their prospects in the UN General Assembly debate. A resolution has now been introduced that once again calls for American withdrawal from Korea.

IV. While the North Koreans have made gains in the international forum, their propaganda efforts have won them little or no return in the American political forum. They may now be raising the ante in hopes of stimulating American opposition to a continued U.S. troop presence. This morning's incident seemed deliberately intended to produce American casualties. — The Joint Security Area is one of the very few places where North Koreans have direct, continuing contact with U.S. military personnel.

— In June, there were several similar incidents in which U.S. forces in the Joint Security Area were harassed by North Korean personnel. No casualties resulted, however.

— According to the account of today's incident issued in Seoul, a North Korean officer at the scene was heard to tell his troops to kill the UNC (i.e., U.S.) personnel.

— A North Korean radiobroadcast shortly after the incident occurred described it as a U.S. provocation that forced North Korean security personnel to take defensive measures. The broadcast warned that future incidents of U.S. aggression would be met in this fashion, but otherwise signaled no major change in Pyongyang's policy.

V. North Korea's next moves will undoubtedly be conditioned by the American reaction. — Should the response to this probe lead them to believe that they can play effectively on American sensitivities by further controlled acts of violence, we would expect them to pursue this course.

VI. But we believe that their principal immediate objective is to improve upon their 1975 success in the General Assembly. Accordingly, we believe that they are extremely unlikely to embark upon a course that would run the risk of major U.S. reprisals or portraying North Korea as significantly raising the threat of instability on the peninsula.

1 Source: Ford Library, National Security Adviser, NSC Staff for East Asia and Pacific Affairs, Convenience Files, Box 27, WSAG Meeting, Korean Incident, August 18, 1976. Secret. The meeting was held in the White House Situation Room.

283. Telegram 206084 From the Department of State to the Embassy in the Republic of Korea, August 19, 1976, 0110Z. 283. Telegram 206084 From the Department of State to the Embassy in the Republic of Korea, August 19, 1976, 0110Z.1

August 19, 1976, 0110Z

TELEGRAM
Department of State
206084

INFO OCT-01 ISO-00 /001 R
DRAFTED BY DRAFTED: EA/K: EHURWITZ: BCL
APPROVED BY S - THE SECRETARY
JCS - CAPT. COMBS
ISA - PFLINT
NSC - MR. HYLAND
EA - MR. ARMSTRONG
P - MR. HABIB
S/S - O: A. OTTO

190110Z AUG 76

FM SECSTATE WASHDC
TO AMEMBASSY SEOUL FLASH

E.O. 11652: GDS
TAGS: PFOR, POPS

SUBJECT: INFORMING PRESIDENT PARK OF IMPENDING MILITARY MEASURES

JOINT STATE/DEFENSE MESSAGE

1. CHARGE AND GENERAL STILLWELL SHOULD IMMEDIATELY CALL ON PRESIDENT PARK TO INFORM HIM OF CERTAIN MEASURES WE INTEND TO TAKE AND OTHERS WE ARE CONSIDERING IN CONNECTION WITH AUGUST 18 JOINT SECURITY AREA INCIDENT.

2. YOU SHOULD TELL PARK THAT WE CONSIDER INCIDENT TO BE HIGHLY PROVOCATIVE ON PART OF NORTH KOREA AND THAT WE MUST MAKE IT ABSOLUTELY CLEAR TO PYONGYANG THAT IT DOES NOT HAVE A FREE HAND TO ENGAGE IN THIS OR SIMILAR ACTIONS IN THE FUTURE. TO SUPPORT THE STRENGTH OF THIS MESSAGE TO PYONGYANG, WE PROPOSE IMMEDIATELY ESTABLISHING DEFCON 3 IN SOUTH KOREA AND TO BRING INTO THE ROK AN ADDITIONAL SQUADRON OF F–4'S FROM KADENA. IN ADDITION WE ARE EXAMINING THE POSSIBILITY OF TAKING SUCH MEASURES AS: [A] HOLDING A B-52 BOMBING EXERCISE IN SOUTH KOREA. [B] BRINGING AN F-111 SQUADRON INTO THE ROK. [C] MOVING A CARRIER TASK FORCE INTO THE SEA OF JAPAN.

3. YOU SHOULD REQUEST PARK'S VIEWS ON NORTH KOREAN ACTIONS AND INTENTIONS, AND REPORT HIS REACTION TO OUR MOVES AND ANY SUGGESTIONS HE MAY HAVE FOR FURTHER ACTION.

KISSINGER

1 Source: Ford Library, National Security Adviser, Presidential Country Files for East Asia and the Pacific, Box 10, Korea, North Korean Tree Incident, August 18, 1976, Telegrams (1). Secret; Flash; Nodis. Drafted by Hurwitz and approved by Kissinger.

284. Telegram 190720Z From the Commander in Chief of the United Nations Command (Stillwell) to the Joint Chiefs of Staff, Secretary of State Kissinger, and Secretary of Defense Rumsfeld, August 19, 1976, 0720Z. 284. Telegram 190720Z From the Commander in Chief of the United Nations Command (Stillwell) to the Joint Chiefs of Staff, Secretary of State Kissinger, and Secretary of Defense Rumsfeld, August 19, 1976, 0720Z.1

August 19, 1976, 0720Z

TELEGRAM

Z 190726Z AUG 76

FM CINCUNC SEOUL
TO JCS WASH DC
SEC STATE WASH DC
SEC DEF WASH DC

INFO CINCPAC HONOLULU HI
CNFK CHINHAE
I CORPS (ROCK/US) GP UIJONGBU

SUBJECT: MEETING WITH PRESIDENT PARK.

1. PER INSTRUCTIONS OF THE ACTING CJCS, AS RELAYED TELEPHONICALLY BY LTG SITTON, I MET MND SUH THIS MORNING; AND THEN PROCEEDED TO A QUICKLY ARRANGED MEETING AT THE BLUE HOUSE.

2. AT THE MEETING WITH MINISTER SUH, I STATED THAT I WAS UNDER INSTRUCTIONS TO MOVE THE UNITED NATIONS COMMAND TO DEFCON 3. THAT I HAD TOLD WASHINGTON THAT I WAS CONFIDENT THAT THE MND WOULD ENDORSE THAT ACTION; AND THAT THE FIRST PURPOSE OF THIS MEETING WAS TO CONFIRM THAT. SUH AGREED AND WE SET 190200Z AS THE TIME DEFCON 3 WOULD BECOME EFFECTIVE. I ALSO REPORTED TO HIM THAT AN F4 SQUADRON WOULD BEGIN DEPLOYMENT FROM OKINAWA IN THE NEXT FEW HOURS. FINALLY, I TOLD HIM THAT WE WERE DEVELOPING A PLAN TO COMPLETE THE TREE OPERATION.

3. MND SUH, GENERAL RO (THE ROK CJCS) AND I THEN PROCEEDED TO THE BLUE HOUSE. MND STARTED OFF BY SUMMARIZING FOR THE PRESIDENT THE KEY ASPECTS OF OUR EARLIER DISCUSSION, NOTABLY INCLUDING THE COORDINATED MOVE TO DEFCON 3 AND THE F4 DEPLOYMENT.

4. PRESIDENT PARK-CALM, DELIBERATE AND POSITIVE THROUGHOUT- STARTED OFF WITH FOLLOWING COMMENTS: A. FIRST EXPRESSION OF HIS DEEP PERSONAL CONCERN ABOUT AN INCIDENT WHICH HE FOUND "BEYOND HUMAN REASON," AND TRANSMITTAL OF HIS HEARTFELT CONDOLENCES TO THE FAMILIES OF THE TWO OFFICERS CONCERNED.

B. CONVICTION THAT THE SITUATION WAS SUFFICIENTLY GRAVE TO DEMAND MORE THAN PROTEST FOR, IF REACTION SO LIMITED, MORE SERIOUS INCIDENTS WOULD LIKELY OCCUR IN THE FUTURE.

C. VIEW THAT THE MOVE TO DEFCON 3 AND DEPLOYMENT OF THE F4 SQUADRON WERE APPROPRIATE.

D. BELIEF THAT ONE NEEDED TO PROCEED ON TWO TRACKS: (1) ISSUANCE OF THE STRONGEST POSSIBLE PROTEST TO INCLUDE DEMAND FOR APOLOGY, FOR REPARATION, AND FOR GUARANTEE OF NON- RECURRENCE—ALL WITH THE RECOGNITION THAT THE COMMUNISTS ARE NOT LIKELY TO BE FORTHCOMING.

(2) DELIBERATE DEVELOPMENT OF APPROPRIATE COUNTERACTION, EMPHASIZING THAT "WE DO NOT WANT OT PLAY INTO THEIR HANDS." HE SAID THAT WE SHOULD TEACH THE NORTH KOREANS A LESSON; AND SHOULD DO SO WITHOUT USE OF ARMS (A POINT WHICH HE WAS SUBSEQUENTLY TO RE- EMPHASIZE). HERE, I CONJECTURE THAT THE PRESIDENT WAS REFERRING TO THE OVERALL DISPOSITION AND PROCEDURES LONG IN EFFECT AT PANMUNJOM, WHICH THE ROKS BELIEVE OPERATE TO OUR DISADVANTAGE.

5. I TOLD PRESIDENT THAT, FROM WHAT I COULD GLEAN, THE USG FELT VERY STRONGLY ABOUT THE INCIDENT AND THAT ITS VIEWS ON COUNTERMEASURE GENERALLY PARALLELED HIS. THERE WOULD MOST CERTAINLY BE A STRONG PROTEST LODGED, IN THE FIRST INSTANCE, BY ME THROUGH MAC. IT WAS DISTINCTLY POSSIBLE THAT MORE AUTHORITATIVE CHANNELS WOULD ALSO BE USED. SECOND, THERE WERE THE MEASURES OF THIS TYPE MIGHT WELL BE UNDER CONSIDERATION. THE PRESIDENT INTERJECTED TO SAY THAT A SHOW OF FORCE, BY ITSELF WOULD NOT IMPRESS THE NORTH, AND MADE PASSING REFERENCE TO THE FACT THAT DEPLOYMENTS AFTER THE PUEBLO INCIDENT DID NOT PREVENT THE DOWNING OF THE EC-121. I CONTINUED THAT A THIRD ACTION WHICH I FELT TO BE ESSENTIALS WAS TO COMPLETE THE TREE OPERATION, FOR REASONS BOTH OF THE PRINCIPAL AND PRACTICAL SECURITY.

6. PICKING UP HIS LAST POINT, THE PRESIDENT AGREED THAT THE TREE PROBLEM SHOULD BE DEALT WITH. THE NORTH KOREANS MIGHT NOT INTERFERE BUT WE HAD TO BE FULLY PREPARED FOR THE MORE LIKELY CONTINGENCY THAT THEY WOULD. IF THEY DID, IT WAS ESSENTIAL THAT THEY COME OUT SECOND BEST. IN HIS ESTIMATE, THE BEST WAY TO INSURE THE SUCCESS OF THE OPERATION WAS TO HAVE AVAILABLE, FOR USE AS NEEDED, ADEQUATE PERSONNEL HIGHLY SKILLED IN THE "MARTIAL ARTS" BY WHICH HE MEANT TAEKWONDO. TO THAT END HE WAS PREPARED TO MAKE AVAILABLE TO ME 50 OR MORE MULTIPLE BLACK BELT HOLDERS FROM THE ROK SPECIAL FORCES FOR INTEGRATION INTO MY FORCES AS KATUSA. I THANKED HIM FOR HIS OFFER AND TOLD HIM I WOULD TAKE IT INTO CONSIDERATION IN DEVELOPMENT OF THE PLAN WHICH I EXPECTED TO SUBMIT TO MY JCS WITHIN THE NEXT 24 HOURS. WHEN I MENTIONED THAT IF THE OPERATION WERE SWIFTLY MOUNTED, THE KPA MIGHT NOT BE ABLE TO REACT IN TIME TO INTERFERE, THE PRESIDENT OPINED THAT IT MIGHT BE BETTER TO PROCEED MORE DELIBERATELY IN ORDER TO INSURE KPA REACTION AND A RESULTANT SOUND THRASHING TO BE ADMINISTERED, HE AGAIN EMPHASIZED WITHOUT FIRE ARMS. THE MEETING CONCLUDED ON THIS NOTE.

1 Source: Ford Library, National Security Adviser, Presidential Country Files for East Asia and the Pacific, Box 10, Korea, North Korean Tree Incident, August 18, 1976, Telegrams (3). Secret.

285. Minutes of Washington Special Actions Group Meeting, Washington, August 19, 1976, 8:12-9:15 a.m. 285. Minutes of Washington Special Actions Group Meeting, Washington, August 19, 1976, 8:12-9:15 a.m. 1

Washington, August 19, 1976, 8:12-9:15 a.m.

WASHINGTON SPECIAL ACTIONS GROUP

August 19, 1976

Time and Place: 8:12 a.m. - 9:15 a.m., White House Situation Room

Subject: Korea

PARTICIPANTS:

Chairman: Secretary Henry A. Kissinger

State: Charles Robinson

Philip Habib

DOD: William Clements

Morton Abramowitz

JCS: Admiral James L. Holloway

Lt. Gen. William Y. Smith

CIA: George Bush

Evelyn Colbert

NSC Staff: William G. Hyland

William Gleysteen

Michael Hornblow

DECISIONS: 1. Seek Presidential approval of a military action to cut down the tree and try to do it in such a way as to avoid confrontation.

2. Seek Presidential approval to start the B-52 exercise. The first such B-52 run should be timed to coincide with the tree cutting.

3. To start moving the Naval Task Force south into either the Sea of Japan or the Yellow Sea.

4. To start moving 18 F-111s from Mountain Home, Idaho.

5. To develop a contingency plan for hitting the North Korean barracks near the JSA.

Secretary Kissinger: I would like some account of why it took so long for our reaction force to go in.

Adm. Holloway: We have not received an account which satisfies us. Stilwell was in Japan when the incident took place and is investigating.

Secretary Kissinger: I complained to the Chinese yesterday. They asked a good question. They wanted to know why we had cameras there if we were not expecting an incident?

Adm. Holloway: It was a precaution because of previous incidents.

Secretary Kissinger: Okay. Their next question was —if we had a photographer there, why didn't we do something?

Adm. Holloway: We have not received a satisfactory answer from Stilwell on that.

Secretary Kissinger: Why did Stilwell go into see Park alone when he was specifically instructed to go in with the DCM?

Mr. Abramowitz: Well he called Stern and Stern said for him to go ahead.

Secretary Kissinger: But did he tell Stern that Stern was supposed to accompany him?

Mr. Abramowitz: He felt that Park was supposed to be informed right away. That was the environment.

Secretary Kissinger: We are not going to let Stilwell run loose. We are not going to let him act like MacArthur. We could have cut him out completely and insured that the whole thing be handled by the DCM.

Adm. Holloway: He talked to the Minister of Defense, then —

Secretary Kissinger: It should not happen again.

Mr. Clements: I will send him a message.

Secretary Kissinger: I heard on the radio this morning a report that the Pentagon says that military action is inconceivable. The President will hit the ceiling when he hears that because I told him we would be discussing possible military actions and that is what the President wants.

Adm. Holloway: It must have been press conjecture.

Mr. Clements: It was probably from our PA. Secretary Kissinger: George, do you have a briefing?

Mr. Bush: (Begins briefing — see attached.)

Secretary Kissinger: We must brief our NATO allies.

Mr. Bush (continues briefing.)

Mr. Habib: Neutral observers (referring to NNSC members at Panmunjom) won't go.

Mr. Bush (finishes briefing.)

Secretary Kissinger: The fact is that they beat two of our men to death. Let's not lose sight of that.

Mr. Clements: Yesterday Henry asked a question about the order of battle. Holloway's judgment was that they are relatively in balance. Is that also your judgment, George?

Mr. Bush: Evelyn?

Mrs. Colbert: Yes, we basically agree. Our ground forces don't count for much. There is a lack of firepower.

Secretary Kissinger: How come 40,000 Americans don't count for much?

Mr. Habib: They consist of one division. The rest are air and ground support.

Adm. Holloway: Our air and mobile forces count for more than is reflected in the numbers. They have great influence.

Secretary Kissinger: I am uneasy about these net assessments. You can look at military history. Wars are often won by the side with the smaller forces. You look at World War I where the Germans were outnumbered. Then again in World War II, the Germans were outnumbered by the French and British. They were able to concentrate their forces at decisive key points and win.

Mr. Habib: Our battle plan for Korea is based on exactly that assumption.

Adm. Holloway: On balance the South Korean forces with US assistance are adequate to stop the North Koreans from reaching Seoul. However a surprise attack could upset that. But that is no longer a possibility since we have gone to DEFCON 3. Of course a lot depends on how the troops fight for there can be breakthroughs. One breakthrough can raise havoc. A bold stroke could cause a lot of trouble. But the North Koreans by their attack on the two men have given away the element of surprise.

Secretary Kissinger: If they had wanted to launch an attack they would not have beat the two Americans to death.

Mr. Hyland: It is obvious from their propaganda that the Chinese were cool to the North Korean August 5 statement. If the North Koreans really want to fight they will need Chinese and Russian support.

Secretary Kissinger: If we do nothing they will think of us as the paper tigers of Saigon. They might then try to create a series of events. If we do nothing there may be another incident and then another.

Mr. Hyland: There is a substantial body of opinion in the US that we should pull out of Korea. Ed Reichauer in the Christian Science Monitor wrote that we should not honor our commitment even if attacked.

Mr. Robinson: When was this article?

Mr. Hyland: About three weeks ago. There may be a problem if the North Koreans think that this crisis will cause controversy in this country.

Secretary Kissinger: Certainly there will be controversy. There would be a controversy if we did nothing. The only way to act is to do something effectively.

Mr. Bush: [text not declassified]

Secretary Kissinger: What kind of alert did they have for the EC-121?

Mr. Bush: There was no such strip alert at that time.

Mrs. Colbert: It was intended to demonstrate to the US a high degree of readiness and to give us pause from undertaking military action. They laid everything on before publicizing their alert.

Secretary Kissinger: You still think that yesterday's incident was a planned action?

Mrs. Colbert: Yes. The way they handled the alert was another indication that it was planned. Within one hour of our going on DEFCON 3 they had their strip alert.

Secretary Kissinger: You do think it was planned.

Mrs. Colbert: An incident was planned but the actual killing of the two Americans may not have been in the plan. Those guards have been indoctrinated to hate Americans. The Koreans are very violent. The weight of the evidence including the number of Korean reinforcements ready prior to the incident indicates that our interpretation is true.

Secretary Kissinger: Obviously the tree was going to be a contentious issue and it was probably clear to the North Koreans that our going-in was likely to create an incident. So why didn't we also anticipate this. Where was our reaction force? We had no authority to prune the tree. We went in, advised the North Korean Officer who said good and then all hell broke loose.

Mr. Clements: Well, I agree. I remember our discussion yesterday and what you (to Holloway) said about our troops being Vietnam veterans trained to obey the rules. But they were armed and I can't understand how they could have let the Koreans get that close to them and get themselves clobbered and chopped up.

Secretary Kissinger: What military options do we have?

Adm. Holloway: Stilwell was in Japan during the incident and still does not understand what happened. It was a surprise to him. One thing he did point out on the telephone is that once the two officers were killed the troops were leaderless.

Secretary Kissinger: What about the guy in the observation tower.

Adm. Holloway: Our information on that is garbled. There is no reasonable excuse. Since yesterday's meeting we have gone up to DEFCON 3 and our F-4s arrived in Korea before nightfall. The North Koreans are aware of it because they complained about it at the MAC meeting.

Secretary Kissinger: Why?

Mr. Habib: Technically speaking any introduction of forces into Korea is illegal. We have done this thousands of times and the North Koreans have always complained. They do it too. The introduction of any weapons not there at the time of the agreement is illegal.

Secretary Kissinger: What are we going to do?

Adm. Holloway: The first priority is to prune or cut the tree. The preliminary plan is to move in with some forces and chop it down quickly.

Secretary Kissinger: Does the Army have highly trained tree choppers?

Adm. Holloway: It would be done by specially trained Army engineers. The second option mentioned by Stilwell would be to announce to the press and observers and the North Koreans that we were going in to cut down the tree. Stilwell says this would be okay politically but might cause some military problems.

Secretary Kissinger: I respect Stilwell's military judgments but politics is not his forte. Can you imagine inviting the world press to a tree cutting. We would be a laughing stock. It would be theatrical. The thing is to do it and then get out. The press could be invited in to look at the stump.

Adm. Holloway: The plan as we know it is not entirely adequate. They are getting it to us.

Mr. Clements: This business of sending in a squad is nonsense. It will just lead to a confrontation and may get a bunch of others killed. What for? A tree? One guy with explosives, some plastique, could do the job. He could go in on a bicycle. Why risk a bunch of people for a tree? I don't like it at all. It makes no sense. We should not expect unarmed Americans to go in there and get killed over a tree.

Secretary Kissinger: The basic point is that we know we have the right to cut down the tree. They have killed two Americans and if we do nothing they will do it again. We have to do something.

Adm. Holloway: The Chiefs are looking at the tree as a military action and looking to see if we have the force to back it up. One option we are looking at is to have the SR-71 penetrate North Korean air space for reconnaissance purposes and advertise this to the world. Nobody would get hurt if we did this.

Secretary Kissinger: Why advertise?

Adm. Holloway: Advertising would tend to embarrass them.

Secretary Kissinger: Advertising would get us involved in a UN debate.

Adm. Holloway: We can advertise or not advertise it. With regard to the B-52 training flights they will proceed from Guam to South Korea and approach to within 43 miles of the DMZ. They will drop radar bombs and return. One option would be to use live conventional ordnance and bring them closer to the DMZ. We could also adjust the profile of B-52s so that North Korean radar can detect them.

Mr. Hyland: How many aircraft?

Adm. Holloway: There would be two to three aircraft per cell. They could have a live load of bombs.

Secretary Kissinger: There is not much point in having a live load unless it was always part of the plan.

Gen. Smith: No, it wasn't.

Secretary Kissinger: Then let's just do it. It is better to talk less and do more.

Adm. Holloway: Is that an execute order?

Secretary Kissinger: Let me check it out with Kansas City. What else can we do?

Adm. Holloway: This show of force in our air operations would not be too impressive to the North Koreans. We could reinforce our ground forces in Korea. The Marines on Okinawa could get there in five days. Or we could keep them afloat. We could fly the Marines from Okinawa in C-130s but a couple of battalions of Marines might not make much difference. We could also send in a Ranger battalion. That could be done in five days. They can do unconventional warfare tasks. But I am not sure we can get the attention of the North Koreans by these kinds of moves.

Secretary Kissinger: Well they have seen us do it twice.

Adm. Holloway: We could use a guided weapon such as an Honest John against a pinpointed target. But the Army can't guarantee its accuracy. We could use artillery to hit some of their observers but the trouble with that is they could come back and do the same thing.

Another option is to prevail upon the South Koreans to reinforce the offshore islands. The North Koreans would regard that as a very provocative act.

We can move our Naval forces into the Yellow Sea. That would be a high visibility move for until now we have restricted ourselves from the Yellow Sea. We could be there in five days.

Secretary Kissinger: Before we chop the tree down and we have to do it tonight, can we get one B-52 cell there which they can see before the tree is chopped down?

Adm. Holloway: Yes. The B-52s could be evident first thing in the morning Korean time.

Gen. Smith: They can be there in 7-8 hours.

Adm. Holloway: We could hit the DMZ or North Korean targets by air or a power plant. But this is not practicable in view of the North Koreans' high state of alert. We could hit the tree with a laser bomb.

Secretary Kissinger: Isn't there anything along the DMZ that we can hit?

Adm. Holloway: There are some observation posts. But it would be better to use artillery rather than aircraft. If we go into North Korean airspace we are violating their territorial sovereignty and it would make our airbase a target.

Secretary Kissinger: The logical thing to do is to hit the base from which the killers of the Americans came from.

Mr. Abramowitz: That could be done with artillery.

Adm. Holloway: Yes. With aircraft you have to take massive defensive measures but artillery is discrete.

Secretary Kissinger: Are the barracks reachable with artillery?

Mr. Abramowitz: Possibly only by South Korean artillery.

Mr. Habib: They can be hit with American artillery.

Secretary Kissinger: But will we know exactly what is being hit? Can we know exactly what is going to happen?

Adm. Holloway: We can come back with a plan.

Secretary Kissinger: It seems to me that the most logical thing is to hit the barracks. There would then be a high probability of getting the people who did this.

Mr. Clements: We all agree that taking out that tree is a must. But we should also do these other things. We have to get that task force moving and do the B-52s. But what I would like to do is to have a party land up that coast and blow the hell out of an industrial site. It could be done [text not declassified]

Adm. Holloway: It could be a "seal" operation. We would need to have 24 hours and two selected targets. They could go in on a rubber boat. There would be a high risk of success.

Secretary Kissinger: What does that mean - a high probability of success?

Adm. Holloway: It could be dangerous as hell. If we pick a target which is significant in their view we would have a 50% chance of doing it without getting some people killed. The North Koreans are in a high state of alert.

Mr. Clements: What do you think, Henry?

Secretary Kissinger: I am a bit leery of getting Americans captured that far up the coast. We have to make it clear that we will not be pushed around and that we are not afraid of the North Koreans, If we let this incident go then there will be other incidents. Ideally we should do something quickly and then generate our forces afterwards. I remember with the EC-121 incident that by the time we had identified our targets, and had meetings and moved the carriers — it was too late.

Mr. Bush: If we try to take that tree down probably that same group of North Koreans as before will come out.

Secretary Kissinger: If we shell the barracks maybe we don't need to take the tree down.

Mr. Habib: The barracks are outside of the Joint Security Area. They have reaction forces outside of the JSA. We are only talking about two miles.

Mr. Clements: I don't like the idea of shelling the barracks. It could start something. What do we do after we shell them? The North Koreans would certainly react violently. I think we should go up the coast.

Adm. Holloway: If we did that, we might have difficulty getting the guys out.

Secretary Kissinger: Why should that operation be with frogmen rather than airplanes? Airplanes would be a lot safer. Also a coastal operation would risk an infinitely more violent North Korean reaction. However the barracks are clearly related to the incident. If we aren't willing to accept some risk then we should not do anything.

Mr. Clements: I like the other operation better. It could be a harbor and we could blow up a couple of ships. They would be wondering what happened and who did it.

Secretary Kissinger: If we don't take that tree tonight we will have to forget about the tree.

Mr. Bush: They will react.

Mr. Abramowitz: If we send in 35 guys, would they mortar?

Mr. Habib: No, they would either leave us alone or move in 100 people.

Secretary Kissinger: What do I tell the President?

Adm. Holloway: That we are going in to cut down the tree. That our forces will be in position and ready to act depending on what happens. And they will take it from there.

Mr. Hyland: If necessary could we withdraw our forces and then plaster them?

Mr. Clements: Why can't we just send one guy in there?

Secretary Kissinger: The purpose of doing something is to show that we are ready to take risks. The trick is to do something from which they will back off.

Mr. Hyland: Then we will get Stilwell's plan and use all men possible.

Secretary Kissinger: It should be done quickly.

Mr. Hyland: Stilwell will need fairly precise instructions about what happens if a fight starts.

Mr. Habib (explains situation from a map)

Adm. Holloway: There could be 200-300 people and a guy with a chain saw.

Mr. Abramowitz: The North Koreans probably expect this and are making plans for it.

Secretary Kissinger: One always assumes the unlimited willingness of opponents to take risks. The purpose of this exercise is to overawe them. We are 200 million people and they are 16 million.

Mr. Abramowitz: They could overawe us locally.

Mr. Hyland: If a fight starts we should get our men out and then plaster the area.

Adm. Holloway: We have to cut down the tree before that happens. We can go in with a full battalion.

Secretary Kissinger: We can start the B-52s before.

Adm. Holloway: Yes.

Mr. Clements: We can cut the tree down and plan the B-52 exercise so that they see the B-52s coming. That will give them something to occupy themselves with in Pyongang. We can cut the tree down while the B-52s are on their way and then keep the B-52s going for a few days.

Secretary Kissinger: How many days.

Adm. Holloway: Five days.

Secretary Kissinger: And make a contingency plan for shelling the barracks.

Mr. Clements: And the Navy task force should move in that direction.

Adm. Holloway: And we can move the F-111s.

Secretary Kissinger: Yes and start the task force moving.

Meeting ended at 9:15 a. m.

1 Source: Ford Library, National Security Adviser, NSC Staff for East Asia and Pacific Affairs, Convenience Files, Box 27, WSAG Meeting, Korean Incident, August 18, 1976. Secret. The meeting occurred in the White House Situation Room. The briefing by the Director of Central Intelligence is attached but not published. Hyland’s draft telegram to Scowcroft, August 19, reported on proposed responses to the attack. (Ibid., Presidential Country Files for East Asia and the Pacific, Box 10, Korea, North Korean Tree Incident, August 18, 1976 [2]) On the morning of August 21, UNC forces felled the disputed tree.

286. Minutes of Washington Special Actions Group Meeting, Washington, August 25, 1976, 10:30 a.m.. 286. Minutes of Washington Special Actions Group Meeting, Washington, August 25, 1976, 10:30 a.m..1

Washington, August 25, 1976, 10:30 a.m.

WASHINGTON SPECIAL ACTIONS GROUP MEETING

August 25, 1976

Time and Place: 10:30 a.m. – [omission in original], White House Situation Room

Subject: Korea: MAC Meeting and Possible Military Action

PARTICIPANTS:

Chairman: Henry A. Kissinger

State: Philip Habib

DOD: William Clements

JCS: Gen. George S. Brown

CIA: George Bush

NSC: William Hyland

William Gleysteen

Kissinger: I see that Stilwell's now beginning to take a tough line even though he was so cautious last week when I was talking of tough action. I saw his incoherent message. As I understand it, the North Korean proposal is evil, immoral, dangerous, etc. but it amounts to unilateral North Korean withdrawal of their guardposts. I want to know what's wrong with it. Would they withdraw all their guardpost and personnel from our side? Supposing we said there must be freedom of movement but that we can accept the proposal to remove the guardposts?

Habib: We couldn't send our guards over to their side. There are two kinds of personnel. They are suggesting that the security or guard personnel be split apart, but other personnel could presumably still move around within the joint security area.

Kissinger: But we would get rid of the North Korean posts on our side and this would be a good thing.

Habib: There may be some problem of the effect on the armistice agreement.

Kissinger: I want to play it as a concession on the part of the North Koreans. We should construct our answer so that their proposal looks like a concession rather than a deal. Let's first get rid of the guardposts.

Clements: Henry's saying make it look like we kicked them out.

Kissinger: Yes. First get rid of the posts, then deal with the problem of access by our security personnel into their part of the area.

Clements: I like that idea. Our people get treated so badly. They get kicked, spit on, cursed, and we are unable to tell our people to protect themselves. Every morning they have a special meeting where they are told to take abuse and to maximize their restraint. Remember our man who got kicked in the throat not long ago?

Kissinger: Who was that? When?

Habib: A Navy commander who got badly kicked in June 1975.

Brown: We had to protect the Pentagon the same way during the riots. Our men had to take almost endless abuse without reacting.

Kissinger: You know my preference was to hit the barracks but that was overruled. Now, we have to find a way of winding the thing up. The practical consequences will be that they will have removed the guardposts.

Clements: And the guards, (mistakenly believing that the North Korean barracks in the JSA area would be removed under the August 25 proposal)

Kissinger: Their barracks will stay. As I understand it their two guardposts on our side would go. We have no posts on their side so we would dismantle nothing.

Habib: I am reading from the North Korean statement: "In order to prevent a conflict between military personnel of both sides and in order that each side insure the security of each personnel in the conference area, Panmunjom, we believe it most reasonable to separate the security personnel of both sides in this area with the MDL between them so that they may perform their guard duty moving in their respective area only. This will make both sides have their guard posts only in their respective part of the conference area. And this will prevent military personnel of both sides from both encountering each other and passing by the posts of the other side. Then there will occur no conflicts.

Kissinger: In effect they are offering to dismantle their guardposts. We should say to them: We notice your proposal amounts to removing two guard posts on our side; we have none on your side; we believe there should be freedom of movement in the zone and suggest that our Secretaries meet to discuss this. First we have to get their assurances about the safety of our personnel, then we can discuss implementation of drawing a line. We should play it up as a retreat on their part. Phil — you will have to find some form of words to do this.

Habib: We will draft a message and we will also draft guidance. We will have to clear both with President Park.

Kissinger: Every time I wanted to hit hard at the North Koreans last week I was told that Park didn't want to take military action. Now I gather he wants to do something.

Clements: He really was playing it very soft at the beginning of this business.

Kissinger: I think we are coming out pretty well.

(Turning to Clements) But we called this meeting to discuss your plan. Go ahead and explain it.

Clements: (Using a map of North Korea and pointing to the area of Sonjin Hang Harbor) We all recognize this coast line is fairly open. Here is a fuel dump. It is easy to get into the harbor. I would like to interrupt to emphasize that in Defense we are treating this matter on a really strict "need-to-know" basis.

[text not declassified]

Brown: Better make that November 1 rather than December 1.

Clements: It will be too damned cold.

Kissinger: How about November 2? It may not make the front page that day. What would they do?

Clements: [text not declassified]

Kissinger: George, what do you think?

Bush: I think it would be terribly risky, but I know you don't need our advice on that score.

Clements: [text not declassified]

Kissinger: What kind of defenses do the North Koreans have?

Brown: They have superb defenses, and the operation would involve a very high risk. The North Koreans have excellent coastal radar. It would be a very high-risk operation.

Clements: I don't completely agree with that.

Kissinger: [text not declassified]

Clements: [text not declassified]

Kissinger: What would we have achieved if the North Koreans did not know who did it?

Clements: The advantage would be the element of doubt.

Brown: They would have to know we did it if it were worth doing.

Kissinger: I'm just thinking the process through. No matter how we did it, the North Koreans would charge us with being responsible for it. Then we would be faced with questioning by the Senate,Foreign Relations Committee and what would we say to them?

Brown: According to Buchen, we would have to report under the War Powers Act to both the Speaker and the President Pro Tempore of the Senate.

Kissinger: What would we say to them as to why we did it?

Clements: Our Assistant General Counsel says you would not have to report under the War Powers Act.

Kissinger: They (the Congress) will say that we have to report and if we don't want to lie we would be forced to take a no-comment line which would in effect be admitting that we did it.

Brown: In explaining why we would have to say that it was a response to the murder of two Americans.

Kissinger: Our explanation would look very weak, particularly after two months (??) I respect your position. Last week I was in favor of firm action but it was overruled at Vail, not by this group. It was a tragedy. I have never seen the North Koreans so scared.

Brown: They didn't get any comfort from the Chinese or Soviets.

Bush: Or from the third world.

Clements: I like the plan.

Brown: I think we should go ahead working out the plan.

Kissinger: Yes. Develop the plan.

Brown: If we have the plan developed, it would be ready if we wanted to use it. [text not declassified]

Kissinger: I think this is a good way.

Clements: I like it. It doesn't have an overt character. I have been told that there have been 200 other such operations and that none of these have surfaced.

Kissinger: It is different for us with the War Powers Act. I don't remember any such operations.

What barracks were we going to hit in North Korea?

Clements: We thought we would need 36 Max (??)

Kissinger: I am positive they would not have hit back. Unfortunately, we can't do it now. My idea had been to cut down the tree, get out of the JSA, take out the North Korean barracks, and then stand down. Of course, there was the risk of further casualties.

Could we have done it with Walleyes? How many Walleyes would it have taken? Could we hit the barracks from our side of the DMZ?

Brown: I don't know how many bombs it would take because I haven't studied the target, but I'm sure we could hit it from our side of the DMZ [text not declassified]

Kissinger: (The advantage of a Walleye would be to) avoid counter-battery fire.

Clements: Why would an air strike avoid counter-battery fire?

Hyland: Because they would not be responding to masked artillery. (??)

Clements: I still think they would have reacted.

Kissinger: You told me last week of your concerns and asked me to relay them to the President, and I did. But the real problem, I think, was not your concerns but the President's speech on Thursday night saying that there were no Americans in combat anywhere in the world. Second, the President was in Vail and I was on an airplane, not the best arrangement for conducting military operations. I don't think the decision had anything to do with your recommendation.

If we can first get the North Koreans to guarantee the safety of our men, then we can cooperate with them on practical plans. We can say that we will have our Secretaries work out the problem of movement of personnel in the JSA while maintaining the principle of the freedom of movement. There are two things to do. First, draft a message on the JSA and second, continue to develop the military plan (for hitting North Korea) but also look at other targets. Then we will have contingency plans next time if there is a further incident.

Brown: I would like to stress once more the close hold we have put on this operation.

Clements: For example, Don (Rumsfeld) knows about the plan but Holcomb doesn't.

Kissinger: Let's keep our extra deployments in Korea until we get the guardposts removed and get some satisfaction from the North Koreans. Don't remove DefCon 3 until we get positive action. Let's try to get a MAC meeting Friday or Saturday.

Habib: We will ask tomorrow and get one Friday. I don't think the North Koreans will stall.

Kissinger: Then after the meeting we can start the drawdown. After we get some satisfaction, we can start to move things down but I want to keep something there for a while.

Clements: We have in mind keeping some of the F-111's in Korea.

Brown: We have sent Stilwell a planning message outlining our views about drawing down from our current alert but they have been told to make no changes without execute order. So far, we have not had any comments from Stilwell on our plan. The B-52's will continue flying through Sunday. If we allow them to down for a while, we would then have the option of resuming them as a pressure tactic if the North Koreans keep giving us trouble.

Kissinger: (to Habib) Ask for a MAC meeting on Friday. Demand assurances from the North Koreans for the safety of our men and then discuss the deployment of our security personnel. The first thing is to get the guard posts removed. Then we can let the Secretaries work out movement of personnel in the JSA.

Habib: I don't think we should make an assurance about safety a precondition.

Kissinger: I want the principle accepted first of all.

Habib: Why don't we imply that they have accepted it or talk on the assumption that they are accepting it?

Kissinger: You can say on the assumption that the North Koreans accept demand for assurances for the safety of our personnel, we are prepared to have them remove their guardposts on our side and to discuss the deployment of our security personnel, while maintaining the principle of freedom of movement in the JSA.

We will discuss the future of B-52 operations next Monday.

1 Source: Ford Library, National Security Adviser, NSC Staff for East Asia and Pacific Affairs, Convenience Files, Box 27, WSAG Meeting, Korean Incident, August 18, 1976. Top Secret; Sensitive. The minutes contain handwritten revisions by Gleysteen. The meeting occurred in the White House Situation Room. Gleysteen sent these minutes to Hyland under an undated memorandum.

287. Telegram 213541 From the Department of State to the Embassy in the Republic of Korea, August 27, 1976, 2010Z. 287. Telegram 213541 From the Department of State to the Embassy in the Republic of Korea, August 27, 1976, 2010Z.1

August 27, 1976, 2010Z

TELEGRAM
Department of State
213541

O 272010Z AUG 76 ZFF4

FM SECSTATE WASHDC
TO AMEMBASSY SEOUL NIACT IMMEDIATE

STATE 213541

E.O. 11652:XGDS-1
TAGS: PFOR, KS, US

SUBJECT: MEETING WITH PRESIDENT PARK
REF: SEOUL 6741

1. YOU SHOULD CALL ON PRESIDENT PARK AS SOON AS POSSIBLE AND TELL HIM THAT UNDER INSTRUCTIONS YOU ARE REPLYING TO HIS COMMENTS TO YOU ON AUGUST 27.

2. YOU SHOULD TELL PARK THAT WE ARE DISMAYED BY HIS DISSATISFACTION WITH OUR MOVES VIS-A-VIS NORTH KOREA AND FIND HIS POSITION DIFFICULT TO UNDERSTAND. IMMEDIATELY FOLLOWING THE AUGUST 18 INCIDENT WE TOOK A NUMBER OF MEASURES (DEFCON 3, DEPLOYMENT OF F-4S AND F-111S, MOVEMENT OF MIDWAY TASK FORCE, B-52 FLIGHTS) WHICH DEMONSTRATED TO THE NORTH KOREANS AND TO THE WORLD THAT WE WOULD NOT TOLERATE SUCH NORTH KOREAN PROVOCATIONS OR PERMIT PYONGYANG TO ESCALATE THE INCIDENT INTO A THREAT AGAINST THE SOUTH. IN THE CONTEXT OF THESE MOVES, WE MOUNTED THE TREE-CUTTING OPERATION — ANOTHER CLEAR-CUT WARNING TO THE NORTH THAT WE WOULD NOT TOLERATE ANY ENCROACHMENT ON OUR RIGHTS OR THREAT TO THE SOUTH.

3. THE NORTH KOREANS HAVE CLEARLY BEEN TAKEN ABACK. MILITARILY, THEY HAVE DONE LITTLE MORE THAN TAKE DEFENSIVE PRECAUTIONS AGAINST OUR BUILD-UP. IN THE JSA THEY STOOD BY AND WATCHED THE TREE-CUTTING WITHOUT RAISING A FINGER. KIM IL-SUNG HAS SENT AN APOLOGETIC MESSAGE ON THE AUGUST 18 INCIDENT. THEIR WHOLE ATTITUDE IN RECENT MEETINGS IN THE JSA HAS BEEN SUBDUED AND BUSINESS-LIKE. THEIR PROPOSAL TO DISMANTLE THEIR GUARD POSTS ON OUR SIDE IS ANOTHER BACKDOWN.

4. THIS RECORD SHOWS THAT IT WAS OUR SIDE WHICH TOOK IMMEDIATE AND RESOLUTE ACTIONS AND THE NORTH KOREAN SIDE WHICH BACKED DOWN. WE THUS FIND IT DIFFICULT TO UNDERSTAND PARK'S VIEW THAT WE HAVE SOMEHOW MADE CONCESSIONS TO PYONGYANG.

5. YOU SHOULD TELL PARK THAT IN OUR HANDLING OF THIS INCIDENT, WE HAVE PROVED THE VIABILITY OF OUR MUTUAL DEFENSE TREATY AND DEMONSTRATED A RAPID CAPACITY TO AUGMENT OUR FORCES MASSIVELY. THIS SHOULD BE A SOURCE OF GREAT SATISFACTION TO PARK AND TO THE KOREAN PEOPLE, RATHER THAN BEING THE OCCASION FOR THE KIND OF CRITICISM NOW BEING VOICED.

6. YOU SHOULD POINT OUT TO PARK THAT IN HIS CONVERSATION ON AUGUST 19 WITH GENERAL STILWELL, HE CAUTIONED AGAINST OVERREACTING AND PLAYING INTO THE HANDS OF THE NORTH KOREANS. IN HIS MEETING THE NEXT DAY WITH STILWELL AND STERN HE EXPRESSED APPRECIATION FOR THE FIRM POSITION BEING TAKEN BY THE USG AND FOCUSED ON THE TREE-CUTTING OPERATION AS A PLAN WHICH WOULD SHOW THE KIND OF FIRMNESS AND RESOLVE THAT WOULD BE UNDERSTOOD BY PYONGYANG. HE ALSO CAUTIONED AGAINST ESCALATING THE INCIDENT UNLESS NORTH DID SO. THE FACT THAT CONFRONTATION WITH PYONGYANG NOW SEEMS TO HAVE PLAYED OUT ALONG LINES PARK HIMSELF CONSIDERED DESIRABLE MAKES HIS RECENT COMMENTS EVEN MORE PERPLEXING. ACCORDING TO EMBASSY REPORT, PARK SAID THAT IF NORTH DID NOT RESPOND TO TREE CUTTING BY ESCALATING' THEN THE MATTER WOULD BE DROPPED.

7. WITH SPECIFIC RESPECT TO PARK'S INSISTENCE ON FURTHER ACTION AGAINST NORTH KOREA, YOU SHOULD POINT OUT THAT OUR FIRM RESPONSE TO DATE HAS MADE IT CLEAR TO PYONGYANG AND THE WORLD THAT WE ARE FULLY PREPARED TO DEFEND THE SOUTH AGAINST NORTH KOREAN AGGRESSION AND TO GUARANTEE THE UNC'S ABILITY TO OPERATE UNDER THE TERMS OF THE ARMISTICE AGREEMENT. PYONGYANG, FOR ITS PART, HAS INDICATED THAT IT HAS GOTTEN THIS MESSAGE. TO UNDERTAKE ADDITIONAL PUNITIVE MEASURES THROUGH THE USE OF FORCE AT THIS TIME WITHOUT FURTHER NORTH KOREAN PROVOCATION WOULD NOT BE UNDERSTOOD IN THE UNITED STATES AND BY WORLD OPINION. PARK MUST BE LED TO APPRECIATE THAT WE HAVE BROAD CONSIDERATIONS WHICH WE MUST TAKE INTO ACCOUNT DOMESTICALLY AND INTERNATIONALLY. OUR ACTIONS HAVE BEEN UNDERSTOOD AND SUPPORTED, AND WE WANT TO KEEP IT THAT WAY. THIS IS IN PARK'S INTEREST AS WELL. IN ADDITION, PARK OBVIOUSLY KNOWS THAT PYONGYANG WILL TRY TO PORTRAY US AS THE AGGRESSOR DURING THE FORTHCOMING UNGA. TO TAKE FURTHER MEASURES THROUGH USE OF FORCE AT THIS TIME MIGHT PLAY INTO THEIR HANDS AND RISK LOSING THE APPROVAL WE HAVE WON SO FAR IN THE HANDLING OF THIS INCIDENT.

8. WITH REGARD TO PHASE DOWN OF U.S. AUGMENTATION MEASURES, YOU MAY TELL PARK THAT CURRENT B-52 FLIGHTS WILL END ON AUGUST 29, ALTHOUGH ADDITIONAL FLIGHTS ARE PLANNED ON INTERMITTENT BASIS AFTER THAT. WITH REGARD TO OTHER FORCES, THEY WILL CLEARLY HAVE TO BE REDEPLOYED OUT OF KOREA, ALTHOUGH THIS OBVIOUSLY WILL NOT HAPPEN IF PYONGYANG TAKES ANY ACTION WHICH WOULD APPEAR TO MAKE SUCH DEPLOYMENT UNWISE. HOW AND OVER WHAT TIME PERIOD THIS REDEPLOYMENT WILL TAKE PLACE WILL BE DISCUSSED WITH THE ROKG.

9. FYI: WE ARE NOT PLEASED WITH PARK'S ATTITUDE. YOU SHOULD MAKE ABOVE POINTS FIRMLY AND NOT ALLOW ANY INNUENDOES ABOUT LACK OF U.S. RESOLVE GO UNANSWERED. REALIZE SOME OF ABOVE FOLLOWS WHAT YOU HAVE ALREADY SAID, BUT THIS TIME YOU ARE TALKING UNDER INSTRUCTIONS. END FYI.

KISSINGER

1 Source: National Archives, Record Group 59, Central Foreign Policy Files. Secret; Niact Immediate; Nodis. Drafted by Director of the Korea desk Edward Hurwitz; cleared by Hummel, Habib, and Deputy Executive Secretary Peter Sebastian; and approved by Kissinger. On August 28, Sneider reported that he had met with Park and had carried out his instructions. (Telegram 6748 from Seoul; ibid.)

288. Memorandum From the Deputy Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs (Hyland) to President Ford, Washington, September 5, 1976. 288. Memorandum From the Deputy Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs (Hyland) to President Ford, Washington, September 5, 1976.1

Washington, September 5, 1976

THE WHITE HOUSE
WASHINGTON

September 5, 1976

MEMORANDUM FOR: THE PRESIDENT
FROM: WILLIAM G. HYLAND [WGH initialed]

SUBJECT: Revision of the Korean DMZ Agreement

It is virtually certain that we will sign a new agreement tomorrow morning with the North Koreans, establishing new regulations for the Joint Security Area where the August 18 incident occurred.

Following the murder of two American Officers in the DMZ and the firm U.S. response, the dispute was referred, at our insistence, to the U.N. Armistice Commission (MAC). At the first meeting, the North Koreans, speaking for Kim Il-sung, expressed "regret" that the incident had taken place and proposed that the Secretaries of the MAC meet to consider changes in the Agreement governing security of each side's forces in the Joint Security Area (JSA).

We agreed and meetings have taken place between the Secretaries of both sides over the past two weeks. As the talks have progressed the North Koreans have conceded several changes to our benefit and final agreement has been reached on a modification to be signed and published jointly tomorrow morning. It provides that the military of both sides will be restricted to their respective sides of the Military Demarcation Line and will not cross into the territory of the other; that neither side will construct barriers or any other obstacle to the vision or right of way in the territory of the other; the security of each other's personnel will be guaranteed; and that the North Koreans will remove existing guard posts (4) on the United Nations side in the JSA.

This should bring the incident to a close on very favorable terms. What started as a probable attempt by the North Koreans to enhance their position at the Non-Aligned Conference then in session in Colombo, has ended — due to the firmness of the U.S. response — in a clear setback to North Korea's international image, as well as a loss of "face" in the Far East.

After publication of the new Agreement on Monday, which will come into effect in ten days, we will gradually return U.S. forces to their former status, going to DEFCON 4 on Monday and commencing the partial withdrawal of the two fighter squadrons (F-4s and F-llls), the following week. We will also withdraw the Midway, after a port visit to Pusan, although we will continue with monthly B-52 training flights.

In sum, our demands have been met; the Koreans expressed regret (the closest they will come to an outright apology); they have agreed to guarantee the safety of our personnel, and have unilaterally withdrawn their four guard posts from the zone.

1 Source: Ford Library, National Security Adviser, Presidential Country Files for East Asia and the Pacific, Box 10, Korea (19). Confidential. Ford initialed the first page of the memorandum.

289. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, September 15, 1976, 2:30 p.m. 289. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, September 15, 1976, 2:30 p.m. 1

Washington, September 15, 1976, 2:30 p.m.

THE WHITE HOUSE
WASHINGTON

MEMORANDUM OF CONVERSATION

PARTICIPANTS:

Brent Scowcroft

Ambassador Richard Sneider

William Gleysteen

DATE AND TIME: September 15, 1976; 2:30 p. m.
SUBJECT: August 18 Incident at Panmunjom; U.S.-Korean Relations

General Scowcroft concurred with Ambassador Sneider's view that the August 18 incident at Panmunjom had come out better than expected — and apparently to our net advantage. Sneider thought it would have a beneficial effect in the U.N. and Scowcroft noted the benefit in the United States, especially in Congress, though the relief might prove temporary.

Scowcroft asked why President Park, after his cautious initial reaction to the August 18 incident, ended up advocating such belligerent measures toward North Korea. Park's toughness seemed to grow as his fears subsided in the face of our buildup and North Korea's soft reaction. Sneider suggested a number of possible reasons for the switch. Perhaps Park was disappointed that the North Koreans had not offered resistance to the tree-cutting operation which would have allowed his special forces to inflict some vengeance. (Despite instructions to the contrary, the ROK forces for the tree-cutting may have been armed.) He explained that Park had a parochial, Israeli complex stemming in part from the protection we have accorded to Korea for so long — Park tends to ignore or discount the costs that we have to calculate in deciding how to react to North Korean provocations. Park may also have been influenced by his Generals who were egging him on. In any event, he and many other Koreans failed to focus on the fact that we had provided full support to them and had for the first time successfully forced the North Koreans to back down.

Sneider concluded that our own handling of the incident had been correct, including the carefully modulated military response. Scowcroft agreed.

While emphasizing that he was not prepared to predict any pattern of North Korean behavior, Sneider suggested that we not rule out the possibility of further soft moves by Pyongyang in a kind of "peace offensive." The North Koreans knew that they had overplayed their hand and they might now shift to a new tack.

Asked what concerned him about the future, Sneider said that the human rights issue probably posed the most immediate difficulty but over the longer term he was most concerned about Park's emotionally-charged drive to seek self-sufficiency and self-reliance through a program of nuclear weapons and missile development. Although there was no immediate need for further action on our part, he felt that within about six months we should start confronting Park on this matter, not only because of direct problems in South Korea but also because North Korea might eventually try to go the same route. Sneider said Park was guilty of sloppy thinking in believing that he could somehow obtain greater security by these policies; yet, given U.S. attitudes, one had to admit that South Koreans had some reason for their concern over their future security. Sneider suggested that we needed more regularity in our relations with the ROK and less emphasis on military matters.

Sneider mentioned his desire to get the U.S. company off the DMZ, granting that it was something we should not consider until after our elections. He explained that the company was excessively exposed and could be a trigger. Scowcroft said he didn't like the idea of removing the company and felt that the exposed quality of this particular deployment was why it was valuable. Sneider agreed there was merit to this view but thought it would be better for us to pull the unit out as an initiative rather than to retreat under domestic pressure. Gleysteen asked what the South Korean response would be and Sneider replied that they were always opposed to all change but would probably take the matter in stride. Scowcroft emphasized his concern about an inclination within certain parts of the government to go ahead with small piecemeal moves which individually had little significance but cumulatively had the net effect of eroding our military presence in East Asia. He said he did not like this tendency and thought we should resist it.

Gleysteen raised the matter of Defense's desire to prepare the way for withdrawal of the nuclear-capable Sargeant missile battalion. He said Defense had a Presidential approval to withdraw the battalion in mid-September but had decided to extend it for 90 days because of the Panmunjom incident. They could not, however, extend it beyond 90 days because of budgetary considerations and the unsupportability of Sargeant units. Defense wanted to know how they should proceed in preparing the press for the withdrawal. Scowcroft said that they should postpone a decision on press handling until later in November.

Gleysteen asked Sneider if he were satisfied that there could not be a repetition of the August 18 incident. He pointed out that in the WSAG meetings the JCS representative had never been able to explain why more precautions had not been taken on August 18. Sneider agreed that this was a serious problem and that as a result of his own checking he was convinced there were inadequate command and control procedures, especially in the JSA. He had spoken to Stilwell about it but thought it best to focus his efforts on General Vessey who would be taking over in October. Sneider said he would be talking to Vessey himself but would also appreciate Scowcroft's mentioning it as well. Scowcroft agreed to do so.

1 Source: Ford Library, National Security Adviser, Presidential Country Files for East Asia and the Pacific, Box 10, Korea (19). Secret; Sensitive. Gleysteen sent the memorandum of conversation to Scowcroft under a covering memorandum, September 17, recommending his approval, which Scowcroft initialed. The talking points that Gleysteen prepared for Scowcroft, September 14, are ibid.

290. Telegram 9567 From Embassy in the Republic of Korea to the Department of State, December 3, 1976, 0835Z. 290. Telegram 9567 From Embassy in the Republic of Korea to the Department of State, December 3, 1976, 0835Z.1

December 3, 1976, 0835Z

TELEGRAM
Department of State
SEOUL 9567

O 030835Z DEC 76

FM AMEMBASSY SEOUL
TO SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 0847

SEOUL 9567

E.O. 11652: XGDS-3
TAGS: PFOR PDIP KS US

SUBJ: KIM CASE AND ITS AFTERMATH IN KOREA

SUMMARY: AS CONSEQUENCE RECENT PUBLICITY IN US, MOOD OF GLOOM DEEPENING IN KOREA FOR FUTURE OF ITS TIES WITH US, GIVING GREATER IMPETUS TO THOUGHTS OF "SELF-RELIANCE."

1. WHILE THERE IS PRESS BLACKOUT ON DEFECTION OF KCIA AGENT KIM SUNG KUN, THE NEWS IS WIDELY KNOWN WITHIN KOREAN ESTABLISHMENT CIRCLES. REACTION OF THOSE WHO HAVE RAISED KIM CASE WITH ME IS ONE OF DEEPENING CONCERN, AND EVEN GLOOM, AS WELL AS FRUSTRATION REGARDING INABILITY TO CONTAIN DAMAGE TO KOREA'S IMAGE IN US. IN FACT WE SENSE GROWING FEAR HERE THAT RECENT DEVELOPMENTS COULD LEAD TO MAJOR FISSURE IN US-ROK RELATIONSHIP.

2. KOREANS IN CONTACT WITH US RECOGNIZE PAST EFFORTS TO INFLUENCE CONGRESS AND OTHERS IN US WERE, AT MINIMUM, MISGUIDED. ALTHOUGH THEY RATIONALIZE "GIFT-GIVING" IS STANDARD PRACTICE IN THIS PART OF WORLD, THEY VIEW REPERCUSSIONS IN US AS RESULT RECENT REPORTS AND NOW DEFECTION OF KIM AS FAR MORE SEVERE THAN MERITED AS FAR AS KOREANS ARE CONCERNED.

3. WHAT UNDERLIES KOREAN CONCERN ABOUT IMPACT OF RECENT DEVELOPMENTS IS FEAR THAT IT WILL IMPACT ADVERSELY ON PROSPECTS OF REACHING UNDERSTANDING ON US-KOREAN RELATIONS WITH PRESIDENT-ELECT CARTER. EVEN BEFORE THESE DEVELOPMENTS, KOREANS WERE VERY ANXIOUS ABOUT POLICIES TOWARD KOREA THAT MIGHT BE ADOPTED BY NEW ADMINISTRATION. DISCUSSION OF TROOP WITHDRAWAL AND HUMAN RIGHTS ISSUE DURING CAMPAIGN HAD ALREADY LED TO STRONG ELEMENT OF UNCERTAINTY REGARDING LONE TERM CREDIBILITY OF AMERICAN COMMITMENT TO KOREA, WHICH VIETNAM COLLAPSE HAD PREVIOUSLY CALLED INTO QUESTION. UNCERTAINTY IS NOW THAT MUCH GREATER.

4. KOREANS ARE EQUALLY FRUSTRATED BY INABILITY TO FIND WHAT ONE SENIOR PRO-GOVERNMENT POLITICIAN CALLED "MAGIC PILL" TO SOLVE THEIR PROBLEMS IN US. FOREIGN MINISTER HAS ON ALMOST EVERY OCCASION I HAVE SEEN HIM SOUGHT RECOMMENDATIONS ON HOW TO CLEAR UP PROBLEM AND HAS HOPED THAT WITHDRAWAL OF KCIA WOULD BE VIEWED AS IMPORTANT HELPFUL GESTURE ON KOREAN PART. WHAT STINGS MOST DEEPLY WITHIN ESTABLISHMENT THAT RUNS KOREA IS ATTACK ON PRESIDENT PARK WHICH HAS LED TO PERCEPTION THAT AMERICAN PRESS AT LEAST IS SEEKING HIS PERSONAL DOWNFALL. I HAVE OFFERED LITTLE SOLACE OR ADVICE EXCEPT TO URGE THAT THEY RECOGNIZE PUBLICLY THEIR PAST MISTAKES AND CAREFULLY AND OBJECTIVELY STUDY THE PROBLEMS KOREA FACES IN US. BUT THERE IS ALMOST UNIVERSAL VIEW HERE THAT IN ABSENCE OF ANY LENDING HAND FROM USG, THERE IS LITTLE FOR KOREA TO DO BUT TRY TO RIDE OUT THE STORM. SEVERAL KEY MINISTERS, FONMIN AND MINISTER INFORMATION, HAVE INDICATED THAT THEY HAVE ADVISED MORE ACTIVE APPROACH, BUT HAVE BEEN TURNED DOWN ON GROUNDS ROKG ACTIONS USELESS SINCE "STATE DEPARTMENT" IS NOT PREPARED TO HELP, WHICH I HAVE SOUGHT TO REBUT. FAILURE TO GAIN ACCESS TO KIM HAS SERVED TO INCREASE KOREAN FRUSTRATION AND VIEW AMONG SOME, WHICH IS ADMITTEDLY EMOTIONAL, THAT USG ITSELF IS NOT PREPARED TO HELP IN EFFORT TO CONTAIN DAMAGE TO US RELATIONSHIP WITH KOREA.

5. WE IN EMBASSY ARE EVEN MORE CONCERNED ABOUT LONGER-TERM IMPLICATIONS OF KOREAN REACTION TO RECENT DEVELOPMENTS. ALREADY WE ARE HEARING FROM MANY SOURCES INCREASED TALK ABOUT SELF-RELIANCE AS ONLY SOLUTION FOR KOREA AND, AS INDICATED BY FORMER PRIME MINISTER KIM CHONG-P'IL (SEOUL 9256), QUIET DEBATE IS IN PROGRESS ON ISSUE OF WHETHER KOREA SHOULD CONTINUE TO MAKE POSITIVE EFFORTS TO MAINTAIN AND STRENGTHEN US RELATIONSHIP, OR IN EFFECT BE PREPARED TO "GO-IT-ALONE." WHAT WAS, AT ITS INCEPTION, CONTINGENCY PLAN IN EVENT US PULLED OUT OF KOREA COULD EMERGE FROM PRESENT MOOD AS PREFERRED COURSE OF ACTION, WHATEVER THE MAJOR COSTS TO KOREA. I DOUBT THAT ANY IRREVOCABLE DECISION HAS BEEN MADE AS YET ALONG THESE LINES, AND IS UNLIKELY TO BE MADE FOR SOME MONTHS AT LEAST. HOWEVER, THE IMPULSE TO A "SELF-RELIANT," "INDEPENDENT" POLICY HAS BEEN GIVEN DECIDED IMPETUS IN RECENT WEEKS.

6. WE CONTINUE TO MAKE EVERY EFFORT TO EXPLAIN FULLY US HANDLING OF ALLEGED SCANDALS, AND ALLEGATION OF BLUE HOUSE BUGGING, AND KCIA AGENT KIM. WHAT KOREANS ARE LOOKING FOR IS CONTINUED EVIDENCE THAT USG IS CONCERNED TO CONTAIN CURRENT DEVELOPMENTS SO THAT THEY DO NOT IMPAIR FUTURE PROSPECTS FOR COOPERATIVE US-ROK RELATIONSHIP ON MUTUAL REPEAT MUTUAL BASIS.

7. IF WE ARE TO SUSTAIN A VIABLE RELATIONSHIP WITH KOREA SATISFACTORY TO US, THERE ARE OTHER, IN OUR VIEW, MORE CRITICAL ISSUES TO FACE UP TO, SUCH AS NUCLEAR-MISSILE DEVELOPMENT, HUMAN RIGHTS ISSUE, AND POSSIBLE TROOP REDUCTION. YET, WE FEAR THAT DRIVING ELEMENT IN OUR RELATIONSHIP COULD EASILY BECOME ISSUE OF ALLEGED BRIBERY, INCLUDING HANDLING OF KIM. WHATEVER THE INIQUITIES OF KOREAN LOBBYING, THIS SHOULD NOT BE THE ISSUE THAT DOMINATES THE DIALOGUE ON THE FUTURE CONDUCT OF RELATIONS WITH KOREA. IF WE MUST HAVE A SERIOUS DIALOGUE ABOUT RELATIONSHIPS, LET IT BE OVER MORE FUNDAMENTAL ISSUES. SNEIDER

1 Source: National Archives, Record Group 59, Central Foreign Policy Files. Secret; Immediate; Nodis.

Chapter VII: Malaysia and SingaporeChapter VII: Malaysia and Singapore

291. Memorandum From John Holdridge and Richard Kennedy of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger), Washington, March 1, 1973.

Washington, March 1, 1973

Kissinger agreed with Holdridge’s and Kennedy’s recommendation that the U.S. Air Force continue directed procurement of air repair service in Singapore.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 559, Country Files, Far East, Singapore, 1972–. Secret. Sent for action. Tab A, the draft State/Defense cable on procurement policy, and Tab B, Kissinger’s memoranda of May 7 and June 28, 1971, are attached but not published. Kissinger initialed his approval of both recommendations on March 6.

292. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, April 10, 1973, 10:30–11:03 a.m.

Washington, April 10, 1973, 10:30–11:03 a.m.

Kissinger and Lee discussed the international situation in East Asia.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 938, VIP Visits, Singapore Prime Minister Lee Kuan Yew, April 10, 1973. Secret; Sensitive. The conversation took place in Kissinger’s office in the White House. Holdridge’s talking points for Kissinger, April 9, are ibid.

293. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, April 10, 1973, 11:13 a.m. –12:18 p.m.

Washington, April 10, 1973, 11:13 a.m. –12:18 p.m.

Nixon and Lee discussed international affairs.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 938, VIP Visits, Singapore Prime Minister Lee Kuan Yew, April 10, 1973. Secret. The conversation took place in the White House. Undated talking points from Kissinger to the President, which the President saw, are ibid.

294. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, April 11, 1973, 9:50–10:20 a.m.

Washington, April 11, 1973, 9:50–10:20 a.m.

Kissinger and Lee discussed Southeast Asia.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 1027, Presidential/HAK memcons, Folder 5, April–November 1975. Top Secret; Sensitive; Exclusively Eyes Only. The conversation took place in Kissinger’s Office. On August 4, 3:30–4:40 p.m., Lee and Kissinger met in a conference room at Kennedy International Airport in New York. A memorandum of conversation from their meeting, which mainly discussed affairs in Indochina, is ibid., folder 3.

295. Memorandum From W.R. Smyser of the National Security Council Staff to Secretary of State Kissinger, Washington, January 30, 1975.

Washington, January 30, 1975

Smyser proposed a NSSM on U.S. military access to Singapore.

Source: Ford Library, NSC Institutional Files (H-Files), Box H–34, NSSM 218, U.S. Policy Toward U.S. and Soviet Military Access to Singapore. Secret. Sent for action. Concurred in by Granger and Oakley. In the top right-hand corner of the first page, Kissinger wrote, “Give new date + then issue.” On the second page, an unknown hand crossed out “draft memorandum to the President at Tab I” and wrote, “NSSM at Tab A.” Attached but not printed is Tab A, NSSM 218. [Malaysia/Singapore, 1973–1976, NSSM 218, 3/3/75]

296. National Security Study Memorandum 218, Washington, March 3, 1975.

Washington, March 3, 1975

Kissinger asked the Department of Defense, the Department of State, and the CIA to review U.S. policy toward U.S. and Soviet military access to Singapore.

Source: Ford Library, National Security Adviser, NSC Staff for East Asia and Pacific Affairs, Convenience Files, Box 10, Singapore, NSSM 218. Secret. A copy was sent to the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff. The NSSM 218 study was cancelled and did not result in a meeting.

297. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, May 8, 1975, noon–1 p.m.

Washington, May 8, 1975, noon–1 p.m.

Ford, Lee, and Kissinger discussed the situation in East Asia after the fall of South Vietnam.

Source: Ford Library, National Security Adviser, Memoranda of Conversation, Box 11. Secret; Sensitive. The conversation took place in the Oval Office. Ford’s talking points from Kissinger, which the President saw, are available ibid., VIP Visits, Box 8.

298. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, May 8, 1975.

Washington, May 8, 1975

Kissinger and Lee conferred on U.S. policy toward East Asia.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Records of Secretary of State Kissinger, E5403, Box 23. Secret; Sensitive. The paper that Lee gave Kissinger is not further identified.

299. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, May 9, 1975, 2:30–4 p.m.

Washington, May 9, 1975, 2:30–4 p.m.

Lee and Schlesinger conversed on the implications of the fall of South Vietnam.

Source: Washington National Records Center, OASD/ISA Files: FRC 330–78–0038, Singapore, 333, 1975 May 30. Secret; Sensitive. The memorandum of conversation was prepared by Holmberg and approved by Ellsworth. The conversation took place in Schlesinger’s office. Ellsworth’s talking points for Schlesinger, May 8, are ibid. Scowcroft’s talking points for Schlesinger, May 9, are in Ford Library, National Security Adviser, NSC Staff for East Asia and Pacific Affairs, Convenience Files, Box 21, Visit of PM Lee of Singapore, May 8, 1975 (1).

300. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, September 30, 1975.

Washington, September 30, 1975

Kissinger and Rithauddeen discussed U.S. relations with Malaysia.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy Files, P–820123–2578. Secret; Nodis. Drafted by Sheppard and approved by Covey.

301. Memorandum From Thomas J. Barnes of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Scowcroft), Washington, November 5, 1975.

Washington, November 5, 1975

Barnes recommended that Scowcroft request an NIE on “Prospects for Stability in Malaysia.”

Source: Ford Library, National Security Adviser, Presidential Agency File, Box 2, Central Intelligence Agency, 12/15/1975. Secret. Sent for action. Richard Ober, a staff member of the NSC involved in intelligence coordination, concurred in the memorandum. Tab A, telegram 250586, October 21, to Singapore; Tab B, telegram 250585, October 21, to Kuala Lumpur; Tab C, telegram 5840, October 1, from Kuala Lumpur; and D, telegram 4398, October 9, from Singapore, are attached but not published. Tab E is published as Document 297. Tab F, Lee’s warning to Kissinger, is not further identified. A handwritten note on the last page of the memorandum indicates that Scowcroft verbally approved the request for the NIE.

302. National Intelligence Estimate 54–1–76, Washington, April 1, 1976.

Washington, April 1, 1976

The estimate assessed the likelihood of instability in Malaysia during the next few years.

Source: Central Intelligence Agency, OPI 122 (National Intelligence Council), Job 91R00884R, Box 5, NIE 54–1–76, Folder 17. Secret. All members of the USIB concurred in the estimate except the representatives of the FBI and the Deputy Assistant Administrator for National Security, Energy Research and Development Administration. The intelligence organizations of the Army, Navy, and Air Force also participated in the estimate.

291. Memorandum From John Holdridge and Richard Kennedy of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger), Washington, March 1, 1973. 291. Memorandum From John Holdridge and Richard Kennedy of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger), Washington, March 1, 1973.1

Washington, March 1, 1973

MEMORANDUM
NATIONAL SECURITY COUNCIL
ACTION

March 1, 1973

MEMORANDUM FOR: MR. KISSINGER
FROM: JOHN H. HOLDRIDGE [JHH initialed]
RICHARD T. KENNEDY [RTK initialed]

SUBJECT: DOD Procurement for Singapore

At Tab A is a draft State/DOD cable which would inform the Government of Singapore (GOS) and Lockheed Air Services Singapore (LASS), which is the only significant air repair facility in Singapore, that we do not intend to make any directed procurement for either air or naval repairs in Singapore for FY74. (Directed procurement is that which we make when a repair facility cannot obtain our contract on a competitive basis.) This is one of four facilities in East Asia — the others being in Thailand, Taiwan, and Japan — that the U.S. Air Force uses for major overhauls of its aircraft.

Your memoranda of May 7 and June 28, 1971 conveyed the President's decision that we should help to preserve U.S. access to Singapore's air and naval repair facilities and to deny or minimize Soviet access to them by increasing our use of these facilities and the level of our ship visits to Singapore (Tab B).

Subsequent DOD directed procurement in FY72-73 helped materially in the accomplishment of these objectives. LASS was brought into being, although its relatively high cost will make it continue dependent on directed procurement. Singapore's ship repair facilities have now made it through the slump caused by the British withdrawal in 1971, and are no longer dependent on U.S. Navy support. The Soviet presence has been kept well within bounds.

The current problem is whether to continue directed procurement of aircraft repairs into FY74. Embassy Singapore and CINCPAC conclude that we should, while State and Defense argue the contrary. The Embassy and CINCPAC contend that without directed procurement: — The amount of GOS and USAF procurement for FY74 will cause the LASS facility to fall 250,000 hours short of the 650,000 hours needed in FY74 to keep open both its air repair plants, and one would probably be closed.

— If we do not pick up the tab for the difference, the GOS probably will do so in order to keep the second repair plant open.

— In consequence, the GOS would feel the U.S. had reneged, and would likely reassess its recently increased military procurement in the U.S. and cooperation with us on ship visits.

State and Defense hold that: — Singapore's willingness to insure our military access and to minimize that of the Soviet's proceeds from its assessment of the balance of power in Asia and the Pacific, which the GOS believes has now tilted in our favor.

— LASS contracts for FY74 now bring it only 150,000 hours short of the 650,000 hour optimum, and LASS has a chance to bid competitively on an additional 240,000 hours of USAF work. Even if its high costs lose the contract for LASS, the GOS will not be resentful.

— We have incurred limited Congressional criticism (Senator Dole) of the subsidization of the Singapore facility as taking business away from U.S. plants here at home.

Our Opinion

We agree with the Embassy and CINCPAC that we should continue directed procurement of air repairs in Singapore at least into FY74. The small FY74 budgetary savings on 150,000 hours of USAF work (probably $100,000-$200,000) and minor Congressional criticism are not worth the risks pointed out by the Embassy and CINCPAC. In addition: — We believe we should respond to Lee Kuan Yew's recently improved confidence in our intentions in Asia by continuing, at least for the short term, our military use of Singapore's air repair facility — which, incidentally, Lee took a personal hand in establishing and in encouraging our support for.

— For us to indicate in the next six months that we plan to reduce our support for this facility in future years would be particularly bad timing.

Lee is visiting the U.S. in late March and early April, and Prime Minister Whitlam has already begun altering the security equation in Malaysia-Singapore by announcing a reduction of Australian ground forces there.

Beyond FY74

For the same reasons, the State/Defense draft cable also states that U.S. subsidization of Singapore's air repair facilities is unlikely in later years, and that USAF procurement of air repair services in Singapore will in all probability be confined to a competitive basis.

We disagree. In effect, State and Defense are trying to take off the books the basic policy articulated in your mid -1971 memoranda, i.e., that increased U.S. military use of Singapore can have a significant impact on our military access to Singapore versus that of the Soviets. The Departments deny that our military use has such an effect, holding that the significant factor is Singapore's perception of the Asian-Pacific power balance. We believe that we should keep the policy intact for possible future use.

Unless Defense is advised to the contrary by March 9, the USAF will proceed to procure repairs on a competitive bid basis.

Recommendation:

That the USAF continue directed procurement of the air repair services in Singapore in FY 74 at a level sufficient to assure LASS of 650,000 hour level.
Approve [HK initialed]
Disapprove

That the question of U.S. directed procurement of air and naval repairs for FY 75 and beyond be considered in the light of conditions at that time.
Approve [HK initialed]
Disapprove

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 559, Country Files, Far East, Singapore, 1972–. Secret. Sent for action. Tab A, the draft State/Defense cable on procurement policy, and Tab B, Kissinger’s memoranda of May 7 and June 28, 1971, are attached but not published. Kissinger initialed his approval of both recommendations on March 6.

292. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, April 10, 1973, 10:30–11:03 a.m. 292. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, April 10, 1973, 10:30–11:03 a.m. 1

Washington, April 10, 1973, 10:30–11:03 a.m.

MEMORANDUM
THE WHITE HOUSE
WASHINGTON

MEMORANDUM OF CONVERSATION

PARTICIPANTS:

Prime Minister Lee Kuan Yew of Singapore

Ambassador Monteiro

Dr. Henry A. Kissinger

John Holdridge, NSC Staff

Kathleen Ryan, NSC Staff

DATE AND TIME: Tuesday, April 10, 1973 10:30 - 11:03 a.m.
PLACE: Dr. Kissinger's Office

Dr. Kissinger: You have been educated at Harvard. Have you returned there this year?

P.M. Lee: Not this year, I went to Florida.

Dr. Kissinger: I have told a lot of people that you were the only positive influence at Harvard.

P.M. Lee: Well, I consider myself a radical liberal, but faced with the basic fact of meeting them in the U.S. I have to speak in terms of our interests as I see them.

Dr. Kissinger: You are looking forward to the chance, I see. What is your assessment of the situation [in Southeast Asia]?

P.M. Lee: I feel it is the best agreement you could have gotten now.

I would never have believed it possible that the North Vietnamese would agree. I did not believe it was possible. The scenario has changed. The agreement was good in principle. I think it was better to accept it with the picture as of now. I think you have succeeded.

In Cambodia, you have given over to the Vietnamese the Cambodian responsibility. You can't act there the way you did in South Vietnam. The guerrillas in Cambodia want to embarrass you by threatening Phnom Penh, but why should they want to capture the town? They may capture it for a little while, but what for?

They would hold it only so long as to gain a psychological victory, and then pull out before your bombers got them. Vietnam it's a 50-50 chance. You should have started to turn it over to the South Vietnamese themselves. Thieu should try, if possible, to give the South Vietnamese Communists, as distinct from the North Vietnamese Communists, a place in the sun. Give them a place, for they are not numerically strong. Otherwise, North Vietnam will start all over again to organize a subversive effort against the South.

Dr. Kissinger: Have you ever talked to Thieu?

P.M. Lee: No, but I have talked to his aides.

Dr. Kissinger: He's better than his aides.

P.M. Lee: This is a new situation that he can take advantage of. Politically and militarily he is strong, with one million one hundred thousand men.

Dr. Kissinger: If there is one point you can argue, it is that we got more than most people thought. The South Vietnamese Communists got nothing. They didn't even get their people out of jail, and obtained no share in political power. They paid a high price in the political settlement, which gave no benefits to them.

P.M. Lee: Madame Binh does not want to push reunification with Hanoi. There are differences between the Tonkinese and the Annamese.

Dr. Kissinger: What do you think of the situation in Southeast Asia and between the United States and China?

P.M. Lee: You now have, as you Americans put it, a whole new ball game. This is the inter-reaction of three great powers—great power politics involving you, China, and the USSR, in which the smaller countries are uncertain as to where they fit in.

Take Malaysia, for example. The Malaysians now want a Chinese embassy in Kuala Lumpur. As Rajaj Mohar, Razak's Special Advisor for Economic Affairs, told one of my people, Razak believes that if Peking comes in now it will solve their total insurgency problem. They will probably recognize Peking within six months.

Dr. Kissinger: What advantage do they see in this?

P.M. Lee: They believe that it would represent Peking's complete abandonment of the Communist insurgents in Malaysia.

Kissinger: However, stupidity is not a Chinese characteristic.

P.M. Lee: The new situation is also having an effect upon the Thai leadership as well. Thanat Khoman would not have been allowed to say all those things (about getting the U.S. out of Thailand) unless they had wanted him to do so. They are buying insurance, which is typically Thai. That is why I said the things I did about the Thai needing to keep the U.S. air bases—I was able to do what they couldn't do themselves. I knew that they wanted me to. Thanom Kittikachorn and Praphat are with you and will to the whole way with you, but I think that if you shake their confidence—

Dr. Kissinger: What do you mean by shake their confidence?

P.M. Lee: By making a sudden withdrawal.

Dr. Kissinger: There is an argument being put forward by some of our bureaucrats that Thailand wants us to reduce our forces.

P.M. Lee: That is difficult to believe.

Dr. Kissinger It is the policy of this Administration, which you can count on for another four years, to stand firm. We want to protect them.

P.M. Lee: The trouble is that a process of erosion has set in, particularly in Malaysia. I blame this partly on Razak and partly on Gough Whitlam. Once the Australians began to talk about getting out of the 5-Power Defense Agreement or reducing their forces, the Malaysians began to lose confidence. As a result, in the May 1969 riots they did not act firmly enough.

Dr. Kissinger: You mean that they should have taken stronger measures?

P.M. Lee: Yes. Is it true that the sentiment in Washington is to get out of Thailand?

Dr. Kissinger: Our Congress is hopeless but not well enough organized to enable us to get out of Thailand. They talk about withholding military appropriations, but their ability to do this is something else again.

What is your honest judgment about our foreign policy? Are we weakening our friends rather than paralyzing our enemies?

P.M. Lee: Initially the Vietnam Agreement upset a lot of people.

Dr. Kissinger: We had to do it. Otherwise, we would have been voted out of Vietnam.

P.M. Lee: What you did was right, and nobody really believes that there was any alternative. There are only a few exceptions on this—Thanat Khoman goes around saying that once the Americans are gotten rid of, all will be well. This is what he even said to me. But you must stay on.

Dr. Kissinger: Thanat Khoman used to be one of our greatest friends.

P.M. Lee: Yes he was, but he finally went too far on some of the things he was doing and was edged out. This included trying to move toward Peking and speaking in favor of neutralization. I remember that in November 1971 he attended an ASEAN Foreign Ministers Meeting and signed a declaration calling for neutralization which had been proposed by Malaysia. The Malaysians try to posture all the time, and have taken the position that the three super powers should guarantee the neutrality of Southeast Asia. This is not realistic.

About the Thai, though, if the unthinkable does happen and they find themselves with communist countries on their borders, then the present generals will simply pack their bags and a new set of leaders will come up. This could happen even if the game is not lost in Vietnam, but if Laos and Cambodia become satellites of the North Vietnamese. The Thai want no part of a real insurgency.

Dr. Kissinger: And what would they say toward Hanoi and Peking?

P.M. Lee: "Please leave us alone." Thanat Khoman would be able to say that all this lining up with the Americans took place under Field Marshal Sarit, and "I was wrong, please forgive me." The Thai would say, too, that it was the previous leaders who had given help to the Malaysians against the Malayan Communist Party.

(At this point Prime Minister Lee digressed briefly to note that the Thai actually claimed the northernmost states of Malaysia, which had been traded to the British in exchange for British political support.)

Another thing which the Thai could say would be that "we are not really against the Communists so long as they don't upset the internal structure of Thailand."

Dr. Kissinger: What about the possibility of keeping Thailand on our side if Laos and Cambodia become Communist satellites?

P.M. Lee: it depends on the time scale — what clicks in the psyche and on the nerves of the people in charge. You don't want too drastic a change, or one which comes too soon.

Dr. Kissinger: What should we do?

P.M. Lee: Quietly spread the word, not among Thanom Kittikachon and Praphat or other older leaders, but among the younger ones, that it would be possible for them to live with a Communist Laos and Cambodia.

Dr. Kissinger: And what about our presence there?

P.M. Lee: Scale it down, but keep a hard core of U.S. squadrons.

Dr. Kissinger: And if there is a massive attack by the North Vietnamese in Vietnam, what we should we do?

P.M. Lee: Do you mean one in which the North Vietnamese were openly involved, such as by infiltrating?

Dr. Kissinger: Yes, I mean massive involvement.

P M. Lee: As far as the North, it would be sufficient to launch a barrage against it by the 7th Fleet. But, you should make sure that there are no POWs in the North. Your 500 or 520 POWs have caused you great political difficulty.

Dr. Kissinger: I know, it is absurd. 50,000 dead, and such a fuss over 500 POWs.

P.M. Lee: That is the American tradition and ethos.

Send your bombers over the South. In the South, even if you do get shot down you can bail out in pretty safe territory.

Dr, Kissinger: You would go back to bombing in the South?

P.M. Lee: I would say that if they knew that you would be prepared to do this, it would be a deterrent. Why shouldn't you?

Dr. Kissinger: If you were they, would you believe it?

P.M. Lee: I would. They are watching closely. Look at 68-72, when they waited for anti-war sentiment to work on you. Another three or four years, maybe five, and they can hope for a change in their favor. They can easily wait for a new President.

Dr. Kissinger: That I understand. But for them to assume that this President is going to accept a defeat is quite a gamble. They could be hit, and it makes no difference what Congress says.

P.M. Lee: I don't believe it will happen in the next few months.

Dr. Kissinger: They will not be in a position for a massive attack until next January.

P.M. Lee: Anything less than a massive attack will not crack South Vietnam's morale, and that is the important element.

Dr. Kissinger: That is the principle reason why we did it. After the mining, South Vietnamese military activities became more aggressive. We will probably do something like it again if they do.

P.M. Lee: I hope they believe that. But you can't use American forces.

Dr. Kissinger: What do you think of aid to North Vietnam?

P.M. Lee: It is a masterpiece of good politics. They are not foolish. They know that China and Russia will never be able to rebuild their economy. Furthermore, they have no Ho Chi Minh and are operating with a system of collective leadership. I believe they are having a hell of a debate now over whether of accept the ceasefire or have another go at it.

Dr. Kissinger: I have always said that you see things very clearly. I agree that they are debating what to do. My own experience with them is that they are morbidly afraid of being tricked. They will never accept the first proposal. Even if we were to give them what they asked for, they would stop to see where they were somehow being taken advantage of.

P.M. Lee: I agree. But I was terrified that they would have accepted your offer of May 8—a ceasefire in situ, followed by a withdrawal in four months. They might have said "right, but just pull out in two months."

Dr. Kissinger: It was always my belief that they would do nothing until September, when they could see how McGovern was doing. They were hoping for a McGovern victory, and had always believed he would win. Le Duc Tho thought I was a lying capitalist pig, when I told him McGovern didn't have a chance. He spoke of a famous figure in America of whom I knew nothing about—some fellow who set fire to himself in front of the United Nations. I don't even remember his name. Do you?

P.M. Lee: No.

Dr. Kissinger: They were waiting for McGovern. If they and accepted our [May 8] proposal, we would have been in bad straits.

P.M. Lee: Proposals terrify them.

Dr. Kissinger: We could always get ahead of them by making a reasonable proposal we knew they wouldn't accept. Speaking frankly, in May 31, 1971 we made a proposal at a secret meeting which if they had accepted would have put us in very difficult circumstances. There was haggling for months.

P.M. Lee: A critical factor is whether they can continue to get supplies.

On economic assistance, they must have argued amongst themselves. China and Russia can't help. They would like American aid and don't want to get things only from Russia and China. How it will turn out, I do not know. It depends on which faction carries the lead.

Dr. Kissinger: My sentiments also.

P.M. Lee: You have not abandoned South Vietnam. If South Vietnam wins, a lot of Americans will see that it was right in 4 or 5 years.

Dr. Kissinger: And Indonesia?

P.M. Lee: Indonesia is preoccupied at the moment with getting more money for development. But the generals are mesmerized with getting rich.

Dr. Kissinger: Personally, or for the sake of the country?

P.M. Lee: Personally, I regret. They have no concept of identifying their future with the country.

[The Ambassador and Mr. Holdridge leave and P.M. Lee and HAK talk]

P.M. Lee: As a final point, who does the contingency planning? I would like to talk to him.

Dr. Kissinger: How long will you be here?

P.M. Lee: Until tomorrow morning. Do you have any free time this afternoon?

Dr. Kissinger: I will try to get some. Where are you staying?

P.M. Lee: At the Madison Hotel.

Dr. Kissinger: You know there are so few leaders with whom I am interested in talking to. Most leaders, if not Prime Ministers, I don't want to spend an hour with.

P.M. Lee: One needs a long term view of things.

Dr. Kissinger: May be I can see you a half hour before dinner.

P.M. Lee: I believe that if Vietnam can be held, Thailand will hold.

Dr. Kissinger: What do you think the Chinese are up to?

P.M. Lee: For the next four years they are going to respond to you. They want to be friends with the Americans. Technology is what they want. They will buy Boeings from you and VC-10s from the British. They want no one single supplier. They don't want a recurrence of their Russian experience for dependence on foreign technology.

Their second strike capability will not be effective for 15 years.

Dr. Kissinger: I don't want to be in office when they have their second strike capability.

P.M. Lee: They will have grown up by then.

Dr. Kissinger: The Chinese psychology is that if Southeast Asia is not unified, their interests are safe, because they are afraid that it may otherwise lean toward Russia.

P.M. Lee: Their attitude is that SEA will lean on Russia. But they want to keep it in a fluid situation. They want room for maneuver, more time in which to deploy, and more military aid to give.

Dr. Kissinger: I think 8 - 10 years is the time span for what you describe. Is that fair?

P.M. Lee: Yes, I think so.

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 938, VIP Visits, Singapore Prime Minister Lee Kuan Yew, April 10, 1973. Secret; Sensitive. The conversation took place in Kissinger’s office in the White House. Holdridge’s talking points for Kissinger, April 9, are ibid.

293. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, April 10, 1973, 11:13 a.m. –12:18 p.m. 293. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, April 10, 1973, 11:13 a.m. –12:18 p.m. 1

Washington, April 10, 1973, 11:13 a.m. –12:18 p.m.

MEMORANDUM
THE WHITE HOUSE
WASHINGTON

MEMORANDUM FOR THE PRESIDENTS FILES
FROM: HENRY A. KISSINGER
SUBJECT: Meeting with Prime Minister Lee Kuan Yew of Singapore, Tuesday, April 10, 1973, at 1:13 a.m. - 12:18 p.m.

PARTICIPANTS:

The President

Dr. Henry A. Kissinger

Prime Minister Lee Kuan Yew

Ambassador Monteiro

Prime Minister Lee: I would like to congratulate you on your achievement. No one thought it was possible.

President Nixon: The toughest decision was the bombing in December. What did you think at the time?

Prime Minister Lee: I thought it would lead to peace at the end of January. The problem now is to maintain the peace.

President Nixon: Re-entering Southeast Asia will be very tough. There is enormous pressure on us.

Prime Minister Lee: The mass media have a silent conspiracy to keep up the mood of withdrawal. U.S. technology has made it a small world, and it is ironic that now you have the death wish of losing your influence in that smaller world.

President Nixon: This applies not only to Southeast Asia. The same people want us out of Europe too. It is the death wish of the ruling groups in the West.

Prime Minister Lee: The leaders are not so bad. What is bad is the leaders of public opinion. They don't understand the implications of their thinking. If the United States removes her last soldier from Europe, what is left?

President Nixon: What should we do in Southeast Asia?

Prime Minister Lee: You must create the impression that your policy will prevail despite the cacophony of voices. You have withdrawn in an honorable way giving South Vietnam a chance — a better than even chance. South Vietnam has a chance if they don't rely on a purely military solution. The right strategy is to try to win the Communists away from the North. Give them a share of power in the municipal level. There must now be a debate in Hanoi between rehabilitation and infiltration.

President Nixon: Do we require a stick as well as a carrot?

Prime Minister Lee: Yes. It is hard to know how they assess the U.S. domestic situation. If I were they, I would play it safe. But then I am not them. Hence, there is the need for a stick and not only a carrot.

President Nixon: I don't want to leave any doubts. With respect to the intellectual class in this country, we face a disturbing softness and weakness. There is a desire to withdraw everywhere. Heath, Home and Carrington are strong men, so is Pompidou. The present time requires a strong, vigorous leadership to maintain a credible defense.

Prime Minister Lee: You are the anchor man of the non-Communist world.

President Nixon: The Japanese and the Germans could do it but they won't be allowed to. If we cave, everything will come apart. If we had come back dishonored, we would have lost the trust of our friends and the respect of our adversaries. We can't turn away from the things that need doing. We must leaven PRC and Soviet policies toward their neighbors. But in order for that game to work we must engage in strong policies. Dr. Kissinger and I strongly believe this. There are no other two people who believe this more strongly.

Prime Minister Lee: If South Vietnam sticks, this whole policy will bring on a change of mood. Americans cannot go on being self- pitying. A weak America is dangerous for the whole world.

President Nixon: What do you think of the Japanese? A people with their history won't be content to make transistor radios.

Prime Minister Lee: Look at the difference between the Japanese and the Germans. The Japanese claim a great power role, the Germans don't. I don't want the Japanese to conduct an independent policy. It must be interwoven with the rest of the world. If they get an independent policy, they will be a joker in the cards.

President Nixon: [Jokingly] You are getting to be an economic problem for us

Prime Minister Lee: We went into textiles only to sop up unemployment.

President Nixon: What do you think of Indonesia?

Prime Minister Lee: It would be better if they spread the benefits beyond Jakarta. The Generals in power are acquiring wealth. In Islam wealth comes with power.

President Nixon: Are we pursuing a correct policy towards China?

Prime Minister Lee: If Chou and Mao live long enough, the line could be set for a decade. Their main preoccupation is with the Russians. The Chinamen know that Americans have a conscience; the Russians do not. Thus they are very careful not to antagonize them.

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 938, VIP Visits, Singapore Prime Minister Lee Kuan Yew, April 10, 1973. Secret. The conversation took place in the White House. Undated talking points from Kissinger to the President, which the President saw, are ibid.

294. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, April 11, 1973, 9:50–10:20 a.m. 294. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, April 11, 1973, 9:50–10:20 a.m. 1

Washington, April 11, 1973, 9:50–10:20 a.m.

MEMORANDUM
THE WHITE HOUSE
WASHINGTON

MEMORANDUM OF CONVERSATION

PARTICIPANTS:

Prime Minister Lee Kuan Yew of Singapore

Ambassador Monteiro

Dr. Henry Kissinger

John Holdridge, NSC Staff

Kathleen Ryan, NSC Staff

DATE AND TIME: Wednesday, April 11, 1973 9:50 - 10:20 a.m.
PLACE: Dr. Kissinger's Office

Dr. Kissinger: That was a very fine toast you gave last night.

P.M. Lee: It was ephemeral. I hope that South Vietnam can stick and anything we can do to help them, we can try and do our best.

Dr. Kissinger: What can you do?

P.M. Lee: Well, our urban problems are not dissimilar. We can help them in three things—organization, housing, and welfare.

Dr. Kissinger: You can pay a visit and talk to Thieu.

P.M. Lee: I can try. It would be easier if he came to me.

Dr. Kissinger: I will try to arrange it.

P.M. Lee: Now let's be frank, or why else should I be here.

Dr. Kissinger: I agree. Thieu is surrounded by second-raters. He is the only one with vision. The problem is to get into his morbidly suspicious head that I am not against him. He thinks I have a deal with the Communists to get rid of him. He believes that I want to unify all of Indochina under Hanoi as a counter weight to the USSR and China. China is not our threat but the USSR is. When China has its second strike capability in 5-10 years. . .

P.M. Lee: 10 years.

Dr. Kissinger: I want Indochina to remain in four different states. Those are your interests, are they not?

P.M. Lee: Yes.

Dr. Thieu is wrong and should hear it from you, not me. You have to get together. You prefer that he comes to you?

P.M. Lee: Yes, it looks more casual. I am known to the Communists as a partisan. He could take a trip to Jakarta and stop in Singapore.

Dr. Kissinger: Would Jakarta have him?

P.M. Lee: Perhaps not, but he could make a swing through Singapore and Bangkok.

Dr. Kissinger: Yes. I'll see if this can be arranged.

P.M. Lee: We could help him with urban problems, housing. If he scales down his military, we can help with the conversion of military bases.

Dr. Kissinger: Do you have technicians to help him?

P.M. Lee: We have some, not enough, but we can help build models.

Dr. Kissinger: We will do much to help his technological needs. Psychology is the real problem: we need to keep his confidence. If he goes on the offensive militarily and politically, he can win. He holds more cards than the enemy, but he has an inferiority complex. The Viet Cong need the support of the North Vietnamese Army, which is based 400 miles away. But we have to pick the time and the provocation. It has to be something great. If we do something prematurely we have to pay the domestic price.

Is that wrong?

P.M. Lee: That is your domestic scene. There has to be a real buildup emotionally and psychologically here before you can give a real wallop. But you can't afford to lose any more prisoners.

Dr. Kissinger: We can do almost anything without losing prisoners.

P.M. Lee: How?

Dr. Kissinger: By mining the ports.

P.M. Lee: There are still surface-to-surface missiles. I would like to take you two steps further. I am not a simplistic man, but the debunking of the domino theory is too simply put. If Thieu goes in the next two or three years and instability follows, the Thais are going to switch.

Dr. Kissinger: I agree.

P.M. Lee: The Thais will keep out of it. Look what they did with the Japanese in World War II—their government supported Japan, but there was an underground that supported you.

Dr. Kissinger: I agree.

P.M. Lee: Why is Thanat Khoman out and allowed to say these things? Thanom Kittikachoun and Praphat are committed to you. Don't let them lose confidence. They were very pleased that you followed Agnew on your visit, it boosted their confidence. They can do a lot for you if they think you will stand by them. On the other hand, they need not have to give away major considerations to reach an accommodation. Just look at their history, and you can understand their temptation to make a deal with the bigger fellow. The North Vietnamese, they know, are tough and near.

Dr. Kissinger: What about their Chinese minority?

P.M. Lee: Their Chinese minority are bourgeois, and their system allows for assimilation. Phote Sarasin is, I believe, half Chinese. Thanat Khoman is Thai by nationality but ethnically Chinese. The Chinese don't pose a problem to them. Their real problem is in Malaysia.

Dr. Kissinger: I have the impression that the Chinese want four states in Indochina and us in Asia until they can push us out. But they want to do the job, and not have others do it for them.

P.M. Lee: They don't want the North Vietnamese or the Russians.

Dr. Kissinger: That's right.

P.M. Lee: The Russians never let anything go. Russia still holds the four Kurile Islands, Japan has had much trouble over this for the past 27 years. After Thailand, then Malaysia. If the Thais switch, so will the Malays. The trouble is ethnic, with 40% non-Malays. In Malaya there is a resistance movement, which is just as tough as the Viet Minh: the MCP (Malayan Communist Party). During World War II they were willing to fight and die, and were not afraid of Japanese torture. One thousand five hundred of them at the border, and they are hard core.

Dr. Kissinger: Along the Thai border?

P.M. Lee: Yes. The Thais and Malays are waiting to see what happens. The terrorists are building up a logistical base, putting C-rations in metal drums and burying them. These will last for 10 years. The Malaysian government finds one, but there are four more not found. I don't want to sound alarmist, but you need to do some thinking before the crisis arrives. If you have some prior thinking, one can appreciate the situation more clearly.

Dr. Kissinger: In a crisis, will Indochina collapse?

P.M. Lee: No, but the Thais will switch if you do not give them confidence.

Dr. Kissinger: How do we give them confidence?

P.M. Lee: By making it known that you are not going to abandon them.

Dr. Kissinger: How do we go about this?

P.M. Lee: By a token presence there.

Dr. Kissinger: We will not remove our airbases. There is no chance in this Administration.

P.M. Lee: If that is so and they have that confidence...

Dr. Kissinger: We are now keeping airplanes there, but we are getting advice from our people there that our presence is generating anti-US feeling.

P.M. Lee: If you have them in large towns, yes, but not in the small towns. The Thais are a very pragmatic people. They like the good life and don't mind enjoying your PXs, the income generated from your bases, and the large spending. Be cautious in putting your people in highly built up areas...the bars and women are bad.

Dr. Kissinger: But the bars and women always follow them wherever they go.

P.M. Lee: It's not important if it's kept out of sight

Dr. Kissinger: We will keep most of our force in Thailand. I think that our successor will want to keep them on if all goes well.

P.M. Lee: I hope so. The critical thing is to avoid panic. Even if we don't panic, Hanoi and not China, may want to get you out of Southeast Asia. They may send supplies to the Malayan Communist party.

Dr. Kissinger: To the Malayan Communist Party operating in Thailand?

P.M. Lee: In Malaysia itself.

Dr. Kissinger: How does causing trouble in Malaysia get us out of Southeast Asia?

P.M. Lee: By making their movement respectable. If things get really bad, the Malays will call on the Indonesians for help, and this will cause a polarization between the Malays and the non-Malays with the respectable people among the non-Malays then opting for Communism. They would have no alternative.

Dr. Kissinger: What is the solution?

P.M. Lee: The solution is maintaining political and economic stability and providing security. We can help.

Dr. Kissinger: How? Do you have military forces?

P.M. Lee: I am not exactly defenseless. I can give them some help.

Dr. Kissinger: Do you mean that your forces and the Malay forces would join together in putting down the terrorists among the non-Malays?

P.M. Lee: That's right. This is what we had in mind in joining Malaysia in the first place, but their conservatives got the upper hand arid kicked us out.

Right now there is a real crisis between the Malays and the non-Malays. They are trying to control the education of the non-Malays, and three-quarters of the non-Malays have failed the Malay language examination. This is a very serious matter for them, because without a pass you can't go from primary school into middle school or from middle school into college. All of this builds resentment.

Dr. Kissinger: Will they make any concessions?

P.M. Lee: Not now.

Dr. Kissinger: With them could you suppress an insurrection?

P.M. Lee: No doubt about it.

Dr. Kissinger: I am sympathetic. If there is anything you can do to help stabilize the situation in the area, we will try to help you.

I would like to set up a channel to you with this place. I will designate some intelligence man who will have a direct channel to you, and then if you have something specific in mind will you feel free to get in touch with me through him?

P.M. Lee: Yes.

Dr. Kissinger: And can I ask things of you?

P.M. Lee: Yes, and we can bounce some ideas around.

Dr. Kissinger: I will designate some intelligence person. We don't do this sort of thing with very many others.

P.M. Lee: This is really a crucial period, it can never be the same again. The Vietnamese have to carry it on their own.

Dr. Kissinger: I agree. The longer we can keep it together, the better. All of this is essential. Therefore, I need people like you to help me. Speaking frankly, this is because I cannot always be perfectly informed.

P.M. Lee: If you think we are of value...

Dr. Kissinger: Very much.

P.M. Lee: I have one last passing thought: don't let the Indonesians think they can deal.

Dr. Kissinger: I haven't found that their precision of thought is outstanding.

P.M. Lee: They never have any concrete ideas.

Dr. Kissinger: They have never studied even moving two divisions.

P.M. Lee: That is the whole trouble; they will have to live off the land.

Dr. Kissinger: And how can they carry out such an enterprise?

P.M. Lee: We have thought how to do it, with transports. First, they would move to Sumatra, and then make a quick jump across the Straits of Malacca. It would be easy if friendly forces hold the landing area.

Dr. Kissinger: What do you think would happen if the Indonesians helped out?

P.M. Lee: Disaster, because you would present the non-Malays who don't want to be Communists with no option but to support them. Indonesia is 70% Javanese and they are different from the Malaysians. The Indonesian knows that he is a Javanese.

Dr. Kissinger: The Indonesians don't care much for guerrilla warfare.

P.M. Lee: No, but they have a thirst for extensive military power. It will be a useful experience for them to be on the supervisory team in Vietnam.

I don't want you to think that I believe all is dark.

Dr. Kissinger: No, I don't think you are neurotic. Your position requires realism. I know what you are saying. We want no major change and we want everything to go as slow as possible. We are willing to cooperate. Certainly before any drastic move in Indochina, you will contacted. Of great importance is Thailand. I will attach great importance to our new communications link. Although I am very busy, once I identify a problem I can move fast.

P.M. Lee: The crucial thing is not to have any crisis spring unexpectedly. It should be envisaged.

Dr. Kissinger: If one has to improvise a response he is in bad shape.

P.M. Lee: You have to get a contact man.

Dr. Kissinger: I will tell your Ambassador by early next week who he is to be.

P.M. Lee: I must be absolutely quiet, no leakage or else it would be counterproductive.

Dr. Kissinger: There is never a leak here. My staff may be incompetent, but they are loyal. Even our Ambassador will not know.

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 1027, Presidential/HAK memcons, Folder 5, April–November 1975. Top Secret; Sensitive; Exclusively Eyes Only. The conversation took place in Kissinger’s Office. On August 4, 3:30–4:40 p.m., Lee and Kissinger met in a conference room at Kennedy International Airport in New York. A memorandum of conversation from their meeting, which mainly discussed affairs in Indochina, is ibid., folder 3.

295. Memorandum From W.R. Smyser of the National Security Council Staff to Secretary of State Kissinger, Washington, January 30, 1975. 295. Memorandum From W.R. Smyser of the National Security Council Staff to Secretary of State Kissinger, Washington, January 30, 1975.1

Washington, January 30, 1975

MEMORANDUM
NATIONAL SECURITY COUNCIL
ACTION

January 30, 1975

MEMORANDUM FOR: SECRETARY KISSINGER
FROM: W.R. Smyser [WRS initialed]
SUBJECT: Proposed NSSM on U.S. Military Access to Singapore

There have been several recent developments with respect to Singapore that could have a considerable impact on our interests there as well as elsewhere. We need to analyze that impact and decide what we can do about it.

Implications of the following developments need to be reviewed: — The U.K. on December 3 announced plans to withdraw virtually all of its 2,200 man military contingent from Singapore. The announcement did not specify a date, but the U.K. will probably complete the withdrawal within the year. The U.K. will also divest itself of its extensive military base structure in Singapore, including the strategic Sembawang Naval Base, which the U.S. Navy uses for port calls, bunkering, and repairs.

— The Soviets, apparently moving quickly in the wake of the U.K. announcement, have asked the Singapore Government for permission to use the Sembawang Naval Shipyard to repair Soviet commercial vessels. Singapore is considering the Soviet request, presumably in light of reduced U.S. Navy use of Singapore's naval facilities as well as the anticipated sharp drop in British naval use of these facilities. Until now, Singapore has given Soviet ships — both military and commercial — only very limited access to the sensitive Sembawang Naval Base area on the north side of the island, and has largely confined them to the use of commercial facilities on the south side.

— CIA has reported that the Soviets are exploring the possibility of constructing a naval bunkering facility for their commercial vessels in either Singapore or Malaysia.

— In accord with the Presidential decision last spring, we intend to end subsidized use of Lockheed's military aircraft repair facilities in Singapore at the end of this fiscal year.

State and Defense have initially and informally concluded that the likely increase in Soviet presence in Singapore following on the U.K. withdrawal will be slight. Our Navy is considering some limited increase in its use of Singapore's bunkering facilities.

The State Department has also instructed our Embassy in Singapore to remonstrate with the Singapore Government about the possible increase in the Soviet presence.

I believe our bureaucracy's informal approach to this question is inadequate, and that a more comprehensive review of the dimensions of the problem and our options for coping with it is called for. Increased Soviet naval access to Singapore could have an important bearing on their naval presence in the Indian Ocean. We may be able to find means to increase our own use of the facilities. I contemplate a quick, short NSSM study of the question.

The purpose of this NSSM would not be to analyze or to project future naval strategy in the Indian Ocean or in Southeast Asia. Instead, we would wish it merely to study what we need to do to maintain our access to Singapore and — as necessary — to cut off Russian access. The study would not interfere with NSSM 199 on the Indian Ocean.

At Tab I is a draft memorandum from you to the President attaching a draft NSSM request.

RECOMMENDATION:

That you sign the NSSM at Tab A.

Concurrence:
Col Granger
Mr. Oakley

1 Source: Ford Library, NSC Institutional Files (H-Files), Box H–34, NSSM 218, U.S. Policy Toward U.S. and Soviet Military Access to Singapore. Secret. Sent for action. Concurred in by Granger and Oakley. In the top right-hand corner of the first page, Kissinger wrote, “Give new date + then issue.” On the second page, an unknown hand crossed out “draft memorandum to the President at Tab I” and wrote, “NSSM at Tab A.” Attached but not printed is Tab A, NSSM 218. [Malaysia/Singapore, 1973–1976, NSSM 218, 3/3/75]

296. National Security Study Memorandum 218, Washington, March 3, 1975. 296. National Security Study Memorandum 218, Washington, March 3, 1975.1

Washington, March 3, 1975

NATIONAL SECURITY COUNCIL
WASHINGTON D.C. 20506

March 3, 1975

National Security Study Memorandum 218

TO: The Secretary of Defense
The Deputy Secretary of State
The Director of Central Intelligence

SUBJECT: U.S. Policy Toward U.S. and Soviet Military Access to Singapore

The President has directed a review of our policy toward U.S. and Soviet military access to Singapore. The study should assume that it remains a basic U.S. objective to minimize Soviet military access to Singapore and to preserve access to Singapore for U.S. Navy vessels and U.S. military aircraft and should: — Assess the present and prospective situation, especially in light of (a) the planned withdrawal of United Kingdom forces from Singapore, and (b) recent displays of Soviet interest in greater access to Singapore s naval facilities.

— Define and evaluate U.S. policy options that would achieve the above objectives in this situation.

The study should be prepared by the NSC Inter-Departmental Group for East Asia, and should be submitted no later than March 31, 1975 for consideration by the Senior Review Group.

[signed]
Henry A. Kissinger

cc: The Chairman, Joint Chiefs of Staff

1 Source: Ford Library, National Security Adviser, NSC Staff for East Asia and Pacific Affairs, Convenience Files, Box 10, Singapore, NSSM 218. Secret. A copy was sent to the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff. The NSSM 218 study was cancelled and did not result in a meeting.

297. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, May 8, 1975, noon–1 p.m. 297. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, May 8, 1975, noon–1 p.m. 1

Washington, May 8, 1975, noon–1 p.m.

MEMORANDUM
THE WHITE HOUSE

MEMORANDUM OF CONVERSATION

PARTICIPANTS:

President Ford

Prime Minister Lee Kuan Yew of Singapore

Dr. Henry A. Kissinger, Secretary of State and Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs

Lt. General Brent Scowcroft, Deputy Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs

DATE AND TIME: May 8, 1975;
12:00 - 1:00 p.m.
PLACE: The Oval Office

[The press was admitted.]

President: Did you got up to Harvard during the difficult days?

Lee: Yes, in '67 and '68.

President: Did they give you a hard time?

Lee: Not any worse than they would an American holding similar views. Moynihan is giving me a dinner. I don't know why.

President: We are putting him in at the UN. [The press was dismissed.]

Lee: Yes, I have read of the appointment.

I saw your TV press conference. Very forceful thoughts. No notes. Quiet. Like the Saturday Review said.

Kissinger: He has made a study of you, Mr. President. He doesn't come unprepared.

President: I know of your vast knowledge of Asia and that you have just come from the Commonwealth Conference.

Lee: You must have gotten a hilarious account.

Kissinger: You baffled them with your Chinese proverbs.

Lee: Four thousand years of history leave a storehouse on which one can draw when it is apt.

[Secretary Kissinger spoke of how the Chinese think — Tangtze and the Chinese Wall.

Lee: There is one proverb which says when a country becomes confused, large matters become small ones and vice versa. We must get things into proportion.

President: I would appreciate your unvarnished views of the situation and what to do. Don't worry about being frank.

Lee: My immediate reaction is one of astonishment and alarm at the rapidity with which the situation fell apart. The present nervousness is reflected in the press like the planted question to Schlesinger which was then relayed to Thailand. Then the Thai blew his lid and said the U.S. has no morals. The press is having a carnival. We must restrain ourselves. The Thai didn't go through an election campaign — they are intoxicated now and feel they must say these things. The two-party coalition won't last, I don't think. The Indonesians are digging their toes in and Suharto, through Lon Nol, committed himself to Cambodia and said boo to us and to the Third World. That is good. Marcos reacts to the mass media. You are doing a reassessment so he has to do one.

Kissinger: Do you think the bombing halt in Cambodia in 1973 made him cancel his trip?

Lee: No doubt about it.

Kissinger: If we had kept the right to bomb and there had been no Watergate, could we have kept North Vietnam from attacking?

Lee: No doubt, but what is the good of saying it?

There was no inevitability it would fail. If these things hadn't happened and the emphasis could have been on reconstruction, there is no doubt.

But if I said it, the press would just say I am inflexible. I told Thieu he couldn't rely on the one-for-one replacement and had to build a self-generating society.

President: Could they have become a viable society?

Lee: If he had turned from leopard spots to competing economies, he could have won. But not just shooting it out.

Kissinger: If we had given one-for-one, could he have held?

Lee: Yes, with the threat of bombing. But he would have faced it in '77. But we shouldn't waste time on this.

Hanoi may see this as a moment of destiny. They may want a master-servant situation with Cambodia and Laos and put pressure on the Thais. Laos will last through Souvanna. Cambodia, I am worried. It is like the Warsaw uprising.

Kissinger: Won't they start the same thing eventually in South Vietnam?

Lee: Sure. Those who won't bend must be destroyed. They will put up this sham government. Here is Whitlam wanting to send aid and Ghandi writing to send a telegram of congratulations. There is a Chinese proverb: same bed, different dreams — someone must be wrong.

President: What should we do? Substantively we intend to do whatever is necessary.

Lee: I will speak frankly. I spent time yesterday with a number of Congressmen. It would not be a realistic forum to...I could put forward proposals which would stiffen Southeast Asia, Japan

Kissinger: There is a problem in Japan too.

Lee: Sure. If I hear these things, the Japs do too.

President: From the Congress?

Lee: Mostly the House. Strong, established members. Not so much in the Senate.

President: That is a change.

Lee: Maybe because I didn't see Mansfield. I probed to find out what could be your policy and intentions. Given what could be a veto-proof Congress, the maximum achievable is not to lose any more big pieces. Just calm it down. The Thai are not in immediate danger. Laos is a goner. Cambodia is a struggle between China and Hanoi. The Khmer Rouge never would have succeeded had Sihanouk not swung Cambodia to them.

Kissinger: We told him for two years.

Lee: Yes. He should have gone to Phnom Penh, or at least stayed in Paris. President: We can't do anything?

Lee: No. China will do its best to see that Hanoi doesn't control.

President: The Soviet Union?

Lee: They will support Hanoi. This is an Asian Yugoslavia. It's Albania in reverse. The Soviet Union is backing the Titoists who are independently-minded people.

Kissinger: And arrogant. Their monomania is unbelievable.

Lee: Even more so after this route of a million-man well-equipped army. We need to calm the Thais down.

Kissinger: How should we handle our withdrawal, fast or slow?

Lee: Khukrit is surprised he is Prime Minister. He is writing his own press articles. He is acceptable to the military. They don't knock him down because they think the King is not ready and it would be messy.

The Chief of Staff is openly contemptuous. I told Khukrit that you have a Congress which can block the President. But then there will be a new Congress and by then remorse and regret will have set in. I said “Don't lose your cool. Say what you have to say to the students, but keep your options open until November 1976. If it's a McGovern, throw the Americans out. But I don't think it will happen that way. So don't throw out the baby with the bath.” The Chief of Staff is saying just the opposite — he wants Utapao open, but he is too simple also. He thinks if he keeps it open he will get more aid for the insurgency. The military is contemptuous of Khukrit. The Government won't last a year, so you can discount sixty percent of what he says.

Kissinger: Won't the Army take over?

Lee: After the King wants it and the civil population has had a belly full.

Chatchai has had experience as Thanom's deputy. He says they have to have the Americans out because they promised. But once they're out, you can't get them back. I played this way with the British. I kept delaying things. It is foolish preemptive statements which are trouble. Whitlam has a penchant for it — it looks good for the moment.

Say nothing at the moment. I have a not very optimistic view. A situation is created where the other side has such a psychological advantage, and the credibility of U.S. aid being sustained over a long period is not good. Thailand will fight 3 to 5 years with your help, but won't want to go through the Phnom Penh and Saigon mangling machine. They will come to terms with China. I spoke to Chatchai and to the middle levels in the Foreign Ministry. I have a real input to their thinking through our Ambassador.

Kissinger: Do you think the Chinese will work with Thailand to block Hanoi? Should we cooperate?

Lee: No. Because it would look like an American plot . You should delay it by stepping in and doling out aid until they say the insurgency can't be solved that way, but only by reforms. This government won't last and will be replaced by a government sympathetic with the Army. The number three Army man is being groomed for the top job.

I would be dishonest if I said Thailand would be a happy peaceful place. The thinking of the middle level in Thailand — they have seen Cambodia and Vietnam. They will try to stop it in the northeast, but if they can't they will come to terms with China. China is their insurance agent. The North Vietnamese Army and Chinese Army won't come down — they will pass arms and pamphlets and encourage subversion.

Kissinger: Can Indonesia keep stable?

Lee: With the oil, yes. There is no danger from the outside. Kissinger: Will he take out an insurance policy?

Lee: He has no need. He can't be overthrown from outside. You can work with Suharto but don't back foolish policies. Don't support building a big military machine because that could lead to his overthrow from within. The people will get disgusted.

Indonesia wants to be a great military power. They can't be, but they can be a stable force.

Kissinger: Can Malaysia hold out?

Lee: If they don't fall for Indonesia saying "You need help, we will come in."

Kissinger: Mr. President, he told me two years ago what would happen if Watergate continued.

Lee: Yes. But it has happened and now I move on. I am angry, frustrated, but we must move on from where we are.

It is not lost, provided the economic side in Southeast Asia is kept going. Protectionism here and isolationism going abroad.

Kissinger: What are you saying about Malaysia?

Lee: Malaysia has to get more queasy before you can be effective. Razak has made a move to Habib. We want joint training in counterinsurgency, the way you learned it in Vietnam. But he can't do it alone, only with me. But I can't do it like the British in Malaysia. I have to lance the cancer.

Kissinger: Korea?

Lee: They won't move if they think you will bomb. The Senate knows this; they want Japan so they know they can't scare Japan by losing Korea. But it takes more than the White House — Congress has to say the U.S. will move if there is open aggression.

Kissinger: What move will China make?

Lee: They will be wistful they didn't take advantage of the confrontation Congress, the Middle East, Cyprus.

Kissinger: How could they take advantage?

Lee: Not very much. They don't want to destroy Taiwan. They know they will get it eventually. One price the Thais must pay is to move from Taiwan to the PRC.

If I may emphasize one point. There is a tendency in the U.S. Congress not to want to export jobs. But we have to have the jobs if we are to stop Communism. We have done that, moving from simple to more complex, skilled labor. If you stop this process, it will do more harm than you can every repair with aid. Don't cut off imports from Southeast Asia. If you start closing down plants in Indonesia, Malaysia, Philippines, you do great damage.

President: Thank you for coming, Mr. Prime Minister.

1 Source: Ford Library, National Security Adviser, Memoranda of Conversation, Box 11. Secret; Sensitive. The conversation took place in the Oval Office. Ford’s talking points from Kissinger, which the President saw, are available ibid., VIP Visits, Box 8.

298. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, May 8, 1975. 298. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, May 8, 1975.1

Washington, May 8, 1975

MEMORANDUM OF CONVERSATION

Participants:

The Secretary, Henry A. Kissinger

Prime Minister Lee Kuan Yew of Singapore

Prime Minister Lee's Private Secretary

Jerry Bremer, Notetaker

Date: May 8, 1975

Distribution: Memcon file, LPB Chron, Memcon Book, Peter Rodman-NSC

The Secretary: The President thought his meeting with you was the best he's had since he's been in office, and I'm not saying that to flatter you.

Lee Kuan Yew: Well, it's important to see now how he can do to hold what's left. It's sort of like an aircraft which has lost one engine, you've got a lot of nervous passengers, and the pilot and the crew must keep everyone calm, if there's to be a safe landing. It will never be the same but nevertheless, we must try.

The Secretary: It's also like the pilot who said, "I have some bad news and some good news for you. The bad news is that we're lost, but the good news is that we're making good time." (laughter)

I'd like to make one suggestion. I haven't heard your public statements, but I think a little pep talk by someone other than me about the problems we face in Southeast Asia would be very good. If I'm the only one saying that Vietnam is serious and we need to pull up our socks, it doesn't have the same impact.

Lee Kuan Yew: Well, Dean Rusk was right. The bill is not in yet. I'll be on CBS this weekend.

The Secretary: Well, be tough; not critical. But we have no hope with Congress, I can tell you that. The only hope we have is with the public, which won't listen unless we tell them.

Lee Kuan Yew: I don't think the public will tell Congress strongly enough until the elections.

The Secretary: That's not entirely true. Congress now is a poorly-based fluke of last year's election.

Lee Kuan Yew: True, but people like Ryan in California fought in Vietnam and Korea — they're tough men. I said what if the North invades South Korea. He said, I'd pull the troops out. What about the Japanese, I asked. He said, I'm talking to you, not to the Japanese and I said, it has to get to the Japanese if that's the message.

The Secretary: I wouldn't over-dramatize this attitude. I think we can turn public opinion around quite a lot before the elections, but it's at a low point now. Vietnam collapsed at a very bad point, but we're determined to try to turn public opinion around.

Lee Kuan Yew: Your mass media, as I watch it, the way they killed-off Southeast Asia, and coming in now with a three-star general and a gold-star and Ky, and they're even now using him . . .

The Secretary: . . . yes, after he disappeared from view for seven years.

Lee Kuan Yew: It turns people first against Asia.

The Secretary: And eventually anywhere.

In Watergate, I was the great hero because people were trying to prove their legitimacy by using me. Now the isolationists are using NATO to show their credentials and when nothing is left but NATO, they'll knock that off too.

What does Reston say?

Lee Kuan Yew: Reston is saying that now he knows which way we're going after Paris. I think that's nonsense.

The Secretary: Do you think Habib understands the problem? I'm asking you frankly. We can talk as friends now.

Lee Kuan Yew: Do you want the truth?

The Secretary: Yes.

Lee Kuan Yew: I spent three-and-a-half hours with him yesterday and Ingersoll was there, too.

The Secretary: I know he doesn't understand, but what about Habib?

Lee Kuan Yew: I give him 65 - 70 marks.

The Secretary: Do you think a trip by him now to Asia would help or hurt?

Lee Kuan Yew: I think neither. It may help if he can give you a correct feeling of the situation.

The Secretary: He will report well, that I can say.

Lee Kuan Yew: He won't be a pep pill or a tranquilizer for anybody.

The Secretary: Who would be? Indeed, what would be?

Lee Kuan Yew: To tell the truth, nobody. The situation now is that what the President says must go through Congress, since once it needs money, it must go to Congress.

The Secretary: You know what they're doing to me now.

Lee Kuan Yew: Yes, I've seen.

The Secretary: Within a year the mood in the country will move Right, and therefore nothing we would do today can cost lots of money. Therefore, we have to keep our eyes on the long-term problem and prevent a disaster this year until next spring.

Lee Kuan Yew: Do you think the mood will change by next spring?

The Secretary: Yes.

Lee Kuan Yew: Well, I pray you're right.

The Secretary: Not in the Congress, but in the country.

Lee Kuan Yew: Then it will have an effect on Congress. (Tea is served)

The Secretary: In the last normal election we had, Nixon, who was after all, not personally attractive, won enormously with a strong foreign policy and a conservative domestic policy.

Watergate was a catastrophe, but I had to maneuver instead of dominating the situation. When you have no authority, every successive move becomes more difficult. If the Israelis had had to deal with an elected President, they would never have dared to do in March what they did.

Lee Kuan Yew: I think I was helpful with Kennedy. I said if that comes unstuck, they all do.

The Secretary: Let's discuss the American position in Asia. What should we do there? I know what we cannot do.

Lee Kuan Yew: You haven't got the strength to convince the Thais that it is worth resisting the insurgents, nor Hanoi that if they continue, they will get met, at least not until you get an elected President. This Congress got away with blue murder.

I would divide the strategy: from now to October 1976, and after the Presidential elections. If Ford is elected and has a mandate and you have a different Congress, he cannot then be brushed aside.

The Secretary: Let us talk concretely. This is not such a long time span, because this year Hanoi will do no more than take Laos. They are fully occupied with absorbing what they have already conquered. They are very careful planners, and they will step up in Thailand and Malaysia next year.

Lee Kuan Yew: But the insurgents there are creatures in their own rights and they get inspired so that the governments get nervous.

The Secretary: What should we do next year?

Lee Kuan Yew: No one expects the Americans to be involved in guerrilla warfare anywhere. There's no use pretending.

The Secretary: I agree.

Lee Kuan Yew: Therefore, you have to give some confidence so that the will to resist doesn't disappear the way it did in the South.

The Secretary: What was that the result of?

Lee Kuan Yew: I think Watergate tried American credibility, then the Americans cut down supplies to the South. This led to rationing of shells and had a cumulative effect. Thieu's order to withdraw broke that will. He must have been out of his mind to give that order.

The Secretary: He lost six divisions, that never fought, in a traffic jam.

Lee Kuan Yew: This was very frightening to the Malays and to the Thais. Unlike Cassandra, I've been slowly conditioning Razak and his ministers and now that they see that I'm not that far wrong, they're asking what now. While you are relatively weak vis-a-vis the Congress, you should do all your planning, have technical aid, contingency planning, etc., you've learned a lot in that area. Razak and his boys fought a World War II-marque-type war. Now the Vietnamese will teach the insurgents new techniques and give them new weapons. They have American weapons now. It sends chills down my spine. My worst fears have come true. How do you tell this to the American public?

The Secretary: You have to say it. If you say it, I can say it too. You live there.

Lee Kuan Yew: I must be careful so as not to scare the Malays and the Thais that the situation is hopeless.

The Secretary: You must get across to the American people that there's a price we will pay for Vietnam.

Lee Kuan Yew: They will leapfrog Thailand, fight 3 to 5 years and then come to terms.

The Secretary: What terms?

Lee Kuan Yew: Neutralism, pro-Communism.

The Secretary: What effect will that have in Malaysia?

Lee Kuan Yew: That's where we come in with contingency plans. I can't fight the same kind of war as the British. The Thais won't let the Malays cross borders to clean it up, but they might let us clean it up, if they also pay the price of concessions to the Chinese, etc.

The Secretary: How soon can you do it?

Lee Kuan Yew: Given the right kind of help from you?

The Secretary: What kind of help?

Lee Kuan Yew: Insurgency training.

The Secretary: Weapons, too?

Lee Kuan Yew: The right kind of intelligence and weapons.

The Secretary: [text not declassified]

Lee Kuan Yew: [text not declassified]

The Secretary: [text not declassified]

Lee Kuan Yew: [text not declassified]

The Secretary: [text not declassified]

Lee Kuan Yew: [text not declassified]

The Secretary: (reading paper) Have you talked to Schlesinger yet?

Lee Kuan Yew: I will talk to him tomorrow.

The Secretary: Rawling did not discuss it with us, but I think he is not unsympathetic. Can I keep this paper?

Lee Kuan Yew: Keep it [text not declassified] If you want secure links, it should be closely held, really discreet and secure. Habib said to me last night if we can start sending men here now, they will need technicians and technical equipment to meet the VC-type tactics, which the Thais and Malays will face.

The Secretary: This sort of thing we can do now. [text not declassified]

Lee Kuan Yew: Otherwise it will blow and I'll play it in the open. I have no motives here. I am trying to be helpful. I get nothing for saying it. I can't go beyond a certain point or the mass media goes after me.

The Secretary: You can go close to that point, though. We must wake up the American people to the dangers of the next five to ten years.

Lee Kuan Yew: Your Congress has to be prepared to lose all of Southeast Asia except Japan and to declare all the seas open. They will tell their constituents that.

The Secretary: In a fight between them and me with the constituents, I may win. History now accelerates very quickly. They won't like the consequences of the Vietnam loss. We were attacked at the Paris Accords for being too tough with them.

We intended to bomb in March or April 1973. It would have kept Hanoi quiet for two or three years.

Lee Kuan Yew: Well, it has happened, and we must deal with the consequences.

The Secretary: On counter-insurgency assistance, the training in Thailand is okay, what about Malaysia?

Lee Kuan Yew: [text not declassified]

The Secretary: Is this arranged?

Lee Kuan Yew: I discussed it with Schlesinger [text not declassified] You give them the idea that this is a good idea. [text not declassified] Their headquarters have been there for fifteen years. If they don't know what we are hoping to do, we can chip them down before it spreads but we need to drain the swamp too.

The Secretary: What do you think the Chinese think now?

Lee Kuan Yew: They are probably astounded that North Vietnam got away with it. They can't believe the Americans are so paralyzed and really fearful.

The Secretary: What will they do?

Lee Kuan Yew: They will try hard in Cambodia and will help the Thais a little.

The Secretary: What will they do towards us?

Lee Kuan Yew: Nothing, they're just sulky and angry. They won't move on Taiwan, I don't think.

The Secretary: Why are they sulky?

Lee Kuan Yew: I think you disappointed them. You have not moved as fast on Shanghai as they had hoped.

The Secretary: Don't you think it would be a mistake to do that now?

Lee Kuan Yew: Yes, I'm sure they'd think you're running away and that that will whet the Russian appetite. The Chinese are deeply concerned with the speed with which events are taking place. They think it's giving the Soviets more openings and they can't keep up.

The Secretary: Is there anything we can do now to give them confidence?

Lee Kuan Yew: I don't think you need to give them confidence. You should show that you have a tough group around the President who himself is robust.

(Kissinger is interrupted for a call to Scowcroft.)

Lee Kuan Yew: What in your view can this President do with this Congress to prevent large chunks being lost?

The Secretary: How can they be lost?

Lee Kuan Yew: Well, Laos and Cambodia are gone. If they sense weakness, they will send large numbers of Pathet Lao into Thailand.

The Secretary: How can we show strength and activity? If you give me an idea, then I'll talk to you and see if we can do it.

Lee Kuan Yew: Get the highest common denominator between the White House and the Congress and make a declaration that external aggression will be met, even if it's Pathet Lao.

The Secretary: We can't get that. Well, I must tell the truth. I think it's a mistake to try to get any approval now. I would be inclined to take our chances and do something and then see. Let them throw me out, if they want to.

Lee Kuan Yew: They will stop you in 60 days in Southeast Asia; maybe not in Korea. In Thailand they will certainly stop you.

The Secretary: It depends on what we're going to do. If it hadn't been for the Indochina Acts, if we'd only had the War Powers, we'd have bombed. Therefore, in Korea I think we can act.

Lee Kuan Yew: Not in Thailand though.

The Secretary: No.

Lee Kuan Yew: You can only bomb the border areas. What use is that, given the euphoric mood they must be in? They need only take the corner of Thailand, and they could for example take over the Mekong hydroelectric scheme. They would then have the entire Mekong delta. That is one step they may risk. Then they would have a basis for becoming an industrial power. They can get away with it, I think. They have the Pathet Lao, and the Lao tribesmen have never been treated as Thais.

The Secretary: If the only thing which will shape them up is a congressional decision that we will fight — that we cannot get.

Lee Kuan Yew: I spoke about this with Jackson and Church.

The Secretary: What is Jackson's view?

Lee Kuan Yew: If you tell him this is a plus for Russia, which it is because it strengthens Hanoi, he will understand. Church wants to give everything away except Japan. He said the only thing there that's important is trade. He really believes it.

The Secretary: Trade with whom?

Lee Kuan Yew: The whole damn world.

The Secretary: He's a God damn fool.

Lee Kuan Yew: He believes it. He's personable. I noticed he has a nice TV image.

The Secretary: Luckily, it's not a good TV image.

Lee Kuan Yew: He believes it sincerely.

The Secretary: Anyone who wants to be President and who is foolish enough to tell a visitor this shows a reckless lack of comprehension.

These fellows in 1969 looked very tough, too, before Nixon appealed to the mass of people. They switched quickly. They have no guts for a fight. For a year the problem — I think next year it will change.

Lee Kuan Yew: You can lose large chunks of Thailand this year, though, and the Thais could come to terms with China for too high a premium.

The Secretary: What is too high?

Lee Kuan Yew: They might cut out Taiwan, give the Russians some kind of a position. The Maylai communists in the south, for example — the Russians will use that insurgency to get what they want — though publicly they will say they're obliged to tell all the people to support revolutionary movements.

The Secretary: What will the Philippines do?

Lee Kuan Yew: Nothing. He is in lots of trouble in the south with the Moslems and all the support they are getting from Libya and the Saudis. Whatever lift Marcos got from sugar is going down now.

The Secretary: What would you do if you were in my shoes? I told the President that when I leave, you are my candidate to succeed me. I have no doubt that you could really work with 2 hundred million people.

Lee Kuan Yew: With this Congress and with a non-elected President?

The Secretary: I won't leave until after the elections.

Lee Kuan Yew: I think if there are some kind of funds somewhere to finance some little projects — you know training and technical assistance . . .

The Secretary: There are funds though they've plugged most of the loopholes. In 1969, we could move massively between various parts of the funds. Now even if we can't get big sums, we can do it.

Lee Kuan Yew: You don't need big sums. These countries are not like Vietnam. Thailand has reserves and food and the 20 years of help you've given it has made it quite self-generatingly wealthy. Of course, they have to be less greedy. They now have weapons on the other side too and they must start spreading the butter a bit. Marcos has got to do the same thing and he can do it in the northern islands. The problem is the Moslem south which wants independence which he cannot concede. Therefore, he should just hold the key positions and at some time Libya will get a new leader and Khalid or Fahd will change their views.

The Secretary: One tragedy was that we had arranged for a substantial Saudi loan to South Vietnam to help just as it collapsed.

Lee Kuan Yew: Did Thieu know?

The Secretary: Yes.

Lee Kuan Yew: Why didn't he stay and fight?

The Secretary: They were going to pay his oil bill. I think the Army cracked psychologically.

In my shoes, what would you do in Asia?

Lee Kuan Yew: Outwardly, I would keep everyone steady. I would send signals to Hanoi, Moscow, and Peking. But if there is open aggression, the congressional mood will change. If you don't believe me, something will happen. Buy time until the next elections. It's a new ball game then. The danger is now because you're not credible.

The Secretary: What can you say on TV that would help us?

Lee Kuan Yew: Doesn't that risk just pulling out more entrails?

The Secretary: No, it helps those of us who are trying to pursue a strong policy. Also, tonight at the dinner give a strong speech. It would do the President a great favor. The President told me he has not been so impressed with anyone since he's been in office as he was with you.

Lee Kuan Yew: How does it help the President with both hands tied behind his back?

The Secretary: He doesn't have both tied. My assessment of the country is that it is very uneasy. Something is wrong. Deep down we are not so secure. Therefore, we talk big. Our strategy has to be to shore them up a bit. Let the leadership opinion know. I say we face extremely difficult situations. I never say the past is over. I think if you, in that strong and elegant way of yours, say there is a massive problem and that the bill will have to be paid, it will have an impact. They know you're a friend.

Lee Kuan Yew: But it will be taken out of context.

The Secretary: But at least 125 people in the room will hear you tonight.

Lee Kuan Yew: It could be obliquely phrased.

The Secretary: I disagree; it should be strongly phrased.

Lee Kuan Yew: I could do it with CBS on Sunday.

The Secretary: You should do both. It should not be hysterical but calm. I talk to you as a friend and not as a foreign leader. This idea that we can have the whole world communist and then trade with them is naive.

Lee Kuan Yew: I said so two years ago and they blacked it out.

The Secretary: I'm not sure and certainly not on Sunday. Tonight I wouldn't be all that conciliatory and reassuring. Seriously, you could really help. You know my views and the President's views are identical. He is not a weak man. The problem now is that the public is so brainwashed.

Lee Kuan Yew: Should I tell them what I discussed with Razak? That your reputation is tarnished in Asia?

The Secretary: Absolutely, don't you think he should do this? Ask my friend here, Jerry, what do you think?

Bremer: I agree very strongly. We Americans are not born losers.

The Secretary: That's right. The American people are not losers. You know what Joe Kennedy used to say — show me a good loser and I'll show you a loser. The only way the media can sell this is by saying that nothing is happening.

Lee Kuan Yew: If I say tonight something then they will be prepared for me on Sunday. It's a little different live tonight. Then on Sunday I wind up getting the blame,

The Secretary: Well, don't be too pleasant.

Lee Kuan Yew: I'm not. In Jamaica I spoke three times. I can say tonight that your position today is so bad that I'm not sure whether it's a plus to have dinner with you tonight, Mr. President.

The Secretary: That goes too far I think. Something like that but more elegantly.

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Records of Secretary of State Kissinger, E5403, Box 23. Secret; Sensitive. The paper that Lee gave Kissinger is not further identified.

299. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, May 9, 1975, 2:30–4 p.m. 299. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, May 9, 1975, 2:30–4 p.m. 1

Washington, May 9, 1975, 2:30–4 p.m.

ASSISTANT SECRETARY OF DEFENSE
WASHINGTON, D.C. 20301

In reply refer to: 1-22749/75

MEMORANDUM OF CONVERSATION
SUBJECT: Call by Singapore Prime Minister Lee Kuan Yew (U)

Participants:

United States

Secretary of Defense - James R. Schlesinger

Assistant Secretary of Defense (ISA) - Robert Ellsworth

Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense (ISA) - Morton I. Abramowitz

Military Assistant to the SecDef - MajGen John A. Wickham, Jr.

Director, East Asia & Pacific Region, OASD (ISA) - RADM William J. Crowe

Assistant for Singapore, EA&PR, OASD (ISA) - CAPT Lennart G. Holmberg, USN

Singapore

Prime Minister - Lee Kuan Yew

Foreign Minister - Sinnathamby Rajaratnam

Private Secretary to PM - A. Sankaran

Time: 1430 - 1600, 9 May 1975
Place: Secretary of Defense's office, Pentagon

1. (S) After introductions and pleasantries, PM Lee began by expressing his shock and dismay at the collapse in Cambodia and Vietnam, indicating that they had occurred much faster than he had thought possible. SECDEF asked if PM Lee had anticipated the collapse and he answered yes, he had anticipated Cambodia, but not Vietnam, certainly not so sudden and so complete. He was appalled at the absolute breakdown of morale, discipline and leadership, and felt that it was criminal to abandon such large amounts of weapons without using them. He indicated that it would have been better to fight and die than to run away from their own country. "How could they live with themselves?"

2. (S) PM Lee has little faith in the Thai but hopes that the top people in the government are willing at least for the next 3-5 years to do everything in their power to avoid a situation like Cambodia or Laos. There is no doubt that Chatchai is an overwrought man and that many of his utterances are made under stress. PM Lee advised us to play it cool and discount 60-70% of what the Thai say. He thinks that the PRC is playing for time; the more time the less it will cost them. Eventually they will arrive at the price they are willing to pay for control of the Northern Malay Peninsula. He noted that when the PRC received Razak, the Malay communist party became isolated. PM Lee believes the North Vietnamese could move all the way to Singapore. "We (the Singaporeans) don't believe the U.S. would make a move, but we do believe the PRC would, and that is what is protecting us." (PM Lee stated that perhaps he should be in China instead of Washington.) SECDEF then commented that American public opinion is very volatile.

3. (S) PM Lee outlining his views on the ability of the U.S. to retain its influence in SEA, made the following points. — Between now and the next U.S. election, don't lose anymore pieces.

— The President's word will not carry any weight unless it is backed by Congress.

— The Senate Foreign Relations Committee now has a new and important status.

4. (S) PM Lee commented that Marcos and the Thai are playing to a scared audience. Laos cannot be compared to Cambodia and Vietnam — the latter two are exporters, Laos is not. Thai Lao and Pathet Lao cannot be distinguished. The competition in Laos will be between the Soviet Union and North Vietnam; PRC will not move in nor will the U.S.

5. (S/S) PM Lee then stated that he had some specific items to discuss: first, that he needed parts for radios that were being co-produced in Singapore by the Israeli's (PRC/77's are being produced) and that certain components were needed but were delayed in the munitions control process. SECDEF said we would try to provide it. PM Lee next discussed several items which will be disseminated to appropriate offices within 0SD.

6. (S) PM Lee discussed in rambling detail the pleasant way of life in Singapore and how he had made mortal enemies out of the communists. On several occasions during the course of the conversation he discussed the withdrawal of Singapore from Malaysia and how his government has demonstrated the effectiveness of honest government and how this contrasts with other Asian states. PM Lee then concluded that it is imperative for the Malays to counter communist influence by becoming more like Singapore. In his opinion the primary threat is the Malay communist element which is centered in Thailand on the border of Malaysia. He commented that if somehow they could take the communists by surprise, they could clean out the hard core. SECDEF asked what that number would be. PM Lee replied that it was 2,000 to 4,000.

7. (S) SECDEF asked what was the role of Thai military? PM Lee indicated that they will do nothing until the King is ready. SECDEF then asked if their military was incapable of action. PM Lee thought so. SECDEF questioned what North Vietnam was going to do in the next 6 months to 1 year. PM Lee predicted that they will be nice for awhile, noting that they will have time to kill later. He then added that Cambodia does not have the same confidence as the Viets.

8. (S) SECDEF asked several questions regarding the Indonesians. PM Lee indicated that Indonesia is not strong because of such things as its internal corruption and the extravagance of Mrs. Suharto, which, combined with indications of lack of support by the populace is not encouraging. They are trying to get all non-Javanese to be loyal to Jakarta, but they do not have the integrity and confidence that is required. SECDEF asked why Indonesian troops could not he put into Malaysia to help stem the communist tide. PM Lee pointed out that it would not work and could be counter-productive as Indonesian troops, used to living off the land would be doing so at the expense of the Malaysians. PM Lee then stated that "it takes time to move from bullock cart to jet age."

9. (S) PM Lee then spoke of the Muslim conflict in the Philippines. In his opinion it would destroy Marcos unless he stopped it from draining his treasury. He indicated that the war stopped Marcos from making any progress in spite of the fact that he had an increased income from sugar and other commodities. SECDEF inquired about the logistics base of the Muslims in the Philippines. Lee answered by suggesting that Marcos stop pursuing the Muslims and instead set up enclaves and merely wait them out.

10. (S) Finally, the SECDEF asked, "Why did U.S. lose in Vietnam?" PM Lee responded that there are many reasons: "Let's not go back to Genesis, let's go to April '73. If you didn't have Watergate, this wouldn't have happened. Thieu was to visit me, and I was going to tell him that if he was not able to tell the U.S. Congress he would need less and less, he would scare the investors away." Thieu should have dealt with the VC then he could have hung on for years and possibly retained the confidence of the Congress.

11. (S) PM Lee's final point was that we need 100 to 150 key leaders in the area to be convinced that we are going in the right direction and who are willing to make the sacrifices to fight the communists. This requires honest, concerned and efficient governments and leaders who are not self-serving.

Memorandum of Conversation
Prepared by: CAPT Holmberg

Approved by:
Date: 5/30/75

Distribution:
SECDEF - 1
Spec Asst/SecDef - 1
ASD/ISA/D - 1
R&C - 2
DEPSECDEF - 1
ASD/ISA/S - 1
DSD/CCS - 1
CJCS - 1

1 Source: Washington National Records Center, OASD/ISA Files: FRC 330–78–0038, Singapore, 333, 1975 May 30. Secret; Sensitive. The memorandum of conversation was prepared by Holmberg and approved by Ellsworth. The conversation took place in Schlesinger’s office. Ellsworth’s talking points for Schlesinger, May 8, are ibid. Scowcroft’s talking points for Schlesinger, May 9, are in Ford Library, National Security Adviser, NSC Staff for East Asia and Pacific Affairs, Convenience Files, Box 21, Visit of PM Lee of Singapore, May 8, 1975 (1).

300. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, September 30, 1975. 300. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, September 30, 1975.1

Washington, September 30, 1975

DEPARTMENT OF STATE
Memorandum of Conversation

DATE: September 30, 1975

SUBJECT: Secretary's Meeting with Foreign Minister Rithauddeen

PARTICIPANTS:

Malaysia

Foreign Minister Rithauddeen

Ambassador Khir Johari, Permanent Representative to the United Nations

United States

The Secretary

Assistant Secretary Philip C. Habib, EA

Thomas Barnes, NSC

William S. Shepard, Malaysia Desk, EA/IMS

DISTRIBUTION: S (Mr. Bremer, Mr. Adams), S/S, WH (Mr. Rodman)

The Secretary: Nice to see you. Profound apologies for having kept you waiting. The Spanish Foreign Minister was here and we have these base negotiations. Someone didn't tell me that he was here, and so my meeting with him started one half-hour late.

Foreign Minister Rithauddeen: I didn't want to pester you.

The Secretary: You didn't indeed, quite the contrary. The meeting was at my request. I asked to see you as I wanted to meet you. Habib told me you were an excellent host. I find that Habib's happiness increases in direct proportion to his distance from me! How much time did you spend in Malaysia — two weeks, wasn't it?

Assistant Secretary Habib: I was there twice last Spring. I went early to see Prime Minister Razak, and then returned.

The Secretary: How long will you be in New York?

Foreign Minister Rithauddeen: I was meaning to stay longer, but my Prime Minister is going to Australia, and he wants me back in Kuala Lumpur before he leaves. I'll be returning the day after tomorrow.

The Secretary: What do you think about our bilateral relations?

Foreign Minister Rithauddeen: They are very good.

The Secretary: What are your views on the security situation in Malaysia? Are arms coming in from Vietnam?

Foreign Minister Rithauddeen: For the moment, there is no conclusive evidence that arms are coming in with the fall of Vietnam. We do find that some M-16s are turning up, and they did even before the fall of Vietnam. Infiltration is a problem, and we must cooperate with other countries.

The Secretary: You mean in the border areas. How are you getting along with your neighbors in that regard?

Foreign Minister Rithauddeen: Our cooperation is better with the Thais, and it is good with the Indonesians as well.

The Secretary: Is anything coming in by sea?

Foreign Minister Rithauddeen: No, but about a year ago there was an attempt to smuggle in arms by boat. But we patrolled and sank it and since then it hasn't been resumed. Our country is tough to patrol. We have a very long coastline, and then there are Sabah and Sarawak as well!

The Secretary: We have an interest in your territorial integrity as well and if we can be helpful we will be glad to do what we can.

Assistant Secretary Habib: We have talked with the Malaysians about this. We sent out a team, and we are now exploring the team's recommendations to see how we can best be helpful. As a start, we are expediting procedures for licensing of M-16s that the Malaysians are ordering.

The Secretary: Wonderful. That is exactly what I want.

Assistant Secretary Habib: Also, there are FMS credits. We are including $17 million in the request for FY-76, and we have so informed the Malaysian Government.

The Secretary: Fine. How did you arrive at $17 million? I always wonder how these figures can be so precisely determined,

Assistant Secretary Habib: That was done in consultation with the Malaysian Government.

The Secretary: The credit approach is a good one if we can be helpful in that way.

Assistant Secretary Habib: Yes. With credits, though, we have to bear in mind that Malaysia is not a poor country. It is very rich by comparison to some other countries.

The Secretary: What is your population?

Foreign Minister Rithauddeen: Eleven million, including sub-islands.

Ambassador Khir Johari: We are interested in technical military help, particularly in the handling of booby traps.

The Secretary: Yes, and Phil Habib speaks for me in these matters.

Foreign Minister Rithauddeen: We need these things badly. We are testing M-16s, and our soldiers prefer M-16s.

Assistant Secretary Habib: We are expediting approval of the M-16s, with an initial shipment of 16,000. Is that the figure, Bill?

Mr. Shepard: The first shipment will be 10,000 rifles.

Assistant Secretary Habib: Yes, that's right. I'd forgotten the exact figure.

Foreign Minister Rithauddeen: We want assistance of a technical sort, but we can look after ourselves. You can give us what we need so that we can remain sovereign. We have had good talks with Mr. Habib. We will use the money (credits) for the necessary hardware. Now, we are facing booby traps when we go out into the jungle.

The Secretary: We never solved that in Vietnam. Only the Koreans solved it, by marching villagers over the booby-trapped fields in front of their soldiers. That would hardly be an acceptable solution for Malaysia!

Assistant Secretary Habib: There are some techniques which the teams talked about, but they are limited in their effectiveness.

Foreign Minister Rithauddeen: They discussed using dogs, but their sense of smell is not always sufficient for the job. We have also heard about a small sort of tractor machine, about five feet by 2 feet, which is a sort of flailing robot.

The Secretary: The problem is that you don't develop a technology unless you have a need for it, and we do not have a need for it. How many insurgents are there now?

Foreign Minister Rithauddeen: There are 1,500-2,000, including supporters

The Secretary: Are you working with Singapore?

Foreign Minister Rithauddeen: Yes. And on operations we are working with the Thais.

Assistant Secretary Habib: That has its ups and downs.

Foreign Minister Rithauddeen: We can get decisions from the top, but then there are problems of implementation. We have meetings, and then...

The Secretary: Well, I wanted to see you to tell you of our goodwill towards Malaysia. We will try to help you. The nations of Southeast Asia continue to have our support within the limits that we all understand. Any nation such as your country which wants to defend itself has our support in its endeavor.

Foreign Minister Rithauddeen: ASEAN is important to us as well. There is a standing ASEAN invitation to other Southeast Asian countries to join, including Vietnam.

The Secretary: The Vietnamese are tough cases. They may put out their hands, but when you take them, they throw you over their shoulders!

It is conceivable to me that Cambodia will get concerned over the Vietnams.

Foreign Minister Rithauddeen: At Lima, there was less Vietnam-Cambodian dialogue than might have been expected. The North Vietnamese are playing their cards well. They are pushing South Vietnam more into the public light to show that they are not under any sort of bondage. That is the impression that I got.

The Secretary: Were you in Hanoi then?

Foreign Minister Rithauddeen: No, those were my impressions when I was in Lima for the Non-Aligned Conference.

The Secretary: Well, I think it will be run from Hanoi. I spent four years with Le Duc Tho, and I now wish him onto someone else. They have a very high opinion of their own abilities. But it is up to the countries of the area to decide how to handle things.

Foreign Minister Rithauddeen: Yes. We have had faith in ASEAN over the past 7-8 years. Until we can be sure of our new friends, we remain sure of our old friends.

The Secretary: You can be sure of our friendship.

Foreign Minister Rithauddeen: Some kind of discreet association is helpful to us.

The Secretary: Phil Habib was very encouraged by your basic attitude.

Foreign Minister Rithauddeen: We are trying to be independent in our foreign policy, but there are things that we have to arrange discreetly.

The Secretary: It was very good to see you. I'm always glad to conduct a little foreign policy in between my dealings with the Congress!

Foreign Minister Rithauddeen: Good-bye.

The Secretary: Have a good trip.

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy Files, P–820123–2578. Secret; Nodis. Drafted by Sheppard and approved by Covey.

301. Memorandum From Thomas J. Barnes of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Scowcroft), Washington, November 5, 1975. 301. Memorandum From Thomas J. Barnes of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Scowcroft), Washington, November 5, 1975.1

Washington, November 5, 1975

MEMORANDUM
NATIONAL SECURITY COUNCIL

ACTION

November 5, 1975

MEMORANDUM FOR: GENERAL SCOWCROFT
FROM: THOMAS J. BARNES

SUBJECT: Request for NIE on "Prospects for Stability in Malaysia"

Singapore's desire for significant quantities of blitzkrieg military equipment highlights Singapore's worries about the future of Malaysia, and raises questions about Singapore's contingency planning. I am thus recommending an NIE, by the beginning of 1976, on "Prospects for Stability in Malaysia."

We recently approved, with both modifications and misgivings, a State cable (Tab A) on sale for cash of military equipment to Singapore. The cable was part of a duo paired with another to Kuala Lumpur (Tab B) dealing with military sales to Malaysia on FMS credit. Among the salient comparative statistics were equal numbers of UHIH helicopters for both countries, but 85 armored personnel and mini-armored troop carriers to Singapore versus 32 armored cars to Malaysia, Singapore will also be getting sixty 105 millimeter howitzers versus twelve for Malaysia,

In adding 85 APC's to Singapore's current stock of 200, one wonders what Lee Kuan Yew is up to in his 226 square miles. Sixty 105's would also pretty well saturate his city-state. It is difficult to avoid the impression that Singapore is planning an intervention strategy elsewhere, and that that strategy envisions going beyond the simple protection of water supplies in Johore.

Admiral Crowe, during his July trip [text not declassified] to Singapore and Malaysia, reported that Singapore officials talked frankly about the contingencies of a broad intervention in Malaysia, with or without GOM approval, in order to deal with the Communist threat, Lee also referred to the need for Singapore to "lance the cancer" in Malaysia in his conversations with the President and you last May (Tab E). He later alerted Secretary Kissinger to the dangers he sees Malaysia facing in the next three to five years and the threat this development poses to regional security (Tab F).

Ambassador Underhill, in a recent cable (Tab C), strongly objected to our providing Singapore with a heightened ability to intervene in Malaysia. He suggests that the large number of howitzers and APC's indicates that Singapore may be planning something other than just defending its own borders. Underhill, in fact, believes that Singapore plans to use this capability to intercede on the side of the ethnic Chinese in any future racial conflict in Malaysia. Such an intervention, in Underhill's estimation, would run the risk of forcing Indonesia to intercede on behalf of the Malays, and further escalating the conflict. He questions whether it is in our national interest to become involved in such a situation, and increase Singapore's capability for aggression.

Ambassador Holdridge, in commenting (Tab D) on Underhill's cable, believes Singapore does not plan such an intervention but rather expects the Malaysian insurgency to worsen in the near future. Singapore would thus merely be preparing for a worst case situation in which forces from within Malaysia would directly threaten Singapore. Moreover, he points out that Singapore's armed forces are of such limited size and structure as to preclude any meaningful military probe into Malaysia, aside from protecting the Singapore water supply in Johore.

There are increasing indications that Malaysia will become less stable in the near future. Lee has made this contention repeatedly, and Indonesian President Suharto recently conveyed the same message to Ambassador Newsom. Moreover, terrorist acts in Kuala Lumpur have pushed the Razak government into adopting severe restrictions on civil liberties. While the insurgency remains small, there are signs it is growing.

We believe that an upheaval in Malaysia in the next three years is much more likely to be on communal grounds than insurgent-inspired. Some 36 percent of the Malaysian population is Chinese. One can foresee a situation, as in Cyprus, where intervention, whatever the justification, would lead to a communal geographic division.

From the above it is clear that as the situation in Malaysia becomes less stable, our sale of arms to Singapore will become more and more sensitive. We, therefore, recommend that you approve our tasking CIA for an NIE on "Prospects for Stability in Malaysia." The NIE would assess the chances for maintaining internal cohesion over the next three years, investigate the communal problem and the insurgency, and indicate the probable reaction of Singapore, the other ASEAN states, and other countries in the region to upheaval in Malaysia.

RECOMMENDATION:

That you sign the memo to the Director of Central Intelligence at Tab I tasking him with preparation of an NIE on "Prospects for Stability in Malaysia."

APPROVE
DISAPPROVE

Dick Ober concurs.

1 Source: Ford Library, National Security Adviser, Presidential Agency File, Box 2, Central Intelligence Agency, 12/15/1975. Secret. Sent for action. Richard Ober, a staff member of the NSC involved in intelligence coordination, concurred in the memorandum. Tab A, telegram 250586, October 21, to Singapore; Tab B, telegram 250585, October 21, to Kuala Lumpur; Tab C, telegram 5840, October 1, from Kuala Lumpur; and D, telegram 4398, October 9, from Singapore, are attached but not published. Tab E is published as Document 297. Tab F, Lee’s warning to Kissinger, is not further identified. A handwritten note on the last page of the memorandum indicates that Scowcroft verbally approved the request for the NIE.

302. National Intelligence Estimate 54–1–76, Washington, April 1, 1976. 302. National Intelligence Estimate 54–1–76, Washington, April 1, 1976.1

Washington, April 1, 1976

THE OUTLOOK FOR MALAYSIA

Scope Note: This Estimate deals with the prospects for stability in Malaysia over the next three years or so.

KEY JUDGMENTS

A. Malaysia's leaders have had considerable success in managing the tensions between the Malays, who constitute almost half the population, and the Chinese, who make up more than a third. The government—dominated by members of a British-trained Malay elite—has kept Malay chauvinism in bounds by responding to demands for reaffirming and perpetuating Malay political supremacy, while actively attempting to end Malay economic inferiority to the Chinese.

B. Whether this approach can be maintained, without restricting the economic opportunities that have generally reconciled the Chinese to their second-class political status, will depend heavily on continued economic growth and rising living standards. The government's development strategy has been an important factor in such growth, but the economy remains heavily dependent on exports of primary products and a favorable climate for foreign investment. Nevertheless, Malaysia has shown remarkable resilience in adapting to adverse world conditions and its economic outlook for the next two to three years is promising.

C. Economic growth has brought much greater benefit to the small but growing Malay urban middle class than to the mass of Malay peasants. Lower class urban and rural Chinese also see a large gap between themselves and the wealthy members of their community. At the same time, they are less capable than the wealthy of protecting themselves against the impact of discriminatory policies. Recognizing the interaction between economic and communal grievances, the government is pledged in its most recent development plan to elevating the living standards of the poor of all communities.

D. Although the communal balance in Malaysia will continue to be a source of tension for the indefinite future, we believe that such tension is unlikely to cause widespread disorder during the period of this Estimate. Even if their economic circumstances were to deteriorate markedly, we doubt that the Malaysian Chinese would resort to violence on any significant scale since, with the preponderance of military and police powers in Malay hands, they would inevitably be the losers. Moreover, we believe that the government will continue to seek the balance that will both contain Malay grievances and moderate the impact on the Chinese of pro-Malay policies. The country's leaders seem well aware of the catastrophic implications of a renewal of communal violence arising out of Malay frustrations. Moreover, political rhetoric notwithstanding, nearly all of them appear to recognize the continued interdependence of the Malay and Chinese communities. Malaysia's neighbors also, for a variety of reasons both regional and national, have a vested interest in the maintenance of Malaysian communal peace and none would see any national profit in disturbing it.

E. There is always the possibility of isolated racial incidents. And the chances that such incidents could lead to serious nationwide violence against the Chinese are greater in Malaysia than anywhere else in Southeast Asia. But, even should disorders develop on a much larger scale than we regard as likely, we believe that the security forces could restore order and that there would not be protracted civil war along Lebanese lines. Malaysia's economy and bureaucracy would be seriously damaged, however, and demoralization and general loss of confidence in the country's future could offer new opportunities to extremists, whether Malay or communist.

F. In the absence of such a major, and unlikely, breakdown, the communist insurgents—largely ethnic Chinese—would have little more success than they have had to date in their efforts to win the support of disaffected elements of both communities. Because of this, although the insurgency will continue to be a burden on resources, we do not believe that it can seriously challenge the government during the period of this Estimate.

G. Either a communal breakdown or a significant increase in insurgency would adversely affect US trade and investment, would probably result in a request from Kuala Lumpur for an increase in US security assistance, and would have an unfavorable impact on the peace and stability of the region.

Discussion

1. The death of Malaysian Prime Minister Razak in January 1976 focused new attention on the question of whether the forces tending to pull Malaysia apart are stronger than those holding it together. Divisive pressures are largely communal in origin; communist insurgency and divisions between peninsular Malaysia and the east Malaysian states of Sabah and Sarawak have communal implications but, in themselves, are unlikely to pose a serious threat to the stability of Malaysia during the period of this Estimate.

2. The communal issue in Malaysia stems from the competing interests of the two principal ethnic groups—the indigenous Malays and the Chinese, whose sizable presence dates from the British colonial period. In dealing with the communal problem Malaysia's leaders have sought to retain a tolerable balance between conflicting interests. They have sought to satisfy the desires of the Malays to improve their economic position while strengthening their political predominance. But they have tried to do this without too deeply restricting the economic opportunities that have generally reconciled the Chinese to their second-class political status.

3. Since independence in 1957, pre-eminent political power has been held by the principal Malay party, the United Malays National Organization (UMNO). The members of the British-trained Malay elite who have dominated UMNO are likely to continue in control over the period of this Estimate. However, this group is beginning to pass from the scene and new political leaders, closer to grass-roots Malay culture and opinion, will be coming to the fore. The degree to which these leaders will be willing and able to contain pressures from Malay extremists and carry out pragmatic policies will determine, over the longer run, whether Malaysia remains a corner of relative stability and prosperity in Southeast Asia.

4. Meanwhile, Malaysia's long-standing communist insurgency is causing greater apprehension in Kuala Lumpur and in neighboring countries, both because of the spectacular nature of recent terrorist incidents and because of concern that communist successes in Indochina will have reverberations in Malaysia. Although there is some link between the insurgency and the communal problem—the insurgents are largely ethnic Chinese—it does not have wide support among Malaysia's Chinese community.

The Communal Problem

5. Malaysia's ethnic Chinese population (4.25 million) constitutes 36 percent of a population whose other principal components are Malays (44 percent) and Indians (10 percent). Most peninsular Malaysian Chinese live in the cities and in rural areas along the western coast; the major cities of Kuala Lumpur, Penang, Ipoh, and Malacca are all heavily Chinese. A small Chinese upper class dominates the Malaysian financial and industrial scene, and a middle class of professionals and small businessmen is growing steadily. In Sarawak, and to a lesser extent in Sabah, where ethnic Malays make up only 12-18 percent of the population, Chinese control most commerce and industry and the production of major cash crops. The Chinese comprise the majority of the work force in mining and quarrying, manufacturing, construction, commerce, and personal services.

6. Historically, the Malays have tended to disdain wage labor and have not kept pace educationally with the Chinese, factors that have largely explained their marginal role in the economy and the numerical predominance of the Chinese in the bureaucracy. Malay society remains essentially divided into two classes: a large peasantry and a small elite. The latter has both provided senior leadership for the Malay community and maintained a firm grip on national political and military power. The "special position" of the Malay is set forth in the constitution, which establishes Islam as the state religion, provides for a Malay monarch elected from among the hereditary Malay rulers of nine of the 11 states of peninsular Malaysia, and incorporates the concept of special Malay prerogatives in various other ways, including citizenship provisions.

7. Government efforts to right the communal balance have brought considerable prosperity to a small group of urban Malays, members either of the traditional aristocracy or of the small, slowly growing middle class. This has resulted in an increasingly conspicuous gap between the living standards of urban and rural Malays. The latter live mostly at subsistence levels, working small rice and rubber holdings or on large plantations. Tradition-bound rural Malays have historically produced lower yields than Chinese farmers, who have been more strongly oriented toward commercial sales of their products; Chinese farm income is estimated to be 80 percent higher than Malay. Scarce data indicate that while Malay rural incomes have moved up somewhat, these gains have been offset by inflation. Even so, by Southeast Asian standards most Malay peasants are not ill-housed, ill-fed, or ill-dressed; government health and other services are extending into the countryside; and several recent studies indicate that rural mortality rates have declined significantly.

8. The average Malay lives in cultural and, to a large extent, physical isolation from the Chinese community. Conservative Islamic influence is strong at the village level and minor disputes and misdemeanors relating to Malay customary law are dealt with by state-established Islamic religious courts. Poor Malays, drawn to urban areas by frequently disappointed hopes for a better life, live in communities as parochial as their native villages but without the occupation and discipline that traditional village life provides.

9. Malay chauvinism is the principal source of racial tension and puts constant pressure on the national leadership. Thus far, however, leadership responses have been predominantly moderate and cautious. At the higher levels of the political power structure consistent advocates of extreme positions are in a small minority. We believe they are more numerous at lower levels. Their principal constituency is the UMNO youth organization, in which Selangors former chief minister Harun bin Idris has been the major influence. Even here, it appears that the radicals are often outmaneuvered by the moderates, partly because of their own divisions.

10. Ethnic tensions, although never absent, have rarely led to race riots. When they have, the initiative has come from the Malays, stimulated by their suspicions of the Chinese. Apparent Chinese threats to Malay political dominance have touched particularly sensitive nerves. Singapore's expulsion from Malaysia in 1965 was the direct result of Prime Minister Lee Kuan Yew's ambitions to leadership in peninsula politics on the basis of an equal role for all citizens regardless of race. The bloody anti-Chinese rioting of May 1969 stemmed from Malay apprehension over the significant—and much flaunted—gains Chinese opposition parties had made in the recent elections.

11. In the wake of the 1969 riots, Malaysia had 21 months of firm executive government. Parliamentary government was restored early in 1971, after the constitution had been amended to guarantee permanently the special position of the Malays. Thereafter it became more than ever the acknowledged central task of the government to help the Malays catch up with the Chinese in all the many fields where they lagged behind. Although the need to avoid extreme policies that would dangerously increase the level of Chinese alienation remained an important consideration in the minds of policy makers, this necessity was more often reflected in how new laws were implemented than in what they said.

12. Assuming office in 1970, Prime Minister Razak made his way along the communal tightrope with great finesse and good fortune. In 1974 he put together the National Front—a multiracial confederation of nine political parties, including three predominantly Chinese groups and his own dominant UMNO. The Chinese and other non-Malay client parties agreed to contest only a mutually agreed-upon number of parliamentary seats. Non-Malay political participation was further hampered by the assignment of disproportionately heavy representation to rural Malay districts and by extensive government restrictions on political debate and activity. Falling particularly heavily on the Chinese were prohibitions on public discussion of communal issues.

13. The government has moved in many other ways to reemphasize the "special position" of the Malay. With the constitution and Malay customary law already restricting Chinese opportunities to acquire land legally, agricultural programs under the Second Malaysia Plan (1971-75) favored the Malay rural population in programs for settling new lands, facilitating loans, and providing additional employment. Language and education regulations are also being used to protect the Malays and improve their competitive position vis-a-vis the Chinese. Malay is to become the language of instruction in all schools by 1980. Government aid to Chinese schools has been terminated and the government does not recognize certificates or degrees granted by Chinese educational institutions in Malaysia, Taiwan, and Singapore. Proficiency in Malay is a prerequisite for entry into universities and colleges. Quotas for admission further discriminate against the Chinese. Malaysian businesses are required to include Malays in their management structures, and Malays receive preferential treatment from public service recruiters.

14. Those carefully nourished and emphasized reminders of Malay preeminence have helped the government recoup the support it had lost to Malay opposition parties before the events of 1969, and UMNO now holds 120 of the 154 seats in the lower house. The transition of leadership to Prime Minister Hussein, a moderate of the Razak school, was accomplished in short order, without a divisive power struggle within UMNO. Hussein appears to be in firm control of the government and of UMNO and has a good grasp of the problems confronting Malaysia. However, he has a heart condition and, although he does not regard himself as a transitional leader, his health may limit his period in power. His deputy, Education Minister Mahathir bin Mo-hamed, selected in March after considerable deliberation, was an early advocate of the government's now well-established pro-Malay communal policies, and this has made his appointment another source of apprehension for the Chinese community. Even should Hussein's tenure be limited by his health or other factors, however, the prospects are that government leadership will remain in moderate hands over the period of this Estimate.

15. Moreover, we believe the Chinese will continue, however grudgingly, to accept secondary political status. Before 1969, many Malaysian Chinese, aware of the Malay nationalist sentiment growing around them, came to view the full exercise of their political rights as the means of protecting their hard-earned economic position. The view that the major Chinese component of the governing coalition—the Malaysian Chinese Association (MCA)—was insufficiently vigorous in advancing the interests of all but a wealthy minority led to an upsurge of support for Chinese opposition parties in the election of 1969. However, the anti-Chinese violence that followed and the government's response convinced most Malaysian Chinese that a continued quest for political parity could only end in disaster. They are far less philosophic, however, about threats to their economic position and to the closely related problem of limits placed on educational opportunities for their children.

The Economic Factor

16. The prospects for communal peace will rest heavily on economic factors—whether Malaysia will continue to prosper at a level that permits the government to improve the position of the Malays without closing off opportunities for the Chinese. Malaysia, with abundant resources and a relatively small population, has made considerably more economic progress over the past 15 years than most less-developed countries. Steady real economic growth (averaging about 7 percent over the past 15 years) pushed Malaysia's gross national product to just over $8 billion, or roughly $675 per person by the end of 1975. The key elements of the governments growth strategy have been: — the rapid expansion of exports within the framework of a relatively unencumbered market economy;

— adept, conservative, and pragmatic management of financial resources;

— a highly developed foreign trade sector;

— a healthy international payments position; and

— a favorable climate for foreign investment.

17. However, the fortunes of the Malaysian economy and of the rural population are highly dependent upon exports of primary products—natural rubber, palm oil, tin, and forestry products. Recession in the industrialized nations began to depress the economy toward the end of 1974. In 1975 sharp declines in export earnings led to a drop in real growth to about 1 percent for the year, as compared with more than 10 percent in 1973—the year of the world commodity boom. Nevertheless, despite the high degree of sensitivity of the economy to the vagaries of world markets, the government effectively countered the effects of the recession through 1975, bringing the inflation rate down from 18 percent in 1973 to 6 percent in 1975, holding unemployment at less than 10 percent, and avoiding sizable drops in real incomes. In late 1974 when natural rubber prices, and accordingly the income of the largely Malay smallholders, plummeted, political repercussions were soon felt. Following demonstrations to protest falling rural income, in which Malay students predominated, the government embarked on a crash program to buoy prices through output restrictions on the more efficient large estates, which could more easily absorb an income loss.

18. Economic growth and generally rising living standards have done much to cushion the impact of efforts to right the balance between Malays and Chinese. Moreover, legislation establishing long-term racial quotas for both employment and equity ownership and providing for government capitalization of Malay investors was initially implemented gradually and flexibly. Early in 1975, however, it appeared that a shift was underway. At that time, a hastily enacted Industrial Coordination Act required all manufacturing firms to acquire licenses and to comply with employment quotas. The act had a sharply discouraging impact on new investment since the Chinese business community viewed it as portending much greater discrimination. This reaction impelled the government into discussions with representatives of the Chinese community concerning the required implementing regulations, which are likely to permit a continued gradual and moderate approach.

19. Foreign investment, long a major source of development capital, also declined markedly in 1975, primarily because of the world economic recession, but also because of uneasiness over the collapse of Indochina and to a lesser degree over communist terrorist activity. Further uncertainty was created by petroleum legislation establishing Malay management of all refining, distributing, and marketing operations. Interpreting this as a precursor of nationalization, the foreign business community reacted strongly; Exxon, for example, suspended all new exploration and investment. In late October 1975 the government moved to reassure foreign investors, who will view the outcome of current negotiations with Exxon as a good indicator of the state of the investment climate.

20. Pressures for more controls over foreign investment will continue to arise not only from Malay demands for a greater share of the benefits of economic growth, but also from aspirations, common to underdeveloped countries, for greater national control of resources and participation in corporate enterprise. Accordingly, the restoration of the unusually favorably climate for foreign investment is unlikely, however loose the implementation of restrictive laws. Nevertheless, in relative terms Malaysia still has attractive investment laws. Although the seeds of doubt have been sown and foreign investor confidence will not achieve earlier heights, a revival in the world economy is likely to restore the flow of foreign funds.

21. On balance, the Malaysian economy remains strong. It has shown remarkable resilience in adapting to adverse world conditions and the outlook for the next two to three years is promising. Government development plans, largely directed at rural areas, should be sufficient to prevent serious disaffection. As recovery in the industrial nations proceeds, demands for exports will pick up resulting in higher real incomes in the primary commodity sector of the economy. We do not believe that the government will shift drastically from its growth strategy based on private enterprise and export growth.

22. There will undoubtedly be greater government emphasis on increased Malay participation in the economy. The combination of successful Malay pressures for more vigorous government action and failure in the economy could have a serious impact on the economic well-being and prospects not only of the Chinese business community, but also of the sizable—and more volatile—Chinese urban working class. Chinese options are limited, however. The privileged few may look to capital transfers to protect their economic interests and to emigration to insure their children's future. But most Chinese recognize that they have no alternative to continued life and work in Malaysia.

The Insurgency

23. Insurgency began in peninsular Malaysia in 1948 when the Communist Party of Malaya (CPM) undertook an armed revolution—the Emergency— against the British colonial government. A 12-year British-led counterinsurgency effort virtually destroyed the CPM; its remnants, numbering about 500 to 600, established jungle sanctuaries in Thailand where they concentrated on recruiting and rebuilding an infrastructure. In 1968 the CPM began to dispatch cadres to the northern Malaysian states to revive old contacts and establish new bases.

24. In 1974 and 1975 the insurgents penetrated deeper into Malaysia and the boldness and number of incidents increased—though still not approaching the levels of the Emergency. This increased activity reflects the implementation of a new strategy outlined in a 1973 directive calling for military confrontation to be coordinated with the activities of united front organizations and a January 1975 CPM directive calling 1975 "a new year of combat." Both directives may have been intended to demonstrate that, despite the developments that led to Malaysia's establishment of diplomatic relations with the Peoples Republic of China in June 1974, the revolutionary movement in Malaysia retained its vitality. The fall of Saigon, while undoubtedly encouraging the communists, did not cause any change in the patterns or intensity of their operations. They continue to concentrate on attempts to build underground support and to recruit and train new cadre, while trying to keep the government off balance by periodic spectacular acts of violence.

25. The Malaysian communists have been seriously divided for some time, although the competing factions all style themselves pro-Peking. The principal communist organization in peninsular Malaysia is the traditional CPM party apparatus with its military arm—the Malayan National Liberation Army (MNLA)—and its principal front organization—the Malayan National Liberation Front (MNLF). A leadership struggle in 1970 produced two breakaway groups—the Communist Party of Malaya (Marxist-Leninist) (CPM-ML) and the Revolutionary Faction (CPM-RF)—each with its own armed force and front organization.

26. The combined strength of the armed communists, exclusive of clandestine support groups, is conservatively estimated at about 2,400 by Malaysian sources—1,700 in the original CPM, 300 members in the CPM-RF, and 400 in the CPM-ML. We have only fragmentary figures on the number of clandestine supporters, and thus little evidence on which to base an estimate.* Malaysian officials claim that of the identified communist 69 percent are ethnic Chinese, 57 percent are Thai nationals (both Chinese and Malay), and less than 5 percent are Malays of Malaysian citizenship.

*At the height of the Emergency in 1948-50, it was estimated that the number of armed clandestine supporters equaled the number of guerrillas (5-6,000) and that there were up to eight times as many active sympathizers as guerrillas.

27. The Malaysian communists appear to be almost wholly self-sustaining, augmenting their miscellany of World War II weaponry by purchases of more modern arms. The Chinese communists provide propaganda support through an active clandestine radio station in southern China, the Voice of the Malayan Revolution, and more intermittently and selectively through their own media. Neither Moscow nor Hanoi has demonstrated any great desire to become materially involved in the Malaysian insurgency, nor has Peking been known to go beyond propaganda broadcasts. We believe that Hanoi is unlikely to undertake a major supply effort to Malaysian communists in the near term. Nevertheless, in the relatively near future, some of the US weapons captured in South Vietnam may well begin to appear in Malaysian communist hands—primarily supplied by arms traders.

28. The sanctuary the communists enjoy in Thailand is a major obstacle to the elimination of the insurgency. Officially, the two governments have been cooperating since 1959 and a Thai-Malaysian border committee is charged with coordinating border surveillance. A bilateral agreement signed in Bangkok in February 1976 by the Thai and Malaysian prime ministers confirmed this arrangement. Such agreements however, are seldom translated into action in the field. In reality, the Thai military are more concerned with the Thai communist party threat, with the Muslim separatist movement (especially in the south), and with general lawlessness than with CPM groups whose activities are targeted against Malaysia. Also, suspicion and mutual distrust prevail at the Thai-Malaysian operational level—the Thai suspect the Malaysians of assisting a Muslim separatist movement in Thailand and the Malaysians believe that Thai security forces avoid contact with CPM groups. The lucrative arrangements Thai military and civil officials enjoy with the criminal elements that move back and forth between the two countries pose an additional obstacle to effective control of the border.

29. The principal counterinsurgency role is played by the police, with the regular army in a secondary role. Influenced by British practice which calls for maximum utilization of police and civil volunteer forces for local security, the Royal Malaysian Police (RMP) with 60,000 men considerably outnumbers the army. Plans call for expanding the police force to 100,000 men by 1980 while maintaining the proportion of Chinese at 40 percent.

The RMP's principal paramilitary element, the Police Field Force (PFF), organized as light infantry (19 battalions) with a current strength of 14,800, is charged with maintaining internal security. The PFF has a broader recruiting base than the army and its ethnic composition corresponds more closely to Malaysian society (PFF is 50 percent Malay, 37 percent Chinese, and 11 percent Indian). The police—although their equipment requirements are generally given lower priority than those of the army—are generally more effective in counterinsurgency roles and consider themselves more attuned to the populace. Frictions and poor coordination between the army and the PFF reflect ethnic antagonisms and limit the effectiveness of counterinsurgency efforts. Security operations are also hampered by a sometimes cumbersome coordination and approval process between state and federal officials.

30. The 51,500-man Malaysian Army is a light infantry force. It is well paid and well quartered. With the possible exception of a basic infantry weapon (the HK-33 rifle is being replaced with the M-16), it is adequately equipped. Its performance against the insurgents on the Thai-Malaysian border has been barely adequate, largely because it is a "parade-ground" army, reluctant to go to the field and preferring to leave internal security matters to the police. Tactical operations have been hampered by insufficient skill and imagination on the part of small unit leaders and an unwillingness to follow up contacts with insurgents aggressively because of their widespread use of mines and booby-traps. The army's racial composition (17 of its 29 infantry battalions are exclusively Malay) also limits its effectiveness when conducting operations in areas with a non-Malay population.

31. Responsibility for intelligence on the insurgents rests largely with the Royal Malaysian Police Special Branch. It has a good reputation for operational efficiency and technical competence and its multiracial composition has been an asset in its work against a predominantly Chinese organization. Since 1969, however, personnel changes and promotions highly favorable to Malays as well as communist assassination efforts have caused morale problems among non-Malays, and many of the more competent Chinese have resigned. As a result, local intelligence nets have lost much of their effectiveness. These problems have been recognized and efforts are being made to redress them, but it is unlikely that previous levels of competence will be completely restored.

32. The government has begun to take more aggressive counterinsurgency measures. Plans for expanding the police, reorganizing the Special Branch, and purchasing new weapons have been supplemented by a number of population control measures. These include: designation of 300 areas and facilities as special security areas; the Rukun Tetangga or Community Self-Reliance Program wherein residents will patrol their own areas, reporting suspicious individuals or activity; expanding the Peoples Volunteer Corps; and, most controversial, the new Essential Regulations (Security Cases) 1975, which curtail the individual rights guaranteed under common law for those accused of national security offenses. Initial implementation of these measures has already caused the Chinese community to feel it is being singled out for discriminatory treatment; the government is now making an effort to avoid abuses.

33. Security force performance has improved somewhat, although not universally. Numerous village sweeps conducted by the police have netted many suspects and given the government some confidence that the communists have been thrown off balance. Performance by police and army units in the jungle, however, has shown no improvement in tactics or aggressiveness. Moreover, plans for providing new equipment and additional men will not solve basic problems in leadership, training, and logistics as well as deficiencies in dealing with communal sensitivities.

34. The insurgency has become a major preoccupation of the Malaysian Government requiring diversion of economic development funds to re-equip security forces and more borrowing abroad in order to maintain the pace of development. However, it has had little impact on the daily lives of the vast majority of the Malaysian population. Except for isolated areas near the Thai border, the progress of the economy and the movement of persons and goods have continued unimpeded.

35. There are many grievances among Malaysians—Chinese and Malay, rural and urban—that could feed an active dissident movement. The benefits of efforts to expand the economic role of the Malays have gone more to the upper than to the lower classes. There is, moreover, a sizable proportion of the Chinese community that shares the poverty of the Malay peasant and worker. It remains to be seen whether aspirations under the Third Malaysian Plan to bring more of the benefits of development to the lower classes, without regard to communal differences, will be fulfilled.

36. The communists have sought to capitalize on these grievances, addressing their appeal to the poor of all communities and putting forward a comprehensive land reform plan. They have attempted to avoid identification with the Chinese community and, to the government's concern, seem to be making more active efforts to proselytize among Malays. Nevertheless, the Malays in general regard the communists as Chinese and accordingly as unacceptable. Communist prospects in the Chinese community may be somewhat better. But while their grievances, frustrations, and fears of the future could cause some greater degree of acquiescence in communist activities and some financial support, the Chinese are not likely to flock to the communist cause in significant numbers.

37. We do not believe that the communist insurgency can seriously challenge the government during the period of this Estimate, although it will continue to be a burden on the government's resources. The communists will remain handicapped by their lack of secure bases within Malaysia and of reliable sources of supply, and most importantly by their inability to secure the allegiance or support of a significant portion of the population.

Separatism

38. Like the communist insurgency, divisive pressures in the east Malaysian states of Sab ah and Sarawak pose problems for the central government, impeding its efforts to integrate, them more closely with the peninsula.

39. In Sarawak a long-standing insurgency has been reduced to insignificance, and the political situation is reasonably stable. In Subah, however, the ambitions and autocratic behavior of former chief minister Tun Mustapah have complicated the state's relations with the central government. Despite his ouster, forced by Kuala Lumpur in 1975, he has retained his political influence.

40. Federal authority over the east Malaysia states is limited by the agreement that incorporated Sabah and Sarawak into Malaysia. But Kuala Lumpur has also moved slowly in attempting to integrate the two states because of the substantial foreign exchange earnings their oil and timber sales contribute to the Malaysian economy. While disagreements over the distribution of these earnings, communal resentments, and other issues will probably continue to trouble relations between Kuala Lumpur and the east Malaysians, genuine moves toward secession are most unlikely during the period of this Estimate.

External Factors

41. A communal breakdown would slow if not completely halt progress in the Association of Southeast Asia Nations (ASEAN) and could have destabilizing domestic repercussions in some ASEAN countries. For this and other reasons, Malaysia's neighbors have a vested interest in the maintenance of Malaysian communal peace and none would see any national profit in disturbing it.

42. Lee Kuan Yew recognizes that the well-being of Singapore is inextricably bound up with the maintenance of communal peace in Malaysia. Serious communal strife would cause great alarm among Singapore's predominantly Chinese population, fear for the country's security, and concern that Indonesian intervention on the peninsula might be the next step. Singapore would be confronted with some painful decisions. The first of these would be whether to allow a massive influx of Malaysian Chinese refugees, which the island could not easily absorb, or whether to close the causeway to Malaysia as it did in 1969. If extreme racial violence spread to the south of the peninsula and was not ended quickly, Singapore might face the dilemma of whether to move troops across the causeway. Factors impelling it to adopt this course would include the desire to secure the water works in Johore from which most of the island's fresh water supply is drawn, to establish a forward defense line against the possibility that hostilities would otherwise extend across its own borders, and to provide a protected space to house Chinese refugees outside its own overcrowded territory. But against these considerations it would have to weigh very carefully an almost certainly hostile Indonesian response and the probability of unfavorable repercussions in the Muslim world.

43. Indonesia considers Malaysia its forward defense line against Chinese-backed communist insurgency. Jakarta believes that Kuala Lumpur seriously underestimates the potential for communist insurgency in Malaysia. It would view with alarm any worsening of the communal situation that could play into the hands of the communists. Serious communal disturbances would also cause concern over possible repercussions in Sumatra, where the indigenous population as well as elements of the large Chinese community have family and other close ties with the peninsula. Such influence as Indonesia is able to exert would therefore be in the direction of restraint in the area of communal policy. While Indonesia has indicated it would be prepared to commit troops to Malaysia in order to help contain a communist insurgency or communal disturbances, the Malaysians do not appear to desire such assistance or to anticipate that they will require it.

44. As long as the PRC is committed to a state-to-state approach in Southeast Asia, prolonged anti-Chinese violence in Malaysia would cause it difficult problems. Peking would be reluctant to side with the Malaysian Chinese out of concern for its official equities in Kuala Lumpur. If anti-Chinese violence extended over a considerable period of time, however, the PRC would find it extremely difficult to maintain a neutral position. It would probably react under these circumstances by diplomatic and propaganda pressure on the Malaysian Government. But, except in the unlikely event Peking saw such aid as certain to tip the balance, we doubt that the PRC would be prepared for any dramatic increase in involvement with the Malaysian communists because of the adverse effect such action would have on its relations with Bangkok and other Southeast Asian capitals.

Conclusions

45. Reason has little to do with the suspicions and emotions that lie at the heart of Malaysia's problem. In that sense, the ability to "prevent" a recurrence of communal violence is beyond the capability of any Malaysian Government, not matter how proficient or well intentioned. Nevertheless, all rational domestic considerations and external pressures seem to point toward a concerted effort to maintain racial harmony or, at worst, the maintenance of communal status quo. Even if their economic circumstances were to deteriorate markedly, we doubt that Malaysian Chinese would take the lead in a renewal of racial violence in which— with the preponderance of military and police powers in the hands of Malays—they would inevitably be the losers. Moreover, we believe that the government will continue to seek the balance that will both contain Malay grievances and moderate the impact on the Chinese of pro-Malay policies. The country's leaders seem well aware of the catastrophic implications of a renewal of communal violence arising out of Malay frustrations. Moreover, political rhetoric notwithstanding, nearly all of them appear to recognize the continued interdependence of the Malay and Chinese communities. Any Malay government must rely on the Chinese private sector to sustain the overall economic growth necessary to promote Malay interests. It is also widely recognized that the loyalties of qualified Chinese bureaucrats are still essential to the effective functioning of the government and, ironically, the implementation of its pro-Malay policies.

46. But the possibility of isolated racial incidents is ever present. And the chances that such an incident could lead to serious, nationwide violence against the Chinese are greater in Malaysia than anywhere else in Southeast Asia. At the time of the 1969 rioting, although communal tensions rose elsewhere, violence was largely confined to the Kuala Lumpur area. If new communal violence were to spread to a number of major urban areas, security forces would be hard pressed to end it as easily or as quickly as they did in 1969. Moreover, the communist insurgents, who would derive considerable satisfaction and encouragement from a new bloody racial confrontation, would probably do their best to add fuel to the fire. Depending on the seriousness and duration of renewed violence, the resulting wave of Chinese alienation could provide the insurgency with a new reservoir of potential recruits. But as long as the insurgency remains concentrated largely in the Thai border area, the communists will not be able to exploit a new round of racial conflict to their own military advantage.

47. Even in a worst-case scenario, however, we do not believe that protracted civil war, along the lines of the recent fighting in Lebanon, would be a likely result. The two communal sides are not evenly matched. We believe that the security forces, perhaps after exacting a heavy toll in Chinese life, could eventually restore order. Serious damage would be done to Malaysia's economy and bureaucracy, however, and demoralization and general loss of confidence in the country's future could offer new opportunities to extremists, whether Malay or communist.

Implications for the United States

48. Either a communal breakdown or an increase in communist insurgency would reduce the currently favorable climate for trade and investment, and might reduce the availability of our most important imports from Malaysia—rubber and tin.* Any reduction of American investment in Malaysia, however, would be more of a blow to Malaysia than to the US since the American share of total foreign investment in Malaysia is very large, while the Malaysian share in total American foreign investment is extremely small. With the US already providing security assistance to Malaysia, albeit on a very small scale, it is likely that Kuala Lumpur would ask for more arms should the central government find itself confronted with widespread communal violence or with a significantly increased insurgent threat. There would also be reason for concern about the broader implications of these developments for regional peace and stability, the viability of ASEAN, and passage through the Malacca Strait.

*One half of US tin imports and one third of its rubber imports come from Malaysia.

1 Source: Central Intelligence Agency, OPI 122 (National Intelligence Council), Job 91R00884R, Box 5, NIE 54–1–76, Folder 17. Secret. All members of the USIB concurred in the estimate except the representatives of the FBI and the Deputy Assistant Administrator for National Security, Energy Research and Development Administration. The intelligence organizations of the Army, Navy, and Air Force also participated in the estimate.

Chapter VIII: Pacific IslandsChapter VIII: Pacific Islands

303. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to President Nixon, Washington, January 2, 1973.

Washington, January 2, 1973

Kissinger reported on Laird’s views of the Micronesian status negotiations and noted that the negotiations have been postponed.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 568, Country Files, Far East, Trust Territories, Vol. III [1 of 2]. Secret. Sent for action. Holdridge initialed the memorandum on behalf of Kissinger. On the second page, Nixon highlighted the paragraph about OEO and the Peace Corps and wrote to Kissinger: “K—this had to be written by a Peace Corps advocate.” At the bottom of the page, the President initialed his approval of the recommendation and wrote, “K with strong reservation. Laird is totally right on the Peace Corps + Legal Services.” He also noted for Erlichman: “E—get both groups out of there discreetly because of need to cut both programs.” Tab A, Kissinger’s memorandum, January 25, to the Secretary of Defense, is attached but not published, as is Tab B, Laird’s memorandum, December 4, to Nixon, and Tab C, Ambassador Williams’s letter, October 27, to Nixon.

304. Letter From the President’s Personal Representative for Micronesian Status Negotiations (Williams) to President Nixon, Washington, January 5, 1973.

Washington, January 5, 1973

Williams reported on the status of negotiations with the Marianas and the other districts of the Trust Territory of the Pacific Islands.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 568, Country Files, Far East, Trust Territories, Vol. III [1 of 2]. Confidential. On March 19, Williams sent a study to the Chairman of the NSC Under Secretaries Committee concerning the negotiations on the future political status of the Mariana Islands District of the Trust Territory of the Pacific Islands. (Ibid., NSC Institutional Files (H-Files), Box H–276, Under Secretaries Decision Memorandums, U/DM 98 [2 of 5])

305. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to President Nixon, Washington, May 3, 1973.

Washington, May 3, 1973

Kissinger reported on the Under Secretaries Committee’s proposed instructions to Williams and asked Nixon to decide on the U.S. negotiating position toward Tinian.

Source: Ford Library, National Security Adviser, NSC East Asian and Pacific Affairs Staff: Files, (1969) 1973–1977, Box 36, Marianas (Working Files) [7]. Secret. Sent for action. The President initialed his approval of the first recommendation, which concerned the acquisition of Tinian, and the second recommendation, which approved the positions advocated by the USC. Tab A, draft instructions to Williams, is not attached. Tab B, the April 13 memorandum from Rush, the Chairman of the USC, to the President, is at National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Institutional Files (H-Files), Box H-276, Under Secretaries Decision Memorandums, U/DM 98 [1 of 5]. Tab C, a report from the DOS Political Advisor in the TTPI, is not attached.

306. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to President Nixon, Washington, November 9, 1973.

Washington, November 9, 1973

Kissinger asked Nixon whether the U.S. negotiator should be authorized to offer an independence option to Micronesia in addition to the option of Free Association.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Institutional Files (H-Files), Box H–277, Under Secretaries Decision Memorandums, U/DM 98 [4 of 5]. Secret. Sent for action. Scowcroft initialed the memorandum on behalf of Kissinger. On page 2, Nixon underlined the phrase “I recommend that William’s authority to offer it be discretionary, to be used only if tactically necessary,” and wrote, “Very important.” On the last page, Nixon initialed his approval of the recommendation. Attached but not published are Tab A, Kissinger’s instructions to Williams, November 14, and Tab B, a November 9 memorandum from Rush to Nixon.

307. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to President Nixon, Washington, March 25, 1974.

Washington, March 25, 1974

Kissinger informed Nixon of progress in the Micronesian status negotiations and requested authorization to draft supplemental instructions for Williams.

Source: Library of Congress, Henry Kissinger Papers, CL 299, Memoranda to the President, March 1974. Secret. Sent for Action. Nixon initialed his approval of the recommendation. Tab A, the supplementary instructions, March 29, that Kissinger sent to Williams, is attached but not published. Tab B, Williams’s January 25 letter to Nixon, and Tab C, Williams’s November 28, 1973 letter to Nixon, are both attached but not published. Tab D, Rush’s memorandum, February 23, to Nixon is not attached but is in the National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Institutional Files (H-Files), Box H–277, Under Secretaries Decision Memorandums, U/DM 98 (5 of 5). Tab E, a memorandum from OMB, is not attached.

308. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to President Nixon, Washington, July 8, 1974.

Washington, July 8, 1974

Kissinger reported on the Micronesian status negotiations and recommended that Nixon authorize draft instructions for Williams.

Source: Ford Library, National Security Adviser, NSC East Asian and Pacific Affairs Staff: Files, (1969) 1973–1977, Box 36, Marianas (Working Files) [6]. Secret. Sent for action. Scowcoft initialed the memorandum on behalf of Kissinger. The President initialed his approval of the recommendation. Tab A, a memorandum, July 10, from Kissinger to William, is not attached but is in the National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Institutional Files (H-Files), Box H–281, Folder 6, U/N 90–149. Tab B, an April 12 letter from Williams to the President, is attached but not published. Tabs C and D, recommendations from concerned departments and agencies, are not further identified, but these recommendations are described in an attached memorandum, May 24, from Rush to the President, which stated that the Departments of State, Defense, Justice, Interior, the Joint Chiefs of Staff, and the Office of Micronesian Status Negotiations endorsed Williams’s recommendations.

309. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to President Ford, Washington, February 6, 1975.

Washington, February 6, 1975

Kissinger informed the President about the final stage of negotiations with the Northern Marianas and asked him to approve instructions for Williams.

Source: Ford Library, National Security Adviser, Presidential Country Files for East Asian and Pacific Affairs, Box 18, Trust Territories of the Pacific Islands (1). Confidential. Sent for action. Ford initialed his approval of the recommendation on the last page. Attached but not published is a signed copy, dated February 7, of Tab A, instructions from Kissinger to Williams. Tab B, a memorandum, January 25, from Ingersoll to Ford presenting the USC’s views of the Marianas’s future political status, is not attached but is in the National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Institutional Files (H-Files), Box H–277, Under Secretaries Decision Memorandums, U/DM 98 [5 of 5]. Tab C, from OMB, is not attached.

310. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, March 19, 1975, 4:15 p.m.

Washington, March 19, 1975, 4:15 p.m.

Ford met with leaders from the Northern Marianas.

Source: Ford Library, National Security Adviser, Memoranda of Conversation, Box 10, 3/19/75. Top Secret. The conversation took place in the Oval Office. According to Ford’s talking points from Kissinger, the purpose of this meeting was “To demonstrate the importance we attach to the recently concluded Commonwealth Covenant with the Northern Marianas, and to Micronesia generally.” (Ibid.) A majority of the voters of the Northern Mariana Islands approved the Commonwealth Covenant in a plebiscite held on June 17, 1975.

311. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to President Ford, Washington, July 24, 1975.

Washington, July 24, 1975

Kissinger recommended that Ford make Fiji eligible to make defense purchases from the U.S.

Source: Ford Library, National Security Adviser, Presidential Subject File, Box 16, Presidential Determinations, FY 1976 (1). Confidential. Sent for action. Attached but not published is Tab A, a memorandum, August 5, from Ford to the Secretary of State making Fiji eligible to purchase defense articles and services. Tab B, Ingersoll’s June 24 memorandum to Ford, is attached but not published. Tab C, a memorandum, July 6, from James Lynn of the Office of Management and Budget to Ford, is also attached but not published.

312. Memorandum From Chairman of the National Security Council Under Secretaries Committee Robinson to President Ford, Washington, May 24, 1976.

Washington, May 24, 1976

The Under Secretaries Committee asked Ford to approve instructions for Williams and discussed an interagency study on the future political status of the Trust Territory of the Pacific Islands.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Institutional Files (H-Files), Box H–277, Under Secretaries Decision Memorandums, U/DM 98 [5 of 5]. Secret. Tab 1, undated instructions for the President’s Personal Representative for Micronesian Status Negotiations, is attached but not published. Tab 2, the Interagency Study is not attached. Tab 3, a memorandum, May 24, from Associate OMB Director Donald Ogilvie to Robinson, is attached but not published. Tab 4, a map of the TTPI, is attached but not published.

313. Editorial Note

303. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to President Nixon, Washington, January 2, 1973. 303. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to President Nixon, Washington, January 2, 1973.1

Washington, January 2, 1973

MEMORANDUM
THE WHITE HOUSE
WASHINGTON

January 2, 1973

MEMORANDUM FOR: THE PRESIDENT
FROM: HENRY A. KISSINGER
SUBJECT: Secretary Laird's Views on Micronesia: Status Negotiations

At Tab B is a memorandum to you from Secretary Laird recommending that the Micronesian Status Negotiations be immediately adjourned sine die, and that we strive to complete our separate negotiations on the Mariana Islands as rapidly as possible. Secretary Laird's rationale includes: — A special session of the Congress of Micronesia last September repudiated the partially completed draft Compact of Association we negotiated with the Micronesian Future Status Committee last July, and also instructed the Committee to negotiate an independence option—along with the Free Association option. Subsequently, the Micronesian negotiators reflected this shift in position at the sixth negotiating round held in October.

— In November, local leaders in the Palau District (where we have military land requirements) issued a declaration against U.S. military use of Palauan land.

— There are wide differences between the U.S. and Micronesian views on the question of procedures for terminating unilaterally the Compact of Free Association and the survivability of those U.S. military base rights still to be negotiated.

— The OEO-subsidized Micronesian Legal Services Corporation along with some Peace Corps members are continuing their anti-U.S. military interference and harassment.

Secretary Laird's recommendation has essentially been overtaken by the Micronesian decision to delay the next negotiating session until at least next March, after the next session of the Micronesian Congress which is to be convened next month. We held our first discussion with the Mariana Islands District representatives earlier this month as planned. (As you will recall, this separate negotiation has been undertaken as a result of the Mariana Islands decision to seek a closer and permanent association with the U.S.)

As regards the specifics of Secretary Laird's rationale, we question whether the Micronesian Congress and the Joint Future Status Committee have reneged on earlier understandings to the extent suggested. What we believe their actions of recent months have done is to raise substantial questions as to whether they are changing their basic approach. It was for this reason that Ambassador Franklin Haydn Williams, your personal representative for the negotiations, at the sixth round proposed a recess in the negotiations in order to allow both sides to reassess the situation—as he reported to you in his letter of October 27 (Tab C).

With respect to the OEO and Peace Corps involvement alluded to by Secretary Laird, the problem seems to lie much more with the OEO legal services program than the Peace Corps. The Peace Corps problem essentially was solved with the departure of two of the agency's lawyers who had been assigned to Micronesia. At the same time, at least two other Peace Corps lawyers who had served in Micronesia are now working, very constructively, on the status negotiations in the Department of Interior here. The difficulties for our negotiations generated by OEO legal services to individual Micronesians have probably increased, and will be addressed in the study mentioned below.

A study reassessing the situation and addressing the independence question fully is currently being done by Ambassador Williams and the Departments of State, Defense, and Interior, and should be ready for your consideration within the next few months.

At Tab A is a draft memorandum from me to Secretary Laird informing him that you have reviewed his memorandum and appreciate his concerns. It also notes that you intend to review our negotiating position when you receive the results of the inter-departmental study.

Recommendation:

That you approve the draft memorandum to Secretary Laird at Tab A.

Approve [RN initialed]
Disapprove

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 568, Country Files, Far East, Trust Territories, Vol. III [1 of 2]. Secret. Sent for action. Holdridge initialed the memorandum on behalf of Kissinger. On the second page, Nixon highlighted the paragraph about OEO and the Peace Corps and wrote to Kissinger: “K—this had to be written by a Peace Corps advocate.” At the bottom of the page, the President initialed his approval of the recommendation and wrote, “K with strong reservation. Laird is totally right on the Peace Corps + Legal Services.” He also noted for Erlichman: “E—get both groups out of there discreetly because of need to cut both programs.” Tab A, Kissinger’s memorandum, January 25, to the Secretary of Defense, is attached but not published, as is Tab B, Laird’s memorandum, December 4, to Nixon, and Tab C, Ambassador Williams’s letter, October 27, to Nixon.

304. Letter From the President’s Personal Representative for Micronesian Status Negotiations (Williams) to President Nixon, Washington, January 5, 1973. 304. Letter From the President’s Personal Representative for Micronesian Status Negotiations (Williams) to President Nixon, Washington, January 5, 1973.1

Washington, January 5, 1973

United States Department of the Interior
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY
WASHINGTON, D.C. 20240

January 5, 1973

Dear Mr. President,

Since my letter to you of October 27, 1972 on the course of Micronesian future political status discussions there have been several developments warranting your attention. A brief status report follows.

The middle of last month in Saipan I opened formal negotiations with representatives of the Mariana Islands aimed at achieving their desire for close permanent association with the United States. While largely ceremonial, these talks succeeded in making clear to the rest of Micronesia the seriousness of our intention to move ahead with separate status for the Marianas. As the next step we will be forwarding to you soon for your decision through the Under Secretaries Committee recommended substantive positions to be taken with the Marianas when these negotiations resume in April.

We are also giving priority attention to the problem of how best to proceed with negotiations with the remaining five districts of the Trust Territory of the Pacific Islands. It is clear there can be no resumption of talks until well after the close of the next session of the Congress of Micronesia the end of next month — probably not before May at the earliest. Meanwhile there are a number of critical questions to be reviewed, particularly the request of the Micronesian Congress that consideration be given to an independence option. An interagency study is being undertaken the results of which will be sent to you for approval again through the Under Secretaries Committee.

Finally, Interior, State, Defense and the Joint Chiefs of Staff have agreed on the need for a special study of the long term aspects of U.S.-Micronesian relations which will examine our basic objectives in the area and review current U.S. programs to determine the degree to which they support U.S. national interests, taking into account the needs of our political status negotiations. This should result in a series of options and policy recommendations to be sent you for decision in the spring.

Very respectfully yours,
[signed]
Franklin Haydn Williams
The President's Personal Representative For Micronesian Status Negotiations

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 568, Country Files, Far East, Trust Territories, Vol. III [1 of 2]. Confidential. On March 19, Williams sent a study to the Chairman of the NSC Under Secretaries Committee concerning the negotiations on the future political status of the Mariana Islands District of the Trust Territory of the Pacific Islands. (Ibid., NSC Institutional Files (H-Files), Box H–276, Under Secretaries Decision Memorandums, U/DM 98 [2 of 5])

305. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to President Nixon, Washington, May 3, 1973. 305. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to President Nixon, Washington, May 3, 1973.1

Washington, May 3, 1973

MEMORANDUM
THE WHITE HOUSE
WASHINGTON
ACTION

May 3, 1973

MEMORANDUM FOR: THE PRESIDENT
FROM: HENRY KISSINGER [HK initialed]
SUBJECT: Negotiating Instructions on the Future Status of the Marianas District of the Trust Territory of the Pacific Islands (Micronesia)

At Tab B is a memorandum to you from the Chairman of the Under Secretaries Committee asking your approval on their proposed instructions to your Personal Representative for Micronesian Status Negotiations, Ambassador F. Haydn Williams, for negotiations on the future status of the Marianas District of the Trust Territory of the Pacific Islands (TTPI). As you will recall, our negotiating with the Marianas separately from the other five TTPI districts resulted from the request of the Marianas, who have long wanted a closer permanent relationship with us than the other districts.

The only controversial aspect of the USC recommendations is the question of our military land requirements in the Mariana Islands. The USC recommends that Ambassador Williams first try to secure our maximum land requirements: the purchase or lease of the entire island of Tinian, relocating its 800 inhabitants to Saipan, plus the acquisition of certain facilities and areas on Saipan and of the small uninhabited island of Farrallon de Medinilla (which is to be used as a bombing range). The USC fallback on Tinian — the potentially serious sticking point — would be first to modify or withdraw our requirements on Saipan, second to leave Tinian's population on the island but still to acquire the entire island (leasing back about 7,000 acres to the Tinianese), and last to acquire only three-quarters of the island (which the USC memorandum calls the "minimum and essential requirement").

We have serious doubts about taking all of Tinian, and a recent report from the State Department Political Adviser in the TTPI, whose past assessments have proved largely accurate, confirms these doubts as to the advisability of even trying to secure the Mariana's agreement to vacate Tinian's population to Saipan. The report arrived after the USC memorandum was submitted. Our Political Advisor and others began focusing on this aspect of Tinianese attitudes only recently because Defense only about two months ago shifted to the position that we definitely should press for exclusive use of the whole of Tinian. Previously, Defense had held only that this would be desirable.

The report (Tab C) confirms that such a negotiating request would be a complete surprise to the Marianas, would scotch Tinian's hopes to benefit economically from the U.S. military presence and by greatly stimulating suspicions would set the Marianas negotiations back seriously from the outset. Ambassador Williams' subsequent conversation with the Marianas chief negotiator strongly supports this estimate. An informal survey of the USC members, in light of the Political Advisers report, shows that State arid Justice agree with that estimate, as do OMB and Ambassador Williams. Defense and Interior dissent, with the latter considerably weaker in its disagreement with the estimate than the former.

I believe we should not risk upsetting the negotiations at the outset. This would endanger our major immediate objective of concluding the negotiations expeditiously for the impact it would have on our stalled negotiations with the other five districts. This risk would seem to outweigh the potential gain of avoiding the usual possible off-base relations problems, the 7,000 additional acres of military maneuver area, and the added increment of negotiating leverage inherent in opening with a stiffer demand on the Marianas.

Therefore, I recommend that Ambassador Williams begin by trying to acquire (a) the whole of Tinian through purchase or lease, but offer to lease back the southeast corner for the relocation of the island's population, (b) certain facilities and areas on Saipan and (c) the whole Farralion de Medinilla. His fallback would be to acquire only three-fourths of Tinian — requirements on Saipan if necessary to do so — and to acquire the whole of Farralion de Medinilla.

Approve [RN initialed]
Disapprove

The other aspects of the USC-recommended negotiating package — with which I agree — are: - Negotiating objectives. In the main, to seek a close, permanent political relationship with the Marianas that will bring them under U.S. sovereignty and will satisfy our security requirements; and to conclude negotiations expeditiously and in a manner that will have the maximum beneficial effort on the temporarily stalled negotiations with the other five districts.

— Political status. To offer the Marianas a commonwealth arrangement, which they favor on the grounds that this will give them maximum internal political control and will confer greater prestige. However if the Marianas wanted to shift to any of the other three options — integration with Guam, integration with Guam but with safeguards against Guam's domination of the less developed Marianas, or unincorporated territorial status — Ambassador Williams would be authorized to negotiate these. If the Marianas wanted a looser form of association, however, Ambassador Williams would be required to return for new instructions.

— Financial arrangements. Offer direct grants of up to $12 million for the first five years (after which our normal budgetary procedures would apply), a range of Federal programs and services which we would expect would be in excess of the approximately $2.5 million the Marianas now receive in this form, short-term assistance to cover transitional costs, and land acquisition and relocation costs. OMB recommends that direct grants be held to the minimum consistent with mutual agreement on program needs, and that any specific amount be approved by the Director of OMB. I believe that overly stringent financial restrictions would contradict the impression of generosity that we are trying to create: your approval of the over-all level would cover OMB's second point.

— Interim arrangements. Ambassador Williams would be authorized to negotiate with the Marianas on the implementation of the agreement as soon as possible, and prior to the termination of the Trusteeship, as a whole if necessary and feasible.

— Congressional consultations. Ambassador Williams would be instructed to consult with Congress on the substance and implementation of this agreement.

I recommend that you approve the USC recommendations on the foregoing five points.

Approve [RN initialed]
Disapprove

At Tab A is a draft instruction from you to Ambassador Williams which includes our recommended change on military land requirements. The original draft instruction prepared by the USC is at pages xxi-xxvi of Tab B.

1 Source: Ford Library, National Security Adviser, NSC East Asian and Pacific Affairs Staff: Files, (1969) 1973–1977, Box 36, Marianas (Working Files) [7]. Secret. Sent for action. The President initialed his approval of the first recommendation, which concerned the acquisition of Tinian, and the second recommendation, which approved the positions advocated by the USC. Tab A, draft instructions to Williams, is not attached. Tab B, the April 13 memorandum from Rush, the Chairman of the USC, to the President, is at National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Institutional Files (H-Files), Box H-276, Under Secretaries Decision Memorandums, U/DM 98 [1 of 5]. Tab C, a report from the DOS Political Advisor in the TTPI, is not attached.

306. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to President Nixon, Washington, November 9, 1973. 306. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to President Nixon, Washington, November 9, 1973.1

Washington, November 9, 1973

MEMORANDUM
THEM WHITE HOUSE
WASHINGTON
ACTION

November 9, 1973

MEMORANDUM FOR: THE PRESIDENT
FROM: HENRY A. KISSINGER
SUBJECT: Micronesian Status Negotiations: Offer of an Independence Option

The U.S. is currently negotiating the termination of our trusteeship over the Trust Territories of the Pacific Islands. At Tab B is a memorandum to you from the Chairman of the Under Secretaries Committee on the question of whether the U.S. negotiator should be authorized to offer an independence option to Micronesia, in addition to the option of Free Association, which is now about half drafted.

Background

Our negotiations with the Micronesians were suspended last fall when they insisted that we negotiate an independence option simultaneously with the Free Association option. Within the past year, however, Micronesian pressure for the offer of an independence option has declined somewhat. It is very possible, however, that they will raise the matter again as a tactic when our negotiations are renewed this month.

Options

The USC study deals with this question in two parts: (1) should Ambassador Williams be authorized to offer an independence option, and (2) if so, what form should the option take.

Option 1: Refuse an independence option.

Option 2: Defer any offer of an independence option until after a plebiscite is held on the Free Association option.

Option 3: Offer an independence option, which could take the form of the following: — Unqualified independence.

— Marginally qualified independence — the U.S. would retain basing rights in Kwajalein Atoll (our missile testing facility) and would continue to deny access to Micronesia by third countries for military purposes.

— Independence and a pre-negotiated U.S.-Micronesian defense treaty — Micronesia would be legally responsible for defense and foreign affairs, but the treaty would provide for denial and U.S. basing rights.

— Independence and pre-negotiated U.S. control over Micronesia's foreign and defense affairs.

I agree with State, Interior, Justice, and Ambassador Williams that the balance of risks and objectives argues for authorizing Williams to offer an independence option now in order to spike likely renewed attempts by Micronesian negotiators to exploit the independence issue to facilitate U.N. approval of our termination of the trusteeship, and in order to avoid further delays in these already drawn-out negotiations. (I would note that in principle we have already offered the Micronesians independence by agreeing that they have the right unilaterally to terminate the Compact of Free Association after a moratorium of 15 years. The present question, therefore, is whether the U.S. is willing to offer independence at this point.)

I also agree with these departments and Ambassador Williams that whatever small risk exists that Micronesia might opt for independence, that risk can be further reduced by extending the offer in the form of "Marginally qualified independence." This form poses a clear choice between Free Association and independence, particularly as regards the minimal financial benefits which Micronesia would receive from us under independence in this form.

Defense dissents, recommending no offer of an independence option in any form at this time, contending that the risk of Micronesian acceptance, though small, is too great in light of the U.S. security interests at stake. Based upon the consensus of those closer to the negotiations that Micronesian acceptance of the offer is extremely remote, I believe the risk to be acceptable. Recognizing the difficulty of judging the ultimate need to offer the independence option at all, however, I recommend that William's authority to offer it be discretionary, to be used only if tactically necessary.

Ambassador Williams' Negotiation Instructions

At Tab A is a draft instruction from you to Ambassador Williams which, in addition to incorporating my recommendation on offering an independence option, also includes: — Authority to negotiate a 10-year moratorium on unilateral Micronesian termination of the Compact of Free Association, if after a determined effort Williams cannot get the Micronesians to agree to a 15-year moratorium.

— A definition of our basic objectives in these negotiations.

— A reaffirmation that our preferred alternative is Free Association, and a definition of the essentials of that relationship.

— Guidance on negotiating U.S. land requirements.

— Guidance on financial arrangements under a relationship of Free Association.

— Ambassador Williams' terms of reference.

This instruction thus pulls together in one document your basic guidance to Ambassador Williams.

Recommendation:

That you approve the above instructions to Ambassador Williams (printed in full at Tab A).

Approve [RN initialed]
Disapprove

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Institutional Files (H-Files), Box H–277, Under Secretaries Decision Memorandums, U/DM 98 [4 of 5]. Secret. Sent for action. Scowcroft initialed the memorandum on behalf of Kissinger. On page 2, Nixon underlined the phrase “I recommend that William’s authority to offer it be discretionary, to be used only if tactically necessary,” and wrote, “Very important.” On the last page, Nixon initialed his approval of the recommendation. Attached but not published are Tab A, Kissinger’s instructions to Williams, November 14, and Tab B, a November 9 memorandum from Rush to Nixon.

307. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to President Nixon, Washington, March 25, 1974. 307. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to President Nixon, Washington, March 25, 1974.1

Washington, March 25, 1974

MEMORANDUM
THE WHITE HOUSE
WASHINGTON
ACTION

March 25, 1974

MEMORANDUM FOR: THE PRESIDENT
FROM: HENRY A. KISSINGER [HK initialed]
SUBJECT: Micronesian Status Negotiations: Request for Supplemental Instructions on Financial Arrangements

At Tab B is a report to you from your Personal Representative for Micronesian Status Negotiations, Ambassador F. Haydn Williams. The report covers the progress made in the latest round of negotiations with Micronesian representatives, and asks for supplemental instructions on the financial aspects of the new status arrangements. Ambassador Williams' initial report on this latest round, to which he refers in this letter of January 25, is at Tab C.

Ambassador Williams reports substantial forward movement in both sets of negotiations — those with the Marianas District (which desires a separate, closer relationship with us than the other five districts of Micronesia do), as well as those with the other five districts. He hopes to conclude the negotiations with the Marianas this spring and those with the other five districts possibly sometime next fall.

The principle problem, for which Williams is seeking additional instructions, is that of financial arrangements with the five districts. He believes the gap between our position and theirs has narrowed to the point where we can settle on a figure that approximates our current level of assistance to Micronesia — about $55 million annually — plus certain supplemental assistance during the transition period. He therefore recommends that you authorize him to: — Negotiate up to a ceiling on assistance of $60 million a year for up to 15 years. (His present instructions authorize him to go up to $50 million.)

— Agree to periodic reviews of the level of our assistance, as well as to adjustments in the levels to compensate for inflation.

— Commit us to provide up to $25 million for one-time costs of moving the capital of Micronesia from Saipan (in the Marianas) to another district, with our assistance over that figure to be provided on a matching two-to-one basis, the total U.S. assistance for this purpose not to exceed $35 million.

— Commit us to a terminal five-year Capital Improvements Program (CIP) for the five districts of no less than $15 million annually. The program would begin in FY75 and would be developed by the Department of Interior.

The Under Secretaries Committee agrees with Ambassador Williams' recommendations, but wants to stress that our annual assistance would not be terminated at the end of 15 years but would be reviewed then — as earlier at five-year intervals — as regards the levels and types of assistance (Tab D).

OMB, however, has raised a number of objections (Tab E): — It would require that the five-year reviews of our financial assistance phase the level of our assistance down by $5 million each time, and that the reviews otherwise be limited to adjusting the level of assistance to compensate for any changes in the value of the dollar. This limitation would be imposed in order to prevent the Micronesians from reopening the total amount of assistance.

— It objects to the commitments at this point to specific figures on assistance for relocating the capital and on the CIP contending that these need further study.

My view. I agree both with Williams' recommendations and with the USC comment on them. I believe that we now have a better prospect of concluding these protracted negotiations at a reasonably early date, and that this modest increase in financial assistance should enable Ambassador Williams to move toward that goal.

As to OMB's view, — I agree that the general principle of a gradual reduction in U.S. financial assistance to Micronesia should be included in Williams' instructions, but I do not agree that we should lock ourselves into a specific figure or should confine our periodic reviews solely to the question of adjustments in the level to compensate for changes in the dollar. More comprehensive reviews would seem advisable, in order to insure that our financial assistance is supportive of a continuing Free Association relationship.

— I disagree with OMB when it contends that we cannot rationally set specific minimum and maximum figures for assistance in relocating the capital and for the CIP. (The question is only one of specific figures, since you previously approved assistance for relocating the capital, and since Secretary Morton last January publicly committed us to a major increase in the CIP for Micronesia for the next five years.) We do have rational bases setting specific minimum or maximum figures. Most importantly at this point, we need specific figures in order to be credible in what we hope will be our coming final rounds of negotiations.

At Tab A is a draft supplementary instruction in your name which approves Williams' recommendations.

Recommendation:

That you authorize me to sign the draft supplementary instruction to Ambassador Williams at Tab A.

Approve [RN initialed]
Disapprove

1 Source: Library of Congress, Henry Kissinger Papers, CL 299, Memoranda to the President, March 1974. Secret. Sent for Action. Nixon initialed his approval of the recommendation. Tab A, the supplementary instructions, March 29, that Kissinger sent to Williams, is attached but not published. Tab B, Williams’s January 25 letter to Nixon, and Tab C, Williams’s November 28, 1973 letter to Nixon, are both attached but not published. Tab D, Rush’s memorandum, February 23, to Nixon is not attached but is in the National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Institutional Files (H-Files), Box H–277, Under Secretaries Decision Memorandums, U/DM 98 (5 of 5). Tab E, a memorandum from OMB, is not attached.

308. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to President Nixon, Washington, July 8, 1974. 308. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to President Nixon, Washington, July 8, 1974.1

Washington, July 8, 1974

MEMORANDUM
THE WHITE HOUSE
WASHINGTON

ACTION

July 8, 1974

MEMORANDUM FOR: THE PRESIDENT
FROM: HENRY A. KISSINGER
SUBJECT: Micronesian Status Negotiations

At Tab B is the report of Ambassador F. Haydn Williams, your Personal Representative for Micronesian Status Negotiations, covering his April round of negotiations with representatives of the five districts of Micronesia. As you recall, he is conducting separate negotiations with representatives of the sixth district, the Marianas.

Ambassador Williams also recommends further amendments to his negotiating instructions.

As you know, Williams earlier had achieved agreement giving the U.S. control of foreign affairs and defense and the Micronesians control over internal government. He reports that he has now reached agreement on the two remaining issues — unilateral termination of the Compact of Free Association and U.S. financial assistance. However, he was able to get agreement on these two issues only by going beyond his current instructions in minor respects on an ad referendum basis, and he therefore is asking your approval of these undertakings. —Unilateral termination. The Micronesians objected to our proposal that the Compact contain pre-negotiated arrangements providing for denial (of Micronesia to third countries for military purposes) and U.S. military basing rights that would survive any termination of the Free Association relationship by 50 years. Instead, Williams subsequently achieved an agreement under which the Compact would be terminated only by mutual consent during first 15 years after the Compact goes into force. Thereafter, the Compact would be terminated unilaterally by either side, but notification to terminate would be followed by a two-year waiting period during which both parties would have to reach agreement on a mutual security agreement covering our continued use of military bases and facilities in the islands. The concerned departments and agencies (Tabs C and D) agree with Williams' recommendations, and I have no objection.

— U.S. Financial Assistance. Williams also achieved agreement on levels of U.S. financial assistance:

For the first 15 years after the Compact goes into force, the annual level would start at $55 million and decrease to $42 million (which is below the $60 million level you authorized).

As regards the period following the first 15 years, the Micronesians, refusing our proposal that this be left to later negotiations, finally agreed that, if agreement on follow-on levels were not readily achieved in later negotiations, U.S. financial assistance would continue on a scale that would decrease at the same rate as during the first 15 years.

As regards the transition period before the Compact goes into farce, the Micronesians agreed to a Capital Improvements Program (CIP) ranging from $20 million in FY 75 to $35 million in FY 78 and back down to $15 million in FY 80.

Williams recommends that he be authorized to proceed with the above tentative agreements. The concerned departments and agencies agree, with the exception of OMB, which does not want Williams to commit us firmly to levels of CIP during the transition period. Rather, OMB would have the concerned agencies review these figures annually in the course of budget preparation, and reallocate some of the CIP funds to current government operating expenses in Micronesia if they believed necessary. Ambassador Williams objects strongly. He contends that priority must go to leaving Micronesia with an adequate structure by the time we end the trusteeship; he also has obtained Micronesian agreement to gradually declining U.S. support for government operating expenses in Micronesia. I agree with Williams, and also support his recommendations above on other aspects of U.S. financial assistance.

Issue of the Plebiscite and Constitutional Convention

Williams also reached agreement with Micronesian representatives on a tentative schedule for bringing the Compact into force over a six-year period. The departments agree with this schedule, except that they recommend that a major effort be made to hold the plebiscite before, rather than after, the Micronesian Constitutional Convention. They believe that the results of the plebiscite would constrain the possible proclivity of some Micronesian leaders to try to re-open certain provisions of the Compact in the course of drafting a Constitution.

Williams disagrees. He contends that Micronesian leaders strongly want to place both the draft constitution and Compact before the populace in the plebiscite, and that there will not be sufficient time to hold a plebiscite before the Constitutional Convention, scheduled for next April. I support Williams. I would also note that we have adequate leverage in terms of our contemplated financial assistance to contain possible Micronesian back-tracking on the draft Compact.

At Tab A is a draft instruction, in your name, from me to Ambassador Williams embodying my recommendations above.

Recommendation
That you authorize me to me to sign the draft instruction to Ambassador Williams at Tab A.
Approve [RN initialed]
Disapprove

1 Source: Ford Library, National Security Adviser, NSC East Asian and Pacific Affairs Staff: Files, (1969) 1973–1977, Box 36, Marianas (Working Files) [6]. Secret. Sent for action. Scowcoft initialed the memorandum on behalf of Kissinger. The President initialed his approval of the recommendation. Tab A, a memorandum, July 10, from Kissinger to William, is not attached but is in the National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Institutional Files (H-Files), Box H–281, Folder 6, U/N 90–149. Tab B, an April 12 letter from Williams to the President, is attached but not published. Tabs C and D, recommendations from concerned departments and agencies, are not further identified, but these recommendations are described in an attached memorandum, May 24, from Rush to the President, which stated that the Departments of State, Defense, Justice, Interior, the Joint Chiefs of Staff, and the Office of Micronesian Status Negotiations endorsed Williams’s recommendations.

309. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to President Ford, Washington, February 6, 1975. 309. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to President Ford, Washington, February 6, 1975.1

Washington, February 6, 1975

MEMORANDUM
THE WHITE HOUSE
WASHINGTON
ACTION

February 6, 1975

MEMORANDUM FOR: THE PRESIDENT
FROM: HENRY A. KISSINGER [HK initialed]
SUBJECT: Micronesia: Final Stage of Negotiation with the Northern Marianas

At Tab B is a memorandum to you from the Chairman of the Under Secretaries Committee forwarding a memorandum from Ambassador F. Haydn Williams, your Personal Representative for Micronesian Status Negotiations. Ambassador Williams reports that he has completed the negotiation of a new U.S. relationship with the Northern Marianas District of the Trust Territory of the Pacific Islands (TTPI). He requests authority to sign a covenant embodying this relationship ad referendum with Marianas representatives this week, and asks for additional authority from you on two points in order to sign the covenant.

Since 1971, Ambassador Williams has been negotiating a new U.S. relationship with the Trust Territory. We have important contingency military basing interests in the TTPI, particularly in the Northern Marianas District. In 1972, the Northern Marianas District decided that it wanted a separate and closer relationship with the U.S. than that desired by the other five districts of the TTPI.

The covenant which Williams has negotiated with the Northern Marianas will retain U.S. sovereignty over it, including U.S. control of its foreign affairs and defense and satisfaction of our military land requirements there, but will give the Northern Marianas complete internal self-government under a self-drafted constitution. They have accepted the commonwealth status which we offered. This arrangement will also facilitate future integration of the Northern Marianas with Guam, which is geographically a part of the same archipelago; as you will recall, you have just approved our negotiation of a new U.S. relationship with Guam.

State, Defense, and Interior have approved the draft covenant. Ambassador Williams has also consulted closely with key members of Congress throughout his negotiation.

The two points of additional authority which Williams seeks from you are: — That the annual level of U.S. direct financial grant assistance to the Northern Marianas be raised from the presently authorized $12 million to $14 million for an initial period of seven years. Williams believes the increase is needed to strengthen the weak economic infrastructure on the islands of Tinian and Rota, where we have important military basing requirements.

— That the U.S. make a one-time grant of $2 million to develop and maintain, as a World War II memorial park, about three quarters of the harbor area on Saipan which we have reserved for military contingency purposes. The device of a memorial park would make this land more readily available in an emergency and would satisfy local political needs.

The Under Secretaries Committee supports these recommendations. Ambassador Williams has also made recommendations on three policy implementation issues which concern land leasing arrangements, timing of a plebiscite, and Congressional briefings; Williams has agreed that the USC can handle these is sues.

OMB Views

OMB asks (Tab C) that you review the covenant before Ambassador Williams signs it with the following points in mind: 1. That this will be the last opportunity to review the draft covenant before it goes to the Congress and United Nations.

2. That U.S. military basing needs in the Marianas are considerably less than in 1972 when we began separate negotiations with the Northern Marianas, and that the proposed level of financial assistance — based upon earlier estimates of our needs — is now too high.

3. That the lease, rather than the purchase, of land for U.S. military bases in the Northern Marianas is contrary to Congressional policy.

4. That the lease of military contingency lands in the Northern Marianas back to the Northern Marianas Government (NMG) or to others by means other than competitive bidding is contrary to normal U.S. policy and amounts to an indirect subsidy for the NMG and present users. (Williams has agreed to lease 6, 000 acres back to the NMG and present users at $1 per acre per year.)

5. That the covenant provides for Presidential, rather than Congressional, approval of a constitution which the Northern Marianas would draft for themselves.

6. That the $14 million annual ceiling for the first seven years, together with the indirect federal financial assistance contemplated, is too high, and would generate demands for increased direct federal assistance in our other territories.

OMB makes no specific comment on Ambassador Williams' request for $2 million to establish a memorial park on Saipan.

My Views

I agree with the recommendations of Ambassador Williams, which have been endorsed by the Chairman of the Under Secretaries Committee and are supported by State, Defense and Interior.

As regards the points raised by OMB (in the order they were presented above): 1. This will not be the last opportunity for Executive Branch review of the covenant. Ambassador Williams is signing the agreement ad referendum. As a practical matter, Ambassador Williams has carefully coordinated the agreement with the departments and agencies concerned throughout his negotiations, and has the Under Secretaries Committee's approval.

2. I cannot agree that U.S. basing needs in the Marianas are less than in 1972. The urgency of our requirements has lessened somewhat, however, the wisdom of preserving, in the agreement, our ability to meet future needs is clear.

3. Leasing, as well as purchasing, of land for U.S. military bases was authorized by President Nixon's basic instruction. Ambassador Williams has found Congressional reactions on this aspect mixed: some favor purchase, while some say they would approve only a lease. Ambassador Williams tried up through the last stage of negotiations to purchase the lands, but was unable to do so, principally because of the islanders' almost religious attachment to their land. Leasing exceptions have been approved for other military land transactions and, in view of the negotiating history, I believe should be allowed in this case.

4. Leasing military contingency lands back to the Northern Marianas Government or to others by other than competitive bidding is, as OMB contends, not our normal policy. However, the military services frequently depart from this policy, and Defense has approved in principle Ambassador Williams' doing so in this instance.

5. The covenant provides for, but does not require, Congressional as well as Presidential approval of the Constitution. This matter is still under review. In view of the close collaboration with the Congress that has taken place during negotiation of the covenant, we do not anticipate difficulty and would have no inhibitions about submission of the Constitution to the Congress. This matter need not be decided at this time however.

6. The increase in the annual ceiling on direct federal assistance to the Northern Marianas from $12 to $14 million does represent a modestly disproportionate funding for the Marianas in comparison to amounts given to other territories. It was the unanimous view of the interested agencies, however, that this marginal increase was warranted in view of the relatively backward state of the Marianas' economy and the need to accelerate its development, thereby facilitating its future integration with Guam which enjoys a much more advanced level of development. The greater amount will also enable us to conclude the Marianas negotiations promptly and will have a favorable impact on our negotiations with the other five districts of Micronesia.

A draft instruction to Ambassador Williams approving his recommendations is at Tab A.

RECOMMENDATION:

That you approve my signing the draft instruction to Ambassador Williams at Tab A.

Approve [GRF initialed]
Disapprove

1 Source: Ford Library, National Security Adviser, Presidential Country Files for East Asian and Pacific Affairs, Box 18, Trust Territories of the Pacific Islands (1). Confidential. Sent for action. Ford initialed his approval of the recommendation on the last page. Attached but not published is a signed copy, dated February 7, of Tab A, instructions from Kissinger to Williams. Tab B, a memorandum, January 25, from Ingersoll to Ford presenting the USC’s views of the Marianas’s future political status, is not attached but is in the National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Institutional Files (H-Files), Box H–277, Under Secretaries Decision Memorandums, U/DM 98 [5 of 5]. Tab C, from OMB, is not attached.

310. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, March 19, 1975, 4:15 p.m. 310. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, March 19, 1975, 4:15 p.m. 1

Washington, March 19, 1975, 4:15 p.m.

MEMORANDUM
THE WHITE HOUSE
WASHINGTON

MEMORANDUM OF CONVERSATION

PARTICIPANTS:

President Ford

Edward Pangelinan, Chairman of Northern Marianas Political Status Commission

Senator P. A. Tenorio, Northern Marianas Senator

James M. Wilson, Jr., Deputy Representative for Micronesian Status Negotiations

Lt. General Brent Scowcroft, Deputy Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs

DATE AND TIME: Wednesday, March 19, 1975 4:15 p.m.
PLACE: The Oval Office

Pangelinan: We are very pleased to have the opportunity to exercise our rights under the UN Trusteeship Council and have a plebiscite.

President: We a pleased at this development and we trust that the plebiscite will be available. Where are you two from?

Tenorio: We both are from Saipan.

President: What are the Islands in the Northern Marianas?

Tenorio: Saipan forms Tinian and Rota.

President: What is the population?

Tenorio: About 14,000. Most of the people live on Saipan.

Wilson: They live in a very beautiful place. I was in Tinian and saw the plaques during World War II.

1 Source: Ford Library, National Security Adviser, Memoranda of Conversation, Box 10, 3/19/75. Top Secret. The conversation took place in the Oval Office. According to Ford’s talking points from Kissinger, the purpose of this meeting was “To demonstrate the importance we attach to the recently concluded Commonwealth Covenant with the Northern Marianas, and to Micronesia generally.” (Ibid.) A majority of the voters of the Northern Mariana Islands approved the Commonwealth Covenant in a plebiscite held on June 17, 1975.

311. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to President Ford, Washington, July 24, 1975. 311. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to President Ford, Washington, July 24, 1975.1

Washington, July 24, 1975

MEMORANDUM
THE WHITE HOUSE
WASHINGTON
ACTION

July 24, 1975

MEMORANDUM FOR: THE PRESIDENT
FROM: HENRY A. KISSINGER

SUBJECT: Presidential Determination to Make Fiji Eligible to Purchase Defense Articles and Defense services Under the Foreign Military Sales Act, as Amended

Deputy Secretary of State Ingersoll recommends that you make the necessary finding under the Foreign Military Sales (FMS) Act to establish the eligibility of Fiji for cash sales of defense articles and defense services (Tab B) . The Department of Defense concurs in this recommendation.

With the exception of American Samoa, Fiji is the only island state or territory in the South Pacific area with existing well-developed airport, harbor, and communications facilities. Moreover, Fiji lies astride the main sea and air routes between the United States, Australia, and New Zealand. Fiji's location also makes it an excellent vantage point for scientific/military observations, and access for these purposes could prove to be advantageous in the future as it was during World War II. It is, therefore, in the United States Government's interest to maintain a relationship with Fiji that would facilitate our military access to its transportation and communications facilities in an emergency and, conversely, to reduce the possibility of any potential enemy acquiring bases or other access to Fiji which could enhance their ability to interdict lines of communication between the United States, Australia and New Zealand.

The Government of Fiji has expressed interest in the purchase of three excess patrol craft to be de-commissioned by the U.S. Navy. These vessels were built in 1954-1955 and would represent a total acquisition cost of $250,000 including overhaul/rehabilitation. The necessary crew training would cost about $255,000. These craft would be operated by the Royal Fiji Military Forces, which have not had a naval capability, to patrol the waters surrounding Fiji territory as well as for disaster relief and rescue operations.

Our overall relationship with Fiji has been friendly. Fiji has been supportive of U.S. interests in the United Nations and in the Law of the Sea negotiations. Fiji could also be helpful to us in the Committee of 24 particularly when that Committee concerns itself with our Pacific territories and Puerto Rico. It would, therefore, be of political benefit to the United States to promote our overall friendly relationship with Fiji.

Section 3(a) (1) of the FMS Act prohibits the sale of defense articles or defense services by the United States Government unless the President finds such sales will "strengthen the security of the United States and promote world peace." By Executive Order 11501, this authority is reserved to the President.

The Department of State advises that after consideration of Section 502 (b) of the Foreign Assistance Act regarding human rights in Fiji, there appears to be no reason not to proceed with the proposed determination.

Based on past experience, there may be some Congressional opposition to increasing the number of countries eligible for Foreign Military Sales. However, given the friendly state of U.S.-Fiji relations and the reasonableness of the Fijian request, any such opposition is not expected to be significant.

A memorandum for the Department of State forwarding your finding that FMS sales to Fiji will strengthen the security of the United States and promote world peace is at Tab A. Attached to the Determination is a justification for this finding. In accordance with established procedures, the Determination and the justification will be furnished to Congress. The Determination alone will be published in the Federal al Register.

Mr. Lynn concurs in this finding (Tab C), as does Max Friedersdorf.

RECOMMENDATION

That you sign the memorandum at Tab A.

1 Source: Ford Library, National Security Adviser, Presidential Subject File, Box 16, Presidential Determinations, FY 1976 (1). Confidential. Sent for action. Attached but not published is Tab A, a memorandum, August 5, from Ford to the Secretary of State making Fiji eligible to purchase defense articles and services. Tab B, Ingersoll’s June 24 memorandum to Ford, is attached but not published. Tab C, a memorandum, July 6, from James Lynn of the Office of Management and Budget to Ford, is also attached but not published.

312. Memorandum From Chairman of the National Security Council Under Secretaries Committee Robinson to President Ford, Washington, May 24, 1976. 312. Memorandum From Chairman of the National Security Council Under Secretaries Committee Robinson to President Ford, Washington, May 24, 1976.1

Washington, May 24, 1976

DEPARTMENT OF STATE
WASHINGTON

NSC UNDER SECRETARIES COMMITTEE

May 24, 1976

MEMORANDUM FOR THE PRESIDENT
Subject: Future Political status of Micronesia

The Under Secretaries Committee recommends your approval of the attached instructions for Ambassador F. Haydn Williams, your representative for Micronesian status negotiations, for the con- duct of negotiations with representatives of five districts of the Trust Territory of the Pacific Islands (TTPI) regarding their future political status. An interagency study on this subject is also attached. These documents have been prepared in response to Ambassador Williams' request in his letter to you of December 10, 1975, for a review of the NSC policy paper on Micronesia dated August 27 1973.

That policy study had recommended that the United States seek to attain the agreement of representatives of the five districts of the TTPI to a "free association" relationship (i.e. less than fully sovereign) with the United States — with the U.S. responsible for foreign and defense affairs and Micronesia fully self-governing with respect to internal affairs. Although Ambassador Williams and the Micronesia negotiators reached tentative agreement in October 1974 on a draft compact of Free Association, the Congress of Micronesia (CON) was unwilling to approve it subsequently on the grounds that it judged the United States offer of financial assistance inadequate when measured against the authority the United States proposed to retain over Micronesian foreign and defense matters.

Meanwhile, pursuant to Presidential decisions based on another 1973 NSC study, Ambassador Williams negotiated a separate agreement with representatives of the Northern Marianas by which those islands would become an unincorporated territory (commonwealth) of the United States. This agreement was signed on February 15, 1975, and has been approved by the United States and the Northern Marianas. The Commonwealth Covenant is now Public Law 94-241, signed by you on March 24, 1976.

It now remains to try to work out an agreement establishing the political status of the Caroline and Marshall Islands. These islands, together with the Northern Marianas, make up the Trust Territory of the Pacific Islands, which is a strategic trusteeship administered by the United States pursuant to an agreement of 1947 with the United Nations. The TTPI is the last remaining UN Trusteeship. The situation in Micronesia has been complicated by several recent developments, in particular (1) the approval in November 1975 by a Micronesian Constitutional Convention of a draft constitution which purports to be "the supreme law of the Federated States of Micronesia" and which conflicts with the basic principles underlying the draft Compact of Free Association, and (2) evidence of growing separatist tendencies in two of the more important districts, the Marshalls and Palau, both of which have formally expressed their desire for separate status negotiations with the United States.

The major U.S. security interests in Micronesia are: (1) the denial of these islands to the military forces of third countries; (2) U.S. access to Micronesian land, water and air space through a continuation of current land use arrangements, principally those relating to the missile testing range at Kwajalein, and the right of the us to negotiate additional land use option agreements in Palau, and elsewhere in case of emergency; and (3) the long-term protection of U.S. access and denial rights in the event of substantial modification or termination of any future political relationship between the United States and Micronesia. In this connection, the continued growth of Soviet sea power in the Western Pacific is of particular concern.

The United States also has a political interest in a stable and cooperative relationship with Micronesia in order to safeguard our security interests in the Western Pacific. We have no specific economic interests, although law of the sea arrangements could create valuable rights to marine resources in Micronesia.

The general U.S. negotiating objective is the conclusion of an agreement establishing a political relationship in the post-trusteeship period which will protect U.S. strategic interests and establish a sound basis for a close, friendly and enduring relationship between the United States and a future Micronesian government representing the five districts of the TTPI.

As regards Micronesian views and interests, it is evident that Micronesia's leaders have not arrived at a consensus regarding the precise nature of the future political relationship with the U.S. Some support the proposed constitution which calls for full Micronesian sovereignty. This approach could point to an independent Micronesia which would be linked with the U.S. by a treaty defining our respective rights, including defense rights, rather than by a Compact of Free Association. Others, probably a majority, still prefer Free Association, given Micronesia's need for substantial assistance and its lack of capability or experience in the areas of foreign or defense affairs. In addition, the leaders in Palau and the Marshalls oppose the proposed constitution and have requested separate status talks with the U.S. However, they might be persuaded to accept unity with the other districts if the U.S. refuses to negotiate separately and if a satisfactory status agreement and constitutional compromise can be worked out.

The Under Secretaries Committee believes that three options merit considerations: 1. Commonwealth — This is the relationship to be established with the Northern Marianas Micronesia would become a territory of the United States, like Guam, and the U.S. would have full sovereignty and exercise complete authority over its foreign affairs and defense. Micronesians would become United States citizens or nationals. The arrangements would be permanent. Our rough estimate of the potential annual cost to the United States is $100 million, but it could run considerably higher because of federal programs which would be extended to Micronesia. U.S. grant subsidy to the five districts for FY 76 is $73.3 million plus approximately $8 million in U.S. federal programs.

2. Free Association — This is the arrangement embodied in the draft compact of October 1974. Micronesia would have full power of internal self-government but the United States would have full responsibility and authority in the areas of defense and foreign relations, although exact arrangements would have to be agreed to. The draft Compact stipulates that it can be terminated by mutual consent or terminated unilaterally by the new Government of Micronesia if two-thirds of those voting in Micronesia favor termination after 15 years, and if prior agreement is reached by the two parties on a mutual security treaty which ensures basic U.S. military rights and interests in these islands. Maximum annual payments of about $60 million for the 15 year period are envisaged.

Subsequent to completion of the interagency study, Micronesian representatives, meeting with Ambassador Williams in Saipan, indicated a desire to continue negotiations on the basis of the 1974 draft compact of free association, but they now wish the compact to be modified to grant them full authority over marine resources within a 200-mile economic zone, as well as the right to negotiate and conclude international agreements regarding these resources in the name of Micronesia.

3. Micronesian independence with a pre-negotiated security treaty with the United States — Micronesia would become an independent state but the United States and Micronesia would negotiate a treaty prior to independence and sign it at the time of independence giving the United States specified defense rights, which would include use of Kwajalein, denial of Micronesian territory to a third power for any defense purposes, and rights for the United States to obtain base option rights in Palau. The United States would seek agreement in this security treaty that its provisions would continue for a stated period, such as 50 years, no matter what political status Micronesia might adopt over that period. Under this option we envisage annual payments on the order of a maximum of $30 million, including payments for defense rights.

The Under Secretaries Committee believes that, given the lack of political unity in Micronesia and the uncertainties regarding its future course, independence together with a United States-Micronesia security treaty would afford less protection than the other feasible options for fundamental U.S. security interests. A commonwealth agreement would clearly provide the maximum security but would be much more costly than the other two options; Micronesian representatives rejected a U.S. offer of commonwealth in 1970, and there is little sign that it would be acceptable to the Micronesians today. A Compact of Free Association would be more costly than a treaty relationship but would give the United States greater freedom of action in the critical areas of foreign and defense affairs.

Micronesian desires for full authority over marine resources and the right to negotiate their own international agreements could cause serious conflicts of interests with the United States and enforcement problems, and could create precedents for our relationship with U.S. territories such as Puerto Rico. The Office of Micronesian Status Negotiations believes that in view of the free association relationship with the U.S., Micronesian authority over marine resources would not create a precedent with respect to U.S. territories. We are sympathetic to Micronesian desires to use marine resources as a springboard for development of their economy. The Under Secretaries Committee believes we should explore with the Micronesian leadership ways of achieving their substantive economic goals through the use of marine resources without creating these problems for the United States.

The U.S. Congress would probably be more receptive to a revised Compact of Free Association than it would be toward the other two options. Commonwealth would probably be considered too costly and to involve unnecessary obligations, in view of the rights obtained by the U.S. in the commonwealth agreement recently reached with the Northern Marianas. Micronesian independence, even if accompanied by a security treaty, might appear to some in Congress to afford inadequate protection for our long-term security interests.

We have stated that we will seek to obtain the approval of the United Nations for termination of our trusteeship and that we expect to seek termination by 1980 or 1981. We have reported annually to the United Nations Trusteeship Council regarding our administration, and the Trusteeship Council's visiting missions have inspected conditions in Micronesia every three years. It is of course unpredictable how the United Nations Security Council will view the arrangements which are ultimately submitted for termination of the U.S. Trusteeship. However, if an independence option is not denied in the act of self-determination, and if the Micronesian people ratify, by a substantial majority, whatever arrangements are finally worked out, the basis for any opposition by the United Nations to this act of self-determination would be reduced, even if the arrangement would entail a permanent relationship between the United States and Micronesia.

The Departments of Defense and State disagree over the way in which the independence option should be treated in the negotiations and subsequent plebiscite. Defense strongly believes that the independence option is the least desirable alternative from a national security perspective and that accordingly it should be presented to the people of Micronesia only if there is clear and convincing evidence that they will not accept either commonwealth status or free association. Defense also states that the risks of an unstable Micronesia and an unsatisfactory treaty relationship would prevent it from supporting Micronesian independence if coupled with a firm U.S. commitment to terminate the Trusteeship by 1981.

State does not take issue with Defense's contention that free association is preferable to independence and in fact recommends instructing the President's Personal Representative to make clear to the Micronesian negotiators that the U.S. prefers a free association relationship. However, State believes a distinction should be made between the USG on the one hand taking steps intended to lead to Micronesian independence, a course which State like Defense would oppose, or on the other hand taking steps intended to lead to Micronesian free association, but entailing a formally stated offer of independence to the Micronesians during the last U.S.-Micronesian free association negotiations and in the subsequent plebiscite. State strongly favors the latter course, believing that the Micronesian leaders' recent urgings to the U.S. to complete agreement on free association demonstrate that the mere statement of an independence option need not be seriously feared. In State's view, the presence of such a statement in the official record would enhance the prospect of Congressional and UN approval of Trusteeship termination and potentially remove the Micronesian issue from the UN agenda during the post-Trusteeship decades.

The Office of Micronesian Status Negotiations notes that the President's Personal Representative is on record with the JCFS that the amounts offered under the financial provisions of the draft Compact for Free Association would be in constant dollars. The abandonment of this assurance would pose a major threat to the early conclusion of the status negotiations. It should be noted in this regard that assuming a 7 per cent annual rate of inflation; the $60 million annual figure for the first five years under free association would shrink to about $41 million in real terms, a consideration which will surely become apparent to the Micronesians if we were to withdraw our previous assurances. The Office of Management and Budget recommends against the use of constant dollar adjustments because of the administrative difficulties they create and would prefer to see specific step increases in the annual amounts of financial assistance. Details are included in their comments which are attached.

The Under Secretaries Committee accordingly recommends that you approve the attached negotiating instructions for your personal representative. The principal features of these new instructions are: 1. The continued authority to offer a free association relationship based on the draft compact of October 1974, and new authority to explore how the Micronesians might use development of marine resources to achieve a viable economy. Additional authority to offer either a commonwealth status or independence with a pre-negotiated security treaty if it becomes evident that the representatives of the Marshalls and the Carolines desire to pursue one of these options and if prior consultation with the Congress indicates that such a course of action would have a good chance of Congressional approval.

2. The authority to advise the Micronesians that the United States would feel compelled to consider measures to expedite the negotiations, possibly by presenting status options directly to the people in a plebiscite, if the negotiations have not produced agreement within a reasonable period of time, as for example, the spring of 1977. New instructions would be sought before action was taken on any specific measure.

3. The discretionary authority to defer efforts to reach immediate agreement for military land options in Palau (40 acres for harbor use, 2000 acres for ammunition and petroleum storage, and occasional use of 30,000 acres for maneuvers), on condition that the Micronesians give a commitment to negotiate in good faith at a later time for these options.

4. U.S. support for the goal of Micronesian unity, although the United States would avoid any commitment to guarantee the political unity of Micronesia. If events during the next twelve months demonstrate that Micronesian unity is not feasible, new instructions should be requested.

[signed]
Charles W. Robinson
Chairman

Attachments:
1. Instructions for Ambassador Williams
2. Interagency Study
3. OMB Comments
4. Map

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Institutional Files (H-Files), Box H–277, Under Secretaries Decision Memorandums, U/DM 98 [5 of 5]. Secret. Tab 1, undated instructions for the President’s Personal Representative for Micronesian Status Negotiations, is attached but not published. Tab 2, the Interagency Study is not attached. Tab 3, a memorandum, May 24, from Associate OMB Director Donald Ogilvie to Robinson, is attached but not published. Tab 4, a map of the TTPI, is attached but not published.

313. Editorial Note 313. Editorial Note

On August 30, 1973, Special Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs Henry Kissinger received and subsequently approved a proposal, originally requested by the National Security Council staff, that the U.S. Government secretly monitor the Micronesian independence movement and influence it to support U.S. objectives. (Memorandum from Froebe, August 30; National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 209, Agency Files, CIA, Vol. VI.) In January 1975, the Micronesia program began and in April 1975, the U.S. government monitored discussions of the Micronesian negotiating team on Saipan as part of an effort to discover the negotiating position and tactics of the Joint Committee on Future Status of the Congress of Micronesia in its talks with the United States. Monitoring was periodically undertaken until November 1975, but the recorded conversations either possessed no intelligence value or were in a language that could not be translated through secure channels. The resultant audiotapes were returned to Washington in August 1976 and subsequently destroyed. (Memorandum from Bush to Scowcroft, December 15, 1976; Central Intelligence Agency, OPI 10 [Executive Registry], Job 79M00467A, Box 19, Folder 16, Micronesia/Marianas ) On December 12, 1976, the Washington Post published a front page article by Bob Woodward stating that the U.S. Government had been conducting electronic surveillance against Micronesia’s negotiating representatives. Following the Washington Post article, which prompted complaints from the leaders of the Congress of Micronesia, Assistant to the President Brent Scowcroft approved a December 16 memorandum from National Security Council staff member William Gleysteen recommending that the U.S. Government terminate its collection effort in Micronesia and assure the Micronesians that the President would ensure pursuit of the negotiations “on the basis of complete respect for the Micronesian negotiators themselves and their duly authorized responsibility to represent the best interest of all the people of Micronesia.” (Memorandum from Gleysteen to Scowcroft, December 16; Ford Library, National Security Adviser, Presidential Country Files for East Asian and Pacific Affairs, Box 18, Trust Territories of the Pacific Islands [5])

Chapter IX: PhilippinesChapter IX: Philippines

314. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, January 5, 1973, 3:30 p.m.

Washington, January 5, 1973, 3:30 p.m.

Nixon and Romulo discussed affairs in the United States, the Philippines, and Vietnam.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 1026, Presidential/HAK Memcons, January–March 1973. Secret; Nodis. At the time Nixon and Romulo met, the Philippines had been under martial law since September 1972 and the Filipino army was fighting rebels in the Sula Archipelago.

315. Telegram 0823 From the Embassy in the Philippines to the Department of State, January 22, 1973, 1000Z.

January 22, 1973, 1000Z

The embassy analyzed events in the Philippines.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Institutional Files (H-Files), Box H–192, NSSM 155 [2 of 2]. Secret; Exdis. Repeated Priority to DOD and CINCPAC.

316. Memorandum From the Acting Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs (Eagleburger) to Secretary of Defense Richardson, Washington, March 15, 1973.

Washington, March 15, 1973

Eagleburger described the Muslim insurgency in the Philippines.

Source: Washington National Records Center, OSD Files: FRC 330–78–0001, Philippines, 091.3, 15 March 1973. Confidential; Noforn. The bottom of the memorandum is stamped, “Sec has seen. 17 Mar 1973.”

317. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to President Nixon, Washington, March 16, 1973.

Washington, March 16, 1973

Kissinger described for Nixon the consensus that resulted from an SRG meeting regarding the Philippines and urged him to approve a NSDM to be released at a later date.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Institutional Files (H-Files), Box H–192, NSSM 155 [2 of 2]. Secret. Sent for action. Tab A, an undated proposed NSDM on U.S. policy toward the Philippines, is attached but not published. The President initialed his approval of the draft NSDM, which was subsequently released. See Document 318. The Laurel-Langley Agreement, which governed U.S. tariffs on Philippine exports and the privileges of U.S. investors, expired on July 4, 1974.

318. National Security Decision Memorandum 209, Washington, March 27, 1973.

Washington, March 27, 1973

Kissinger issued NSDM 209 concerning U.S. policy toward the Philippines.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Institutional Files (H-Files), Box H–239, NSDMs, NSDM 209, Philippines. Secret. Copies were sent to the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff and the Assistant to the President for International Economic Affairs. The text of NSSM 155 is in Foreign Relations, 1969–1976, vol. XX, Southeast Asia, 1969–1972, Document 254.

319. Special National Intelligence Estimate 56–73, Washington, March 28, 1973.

Washington, March 28, 1973

The estimate examined the implications for the United States of the Muslim insurrection in the southern Philippines.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 557, Country Files, Far East, Philippines, Vol. IV, January 1972–December 31, 1973. Secret; Controlled Dissem. The CIA and the intelligence organizations of DOS, DOD, and the NSA participated in the preparation of the SNIE. All members of the U.S. Intelligence Board concurred in the estimate except the representative of the FBI who abstained because the subject was outside of his jurisdiction. In a memorandum, March 20, Holdridge recommended that Scowcroft ask the CIA to produce a SNIE on the Muslim uprising in the southern Philippines. (Ibid.)

320. Memorandum From the Acting Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs (Eagleburger) to Secretary of Defense Richardson, Washington, April 7, 1973.

Washington, April 7, 1973

Eagleburger sent Richardson a memorandum on the U.S. attitude toward the Philippine claim to Sabah.

Source: Washington National Records Center, OSD Files: FRC 330–78–0001, Philippines, 370.64, 7 April 1973. Confidential. Sent for information. Captain Robert Shaid, USN, prepared the memorandum. At the top of the first page of the memorandum, Richardson wrote, “Noted. Sounds right. ELR 4/12.” Attached but not published is an undated background sheet on the “Sabah Claim Issue.” Eagleburger sent the memorandum in response to a comment, attached but not published, that Richardson wrote on SNIE 56–73; see Document 319.

321. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to President Nixon, Washington, April 17, 1973.

Washington, April 17, 1973

Kissinger recommended that the President approve a NSSM to examine the insurrection in the southern Philippines.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Institutional Files (H-Files), Box H –199, NSSMs, NSSM 180. Secret. Sent for action. Nixon initialed his approval of the recommendation. Tab A, the proposed NSSM, is attached. A signed version is published as Document 323.

322. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to President Nixon, Washington, April 18, 1973.

Washington, April 18, 1973

Kissinger recommended that the President authorize him to approve an AID program to assist in the reorganization of the Manila police administration.

Source: Library of Congress, Henry Kissinger Papers, CL 297, Memoranda to the President, April 1973. Secret. Sent for action. Concurred in by Timmons. Nixon initialed his approval of the recommendation that AID assist in the reorganization of the Manila police administration. Attached but not published is Tab A, the memorandum from Kissinger to Rogers, April 26, as sent.

323. National Security Study Memorandum 180, Washington, May 1, 1973.

Washington, May 1, 1973

Kissinger asked the Department of State, the Department of Defense, and the CIA to study how the insurrection in the southern Philippines affects U.S. policy in Southeast Asia.

Source: Library of Congress, Henry Kissinger Papers, CL 316, National Security Study Memoranda, October 1971–May 1973. Secret. Copies were sent to the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff. On July 26, Hummel, the Acting Chairman of the East Asian and Pacific Interdepartmental Group, sent a study to the NSC Review Group in response to NSSM 180. The study provided options in response to four questions: how the U.S. should react to GOP requests for increased security assistance to help end the insurgency; whether the U.S. should use economic assistance to encourage the GOP to be more responsive to the needs of Philippine Muslims; whether the U.S. should encourage other countries in the region to help stabilize the situation; how the U.S. should treat the Philippine claim to Sabah. (National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Institutional Files [H-Files], Box H–199, NSSMs, NSSM 180)

324. Memorandum From the Deputy Director of Operations of the Central Intelligence Agency (William Colby) to the Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian and Pacific Affairs (Godley), Washington, July 6, 1973.

Washington, July 6, 1973

The CIA assessed the political and economic situation in the Philippines.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Institutional Files (H-Files), Box H–192, Folder 1, NSSM 155 [2 of 2]. Secret; Sensitive. Richard Kennedy also received a copy. Theodore Shackley, the Chief of the Far East Division, Directorate of Operations, CIA, sent this memorandum on behalf of Colby.

325. Telegram 998 From the Embassy in the Philippines to the Department of State, January 26, 1974, 0540Z.

January 26, 1974, 0540Z

The Embassy reported on the Philippine position regarding the Spratly Islands.

Source: National Archives, Record Group 59, Central Foreign Policy Files. Secret; Immediate; Exdis. Repeated for information to Saigon, Peking, Taipei, and CINCPAC. The Spratly Islands consist of more than 100 islands or reefs in the South China Sea surrounded by rich fishing grounds and, potentially, by gas and oil deposits.

326. Telegram 020401 From the Department of State to the Embassy in the Philippines, January 31, 1974, 0311Z.

January 31, 1974, 0311Z

The Department conveyed the U.S. position regarding the Spratly Islands.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 558, Country Files, Far East, Philippines, 1 January 1974. Secret; Cherokee; Priority; Nodis; Eyes Only Ambassador. Drafted by Hummel; cleared by Lord and Scowcroft; and approved by Kissinger.

327. Minutes of the Secretary of State’s Staff Meeting, Washington, January 31, 1974, 3:08 p.m..

Washington, January 31, 1974, 3:08 p.m.

Kissinger and his staff discussed the Spratly Island dispute.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Transcripts of Secretary of State Kissinger’s Staff Meetings, 1973–1977, E5177, Box 2. Secret. According to the summary of decisions that proceeds these minutes, Kissinger decided at this meeting “That we do not want to do anything re the Spratly Islands that would encourage the PRC to believe it has a free hand to take military action or lead our allies to believe we are needlessly alarmed at the prospect of such action.”

328. Minutes of the Secretary of State’s Staff Meeting, Washington, March 13, 1974, 4 p.m..

Washington, March 13, 1974, 4 p.m.

Kissinger and his staff discussed the insurgency in the southern Philippines.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Transcripts of Secretary of State Kissinger’s Staff Meetings, 1973–1977, E5177, Box 2. Secret.

329. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, April 24, 1974, 1610–1640.

Washington, April 24, 1974, 1610–1640

Sullivan and Schlesinger discussed U.S. relations with the Philippines.

Source: Washington National Records Center, OASD/ISA Files: FRC 330–77–0054, Philippines, 333, 13 May 1974. Confidential. Drafted by Bigley and approved by Peet.

330. Minutes of the Secretary of State’s Staff Meeting, Washington, May 9, 1974, 8 a.m..

Washington, May 9, 1974, 8 a.m.

Kissinger and his staff discussed Philippine claims to the Paracel Islands.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Transcripts of Secretary of State Kissinger’s Staff Meetings, 1973–1977, E5177, Box 3. Secret. According to the summary outline that precedes the minutes, “Secretary wants to be advised before we discuss application of defense treaty with Philippine Government. Amb. Sullivan should not raise this subject.”

331. Memorandum From the Executive Secretary of the Department of State (Springsteen) to the Deputy Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs (Scowcroft), Washington, July 3, 1974.

Washington, July 3, 1974

Springsteen reported on bilateral economic and security negotiations with the Philippines.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Institutional Files (H-Files), Box H–239, NSDMs, NSDM 209, Philippines. Confidential. On April 17, 1975, the NSC staff logged this memorandum and marked it OBE.

332. Memorandum From the Deputy Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs (Scowcroft) to President Ford, Washington, November 7, 1974.

Washington, November 7, 1974

Scowcroft asked the President whether Mrs. Ford should meet with Imelda Marcos.

Source: Ford Library, National Security Adviser, Presidential Country Files for East Asia and the Pacific, Box 15, Philippines (1). Secret. Sent for action. Ford initialed his disapproval of a meeting between his wife and Mrs. Marcos.

333. Minutes of the Secretary of State’s Staff Meeting, Washington, February 6, 1975, 8 a.m..

Washington, February 6, 1975, 8 a.m.

Kissinger and Habib discussed the Philippines’ request for weapons to combat the insurgency.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Transcripts of Secretary of State Kissinger’s Staff Meetings, 1973–1977, E5177, Box 6. Secret. Telegram 1667, February 6, from Manila describes GOP weapons requests. (National Archives, Record Group 59, Central Foreign Policy Files) Telegram 2806, March 5, from Manila reports on the successful fulfillment of most of the GOP requests. (Ibid.)

334. Telegram 4661 From the Embassy in the Philippines to the Department of State, April 14, 1975, 0842Z.

April 14, 1975, 0842Z

The Embassy warned that the Philippines was reassessing its security arrangements with the United States.

Source: National Archives, Record Group 59, Central Foreign Policy Files. Confidential; Priority; Limdis. Repeated for information to Bangkok, Kuala Lumpur, Jakarta, Seoul, Singapore, Tokyo, CINCPAC.

335. Backchannel Message 170 From the Ambassador to the Philippines (Sullivan) to the President’s Deputy Assistant for National Security Affairs (Scowcroft), Manila, April 16, 1975, 0321Z.

April 16, 1975, 0321Z

Sullivan alerted Scowcroft to the Philippine reassessment of security relations with the United States.

Source: Ford Library, National Security Adviser, Backchannel Messages, Box 7, Southeast Asia, 4/75, Incoming. Confidential; Eyes Only.

336. Memorandum From W.R. Smyser of the National Security Council Staff to Secretary of State Kissinger, Washington, April 21, 1975.

Washington, April 21, 1975

Smyser recommended that the United States reassure Marcos.

Source: Ford Library, National Security Adviser, Presidential Country Files for East Asia and the Pacific, Box 15, Philippines (2). Secret. Sent for immediate action. Although neither recommendation was initialed, a handwritten notation on the first page reads, “Taken care of per Gen S.” Attached but not published are Tab A, the draft backchannel telegram from the White House to Simon; Tab B, telegram 2681, April 18, from the Department of Treasury to the Department of State; and Tab C, telegram 090638, April 20, to Manila.

337. Memorandum From Jan Lodal of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Deputy Assistant for National Security Affairs (Scowcroft), Washington, May 7, 1975.

Washington, May 7, 1975

[1 page not declassified.]

Source: Library of Congress, Henry Kissinger Papers, Chronological File, 1969–1975, TS 9, May 1975. Top Secret; Sensitive.

338. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, July 10, 1975, 10:30 a.m.

Washington, July 10, 1975, 10:30 a.m.

Scowcroft and Sullivan discussed relations between the United States and the Philippines.

Source: Ford Library, National Security Adviser, Presidential Country Files for East Asia and the Pacific, Box 15, Philippines (3). Secret; Sensitive. Scowcroft’s talking points, July 9, from Smyser are in the Library of Congress, Henry Kissinger Papers, Chronological File, 1969–1975, TS 10, July 1975.

339. Memorandum From John Froebe of the National Security Council Staff to Secretary of State Kissinger, Washington, August 8, 1975.

Washington, August 8, 1975

Froebe recommended that Scowcroft refuse a short notice meeting between Mrs. Marcos and Mrs. Ford.

Source: Ford Library, National Security Adviser, Presidential Country Files for East Asia and the Pacific, Box 15, Philippines (3). Secret. Sent for action. Scowcroft initialed his approval of the sending of a draft State cable to Sullivan. Attached but not published are Tab A, the draft cable to Sullivan, and Tab B, the August 7 backchannel telegram from Sullivan. A handwritten notation on the first page indicates that at 10:30 p.m. on August 8, the NSC staff directed the Department of State to send the telegram.

340. Minutes of the Secretary of State’s Staff Meeting, Washington, September 22, 1975, 8 a.m..

Washington, September 22, 1975, 8 a.m.

Habib told Kissinger about a cut in U.S. aid for the Philippines that the White House had approved.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Transcripts of Secretary of State Kissinger’s Staff Meetings, 1973–1977, E5177, Box 8. Secret.

341. Editorial Note.

342. Editorial Note.

343. Telegram 81789 From the Department of State to the Embassy in the Philippines, April 5, 1976, 2357Z.

April 5, 1976, 2357Z

The Department of State reported on a meeting between Habib and Virata that covered economic aspects of the U.S.-Philippines relationship.

Source: National Archives, Record Group 59, Central Foreign Policy Files. Secret; Limdis. Repeated to the MTN Delegation in Geneva and to CINCPAC in Honolulu. Drafted by Willner, Country Officer for the Philippines; cleared by Edmond; and approved by Habib. The memorandum of conversation is in the Ford Library, National Security Adviser, NSC Staff for East Asia and Pacific Affairs, Convenience Files, Box 10.

344. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, April 10, 1976, 11 a.m.

Washington, April 10, 1976, 11 a.m.

Kissinger, Habib, and Sullivan discussed the U.S. base negotiations with the Philippines.

Source: National Archives, Record Group 59, Secretary of State Kissinger’s Lot File, E5403, Box 16. Top Secret; Nodis. Fleck drafted the memorandum. The meeting occurred in Kissinger’s office.

345. Memorandum From Thomas J. Barnes of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Scowcroft), Washington, April 12, 1976..

Washington, April 12, 1976.

Barnes described the opening session of the U.S.-Philippine base negotiations.

Source: Ford Library, National Security Adviser, Presidential Country Files for East Asia and the Pacific, Box 15, Philippines (4). Confidential. Urgent; Sent for information. Attached but not published are Tab A, an undated briefing memorandum from Habib to Kissinger providing a list of participants at the session, and Tab B, the undated statement of Romulo. Tab C, the press statement, is not attached.

346. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, April 13, 1976, 11:08–11:30 a.m.

Washington, April 13, 1976, 11:08–11:30 a.m.

Ford, Romulo, and Kissinger discussed U.S. politics and the base negotiations.

Source: Ford Library, National Security Adviser, Memoranda of Conversation, April 13, 1976. Secret; Nodis. The meeting was held in the Oval Office. Ford’s talking points from Scowcroft, which the President saw, assert that the meeting “is meant as a courtesy call to welcome Secretary Romulo to the United States and to underline the importance you attach to our military base negotiations which began on April 12, as well as our bilateral economic negotiations which started March 29.”

347. Telegram 9671 From the Embassy in the Philippines to the Department of State, July 3, 1976, 0628Z.

July 3, 1976, 0628Z

The Embassy in Manila reported on the base negotiations between the United States and the Philippines.

Source: National Archives, Record Group 59, Central Foreign Policy Files. Confidential; Exdis; Stadis; Eyes Only.

348. Telegram 169597 From the Department of State to the Embassy in the Philippines, July 8, 1976, 2313Z.

July 8, 1976, 2313Z

The Department responded to Sullivan’s telegram about the Philippine base negotiations and emphasized that the United States Government was not wedded to a particular negotiating schedule.

Source: National Archives, Record Group 59, Central Foreign Policy Files. Secret; Priority; Exdis; Stadis. Drafted by O’Donohue; cleared by Vortiz and Gleysteen; and approved by Habib. Telegram 10024 from Manila, July 10, contains Sullivan’s expectations and scenario on the upcoming negotiations and includes his view that any agreement will be expensive for the United States.

349. Memorandum From Thomas J. Barnes of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Scowcroft), Washington, August 6, 1976..

Washington, August 6, 1976.

Barnes described the Marcos-Robinson meeting of August 6 and speculated on Philippine negotiating strategy for the base negotiations.

Source: Ford Library, National Security Adviser, Presidential Country Files for East Asia and the Pacific, Box 15, Philippines (5). Secret. Sent for urgent information. Scowcroft initialed the memorandum. At Tab A was telegram 11763 from Manila, August 6, describing Robinson’s meeting with Marcos. At Tab B was telegram 11733 from Manila, August 6, describing Marcos’ earlier meeting with Robinson and Sullivan. At Tab C was the aide memoire from Marcos contained in telegram 11734 from Manila, August 6. At Tab D was Romulo’s August 3 interview with the London Times.

350. Minutes of the Secretary of State’s Staff Meeting, Washington, August 16, 1976, 8:10 a.m..

Washington, August 16, 1976, 8:10 a.m.

Kissinger and his staff discussed the base negotiations with Marcos.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Transcripts of Secretary of State Kissinger’s Staff Meetings, 1973–1977, E5177, Box 11. Secret. The meeting was held in the Secretary’s conference room of the Department of State.

351. Memorandum From William Gleysteen of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Scowcroft), Washington, September 2, 1976.

Washington, September 2, 1976

Gleysteen gave Scowcroft an account of the Philippine base negotiations

Source: Ford Library, National Security Adviser, NSC Staff for East Asia and Pacific Affairs Convenience File, Box 31, Next Steps in the Philippine Base Negotiations. Secret. Hyland initialed the approve option on behalf of Scowcroft. At the end of the document, after the phrase “hold off any specific,” Hyland wrote, “or a memo to President first.” An NSC meeting to discuss both the Philippine base negotiations and assistance to Zaire was scheduled, but then cancelled and not rescheduled. (Ford Library, NSC Institutional Files (H-Files), Box H–25, NSC Meetings)

352. Letter From Secretary of Defense Rumsfeld to Secretary of State Kissinger, Washington, September 13, 1976.

Washington, September 13, 1976

Rumsfeld expressed his views on the base negotiations and indicated he was willing to meet Romulo later in the month.

Source: Washington National Records Center, OASD/ISA Files: FRC 330–79–0037, Philippines, 680.1–, August–December 1976. Secret.

353. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Scowcroft) to President Ford, Washington, undated.

Washington, undated

Scowcroft presented Ford with key issues in our base negotiations with the Philippines.

Source: Ford Library, NSC Institutional Files (H-Files), Box H–40, NSSM 235, U.S. Interests and Objectives in the Asia-Pacific Region (2 of 2) (10). Secret. Sent for action. The memorandum was probably written shortly before Kissinger’s October 6 meeting with Romulo. Ford initialed his approval of the recommendations concerning the Reed Bank, option one concerning compensation, and timing. Tab B, presenting Marcos’s request, and Tab F, the maps, are not attached.

354. Telegram 250861 From the Department of State to the Embassy in the Philippines, October 8, 1976, 1609Z.

October 8, 1976, 1609Z

The Department reported on Kissinger’s discussion with Romulo.

Source: Library of Congress, Henry Kissinger Papers, CL 205, Philippines, 1974–76. Secret; Immediate; Nodis. Fleck drafted, David Passage of S cleared, and Hummel approved the telegram.

355. Memorandum From Kenneth M. Quinn of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Scowcroft), Washington, October 8, 1976.

Washington, October 8, 1976

[text not declassified in time for publication]

Source: Ford Library, National Security Adviser, Presidential Country Files for East Asia and the Pacific, Box 15, Philippines (5). Secret; Sensitive. Sent for information. Scowcroft initialed the upper right hand corner of the document. Theodore Shackley, the Associate Deputy Director for Operations at the CIA, produced a memorandum for the record, October 4, describing the meeting between Romulo and Bush. ( Central Intelligence Agency, OPI 10 [Executive Registry], Job 79M00467A, Box 23, Folder Number 15, P – 9: Philippines [426])

356. Telegram 267549 From the Department of State to the Embassy in the Philippines, November 24, 1976, 0015Z.

November 24, 1976, 0015Z

The Department reported on Kissinger’s November 23 meeting with Romulo.

Source: Ford Library, National Security Adviser, Presidential Country Files for East Asia and the Pacific, Box 16, Philippines, State Department Telegrams From SECSTATE-NODIS. Secret; Immediate; Nodis. Drafted by Fleck; cleared by Hummel and Sebastian; approved by Habib. Telegram 287342 to Manila, November 23, provides the verbatim text of the aide-memoire that Romulo gave to Kissinger. (National Archives, Record Group 59, Central Foreign Policy Files)

357. Telegram 18586 From the Embassy in the Philippines to the Department of State, November 29, 1976, 0824Z.

November 29, 1976, 0824Z

The Embassy in Manila analyzed the negotiations between the United States and the Philippines.

Source: Ford Library, National Security Adviser, Presidential Country Files for East Asia and the Pacific, Box 16, Philippines, State Department Telegrams To SECSTATE–NODIS (2). Secret; Nodis.

358. Telegram 293490 From the Department of State to the Embassy in the Philippines, December 2, 1976, 0118Z.

December 2, 1976, 0118Z

The Department reported on Kissinger’s December 1 discussion with Romulo.

Source: Library of Congress, Henry Kissinger Papers, CL 277, Memoranda of Conversations, Chronological File, December 1976. Secret; Immediate; Nodis. Drafted and approved by Habib. At a 9:59 a.m. meeting with Ford and Scowcroft on December 3, Kissinger said, “We will announce agreement in principle with the Philippines Saturday. We offered them $1 billion and they asked for $2 billion. I said okay, deal with Carter. Then I told Romulo he was crazy; Carter would badger them on human rights, etc. He bought our proposals in Mexico City totally.” (Ford Library, National Security Adviser, Memoranda of Conversation, Box 21)

359. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Scowcroft) to President Ford, Washington, December 3, 1976.

Washington, December 3, 1976

Scowcroft presented Ford with information on the Philippine base negotiations.

Source: Ford Library, National Security Adviser, NSC Staff for East Asia and Pacific Affairs Convenience File, Box 31, Breakthrough in Philippine Base Negotiations. Secret; Sensitive. Sent for information. Ford initialed the memorandum. The draft of the joint U.S.-Philippine statement is ibid., Presidential Country Files for East Asia and the Pacific, Box 15, Philippines (5)

360. Telegram 295628 From the Department of State to the Embassy in the Philippines, December 4, 1976, 0159Z.

December 4, 1976, 0159Z

Habib transmitted to Sullivan an account of the collapse of negotiations.

Source: National Archives, Record Group 59, Central Foreign Policy Files. Secret; Niact; Immediate. Drafted and approved by Habib; cleared in S/S.

361. Telegram 19864 From the Embassy in the Philippines to the Department of State, December 23, 1976, 0900Z.

December 23, 1976, 0900Z

The Embassy in Manila reported the Philippine negotiating position and recommended that the new U.S. administration consider paying rental for bases in the Philippines.

Source: National Archives, Record Group 59, Central Foreign Policy Files. Secret; Nodis.

362. Letter From Secretary of Defense Rumsfeld to Secretary of State Kissinger, Washington, December 29, 1976.

Washington, December 29, 1976

Rumsfeld recommended that Kissinger direct Sullivan to inform Marcos that the United States is unwilling to pay rent for its bases in the Philippines.

Source: Washington National Records Center, OSD Files: FRC 330–79–0049, Philippines, 323.3, 29 December 1976. Secret.

314. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, January 5, 1973, 3:30 p.m. 314. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, January 5, 1973, 3:30 p.m. 1

Washington, January 5, 1973, 3:30 p.m.

MEMORANDUM
THE WHITE HOUSE
WASHINGTON

MEMORANDUM OF CONVERSATION

PARTICIPANTS:

President Nixon

Carlos P. Romulo, Secretary for Foreign Affairs of the Philippines

Richard T. Kennedy, Acting Assistant to President for National Security Affairs

DATE AND TIME: Friday, January 5, 1973 3:30 p.m.
PLACE: The Oval Office

Romulo: Congratulations on your election victory.

The President: I'm glad you recovered from your accident. You're a strong man.

Romulo: It's hard to kill weeds.

The President: Do you follow American politics?

Romulo: Very closely.

The President: I wanted you to know you are here because you're an old friend.

Romulo: Of long standing.

The President: [Reminisced] I hope things are quieting down.

Romulo: Yes. The politicians have surrendered their arms.

The President: I told the people here we are not going to lecture you. You can't have anarchy. You once told me that The Philippines had taken all our faults and improved on them.

Romulo: I'm affected. I'm a landowner. We've cleaned up the cities. Democracy is for a mature developed society. In a developing society you need some restraint.

The President: How true.

Romulo: The editorial board of the New York Times — the power of the press — they went after you and repudiated you.

The President: Years ago we discussed the People's Republic of China. You alone said it was time for the US to take a new look.

Romulo: It was masterful. It has relaxed tensions in the area.

The President: Some said they were worried for the non-Communist countries.

Romulo: No, it's strengthened us. It showed the PRC would rather have the US in the Formosa Strait than the USSR. Japan knows she can be killed in a nuclear war, and this affects a restraint. Their [Japan] national discipline is the greatest in the world.

The President: Let me say one thing about Vietnam. We are doing the best we can. I have sent Kissinger to go to Paris against all odds. What we want is a ceasefire, return of our prisoners, and a political process to let the South Vietnamese people determine their own future. In October North Vietnam said they had agreed and it was true, but then after the elections they backed away. I then returned to bombing — two days before the first of the year they said we can talk again. We are serious if they are; we'll make a deal. My view is that it's up to the other side whether they want to settle. Our role down will be reduced. The South Vietnamese can handle themselves. The question is: Can we have an honorable peace so we can take another road.

Romulo: We were worried. First he said peace is at hand and then he explained to the press that it wasn't. President Marcos realized the US did its best and they filibustered. This is the Communists' way of negotiation.

The President: We want to end the war. Your interest is that our withdrawal not be a bug-out, but an honorable settlement — a ceasefire in place and a political settlement. President Thieu wants more — he wants to kill all Communists.

Romulo: We know you want out of the war.

The President: But not out of Asia.

Romulo: You said it well at Guam. Your presence has to remain; otherwise there is a vacuum. The Chinese, or Russia, or Japan would try to fill it.

The President: None of the others are strong enough, except Japan or the US.

Romulo: We'd rather it be the US than any others.

The President: We want to help others to help themselves.

Romulo: You were right to say that American manpower shouldn't be in Asia in war. We are happy you are the head of this country. Of all the Presidents I have met, you are the most knowledgeable about Asia.

The President: You are very kind.

Romulo: President Marcos instructed me to give you his best wishes.

The President: Please carry to him my respect. We will keep in the closest touch. Do what he needs to do; we understand his situation. We may make a change in our Embassy but we'll have a very strong man.

Romulo: Byroad is highly respected. I wish you had Bush in the UN. He's a good man.

The President: Scali is a very good man. He knows the world. Bush is needed in the party.

Romulo: I'm signing a loan for a $70 million education loan in the IBRD. There are too many lawyers — now we'll have vocational and agricultural training.

The President: We have lots of vocational training here. It gives a great education.

Romulo: We have too many politicians.

The President: Here is an ash tray. Have some.

Romulo: Yes. How is Mrs. Nixon?

The President: She's fine. She's in California.

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 1026, Presidential/HAK Memcons, January–March 1973. Secret; Nodis. At the time Nixon and Romulo met, the Philippines had been under martial law since September 1972 and the Filipino army was fighting rebels in the Sula Archipelago.

315. Telegram 0823 From the Embassy in the Philippines to the Department of State, January 22, 1973, 1000Z. 315. Telegram 0823 From the Embassy in the Philippines to the Department of State, January 22, 1973, 1000Z.1

January 22, 1973, 1000Z

TELEGRAM
Department of State
MANILA 0823

P 221000Z JAN 73

FM AMEMBASSY MANILA
TO SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 2647
DOD
CINCPAC

CINCPAC EXCLUSIVE FOR ADMIRAL GAYLER AND POLAD

IT IS TIME NOW TO SETTLE BACK AND EXAMINE WHERE WE ARE IN THE PHILIPPINES AND WHAT, IF ANYTHING, WE CAN AND SHOULD DO ABOUT THE CHANGED SITUATION. THIS MESSAGE WILL DEVOTE ITSELF ENTIRELY TO SOME OF THE MANY ELEMENTS WE MUST KEEP IN MIND AS WE TRY TO THINK THINGS THROUGH. THEY ARE LISTED BELOW AS OFTEN UNRELATED "ITEMS," NOT NECESSARILY IN ANY ORDER OF PRIORITY.

ITEM NO. 1: DEVELOPMENTS SOMEWHAT ALONG THE LINES OF WHAT HAS HAPPENED HERE PROBABLY HAD TO HAPPEN AT SOME TIME. THE STATEMENT OF MARCOS THAT THIS IS A "SICK SOCIETY" IS NO EXAGGERATION, ALTHOUGH THERE ARE THOSE THAT WOULD ADD THAT HE IS MERELY THE LATEST OF A LONG LINE OF PREDECESSORS THAT HELPED MAKE IT SO. BE THAT AS IT MAY, THE MERE FACT THAT AN HONEST NATIONWIDE PLEBISCITE ON THE QUESTION OF "STATEHOOD-USA" WOULD PROBABLY HAVE WON IS AMPLE INDICATION OF FRUSTRATIONS OF THE MASSES AT THEIR OWN SYSTEM. I DO NOT BELIEVE WE SHOULD CRY TOO MUCH OVER A TEMPORARY LOSS OF DEMOCRACY AS IT WORKED IN THE PHILIPPINES, AS DEMOCRACY IS DEEPLY ROOTED AND PREDICTABLY WILL RETURN IN TIME AND ONE WOULD HOPE IN A MORE EFFECTIVE MANNER. THE QUESTION BEFORE US, THEREFORE, IS REALLY WHETHER THIS IS THE RIGHT TIME, WHETHER THIS IS THE RIGHT MAN, AND WHETHER HE IS DOING IT THE RIGHT WAY.

ITEM NO 2: IS IT THE RIGHT TIME? I WOULD SAY THERE IS NOTHING WRONG AS REGARDS TIMING. IF CHANGE HAD TO COME TO THE PHILIPPINES, PROBABLY BETTER NOW THAN LATER, BECAUSE THE TREND WAS SO BAD THAT DELAY MIGHT HAVE INCREASED THE CHANCES A CHANGE WOULD BE MORE VIOLENT AND BLOODY, WHICH SO FAR HAS NOT BEEN THAT CASE.

ITEM NO. 3: IS THIS THE RIGHT MAN? MARCOS IS WITHOUT DOUBT THE MOST CAPABLE MAN OF ANYONE ON THE SCENE WHO HAD ANY CHANCE TO BE IN POWER AT THIS POINT IN TIME IN THE PHILIPPINES. AND YET HE STARTS HIS TASK WITH VERY LOW CREDIBILITY INDEED, AND THERE ARE ELEMENTS OF BOTH CONCERN AND FEAR AMONG THE POPULACE AS TO HIS INTENTIONS. THIS CREDIBILITY QUESTION RELATES BOTH TO THE SINCERITY OF THESE INTENTIONS AND HIS CAPABILITY TO CARRY THEM OUT. TO SAY THAT THIS IS UNFORTUNATE IS REALLY AN UNDERSTATEMENT — BECAUSE THIS IS REALLY THE NUB OF THE PROBLEM.

ITEM NO 4: IS HE DOING THE RIGHT THINGS? AS FAR AS THE DIRECTION OF HIS PROGRAM OF REFORM IS CONCERNED, THE ANSWER IS GENERALLY YES. HOWEVER, HIS PROGRAM, WHILE PRAISEWORTHY, IS PROBABLY OVERAMBITIOUS AND THERE IS SOME DANGER THAT THE LIMITED RESOURCES AND TALENTS AVAILABLE TO ACCOMPLISH IT MIGHT BE DISSIPATED IN AN EFFORT TO DO TOO MUCH WITH TOO LITTLE. I WILL NOT TAKE UP SPACE BY LISTING THE STEPS HE HAS ALREADY TAKEN THAT ARE BENEFICIAL AND THAT ARE WIDELY ACCEPTABLE. SOME, LIKE THE PICKING UP OF GUNS AND DISBANDMENT OF PRIVATE ARMIES ARE NEARLY FINISHED. OTHERS, LIKE GETTING RID OF THE INEFFICIENT AND CORRUPT ARE ONLY PARTIALLY UNDERWAY. HE WILL HAVE TO CONTINUE PROGRAMS SUCH AS THESE AND AT A HIGHER AND HIGHER LEVEL IN GOVERNMENT UNTIL IT REACHES THE TOP TO REGAIN HIS MUCH NEEDED CREDIBILITY.

ITEM NO. 5. NO ONE WANTS THE SYSTEM TO RETURN AS IT WAS BEFORE. IN ANY HONEST REFERENDUM IN THE PHILIPPINES THE PEOPLE WOULD HAVE VOTED FOR THE CONTINUATION OF MARTIAL LAW, EXPRESSED THEIR DISGUST IN GENERAL AT POLITICIANS, AND VOTED OVERWHELMINGLY FOR SIGNIFICANT CHANGE IN THE STATE OF SOCIETY. THERE ARE VERY FEW VOICES OF DISAPPROVAL THAT EVEN SENATORS AND CONGRESSMEN ARE NOW OUT OF A JOB.

ITEM NO. 6: CONTRARY TO USUAL PATTERN, CHANGE HERE SO FAR HAS NOT BEEN ACCOMPANIED BY XENOPHOBIA AND NATIONALISM WITH ANTI-FOREIGN TONES. QUITE THE OPPOSITE IS TRUE, AND THIS IS SIMPLY BECAUSE MARCOS KNOWS THAT HE NEEDS FOREIGN INVESTMENT TO HELP THE COUNTRY DEVELOP. IT IS FOR THIS REASON THAT HE TOOK A HAND IN DRAFTING THE NEW CONSTITUTION TO MAKE IT MORE FAVORABLE TO FOREIGN INTERESTS, PARTICULARLY U.S., THAN THE OLD CONSTITUTION.

ITEM NO 7: IF MARCOS FAILS, OR SOMETHING HAPPENS TO HIM THE NEW CONSTITUTION WILL PROBABLY (AND PARTICULARLY DUE TO HIS MANNER OF RATIFICATION) BE TORN UP BY SUCCESSORS. ANY SUCCEEDING CONSTITUTION UNDER THESE CIRCUMSTANCES WOULD ALMOST CERTAINLY BE MORE NATIONALISTIC AND LESS FAVORABLE TO FOREIGN INTERESTS.

ITEM NO. 8: IF MARCOS FAILS, OR IF SOMETHING ELSE HAPPENS TO TAKE HIM OFF THE SCENE, WE COULD BE FACED WITH A CHAOTIC SITUATION. THERE IS ALREADY ALMOST NOTHING LEFT OF THE TRADITIONAL PARTY STRUCTURE THAT COULD TAKE OVER IN ANY ORGANIZED SORT OF WAY. THE ULTIMATE RESULT MIGHT BE THAT THE MILITARY, ALMOST BY NECESSITY, WOULD HAVE TO TAKE OVER COMPLETELY. THERE WOULD BE PREDICTABLE SPLITS WITHIN THEIR RANKS AND THEIR STRENGTH AND CAPABILITY IS NOT ALL THAT GOOD IN ANY EVENT. AND THE COUNTRY WOULD BE FACED IN TIME WITH THE INEVITABLE PROPOSITION THAT ONCE THE MILITARY HAVE TASTED POWER TO THE EXTENT THEY MIGHT NOW WILLINGLY AGREE WITHIN SOME REASONABLE AND SHORT PERIOD TO GO BACK TO THE BARRACKS AND THE PARADE GROUND. SINCE THEY WOULD HAVE TO RELY ON THE SUPPORT OF CONSERVATIVE POLITICAL ELEMENTS, THIS COULD ACCENTUATE A TREND TOWARD THE POLARIZATION OF POLITICAL FORCES IN THE PHILIPPINES WHICH MIGHT WELL HAVE ALREADY BEGUN UNDER MARCOS' PERSONAL RULE.

THE FOLLOWING ITEMS PERTAIN MORE DIRECTLY TO U.S. INTERESTS HERE:

ITEM NO. 9: THE UNITED STATES HAS AN ENORMOUS STAKE IN THE PHILIPPINES. CLARK AND SUBIC ALONE ARE VERY MUCH NEEDED LOGISTIC BASES FOR SUPPORT OF FUTURE MOBILE FORCES IN THE PACIFIC. AS THE YEARS GO BY THEIR RELATIVE REPEAT RELATIVE IMPORTANCE IN OUR PACIFIC POSTURE WILL IN MY OPINION GO UP, AND NOT DOWN. OUR MILITARY INSTALLATIONS HERE ALONE UNDOUBTEDLY REPRESENT INVESTMENTS OF OVER TWO BILLIONS OF DOLLARS. THEY HAVE BEEN BUILT UP OVER THE YEARS WHEN LABOR AND MATERIALS WERE FAR CHEAPER THAN TODAY. REPLACEMENT ELSEWHERE AT TODAY'S COSTS WOULD RUN INTO SEVERAL TIMES THAT MUCH. OUR POSTURE IN THE PACIFIC WOULD BE GREATLY IMPAIRED WHILE SUCH A PROCESS WAS GOING ON, AND EVEN BEYOND THAT WOULD BE PERMANENTLY IMPAIRED BY LOSS OF THE STRATEGIC POSITION OF THE PHILIPPINES.

ITEM NO 10: JUST AS THE MILITARY INSTALLATIONS HERE SERVE AS A LOGISTIC BASE FOR OUR PRESENCE IN THE WESTERN PACIFIC, SO DOES THIS MISSION ITSELF, FOR THE LARGEST ELEMENT OF ITS STRENGTH IS ENGAGED IN REGIONAL ACTIVITY. WE HAVE 20 U.S. FEDERAL AGENCIES OPERATING IN MANILA, WITH EIGHT OFFICES HAVING REGIONAL RESPONSIBILITIES. AS ONLY ONE EXAMPLE, ALL OF OUR COMMUNICATIONS FROM KOREA TO INDIA ARE PROCESSED THROUGH FACILITIES IN THE PHILIPPINES. THE VOA INSTALLATIONS HERE ARE DESIGNED FOR ALL OF EAST ASIA, AND WE HAVE RECENTLY BEEN TOLD OF THEIR INCREASING IMPORTANCE FROM A WASHINGTON POINT OF VIEW AFTER WE LEAVE INDOCHINA. WE CAN ONLY MAKE THE ROUGHEST KIND OF ESTIMATE OF THE EXTENT OF THE DOLLAR VALUE OF U.S. NON-MILITARY HOLDING HERE, BUT THEY CERTAINLY WOULD RUN INTO HUNDREDS OF MILLIONS OF DOLLARS. THEIR REAL IMPORTANCE, HOWEVER, CAN IN NOW WAY BE TIED TO THE COST VALUE ALONE.

ITEM NO. 11: THE EFFECTIVE UTILIZATION OF ALL OUR FACILITIES HERE, OF COURSE, REQUIRES A TOLERABLE STATE OF SECURITY AND LAW AND ORDER, A STATE OF FRIENDLY RELATIONS WITH THE FILIPINO PEOPLE, BUT BEYOND THAT GOOD RELATIONS WITH THE PHILIPPINE GOVERNMENT ITSELF.

ITEM NO. 12: OUR AID PROGRAM HERE IS AN UNUSUAL ONE AND IS UNUSUALLY EFFECTIVE. IT IS AIMED STRICTLY TOWARDS THE LITTLE MAN IN THE PROVINCES, AND THE GRATITUDE AND FRIENDSHIP WE RECEIVE IN RETURN IS VERY NOTICEABLE AND TOUCHING. MARCOS HAS LET US BYPASS MANILA AND DEVISE WAYS THAT EFFECTIVELY PROHIBIT GRAFT IN OUR PROGRAMS. HE WINCES A BIT AT TIME OVER THE FACT THAT WE OFTEN GET MORE CREDIT THAN WE PERHAPS DESERVE, AND THE GOVERNMENT SOMETIMES GETS LESS. IT IS A FACT OF LIFE THAT WE DO GET THE CREDIT, EVEN WHERE A MAJORITY OF THE FUNDING IS LOCAL, SIMPLY BECAUSE PEOPLE THINK THE ACCOMPLISHMENTS WOULD NOT BE MADE IF WE WERE NOT THERE.

ITEM NO 13: OUR MILITARY ASSISTANCE HERE IS MODEST AND INSUFFICIENT TO MEET THEIR REAL NEEDS. THE PROPOSITIONS OF MILITARY PERSONNEL TO THE CIVILIAN POPULATION AND OF THE MILITARY BUDGET TO NATIONAL EXPENDITURE ARE VERY SMALL IN THE PHILIPPINES, AND MUST BE INCREASED IF THE MILITARY ARE TO CARRY OUT ALL OF THEIR INTERNALLY ASSIGNED ROLES.

ITEM NO 14: WE ARE LONGER AS IN THE PAST, SITTING HERE ALONE IN THE PHILIPPINES AND PAYING THE WHOLE BILL. THE INTERNATIONAL CONSORTIUM IDEA IS WORKING AND OUR OWN DIRECT CONTRIBUTION HAS FALLEN BELOW 50 PERCENT (IT WAS BELOW A THIRD BEFORE FLOOD RELIEF) WHICH IS ONE OF THE MOST ENCOURAGING THINGS THAT HAS HAPPENED SINCE I HAVE BEEN HERE.

ITEM NO. 15: THE STATE OF OUR RELATIONSHIP HERE HAS IMPROVED BY 100 PERCENT SINCE EARLY 1970. MARCOS, I AM SURE FOR REASONS OF HIS OWN, PUT OUT THE WORD THROUGHOUT THE GOVERNMENT TO BE HELPFUL AND COOPERATIVE WITH AMERICANS. OUR DAILY WORKING RELATIONSHIPS WITH ALL OF THE MINISTRIES HAVE NEVER BEEN AS GOOD AS THEY ARE NOW, OR EVEN BEFORE MARTIAL LAW. HE HAS INTERVENED PERSONALLY, ON DELICATE MATTERS THAT WERE DIFFICULT FOR HIM UNDER THE OLD SYSTEM AND ITS PRESS, TO HELP US ON MANY ACTIONS ON MATTERS AFFECTING THE BASES AND THEIR STRATEGIC ROLE, AS WELL AS WITH OUR BUSINESS INTERESTS. HE HAS DONE ALL OF THESE THINGS EVEN WHILE SMARTING UNDER IT, IN THE BELIEF THAT WE TAKE THE PHILIPPINES TOO MUCH FOR GRANTED, SLIGHTING THEM ON SUCH VITAL MATTERS AS MILITARY ASSISTANCE.

ITEM NO 16: IF THINGS GO WELL I WOULD PREDICT WE COULD GET A SATISFACTORY NEW MILITARY BASES AGREEMENT WITH MARCOS, AND PROBABLY AS SOON AS THINGS SETTLE DOWN TO THE POINT WHERE THERE IS TIME FOR HIM TO UNDERTAKE IT. UNLESS WE CAN CHANGE OUR OWN POSTURE AS REGARDS FUTURE ECONOMIC RELATIONS, WE ARE HEADED FOR TROUBLE, BUT HOPEFULLY SOMEHOW OR OTHER WE CAN WORK THIS ONE OUT.

ITEM NO 17: IF MARCOS SEES THAT HE IS GOING TO FAIL HE MAY VERY LIKELY BECOME HIMSELF XENOPHOBIC AND PERHAPS ANTI-AMERICAN. IN THE EXTREME, IF THIS SHOULD HAPPEN, HARASSMENT AROUND THE BASES AND AGAINST AMERICAN INVESTMENT WOULD REACH THE POINT WHERE THIS WOULD NOT BE A VERY NICE PLACE TO WORK AND LIVE.

THE ABOVE LIST COULD, OF COURSE, GO ON AND ON TO THE POINT WHERE CABLE TRANSMISSION WOULD BE PROHIBITIVE. THE STAKES HERE ARE VERY HIGH, AND MANY MATTERS OF IMPORTANCE HAVE NOT BEEN ADDRESSED ABOVE. BUT IT IS ITEMS SUCH AS THE ABOVE THAT WE MUST PUNCH INTO THE COMPUTERS, BEFORE WE TRY TO GET OUT ANY ANSWERS.

EXEMPT GDS 58 (3)
BYROADE

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Institutional Files (H-Files), Box H–192, NSSM 155 [2 of 2]. Secret; Exdis. Repeated Priority to DOD and CINCPAC.

316. Memorandum From the Acting Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs (Eagleburger) to Secretary of Defense Richardson, Washington, March 15, 1973. 316. Memorandum From the Acting Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs (Eagleburger) to Secretary of Defense Richardson, Washington, March 15, 1973.1

Washington, March 15, 1973

ASSISTANT SECRETARY OF DEFENSE
WASHINGTON, D.C. 20301

15 MAR 1973

In reply refer to: 1-34141/73

MEMORANDUM FOR THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE
SUBJECT: The Philippines and Muslim Conflict (U)

(U) This memorandum summarizes the subject situation for your information.

(C-NF) Ambassador Byroade and Admiral Gayler have reflected President Marcos' fears of the renewed threat to GOP stability caused by Muslim activities in Mindanao and surrounding areas. Both the Ambassador and CINCPAC have requested increased military assistance. DOD and State have provided token assistance (expedited deliveries of selected equipment) and are studying the ramifications of increased U.S. involvement related to the internal situation.

(C-NF) The problem is one of religion and Muslim fanaticism. For four hundred years the Muslims in the Sulu area have successfully resisted non-Muslim influence. The normally hostile situation has been aggravated by Marcos' attempts to restore a climate of law and order (collection of weapons) and the simmering feud between the Governments of Malaysia and the Philippines over sovereignty of Sabah (formerly North Borneo). The active Muslim insurgents are estimated to number sixteen to seventeen thousand distributed among Cotabato, Sulu, Two Zamboangas, Two Landaos, and South Cotabato. Some 6,000 to 7,000 of the rebels are armed with variety of rifles, machine guns, mortars, rockets and land mines. The GOP reports Muslim munitions sources as Malaysia, Pakistan and Libya.

(C-NF) Immediate and positive reaction by the U.S. in providing marked increased MAP support to the GOP is not considered warranted at this time as:

- The Muslim threat cannot be considered as an immediate and real danger to U.S. interests, at least at this time.

- Repercussions, both national and worldwide, would follow any large scale U.S. assistance in suppression of a religious minority within a dictatorially governed nation.

(C-NF) However, continuation of our Military Assistance Program with adjustments to reflect the new GOP requirements within programmed dollar levels should be handled as a routine manner without publicity.

(C-NF) CINCPAC has, with Embassy concurrence, initially requested expeditious delivery of two programmed UH-1H helicopters and reprogramming of the Philippine MAP program to enable delivery of five additional UH-1H's and associated gun systems. DOD has responded by air shipping the two programmed UH-1H helicopters, air shipping 1140 programmed M-16 rifles, and making available four excess C-47's as replacement aircraft or source of needed spare parts.

(C-NF) The provision of the five additional UH-1Hs and other CINCPAC approved program changes will be reviewed by State and within DOD, and any reprogramming or expediting deliveries will be kept on a "business as usual" level, while maintaining a posture of non-interference in internal GOP affairs.

(C-NF) In addition to the above actions, we have received an extensive shopping list presented to our Embassy by the GOP. Presumably, this list represents a GOP request for grant aid (MAP) in addition to that now programmed as planned through FY 73. We are analyzing the list and are awaiting CINCPAC comments on it.

(C-NF) Given the current state of FY 73 MAP funds, it will be extremely difficult for us to do more than already programmed (although adjustments within the program are possible). Nor am I certain that it would be advisable for us to do more. In any event, we will be back to you after we have examined the new GOP requests.

[signed]
Laurence Eagleburger
Acting Assistant Secretary

1 Source: Washington National Records Center, OSD Files: FRC 330–78–0001, Philippines, 091.3, 15 March 1973. Confidential; Noforn. The bottom of the memorandum is stamped, “Sec has seen. 17 Mar 1973.”

317. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to President Nixon, Washington, March 16, 1973. 317. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to President Nixon, Washington, March 16, 1973.1

Washington, March 16, 1973

MEMORANDUM
THE WHITE HOUSE
WASHINGTON
ACTION

March 16, 1973

MEMORANDUM FOR: THE PRESIDENT
FROM: HENRY A. KISSINGER [HK initialed]
SUBJECT: Review of U.S. policy towards the Philippines

An SRO meeting was held on November 30 to consider the interdepartmental response to our NSSM of last June asking for a review of U.S. policy toward the Philippines. The review was undertaken to consider actions which we might take in the face of growing political uncertainties in the Philippines, to protect our access to U.S. military bases and our substantial trade with (not quite $800 million) and private investment in (approaching $1 billion) that country, as well as to express our basic concern for Philippine long-term stability. Growing Philippine nationalism, finding its voice in the Constitutional Convention's redrafting of the 1936 Constitution, threatened unacceptable restrictions on our base access and on U.S. private investment. Marcos, suffering from badly reduced political support and widely accused of wanting to perpetuate himself in power, resorted to the nationalistic ploy of asking for a basic review of all Philippine treaties and agreements with the U.S. Civil disorder continued the slow slide toward what Marcos and many others feared would become a revolution from the extreme left within the next decade.

President Marcos' imposition of martial law in late September, however, somewhat changed the nature of the policy problem we faced last June. Essentially, Marcos' action greatly increased his control over the government and country, but also made him more dependent on us. He now must look to us for important political support and for what may be critical assistance to the basic reform program on which he has staked his political future.

SRG Consensus

The SRG meeting resulted in a consensus on the following major points of policy: — There is no viable alternative to Marcos, and we believe him to be in effective control at least for the near-term.

— We will continue to deal with the Marcos Administration as the effective Government of the Philippines to the extent that he cooperates with us in helping us pursue our basic interests in the Philippines. Conversely, we recognize that we now have an interest in Marcos' succeeding in his gamble to improve stability in the Philippines through martial law and a thorough-going program of basic economic and political reforms. We will assist him with his reform program as long as we believe he is enhancing the prospects for long-term stability and cooperating with us in our pursuit of our other basic interests.

— Marcos has already displayed his cooperative inclination toward us by resolving at least for the moment the threat to U.S. private investment posed by the Philippine Supreme Court's decision in the Quasha case. (The decision held that U.S. private investors' rights to exploit natural resources and to operate public utilities would lapse with the expiration of the Laurel-Langley Agreement in 1974, and called into question their titles to land not in the public domain.)

— Reaffirmed the U.S. Government decision of 1966 not to seek an extension of the trade and investment privileges granted under the Laurel-Langley Agreement.

Other Aspects of Our Policy Problem — Continued effective access to our military bases in the Philippines. Our base access is strongly linked in the Filipino mind to an adequate level of grant military assistance. In recent years, this level has fallen from the $22-$25 million level to $14-17 million, with consequent Filipino expressions of discontent affecting our access. We have raised our requests to Congress for FY 73 and 74 back to $22 million.

— Renegotiation of the Military Bases Agreement. The negotiations have been in abeyance since last February, with a number of important issues still to be resolved.

— U.S. Philippine bilateral trade preference and the Philippine sugar quota. The Philippines has been pressing us for a continuation of preferential access to the U.S. market. Such an extension after the expiration of Laurel-Langley would be inconsistent with our global trade policy. The best we can do is to try to give close attention to Philippine needs in the framework of GATT and the General scheme of Preferences. On the Philippine sugar quota, which is guaranteed under the Sugar Act of 1971, we can do no better than assure the Philippines that we will urge Congress to extend the current quota when the Act comes up for renewal in 1974.

Marcos has indicated to Ambassador Byroade that he would like across-the-board negotiations on these and other major bilateral issues early this year. His tactic in such an approach no doubt is to try to link his leverage on base access and investment to what he wants on trade preferences and the sugar quota. Consequently, we believe we should try to negotiate the issues separately.

We believe we should withhold issuing a NSDM embodying these policy conclusions until the situation resulting from Marcos January 17 changes in the Philippine political system has clarified. (A draft NSDM is at Tab A.) If issued, such a policy directive might leak, which could then cause us problems at home, particularly with Congressional critics, and in the Philippines, where Marcos might be led to believe he had fuller U.S. support for his administration than is actually the case.

Peter Flanigan concurs.

Recommendation:

That you approve the basic U.S. policy line articulated above and in the draft NSDM which will not be issued at this time.

Approve [RN initialed]
Disapprove

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Institutional Files (H-Files), Box H–192, NSSM 155 [2 of 2]. Secret. Sent for action. Tab A, an undated proposed NSDM on U.S. policy toward the Philippines, is attached but not published. The President initialed his approval of the draft NSDM, which was subsequently released. See Document 318. The Laurel-Langley Agreement, which governed U.S. tariffs on Philippine exports and the privileges of U.S. investors, expired on July 4, 1974.

318. National Security Decision Memorandum 209, Washington, March 27, 1973. 318. National Security Decision Memorandum 209, Washington, March 27, 1973.1

Washington, March 27, 1973

NATIONAL SECURITY COUNCIL
WASHINGTON, D.C. 20504

March 27, 1973

National Security Decision Memorandum 209

TO: The Secretary of State
The Secretary of Defense
The Secretary of the Treasury
The Secretary of Commerce
The Secretary of Agriculture
The Director of Central Intelligence

SUBJECT: U.S. Policy Toward the Philippines

The President has considered the interdepartmental response to NSSM 155 of June 30, 1972, and the views expressed by the NSC Senior Review Group in its meeting on this subject on November 30, 1972. He has approved the following as tenets of U.S. policy toward the Philippines: — The United States Government will continue to deal with the Marcos Administration as the effective Government of the Philippines. Assuming that the Marcos Administration will continue to be the effective Government and given the U.S. interests in improved long-term stability in the Philippines, the U.S. Government will continue security and economic assistance to the Philippines on the basis of continued cooperation from the Marcos Administration in our pursuit of fundamental U.S. interests in the Philippines and of implementation by the Marcos Administration of measures aimed at long-term stability for the Philippines.

— The U.S. will not seek an extension of the Laurel-Langley Agreement beyond its expiration in 1974.

— We should endeavor to avoid establishment of direct linkage between U.S. military assistance and continued effective access to U.S. military bases in the Philippines. Military assistance should be provided, however, in an amount which, in conjunction with other U.S. programs including other forms of assistance, will assure the desired continued effective access to the bases. In this context military assistance should be planned and requested in the amount of $20-$25 million annually.

[signed]
Henry A. Kissinger

cc: The Chairman, Joint Chiefs of Staff
The Assistant to the President for International Economic Affairs

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Institutional Files (H-Files), Box H–239, NSDMs, NSDM 209, Philippines. Secret. Copies were sent to the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff and the Assistant to the President for International Economic Affairs. The text of NSSM 155 is in Foreign Relations, 1969–1976, vol. XX, Southeast Asia, 1969–1972, Document 254.

319. Special National Intelligence Estimate 56–73, Washington, March 28, 1973. 319. Special National Intelligence Estimate 56–73, Washington, March 28, 1973.1

Washington, March 28, 1973

[Omitted here is the title page, the list of concurrences, and a map of the Philippines.]

THE MUSLIM INSURRECTION IN THE SOUTHERN PHILIPPINES: IMPLICATIONS FOR THE UNITED STATES

PRECIS

The basic problem behind the Muslim insurrection in the southern Philippines is the Christian encroachment on traditional Muslim lands. A low level of armed dissidence has been endemic to the area, but the recent major fighting was sparked by efforts to pick up Muslim weapons under President Marcos' martial law decree. The insurgents are increasingly well-armed and despite a lack of any central political organization, they appear to have developed some military coordination. Malaysia, principally the State of Sabah, and Libya have given support to the insurgents.

Continuation of the Muslim insurrection would jeopardize US interests in the Philippines and the Southeast Asian region. It would weaken Marcos' political position and the ability of the Philippine armed forces to contain the communist New People's Army. Philippine relations with Malaysia and Indonesia would become increasingly contentious, thus damaging the promising development of ASEAN (Association of Southeast Asian Nations).

Providing the large quantities of military equipment which Marcos has requested from the US would not give him the capability to suppress the Muslim insurgents. It would alleviate temporarily the pressure for a political compromise and would undoubtedly lead to further requests. Heavy US military support would also strain US relations with Malaysia and, perhaps, Indonesia—particularly if Philippine military units stepped up shelling and bombing which affected the civilian population.

A US response limited only to a speed-up of deliveries of current MAP assistance might not be accepted gracefully by Marcos. He could try to pressure the US for more military aid by attempting to exploit Washington's desire to retain the basing arrangements at Clark and Subic.

The best hope to avoid a consolidation of the insurrection would be a political compromise that would stop the major fighting and allow the Christians and the Muslims to coexist. The government would probably have to permit the Muslims to retain their personal weapons, and to take some steps to protect the Muslims against wholesale loss of their traditional lands. Some form of local self-rule and greater government attention to their economic needs would also help.

A persuasive US posture to encourage Marcos toward such a compromise would involve economic development assistance and refugee aid for the south, along with the speed-up of MAP support currently planned. Expressions to Manila and the ASEAN nations of the US preference for a political approach to the Muslim problem would probably have some influence.

[Omitted here is the body of the paper.]

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 557, Country Files, Far East, Philippines, Vol. IV, January 1972–December 31, 1973. Secret; Controlled Dissem. The CIA and the intelligence organizations of DOS, DOD, and the NSA participated in the preparation of the SNIE. All members of the U.S. Intelligence Board concurred in the estimate except the representative of the FBI who abstained because the subject was outside of his jurisdiction. In a memorandum, March 20, Holdridge recommended that Scowcroft ask the CIA to produce a SNIE on the Muslim uprising in the southern Philippines. (Ibid.)

320. Memorandum From the Acting Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs (Eagleburger) to Secretary of Defense Richardson, Washington, April 7, 1973. 320. Memorandum From the Acting Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs (Eagleburger) to Secretary of Defense Richardson, Washington, April 7, 1973.1

Washington, April 7, 1973

ASSISTANT SECRETARY OF DEFENSE
WASHINGTON D.C. 20301

7 Apr 1973

In reply to: I-22058/73

MEMORANDUM FOR THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE

SUBJECT: U.S. Attitude Toward Philippine Claim to Sabah (U) - INFORMATION MEMORANDUM

(S) This memorandum is in response to your question, "What is our attitude toward Philippine claim to Sabah? Should we try to get Philippines to drop it?" Your question related to the recent Special National Intelligence Estimate issued on "The Muslim Insurrection in the Southern Philippines: Implications for the United States." A brief background of the Sabah claim issue is attached herewith as a matter of related information.

(S) The United States, in line with its traditional policy of taking no position on territorial disputes between friendly states, has remained officially impartial. We have consistently tried to avoid becoming involved in this particular dispute, or in the attempts of the two parties and other friendly governments to settle it. Assistance in settling the dispute can probably most appropriately be offered by neighboring countries such as Indonesia and Thailand, or through the ASEAN forum. Intervention by the United States or other outside powers would probably not be effective, and would weaken the responsibility of Southeast Asian nations for handling their own problems in a regional context. Philippine renunciation of the claim, though perhaps helpful in easing tensions, would not guarantee that Malaysia could stifle Sabah's involvement with the Philippine Muslim insurgency. Sabah has traditionally gone its own way, and has the right to secede from the Federation of Malaysia if it so desires.

(S) While I view the Philippine claim as weak, I don't see it as a viable course of action for us to lean on President Marcos regarding the Sabah claim, which is an emotional issue with the Filipinos. Moreover, we should even be careful about stating a neutral position, which would demonstrate a lack of our support for a traditional ally. The real issue is how to deal with the Muslim frictions in the southern Philippines, a problem which has resisted solution to any degree for over 400 years. The eventual answer may be something akin to a semi-autonomous state worked out through arrangements made by the countries in that region. However, the U.S. Ambassador to the Philippines, in a lengthy cable of 4 April 1973, stated that, "We do not see role for USG in promoting such an arrangement (regional assistance, arms control, resolution of Sabah claim) with Phils...U.S. can make appropriate contribution in meeting emergency relief needs...and possibly participating in regional development effort, if such were to materialize."

(U) I agree with that assessment.

[signed]
Lawrence S. Eagleburger
Acting Assistant Secretary

1 Source: Washington National Records Center, OSD Files: FRC 330–78–0001, Philippines, 370.64, 7 April 1973. Confidential. Sent for information. Captain Robert Shaid, USN, prepared the memorandum. At the top of the first page of the memorandum, Richardson wrote, “Noted. Sounds right. ELR 4/12.” Attached but not published is an undated background sheet on the “Sabah Claim Issue.” Eagleburger sent the memorandum in response to a comment, attached but not published, that Richardson wrote on SNIE 56–73; see Document 319.

321. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to President Nixon, Washington, April 17, 1973. 321. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to President Nixon, Washington, April 17, 1973.1

Washington, April 17, 1973

THE WHITE HOUSE
WASHINGTON
ACTION

April 17 1973

MEMORANDUM FOR: THE PRESIDENT
FROM: HENRY A. KISSINGER [HK initialed]

SUBJECT: Implications of Southern Philippines Muslim Insurrection for U.S. Interests in Southeast Asia and Possible U.S. Role

At Tab A is a proposed NSSM on implications of the Muslim insurrection in the southern Philippines for U.S. interests in Southeast Asia. The insurrection, which had been a three-year-old low-level communal dispute, flared last fall when the Marcos Administration attempted to collect arms there, as elsewhere in the Philippines, as part of the martial law program to improve civil order. Also, the Philippines has charged that the Muslim ruler of the East Malaysian state of Sabah has been providing arms and other assistance to the Muslim insurgents. If the insurrection continues and expands, it could pose serious problems for long -term stability in the Philippines and for our military base access and for U.S. investment there. Sabah's interference would contribute another de-stabilizing element in Southeast Asia.

Therefore, I believe it would be useful for us to study the extent of the threat this conflict poses for stability in the Philippines and of the tensions it adds regionally. The study would also consider what role, if any, the U.S. might play in helping the Marcos Administration end the insurrection and in resolving the regional frictions that have resulted from it.

Recommendation:

That you approve the draft NSSM at Tab A.

Approve [RN initialed]
Disapprove

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Institutional Files (H-Files), Box H –199, NSSMs, NSSM 180. Secret. Sent for action. Nixon initialed his approval of the recommendation. Tab A, the proposed NSSM, is attached. A signed version is published as Document 323.

322. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to President Nixon, Washington, April 18, 1973. 322. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to President Nixon, Washington, April 18, 1973.1

Washington, April 18, 1973

WASHINGTON
ACTION

April 18, 1973

MEMORANDUM FOR: THE PRESIDENT
FROM: HENRY A. KISSINGER
SUBJECT: Philippines: Proposed AID Assistance to Reorganization of Manila Police Administration

State and AID have for some time been considering the question of possible AID assistance in the reorganization of the Manila police administration. The AID program would provide AID police experts and equipment to assist the Manila police administration in integrating the present 17 separate police departments of the greater Manila area into one consolidated administration. This is only one part of a general reorganization of the Manila municipal administration — and the Philippine Government structure generally — which Marcos began soon after imposing martial law last September. The AID project is valued at about $500, 000 in FY 74, and would last for approximately four years — at lower costs in later years.

State (including AID) recommends that the project be postponed indefinitely. They acknowledge that the reorganization could improve the security of the Manila area substantially, and that our assistance would eliminate the time-consuming trial-and-error approach of the Filipinos' doing it themselves. State believes that this is outweighed, however, by the credence our assistance would lend to the charge by Marcos' political opposition that the U.S. supports martial law, and that it might hurt the Congressional chances for our military and economic assistance programs for the Philippines. Embassy Manila disagrees, believing the AID project should go forward.

My View

Given the importance of this project to this major reorganization of the Manila police administration and our basic interest in seeing the Marcos Administration improve the prospects for long-term stability, I believe that the risks are acceptable. Congressional comment on Marcos' authoritarian turn and on our continued assistance has been notably mild. Moreover, those who will object are going to oppose the aid bill anyway. Those we must depend on for votes are favorable to Public Safety programs. As to the program's political sensitivity in the Philippines, I believe that the possible risk involved can be reduced by maintaining a low profile in the activity of our AID personnel and in the type of equipment we furnish.

At Tab A is a proposed memorandum from me to Secretary Rogers indicating your approval of the AID project.

Recommendation:

That you authorize me to sign the memorandum to Secretary Rogers indicating your approval of the AID program to assist in the reorganization of the Manila police administration. Bill Timmons concurs.

Approve [RN initialed]
Disapprove

1 Source: Library of Congress, Henry Kissinger Papers, CL 297, Memoranda to the President, April 1973. Secret. Sent for action. Concurred in by Timmons. Nixon initialed his approval of the recommendation that AID assist in the reorganization of the Manila police administration. Attached but not published is Tab A, the memorandum from Kissinger to Rogers, April 26, as sent.

323. National Security Study Memorandum 180, Washington, May 1, 1973. 323. National Security Study Memorandum 180, Washington, May 1, 1973.1

Washington, May 1, 1973

NATIONAL SECURITY COUNCIL
WASHINGTON, D.C. 20506

May 1, 1973

National Security Study Memorandum 180

TO: The Secretary of State
The Secretary of Defense
The Director of Central Intelligence

SUBJECT: U.S. Policy in Southeast Asia in the Light of the Southern Philippines Muslim Insurrection

The President has directed a study of the implications of the Muslim insurrection in the southern Philippines for basic U.S. interests, objectives, and policies in that country and as concerns regional stability in Southeast Asia. The study should define and evaluate the policy options open to the United States, and pursuant to these options the specific courses of action that might be taken to protect the U.S. interests involved.

The study should draw upon the interdepartmental response to NSSM 155 and SNIE 56-73, and should reflect the basic policy guidance contained in NSDM 209.

The study should assess the current situation as it may affect (1) basic U.S. interests, objectives, and policies in the Philippines and (2) U.S. interests in Southeast Asian regional stability. This evaluation should include but not necessarily be limited to consideration of the following: — The nature and extent of outside support for the insurrection, and the possibility of involvement by other major powers.

— An evaluation should also be made of the leadership of the insurrection including identification of the leaders and their past and present contacts with the U.S. in business, education and other fields.

— Evidence of any Philippine Communist involvement and outside support for such Communist involvement, as well as an undated assessment of the personalities, training and supply situation of the Communist led New People's Army on Luzon.

— The extent of Malaysia's control over Tun Mustapha, and of Indonesia's influence with him.

— The present and potential affects of the insurrection and related outside involvement on regional cooperation in Southeast Asia, and on Southeast Asian stability.

— The importance of the Philippine claim to Sabah in the dispute, and the extent of the Marcos Administration's flexibility on this question.

— The likely near and longer-term effects on Philippine internal stability and development, and on U.S. military basing and investment interests, should the insurrection continue at its present level or worsen.

— The Marcos Administration's strategy and tactics for handling the insurrection — both internally and diplomatically — and their effectiveness to date. A brief review of the types of contacts between the Philippine Government and the insurgents should be included with attention as well to the subjects discussed, reactions of the parties and the participants in the discussions.

Based upon the foregoing assessment, the study should define and evaluate the policy options open to the United States to protect U.S. interests and objectives. Within the context of the basic policy options, specific steps which could be taken to protect U.S. interests and objectives should be discussed. The evaluation should include but not be limited to consideration of the following issues: — Should the U.S. encourage individual countries in the region, or forces such as ASEAN, to attempt to help stabilize the situation?

— What position should the U.S. take on the question of the Philippine claim to Sabah?

— How should the U.S. respond to the Philippine Government's request for increased and accelerated U.S. security assistance to help end the insurrection?

The study should be prepared by the NSC Interdepartmental Group for East Asia and be submitted not later than June 15, 1973 for consideration by the Senior Review Group.

[signed]
Henry A. Kissinger

cc: Chairman, Joint Chiefs of Staff

1 Source: Library of Congress, Henry Kissinger Papers, CL 316, National Security Study Memoranda, October 1971–May 1973. Secret. Copies were sent to the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff. On July 26, Hummel, the Acting Chairman of the East Asian and Pacific Interdepartmental Group, sent a study to the NSC Review Group in response to NSSM 180. The study provided options in response to four questions: how the U.S. should react to GOP requests for increased security assistance to help end the insurgency; whether the U.S. should use economic assistance to encourage the GOP to be more responsive to the needs of Philippine Muslims; whether the U.S. should encourage other countries in the region to help stabilize the situation; how the U.S. should treat the Philippine claim to Sabah. (National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Institutional Files [H-Files], Box H–199, NSSMs, NSSM 180)

324. Memorandum From the Deputy Director of Operations of the Central Intelligence Agency (William Colby) to the Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian and Pacific Affairs (Godley), Washington, July 6, 1973. 324. Memorandum From the Deputy Director of Operations of the Central Intelligence Agency (William Colby) to the Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian and Pacific Affairs (Godley), Washington, July 6, 1973.1

Washington, July 6, 1973

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
Washington, D.C. 20505

6 JUL 1973

MEMORANDUM FOR: The Honorable G. McMurtrie Godley
Assistant Secretary for East Asian and Pacific Affairs,
Department of State

SUBJECT: An Assessment of the Political and Economic Situation in the Philippines

1. [text not declassified]

2. We are now seeing in Manila, the major urban center of the country, what appears to be the beginning of a current of discontent with life under martial law. It is a current, not just a few isolated examples of unhappiness. Discontent, at this point at least, does not appear to be solely politically or socially motivated. It arises initially from economic factors. Although these factors may have, in fact, very little to do with the martial law administration of President Marcos, in the eyes of most he is to blame for the problems.

3. Prices on all basic commodities, including rice, are increasing despite price control efforts. School textbooks and paper are more expensive this year than in previous years. Unemployment and underemployment continue at about the same level as in pre-martial law days. Wages, however, have remained fixed at minimum levels established by law at least three years ago. Crime in the greater Manila area, particularly crimes against property, are at the same level they were in the weeks preceding martial law. Caught between rising prices and stagnant wages, urban residents across the board are beginning to express their discontent with life under martial law.

4. An aggravating factor in the current of dissatisfaction is the pervasive distrust of the President and his motives. This results from the widely publicized activities of both Marcos and his lady in the pre-martial law era. It is especially noticeable in the greater Manila area, where many have the attitude that martial law may be acceptable but not the man who has imposed it. Still, the great majority who hold this view are also unprepared to do anything about the situation, at least for the time being. They realize that the President now holds all the cards and that they must wait for him to lose or misdeal some before they dare make any moves.

5. In contrast to the urban population, rural residents appear to be more or less content with their current economic lot. Price hikes have apparently been less dramatic in the provinces. Rural residents have also from the outset been much less concerned than their more sophisticated big city brothers about the "legality" of martial law. Infrastructure improvements which have been either initiated or announced (e.g., roads, bridges, etc.) all tend to reflect the President's emphasis on the provinces and undoubtedly have buoyed the peasants' confidence in future improvements. If asked to weigh and compare the situation as it exists today with the days of the pre-martial law era, it is probable that the rural resident, particularly on the island of Luzon, would conclude that he is now slightly better off. The rural population, though, is exhibiting signs of confusion over the political methods used to usher in the new Constitution in January 1973. One of the President's closest advisors recently commented that Barrio residents appear not to fully understand which constitution is in effect today and are now asking questions about elections.

6. The Marcos administration is aware of the appearance of discontent and questioning and of the several causes for these developments. We can anticipate, therefore, that in the coming months Marcos will take actions to mute these problems. In the economic field, these will probably be swift, largely cosmetic moves aimed at creating the impression that solutions to problems facing the urban population are imminent. We can also anticipate several moves in the political field—e.g., convening of the Citizens' Assemblies, reshuffling of the Cabinet, convoking the interim National Assembly, talking generally of elections at some future date—all designed to create the impression of gradual return to democratic normalcy, to reinforce the acceptance of the new Constitution and perhaps more important, to provide Marcos with a fresh mandate, weak as it may\be from a legal point, to continue ruling the Philippines after 30 December 1973 when his tenure as President under the 1935 Constitution expires.

7. The absence of an independent press or of any forum in which problems, failures, or progress of the Republic can be discussed freely and without fear, the continuing backing by the armed forces, the apparent endorsement of the regime by the U.S. Government, the dismemberment of the political opposition, the weakening of the pro-Chinese Communist Party (CPP/ML) and its military arm, but above all, the absence of a leader of stature around whom the opposition can coalesce are all factors which help ensure Marcos1 continued control of the situation. Barring a substantial failure of the economy or a gross misjudgment in action—shooting of food rioters would be an example—the Filipino masses, including those of urban centers, are not prepared to move against the regime at this juncture even though they are discontented for various reasons. For the next six months or so, we would expect the discontent to continue to ferment but certainly not to manifest itself in any appreciable fashion. Many Filipinos have pointed out Filipinos are a very patient people. That, combined with a general aura of fear, is enough at this point to keep matters essentially under control.

FOR THE DEPUTY DIRECTOR FOR OPERATIONS:

Theodore G. Shackley
cc: Colonel Richard T. Kennedy, Deputy Assistant to the President For National Security Affairs

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Institutional Files (H-Files), Box H–192, Folder 1, NSSM 155 [2 of 2]. Secret; Sensitive. Richard Kennedy also received a copy. Theodore Shackley, the Chief of the Far East Division, Directorate of Operations, CIA, sent this memorandum on behalf of Colby.

325. Telegram 998 From the Embassy in the Philippines to the Department of State, January 26, 1974, 0540Z. 325. Telegram 998 From the Embassy in the Philippines to the Department of State, January 26, 1974, 0540Z.1

January 26, 1974, 0540Z

TELEGRAM
Department of State
MANILA 0998

O R 260540Z JAN 74

FM AMEMBASSY MANILA
TO SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 0639
INFO AMEMBASSY SAIGON
USLO PEKING
AMEMBASSY TAIPEI
CINCPAC

MANILA 0998

CINCPAC ALSO FOR POLAD

E.O. 11652: GDS
TAGS: PBOR, MARR, MOPS, RP, CH

SUBJECT: PHILIPPINE POSITION WITH RESPECT TO SPRATLEY ISLANDS
REF: MANILA 0859

1. ON MORNING JANUARY 26, I RECEIVED AN AIDE MEMOIRE FROM FONSEC ROMULO FORWARDING THE TEXT OF A CONFIDENTIAL CABLE RECEIVED FROM PHIL REP AT UN REPORTING CONVERSATION WITH DEPUTY CHINESE REP. TEXT OF PHIL CABLE SENT SEPTEL, BUT ESSENCE CONTAINED IN ITS LAST SENTENCE IN WHICH CHINA ASSERTS "IT IS PREPARED TO DEFEND ITS RIGHT OF SOVEREIGNTY OVER CHINESE TERRITORIES INCLUDING THE PARACEL AND SPRATLEY ISLANDS".

2. THIS CHINESE POSITION CONFORMS WITH PEKING'S PREVIOUSLY STATED PUBLIC POSITION AND DRAWS NO RPT NO DISTINCTION BETWEEN PARACELS AND SPRATLEY. INFERENCE COULD THEREFORE BE DRAWN THAT CHINESE ACTION RE SPRATLEYS WILL BE SAME AS EARLIER ACTION RE PARACELS.

3. FROM WHAT I CAN LEARN FROM LOCAL U.S. NAVY REPRESENTATIVES, U.S. INTELLIGENCE WAS SURPRISED BY SUDDEN APPEARANCE OF SIGNIFICANT CHINESE NAVAL FORCES IN PARACELS AND DID NOT RPT NOT HAVE USEFUL FOREWARNING OF MILITARY ACTION AGAINST GVN UNITS BEFORE IT OCCURRED. MOREOVER, FROM WHAT I UNDERSTAND OF CURRENT U.S. SURVEILLANCE ACTIVITY, WE DO NOT RPT NOT MAINTAIN 24 HOUR WATCH ON SEA APPROACHES TO SPRATLEYS. FROM THESE FACTS, I CONCLUDE THERE IS REASONABLE POSSIBILITY OF SURPRISE CHINESE ACTION AGAINST SPRATLEY GROUP WITH INADEQUATE U.S. INTELLIGENCE ALERT.

4. ALTHOUGH WE DO NOT RPT NOT YET HAVE OFFICIAL DEFINITIVE INFORMATION ON PHIL DEPLOYMENTS IN SPRATLEYS, OUR PRELIMINARY SOUNDINGS INDICATE THAT THERE IS FULL COMPANY OF PHILIPPINE MARINES STATIONED ON A GROUP OF ISLANDS AND ATOLLS AT 115 DEGREES E. 11 DEGREES N. WITHIN EASY STRIKING DISTANCE FROM THE PARACELS. THE REASON IT IS TAKING SOME TIME TO DETERMINE THESE FACTS MORE EXACTLY IS THAT I HAVE DELIBERATELY REFRAINED FROM SEEKING THE INFORMATION IN THE CONTEXT OF OUR MUTUAL DEFENSE TREATY IN ABSENCE OF AUTHORITATIVE INTERPRETATION OF U.S. DEFENSE OBLIGATIONS REQUESTED REFTEL.

5. ACTION REQUESTED: I REPEAT MY PREVIOUS REQUESTS FOR (A) AUTHORITATIVE INTERPRETATION OF U.S. OBLIGATIONS TO "ACT" IF PHIL FORCES ARE ATTACKED IN SPRATLEYS; (B) ASSURANCES THAT U.S. CONDUCTING ADEQUATE SURVEILLANCE TO GUARD AGAINST SURPRISE ATTACK; AND (C) DEMARCHE TO PEKING TO WARN CHINESE THAT MILITARY ACTION AGAINST PHILIPPINE FORCES WOULD ENGAGE U.S. OBLIGATIONS UNDER OUR MUTUAL DEFENSE TREATY. IN ADDITION TO THESE ACTIONS, I REQUEST AUTHORITY TO CONSULT WITH PHILIPPINE OFFICIALS WITHIN CONTEXT MUTUAL DEFENSE TREATY TO DETERMINE MORE PRECISELY WHAT PHIL INTENTIONS ARE AND TO ADVISE PHILS OF ACTION BEING TAKEN BY U.S.

6. IT IS NOW THREE DAYS SINCE I SENT PREVIOUS CABLE AND I HAVE YET TO RECEIVE ANY INDICATION THAT ACTION ADDRESSEES HAVE TURNED ATTENTION TO THIS ISSUE. IF COMPLETED ACTION IMPOSSIBLE AT THIS TIME, KINDLY SEND UP A FLARE SO THAT I WILL HAVE THE IMPRESSION SOMEONE IS THINKING OF US BACK THERE.

SULLIVAN

1 Source: National Archives, Record Group 59, Central Foreign Policy Files. Secret; Immediate; Exdis. Repeated for information to Saigon, Peking, Taipei, and CINCPAC. The Spratly Islands consist of more than 100 islands or reefs in the South China Sea surrounded by rich fishing grounds and, potentially, by gas and oil deposits.

326. Telegram 020401 From the Department of State to the Embassy in the Philippines, January 31, 1974, 0311Z. 326. Telegram 020401 From the Department of State to the Embassy in the Philippines, January 31, 1974, 0311Z.1

January 31, 1974, 0311Z

TELEGRAM
Department of State
020401

P 310311Z JAN 74 ZFF4

FM SECSTATE WASHDC
TO AMEMBASSY MANILA PRIORITY 4324

E.O. 11652: GDS
TAGS: PBOR, MARR, MOPS, RP, CH

SUBJECT: POSITION WITH RESPECT TO SPRATLEY ISLANDS
EYES ONLY AMBASSADOR

1. YOUR TEL 0998 PARA 5 RAISES FOUR ISSUES: (A) LEGAL POSITION ON US OBLIGATION TO ACT IF PHL FORCES ARE ATTACKED IN SPRATLEYS; WE HAVE SENT STATE 017663 WHICH IS PARTIAL AND PRELIMINARY RESPONSE AND WE ARE STILL LOOKING INTO US POSITION.

(B) ASSURANCE TO YOU THAT US IS CONDUCTING SURVEILLANCE TO GUARD AGAINST SURPRISE ATTACK ON SPRATLEYS; THE HIGHEST APPROPRIATE LEVEL HERE HAS DECIDED THAT SUCH SURVEILLANCE WILL NOT RPT NOT BE UNDERTAKEN.

(C) YOU SUGGEST "DEMARCHE TO PEKING TO WARN CHINESE THAT MILITARY ACTION AGAINST PHL FORCES WOULD ENGAGE US OBLIGATIONS"; A NUMBER OF FACTORS RULE THIS OUT AT THIS TIME: THE LACK OF TIME: THE UNCERTAINTY OF US POSITION (A, ABOVE), LACK OF ANY INDICATIONS THAT PRC INTENDS TO MOVE AGAINST SPRATLEYS, AND OTHERS.

(D) YOUR REQUEST FOR AUTHORITY TO CONSULT WITH PHL OFFICIALS SHOULD, OBVIOUSLY, AWAIT FURTHER EXAMINATION OF POINT (A).

2. WE WILL BE REPLYING IN LESS RESTRICTED CHANNEL ON POINTS OTHER THAN B AND C.

KISSINGER

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 558, Country Files, Far East, Philippines, 1 January 1974. Secret; Cherokee; Priority; Nodis; Eyes Only Ambassador. Drafted by Hummel; cleared by Lord and Scowcroft; and approved by Kissinger.

327. Minutes of the Secretary of State’s Staff Meeting, Washington, January 31, 1974, 3:08 p.m.. 327. Minutes of the Secretary of State’s Staff Meeting, Washington, January 31, 1974, 3:08 p.m..1

Washington, January 31, 1974, 3:08 p.m.

In Attendance:

Secretary of State Kissinger

D - Mr. Rush

M - Mr. Brown

S/AM - Mr. McCloskey

ARA - Mr. Kubisch

NEA - Mr. Sisco

EA - Mr. Hummel

EUR - Mr. Hartman

AID - Mr. Parker

EB - Mr. Weintraub

IO - Mr. Herz

AF - Mr. Easum

L - Mr. Maw

S/PC - Mr. Lord

S/PC - Mr. Wilhelm

S - Mr. Bremer

S - Mr. Eagleburger

S/S - Mr. Pickering

[Omitted is material unrelated to the Philippines.]

MR. HUMMEL: Two brief items, sir. One on the island situation in the Paracels and the Spratlys. You're getting a more comprehensive report from CIA but just for preliminary update, there are no indications that the PRC intends to move toward the Spratly Islands. Despite this, there's considerable nervousness being exhibited by the Japanese, the Filipinos — and, most especially, the South Vietnamese — who the news tickers said today have sent a 200-man contingent off to occupy some of the presently unoccupied islands in the area of the Spratlys.

The ROC has already occupied at least one island and the PRC also.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: Have the Chinese got all the Paracels also?

MR. HUMMEL: Yes, sir. That's over and finished. And apparently no more activity has taken place. But this has caused people to worry about the PRC intentions in regard to this matter. And there does not, in my view, seem to be any indication that anybody really needs to work at this point.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: Can we steer them towards the Senkaku Island?

MR. HUMMEL: Beg pardon, sir?

SECRETARY KISSINGER: Can we steer them to the Senkaku Island?

MR. HUMMEL: Steer whom?

SECRETARY KISSINGER: The PRC.

MR. HUMMEL: Are you sure we want to do that, sir?

SECRETARY KISSINGER: It would teach religion to the Japanese.

MR. HUMMEL: I realize we have to teach religion to the Japanese, but is it worth that price?

SECRETARY KISSINGER: No, no.

MR. HUMMEL: The question has been raised about whether our Mutual Security Treaty with the Philippines would be invoked in the event that the Philippine forces know the Spratlys are attacked by PRC if they move there. The lawyers have come up with what Bill Sullivan describes as a somewhat waffly position, but negotiating this treaty gives us apparently a number of outs.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: Whose lawyers?

MR. HUMMEL: Mr. Maw's lawyers, George Aldrich. It is not, apparently — well, it's not a clear-cut case.

MR. MAW: It's not a clear-cut case. At our insistence, the treaty was broad, very general, to cover the outer islands, and having in mind that we were trying to cover apparently naval stations at sea. They can cover these islands as part of the Philippine archipelago — at least, that's our construction of it.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: Have we told this to the Philippines?

MR. HUMMEL: Yes, sir. And there is no sign that they really are raising the issue that Bill Sullivan had raised with us. For legitimate reasons is why he did it. But Filipinos have not cited the Mutual Security Treaty as being applicable in the dispute over these islands. Lastly —

SECRETARY KISSINGER: I don't think I ever saw that. Did I ever see that Sullivan cable?

MR. HUMMEL: Yes, sir. It's my understanding you signed off a reply to it, which summarized important parts of it. One went out with your name on it.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: That's a different proposition!

(Laughter.)

MR. RUSH: I saw the cable and the reply —

SECRETARY KISSINGER: You're ahead of me.

MR. RUSH: — with your name signed.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: Should we have cancelled these meetings?

(Laughter.)

I don't remember addressing that problem. It's all right; I don't disagree with it. But do you want to check into what happened there?

MR. EAGLEBURGER: Yes, sir.

MR. HUMMEL: I can give you a bit of background now. The telegram was either in the NSC or in your office here — on different occasions over a period of three days — and I know the pressure on your time, but you had not had time to get to it. A number of us thought it was quite urgent and tried to bring it to your attention. I don't know if we failed or somebody slipped. Maybe somebody decided, in desperation, not to send it —

SECRETARY KISSINGER: O.K., but where do we stand now? So this is where we stand on the Philippines?

MR. HUMMEL: Yes, sir.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: We have notified the Filipinos?

MR. HUMMEL: Yes, sir.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: And their attitude was what?

MR. HUMMEL: They are quite calm about this and they have not been disposed in any considerations to attempt to invoke the Mutual security Treaty.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: Did they raise it or did we raise it with them?

MR. HUMMEL: The conversation that Mr. Ingersoll had on his trip there with Bill Sullivan on the Marcos problem and on the Spratlys and the Paracels came up, and an opportunity in the general discussion came up.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: The question is: Did we volunteer to them the information that we would not let them invoke the treaty, or did they first ask us whether we considered them to be covered by the treaty?

MR. HUMMEL: I'm sorry, sir. I'll have to — I don't think it was ever that clear-cut. First of all, our reply was not a flat no that the treaty could not apply —

SECRETARY KISSINGER: My question was: Did we volunteer it or did they first ask us? — because this, I think, would make a psychological difference.

MR. HUMMEL: It was not something that was shoved at them. And whether Bill Sullivan drove through an opening that was given to him in order to convey this or whether the Filipinos raised this, I honestly don't remember.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: That, to me, is the only interesting question. I agree with the fact that we should not invoke the Mutual Security Treaty. I wonder whether it's in our interest to show excessive eagerness in volunteering reluctance to take on the Chinese when we haven't been asked — whether that might not actually trigger things, the way things leak out there.

MR. HUMMEL: Well, at the same time, sir, our governmental spokesman has been saying repeatedly that we take no position on the Southeast —

SECRETARY KISSINGER: Yes; but that isn't the question of what we would do if a Philippine garrison was attacked — which was the issue before us.

MR. HUMMEL: Well, I think the atmospherics surrounding our repeated statements about these islands certainly conveyed already to the Filipinos that we don't intend to or that we don't want to.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: I don't think we want to encourage the PRC in believing that they have a free shot at military moves, and we don't want to encourage our allies there to believe that we are needlessly panicky.

Our answer is the right answer. I do not think that we should have indicated that we would defend it. The question is whether we should have left some ambiguity in other people's minds, not in ours.

MR. HUMMEL: Well, there is ambiguity built into our position that they conveyed — but I'll check into this, sir, and see if I can get something.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: O.K.

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Transcripts of Secretary of State Kissinger’s Staff Meetings, 1973–1977, E5177, Box 2. Secret. According to the summary of decisions that proceeds these minutes, Kissinger decided at this meeting “That we do not want to do anything re the Spratly Islands that would encourage the PRC to believe it has a free hand to take military action or lead our allies to believe we are needlessly alarmed at the prospect of such action.”

328. Minutes of the Secretary of State’s Staff Meeting, Washington, March 13, 1974, 4 p.m.. 328. Minutes of the Secretary of State’s Staff Meeting, Washington, March 13, 1974, 4 p.m..1

Washington, March 13, 1974, 4 p.m.

SECRETARY'S STAFF CONFERENCE
WEDNESDAY, MARCH 13, 1974 - 4:45 P.M.

PRESENT:

The Secretary of State — HENRY A. KISSINGER

Mr. Rush

Mr. Sisco

Mr. Brown

Mr. Easum

Mr. Bawdier

Mr. Ingersoll

Mr. Stabler

Mr. Davies

Mr. Vest

Mr. Lord

Mr. Maw

Mr. McCloskey

Mr. Hyland

Mr. Springsteen

[Omitted is material unrelated to the Philippines.]

MR. INGERSOLL: I just want to mention the continuing insurgency in the southern Philippines with the Muslims. This has been a longstanding conflict between the Christian and the Muslim community. When Marcos came in, it was sort of intensified, and in recent years it has been intensified by the Christians moving into what the Muslims consider their normal lands. And then Marcos attempted, after his election in 1969, to have more control than the central government had had before. It started a real shooting insurrection, when Marcos tried to take the guns away from everybody, when he instituted martial law.

Initially, the Philippine military was on the defensive. They were not able to contain this insurrection at all. But in recent months, they have taken the offensive and even though they took a licking down in Jolo, they have at least recaptured the city that was pretty well destroyed.

Marcos claims that the Muslims are receiving arms from Sabah the northeastern part of Malaysia, some of them supplied by Libya as well.

We believe that until Marcos solves the concerns of the Muslims in the Philippines, even if Malaysia cuts off arms, they are going to continue their insurrection. Even though Marcos has accused Malaysia of fomenting the insurrection, it won't stop when Malaysia stops supplying them.

Of course you know the Philippines have claimed Sabah as part of their territory, and Marcos has privately told our Ambassador that he would be willing to give up his claim if Malaysia would be willing to stop sending arms to the insurgents.

But we don't yet see Marcos taking the steps that will satisfy the Muslims to completely lay down their arms, because he has not provided the conditions. He says it is a Communist-inspired insurrection. But it really is not.

MR. SISCO: Is Saqqaf going to do any mediating on this thing? Has he involved himself?

MR. INGERSOLL: No, he really has not. He has just been trying to get information from both sides.

MR. RUSH: Of course Saqqaf is there on a state visit of some five days. The welcome he received was a royal welcome. They had the school children out, cheering him when he arrived. Marcos was going to meet him at the airport, and of all things he came in on a KLM plane, the Dutch being on the embargo list — but he still came an a KLM plane, which was two hours late. So Marcos didn't meet him. But all along the route they had placards and signs, just as you would for a royal welcome. And they treated him really as though he were royalty. It was quite obsequious. And Saqqaf was making very good sounds.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: He will be insufferable when he comes here.

MR. RUSH: Oh, yes. Unless you meet him at the airport — you or the President.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: We will have to escalate it to the Deputy Assistant Secretary level. We have had country directors meet him at the airport.

MR. INGERSOLL: This is where Marcos is going to be in trouble. Unless he solves this, he may have difficulty getting continuing oil from the Middle East.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: They told me they were not going to use this on the Philippine insurrection.

MR. INGERSOLL: They haven't, yet. But there is a Muslim meeting in May, another one of these summit meetings, at which there may be some sanctions imposed on him.

MR. RUSH: They have been taken off the friendly list, you know, and relegated to the list of those who have what is left over.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: Who?

MR. RUSH: The Philippines have been taken off the friendly list and put onto the list of — what do they call that list — those who receive what is left over after the friendly requirements are met. This is what upset the Philippines so seriously,

The impact of the price increase throughout the area we went is one of the major things we talked about. They are seriously upset about it.

[Omitted is material unrelated to the Philippines.]

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Transcripts of Secretary of State Kissinger’s Staff Meetings, 1973–1977, E5177, Box 2. Secret.

329. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, April 24, 1974, 1610–1640. 329. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, April 24, 1974, 1610–1640.1

Washington, April 24, 1974, 1610–1640

ASSISTANT SECRETARY OF DEFENSE
WASHINGTON 20301

In reply refer to: 1-3941/74

MEMORANDUM OF CONVERSATION

SUBJECT: Meeting between U.S. Ambassador to the Philippines William Sullivan and Secretary of Defense Schlesinger (U)

Participants:

Secretary of Defense - James R. Schlesinger

U.S. Ambassador to the Philippines - William H. Sullivan

Assistant Secretary of State, East Asian & Pacific Affairs - Robert S. Ingersoll

Philippines Country Director, Dept. of State - David C. Cuthell

Director, Defense Security Assistance Agency - VADM Ray Peet

Director, East Asia & Pacific Region, ISA - RADM T.J. Bigley

Military Asst. to SecDef - B/GEN Robert C. Taylor

Time: 1610-1640, 24 April 1974
Place: Secretary Schlesinger's office, Pentagon

1. (C) Ambassador Sullivan said that he was in Washington in preparation for forthcoming negotiations expected to be held with the Filipinos prior to termination of the Laurel-Langley Treaty on 3 July 1974. President Marcos has indicated a desire to announce a new Philippine relationship with the United States which would include on the military side a new Military Base Agreement which would be tied to a coterminous provision to the Mutual Defense Treaty. Ambassador Sullivan said the Military Defense Treaty is now open-ended and the Military Base Agreement runs until 1991; however, Marcos would like to have both of these run for a specified period of time at which point they would be subject to review. Ambassador Sullivan stated that although the military assistance that we provide is not tied to the concept of rent for the bases, it is perceived by the Filipinos to be a quid for the use of the bases. Ambassador Sullivan stated that as a result of his contacts since he was been in Washington with both State and the Congress, he appreciates the fact that opening of discussions on the Military Base Agreement will most probably result in the Congress requiring that any new agreement be submitted as a treaty. This will give a higher profile to the negotiations than is desired, but Ambassador Sullivan feels we could always go back to the original agreement which expires in 1991 should congressional action preclude a new agreement.

2. (C) Ambassador Sullivan pointed out that past decision have specified a 20-25 million dollars annual military assistance level for the Philippines. There have been shortfalls in recent years and he is, therefore, hopeful of being able to obtain some excess items of military equipment for the Philippines as part of a quid to offset these shortfalls. He said that he had talked with VADM Peet about a shopping list that included replacement aircraft for the aging F-86s presently in the Philippine inventory. An F5-type aircraft is being looked into as a possible replacement. Secretary Schlesinger suggested we might look at F-100s from our reserve forces. VADM Peet said that we would do so. Ambassador Sullivan also mentioned a need for close support aircraft (T28, A37); a dual purpose civil/military air control and air defense system for the southern quadrant; diesel powered destroyer escorts; and LSTs, if such were available. The Ambassador said the Filipinos had been developing a rocket for use in seeding typhoons. Their rocket is presently limited to a ballistic mode but they desire a guidance system. He stated that he was trying to obtain a few NIKE cadavers with their guidance gear which we could give to the Filipinos and let them see what they could come up with in the way of a guidance system for their rocket. VADM Peet said he thought we might be able to get a couple of these as they phase out of Army inventory and would look into the matter.

3. (U) In discussing the possibilities of having to go to the treaty route rather than an executive agreement on the base rights issue, Secretary Schlesinger said he did not want to establish a precedent of including any quid in the text of any treaty for the use of bases.

4. (U) Ambassador Sullivan asked about the status of the new unified command plan and a short discussion of the plan ensued.

5. (U) In closing, Ambassador Sullivan said he had an invitation from President Marcos for Secretary and Mrs. Schlesinger to visit the Philippines in early May for the Corregidor celebration. Secretary Schlesinger said that he would not be able to accept but perhaps Admiral Gaylor could represent for that occasion. It was agreed to attempt to provide another four-star-level representative if Admiral Gaylor could not attend. Action has been initiated with CINCPAC to do so.

Memorandum of Conversation Prepared by: RADM T.J. Bigley
Approved by: [signed] Ray Peet
Date: 5/13/74

Distribution:
SecDef (1)
DepSecDeC (1)
OSD/CCS (1)
ASD (ISA)
DirDSAA (1)
DASD/EA&PA (ISA) (1)
ISA/RC (1)

1 Source: Washington National Records Center, OASD/ISA Files: FRC 330–77–0054, Philippines, 333, 13 May 1974. Confidential. Drafted by Bigley and approved by Peet.

330. Minutes of the Secretary of State’s Staff Meeting, Washington, May 9, 1974, 8 a.m.. 330. Minutes of the Secretary of State’s Staff Meeting, Washington, May 9, 1974, 8 a.m..1

Washington, May 9, 1974, 8 a.m.

The Secretary's 8:00 a.m. Staff Meeting
Friday, May 9, 1975

PRESENT:

THE SECRETARY OF STATE — HENRY A. KISSINGER

D - Mr. Ingersoll

M - Mr. Eagleburger, Acting

C - Mr. Sonnenfeldt

AF - Ambassador Mulcahy, Acting

ARA - Mr. Rogers

EA - Mr. Habib

EUR - Mr. Hartman

NEA - Mr. Sober, Acting

INR - Mr. Hyland

S/P - Mr. Lord

EB - Mr. Enders

S/PRS - Ambassador Anderson

PM - Mr. Goodby

IO - Ambassador Buffum

H - Ambassador McCloskey

L - Mr. Leigh

IATF - Ambassador Brown

S/S - Mr. Springsteen

S - Mr. Bremer

[Omitted is material unrelated to the Philippines.]

MR. HABIB: Well, there is another question, and that is Philippine concern over the Paracel Islands. Those islands are disputed between the Republic of China, PRC, the Vietnamese and the Philippines. And there are a whole bunch of islands, with different people sitting on different islands. I haven't got it all sorted out yet, but I will have shortly. And they have disputed claims. And of course the Filipinos now are worried, with what is going on in Vietnam, that somebody might try to assert claims to islands on which they presently sit, and have raised the interesting question as to whether or riot they would invoke SEATO in the bilateral mutual security treaty. And of course the answer is we don't like to have such things invoked in disputed areas.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: All another country has to do is dispute an area —

MR. HABIB: No, These islands have been disputed for years. Of course, the logical way would be the International Court.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: Before you start declaiming to the Filipinos about the defense treaty, I want to hear about it.

MR. HABIB: Yes, sir. As a matter of fact, that is another cable that I took out — any declaiming about the treaty.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: I don't want Sullivan to give lectures on legal obligations, either, on his own.

MR. HABIB: No.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: You wouldn't bet that he hasn't done it already.

MR. HABIB: He did the right thing.

SECRETARY KISSINGER Which is what — that we don't like to invoke treaties?

MR. HABIB: When they raised it with him, he just sort of set the whole problem aside by discussing the problem of disputed territories per se.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: Therefore making exactly the point that you just made here.

MR. HABIB: Well, let me —

SECRETARY KISSINGER: He raised the philosophical issue of whether we —

MR. HABIB: Right. And the reason I am raising it with you is I think —

SECRETARY KISSINGER I haven't thought it through. But I know I don't want Sullivan to jump the gun.

MR. HABIB: We will send you a paper.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: No. You tell Sullivan to shut up. Then you send me a paper.

MR. HABIB: Sullivan is asking us for our views.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: I know Sullivan. I do not want him to lecture the Philippine Government. There is enough uncertainty out there now. I don't know the facts on this island business.

MR. HABIB: We will get them to you.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: Although the fact that there are Philippine troops on it could not have been a secret from us for the last twenty years.

MR. HABIB: They are on some and others are on others. This is a long-standing —

SECRETARY KISSINGER: That's right. I remember it came up once before.

MR. HABIB: But you wouldn't want to —

SECRETARY KISSINGER: I wouldn't know what I want until I have studied it.

MR. HABIB: All right. We will keep Sullivan quiet.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: He has probably done it already.

MR. HABIB: No.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: Oh, yes. If you give a lecture on the nature of obligations in disputed territories to people that are nearly as intelligent as we are, they draw only one conclusion, especially in the present circumstances. Especially since we don't even know whether it is a genuinely disputed territory or whether someone is just disputing it.

MR. HABIB: No — this has a long history.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: I don't like policy made that way in this atmosphere, with a country towards which we have a defense treaty.

All right.

[Omitted is material unrelated to the Philippines.]

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Transcripts of Secretary of State Kissinger’s Staff Meetings, 1973–1977, E5177, Box 3. Secret. According to the summary outline that precedes the minutes, “Secretary wants to be advised before we discuss application of defense treaty with Philippine Government. Amb. Sullivan should not raise this subject.”

331. Memorandum From the Executive Secretary of the Department of State (Springsteen) to the Deputy Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs (Scowcroft), Washington, July 3, 1974. 331. Memorandum From the Executive Secretary of the Department of State (Springsteen) to the Deputy Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs (Scowcroft), Washington, July 3, 1974.1

Washington, July 3, 1974

DEPARTMENT OF STATE
Washington, D.C. 20520

July 3, 1974

MEMORANDUM FOR MAJOR GENERAL BRENT SCOWCROFT
THE WHITE HOUSE

Subject: Realignment of US-Philippine Bilateral Economic and Security Relationships

The expiration of the Laurel-Langley Agreement on July 3 of this year and the Philippine interest in renegotiating our 1947 Military Bases Agreement have set the stage for revising the basic U.S.-Philippine bilateral economic and security relationships. We have been undertaking to do this in accordance with the terms of reference set forth in the response to NSSM 155 and in NSDM 209 of March 27, 1973.

Dimensions of the Problem

On the economic side our immediate interests include both investment and trade. The Philippine Constitution and statutes contain various restrictions on foreigners' business activities, from which U.S. firms have been exempt under Laurel-Langley and the coterminous "Parity" Amendment to the Philippine Constitution. They include: prohibition of land ownership by foreigners or by firms owned more than 40 percent by non-Filipinos; prohibition of any foreign involvement in retail trade (broadly and vaguely defined); and restrictions on foreign participation in corporate management. Of the estimated $1 billion (market value) of U.S. investment in the Philippines, our Embassy has estimated that perhaps $70 million worth could be directly affected by the termination of the "Parity" Amendment and the Laurel-Langley Agreement, while the entire amount could be adversely affected should the overall investment climate deteriorate as a result of failure in our negotiations.

In the current negotiations, our most urgent need is the easing of transitional problems for the immediately affected investment, while we also hope to obtain the maximum feasible protection for U.S. firms against possible future actions by the Philippine Government (GOP) designed to restrict foreign business in favor of Philippine companies. The GOP seeks to retain an attractive climate for foreign investment, compatible with a substantial measure of economic nationalism. It has adopted certain measures to ease the adjustment problems of U.S. firms and has announced plans for others. In late May President Marcos declared a one-year moratorium on actions affecting U.S. land titles, issued a decree permitting land leases to foreigners, and stated publicly his intention to issue further decrees clarifying the definition of retail trade and amending restrictions on company management. However, the latter actions have not yet been taken and many companies hope (perhaps unrealistically) to be able to retain title to land already acquired.

The GOP actions and commitments described above were undertaken on the understanding that a U.S. negotiating team would be in Manila in June to negotiate a new treaty and trade agreement, and to hold preliminary discussions on items which might be subject to Most Favored Nation (MFN) tariff reductions, in accordance with the necessary U.S. legislative authority when it is obtained. While any agreement on investment protection would be reciprocal, Philippine investment interests in the U.S. are minor and GOP concerns re Laurel-Langley expiration focus on the loss of bilateral tariff preferences, which have been phased out under that Agreement. Specific GOP desires, in addition to a request for the benefits of any Generalized System of Preferences (GSP) , involve reductions in U.S. MFN tariff rates on certain exports of particular interest to the Philippines, including coconut oil, abaca cordage, and products of Philippine mahogany.

As regards security questions, the Philippine Government has long sought changes in the increasingly outdated provisions of the 1947 Military Bases Agreement, (which expires in 1991). Technical talks on a number of articles were held in 1971 and 1972, producing agreement on several proposed revisions. However, certain key issues, relating to criminal jurisdiction, taxes, customs, and immigration, were not resolved. In 1973 President Marcos told Ambassador Sullivan that all the outstanding "technical" issues could be easily solved, including criminal jurisdiction, but he indicated that problems remain in regard to "tenure and mutuality." While these problems have not been clearly defined, the Philippine Government may desire to move away from a specific expiration date in the revised MBA, and toward making it coterminous with the 1951 Mutual Security Agreement. The latter Agreement has no specific expiration date but provides for termination on one year's notice by either party. (Reversion to the GOP of part of Clark Air Base is also under consideration.)

The Philippine Government has complicated our approach to these two sets of negotiations by seeking to link them in some fashion, partly, it appears, in order to improve the GOP bargaining position on the economic side. President Marcos has made it clear that he regards the security and economic issues as related, and essential, elements of an updated Philippine-U.S. relationship, one based on the traditional close ties but without its previous preferential and one-sided character. (The House of Representatives' rejection of the Sugar Bill also complicated matters by removing one of the stabilizing factors and material benefits in our bilateral trade, on which the GOP had counted.)

U.S. Response

A U.S. delegation is now in Manila to begin negotiations on a Treaty of Economic Cooperation and Development, with an annexed agreement on trade. This Treaty is intended to provide: a. Protection of the legal (personal and property) rights of U.S. citizens, in the Philippines;

b. Guarantees of non-discriminatory treatment for U.S. investors vis-a-vis Filipinos, subject to specific exception, and protection against future nationalistic limitations;

c. Assurances that trade will be conducted on an MFN basis with only such exceptions as permitted under GATT, and other protection along the lines of the GATT. (The GATT allows departure from MFN in certain cases; e.g., measures for extension of GSP, for the U.S.-Canada auto agreement and for Free Trade Areas and Customs Unions.)

d. Assurance that the Philippines will benefit from any U.S. Generalized System of Preferences for developing countries.

The Annexed Agreement on Trade Measures, which has been drafted to be implemented under the authority of the proposed Trade Reform Act (TRA), would: a. Specify the GATT-type undertakings in greater detail;

b. Contain a schedule of trade concessions to be applied on an MFN basis to trade items of special interest to both parties;

c. Provide protection against new barriers to trade in items included in the schedules.

As regards specific trade items, we are considering MFN reduction in tariffs, under the terms and procedures set forth in the TRA, on the following items, for which the Philippines is (with one or two minor exceptions) the chief supplier: a. Coconut oil and coconut meat;

b. Philippine mahogany veneer, panels, and lumber;

c. abaca yarn and certain other fiber products, excluding cordage;

d. products of shell, glycerin, and a few other minor Philippine export items to the U.S.

U.S. import of these items in 1972 totaled $142 million, and our assessment on the basis of preliminary studies is that such reductions would have no adverse economic effects in the U.S.

In our negotiations regarding tariff reductions, we would seek a measure of reciprocity, particularly in Philippine tariffs and other trade barriers affecting U.S. agricultural exports, in addition to the desired investment benefits. Noting that the GOP has recently lowered its tariffs on soybeans, soybean oil, and other vegetable oils, we would seek some further reductions on such products or at least bindings, and would seek guarantees against new non-tariff barriers. Our Embassy has indicated that we could probably expect a reasonably cooperative Philippine response along these lines, and possibly some informal undertakings regarding continued purchase levels or market shares.

Agreement to negotiate bilaterally with the Philippines on trade and investment matters does not represent a departure from the basic U.S. position that trade concessions should normally be dealt with in the Multilateral Trade Negotiations, and should be offered in exchange for other trade concessions. While these principles remain valid, the exceptional circumstances present in our relations with the Philippines, including our national security and foreign relations interests, make the case unique and thus do not establish a precedent for bilateral trade agreements in our relations with other countries.

Because of the proposed trade agreement's dependence on the authority provided in the Trade Reform Act and the procedures required under that authority, the negotiations could not be concluded by July 3 in any case, but we and the GOP have regarded it as politically important to start them before that date. We have already completed, with satisfactory results, an extensive series of consultations with the Congress on these plans, and gave our draft Treaty and agreement to the GOP for consideration on June 15.

On the security side, we have told the GOP of our readiness to resume technical talks on the Bases Agreement whenever they choose. While our position on tenure is not yet determined, we have developed working drafts for most of the MBA articles to be revised. We are prepared to conduct negotiations parallel with our economic negotiations if necessary. However, we do not intend to trade economic interests for military benefits or vice versa. We expect, rather, that each negotiation will proceed on its own merits, although we recognize that the success of one may well affect progress on the other.

[signed for]
George S. Springsteen, Jr.
Executive Secretary

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Institutional Files (H-Files), Box H–239, NSDMs, NSDM 209, Philippines. Confidential. On April 17, 1975, the NSC staff logged this memorandum and marked it OBE.

332. Memorandum From the Deputy Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs (Scowcroft) to President Ford, Washington, November 7, 1974. 332. Memorandum From the Deputy Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs (Scowcroft) to President Ford, Washington, November 7, 1974.1

Washington, November 7, 1974

MEMORANDUM
THE WHITE HOUSE
WASHINGTON

November 7, 1974

MEMORANDUM FOR: THE PRESIDENT
FROM: BRENT SCOWCROFT [BS initialed]

SUBJECT: Philippine First Lady's Request to Call on Mrs. Ford

The Philippine First Lady, Mrs. Imelda Marcos, has asked to call on Mrs. Ford sometime next week.

Mrs. Marcos' current visit is another of her annual informal trips to the US. During each of these, she has exerted considerable effort to see the President or the First Lady. In late 1970 she was received by President Nixon and in 1971 Mrs. Nixon gave a small tea and President Nixon dropped by briefly. In early 1973, Mrs. Marcos did her best to attend the Inauguration as Philippine First Lady. Because she did not think the seat given her at the Inaugural ceremony sufficiently prominent, she stayed away from that and the Inaugural Ball, and instead attended a counter inaugural party with Jack Valenti.

The following are the principal advantages and disadvantages of Mrs. Ford's giving a tea for Mrs. Marcos:

Advantages — Would demonstrate the friendly ties that exist with a close South Asian ally.

— Would reassure the Philippines of US interest at a time when attention is focused on your visits to Northeast Asia.

— Would avoid giving offense to President and Mrs. Marcos.

Disadvantages — May be exploited by Mrs. Marcos to suggest US support for President Marcos' authoritarian political controls, which could generate criticism among certain elements in both the Philippines and in the US.

— Might present us with new requests for economic and military assistance to the Philippines, accompanied by substantial publicity in the Philippines.

— In light of her recent visit to Peking and meetings with Chairman and Mrs. Mao, could lead Mrs. Marcos to claim an underserved position of East-West go-between.

Mrs. Marcos can be counted upon to use a meeting and anything said at the meeting for her own political purposes (which are not invariably identical with those of her husband). Her record in this regard is such that the State Department and NSC Asian experts unanimously recommend against a meeting. The problems which such a meeting might bring, however, are not likely to be of a deeply serious or lasting nature. In other words, while the hazards of a meeting appear to outweigh its benefits, a decision either way appears manageable.

RECOMMENDATION:

That you indicate your preference for Mrs. Ford's giving a tea for Mrs. Marcos.

Approve [GRF initialed]
Disapprove

1 Source: Ford Library, National Security Adviser, Presidential Country Files for East Asia and the Pacific, Box 15, Philippines (1). Secret. Sent for action. Ford initialed his disapproval of a meeting between his wife and Mrs. Marcos.

333. Minutes of the Secretary of State’s Staff Meeting, Washington, February 6, 1975, 8 a.m.. 333. Minutes of the Secretary of State’s Staff Meeting, Washington, February 6, 1975, 8 a.m..1

Washington, February 6, 1975, 8 a.m.

Secretary's 8:00 a.m. Staff Meeting
Thursday, February 6, 1975

Present:

D- Mr. Ingersoll

E- Mr. Robinson

T- Mr. Maw

M- Ambassador Brown

C- Mr. Sonnenfeldt

AF- Mr. Mulcahy, Acting

ARA- Mr. Rogers

EA- Mr. Habib

EUR- Mr. Hartman

NEA- Mr. Atherton

INR- Mr. Hyland

S/P- Mr. Lord

EB- Mr. Boeker, Acting

S/PRS- Mr. Anderson

S/AM- Ambassador McCloskey

PM- Mr. Vest

IO- Ambassador Blake, Acting

H- Mr. Jenkins, Acting

L- Mr. Leigh

S/S- Mr. Springsteen

[Omitted is material unrelated to the Philippines.]

SECRETARY KISSINGER: What is going on there?

MR. HABIB: The rebellion is getting serious. Marcos is quite concerned. They are now approaching us for arms to equip separate battalions.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: What is our position conciliation and not confrontation?

MR. HABIB: That cable also came in just early this morning.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: Do we say conciliation and not confrontation with the rebels?

MR. HABIB: He tried conciliation in a meeting

SECRETARY KISSINGER: No — just to get you know my sympathy. I was being sarcastic. I am in favor of giving him arms.

MR. HABIB: I would be prepared to promote conciliation if possible.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: I want you to promote giving him arms.

MR. HABIB: This is one of those circumstances that unless he shows a bit of strength —

SECRETARY KISSINGER: I agree with you.

MR. HABIB: — he is not going to resolve this question; especially when the rebels are getting their arms from Libya.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: Sullivan can't be ambassador somewhere without having a war. Did you ship him his uniform?

MR. HABIB: He doesn't get any uniform for this.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: What are you doing about arms?

MR. HABIB: These are battalion level, small arms. They are willing to pay cash for them.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: In what time frame can you do it?

MR. HABIB: Tomorrow.

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Transcripts of Secretary of State Kissinger’s Staff Meetings, 1973–1977, E5177, Box 6. Secret. Telegram 1667, February 6, from Manila describes GOP weapons requests. (National Archives, Record Group 59, Central Foreign Policy Files) Telegram 2806, March 5, from Manila reports on the successful fulfillment of most of the GOP requests. (Ibid.)

334. Telegram 4661 From the Embassy in the Philippines to the Department of State, April 14, 1975, 0842Z. 334. Telegram 4661 From the Embassy in the Philippines to the Department of State, April 14, 1975, 0842Z.1

April 14, 1975, 0842Z

TELEGRAM
Department of State
MANILA 4661

P R 140842Z APR 75

FM AMEMBASSY MANILA TO SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 2208
INFO AMEMBASSY BANGKOK
AMEMBASSY KUALA LUMPUR
AMEMBASSY JAKARTA
AMEMBASSY SEOUL
AMEMBASSY SINGAPORE
AMEMBASSY TOKYO
CINCPAC

MANILA 4661 LIMDIS

DEPT PASS WHITE HOUSE, DOD, USIA, CIA

E.O. 11652: GDS
TAGS: PFOR, MARR, RP, US

SUBJECT: PHILIPPINES "REASSESSING" SECURITY ARRANGEMENTS WITH US 1. ALL MAJOR MANILA NEWSPAPERS MAY 13 CARRIED BANNER HEADLINE STORIES STATING THAT PHILIPPINES IS REASSESSING ITS SECURITY ARRANGEMENTS WITH U.S. IN LIGHT U.S. "ABANDONMENT OF CAMBODIA AND VIET-NAM." STORY WHICH QUOTES HIGH GOVERNMENT SOURCES, MAKES FOLLOWING POINTS: DELICATE BALANCE OF POWER IN ASIA SEEMS TO TEETER ON EDGE OF DANGER AND MAY HAVE BEEN WRECKED BY OCCURRENCES AND DEVELOPMENTS OF LAST SEVERAL MONTHS. HARD-HEADED REASSESSMENTS OF PHILIPPINE-AMERICAN SECURITY RELATIONS PREDICATED ON APPARENT NEW AMERICAN PERCEPTION OF ITS COMMITMENTS TO ITS ALLIES, PARTICULARLY IN ASIA: PHILIPPINES DISTURBED BY EMERGING VIEW THAT COMMITMENTS MADE BY AMERICAN PRESIDENTS ARE NOTHING MORE THAN STATEMENTS OF INTENT THAT DO NOT BIND THE AMERICAN PEOPLE, THE CONGRESS, OR THE GOVERNMENT. CAMBODIA AND SOUTH VIET-NAM, LIKE THE PHILIPPINES, HAVE DEFENSE TREATIES WITH THE UNITED STATES. IN VIEW U.S. TURNABOUTS IN CAMBODIA AND SOUTH VIET-NAM, STRENGTH OF U.S. PAPER GUARANTEE TO PHILIPPINES SERIOUSLY PLACED IN QUESTION AND GOVERNMENT SOURCES DOUBT TODAY THAT SECURITY PROVISO OF MUTUAL DEFENSE TREATY WOULD BE HONORED BY U.S. WHILE WE HAVE THESE SECURITY ARRANGEMENTS WITH U.S., WE HAVE ALWAYS RELIED ON NO ONE BUT OURSELVES, AND THIS POLICY OF SELF-RELIANCE UNDERSCORES NEED TO REEXAMINE ARRANGEMENTS THAT COULD PROVE TO BE A LIABILITY, RATHER THAN ANYTHING ELSE. WE HAVE TO ASK OURSELVES WHETHER WE CAN CONTINUE TO BE INVOLVED IN THE CONFLICTS AND ANIMOSITIES ENGENDERED BY POLICIES THAT ARE NOT OUR OWN. WHAT IS NOW BEING UNDERTAKEN BY THE PHILIPPINE GOVERNMENT IS AN UPDATED STUDY ON HOW USEFUL THE U.S. BASES ARE TO THE PHILIPPINES.

2. WHILE THIS OFFICIAL GOVERNMENT POSITION OWES MUCH OF ITS INSPIRATION TO GENUINE CONCERN ABOUT U.S. INTENTIONS IN ASIA, AND WHILE IT WAS DOUBTLESS INFLUENCED IN PART BY THE ATMOSPHERICS SURROUNDING CEAUCESCU VISIT, ITS MOST PROXIMATE CAUSE APPEARS TO HAVE BEEN CONSPICUOUS ABSENCE ANY MENTION WHATSOEVER OF PHILIPPINES IN PRESIDENT FORD'S FOREIGN POLICY SPEECH WHICH TOUGHED ON AUSTRALIA, NEW ZEALAND, INDONESIA, SINGAPORE, JAPAN, AND SOUTH KOREA. MANY FILIPINOS, ALWAYS SENSITIVE TO U.S. UTTERANCES, HAVE INTERPRETED THIS CIRCUMSTANCE TO ASSUMPTION THAT U.S. HAS "REASSESSED" PHILIPPINES OUT OF ITS SECURITY COMMITMENTS.

3. EMBASSY WILL BE HARD PUT TO EXPLAIN U.S. POSITION WITHOUT FURTHER WASHINGTON GUIDANCE. IF OMISSION OF PHILIPPINES WAS DELIBERATE AND REPRESENTS CONCLUSION THAT U.S. MILITARY BASES, VOA INSTALLATIONS, AND OTHER FACILITIES IN THIS COUNTRY ARE VIEWED WITH DIMINISHED VALUE IN OUR NEW GLOBAL POSTURE, EMBASSY WOULD APPRECIATE INSTRUCTIONS SOONEST ON MANNER IN WHICH DEPARTMENT WISHES US TO SHARE THIS CONCLUSION WITH OUR PHILIPPINE ALLIES. IT WILL BE APPRECIATED THAT CAREFUL PLANNING WILL BE REQUIRED TO HANDLE THIS SORT OF READJUSTMENT IN AN ORDERLY WAY.

4. IF, ON THE OTHER HAND, OMISSION OF PHILIPPINES WAS INADVERTENT, EMBASSY BELIEVED CURRENT DAMAGE CAN BE CONTAINED, BUT AT SOME PREDICTABLE COST. PHILIPPINES WILL PROBABLY POSE ISSUE IN SPANISH TERMS; I.E., U.S. EITHER GIVE AN IRON-CLAD COMMITMENT GO AUTOMATIC DEFENSE OF PHILIPPINES, OR ELSE SHIFT U.S. MILITARY BASE RIGHTS TO A RENTAL ARRANGEMENT.

5. SINCE PHILIPPINE LEADERSHIP SERIOUSLY DOUBTS U.S. SENATE WILL ACCEPT AUTOMATIC DEFENSE COMMITMENT, THEIR FOCUS WILL DOUBTLESS BE ON BASE RENTALS. EMBASSY ESTIMATES SUCH AN ARRANGEMENT CAN BE WORKED OUT WITH REASONABLE GOOD WILL, AND CALCULATES COST TO U.S. WILL PROBABLY RUN IN NEIGHBORHOOD OF THREE HUNDRED MILLION DOLLARS OVER THE NEXT FEW YEARS.

6. SINCE WE CAN DOUBTLESS EXPECT OFFICIAL DEMARCHE OF SOME SORT IN NEAR FUTURE TO FOLLOW UP THIS PRESS BARRAGE, REQUEST DEPARTMENT'S VIEWS SOONEST.

SULLIVAN

1 Source: National Archives, Record Group 59, Central Foreign Policy Files. Confidential; Priority; Limdis. Repeated for information to Bangkok, Kuala Lumpur, Jakarta, Seoul, Singapore, Tokyo, CINCPAC.

335. Backchannel Message 170 From the Ambassador to the Philippines (Sullivan) to the President’s Deputy Assistant for National Security Affairs (Scowcroft), Manila, April 16, 1975, 0321Z. 335. Backchannel Message 170 From the Ambassador to the Philippines (Sullivan) to the President’s Deputy Assistant for National Security Affairs (Scowcroft), Manila, April 16, 1975, 0321Z.1

April 16, 1975, 0321Z

R 160321Z APR 75

TO THE WHITE HOUSE

160321Z APR 75

TO: WHITE HOUSE
FROM: MANILA 170

EYES ONLY GENERAL SCOWCROFT FROM AMBASSADOR SULLIVAN

REF: W.H. 50639

1. IN REFTEL YOU INVITED ME TO USE THIS CHANNEL ON MATTERS OF PARTICULAR SENSITIVITY. I REALIZE THIS IS A TIME OF GREAT PREOCCUPATION WITH INDOCHINA, BUT THERE ARE REPERCUSSIONS RE OUR BASES IN PHILIPPINES ON WHICH I HAVE BEEN UNABLE OBTAIN GUIDANCE IN STATE CHANNELS.

2. MATTER AT ISSUE CONCERNS PHILIPPINE "REASSESSMENT" U.S. BASES. I FEEL THIS CAN BE HANDLED EFFECTIVELY IF WE TAKE CERTAIN FORTHRIGHT STEPS. AMONG STEPS WHICH I HAVE BEEN URGING THROUGH HABIB IS PROPOSAL THAT PRESIDENT FORD PLAN TO MAKE MANILA A ONE-WAY "REST STOP" ENROUTE TO CHINA NEXT FALL. I HAVE ALSO SUGGESTED THAT HAK DO SAME THING ON HIS PREPARATORY TRIP, ASSUMING ONE WILL BE MADE.

3. MY PURPOSE IN THIS IS TO HAVE HAK AND PHILS PREPARE A "DECLARATION OF PRINCIPLES" WHICH WOULD THEN BE SIGNED BY PRESIDENTS FORD AND MARCOS. THIS DECLARATION COULD TAKE MOST OF THE STEAM OUT OF THE MILITARY BASES ISSUE AND LAY FOUNDATION FOR ORDERLY NEGOTIATIONS ON SUBJECT WITH LEAST DISRUPTIVE RESULTS. IT WOULD PROBABLY PRESAGE SUBSTITUTION OF SOME SORT OF ANNUAL RENTAL IN PLACE OF OUR CURRENT ANNUAL MILITARY ASSISTANCE PROGRAM. ALL IN ALL, THESE PROPOSALS SEEM A SMALL PRICE TO PAY FOR PRESERVATION OF OUR BASES HERE.

4. CURRENT PROBLEM IS THAT ALL OFFICIAL U.S. STATEMENTS ON ASIA SEEM TO IGNORE PHILIPPINES. PRESIDENT FORD'S FOREIGN POLICY SPEECH LISTED NUMBER OF FRIENDS IN ASIA, BUT OMITTED PHILIPPINES. JIM SCHLESINGER'S NEW YORK SPEECH SPOKE OF HONORING OUR COMMITMENTS TO JAPAN AND KOREA, BUT SAID NOTHING OF PHILIPPINES. I DON'T THINK A SPECIAL, GRATUITOUS, STATEMENT ON PHILIPPINES IS REQUIRED AT THIS POINT, BECAUSE IT WOULD APPEAR TOO FACILE. BUT I DO NEED GUIDANCE FOR ORDERLY NEGOTIATIONS, AND IN MY JUDGMENT, VISITS BY PRESIDENT FORD AND HAK ARE CENTERPIECE OF THAT GUIDANCE.

5. IT WOULD APPEAR FROM ABSENCE ANY HABIB REPLY TO THREE MESSAGES I HAVE SENT HIM ON THIS SUBJECT THAT HE IS TOO TIED UP WITH OTHER THINGS TO HAVE RAISED SUBJECT TO DECISION LEVELS. HE MAY ALSO FEEL THAT FALL IS LONG WAYS AHEAD AND DECISIONS CAN BE MADE MUCH LATER. UNFORTUNATELY, I NEED DECISION NOW SO THAT I KNOW HOW TO SHAPE STRATEGY FOR EFFECTIVE RETENTION OF OUR BASES.

6. THEREFORE, I AM ENLISTING YOUR HELP TO CUT THROUGH BUREAUCRACY TO HAK AND THE PRESIDENT FOR AN EARLY (AND FAVORABLE) REPLY.

7. WARM REGARDS

1 Source: Ford Library, National Security Adviser, Backchannel Messages, Box 7, Southeast Asia, 4/75, Incoming. Confidential; Eyes Only.

336. Memorandum From W.R. Smyser of the National Security Council Staff to Secretary of State Kissinger, Washington, April 21, 1975. 336. Memorandum From W.R. Smyser of the National Security Council Staff to Secretary of State Kissinger, Washington, April 21, 1975.1

Washington, April 21, 1975

MEMORANDUM
NATIONAL SECURITY COUNCIL
IMMEDIATE ACTION

April 21, 1975

MEMORANDUM FOR: SECRETARY KISSINGER
FROM: W.R. SMYSER [WRS initialed]
SUBJECT: Presidential Assurances to Philippine President Marcos

Secretary Simon asked you (Tab B) if there is any message that he could pass from the President or you to President Marcos when he sees Marcos on April 23.

Before we had a chance to make our views known, State sent out yesterday, in your name, a message (Tab C) turning down Simon's offer.

I believe the State response misses a strategic opportunity to reassure Marcos in light of the strong fears he has expressed in the past week that Indochina means the Philippines can no longer depend on the U.S. security commitment, and that the Philippines therefore must reassess the U.S. base presence. I recognize that Marcos may be exaggerating — as he often does — and that we must not leave ourselves vulnerable in any renegotiation of our base presence that may result. An important and immediate means to try to lessen Marcos' anxieties and consequent pressures on us, however, would be to recognize his legitimate fears, and to reassure him as to the constancy of our intentions towards the Philippines.

Further, for Simon, a leading figure in this Administration, to meet with Marcos but to say nothing as regards Marcos publicly expressed concern over U.S. intentions would only intensify Marcos' anxiety and strengthen his long-term suspicions that the U.S. takes the Philippines for granted.

At Tab A is a draft back channel cable for you to Secretary Simon saying that you have reconsidered your earlier reaction and you believe it would be useful for him to pass reassurances during his April 23 meeting with President Marcos.

RECOMMENDATION

That you approve the draft cable to Secretary Simon at Tab A.

APPROVE
DISAPPROVE

1 Source: Ford Library, National Security Adviser, Presidential Country Files for East Asia and the Pacific, Box 15, Philippines (2). Secret. Sent for immediate action. Although neither recommendation was initialed, a handwritten notation on the first page reads, “Taken care of per Gen S.” Attached but not published are Tab A, the draft backchannel telegram from the White House to Simon; Tab B, telegram 2681, April 18, from the Department of Treasury to the Department of State; and Tab C, telegram 090638, April 20, to Manila.

337. Memorandum From Jan Lodal of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Deputy Assistant for National Security Affairs (Scowcroft), Washington, May 7, 1975. 337. Memorandum From Jan Lodal of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Deputy Assistant for National Security Affairs (Scowcroft), Washington, May 7, 1975.1

Washington, May 7, 1975

[1 page not declassified.]

1 Source: Library of Congress, Henry Kissinger Papers, Chronological File, 1969–1975, TS 9, May 1975. Top Secret; Sensitive.

338. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, July 10, 1975, 10:30 a.m. 338. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, July 10, 1975, 10:30 a.m. 1

Washington, July 10, 1975, 10:30 a.m.

THE WHITE HOUSE
WASHINGTON

MEMORANDUM OF CONVERSATION

PARTICIPANTS:

William H. Sullivan, United States Ambassador to the Philippines

Lieutenant General Brent Scowcroft, USAF Deputy Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs

John J. Taylor, Staff Member, NSC

DATE, TIME, AND PLACE: July 10, 1975, 10:30

The White House

SUBJECT: The Philippine s

Ambassador Sullivan said that the Philippine leaders were shocked by U.S. inaction in the face of the collapse of Indochina. At the same time Marcos felt relatively close to President Nixon, and he blames Nixon's troubles on a hostile press and Congress, which he also sees as being unfriendly to himself.

The Ambassador said that Assistant Secretary Habib had informed him that Secretary Kissinger had now agreed to push for a Presidential visit to Manila and Jakarta on the way home from the Peking trip later this year. The Ambassador said that this was good news and he looked forward to a communiqué or a declaration at the conclusion of the Manila visit which would reflect the direction of our relations with the Philippines. He thought that the visit should be followed up by occasional personal correspondence between President Ford and Marcos.

During his tour in Manila, the Ambassador said, he has been preoccupied with two substantive matters. The first deals with economic and commercial questions. He believes most of these questions have been solved to the satisfaction of both sides. There is still need, however, to complete a treaty on trade and investment.

The next matter at hand is the renegotiation of our military base rights. While a NSSM would be necessary to set out our policies on this question, the Ambassador hoped that he could receive some preliminary instructions that would allow him to smoke out the Philippine desires. This could make an essential contribution to the preparation of the NSSM.

In the negotiations, the Ambassador said that there would be several Philippine concerns. First of all was the question of sovereignty over the bases. The Philippines would want at least the appearance of sovereignty. They do not want to run the bases but would like Philippine guards at the gate, Philippine base commanders, etc.

The Filipinos also had talked about automaticity in the security commitment on the basis of the NATO model. The Ambassador was uncertain how serious Marcos was on this issue. He agreed with General Scowcroft that any revision of the Defense Treaty along these lines would be very difficult to achieve on the Hill. The Ambassador said an alternative might be an air defense agreement.

It will be important, the Ambassador said, to alert Congress at an early date to our renegotiation of the base agreement. We will have to consider carefully whether we should choose to negotiate a new treaty or a new agreement.

Another issue was the quid pro quo for use of the bases. In receiving MAP, the Philippines see themselves as annual mendicants. The Ambassador said he realized that DOD objects to the idea of rental payments, but he thought there could be some acceptable variation. For example, the Navy could arrange to pay for its use of facilities. Tenure was another issue. The Philippines would like to see the lease period shortened from the present date of 1991. The Ambassador suggested we consider making the tenure co-equal with the Mutual Defense Treaty.

We would also have to agree to return some military acreage to civilian use. Clark Air Base, he pointed out, is four times larger than the District of Columbia.

The Ambassador thought that, despite the risks involved, the next time Mrs. Marcos is in the United States we should make a point of asking Mrs. Ford to invite her to the White House.

The Ambassador said that he hoped that he could receive some general instructions on the base negotiations no later than August so that substantive talks could begin in October. Preferably an agreement will be concluded before the President's visit to Manila.

1 Source: Ford Library, National Security Adviser, Presidential Country Files for East Asia and the Pacific, Box 15, Philippines (3). Secret; Sensitive. Scowcroft’s talking points, July 9, from Smyser are in the Library of Congress, Henry Kissinger Papers, Chronological File, 1969–1975, TS 10, July 1975.

339. Memorandum From John Froebe of the National Security Council Staff to Secretary of State Kissinger, Washington, August 8, 1975. 339. Memorandum From John Froebe of the National Security Council Staff to Secretary of State Kissinger, Washington, August 8, 1975.1

Washington, August 8, 1975

MEMORANDUM
NATIONAL SECURITY COUNCIL
ACTION

August 8, 1975

MEMORANDUM FOR SECRETARY KISSINGER
THROUGH: GENERAL SCOWCROFT
FROM: JOHN A. FROEBE, JR. [JAF initialed]

SUBJECT: Possible Call on Mrs. Ford by Philippine First Lady

Mrs. Imelda Marcos arrived in New York today on one of her periodic informal visits. She would almost certainly like to call on Mrs. Ford — and also the President, if she thought a meeting with him were possible. She apparently will not, as in the past, ask for a call, given the fact that she has been consistently turned down in the past two years.

Mrs. Marcos has just visited Bolivia and other countries, where she reportedly has explored alternative sources of petroleum for the Philippines. According to some reports, she might leave next week for Cuba to discuss common interests the Philippines and Cuba have as sugar producers.

You are familiar with the difficulties which resulted from Mrs. Marcos' meeting with President and Mrs. Nixon. In 1970, when she met with them over tea, she pleaded emotionally for massive new U.S. assistance to the Philippines to avert what she said would otherwise be a communist takeover there. When she returned from Manila, she claimed publicly that the President had promised her a half billion dollars in new economic assistance to the Philippines. At the time of the 1973 inaugural, when she was given no answer on her request to meet the First Family and when the status offered her for the inaugural ceremonies did not meet her liking, she attended a counter-inaugural ball with Jack Valenti. Since then she has let her continued interest in meeting with the First Family be known, but has not pressed her case.

Ambassador Sullivan argues vigorously that the time has come to stop cold-shouldering Mrs. Marcos. He believes that she has assumed new importance in Philippine diplomacy — her trips earlier this year to Peking, Moscow, and the Mid-East — and that, because she has not had access to the White House in recent years, she has injected an anti-American bias into her efforts to improve Philippine standing with the Third World.

Sullivan made this pitch to General Scowcroft here last month, and General Scowcroft agreed in principle that it would be useful if Mrs. Ford could receive Mrs. Marcos. Sullivan on August 7 sent General Scowcroft a backchannel (Tab B) to urge that Mrs. Ford see Mrs. Marcos on August 8 or 9.

It would be virtually impossible for Mrs. Ford to see Mrs. Marcos on such short notice before the President and Mrs. Ford leave on August 10 for two weeks in Colorado.

At Tab A is a draft State cable which tells Ambassador Sullivan that we intend to inform Mrs. Marcos informally that an immediate meeting is impossible for scheduling reasons, but that Mrs. Ford would like to see Mrs. Marcos at "some future date."

I agree that it would be useful if Mrs. Ford could receive Mrs. Marcos. This could be done in a way which limits the risk that she would repeat her past performances. Her awareness of our sensitivity should itself reduce her proclivity to exploit a call on Mrs. Ford, or to push too strenuously for a meeting with the President.

The draft State cable by implication leaves open the possibilities that Mrs. Marcos will suggest that she meet with the President and Mrs. Ford in Colorado — which she suggested last December when they went to Vail — or that she wait until they return to Washington in late August. We presumably could refuse a Colorado meeting. At the same time, we could leave open the possibility of a late August meeting, or one late this year during what will probably be another trip here by Mrs. Marcos.

RECOMMENDATION:

That you approve the draft State cable to Ambassador Sullivan at Tab A.

APPROVE [BS initialed]
DISAPPROVE

1 Source: Ford Library, National Security Adviser, Presidential Country Files for East Asia and the Pacific, Box 15, Philippines (3). Secret. Sent for action. Scowcroft initialed his approval of the sending of a draft State cable to Sullivan. Attached but not published are Tab A, the draft cable to Sullivan, and Tab B, the August 7 backchannel telegram from Sullivan. A handwritten notation on the first page indicates that at 10:30 p.m. on August 8, the NSC staff directed the Department of State to send the telegram.

340. Minutes of the Secretary of State’s Staff Meeting, Washington, September 22, 1975, 8 a.m.. 340. Minutes of the Secretary of State’s Staff Meeting, Washington, September 22, 1975, 8 a.m..1

Washington, September 22, 1975, 8 a.m.

In Attendance - Monday, Sept. 8, 1975

Secretary of State Kissinger - Chairman

P - Mr. Sisco

E - Mr. Robinson

T - Mr. Maw

C - Mr. Sonnenfeldt

AF - Mr. Davis

ARA - Mr. Rogers

EA - Mr. Habib

EUR - Mr. Hartman

NEA - Mr. Sober (Acting)

INR - Mr. Hyland

S/P - Mr. Lord

EA - Mr. Enders

S/PRS - Mr. Anderson

PM - Mr. Stern (Acting)

IO - Mr. Buffum

H - Mr. McCloskey

L - Mr. Leigh

S/S - Mr. Springsteen

S - Mr. Bremer

S - Mr. Barbian

[Omitted is material unrelated to the Philippines.]

MR. HABIB: Well, the problem I was facing was, first of all, the Philippines. The decision now of the White House is to cut grant aid to the Philippines.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: What do you mean "decision at the White House?" Now, what does that mean operationally?

MR. HABIB: I was told the President signed off on a piece of paper.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: That can happen only if the President didn't keep me informed. There's no way the President would sign off on a piece of paper without telling me.

MR. STERNS: On the Philippines, Scowcroft was given the choice of two levels — 25 million and 19.6. He took 19.6.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: But don't you come to me crying after a Presidential decision. This is something I can handle three times a week if it's brought to my attention.

MR. HABIB: Well, it came to my attention when I was told that of a Presidential decision. We had requested 25 million. I was told by PM that our position was rejected. And so my point is to raise it. That's why I'm raising it with you.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: That happens only because you guys constantly negotiate. If it's brought to me it cannot be rejected. There's no way that the President can rule on a six-million-dollar items against me. I mean that just cannot happen, unless you let it go up through the whole damn procedure.

MR. HABIB: Our procedure is to put in simply what we want. I don't know what goes on there.

They don't keep us informed until a decision is made—am I correct?

SECRETARY KISSINGER: "They" is the NSC staff, to whom I have some relationship; and "they" is the President, to whom I can talk every morning. So don't tell me.

If I understand the 25 million is important to the Philippines, it never gets to be an issue. When have we ever lost an argument when I can focus on it?

MR. HABIB: That's what I'm hoping.

MR. STERN: Against OMB.

MR. STERN: It's OMB. And the way to handle that —

SECRETARY KISSINGER: NOW, the President will have to overrule a decision he's already made and that's going to create a lot of bad feelings that are totally unnecessary.

MR. SOBER: Well, Mr. Secretary, sometimes we don't really know. The same way last week — we learned about it after the action was taken.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: What do you have to do with the Philippines?

MR. SOBER: Well, it's not the Philippines, but at the same time the President made a decision about a decision you had made about some small aid to CENTO. You had said something to the CENTO Ministerial Meeting. And we learned after the President acted that it hadn't been submitted or knocked out, and we're trying to go back and get it restored, but it's in the same process.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: It's the Department's business to know what's going on over there bureaucratically. There's no way that I can be asked to be overruled on which there was already a Presidential decision. There's no way on which these decisions could go.

MR. HABIB: Well, the Bureau found out what decision was made in advance of the decision. That way I just don't know.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: Of course the NSC knows.

MR. HABIB: Our feeling is we'll just have to work a little more closely with the NSC, so we understand every time a decision is coming up and we recommend it. We've got to be told in advance.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: You've got to tell me if it's important or if we don't care how the decision goes.

I'm not saying we have to win every time. But if it's important enough to ask me to go to the President to overrule a decision that's already made, then it sure as hell is important for me to go to him ahead of time.

(Mr. Robinson leaves the room.)

MR. HABIB: We've got some other things taken out that we don't find objectionable. For example, we cut the Thai out of that program by 25 million dollars. But I'm not arguing. I think we can shift some of that over to grant. But on the Filipino one, I think it's worth going back because of the base negotiations. If it weren't for the base negotiations, I wouldn't raise it.

[Omitted is material unrelated to the Philippines.]

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Transcripts of Secretary of State Kissinger’s Staff Meetings, 1973–1977, E5177, Box 8. Secret.

341. Editorial Note. 341. Editorial Note.

On November 13, 1975, in anticipation of President Gerald Ford’s visit to the Philippines, the United States Embassy in Manila sent telegram 15944 reporting Philippine President Ferdinand Marcos’s suggested topics of conversation: “(A) U.S.-R.P. mutual security relations, (B) U.S.-R.P. economic relations, and (C) U.S. military facilities in the Philippines.” (Ford Library, National Security Adviser, NSC Staff for East Asia and Pacific Affairs Convenience File, Box 18, President’s Trip to the Philippines and Indonesia)

From December 1 until December 7, 1975, Ford and Secretary of State Henry Kissinger travelled to East Asia and made official visits to China, Indonesia, and the Philippines. On December 6, after participating in arrival ceremonies, Ford and Kissinger met with Marcos and Foreign Secretary Carlos Romulo from 6:15 until 7 p.m. at Malacanang Palace in Manila. The next morning, Ford and Kissinger met with Marcos and Romulo from 9:30 until 10:30 on the Philippine presidential yacht Ang Pangulo as it cruised to Corregidor Island. (Ford Library, President’s Daily Diary, December 1–7, 1975) No memoranda of conversation from these meetings have been found. On July 9, 1976, Thomas Barnes of the National Security Council Staff informed Brent Scowcroft, the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs, “We have checked with Peter Rodman, and unfortunately there are no notes from the President’s December meeting with Marcos to determine what, if anything, the President agreed to.” (Ford Library, National Security Adviser, Backchannel Messages, Box 7, Southeast Asia, 7/76, Outgoing)

On November 13, 1975, in anticipation of President Gerald Ford's visit to the Philippines, the United States Embassy in Manila sent telegram 15944 reporting Philippine President Ferdinand Marcos 's suggested topics of conversation: "(A) U.S.-R.P. mutual security relations, (B) U.S.-R.P. economic relations, and (C) U.S. military facilities in the Philippines." (Ford Library, National Security Adviser, NSC Staff for East Asia and Pacific Affairs Convenience File, Box 18, President's Trip to the Philippines and Indonesia)

From December 1 until December 7, 1975, Ford and Secretary of State Henry Kissinger travelled in East Asia and made official visits to China, Indonesia, and the Philippines. On December 6, after participating in arrival ceremonies, Ford and Kissinger met with Marcos and Foreign Secretary Romulo from 6:15 until 7:00 p.m. at Malacanang Palace in Manila. The next morning, Ford and Kissinger met with Marcos and Romulo from 9:30 until 10:30 on the Philippine presidential yacht "Ang Pangulo" as it cruised to Corregidor Island. (Ford Library, President's Daily Diary, December 1-7, 1975) No memoranda of conversation from these meetings have been found. On July 9, 1976, Thomas Barnes of the National Security Council Staff informed Brent Scowcroft, the President's Assistant for National Security Affairs, "We have checked with Peter Rodman, and unfortunately there are no notes from the President's December meeting with Marcos to determine what, if anything, the President agreed to." (Ford Library, National Security Adviser, Backchannel Messages, Box 7, Southeast Asia, 7/76, Outgoing)

342. Editorial Note. 342. Editorial Note.

On September 2, 1975, Thomas Barnes of the National Security Council (NSC) Staff sent a memorandum to Secretary of State Henry Kissinger suggesting a review of U.S. policy toward military bases in the Philippines in anticipation of future negotiations with the Philippine Government. On the first page of Barnes’ memorandum, Deputy Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs Brent Scowcroft wrote, “HAK wants the review in terms of our entire Pacific posture and interests—not just SEA.” (Ford Library, NSC Institutional Files (H-Files), Box H–40, NSSM 235, U.S. Interests and Objectives in the Asia-Pacific Region [2 of 2] [11]) In response to Kissinger’s request, Scowcroft issued National Security Study Memorandum 235 (Document 23) on January 15, 1976, asking the Central Intelligence Agency and the Departments of State and Defense to review American interests and security objectives in the Asia-Pacific region in light of the military base negotiations with the Philippines. The NSC Interdepartmental Group for East Asia prepared a paper in response to NSSM 235; Part I of the NSSM 235 paper is ibid., H–17, Institutional Files, Meetings (IFM), SRG Meeting, NSSM 235, June 4, 1976 (1); Part II is ibid., Box H–39, NSSMs, NSSM 235 (1 of 2). Part I dealt mostly with American interests and objectives in the Asia-Pacific area, whereas Part II considered American bases and interests in the Philippines. A Senior Review Group meeting on June 4, 1976 considered Part I of the NSSM 235 paper, generally ignoring those parts of the paper that specifically discussed the Philippines. (Ford Library, NSC Institutional Files [H-Files], Box H–24, Meeting Minutes, SRG, Originals, June 1976) Scowcroft sent out a revised version of Part I of the NSSM 235 paper on November 5, 1976. (Ibid., Box H–39, NSSMs, NSSM 235 [1 of 2], Folder 1) The NSC staff considered Part II to be overtaken by events and nothing further was done with it.

On September 2, 1975, Thomas Barnes of the National Security Council (NSC) Staff sent a memorandum to Secretary of State Henry Kissinger suggesting a review of U.S. policy toward military bases in the Philippines in anticipation of future negotiations with the Philippine government. On the first page of Barnes' memorandum, Deputy Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs Brent Scowcroft wrote, "HAK wants the review in terms of our entire Pacific posture and interests—not just SEA." (Ford Library, NSC Institutional Files (H-Files), Box H-40, NSSM 235, U.S. Interests and Objectives in the Asia-Pacific Region [2 of 2] [11]) In response to Kissinger's request, Scowcroft issued National Security Study Memorandum (NSSM) 235 [printed in FRUS, 1973-1976, E–12, regional chapter] on January 15, 1976, asking the Central Intelligence Agency and the Departments of State and Defense to review American interests and security objectives in the Asia-Pacific region in light of the military base negotiations with the Philippines. The NSC Interdepartmental Group for East Asia prepared a paper in response to NSSM 235; Part I of the NSSM 235 paper is ibid., H-17, Institutional Files, Meetings (IFM), SRG Meeting, NSSM 235, June 4, 1976 (1); Part II is ibid., Box H-39, NSSMs, NSSM 235 (1 of 2). Part I dealt mostly with American interests and objectives in the Asia-Pacific area, whereas Part II considered American bases and interests in the Philippines. A Senior Review Group meeting on June 4, 1976 considered Part I of the NSSM 235 paper, generally ignoring those parts of the paper that specifically discussed the Philippines. (Ford Library, NSC Institutional Files [H-Files], Box H-24, Meeting Minutes, SRG, Originals, June 1976) Scowcroft sent out a revised version of Part I of the NSSM 235 paper on November 5, 1976. (Ibid., Box H-39, NSSMs, NSSM 235 [1 of 2], Folder 1) The NSC staff considered Part II to be overtaken by events and nothing further was done with it.

343. Telegram 81789 From the Department of State to the Embassy in the Philippines, April 5, 1976, 2357Z. 343. Telegram 81789 From the Department of State to the Embassy in the Philippines, April 5, 1976, 2357Z.1

April 5, 1976, 2357Z

TELEGRAM
Department of State
081789

R 052357Z APR 76

FM SECSTATE WASHDC TO AMEMBASSY MANILA
INFO USDEL MTN GENEVA
CINCPAC HONOLULU HI

STATE 081789

LIMDIS CINCPAC FOR POLAD

E.O. 11652: GDS
TAGS: ETRD, RP

SUBJECT: PHILIPPINE NEGOTIATIONS — MEETING WITH VIRATA

1. APRIL 2 FINANCE SECRETARY VIRATA, AMBASSADORS VEGA AND SUAREZ, MET WITH ASSISTANT SECRETARY HABIB, AMBASSADOR SULLIVAN AND DEPUTY ASSISTANT SECRETARY EDMOND. FOLLOWING ARE MAIN POINTS OF CONVERSATION. MEMCON BEING POUCHED.

2. VIRATA CONFIRMED THAT TAX TREATY APPEARED AGREED SUBJECT TO FINAL REVIEW OF TEXT. HABIB NOTED THAT TEXTILE CONSULTATIONS NOT SUCCESSFUL BUT SUGGESTED NEW EFFORT AIMED AT TRANSFER BETWEEN TRADITIONAL AND NONTRADITIONAL CATEGORIES.

3. REGARDING ECONOMIC NEGOTIATIONS, HABIB SAID PHILIPPINE TRADE OFFERS SO FAR DID NOT APPEAR VERY CONCESSIONAL, THAT U.S. APPRECIATED HAVING PHILIPPINE DRAFT ON INVESTMENT AND WOULD REVIEW IT, AND U.S. WOULD EXPLORE POSSIBILITY OF GSP WAIVER. HOWEVER, HE STRESSED THAT BLANKET WAIVER GOP SEEKING IS NOT IN THE CARDS AND THAT ESSENTIAL REQUIREMENT FOR AGREEMENT WAS A SATISFACTORY OVERALL PACKAGE THAT THE UNITED STATES COULD ACCEPT AS BEING IN ITS INTERESTS. ASKED HOW HE SAW NEGOTIATIONS PROCEEDING, HABIB SAID HE FELT WE WERE IN FIRST STAGE AND THAT AFTER A FEW MORE EXCHANGES WE WOULD PROBABLY WANT TO RECESS AND EACH SIDE CONSIDER THE OTHERS PROPOSALS FOR A PERIOD OF TIME. HE INDICATED THAT WE FELT WE SAW THE SHAPE OF AN ULTIMATE AGREEMENT, BUT THAT IT WOULD TAKE CONSIDERABLY MORE WORK TO ACHIEVE.

4. TO VIRATA INQUIRY ON LINKAGE OF ECONOMIC AND BASE TALKS, HABIB REPLIED THAT WE VIEWED THEM AS SEPARATE, WITH EACH PROCEEDING ON ITS OWN MERITS. HE THOUGHT THE ECONOMIC NEGOTIATIONS WOULD BE THE MORE DIFFICULT OF THE TWO. BASE TALKS HE FELT SHOULD PRESENT RELATIVELY FEW PROBLEMS, SINCE THE PHILIPPINES RECOGNIZED THE DESIRABILITY OF THE U.S. RETAINING ITS BASES AND THE U.S. RECOGNIZES THE NEED TO MEET REQUIREMENTS OF PHILIPPINE SOVEREIGNTY. HE REJECTED A COMPARISON WITH SPAIN POINTING OUT THAT THE U.S.-PHILIPPINE RELATIONSHIP IS BASED ON A MUTUAL DEFENSE TREATY. KISSINGER

1 Source: National Archives, Record Group 59, Central Foreign Policy Files. Secret; Limdis. Repeated to the MTN Delegation in Geneva and to CINCPAC in Honolulu. Drafted by Willner, Country Officer for the Philippines; cleared by Edmond; and approved by Habib. The memorandum of conversation is in the Ford Library, National Security Adviser, NSC Staff for East Asia and Pacific Affairs, Convenience Files, Box 10.

344. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, April 10, 1976, 11 a.m. 344. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, April 10, 1976, 11 a.m. 1

Washington, April 10, 1976, 11 a.m.

DEPARTMENT OF STATE

Memorandum of Conversation

DATE: April 10, 1976
11:00 a.m.
The Secretary's Office

SUBJECT: Military Base Negotiations with the Philippines; the Secretary's Meeting with General Carlos P. Romulo, Secretary of Foreign Affairs, the Philippines, April 12, 1976

Participants:

The Secretary

Assistant Secretary Philip C. Habib

Ambassador William H. Sullivan

Mr. Benjamin A. Fleck, Country Director, Philippines (Note-taker)

Mr. Paul Barbian

Distribution:

The Secretary: Imelda Marcos is one woman I have totally failed with — she never answered my note.

Amb. Sullivan: She is trying to be designated as successor to President Marcos.

The Secretary: Why would he do a thing like that?

Amb. Sullivan: He doesn't want to. But she maneuvered things in such a way that he had no choice but to appoint her as Governor of Greater Manila, even though he had not originally wanted to appoint her to that position.

The Secretary: Is there a final limit on Marcos' term of office?

Arab. Sullivan: No, but someone might shoot him.

The Secretary: Is there a file I should have for this session?

Mr. Barbian: Yes sir, right there on your desk.

The Secretary: What's the issue?

Amb. Sullivan: If I may lay out the scenario — you will open the session with a few remarks, pointing out that we are not meeting in a spirit of confrontation, and then turn the floor over to Romulo. He had told us that he will enunciate a series of principles. We do not know exactly what they will be but we do have a previous informal paper which was given us which we believe contains the probable Philippine position. That position is outlined on page two of the briefing memorandum.

The Secretary: We can agree to principles one and two, can we not?

Amb. Sullivan: We can agree to most of them, which are legitimate demands. Rather than ask them to prepare a formal negotiating document, which I fear would be a horrendous document, our tactic is for you to listen to Romulo's principles and then to lay on the table our draft of a new agreement to be negotiated.

The Secretary: That should stop the negotiations. They will want to read it.

Amb. Sullivan: That's right. Then we will adjourn back

to the Philippines, where the negotiations will take place.

The Secretary: Wouldn't it have been more polite, especially to me, to have distributed it in advance, so that we all would know what it says?

Amb. Sullivan: No. The idea is not to negotiate at this session. You should table the draft only at the end of the meeting.

The Secretary: In other words, we will be operating from a document which they haven't read and which I haven't read. Even I can do that! Are there any talking points?

Amb. Sullivan: Yes sir. At Tab 4, there are talking points for the anticipated Philippine positions: As you see, the first one listed is the question of paying rent for the bases.

The Secretary: Are we willing to enter into a Security Assistance Agreement?

Amb. Sullivan: The Filipinos want to terminate the Military Assistance Group in the Philippines and set up a purchasing mission here instead. They would like us to pay rent for the bases. The Department of Defense is opposed and would prefer the Turkish pattern. I think the Filipinos in due course would accept that. The Department of Defense objects to payment of rent because it would have to come out of the defense budget.

The Secretary: We have just told the Greeks and the Turks that we won't pay rent.

Mr. Habib: Yes, but we have agreed to a multi-year commitment to the Turks. Can we get Congressional approval for it?

The Secretary: Probably not.

Amb. Sullivan: It would require review of the agreement every four years with the Filipinos; that would be difficult. We need to thrash this question of rent versus multi-year assistance around within the U.S. Government.

The Secretary: Why is Romulo coming, if not to reach an agreement?

Amb. Sullivan: It's theater; part of the lubrication process. We're going to have television cameras and reporters, and Romulo is being invited to call on the President. It's mainly for show.

Mr. Habib: On the next point, sovereignty, we can be very forthcoming.

Amb. Sullivan: The question of command is a tough one. It will be more difficult now than it might have been a few weeks ago, before the Turkish agreement was published. That agreement sets some very tough precedents.

Mr. Habib: This is one of the sticking points with the Department of Defense.

Amb. Sullivan: This is the one on which we have had most difficulty with Defense. There is a bit of sophistry here. The article provides for a Philippine installation commander

but the facilities used by U.S. forces would be under a U.S. commander. At some places, such as Clark Air Base, the installation and the facilities are coterminous, If the Filipinos really desire to participate in the administration of the bases, then we would have problems. Otherwise, the provisions regarding the Philippine installation, commander have no substance. I think the jurisdiction article will be ok. The next point has to do with flying the Philippine flag.

The Secretary: We certainly aren't going to torpedo the agreement just because they want to fly their flags. There's no point in sticking on that.

Amb. Sullivan: The provision for return of baselands is ok. [text not declassified]

The Secretary: This April 12 session is going to tax my mind!

Mr. Habib: They could come in with a few surprises.

The Secretary: Don't give me any of that Lebanese nonsense! I suppose it's good for my ego to have a session like this. We may end up with Philippine flags flying over Pearl Harbor! What is this about commercialization?

Amb. Sullivan: A year ago there was great concern about the possibility that we would leave the area and. the bases. That would have thrown 40,000 employees on the bases out of work and stopped the flow of more than $150 million annually into the Philippine economy. Therefore, they began drawing up plans for commercialization of the bases and the excess capacity which they thought was going to come into existence. The man responsible for this idea has since been fired from the Philippine Government. In one sense commercialization is a straw man. But in another sense it is a legitimate concern because several years ago the Navy just walked away from Sangley Point Naval Air Station and it took the Philippine Navy quite some time to pick up the pieces. In contrast, the British made a gracious exit from Singapore. The Filipinos may want to preserve commercialization as a contingency plan but right now it is not feasible, practical or necessary.

Mr. Habib: The remaining issues are not serious.

The Secretary: Tell me about them.

Amb. Sullivan: Under the present agreement, we have tenure at the bases until 1991. In this new draft, we propose to make the agreement coterminous with the Mutual Defense Treaty, which is open-ended. But the Filipinos will want the right of review every few years.

The Secretary: I was not aware that the two presidents had agreed to exclude the Mutual Defense Treaty from the negotiations.

Amb. Sullivan: Yes, yes, don't you remember?

The Secretary: Were talking points provided to the President on this?

Amb. Sullivan: Oh yes. I'm afraid meeting Imelda has eclipsed your memory of what happened. On military

assistance, as I said earlier, the Filipinos would prefer to get rid of the JUSMAG. Do you really feel that rent is a non-starter?

The Secretary: Yes. I have had a lot of experience with other base agreements.

Amb. Sullivan: What about sentiment on the Hill?

The Secretary: They of course prefer to appropriate yearly. Rent would bypass this process. I would much rather have it in the defense budget than in appropriation. The Democratic liberals will be much more influential after the elections, even if they lose.

Mr. Habib: We have to remember the human rights issue also. They've amended the 1976 legislation to make it much tougher in the human rights field.

Amb. Sullivan: You may remember that the two presidents also agreed not to submit this agreement to the present Congress. It certainly won't be ready before Congress has acted on the Turkish agreement.

Mr. Habib: And the Greek agreement?

The Secretary: The Turkish agreement will fail because of Cyprus. But the Greek and Spanish agreements will pass.

Mr. Habib: Can the Greek agreement pass without the Turkish?

The Secretary: Yes.

Mr. Habib: But what will that do to our Eastern Mediterranean policy?

The Secretary: It will be a shambles. There is no chancre of the Turkish agreement being approved without the Greek agreement. The Greeks are asking for outrageous sums. They want the same as the Turks — one billion dollars over four years. The maximum we can give is $700 million, including economic aid.

Amb. Sullivan: As a result of all this, the Philippine appetites are getting bigger. One last point: we think

it would be preferable to handle this as an executive agreement rather than as a treaty.

The Secretary: By all means.

The Secretary (to Mr. Habib): What about that Indonesian action?

Mr. Habib: I had an agreement with Mr. Maw.

The Secretary: Never mind about any agreement, just answer the question. Whenever I ask a question, they always start telling me about agreements they have made among themselves.

Mr. Habib: Mr. Maw is responsible in this case. The stuff has been pre-positioned and as soon as the 1976 appropriation bill passes, it will begin to flow.

The Secretary: Why has it been held up? Why have my instructions not been carried out?

Mr. Habib: The appropriation bill includes military aid for Indonesia. That will put a Congressional stamp of approval on such aid.

The Secretary: Will the bill be passed before the Easter recess?

Mr. Habib: Yes.

The Secretary: You're going to carry out my orders. On April 15 the operation will start, regardless of whether Congress has passed the bill or not. When do I meet Malik?

Mr. Habib: Either before or after the Islamic Conference. I think the date we have suggested is either May 10 or 12.

The Secretary: What about August?

Mr. Habib: Let's try this. If it doesn't work, we can shift it. We thought we would give Malik one more chance.

Amb. Sullivan: I'd like to raise one final point. President Marcos asked me to arrange a private meeting between Romulo and yourself. We thought it would logically fit in between the luncheon and the 3:00 p.m. negotiating meeting.

The Secretary: Alone?

Amb. Sullivan: He said "away from the negotiating panels." I suggest that the subject may be Marcos' desire to visit the United States.

The Secretary: What is our view? He's a friend, isn't he; we can't avoid it.

Amb. Sullivan: There may be some anti-Marcos demonstrations here. But have him come when the Congress is not in session.

Mr. Habib: That would mean after the fall adjournment.

The Secretary: I believe they intend to adjourn during the summer for two weeks for each political convention. Well, if he doesn't specify a date, I can agree in principle.

Mr. Habib: Will you want a note-taker present?

The Secretary: Ask him.

Amb. Sullivan: I'll find out tomorrow when I meet him. You know you will be seeing Marcos in Nairobi.

The Secretary: I will? (to Mr. Barbian) Have the African Bureau do a scenario of my Nairobi visit. There are certain receptions I'll have to attend and some bilaterals, such as that with Marcos, that will have to be scheduled.

Amb. Sullivan: In Nairobi, Marcos will be wearing his third world hat rather than his U.S.-ally hat. He will act as a member of the third world rather than as a bosom ally.

Mr. Habib: But he wants to be helpful.

Arab. Sullivan: If the subject Romulo is going to take up with you concerns a Marcos visit to the U.S., the subject may arise again in Nairobi.

The Secretary (to Mr. Habib): Does this mean that you and the Country Director will have to go to Nairobi?

Mr. Habib: No indeed! I have placed a ban on travel, especially my own.

The Secretary: What is the date for the Malik meeting?

Mr. Habib: I don't recall; I will check. It's either before or after the Islamic Conference.

The Secretary: When I make the ANZUS trip, I plan to visit a few countries in your area I haven't been to, including Malaysia and Singapore.

Mr. Habib: We're planning on your going to New Zealand.

Amb. Sullivan: How about Papua-New Guinea?

The Secretary: I thought I might return by way of Europe.

Mr. Habib: It will give you a good chance to visit Thailand. The new government there looks very good.

The Secretary: Who is the new Prime Minister?

Mr. Habib: Seni, Kukrit's brother.

The Secretary: I'll take a look.

1 Source: National Archives, Record Group 59, Secretary of State Kissinger’s Lot File, E5403, Box 16. Top Secret; Nodis. Fleck drafted the memorandum. The meeting occurred in Kissinger’s office.

345. Memorandum From Thomas J. Barnes of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Scowcroft), Washington, April 12, 1976.. 345. Memorandum From Thomas J. Barnes of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Scowcroft), Washington, April 12, 1976..1

Washington, April 12, 1976.

MEMORANDUM
NATIONAL SECURITY COUNCIL
URGENT INFORMATION

April 12, 1976

MEMORANDUM FOR: BRENT SCOWCROFT
FROM: THOMAS J. BARNES
SUBJECT: Opening Session of U.S.-Philippine Base Negotiations

Secretary Kissinger and Secretary Romulo chaired the opening meeting of the U.S.-Philippine military base negotiations held in the State Department at 3 p.m. April 12. Ken Quinn attended as NSC representative. A list of all attendees is at Tab A.

The meeting was short with introductory remarks and the tabling of the U.S. draft agreement taking only 25 minutes. Secretary Romulo stressed that while U.S.-Philippine friendship persists, the radical alteration of the world which has occurred in the past ten years has significantly changed the conditions under which our base agreements were first made 30 years ago. Contrary to our expectations, Secretary Romulo did not enunciate any principles or conditions for a continued U.S. presence in the Philippines.

Despite the absence of this statement, Secretary Kissinger then made some initial remarks addressing the major points that we thought the Philippine delegation might stress. Specifically, in addressing the issue of rent, the Secretary said we are opposed to it in principle since if we pay rent in one country we would have to do it in all. Moreover, he added that our paying rent creates the impression that we are not cooperating in a joint security effort. The Secretary then added that we are, however, prepared to look at some type of security assistance package which could take the place of rent. He also mentioned that the issues of Philippine administration of the bases and the naming of a Philippine base commander are addressed in the U.S. draft treaty which he later presented to the Philippine side.

Romulo then read a prepared statement (Tab B) which somewhat surprisingly stressed that U.S. military assistance and U.S. security guarantees were never fully satisfactory to the Philippine side. He added that in view of the ASEAN pledge to pursue peace and minimize relations with the superpowers, the GOP must now seek to adjust its relationship with the United States.

The Secretary, in response, reiterated the need for us to cooperate in maintaining a global balance of power as well as regional stability. He emphasized that we are determined to stand by our friends and to prevent any single country or group of countries from dominating the world. He urged the Philippine delegation to keep these overall goals in mind as we renegotiate our agreement. The Secretary also emphasized the danger to the world which could result if a more isolationist attitude becomes prevalent in the United States. He emphasized the need for our negotiations to work to prevent that outcome.

Romulo then returned to the question of rent and stressed that the GOP does not want to receive a "dole or grant" but rather wishes to receive "just compensation for the use of its bases." In reply the Secretary again stressed that we have a principle against paying rent in the strict sense of the word, but could consider a multi-year appropriation for foreign assistance in lieu of rent. The Secretary then added that we would deal with the Philippines in the same spirit that we have dealt with Turkey, Spain, and our other allies.

Following this exchange, there was mutual agreement that the negotiations would resume the first week of June in Manila. The Philippines would present us a counterproposal to our draft agreement beforehand. Both sides would endeavor to conclude the agreement by the end of July so that the Secretary could stop in Manila to sign it on his way back from the ANZUS meeting in Canberra August 3 and 4.

The meeting then turned to the question of a joint statement. After 35 minutes of haggling, the two sides agreed to issue the press statement at Tab C which makes the following points: — Secretary Romulo and Secretary Kissinger met to begin negotiations regarding new arrangements between the GOP and the U.S. for the use by the U.S. armed forces of facilities in Philippine military bases.

— Both governments expressed their initial view in a cordial atmosphere.

— The U.S. presented a draft agreement.

— The Philippine delegation proposed that negotiations continue in Manila in early June, and the U.S. agreed.

1 Source: Ford Library, National Security Adviser, Presidential Country Files for East Asia and the Pacific, Box 15, Philippines (4). Confidential. Urgent; Sent for information. Attached but not published are Tab A, an undated briefing memorandum from Habib to Kissinger providing a list of participants at the session, and Tab B, the undated statement of Romulo. Tab C, the press statement, is not attached.

346. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, April 13, 1976, 11:08–11:30 a.m. 346. Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, April 13, 1976, 11:08–11:30 a.m. 1

Washington, April 13, 1976, 11:08–11:30 a.m.

MEMORANDUM
THE WHITE HOUSE
WASHINGTON

MEMORANDUM OF CONVERSATION

PARTICIPANTS:

President Ford

Carlos P. Romulo, Secretary of Foreign Affairs, The Philippines

Secretary Kissinger

Brent Scowcroft, Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs

Amb. Eduardo Romualdez, Philippine Ambassador

Juan Ponce Enrile, Secretary of Defense

Amb. Philip C. Habib, Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian and Pacific Affairs

Amb. William H. Sullivan, US Ambassador to the Philippines

DATE AND TIME: Tuesday, April 13, 1976
11:08 - 11:30 a.m.
PLACE: The Oval Office

[The press enters and takes photographs. There is discussion of the President's wartime experience in the Philippines. The press departs.

Romulo: I have been asked by the President to express his greetings, and he hopes for a successful negotiation.

The President: Please convey my greetings to the President and Mrs. Marcos and my thanks for a marvelous greeting and my visit. I am going to return to play golf sometime.

Romulo: The President asked us not to do anything which would interfere with your reelection.

The President: That is very thoughtful.

1 Source: Ford Library, National Security Adviser, Memoranda of Conversation, April 13, 1976. Secret; Nodis. The meeting was held in the Oval Office. Ford’s talking points from Scowcroft, which the President saw, assert that the meeting “is meant as a courtesy call to welcome Secretary Romulo to the United States and to underline the importance you attach to our military base negotiations which began on April 12, as well as our bilateral economic negotiations which started March 29.”

347. Telegram 9671 From the Embassy in the Philippines to the Department of State, July 3, 1976, 0628Z. 347. Telegram 9671 From the Embassy in the Philippines to the Department of State, July 3, 1976, 0628Z.1

July 3, 1976, 0628Z

TELEGRAM
Department of State
MANILA 9671

R 030628Z JUL 76

FM AMEMBASSY MANILA TO SECSTATE WASHDC 6998

EYES ONLY HABIB FROM SULLIVAN

E. O. 11652: GDS
TAGS: MARR, RP

SUBJECT: PHILIPPINE BASE NEGOTIATIONS REFS: (A) STATE 163986, (B) STATE 163985

1. AS YOU ARE AWARE, FILIPINOS HAVE SUBMITTED EXTORTIONATE DRAFT OF MILITARY BASE AGREEMENT AND CONTINUE TO DRAG THEIR HEELS IN TELLING US WHAT THEY EXPECT IN WAY OF QUID PRO QUO. I SUSPECT THIS SITUATION HAS HAD ADVERSE EFFECT UPON WASHINGTON WORKING GROUP BACKING UP OUR NEGOTIATIONS. WE THINK WE SEE A SYNDROME DEVELOPING WHICH REFLECTS FACT THAT WE HAVE A PERFECTLY VALID AGREEMENT EFFECTIVE UNTIL 1991 AND THE HELL WITH IT.

2. MUCH AS I CAN APPRECIATE THE FRUSTRATION THAT PRODUCES THIS VIEW, IT IS VERY SHORT-SIGHTED INDEED. THE CAPACITY OF THE FILIPINOS (AND THEIR TALENT) TO HARASS OUR BASES IS INFINITE. THE GENERAL DETERIORATION WHICH WOULD FLOW FROM A COLLAPSE OF THESE TALKS WOULD BE EXTENSIVELY CORROSIVE TO ANY BROADER POSITION IN ASIA.

3. THEREFORE, DESPITE THE ENORMOUS WORKLOAD YOU CURRENTLY HAVE AND YOUR PREOCCUPATION WITH CRISES, I WOULD LIKE TO ASK YOU TO TAKE A PERSONAL HAND IN RESPONDING TO OUR PROBLEMS OVER THE NEXT COUPLE OF WEEKS. WHAT WE WILL NEED IS FAST WASHINGTON REACTION AS WELL AS AN ABILITY TO SEE SOME OF THE LARGER ISSUES INVOLVED. WHILE WE EXPECT DETAILED GUIDANCE ON SUBSTANCE, WE ASSUME WASHINGTON CONSIDERS US CAPABLE OF MAKING OUR OWN DECISIONS ON TACTICS.

4. AS A MATTER OF TACTICS, I AM ATTEMPTING TO MAKE A NUMBER OF RATHER MEANINGLESS "CONCESSIONS" IN THE US DRAFT TO DEMONSTRATE FLEXIBILITY AND TO TEASE FILIPINOS INTO MAKING MAJOR CONCESSIONS IN THEIR DRAFT. WE HAVE ENCOUNTERED DELAYS UP TO 8 DAYS IN GETTING ANY WASHINGTON RESPONSES TO OUR MOST TRIVIAL PROPOSALS. FOR EXAMPLE, ON TAXATION, WE WISHED TO TABLE A PARAGRAPH RECORDING A PRACTICE WHICH WE ALREADY FOLLOW. WASHINGTON AGREED IN PRINCIPLE WITH EH PARAGRAPH BUT REFUSED TO LET US TABLE IT (REF A). ON CLAIMS, WE SUBMITTED A DRAFT TO WASHINGTON WHICH FOLLOWS PRECISELY THE CURRENT PRACTICE AND WHICH PARALLELS THE DRAFT WE TABLED IN WASHINGTON. THIS HAS BEEN REBUFFED (REF B) AND WASHINGTON HAS ASKED US TO GET A JURISDICTION EXEMPTION WHICH WE HAVE NEVER ENJOYED IN THE PAST. IN DEFINING OUR FACILITIES, WE HAVE TAKEN A TEXT BORROWED DIRECTLY FROM A JCS PUBLICATION, AND HAVE BEEN TOLD THAT IT WILL TAKE SOME TIME TO "COORDINATE" THIS DEFINITION. NO DATE FOR A REPLY CAN BE PROMISED.

5. ALL THIS IS DISTRESSINGLY REMINISCENT OF WHAT CHARLIE WHITEHOUSE HAS TOLD ME OF HIS PROBLEMS IN ATTEMPTING TO GET ANSWERS FROM WASHINGTON ON THE THAI NEGOTIATIONS. RIGHTLY OR WRONGLY, HE BLAMES MUCH OF THE THAI FIASCO ON THIS BUREAUCRATIC CONSTIPATION. PERHAPS WE WANTED TO BE GENTLY PUSHED OUT OF THAILAND BY THE THAIS AND THE CONFUSION WAS DELIBERATE. IT IS MY UNDERSTANDING THAT WE WANT TO STAY IN THE PHILIPPINES AND THEREFORE THE CONFUSION WOULD SEEM COUNTER-PRODUCTIVE.

6. I BELIEVE IT WOULD BE MOST HELPFUL IF YOU COULD CALL TOGETHER THE VARIOUS KEY PERSONNEL IN WASHINGTON TO STRESS (A) THAT HIGHEST AUTHORITY DOES WANT AN AGREEMENT AND HE WANTS IT SOON, PREFERABLY IN AUGUST, BECAUSE OF LARGER CONSIDERATIONS IN DEALING WITH THE CONGRESS; (B) THAT THIS NEW AGREEMENT NECESSARILY IS GOING TO LESSEN, RATHER THAN ENHANCE, OUR STATUS BECAUSE WE ARE EXPLICITLY GOING TO ACCOMMODATE PHIL SOVEREIGNTY. OUR PROBLEM IS TO LIMIT THE DAMAGE RATHER THAN SEEK NEW AND BETTER EXEMPTIONS THAN WE HAVE HAD BEFORE; AND (C) FIX A SUSPENSE TIME (PREFERABLY 24 HOURS, BUT NO MORE THAN 48 HOURS) FOR REPLIES TO OUR OPERATIONAL CABLES. WE CAN DEAL BETTER WITH TOUGH REPLIES THAN WE CAN WITH NO REPLIES AT ALL, BUT WE EXPECT THE REPLIES TO BE REALISTIC.

7. I HAVE NO RPT NO ILLUSIONS ABOUT THE EXORBITANCE OF PHIL DEMANDS AND ABOUT THE NEED TO REDUCE THEM. ON THE OTHER HAND, I KNOW A LITTLE SOMETHING ABOUT PHIL CHARACTER AND THEIR NEGOTIATING TACTICS. I DO NOT RPT NOT FEEL WE SHOULD WRITE OFF THE PROSPECT OF GETTING MAJOR CONCESSIONS FROM THEM IF WE KEEP UP THE MOMENTUM. I DO NOT RPT NOT THINK IT SMART TO THROW UP OUR HANDS AND FALL BACK ON OUR 1991 PROSPECTS. HOWEVER, WE CAN NOT RPT NOT KEEP UP THE MOMENTUM UNLESS WE GET RAPID ANSWERS TO OUR CABLES, IN A GENERAL FRAMEWORK OF ACCEPTING SOME INCONVENIENCES PERTAINING TO PHIL SOVEREIGNTY, WHILE MAINTAINING MAXIMUM US OPERATING FLEXIBILITY. SULLIVAN

1 Source: National Archives, Record Group 59, Central Foreign Policy Files. Confidential; Exdis; Stadis; Eyes Only.

348. Telegram 169597 From the Department of State to the Embassy in the Philippines, July 8, 1976, 2313Z. 348. Telegram 169597 From the Department of State to the Embassy in the Philippines, July 8, 1976, 2313Z.1

July 8, 1976, 2313Z

TELEGRAM
Department of State
169597

DRAFTED BY P: DAO'DONOHUE: CHG
APPROVED BY P - MR HABIO
S/S - FVORTIZ
EA-MR GLEYSTEEN
DESIRED DISTRIBUTION
S, P, EA ONLY

P 082313Z JUL 76

FM SECSTATE WASHDC
TO AMEMBASSY MANILA PRIORITY

EXDIS FOR AMBASSADOR FROM HABIO E.O. 11652: GDS
TAGS:PFOR, MARR, RP

SUBJECT: PHILIPPINE BASE NEGOTIATIONS REF: MANILA 9671

1. AS A RESULT OF YOUR MESSAGE, I HAVE REVIEWED WITH EA THE STATUS OF THE PHILIPPINE NEGOTIATIONS AND YOUR REQUESTS FOR INSTRUCTIONS. I UNDERSTAND AND SYMPATHIZE WITH YOUR FRUSTRATION OVER THE INEVITABLE DELAYS HERE IN GETTING OUT SUBSTANTIVE RESPONSES TO YOUR REQUESTS. AFTER MY REVIEW, INCLUDING DISCUSSION WITH DEFENSE, I AM CONVINCED THAT WE ARE WORKING AS HARD AS WE CAN TO BE RESPONSIVE. NEITHER HERE NOR IN DEFENSE IS THERE ANY DESIRE TO LET THE NEGOTIATIONS LAG OR TO ENGAGE IN ANY WISHFUL THINKING ABOUT LETTING THE PRESENT AGREEMENT CONTINUE AD INFINITUM. IF WE ARE TO MISS OUR TARGET COMPLETION DATES, WE, LIKE YOU, WANT IT TO BE CLEARLY BECAUSE OF PHILIPPINE NEGOTIATING INTRANSIGENCE NOT OUR INABILITY TO RESPOND PROMPTLY.

2. AT SAME TIME, THE PHILIPPINE POSITION TO DATE HAS NOT BEEN ENCOURAGING, PARTICULARLY IN VIEW OF OUR MUTUAL DESIRE TO REACH AN EARLY AGREEMENT. LIKE YOU, WE WANT A GOOD AGREEMENT FROM BOTH OUR OWN AND THE PHILIPPINE POINT OF VIEW. HOWEVER, WE DO NOT WANT THE FILIPINOS TO BELIEVE THAT WE WILL ENTER INTO AGREEMENT SIMPLY TO MEET A NEGOTIATING SCHEDULE. FURTHER, IT WILL NOT BE EASY HERE TO CONSIDER ANY MAJOR CHANGES IN OUR KEY SUBSTANTIVE POSITIONS UNTIL WE HAVE A CLEARER PICTURE OF THE HARD CORE OVERALL FILIPINO NEGOTIATING POSITION, PARTICULARLY REGARDING MONEY.

3. AT THIS POINT, IT WOULD BE MOST USEFUL TO ME IF, IN NORMAL CHANNELS, YOU WOULD FORWARD YOUR VIEWS ON THE LIKELY NEGOTIATING SCENARIO FOR THE NEXT WEEKS.
KISSINGER

1 Source: National Archives, Record Group 59, Central Foreign Policy Files. Secret; Priority; Exdis; Stadis. Drafted by O’Donohue; cleared by Vortiz and Gleysteen; and approved by Habib. Telegram 10024 from Manila, July 10, contains Sullivan’s expectations and scenario on the upcoming negotiations and includes his view that any agreement will be expensive for the United States.

349. Memorandum From Thomas J. Barnes of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Scowcroft), Washington, August 6, 1976.. 349. Memorandum From Thomas J. Barnes of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Scowcroft), Washington, August 6, 1976..1

Washington, August 6, 1976.

MEMORANDUM
NATIONAL SECURITY COUNCIL

URGENT INFORMATION

August 6, 1976

MEMORANDUM FOR BRENT SCOWCROFT
FROM: THOMAS J. BARNES [TJB initialed]

SUBJECT: Marcos-Robinson Meeting August 6, 1976 and Philippine Negotiating Strategy

The GOP used Deputy Secretary Robinson's visit to press the U.S. for a more explicit statement of its obligations under the U.S.-RP Mutual Defense Treaty. President Marcos made clear (Tab B) in his first meeting with Deputy Secretary Robinson and Ambassador Sullivan, and in an aide memoire (Tab C), that he is seeking this statement primarily in connection with Philippine claims to the Reed Bank. In addition, Marcos, Romulo and Enrile all rehashed with some show of bitterness the alleged U.S. failure to be responsive to their need for military equipment when Muslim attacks began in Mindanao in 1972. They stressed that this failure gave them cause to doubt that, in a future crisis, the U.S. would be willing to respond positively to assist the Philippines.

The aide memoire given to Robinson quotes the 1969 testimony of the Deputy Chief of Mission James Wilson before the Symington Subcommittee, and statements of Ambassador Sullivan;as proof that the U.S. will respond only to attacks on the Philippines which endanger U. S„ bases. Secretary Romulo echoed this same line in an August 3 interview with the London Times (Tab D). Romulo also used that interview to emphasize that the GOP wants to have Philippine Base Commanders in charge of U.S. bases to "prevent unilateral action by the United States." He then used a hypothetical situation in which Thailand would ask for U.S. military help against "Indochina" to demonstrate his point. Romulo said that such a use of the Philippine bases would adversely affect Manila's current efforts to improve its relations with Indochina, and therefore the GOP needs to have control of the bases to insure that the U.S. does not unilaterally act to the detriment of the Philippines.

Robinson reported to the Secretary (Tab A) that in their following private 20 minute session Marcos expressed appreciation for the Secretary's concern over the base negotiations. Marcos added, however, that he believes any final solution will require some fundamental political decision on which he hopes to deal with the Secretary more directly. Marcos reiterated that he needs a reaffirmation of our commitment to defend the Philippines, and a further clarification of the specific response we would make to an attack against the Philippines or its flag vessels in connection with the Reed Bank dispute. Marcos said this response need not be written; however, he expects it to come from the highest level of government, presumably President Ford and the Secretary, to him personally. Marcos agreed we should continue the base negotiations and mentioned the possibility of finalizing them in a month if we provided a satisfactory response to the aide memoire removing the ambiguities of our defense commitment.

An intelligence report (Tab E) from a reliable source quotes Emmanuel Pelaez, a senior member of the Philippine negotiating panel as saying July 29 that the GOP believes a Jimmy Carter victory would be favorable to it. The Philippine delegation considers Carter a "hawk" who would place more value on the U.S. bases. Pelaez added that the GOP is prepared to wait until after the Republican convention before really getting down to serious negotiations, and therefore is "digging in its heels now" to slow down the talks. In addition, Pelaez said Marcos believes a strong stand against the U.S. will help him achieve a preferred status at the forthcoming Non-aligned Summit.

Our View

In light of the intelligence report, Marcos' arguments may be purely tactical. He could be trying to stall the negotiations until after the U.S. Presidential elections. Alternatively, although the GOP has not presented the bargain in the following terms, the quid pro quo may be our agreeing to militarily support their claims in the Spratlys against the PRC and Vietnam in exchange for a free hand in use of the bases. Since we cannot give the Philippines assurances that we will defend them in a military conflict that occurs in contested territory, early conclusion of the base agreement appears unlikely.

1 Source: Ford Library, National Security Adviser, Presidential Country Files for East Asia and the Pacific, Box 15, Philippines (5). Secret. Sent for urgent information. Scowcroft initialed the memorandum. At Tab A was telegram 11763 from Manila, August 6, describing Robinson’s meeting with Marcos. At Tab B was telegram 11733 from Manila, August 6, describing Marcos’ earlier meeting with Robinson and Sullivan. At Tab C was the aide memoire from Marcos contained in telegram 11734 from Manila, August 6. At Tab D was Romulo’s August 3 interview with the London Times.

350. Minutes of the Secretary of State’s Staff Meeting, Washington, August 16, 1976, 8:10 a.m.. 350. Minutes of the Secretary of State’s Staff Meeting, Washington, August 16, 1976, 8:10 a.m..1

Washington, August 16, 1976, 8:10 a.m.

LIST OF PARTICIPANTS

Henry A. Kissinger, Secretary of State

Charles W. Robinson, Deputy Secretary

Philip C. Habib, Under Secretary for Political Affairs

Carlyle E. Maw, Under Secretary for Security Assistance

Helmut C. Sonnenfeldt, Counselor

William E. Schaufele, Jr., Assistant Secretary, African Affairs,

Harry W. Shlaudeman, Assistant secretary, Inter-American Affairs

Arthur W, Hummel, Assistant Secretary, East Asian & Pacific Affairs

Arthur A. Hartman, Assistant Secretary, European Affairs

Alfred L. Atherton, Jr., Assistant Secretary, Near Eastern & South Asian Affairs

Roger Kirk, Deputy Director, INR

Winston Lord, Director, Policy Planning Staff

Paul Boeker, Economic & Business Affairs

Frederic Z. Brown, Press Relations

George S. Vest, Politico-Military Affairs

Samuel W. Lewis, Assistant Secretary, IO

Robert J, McCloskey Assistant Secretary, Congressional Relations

Frank V. Ortiz, S/S

Richard W Aherne, S

[Omitted here is material unrelated to the Philippines.]

Okay, Art.

MR. HUMMEL: I just got back on Saturday evening and I am still trying to catch up.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: Back from where? Oh, I forgot that you had been gone.

MR. HUMMEL: I will do a trip report. We have more problems in the Southeast Asian countries. The reporting has indicated, at least to me, in terms of the reverberations back from the Third World group on these countries, that we previously felt were more sensible.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: Like where, Malaysia?

MR. HUMMEL: I didn't go to Malaysia, but from Thailand and Indonesia. I stopped briefly in Singapore.

MR. ROBINSON: It has an impact on the Philippines.

MR. HUMMEL: My feeling is the negotiations with the Philippines are in somewhat more trouble.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: Chuck's impressions is that we are not doing much to help them. This is also my impression.

MR. HUMMEL: Yes. I will have some suggestions on how to handle this sort of thing.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: My impression for months has been that for some reason I can't figure out, we have chosen this to make our grand stand.

MR. ROBINSON: Well, that is —

SECRETARY KISSINGER: Without approval from me.

MR. HABIB: There is a memo that was just sent to you on the weekend, which is out, with some options and some approaches which I think will bring the whole thing together.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: That has nothing to do with it.

MR. HABIB: In some ways, the Defense Department has been dragging its feet because it is quite satisfied with the present agreement. We have an agreement now that goes to '99.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: Which they have got to be given to understand will not be sustained.

MR. HARTMAN: That is the same attitude as the Greek thing. They don't want anything to set a precedent.

MR. HABIB: As a result, you bog down in some of these technicalities on definitions, and things like that, which don't allow you to go forward. They don't help you to get the financial element of the agreement squared away. It is bogged down in OMB, which is refusing to consider the thing at the present time. And if you can't provide the financial inducement —

SECRETARY KISSINGER: That is only $4 million of an opening bid.

MR. HUMMEL: They want to wrap up a final answer at the top-most level, and that is what we are hung up on. I think we ought to break this out, and go in with the decision on opening bids, and save for later the wrangle on how high we shall go eventually.

MR. HABIB: We need an opening bid. Our proposal was an opening bid.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: What we can't have is middle level people fighting with middle level people at OMB. One phone call by me will bring it to a head. And it is easier making it now than two months ago. I could have done it two months ago, and that forces it to the President. There is no way. You guys can talk until you are blue in the face. Lynn is playing a different game. He doesn't care about the Philippine bases.

MR. HABIB: The only reason you haven't got the two, we knew Chuck was going out, and as soon as he got back, the thing is going to be brought to your attention now to break it loose. Because that is what has to be done.

MR. HUMMEL: We have agreement on the opening figure. At least there is no disagreement.

MR. HABIB: That is right, except in OMB, which is what the Secretary has to break loose. They say they don't want to start that high. So that is why it has got to be broken loose. We have got Defense to agree to the starting figure. OMB doesn't like it. I went over the memo on the weekend. It will be coming up. We will take your latest discoveries from your trip out there into account. And there are certain things the Secretary has to do now, and one is to get OMB to knuckle under.

MR. ROBINSON: There are two basic issues. One is the technical hang-ups.

MR. HABIB: My suggestion is —

SECRETARY KISSINGER: We can settle the thing in one week, if we can get Marcos — if we have a will to settle it, and if we can get Marcos. All the rest is baloney. That is the sort of negotiation that used to be done if I would go out there. If that is what Marcos' attitude is, which I suspect it is, since Marcos can't afford to let us give up the bases, either. We could basically settle this thing in a week or two, if we could get cooperation at the top level here and cooperation at the top level there. All the rest is — excuse me — chicken shit stuff. This is all little bureaucrats trying to prove how important they are by kicking stupid figures around.

What is the sense of arguing about a low figure when you know full well you have got to go to the higher figure. So it is the minor leaguers approving $64 million or $60 million, when they know it is going to be let at $75 million.

MR. HABIB: Or $100 million.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: It will not be $64 million, so what is the sense of arguing about that figure. We have spent six weeks at least on whether it should be $60 or $64 million.

MR. HABIB: That hasn't been a factor in the negotiation. My suggestion, very frankly, is that we give it one month to clean up all of the details, and then whatever is left, that you go out and solve it in 24 hours.

SECRETARY KISSINGER It will never work that way. I can't go out. But it will never work that way, because Defense is going to find a way of screwing it up.

MR. HABIB: They have vacillated over it, they either want it or they don't want it before the election. I don't think Marcos is playing it square. Marcos is trying to figure out whether he can get a better deal before or after the election.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: Marcos is not a fool. He knows he can't get a better deal from us, and he will get a worse deal from the Democrats.

So, you figure the Democrats are going to start out with a big bang on the bases agreement?

MR. ROBINSON: I think he recognized that —

SECRETARY KISSINGER: He can do better — he can either get the best we can do. We are not going to do better after the election, if Ford gets re-elected.

MR. HUMMEL: There are not only technical matters, there is another memo on the way to you about a substantive problem about how the treaty applies in various difficult cases.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: That is it exactly. That is the real issue.

MR. HUMMEL: Exactly. This is a substantive issue, and not merely technicalities.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: That has to be settled. That is a serious issue. The rest is minor league stuff, I agree with you.

MR. HABIB: This isn't going to be settled in negotiations.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: Not settled out there.

MR. HABIB: That is going to have to be settled at a very high level.

MR. ROBINSON: That is the only way, and I don't think you will make much progress on these technical problems.

MR. HABIB: That does not have to be part of the negotiation of the treaty itself, of the base agreement. The base agreement has nothing to do with that directly. You can negotiate the base agreement provided there is an interpretation of the mutual security treaty. That could be done separately and distinctly, and it has got to be done at a high level.

MR. LORD: As far as the political part, but the technical part you can separate and try to use it as leverage.

MR. ROBINSON: Politically, he doesn't have anyone in that country that can open his mouth about one Goddamn thing.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: Don't be an idiot. The guy is sitting out there, with Viet-Nam having gone down the drain, having the only U.S. bases there. He needs something to justify our being there. The fact that he doesn't have any opposition doesn't prove a bloody thing.

MR. HABIB: If he goes too far and pushes us, he will get into trouble in his own country. We don't have to knuckle under on anything with this guy.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: That is not the point. It is spectacularly not the point. It is that mentality that has gotten us into difficulty.

MR. HABIB: This fellow has been playing games on certain things. He will say one thing one month, and something else another month. It is not that Sullivan hasn't tried. I am not trying to defend everything Sullivan has done.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: He has missed the point of what concerns the Philippines sitting out there with an American base. Therefore, he kept raising a whole series of objections, since he never got the principal point, which is a political one.

Once we have answered that, then we can see whether he is playing games. Before that, we can't know whether he is playing games because we have studiously avoided what bothers him.

MR. HABIB: We have answered him for ten years. And he hasn't accepted the answer.

Okay, wait until you study the issue, you will see what I mean.

[Omitted here is material unrelated to the Philippines.]

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Transcripts of Secretary of State Kissinger’s Staff Meetings, 1973–1977, E5177, Box 11. Secret. The meeting was held in the Secretary’s conference room of the Department of State.

351. Memorandum From William Gleysteen of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Scowcroft), Washington, September 2, 1976. 351. Memorandum From William Gleysteen of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Scowcroft), Washington, September 2, 1976.1

Washington, September 2, 1976

MEMORANDUM
NATIONAL SECURITY COUNCIL

ACTION

September 2, 1976

MEMORANDUM FOR BRENT SCOWCROFT
FROM: WILLIAM GLEYSTEEN [WG initialed]

SUBJECT: Next Steps in the Philippine Base Negotiations

Marcos may have thrown a monkey wrench into our plans for high-level talks in search of a breakthrough in the Philippine base negotiations. After proposing that Foreign Secretary Romulo visit Washington to see if a Kissinger/Clements visit to Manila would be worthwhile, he has subsequently told us that he would not authorize a Romulo/Kissinger meeting until first receiving our answer to the Philippines aide memoire concerning applicability of the Defense treaty to the Spratley Island and Reed Bank areas.

Marcos' maneuver underscores the extent to which he has cooled about the idea of trying to reach an agreement this year. We had intelligence reports to this effect some time ago, and rumors have been planted in Manila that Marcos thinks the Philippines could get better terms from a Carter Administration. Given his willingness to wait until next year, Marcos undoubtedly sees his negotiating tactics as a no-lose proposition if he can stimulate U.S. impatience and extract extra concessions, he will consider himself very successful; if we fail to satisfy him, he will place the onus for delay on us.

Although the prospects of reaching a quick settlement with the Philippines are even worse than when we talked on Tuesday at Staff Meeting, I still believe we should get in position so that we could promptly convene an NSC meeting to obtain inter-agency positions and a Presidential decision on certain basic issues.

Issues

Ambassador Sullivan has identified the following nine issues as closest to Philippine hearts:

— Terms of use

[text not declassified]

— Takeover of national security tactics

[text not declassified]

— Authority of Philippine base commander

— Criminal jurisdiction

— Defense support or compensation

— Conversion of bases to civilian uses

— Term of agreement

However, high-level discussions will probably focus more narrowly on what we are prepared to pay for the use of bases and how we interpret our treaty obligations in terms of the Reed Bank and Spratley Islands. Our position on these two issues will probably determine the extent to which Marcos will soften the tough positions his negotiators have adopted on most other matters, including our need for unfettered operational control over our facilities and our forces.

Agency Positions

At the working level, there appears to be no fundamental difference within the government on the key issues. Both State and Defense seem to favor a cautious position regarding applicability of our treaty responsibilities in the Spratley and Reed Bank areas, although there may be differences about how we might offset this unpleasant news for Marcos. On the question of compensation, State and Defense recommendations differ only marginally, but OMB, and to a lesser extent Defense, are concerned that we will be forced to raise the ante beyond our high position to the point where the base agreement might be highly controversial in Congress and establish an unfortunate precedent. There is general agreement that our present proposals regarding operational and jurisdictional matters are very close to our final fallback position. The general assumption is that Marcos is less concerned to achieve further concessions in this area than to exploit these issues for bargaining purposes.

Despite this general agreement on substantive positions, there has been considerable skepticism about our ability to satisfy Marcos. The latest ploy will certainly intensify this feeling. In any case, careful consideration of our negotiating strategy may well be as important as our substantive positions.

State has held the view that, while a recess in the negotiations until after our elections would probably not be harmful, early and successful conclusion of the base agreement would offer the best protection for our interests. I agree but believe nevertheless that the prospect of an early agreement is unpromising and that we could seriously damage ourselves if we display impatience. Consequently, I recommend that we continue to prepare for an NSC meeting but hold off any specific action until we see the results of Sullivan's next round with Marcos.

APPROVE [WAH initialed]
DISAPPROVE

1 Source: Ford Library, National Security Adviser, NSC Staff for East Asia and Pacific Affairs Convenience File, Box 31, Next Steps in the Philippine Base Negotiations. Secret. Hyland initialed the approve option on behalf of Scowcroft. At the end of the document, after the phrase “hold off any specific,” Hyland wrote, “or a memo to President first.” An NSC meeting to discuss both the Philippine base negotiations and assistance to Zaire was scheduled, but then cancelled and not rescheduled. (Ford Library, NSC Institutional Files (H-Files), Box H–25, NSC Meetings)

352. Letter From Secretary of Defense Rumsfeld to Secretary of State Kissinger, Washington, September 13, 1976. 352. Letter From Secretary of Defense Rumsfeld to Secretary of State Kissinger, Washington, September 13, 1976.1

Washington, September 13, 1976

THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE
WASHINGTON D.C.

13 DEC 1976

Honorable Henry A. Kissinger
Secretary of State
Washington, D.C. 20520

Dear Henry:

I am concerned about the status of military base negotiations with the Philippines and the potential impact of these negotiations on the operations of our bases at Subic and Clark. The Defense Department continues to view the unhampered operation of these bases as necessary to our air and naval operations in the Southwest Pacific and Indian Ocean areas. In addition I recognize that we have a political stake in the successful conclusion of negotiations as a demonstration of our ability to retain a significant US presence in the region.

We had hoped that the initiatives begun by President Ford in Manila last December and your efforts, including the presentation of a forthcoming draft agreement to Secretary Romulo last April, would set the stage for a successful negotiation based on a mutuality of interests. We acknowledge the need for adjustments to the 1947 bases agreement but I was shocked by the extent of the proposals contained in the Philippine draft of June 15. My concern grew with the lack of substantial movement by the Philippines from these hard line positions despite US efforts to be accommodating are with the additional demands for amplification of our mutual defense commitment made by President Marcos to Deputy Secretary Robinson in August. We note that Marcos has imposed conditions on your possible visit to the Philippines in October and has been backtracking from his request for a meeting between Secretary Romulo and yourself here this month.

In view of these developments I don't believe we should continue with unrequited efforts at accommodation. There are few concessions we can still make from the US position before we begin seriously to hamper base operations. Would it not be better to retain our limited remaining flexibility until an agreement is in sight?

Our negotiators have a difficult task. We do have need for the bases. But we do have leverage. Beyond the economic benefits which flow to the Philippines there is the fact that US presence in the Pacific is stabilizing and our absence would create a vacuum. Marcos' apparent decisions to go slowly in negotiations and to place the responsibility for delay on the United States complicate the negotiators' tasks. Your willingness to meet with Marcos and Romulo effectively meets this challenge. Let us hope that the GOP will be responsive to this latest initiative. If they are not, I believe we should avoid reinforcing the impression that our need for the bases is unmatched by the Philippine need for us to be there and instead let the negotiations wind down at a pace established by the Philippines.

I would be happy to join you in meeting with Romulo later this month if the Philippines desire such a meeting on our defense relationship.

Sincerely,
[signed]
Donald Rumsfeld

1 Source: Washington National Records Center, OASD/ISA Files: FRC 330–79–0037, Philippines, 680.1–, August–December 1976. Secret.

353. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Scowcroft) to President Ford, Washington, undated. 353. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Scowcroft) to President Ford, Washington, undated.1

Washington, undated

MEMORANDUM
THE WHITE HOUSE
WASHINGTON
ACTION

MEMORANDUM FOR: THE PRESIDENT
FROM: BRENT SCOWCROFT [BS initialed]
SUBJECT: Key Issues in Our Base Negotiations with the Philippines

The Problem

Our military base negotiations with the Philippines (GOP) are stalemated over two issues: whether our Mutual Defense Treaty requires us to come to the aid of Philippine forces if attacked in the disputed Reed Bank area, and the amount of military assistance we will offer in exchange for use of Philippine bases. Secretary Kissinger is scheduled to hold discussions with Philippine Foreign Secretary Romulo on October 6 on these subjects and needs your guidance prior to that meeting. OMB believes there is also a third question regarding the timing of further negotiations with the Philippines on these issues.

Background on the Reed Bank

The Reed Bank is a submerged shelf in the South China Sea about 250 kilometers from the Philippine island of Palawan. The Spratly islands rest on this shelf (see maps at Tab F). Peking, Hanoi, Taipei and Manila all claim title to the Spratly Islands and to the Reed Bank as an extension of the continental shelf of those islands. The Philippines also claim the Reed Bank as part of its continental shelf running from Palawan Island. All of the countries except the PRC have militarily occupied one or more of the Spratly Islands.

The Philippines recently granted concessions to a private consortium headed by AMOCO to explore and drill for oil in the Reed Bank. Philippine military units in the area have been strengthened to protect these exploration activities, and air and sea patrols in the Spratlys have been increased.

This stepped-up activity has already produced one situation in which Vietnamese troops on one island fired at a Philippine plane. Peking has also registered a private and public protest over Manila's actions.

President Marcos has asked us for a clear written statement of whether we will respond under the Mutual Defense Treaty if his forces are attacked while operating in the Reed Bank (Tab B). Marcos made clear that a formal answer on this question must precede any further progress on the base negotiations.

Agency Positions on the Key Issues

The Reed Bank Issue

Marcos' request that we give him a written guarantee that we will defend his forces in the Reed Bank area poses a dilemma. The Mutual Defense Treaty requires us to react to attacks against Philippine territory, islands or "on its armed forces, public vessels or aircraft in the Pacific." As disputed areas, the Spratlys and the Reed Bank can be defined as territory to which the treaty would not apply. However, the broader reference to forces, vessels or aircraft "in the Pacific," could be interpreted to cover Philippine units attacked in either the Spratlys or the Reed Bank. We have consistently declined to take a position on any of the claims to the Spratlys and the Reed Bank.

Essentially there are three responses we can give to Marcos on this issue: an affirmative one clearly extending our commitment to cover Philippine units attached in the Reed Bank; a negative one definitely excluding the area from our defense commitment; or an ambiguous one restating our overall defense commitment to the Philippines but leaving unanswered whether we would respond to all attacks on Philippine units in the area.

A clearly negative response to this issue may at the very least be expected to complicate gravely our current task of renegotiating the bases agreement. It could well lead to tighter restrictions on the use of our bases, e.g., for support of activities in the Indian Ocean.

On the other hand, any strongly affirmative response to Marcos will bear at least equal risks. It would increase the possibility of tensions with the PRC and Vietnam. Congress and the public would probably see such a position as an unnecessary expansion of our defense commitment.

Finally, a forthcoming response might encourage Marcos to pursue his claims to the Spratlys more actively, and to use military force to protect such claims.

State and Defense recommend that, as an opening move, you authorize our making an ambiguous reply. In it we would state that we would consider Philippine units operating in the Reed Bank as covered by our Defense Treaty "as long as their presence is consistent with the provisions of the Mutual Defense Treaty, particularly Article I regarding peaceful settlement of disputes and refraining from the threat or use of force." Such a response would: leave us the flexibility necessary to tailor our responses to attacks upon Philippine craft; neither expand nor contract our current treaty obligations; and allow us to avoid the significant risks that both of the other options present.

Compensation issue

Your decision is also needed concerning the level of military aid we should offer to the Philippines as part of our base agreement. State and Defense propose that you authorize our tabling an initial offer of 564 million of annual military assistance for 5 years ($30 million grant — $34 million credit). They further request authority to raise this figure, if necessary, during the negotiations up to $100 million a year, no more than $40 million of which would be in grant. They point out, moreover, that it may be necessary to settle on a somewhat higher figure in order to get a satisfactory agreement.

OMB believes that the State/Defense position is overly generous in terms of the amount of grants in contrast with the restraint we have placed on other government spending in 1978 and future years and in light of the Congressional mandate to eliminate grant military assistance after fiscal 1977. Moreover, the proposed offer greatly exceeds the levels we provided the Philippines in the last five years. (Largest total of grant and credit has been $37 million.)

OMB would conduct the discussion with a much lower grant/credit ratio, although the total amount would be the same.

While I do not recommend it, you may wish to consider a third alternative in the event you believe the State/DOD grant figures are too high. This alternative starts out with the State/DOD position but reduces grant MAP annually while raising the overall aid figure.

On a year by year basis, the three options would look as follows:

($ millions)

1978 1979 1980 1981 1982 Total

Alternative #1 (State/Defense)

Grant 30-40 30-40 30-40 30-40 30-40 150-200

Credit 34-60 34-60 34-60 34-60 34-60 170-300

Total 64-100 64-100 64-100 64-100 64-100 320-500

Alternative #2 (OMB)

Grant 20 15 10 10 — 55

Credit 44-80 49-85 54-90 54-90 64-100 265-445

Total 64-100 64-100 64-100 64-100 64-100 320-500

Alternative #3

Grant 30-40 25-35 20-30 15-25 10-20 100-150

Credit 34-60 44-70 54-80 64-90 74-100 270-400

Total 64-100 69-105 74-110 79-115 84-120 370-550

Timing

OMB believes we should not proceed with the negotiations now. Jim Lynn argues that:

— Since our position does not meet Marcos' request for a clear commitment on the Reed Bank it is doubtful that any reasonable quid offer will be sufficient to overcome Philippine insistence on severely restricting our operating freedom and limiting the terms of the base agreement.

— A recess would provide time to consider alternative base requirements in the Philippines in light of the NSSM 246 worldwide review of military strategy and bases.

State believes that delays will only serve to harden the Philippine position and may push up the price we have to pay. In addition, should Marcos perceive that we are attempting to stall, he might seek to apply pressure by unilaterally imposing restrictions on our operating rights. The question of alternative base requirement in the Philippine s has already been addressed in March 1976. At that time both Defense and State recommended no change in our basing structure or our force levels. I believe State and Defense are in the best position to judge these issues.

Subject to your decisions, I will issue an appropriate directive to the Departments of State and Defense providing guidance on the level of compensation we should offer to the Philippines, what stand we should take on the Reed Bank defense issue, and the timing of making our approaches.

RECOMMENDATIONS

Reed Bank

That you authorize State and Defense to reply to Marcos on the Reed Bank defense commitment issue by saying our Defense Treaty would apply to Philippine units operating in the Reed Bank region as long as their presence is consistent with the provisions of our Mutual Defense Treaty, particularly Article I regarding peaceful settlement of disputes and refraining from the that or use of force.

APPROVE [GRF initialed]
DISAPPROVE

Compensation

#1 That you authorize a five year security assistance commitment in the range of $64 million ($30 million of which is grant aid) to $100 million per year (of which no more than $40 million is grant). [State and Defense recommend.]
APPROVE [GRF initialed]
DISAPPROVE

OR

#2 That you authorize a five year security assistance commitment in the range of $64 to $100 million per year with no more than $55 million in grant aid over the entire period. [OMB recommends.]
APPROVE
DISAPPROVE

OR

#3 That you authorize a first year minimum offer of $30 million grant and $34 million FMS credits. Following that, the grant element would decline $5 million each year while the FMS element would increase by $10 million.
APPROVE
DISAPPROVE

Timing

That you approve Secretary Kissinger's proceeding with the negotiations using the positions you have approved as his guidelines.

APPROVE [GRF initialed]
DISAPPROVE

1 Source: Ford Library, NSC Institutional Files (H-Files), Box H–40, NSSM 235, U.S. Interests and Objectives in the Asia-Pacific Region (2 of 2) (10). Secret. Sent for action. The memorandum was probably written shortly before Kissinger’s October 6 meeting with Romulo. Ford initialed his approval of the recommendations concerning the Reed Bank, option one concerning compensation, and timing. Tab B, presenting Marcos’s request, and Tab F, the maps, are not attached.

354. Telegram 250861 From the Department of State to the Embassy in the Philippines, October 8, 1976, 1609Z. 354. Telegram 250861 From the Department of State to the Embassy in the Philippines, October 8, 1976, 1609Z.1

October 8, 1976, 1609Z

TELEGRAM

Department of State

250861

R 3315292 OCT 76

FM SECSTATE WASHDC
TO AMEMBASSY MANILA IMMEDIATE

STATE 250861

E.O. 11652:GDS
TAGS: PFOR, US, RP

SUBJECT: SECRETARY'S MEETING WITH PHILIPPINE FOREIGN SECRETARY

1. THE SECRETARY MET WITH FOREIGN SECRETARY ROMULO FOR AN HOUR AND A HALF IN THE AFTERNOON OF OCTOBER 6 IN NEW YORK. ROMULO OPENED DISCUSSION BY READING STATEMENT SEEKING AUTHORITATIVE CLARIFICATION OF USG INTERPRETATION OF ARTICLE 5 OF MUTUAL DEFENSE TREATY, NOTING THAT PHILIPPINES IS NOT IN IMMINENT DANGER OF EXTERNAL ATTACK AND THAT GOP HAS RESOLVED TO SETTLE ANY DISPUTES WITH ASIAN NEIGHBORS THROUGH PEACEFUL NEGOTIATIONS. ROMULO SAID SERIOUS DOUBTS HAVE ARISEN WITH REGARD TO ASSURANCES PREVIOUSLY GIVEN BY USG THAT AN ATTACK ON THE PHILIPPINES FROM ANY QUARTER WOULD BE INSTANTLY REPELLED BY THE U.S. FILIPINOS HAVE GRAVE MISGIVINGS THAT THE TREATY EXISTS SOLELY FOR DEFENSE OF THE U.S. BASES IN THE PHILIPPINES, BASIC CONSIDERATION, ROMULO CONTINUED, IS THAT PHILIPPINE SELF-DEFENSE PROGRAM MUST PROGRESS AS RAPIDLY AS POSSIBLE AND THAT CREDIBILITY OF THE PROGRAM WOULD BE CONSIDERABLY ENHANCED BY A FIRM COMMITMENT BY USG TO DEFEND THE PHILIPPINES AGAINST EXTERNAL AGGRESSION,

2. WITH REGARD TO THE QUESTION OF THE SPRATLY ISLANDS, ROMULO SAID HE WAS AWARE THIS WOULD HAVE SOME BEARING ON USG CONSIDERATION OF THE PROBLEM OF INTERPRETING THE TREATY, HE WISHED TO ASSURE THE SECRETARY ON THE AUTHORITY OF PRESIDENT MARCOS, THAT THE GOP HAS NO INTENTION OF INVOLVING THE UNITED STATES IN THE RESOLUTION OF THE SPRATLYS QUESTION BECAUSE THE GOP FEELS IT CAN RESOLVE THE ISSUE ON THE BASIS OF UNDERSTANDING WITH THE PARTIES INVOLVED, WITHOUT THE NEED OF U.S. ASSISTANCE.

3. THE SECRETARY REPLIED THAT WE WOULD HAVE NO PROBLEM IN MAKING CLEAR THAT THE TREATY APPLIES NOT JUST FOR THE DEFENSE OF U.S. BASES BUT FOR DEFENSE OF THE METROPOLITAN AREA OF THE PHILIPPINES. OUR CONCERN HAS SEEN THAT WE MIGHT BE DRAWN INTO MILITARY CONFRONTATIONS RESULTING FROM PHILIPPINE ACTIVITIES IN THE REED SANK AND THE SPRATLYS, AND THEREFORE ANY USG STATEMENT ON THOSE OUTLYING AREAS WOULD HAVE TO BE SO QUALIFIED AS TO BE NEARLY UNSATISFACTORY FROM GOP POINT OF VIEWS. ROMULO RESPONDED BY REITERATING THAT THE GOP DOES NOT WANT TO INVOLVE THE USG IN THOSE AREAS.

4. WITH REGARD TO THE REFERENCE IN THE TREATY TO CONSTITUTIONAL PROCESSES, THE SECRETARY POINTED OUT THAT ANY ATTACK ON THE PHILIPPINES WOULD UNDOUBTEDLY BE OF GREAT MAGNITUDE AND THAT WE HAVE THE SAME PROBLEM OF OBTAINING CONGRESSIONAL ASSENT RELATED TO ATTACKS ON ANY OF OUR ALLIES, HE SAID HE COULD NOT IMAGINE HAVING ANY PROBLEM OBTAINING CONGRESSIONAL SUPPORT FOR DEFENSE OF THE PHILIPPINES, IN VIEW OF THE EXISTENCE OF THE TREATY AND OUR BASES THERE.

5. THE SECRETARY STATED THAT ROMULO'S OPENING STATEMENT GIVES THE USG A BASIS ON WHICH TO GIVE THE GOP A CLEAR-CUT ASSURANCE THAT THE TREATY APPLIES TO THE METROPOLITAN AREA OF THE PHILIPPINES. IF, HOWEVER, THE GOP INSISTED ON DRAGGING IN THE SPRATLYS, WE WOULD HAVE TO INCLUDE COMPLICATED FORMULATIONS AND ESCAPE CLAUSES WHICH WOULD CAUSE MORE PROBLEMS THAN THEY SETTLED. ROMULO RESPONDED BY SAYING THAT CONTROVERSIAL AREAS COULD BE EXCLUDED.

6. ROMULO TURNED TO THE QUESTION OF MODERNIZING THE PHILIPPINE ARMED FORCES, NOTING THAT THE GOP WISHED TO BE SELF-RELIANT SO AS NOT TO INVOLVE THE U.S. IN ITS QUARRELS, HE SAID A SHOPPING LIST OF DESIRED EQUIPMENT HAD ALREADY BEEN SUPPLIED TO THE USG, THE SECRETARY RESPONDED THAT THE STRONGER THE PHILIPPINES, THE FEWER HARD CHOICES THE USG HAS TO MAKE, BUT HE CAUTIONED THAT CONGRESSIONAL ATTITUDES REQUIRE THAT WE BE REALISTIC IN OFFERING ASSISTANCE. HE ASKED ABOUT THE MAGNITUDE OF PHILIPPINE DESIRES. DEFENSE SECRETARY ENRILE REPLIED THAT THEY DESIRE A FIVE-YEAR ASSISTANCE PROGRAM, OF WHICH THE FIRST YEAR'S PRICE TAG WOULD BE ABOUT HALF A BILLION DOLLARS. THE SECRETARY REPLIED THAT THIS WAS TOTALLY UNREALISTIC AND SUGGESTED THAT AS AN ALTERNATIVE THE GOP SHOULD ATTEMPT TO DEFINE ITS PRIORITIES IN TERMS OF EQUIPMENT, WHICH HE WOULD THEN TRY TO SUPPLY, ROMULO RESPONDED THAT ANOTHER WAY OF APPROACHING THE PROBLEM WOULD BE IN TERMS OF HOW IMPORTANT THE BASES REALLY ARE TO THE U.S. THE SECRETARY REPLIED THAT IN AN ALL-OUT WAR WE COULD DO WITHOUT THE BASES, BUT THAT WE CONSIDER THEM TO BE QUITE IMPORTANT IN PERIPHERAL ENCOUNTERS INVOLVING THE INDIAN OCEAN, SOUTHEAST ASIA, OR PRC ACTIVITIES IN THE AREA.

7. ROMULO SAID HIS GOVERNMENT WAS AFRAID OF BEING SUBJECTED TO NUCLEAR ATTACK [text not declassified] AT THIS POINT, THE SECRETARY, DEPUTY DEFENSE SECRETARY CLEMENTS, AND AMBASSADOR SULLIVAN LEFT ROOM FOR A SHORT CONSULTATION, UPON RETURN, THE SECRETARY STATED THAT THIS WAS A COMPLICATED ISSUE TO WHICH IN HIS OPINION THERE WAS A PRACTICAL SOLUTION BUT HE BELIEVED IT HAS A MATTER FOR DISCUSSION WITH PRESIDENT MARCOS. ENRILE AGREED THAT ONLY PRESIDENT MARCOS COULD DECIDE FOR THE GOP.

8. THE SECRETARY NOTED THAT AS A PRACTICAL MATTER IT WOULD NOT BE POSSIBLE TO CONCLUDE THE BASES AGREEMENT BETWEEN THE ELECTION AND INAUGURATION OF THE NEW PRESIDENT IF PRESIDENT FORD LOST THE ELECTION, WHICH WAS UNLIKELY, AND AGREEMENT ON THE TREATY ISSUE AND THE FINANCIAL PACKAGE HAD NOT BEEN REACHED PRIOR TO THE ELECTION. HOWEVER, IF THE LEGAL AND FINANCIAL PROBLEMS COULD BE SETTLED BEFORE NOVEMBER 2, THEN THE AGREEMENT COULD BE CONCLUDED, EVEN IF THE PRESIDENT LOST THE ELECTION. HE EMPHASIZED THAT THE USG WAS NOT PRESSING FOR AN EARLY AGREEMENT AND WAS WILLING TO WAIT IF THAT WAS WHAT THE GOP WANTED TO DO. HE STRESSED THAT THE GOP SHOULD DECIDE WHETHER OR NOT TO PRESS FOR AN EARLY AGREEMENT.

9. ENRILE ASKED FOR SOME INDICATION OF HOW MUCH OF THE FINANCIAL PACKAGE WOULD BE IN GRANTS, CREDITS, OR LOANS, HE INDICATED HIS PREFERENCE FOR AGREEMENT ON A TOTAL SUM RATHER THAN AGREEMENT ON EQUIPMENT PRIORITIES. THE SECRETARY ACCEPTED THIS SUGGESTION AND SAID HE PREFERRED TO AVOID HAGGLING OVER FIGURES, THEREFORE HE PROPOSED TO GIVE THE GOP A TOTAL FIGURE, FOLLOWING A MEETING NEXT WEEK WITH THE PRESIDENT AND THE NSC, WHICH WOULD BE OUR BEST ESTIMATE OF WHAT THE CONGRESS WILL APPROVE AND WHICH THE GOP WOULD HAVE TO ACCEPT AS OUR FINAL OFFER. THEN WE COULD ANNOUNCE AGREEMENT IN PRINCIPLE ON THE PRINCIPAL ISSUES OF OUR NEGOTIATIONS, WITH THE REMAINING ISSUES TO BE SETTLED BETWEEN THE SECRETARY AND PRESIDENT MARCOS AT A MEETING IN MANILA AFTER THE U.S. ELECTIONS. ROMULO AGREED AND INSTRUCTED AMBASSADOR ROMUALDEZ TO REPORT THE SECRETARY'S PROPOSAL TO PRESIDENT MARCOS IMMEDIATELY UPON ROMUALDEZ' ARRIVAL IN MANILA ON OCTOBER 10.

10. ASSISTANT SECRETARY HUMMEL NOTED THE NEED FOR PRESS GUIDANCE AND IT WAS AGREED THAT THE PRESS WOULD BE TOLD THAT THE TWO SECRETARIES HAD MADE GOOD PROGRESS IN DISCUSSING THE BASE NEGOTIATIONS AND THAT THE NEGOTIATIONS WILL CONTINUE. ROBINSON

1 Source: Library of Congress, Henry Kissinger Papers, CL 205, Philippines, 1974–76. Secret; Immediate; Nodis. Fleck drafted, David Passage of S cleared, and Hummel approved the telegram.

355. Memorandum From Kenneth M. Quinn of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Scowcroft), Washington, October 8, 1976. 355. Memorandum From Kenneth M. Quinn of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Scowcroft), Washington, October 8, 1976.1

Washington, October 8, 1976

[text not declassified in time for publication]

1 Source: Ford Library, National Security Adviser, Presidential Country Files for East Asia and the Pacific, Box 15, Philippines (5). Secret; Sensitive. Sent for information. Scowcroft initialed the upper right hand corner of the document. Theodore Shackley, the Associate Deputy Director for Operations at the CIA, produced a memorandum for the record, October 4, describing the meeting between Romulo and Bush. ( Central Intelligence Agency, OPI 10 [Executive Registry], Job 79M00467A, Box 23, Folder Number 15, P – 9: Philippines [426])

356. Telegram 267549 From the Department of State to the Embassy in the Philippines, November 24, 1976, 0015Z. 356. Telegram 267549 From the Department of State to the Embassy in the Philippines, November 24, 1976, 0015Z.1

November 24, 1976, 0015Z

TELEGRAM
Department of State
267549

DRAFTED BY: EA/PHL:BAFLECK:PAW
APPROVED BY P:PCHABIB
EA:AWHUMEL, JR.
S/S: PSEBASTIAN
S:DSPASSAGE

O 240015Z NOV 76 ZFF4

FM SECSTATE WASHDC

TO AMEMBASSY MANILA IMMEDIATE

E.O. 11652: GDS
TAGS: MRR, RP

SUBJECT: PHILIPPINE BASE NEGOTIATIONS: SECRETARY'S NOVEMBER 23 MEETING WITH ROMULO

1. AT HIS INITIATIVE, FOREIGN SECRETARY ROMULO CALLED ON SECRETARY NOVEMBER 23, ACCOMPANIED BY AMBASSADORS ROMUALDEZ AND MABILANGAN. ALSO PRESENT WERE HABIB, HUMMEL, AND COUNTRY DIRECTOR.

2. INITIALLY, SECRETARY AND ROMULO MET ALONE FOR TEN MINUTES. DURING THIS PERIOD, ROMULO GAVE SECRETARY AN AIDE-MEMOIRE WHICH (1) PROPOSED A FIVE-YEAR FINANCIAL PACKAGE TOTALING DOLS 2 BILLION: (2) STATED THAT THE GOP DOES NOT INTEND TO HAMPER U.S. OPERATIONAL EFFECTIVENESS AT THE BASES; (3) REQUESTED CLARIFICATION OF THE TERMS "METROPOLITAN TERRITORY" AND "PACIFIC AREA," AS USED IN THE MUTUAL DEFENSE TREATY; AND (4) SOUGHT A MORE FORCEFUL AND UNEQUIVOCAL STATEMENT OF USG READINESS TO DEFEND THE PHILIPPINES AGAINST EXTERNAL AGGRESSION. TEXT OF AIDE-MEMOIRE SENT SEPTEL.

3. SECRETARY INFORMED ROMULO THAT HE SAW NO POSSIBILITY OF U.S. AGREEMENT TO DOLS 2 BILLION FIGURE AND SAID THIS MATTER WOULD HAVE TO BE LEFT FOR CONSIDERATION BY NEXT ADMINISTRATION. HE SAID HE THOUGHT ISSUE OF MDT DEFINITIONS COULD BE HANDLED AND THAT AIDE-MEMOIRE'S STATEMENT REGARDING OPERATIONAL EFFECTIVENESS PROVIDED CONCEPTUAL BASIS FOR FINDING SOLUTIONS TO THE REMAINING UNRESOLVED ISSUES.

4. IT WAS AGREED THAT RESPONSE TO PRESS INQUIRIES WOULD BE THAT THE TWO SECRETARIES HAD AGAIN DISCUSSED BASE NEGOTIATIONS, THAT FURTHER PROGRESS WAS MADE, AND THAT NEGOTIATIONS ARE CONTINUING.

ROBINSON

1 Source: Ford Library, National Security Adviser, Presidential Country Files for East Asia and the Pacific, Box 16, Philippines, State Department Telegrams From SECSTATE-NODIS. Secret; Immediate; Nodis. Drafted by Fleck; cleared by Hummel and Sebastian; approved by Habib. Telegram 287342 to Manila, November 23, provides the verbatim text of the aide-memoire that Romulo gave to Kissinger. (National Archives, Record Group 59, Central Foreign Policy Files)

357. Telegram 18586 From the Embassy in the Philippines to the Department of State, November 29, 1976, 0824Z. 357. Telegram 18586 From the Embassy in the Philippines to the Department of State, November 29, 1976, 0824Z.1

November 29, 1976, 0824Z

TELEGRAM
Department of State
MANILA 18586

R 290824Z NOV 76

FM AMEMBASSY MANILA
TO SECSTATE WASHDC 3344

NODIS
E.O. 11652: GDS
TAGS: MARR, RP

SUBJECT: PHILIPPINE BASE NEGOTIATIONS
REF: (A) STATE 287649, (B) STATE 287342

1. TO ASSESS LATEST PHILIPPINE POSITION ON MILITARY BASES, MILITARY ASSISTANCE, AND THE APPLICATION OF THE MUTUAL DEFENSE TREATY, IT IS NECESSARY TO START FROM THE PREMISE THAT MARCOS HAD ALREADY DECIDED, SHORTLY AFTER THE U.S. ELECTIONS, THAT HE WISHED TO CONSUMMATE HIS NEGOTIATIONS WITH THE INCOMING CARTER ADMINISTRATION RATHER THAN WITH THE FORD ADMINISTRATION. HE CAME TO THIS CONCLUSION NOT BECAUSE HE EXPECTED TO BE ABLE TO OBTAIN A BETTER DEAL FROM THE NEW ADMINISTRATION BUT RATHER BECAUSE, IN TYPICAL FILIPINO PERSONALIZATION OF POLITICS, HE WISHED TO BE SURE THAT THE NEW U.S. ADMINISTRATION, WHICH WILL HAVE THE TASK OF EXECUTING THE AGREEMENT, FEELS A SENSE OF RESPONSIBILITY FOR ITS TERMS. ALTHOUGH I HAVE REFRAINED FROM ANY DISCUSSION OF THIS RATIONALE WITH MARCOS DIRECTLY, HE HAS CONDUCTED AN INFORMAL, INDIRECT COLLOQUY WITH ME THROUGH JACK VALENTI, WHO WAS HIS RECENT HOUSE GUEST, IN ORDER TO ASSURE (WITH SOME DELICADEZA) THAT WE UNDERSTOOD HIS MOTIVATIONS.

2. SEEN IN THIS PERSPECTIVE, THE AIDE-MEMOIRE DELIVERED BY RUMOLO NOVEMBER 23 CAN BE REGARDED, IN THE BEST TRADITION OF THE ORIENTAL BAZAAR, AS A POSITION WHICH IS DELIBERATELY DESIGNED TO BE UNACCEPTABLE TO US, THEREBY BRINGING CURRENT PHASE OF NEGOTIATIONS TO A POINT OF SUSPENSION, WITH THE BALL IN OUR COURT. THE FILIPINOS ARE FULLY AWARE THAT AN ANNUAL COMPONENT OF $150 MILLION GRANT MILITARY ASSISTANCE IS CLEARLY OUT OF THE PICTURE, BUT THEIR OVERALL TOTAL OF $2 BILLION FOR FIVE YEARS IS POTENTIALLY CALCULATED IN SUCH A WAY THAT WE CAN APPEAR EVENTUALLY TO COME CLOSER TO THEIR TOTAL THAN OUR PROPOSED TOTAL OF $900 MILLION FOR FIVE YEARS.

3. IN EXPLAINING THIS OBSERVATION, WE SHOULD APPRECIATE THAT THE STRUCTURE OF OUR OWN OFFER, MIXING ECONOMIC AND MILITARY AIDE, IS VERY FLEXIBLE. THE $90-95 MILLION ECONOMIC AID PER YEAR IS DESCRIBED AS CONSISTING OF "DEVELOPMENT AID, PL 480 LOANS, AND SOME EXIM BANK CREDITS." SINCE OUR DEVELOPMENT AID PLUS PL 480 IS PROJECTED TO RUN CLOSE TO $80 MILLION PER YEAR, THIS LEAVES ONLY $10-15 MILLION PER YEAR FOR EXIM CREDITS. IN PRACTICE, OVER THE PAST FIVE YEARS, OUR EXIM LOANS PLUS GUARANTEES TO THE PHILIPPINES HAVE AVERAGED MORE THAN $200 MILLION PER YEAR. IN ADDITION TO THESE CATEGORIES WE COULD TOSS IN OTHER CREDITS, SUCH AS CCC LOANS, WHICH THIS YEAR ALONE AMOUNT TO 62 MILLION. IN SHORT, WE CAN CONSTRUCT AN ECONOMIC PACKAGE, USING ONLY THOSE ITEMS ALREADY SCHEDULED, WHICH COULD BE DESCRIBED AS WELL OVER $1 BILLION OVER THE NEXT FIVE YEARS.

4. PROCEEDING, THEREFORE, FROM THE FACT THAT THE ECONOMIC PACKAGE AS CURRENTLY DESCRIBED, IS LARGELY COSMETIC, WE MUST RECOGNIZE THAT THE ONLY REALLY CRITICAL MONETARY ELEMENT IN OUR NEGOTIATIONS IS THE MILITARY AID, AND THAT ITS GRAVAMEN IS THE GRANT MILITARY ASSISTANCE. WE HAVE DESCRIBED THAT AS POTENTIALLY $40 MILLION PER YEAR IN OUR OFFER, ALTHOUGH WE HAVE PRESIDENTIAL AUTHORITY TO GO OUT TO $50 MILLION, AND THAT IS PROBABLY WHERE THE FILIPINOS WOULD BE PREPARED TO SETTLE. ASSUMING THIS SUM WERE MATCHED BY AN EQUAL AMOUNT OF FMS CREDIT AND/OR GUARANTEED LOANS, WE COULD HAVE A MILITARY PACKAGE OF $500 MILLION OVER FIVE YEARS. ADDING THIS TO THE ECONOMIC PACKAGE, WE COULD DESCRIBE A TOTAL OF NEARLY $2.0 BILLION OVER FIVE YEARS, OUR POSITION AND THE PHILIPPINE POSITION, WITH THE WEIGHT CLEARLY IN THEIR FAVOR.

5. SIMILARLY, IN DEALING WITH THE MUTUAL DEFENSE ASPECTS OF THE AIDE-MEMOIRE, WE CAN ACCEPT THEIR POSITION WITH SEMANTIC (BUT SUBSTANTIAL) ADJUSTMENTS. "METROPOLITAN TERRITORY," FOR EXAMPLE, CAN BE DESCRIBED AS THE "LAND AREAS" WITHIN THE AREA DELINEATED IN THE TREATY OF PARIS AS AMENDED BY THE US-UK TREATY OF 2 JANUARY 1930. THIS WOULD AVOID A NUMBER OF COMPLEX ISSUES WHICH THE FILIPINOS KNOW WE WILL NOT ACCEPT. WE CAN ALSO ASSURE THEM THAT THE SOUTH CHINA SEA IS IN THE PACIFIC AREA. AS FAR AS AUTOMATICITY IS CONCERNED, WE CAN REAFFIRM THE LANGUAGE USED BY DULLES, EISENHOWER AND JOHNSON, BUT MAKE CLEAR THAT IT DOES NOT RPT NOT CARRY AS BROAD A COMMITMENT AS DESCRIBED IN THE AIDE-MEMOIRE. WITTINGLY OR UNWITTINGLY, THE FILIPINOS HAVE MISCONSTRUED THE LANGUAGE OF THE WAR POWERS ACT; BUT, AGAIN, IT CAN BE CITED VERBATIM FOR WHATEVER SOLACE IT MAY GIVE THEM.

6. IN SHORT, EXCEPT FOR THE ABSURDLY HIGH GRANT AID COMPONENT ON MILITARY AID, THE FILIPINO AIDE-MEMOIRE IS RATHER SHREWDLY DESIGNED TO PERMIT A CONSTRUCTIVE RENEWAL OF NEGOTIATIONS WHENEVER THE CARTER ADMINISTRATION DECIDES TO TAKE THIS INITIATIVE. I BELIEVE THE FILIPINOS WILL GIVE US FEW MONTHS GRACE, AT LEAST SO LONG AS OUR CURRENT MILITARY ASSISTANCE PROGRAM CONTINUES TO FUNCTION, BUT ASSUME THAT THEY WILL BEGIN TO DEMONSTRATE SOME MEASURE OF IMPATIENCE AS THE SPRING OF 1977 WEARS ON.

7. FROM OUR POINT OF VIEW, THE ISSUE WHICH HAS TO BE DECIDED IS WHETHER THE NEW ADMINISTRATION SHOULD JUST PICK UP THE NEGOTIATIONS WHERE THEY LEFT OFF, OR WHETHER IT SHOULD INTRODUCE A NEW ELEMENT. I STRONGLY RECOMMEND THAT WE REEXAMINE A VERY CENTRAL ASPECT OF OUR APPROACH—THE PROPOSAL TO PROVIDE GRANT MILITARY ASSISTANCE ON AN ANNUAL BASIS. MY REASONS FOR THIS RECOMMENDATION ARE PROVIDED IN THE FOLLOWING PARAGRAPHS.

8. AS DEPARTMENT IS AWARE, PHILIPPINE AUTHORITIES, LED BY DEFENSE SECRETARY ENRILE, HAVE PRESSED HARD FOR AN ARRANGEMENT UNDER WHICH WE WOULD PAY RENTAL, IN THE FORM OF AN ANNUAL CASH GRANT, FOR THE USE OF OUR MILITARY BASES HERE. ON OF THEIR EXPRESSED REASONS FOR THIS PROPOSAL IS THEIR DESIRE TO TERMINATE THE CURRENT MUTUAL DEFENSE ASSISTANCE AGREEMENT AND THE MAP SYSTEM OF PROCURING MILITARY EQUIPMENT FROM THE UNITED STATES. THE GOP WOULD PROPOSE, INSTEAD, TO ESTABLISH A MILITARY PURCHASING MISSION IN THE UNITED STATES, USING THE ANNUAL CASH GRANT TO FINANCE ACQUISITION OF MILITARY MATERIAL.

9. BECAUSE OF THIS PREFERENCE, THE GOP HAS BEEN LESS THAN ENTHUSIASTIC ABOUT U.S. PROPOSALS TO INSERT AN ARTICLE IN THE MILITARY BASES AGREEMENT BEING NEGOTIATED TO PROVIDE FOR A TURKISH-TYPE MILITARY ASSISTANCE PROGRAM, PREMISED UPON STRICT OBSERVANCE OF ALL MAP REGULATIONS AND PROCEDURES. IN A SENSE, THE GOP FEELS IT WOULD BE DOING US A FAVOR TO ACCEPT THIS SORT OF ARRANGEMENT RATHER THAN THE RENTAL ARRANGEMENT THEY PROPOSE.

10. AT THE SAME TIME, IT IS CLEAR FROM THE RESULTS OF THE RECENT U.S. ELECTIONS AND THE EXPRESSED SENTIMENT OF THE U.S. CONGRESS THAT MILITARY ASSISTANCE PROGRAMS, FOR WHATEVER PURPOSE, WILL MEET WITH LESS FAVOR THAN THEY HAVE IN THE PAST. MOREOVER, GIVEN THE NATURE OF THE PHILIPPINE GOVERNMENT AND THE TENOR OF THE HUMAN RIGHTS PROVISIONS IN THE LATEST FOREIGN ASSISTANCE ACT, IT IS EQUALLY CLEAR THAN AN ANNUAL APPROPRIATION FOR MILITARY ASSISTANCE FOR THE PHILIPPINES, UNDER A MULTI-YEAR ASSISTANCE AGREEMENT, WOULD BE A PAINFUL ORDEAL THAT WOULD BRUISE OUR BILATERAL RELATIONS INORDINATELY.

11. IN VIEW OF ALL THESE CONSIDERATIONS, I INFORMALLY SUGGESTED TO SENIOR OFFICIALS OF STATE AND DEFENSE, DURING MY CONSULTATIONS IN EARLY OCTOBER, THAT U.S. NEGOTIATORS OUGHT TO EXAMINE THE PROSPECTS FOR "QUID" TO COVER OUR MILITARY BASES IN SOME DENOMINATION OTHER THAN MILITARY EQUIPMENT. I POINTED OUT THAT THE PHILIPPINES, IN ORDER TO ESTABLISH SOME MEASURE OF SELF-RELIANCE AND INDEPENDENCE FROM OPEC OIL, NEEDS TO SPEND CONSIDERABLE CAPITAL SUMS ON ITS DEVELOPMENT OF ENERGY RESOURCES. ITS POTENTIAL, FOR EXAMPLE, IN GEO-THERMAL POWER IS SIGNIFICANT AND IT CAN USEFULLY EMPLOY ALMOST ANY ANNUAL SUM WE WOULD BE PREPARED TO CONSIDER IN GEOTHERMAL POWER DEVELOPMENT OVER THE NEXT TEN YEARS.

12. I HAVE THEREFORE PROPOSED THAT, INSTEAD OF A MULTI-YEAR MILITARY ASSISTANCE PROGRAM COMPOSED OF PART GRANT AND PART CREDIT, WE OFFER AN ASSISTANCE PROGRAM DENOMINATED EXCLUSIVELY IN ECONOMIC TERMS. THE MAJOR NEW COMPONENT OF THIS PROGRAM WOULD BE A MULTI-YEAR GRANT RPT GRANT FOR ACQUISITION OF GEO-THERMAL POWER INSTALLATIONS. THIS FEATURE OF THE PROGRAM WOULD NOT RPT NOT NEED TO BE HANDLED THROUGH AID, EVEN THOUGH THE FUNDS MIGHT BE INCLUDED IN THE FAA LEGISLATION. THE OPERATION COULD BE DONE ON A STRAIGHT REIMBURSEMENT BASIS TO U.S. CONTRACTORS AGAINST PROOF OF SATISFACTORY PERFORMANCE IN INSTALLATION OF THE GEOTHERMAL PLANTS.

13. SINCE THIS COMPONENT WOULD BE ON A GRANT BASIS, AND WOULD BE OVER AND ABOVE OUR NORMAL AID PROGRAMS, IT WOULD NATURALLY RESULT IN A BUDGETARY AND FOREIGN EXCHANGE SAVINGS TO THE GOP FOR EXPENSIVE PROGRAMS TO WHICH THEY ARE ALREADY COMMITTED IN ANY EVENT. THESE BUDGETARY AND FOREIGN EXCHANGE SAVINGS COULD CONSEQUENTLY BE USED, IN A FUNGIBLE FASHION, IN LIEU OF THE CASH GRANTS WHICH THE GOP HAS BEEN SEEKING FROM US FOR THE ACQUISITION OF MILITARY EQUIPMENT.

14. THIS SORT OF TRANSACTION WOULD THEREFORE ENABLE US TO TERMINATE OUR GRANT MILITARY ASSISTANCE PROGRAM TO THE PHILIPPINES, PERMIT THEM TO ESTABLISH THE MILITARY PURCHASING MISSION THEY WISH TO INSTALL IN THE UNITED STATES, AND RESULT IN THE DISESTABLISHMENT OF JUSMAG PHILIPPINES. I WOULD EXPECT THAT, AS ALLIES, THE PHILIPPINES WOULD STILL BE ELIGIBLE FOR FMS CREDIT PROGRAMS, FOR GUARANTEED LOANS, AND, PERHAPS, ALSO FOR SOME GRANT FUNDS WHICH WOULD COVER THE COSTS OF TRAINING FILIPINOS IN U.S. SERVICE SCHOOLS.

15. IN THE LONG RUN, IT WOULD LEAVE IN PHILIPPINE HANDS THE ULTIMATE DECISIONS ABOUT THE AMOUNTS OF MONEY IT WISHES TO SPEND FOR MILITARY EQUIPMENT, THE KINDS OF EQUIPMENT, AND THE ORDER OF PRIORITIES IN ITS ACQUISITION. WHILE IT WOULD, AT LEAST FOR A WHILE, RESULT IN LESS EFFICIENCY, IT WOULD CREATE MORE SENSE OF SELF-RELIANCE AND RESPONSIBILITY AS WELL AS REDUCE ADMINISTRATIVE FRICTIONS. SINCE IT IS DOUBTFUL THAT PRESIDENT MARCOS WOULD PERMIT THE MILITARY TO REALIZE ALL THE DOLLAR BENEFITS THAT WOULD FLOW FROM THE PROPOSED GEOTHERMAL POWER PROGRAM, IT WOULD PROBABLY ALSO RESULT, IN THE LONG RUN, IN A SMALLER ANNUAL ACQUISITION OF MILITARY EQUIPMENT BY THE PHILIPPINES AND HENCE, LESS CHANCE OF INAPPROPRIATE AND WASTEFUL PROCUREMENT.

16. FINALLY, BY CONCENTRATING ON ELECTRIC POWER GENERATION, THE U.S. WILL BE DOING SOMETHING MORE VITAL FOR THE PHILIPPINES AND MORE LASTING THAN THE PROVISION OF MILITARY EQUIPMENT. IN AN EARLIER GENERATION, U.S. CREATION OF A PUBLIC SCHOOL SYSTEM IN THE PHILIPPINES HAS ENABLED THIS COUNTRY TO HAVE A LITERATE AND SKILLED POPULATION, WELL AHEAD OF ITS NEIGHBORS. BY DEVELOPING AN ELECTRIC POWER SYSTEM, AND IDENTIFYING IT AS A U.S. PROGRAM IN THE PHILIPPINES, WE MAY BE ABLE TO HELP MEET THE MOST PRESSING NEED OF THE CURRENT GENERATION OF FILIPINOS, WHICH IS TO FIND GAINFUL EMPLOYMENT FOR THE HUNDREDS OF THOUSANDS OF THEIR YOUNG CITIZENS WHO ARE ANNUALLY PROVING SURPLUS TO THE NEEDS OF THE AGRICULTURAL SECTOR AND SEEK INDUSTRIAL JOBS. WITHOUT ELECTRICAL ENERGY, THESE JOBS CAN NOT BE CREATED. WITH IT, PLUS INTELLIGENT LEADERSHIP AND GOOD ORGANIZATION, THERE IS THE PROSPECT THAT THAT THEY CAN BE CREATED.

17. IN GENERAL, I THINK THE AMOUNTS TO BE INVOLVED IN THIS NEW GRANT AID PROGRAM SHOULD BE THE SAME AS WE HAVE BEEN PREPARED TO OFFER IN THE GRANT MILITARY AID PROGRAM—$50 MILLION PER YEAR. THIS, PLUS THE NORMAL AID, PL 480, EXIM, CCC, FMS, AND GUARANTEED LOAN PROGRAMS COULD ADD UP TO NEARLY $2 BILLION, AS PREVIOUSLY CITED. HOWEVER, BECAUSE THE GEOTHERMAL PROGRAM WOULD BE BUILT AROUND CONCRETE PRODUCTION UNITS, THE SUMS TO BE APPROPRIATED MIGHT HAVE TO BE CAST IN NUMBERS NOT QUITE SO ROUND AS THE PUTATIVE MILITARY PROGRAM.

18. SINCE THIS RECOMMENDATION IS CAST IN TERMS OF PROPOSALS FOR THE NEXT ADMINISTRATION, IT IS INAPPROPRIATE TO SUGGEST THAT THESE PROPOSALS BE DISCUSSED WITH PHILIPPINE AUTHORITIES AT THIS TIME. HOWEVER, I SHOULD, PERHAPS, RECORD MY VIEW THAT, AT THE APPROPRIATE POINT, THE ESSENCE OF THE GEOTHERMAL SCHEME SHOULD FIRST BE RAISED WITH DEFENSE SECRETARY ENRILE, WHO WOULD BE THE OFFICIAL MOST DIRECTLY CONCERNED BY ITS IMPLICATIONS AND THE ONE MOST LIKELY TO GRASP ITS TOTAL IMPORT.
SULLIVAN

1 Source: Ford Library, National Security Adviser, Presidential Country Files for East Asia and the Pacific, Box 16, Philippines, State Department Telegrams To SECSTATE–NODIS (2). Secret; Nodis.

358. Telegram 293490 From the Department of State to the Embassy in the Philippines, December 2, 1976, 0118Z. 358. Telegram 293490 From the Department of State to the Embassy in the Philippines, December 2, 1976, 0118Z.1

December 2, 1976, 0118Z

TELEGRAM
Department of State
293490

DRAFTED BY P:PCHABIB:JNP
APPROVED BY P:PCHABIB
S/S- FVORTIZ

O 020118Z DEC 76 ZFF4

FM SEC STATE WASHDC
TO AMEMBASSY MANILA IMMEDIATE

NODIS
FOR AMBASSADOR FROM HABIB

E.O. 11652: GDS
TAGS: MARR, RP, US

SUBJECT: PHILIPPINE BASE NEGOTIATIONS

1. THE SECRETARY MET WITH ROMULO IN MEXICO CITY YESTERDAY. THEY AGREED IN PRINCIPLE ON THE COMPLETION OF THE BASE AGREEMENT IN AS SHORT A TIME AS POSSIBLE WITH A FINANCIAL PACKAGE OF ONE BILLION DOLLARS DIVIDED AMONG GRANTS AND CREDITS WITH THE TOTAL EQUALLY DIVED BETWEEN ECONOMIC AND MILITARY AID. ROMULO WILL BE COMING TO WASHINGTON ON DECEMBER 4 AT WHICH TIME THERE WILL BE A JOINT ANNOUNCEMENT OF THE AGREEMENT IN PRINCIPLE, THE TEXT OF WHICH APPEARS AT THE END OF THIS MESSAGE.

2. THIS WILL MEAN RESUMING NEGOTIATIONS IN MANILA ON AN URGENT BASIS. YOU WILL BE GETTING OUR LATEST REVIEW OF OUR NEGOTIATING POSITION, COORDINATED WITH DEFENSE, AS QUICKLY AS POSSIBLE.

3. ALL OF THIS IS BEING HELD CLOSELY UNTIL ANNOUNCEMENT. WE WILL KEEP YOU INFORMED AND THERE IS NO NEED FOR ANY ACTION ON YOUR PART AT THIS POINT.

4. FOLLOWING IS THE TEXT OF THE PROPOSED ANNOUNCEMENT:

BEGIN TEXT:

GENERAL CARLOS P. ROMULO, SECRETARY OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS OF THE REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES, AND SECRETARY OF STATE HENRY A KISSINGER MET ON DECEMBER 4, 1976, FOR FURTHER DISCUSSION OF THE MILITARY BASE AGREEMENT NEGOTIATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN IN PROGRESS SINCE APRIL 12, 1976.

THE TWO SECRETARIES ANNOUNCED THAT AS A RESULT OF THEIR DISCUSSIONS IN OCTOBER DURING WHICH THE BASIC LINES WERE WORKED OUT, THEY HAVE REACHED AGREEMENT IN PRINCIPLE ON THE NATURE OF A NEW MILITARY BASE AGREEMENT BETWEEN THE PHILIPPINES AND THE UNITED STATES.

THE UNITED STATES WILL HAVE USE OF MILITARY BASES IN THE PHILIPPINES IN ACCORDANCE WITH THE TERMS OF SUCH AN AGREEMENT. AS PART OF SUCH AN AGREEMENT, THE UNITED STATES WOULD PROVIDE, SUBJECT TO NECESSARY LEGISLATIVE APPROVAL, OVER A PERIOD OF FIVE YEARS, THE SUM OF ONE BILLION DOLLARS IN GRANTS AND CREDITS, THE TOTAL TO BE DIVIDED EQUALLY BETWEEN MILITARY AND ECONOMIC ASSISTANCE.

IT WAS ALSO AGREED THAT THE NEGOTIATING PANELS IN MANILA WILL RESUME THEIR WORK SHORTLY IN ORDER TO RESOLVE THE REMAINING ISSUES IN THE NEGOTIATIONS, AND ARRIVE AT A MUTUALLY AGREED TEXT. THE FINAL AGREEMENT WILL BE SUBJECT TO APPROVAL BY THE TWO GOVERNMENTS IN ACCORDANCE WITH THEIR RESPECTIVE CONSTITUTIONAL PROCESSES.

END TEXT

ROBINSON

1 Source: Library of Congress, Henry Kissinger Papers, CL 277, Memoranda of Conversations, Chronological File, December 1976. Secret; Immediate; Nodis. Drafted and approved by Habib. At a 9:59 a.m. meeting with Ford and Scowcroft on December 3, Kissinger said, “We will announce agreement in principle with the Philippines Saturday. We offered them $1 billion and they asked for $2 billion. I said okay, deal with Carter. Then I told Romulo he was crazy; Carter would badger them on human rights, etc. He bought our proposals in Mexico City totally.” (Ford Library, National Security Adviser, Memoranda of Conversation, Box 21)

359. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Scowcroft) to President Ford, Washington, December 3, 1976. 359. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Scowcroft) to President Ford, Washington, December 3, 1976.1

Washington, December 3, 1976

MEMORANDUM
THE WHITE HOUSE
WASHINGTON

INFORMATION

December 3, 1976

MEMORANDUM FOR: THE PRESIDENT
FROM: BRENT SCOWCROFT [BS initialed]

SUBJECT: Breakthrough in Philippine Base Negotiations

Philippine Foreign Secretary Romulo told Secretary Kissinger in Mexico City that his Government is prepared to accept the billion-dollar financial package we offered as compensation for the bases, on the assumption that all other issues are resolved to our satisfaction. The five-year financial package which you approved would be broken down as follows:

Military Assistance

Grant Aid $200 million

FMS Financing $300 million

$500 million

Economic Assistance

Development Assistance $250 million

PL 480 Loans $125 million

Consideration of Exim Bank Loans $125 million

$500 million

Total $ 1 billion

It would appear that President Marcos has decided that our financial offer was good enough to nail down before the change in administrations. [text not declassified] Hopefully, Marcos will also share our desire to wind up the negotiations promptly. Some potentially difficult issues remain, however:

— We still have to ensure that Philippine negotiators agree to provisions which will allow us adequate operational freedom at the bases.

[text not declassified]

— We must square away language concerning the nature of our treaty commitment — though this should not be too difficult.

Next Steps

Secretary Kissinger is trying to work out a joint announcement which he could make with Romulo here in Washington on Saturday, December 4. (A copy of the proposed text is attached at Tab A.) State plans to brief key Senators and Congressmen (Sparkman, Humphrey, Case, Zablocki, Broomfield, and Fascell), and Defense is considering the possibility of informing the Armed Services leadership in the House and Senate.

State and Defense are working urgently on negotiating instructions to Ambassador Sullivan so that he will be ready to begin talks next week and wind them up as rapidly as possible.

1 Source: Ford Library, National Security Adviser, NSC Staff for East Asia and Pacific Affairs Convenience File, Box 31, Breakthrough in Philippine Base Negotiations. Secret; Sensitive. Sent for information. Ford initialed the memorandum. The draft of the joint U.S.-Philippine statement is ibid., Presidential Country Files for East Asia and the Pacific, Box 15, Philippines (5)

360. Telegram 295628 From the Department of State to the Embassy in the Philippines, December 4, 1976, 0159Z. 360. Telegram 295628 From the Department of State to the Embassy in the Philippines, December 4, 1976, 0159Z.1

December 4, 1976, 0159Z

TELEGRAM
Department of State
295628

O 040159Z DEC 76 ZFF4

FM SECSTATE WASHDC
TO AMEMBASSY MANILA NIACT IMMEDIATE

STATE 295628

FOR AMBASSADOR FROM HABIB

E.O. 11652: GDS
TAGS: MARR,PFOR, RP,US

SUBJECT: PHILIPPINE BASE NEGOTIATIONS

1. ROMULO INFORMED US DECEMBER 3 THAT HE HAD SPOKEN TO PRESIDENT MARCOS WHO WAS NOT WILLING TO PROCEED WITH THE AGREEMENT IN PRINCIPLE ON THE BASIS LAID OUT IN DISCUSSIONS BETWEEN THE SECRETARY AND ROMULO IN MEXICO CITY. MARCOS HAD INSTRUCTED ROMULO TO INFORM US THAT PHILIPPINE FINANCIAL REQUIREMENT WAS FOR ONE BILLION DOLLARS FOR MILITARY AID ALONE AND NOTHING FOR ECONOMIC ASSISTANCE. THE MILITARY AID WAS TO BE DIVIDED INTO 75 GRANTS AND 25 FMS.

2. ROMULO HAS BEEN INFORMED THAT THIS IS NOT ACCEPTABLE AND THAT PHILIPPINES WILL HAVE TO DEAL WITH THE NEW ADMINISTRATION ON THIS MATTER. ARRANGEMENTS FOR THE MEETING WITH ROMULO AND THE ANNOUNCEMENT IN WASHINGTON ON DECEMBER 4 ARE CANCELLED.

KISSINGER

1 Source: National Archives, Record Group 59, Central Foreign Policy Files. Secret; Niact; Immediate. Drafted and approved by Habib; cleared in S/S.

361. Telegram 19864 From the Embassy in the Philippines to the Department of State, December 23, 1976, 0900Z. 361. Telegram 19864 From the Embassy in the Philippines to the Department of State, December 23, 1976, 0900Z.1

December 23, 1976, 0900Z

TELEGRAM
Department of State
MANILA 19864

R 230900Z DEC 76

FM AMEMBASSY MANILA
TO SECSTATE WASHDC 4255

MANILA 19864

E. O. 11652: GDS
TAGS: MARR, RP

SUBJECT: PHILIPPINE BASE NEGOTIATIONS
REF: (A) MANILA 18586, (B) MANILA 19306

1. IN REF A, I REPORTED THAT MARCOS HAD OPTED TO DELAY NEGOTIATIONS ON U.S. MILITARY BASES UNTIL THE NEW U.S. ADMINISTRATION IS INSTALLED. I ALSO RECOMMENDED THAT DEPT. EXAMINE PROSPECT OF ELIMINATING MILITARY ASSISTANCE FROM THE NEGOTIATING PACKAGE IN FAVOR OF A GRANT ECONOMIC ASSISTANCE PROGRAM WHICH WOULD CONCENTRATE UPON DEVELOPMENT OF PHILIPPINE GEOTHERMAL POWER.

2. SHORTLY AFTER REF A WAS SENT, PHILIPPINE FOREIGN SECRETARY ROMULO ENTERED INTO TENTATIVE "AGREEMENT" ON A COMBINATION MILITARY-ECONOMIC AID PACKAGE IN RETURN FOR CONTINUED U.S. USE OF THE BASES. MARCOS SUBSEQUENTLY REPUDIATED THIS ARRANGEMENT, AND CONSIDERABLE CONFUSED PUBLICITY ENSUED. AS RESULT OF THIS CONFUSION, MARCOS HAS RESILED FROM HIS EARLIER PUBLIC STATEMENTS ON MILITARY AND ECONOMIC ASSISTANCE, AND HAS REVERTED TO HIS ORIGINAL DEMAND FOR AN ANNUAL CASH "RENTAL" TO BE PAID FOR THE BASES.

3. SINCE THIS WHOLE MATTER IS PRESUMABLY TO BE REVIEWED BY THE NEW U.S. ADMINISTRATION, I STRONGLY RECOMMEND THAT THIS REVIEW ALSO ENCOMPASS POSSIBILITY THAT U.S. PAY RENTALS FOR BASES IN THE PHILIPPINES. IN THE PAST, THIS PROSPECT HAS BEEN STRONGLY RESISTED, ESPECIALLY BY THE U.S. ARMED SERVICES WHICH PRESUME THAT THE RENTAL COSTS WOULD BE INCLUDED IN THEIR BUDGETS. BUT IT HAS ALSO BEEN SOMEWHAT EMOTIONALLY REJECTED FOR METAPHYSICAL REASONS WHICH I DO NOT FULLY UNDERSTAND. THE UNDERLYING THESIS OF THIS REJECTION IS THAT, FOR ALLIES, DEFENSE IS "MUTUAL" AND THIS RELATIONSHIP WOULD BE SULLIED BY A CRASS RENTAL TRANSACTION.

4. THIS ATTITUDE HAS NEVER BEEN SHARED BY LEADING MEMBERS OF THE U.S. CONGRESS, WHO SEE RENTALS AS A SOMEWHAT MORE SAVORY ARMS LENGTH RELATIONSHIP WITH A MARCOS ADMINISTRATION WHICH MANY REGARD AS A TAR BABY. SEVERAL KEY CONGRESSIONAL LEADERS HAVE URGED THIS EMBASSY TO AGREE TO RENTALS AND ELIMINATE THE GRANT MILITARY AID PROGRAM.

5. CONSEQUENTLY, IN RECOGNITION OF THE PHILIPPINE PREFERENCE FOR RENT, IN DEFERENCE TO SIGNIFICANT CONGRESSIONAL OPINION, AND IN VIEW OF THE PROBABILITY THAT IT WOULD CONSTITUTE A CHEAPER TRANSACTION, I SUGGEST WE TAKE A NEW LOOK AT OUR CURRENT POSITION IN OPPOSITION TO RENTALS. IF IT WOULD MAKE IT BUREAUCRATICALLY EASIER, WE COULD PERHAPS ARRANGE TO CARRY THE BUDGET FOR THE RENTALS AS A LINE ITEM IN THE STATE DEPT. BUDGET RATHER THAN IN THE MILITARY SERVICE ACCOUNTS WHERE THEY WOULD NORMALLY FALL.

SULLIVAN

1 Source: National Archives, Record Group 59, Central Foreign Policy Files. Secret; Nodis.

362. Letter From Secretary of Defense Rumsfeld to Secretary of State Kissinger, Washington, December 29, 1976. 362. Letter From Secretary of Defense Rumsfeld to Secretary of State Kissinger, Washington, December 29, 1976.1

Washington, December 29, 1976

THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE
WASHINGTON DC 20301

29 DEC 1976

Honorable Henry A. Kissinger
Secretary of State
Washington, D.C. 20520

Dear Henry:

For political, financial, and strategic reasons, the United States Government has historically maintained that we will not pay "rent" for the use of bases on allied territory. That policy and unfaltering adherence to it are of prime importance to the Department of Defense because of its world-wide defense responsibilities. You expounded the US position on rent with great skill and clarity to Secretary Romulo last April when you told him that it is a question of principle—of fundamental relations between allies—which we would neither surrender nor abandon; but that we were prepared to look at a stable security assistance package which would contribute to the shared security interests of both our countries.

In a major public foreign policy address December 11, President Marcos is widely and apparently reliably reported to have requested rent for continued use of the bases. Marcos' emphasis on this concept, which is unacceptable to us, distorted what was otherwise a reasonable presentation of current Philippine views on the status of base negotiations. If the Philippine President persists in publicly putting the defense relationship between the two governments on a pecuniary footing, he is almost certain to jeopardize the mutual defense relationship with the Philippines by prejudicing the US Congress and the American people. Moreover, public repetition of this theme is certain to interject a troublesome issue in our defense arrangements elsewhere around the world. It is my belief that, in the long term interests of both the US and the Philippines, Marcos should be warned.

As soon as the opportunity presents itself Bill Sullivan should, I believe, discuss the December 11 speech frankly with Marcos. It would probably be better if Sullivan portrayed himself as speaking personally rather than making a demarche. This would be an occasion to encourage Marcos to continue to take the constructive position which characterized the bulk of his remarks, to point out the hazards of pushing the rental concept, and to suggest instead the desirability of emphasizing the military and economic cooperation theme which you developed in your excellent remarks on April 12 to Secretary Romulo.

Your subordinates have expressed understandable reluctance, given the imminent change in administration in Washington, about asking Sullivan to reiterate those considerations directly to Marcos. Undoubtedly Sullivan would have to select with care the right moment for approaching Marcos. However, I firmly believe the US can ill afford to allow Marcos public espousal of rent to go uncontested until the new Administration has established its negotiating position and negotiations have resumed. That could be a little while.

But the passage of time begs the point. There has been a broad consensus in this country that the US should not pay rent to its allies for bases which serve the common weal, the political principle which you stressed to Romulo and which Marcos appears to have rejected. The American forces stationed in the Philippines serve both US and Philippine national interests. Either there is a shared interest, which is perceived as such by both parties, or there is no basis for a mutual security treaty. Most Americans, in my experience, adhere to this view.

Our bases in the Philippines are an integral element in our worldwide basing posture. It would be unfortunate if continued Philippine rhetoric on rents were to undermine the current negotiations. But it is of paramount importance that we discern the inherent risk to our worldwide basing system and that we alert the Philippine President to the consequences of what may have been bad advice or simply an unfortunate choice of words. In any event I see no harm in our doing so.

I would appreciate your further consideration of this matter and would like to have your views.

Sincerely,
[signed]
Donald Rumsfeld

1 Source: Washington National Records Center, OSD Files: FRC 330–79–0049, Philippines, 323.3, 29 December 1976. Secret.

Chapter X: Thailand and BurmaChapter X: Thailand and Burma

[363] Memorandum From the Military Assistant to the President (Scowcroft) to President Nixon, Washington, February 11, 1973.

Washington, February 11, 1973

Scowcroft conveyed Kissinger’s report of his meeting in Bangkok.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, HAK Office Files, Box 29, HAK Bangkok, Vientiane, Hanoi, Hong Kong, Peking, Tokyo Trip, February 7-20, 1973. Top Secret; Sensitive. Sent for information. A notation on the first page reads, “The President has seen.” The full memorandum of conversation from Kissinger’s meeting with Chartchai on February 9 is ibid., Box 1026, Presidential/HAK Memcons, January–March 1973, Folder 23.

[364] Memorandum From Richard T. Kennedy of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger), Washington, March 7, 1973.

Washington, March 7, 1973

Kennedy recommended that Kissinger tell Clements to prepare additional military assistance for Thailand.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 565, Country Files, Far East, Thailand, Volume 10, 1973–. Secret. Sent for urgent action. Kissinger initialed the “approve” option, and a notation from Scowcroft indicates that Kissinger followed up by calling Clements. A notation on the first page indicates that Tab B, attached, the proposed telegram to Unger, was given to the situation room for dispatch on March 9. Tab A, a telephone conversation between Kissinger and Clements from March 5, is attached but not published. Tab C, telegram 3675 from Bangkok, March 7, is attached but not published. On March 16, Kissinger asked Richardson to make twelve 105 mm howitzers available for Thailand in addition to the eight C–123 aircraft. (Memorandum from Kissinger to Secretary of Defense; ibid.)

[365] Telegram 4623 From the Embassy in Thailand to the Department of State, March 22, 1973, 1236Z.

March 22, 1973, 1236Z

The Embassy in Bangkok recommended a reduction in U.S. forces stationed in Thailand.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 565, Country Files, Far East, Thailand, Volume 10, 1973–. Secret; Priority; Nodis.

[366] Letter From Secretary of Defense Richardson to Secretary of State Rogers, Washington, April 3, 1973.

Washington, April 3, 1973

Richardson provided figures quantifying U.S. Department of Defense spending in Thailand and suggested that they be shared with the Thai leadership.

Source: Washington National Records Center, OASD/ISA Files: FRC 330–76–117, Thailand 121, 1973 April 3. Secret. On April 12, Rogers replied, “the tendency of Thai leaders to view bilateral assistance levels as perhaps the primary indicator of U.S. interest in Thailand’s security has long posed problems in our mutual discussions. Although we may never be able to eliminate this tendency completely, I am sure Ambassador Unger and his staff will appreciate and make good use of the newly-developed figures, which we are cabling out to Bangkok today. (Rogers to Richardson; National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970–1973, DEF 19 US–THAI)

[367] Executive Summary of an Intelligence Memorandum, Washington, April, 1973.

Washington, April 1973

The memorandum examined Chinese support for Southeast Asian insurgencies and attributed this policy to the Mao.

Source: Central Intelligence Agency, OPI 16 (Office of Current Intelligence), Job 80T00039A, Box 4, Item Number 13. Secret; No Foreign Dissem; Background use only.

[368] Memorandum From President Nixon to Secretary of State Rogers, Washington, April 19, 1973.

Washington, April 19, 1973

Nixon announced the appointment of Ambassadors to Thailand and Cambodia.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 286, Agency Files, State, Vol. 18. Confidential.

[369] Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to Secretary of Defense Richardson, Washington, May 3, 1973.

Washington, May 3, 1973

Kissinger endorsed the Department of Defense’s request to maintain Thai Special Guerrilla Units after their withdrawal from Laos.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 565, Country Files, Far East, Thailand, Volume 10, 1973–. Secret; Sensitive. Richards’s memorandum of April 6 is attached but not published.

[370] Memorandum From Secretary of Defense Richardson to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger), Washington, May 10, 1973.

Washington, May 10, 1973

Richardson informed Kissinger about difficulties in funding the Thai Special Guerrilla Units.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 565, Country Files, Far East, Thailand, Volume 10, 1973–. Secret; Sensitive. In an attached memorandum, May 14, to Kissinger, Schlesinger stated that the 30 battalions must be retained through FY 1974, and provided options for doing so.

[371] Memorandum From Acting Secretary of State Rush to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger), Washington, May 18, 1973.

Washington, May 18, 1973

Rush submitted the study on U.S. counterinsurgency support for Thailand written in response to NSSM 159.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Institutional Files (H-Files), Box H–193, NSSM 159. Secret; Nodis. The paper, dated March 30, is attached but not published. For NSSM 159, see Foreign Relations, 1969–1976, Vol. XX, Southeast Asia, 1969–1972, Document 174.

[372] Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to the Acting Secretary of Defense and the Director of Central Intelligence (Schlesinger), Washington, June 18, 1973.

Washington, June 18, 1973

Kissinger directed the DOD to fund the Thai Special Guerrilla Units during the 1974 fiscal year.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 565, Country Files, Far East, Thailand, Volume 10, 1973–. Secret; Sensitive. The Secretary of State also received a copy of this memorandum.

[373] Memorandum From John A. Froebe and William L. Stearman of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger), Washington, July 20, 1973.

Washington, June 20, 1973

Froebe and Stearman reported to Kissinger on the Thai Government’s requests for a reduced U.S. military presence, and they recommended that Kissinger authorize a Department of State telegram in response.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 565, Country Files, Far East, Thailand, Volume 10, 1973–. Secret; Nodis. Sent for action. Concurred in by Eagleburger and Pinckney. Kissinger initialed the “approve” option. The Department of State sent Tab A, attached but not published, to the Embassy in Bangkok as telegram 144716, dated July 23. Tab B, July 18, is also attached but not published.

[374] Memorandum of Conversation, New York, September 26, 1973, 10 a.m.

New York, September 26, 1973, 10 a.m.

Kissinger and Chatchai discussed Cambodia, U.S. forces in Thailand, U.S. aid, and relations with Hanoi.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 565, Country Files, Far East, Thailand, Volume 10, 1973–. Secret; Exdis. The meeting occurred at the U.S. Mission to the United Nations. Drafted by Bergesen; cleared by Hummel and Unger; and approved in S.

[375] Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to President Nixon, Washington, October 15, 1973.

Washington, October 15, 1973

Kissinger informed Nixon of the change of government in Thailand and its likely effect on U.S. interests.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 566, Country Files, Far East, Thailand, Volume 11, October 1973–. Secret. Urgent; Sent for information. Scowcroft initialed the memorandum on behalf of Kissinger. Near the top of the first page, Nixon wrote, “K—Maybe not so bad as we first thought.”

[376] Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to the Deputy Secretary of State (Rush), Washington, October 15, 1973

Washington, October 15, 1973

Kissinger authorized a schedule for withdrawing Thai forces from Laos.

Source: [text not declassified]. Secret; Sensitive. Kissinger received this memorandum under a covering memorandum, October 10, from William Stearman of the NSC staff.

[377] Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to President Nixon, Washington, October 29, 1973.

Washington, October 29, 1973

Kissinger offered Nixon a reappraisal of the change of government in Thailand.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 566, Country Files, Far East, Thailand, Volume 11, October 1973–. Secret. Sent for information. Scowcroft initialed the memorandum on behalf of Kissinger. A notation on the memorandum indicates, “The President has seen.”

[378] Memorandum From the Executive Secretary of State (Pickering) to the Deputy Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs (Scowcroft), Washington, November 29, 1973.

Washington, November 29, 1973

Pickering transmitted the Department of State’s view on U.S. deployments in Thailand.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Subject-Numeric Central Files, Top Secret Files, Box 4, DEF 1–1 US, 1970–1973. Secret. Barnes signed the memorandum for Pickering. Drafted by Dexter. Concurred in by Rush, Sneider, PM, and EA/RA. The DOD analysis of U.S. Deployments in Thailand, transmitted under Clements memorandum of October 13, is attached but not published. Kissinger requested this DOD study in a memorandum, attached but not published, from August 28. For NSSM 171, see Document 2.

[379] Telegram 1667 From the Embassy in Thailand to the Department of State, January 30, 1974, 1248Z.

January 30, 1974, 1248Z

The embassy assessed developments in Thailand.

Source: National Archives, Record Group 59, Central Foreign Policy Files. Secret; Limdis. Repeated to Jakarta, Kuala Lumpur, Manila, Paris, Phnom Penh, Rangoon, Saigon, Singapore, Vientiane, the Consulates of Chiang Mai and Udorn, USSAG at Nakhon Khanom Royal Thai air force base, the 13th Advanced Echelon at Udorn, CINCPAC, and DIA.

[380] Memorandum From the National Intelligence Officer for South and Southeast Asia at the Central Intelligence Agency (Christison) to the Director of Central Intelligence (Colby), Washington, March 8, 1974.

Washington, March 8, 1974

Christison forwarded guidelines for responding to a military coup in Thailand.

Source: Central Intelligence Agency, OPI 122 (National Intelligence Council), Job 79R01099A, Box 11, Folder 7, Contingency Planning for a Possible Military Coup in Thailand. Secret. On the routing slip attached to the memorandum, an unknown hand wrote, “Excellent memo. Let’s hold it for possible use at a WSAG or elsewhere.”

[381] Memorandum From Deputy Secretary of State Rush to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger), Washington, March 14, 1974.

Washington, March 14, 1974

Rush submitted State’s response to Department of Defense proposals concerning U.S. deployment and equipment turnover in Thailand.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 566, Country Files, Far East, Thailand, Volume 11, October 1973–. Secret. Davis’s memorandum of March 9, on U.S. deployments in Thailand, and March 12, on U.S. force reductions in Thailand, and their accompanying DOD attachments are attached but not published.

[382] National Security Decision Memorandum 249, Washington, March 23, 1974.

Washington, March 23, 1974

Kissinger issued NSDM 249 concerning U.S. deployments in Thailand.

Source: Ford Library, National Security Adviser, Presidential Country Files for East Asia and the Pacific, Box 16, Thailand (2). Secret. Copies were sent to the Director of the Office of Management and Budget and to the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff. Attached to a Defense copy of NSDM 249 is a message written in red pencil by an unknown hand on OSD letterhead: “Sec Def said, ‘not sure I’ll do anything about this one.’ ‘More crap just to keep us busy.’ Suggest we tell Doolin to go slow + check with us at each step. T.” (Washington National Records Center, OSD Files: FRC 330-78-0011, Thailand, 370.02)

[383] Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, May 22, 1974, 10 a.m.

Washington, May 22, 1974

Scowcroft and Kintner discussed U.S.-Thai relations.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 566, Country Files, Far East, Thailand, Volume 11, October 1973–. Secret. Drafted by Smyser. Froebe’s talking points for Scowcroft, May 21, are ibid.

[384] Memorandum From the Director of the Central Intelligence Agency (Colby) to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger), Washington, May 23, 1974.

Washington, May 23, 1974

[1 page not declassified.]

Source: Ford Library, National Security Adviser, Kissinger and Scowcroft West Wing Office Files, Box 2, Folder 16, Central Intelligence Agency, Communications, 3/8/74–5/31/74. Secret.

[385] Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, May 24, 1974, 10:30–11 a.m.

Washington, May 24, 1974, 10:30–11 a.m.

Schlesinger and Kintner discussed military assistance to Thailand, U.S. force reductions, Indian Ocean Surveillance, and OV–10 Aircraft.

Source: Washington National Records Center, OSD Files: FRC 330–78–0011, Thailand, 091.112, 30 May 1974. Secret. Drafter by Kelly and approved by Peet. Schlesinger’s talking points from Kelly, May 23, are ibid.

[386] Telegram 9350 From the Embassy in Thailand to the Department of State, June 7, 1974, 1156Z.

June 7, 1974, 1156Z

Kintner complained about U.S. policy toward Thailand.

Source: Library of Congress, Henry Kissinger Papers, Geopolitical File, Container CL 238, Thailand, 1974–1976. Secret; Immediate; Nodis. An unknown person marked up the telegram and sent an attached note about it to Eagleburger: “LSE A rough message which you should read. Kintner’s pulled out all the stops—and in the process overstated his case. One point—a key one—he seems to forget: our expenditures in Indochina are as much in Thailand’s interest as they are in our own. Kintner does make a valid point, however: can’t we do something more for the Thais on such aspects as sugar quotas, textiles, etc.?”

[387] Memorandum From W.R. Smyser of the NSC Staff to Secretary of State Kissinger, Washington, August 16, 1974.

Washington, August 16, 1974

Smyser asked Kissinger to approve a Department of State cable regarding renewed economic assistance to Burma.

Source: Ford Library, National Security Adviser, Country Files, Box 2, Far East, Burma. Confidential. Sent for action. Scowcroft initialed his approval of the State cable as drafted. Concurred in by Ellerman. Tab A, the attached draft telegram, was sent to Rangoon as telegram 181158, August 18. (National Archives, Record Group 59, Central Foreign Policy Files) On August 17, Smyser sent Scowcroft another memorandum arguing for the superiority of working through an international aid consortium rather than giving bilateral aid to Burma. (Ibid.)

[388] Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, September 12, 1974, 4 p.m.

Washington, September 12, 1974, 4 p.m.

Kissinger and Anand discussed U.S. force levels in Thailand and economic aid.

Source: National Archives, Record Group 59, Central Foreign Policy Files, P–770087–0333. Secret; Exdis.

[389] Memorandum From Richard Kennedy and W.R. Smyser of the NSC Staff to the Deputy Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs (Scowcroft), Washington, September 28, 1974.

Washington, September 28, 1974

Kennedy and Smyser asked Scowcroft to call DOD’s attention to the request in NSDM 249 for Thai force level options.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Institutional Files (H-Files), Box H–245, NSDM 249, Folder 4. Secret. A handwritten notation from Scowcroft indicates that he handled the matter by phone. Tab A to Wickham was not found. In a memorandum to Scowcroft from September 30, Froebe wrote, “I understand that you have asked Defense (General Wickham) to forward the options study of our residual force presence in Thailand requested by NSDM 249 to the NSC staff by October 4.” (Ibid.)

[390] Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, October 9, 1974, 4:30 p.m.

Washington, October 9, 1974, 4:30 p.m.

Kintner and Scowcroft described the situation in Thailand, U.S. force levels, and foreign aid.

Source: Library of Congress, Memoranda of Conversations, Container CL 284, Staff and Others, 1974. Secret; Sensitive. On September 27, in telegram 15626 from Bangkok, Kintner expostulated on “Southeast Asia in a Global Context.” (National Archives, Record Group 59, Central Foreign Policy Files)

[391] Minutes of the Secretary of State’s Staff Meeting, Washington, November 14, 1974, 8:11 a.m.

Washington, November 14, 1974, 8:11 a.m.

Kissinger and his staff discussed Thanom’s activities and the political situation in Thailand.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Transcripts of Secretary of State Kissinger’s Staff Meetings, 1973–1977, E5177, Box 5. Secret.

[392] Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to Secretary of Defense Schlesinger, Washington, November 14, 1974.

Washington, November 14, 1974

Kissinger directed the DOD to produce an alternative scenario for U.S. military force levels in Thailand.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Institutional Files (H-Files), Box H–245, NSDM 249, Folder 4. Secret. Kissinger received this memorandum to sign under a covering memorandum, November 1, from Kennedy, which stated, “It is apparent that a basic difference of opinion exists between Defense and State, on one hand, and the CIA and ourselves on the other, concerning the ability of US combat air units in Thailand to exert any meaningful influence vis-à-vis the Hanoi leadership.” Schlesinger’s October 11 memorandum to Kissinger on “Long-Term US Military force Levels in Thailand (FY 1976 and Beyond),” is attached but not published.

[393] National Intelligence Estimate 52–1–75, Washington, January 9, 1975.

Washington, January 9, 1975

The estimate assessed the implications for the United States in light of the political situation in Thailand.

Source: Central Intelligence Agency, OPI 122 (National Intelligence Council), Job 79R01012A, Box 497, Folder 6, NIE 52–1–75. Secret. Concurred in by all members of the U.S. Intelligence Board except the FBI, who abstained. Thailand’s election occurred on January 26.

[394] Memorandum From Richard T. Kennedy of the NSC Staff to the Deputy Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs (Scowcroft), Washington, January 15, 1975.

Washington, January 15, 1975

Kennedy asked Scowcroft to direct the DOD to produce an alternative policy option for the level of U.S. forces in Thailand.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Institutional Files (H-Files), Box H–245, NSDM 249, Folder 4. Secret. Sent for action. Concurred in by Smyser. Scowcroft wrote, “Done,” near the bottom of the page, indicating that he handled the matter by phone. The attached memorandum to Wickham on “Long Term U.S. Military Force Levels in Thailand” is not published.

[395] Minutes of the Secretary of State’s Staff Meeting, Washington, February 6, 1975, 8 a.m.

Washington, February 6, 1975, 8 a.m.

Kissinger and his staff discussed the situations in Thailand and Burma.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Transcripts of Secretary of State Kissinger’s Staff Meetings, 1973–1977, E5177, Box 6. Secret.

[396] Memorandum From the Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to President Ford, Washington, February 6, 1975.

Washington, February 6, 1975

Kissinger asked Ford to determine long-term U.S. military force levels in Thailand.

Source: Ford Library, NSC Institutional Files (H-Files), Box H–57, NSDMs, NSDM 286, Long-Term U.S. Military Force Levels in Thailand (2). Secret. Sent for Action. Ford initialed his approval of Tab A, not attached, which became NSDM 286. Tab B apparently refers to two memoranda from Schlesinger to Kissinger on “Long-Term US Military Force Levels in Thailand (FY 76 and Beyond),” the first, which presented four options, dated October 11, 1974 and the second, presenting a fifth option, dated January 18, 1975. Both are attached but not published. Tab C, not attached, is apparently a reference to Colby’s Memorandum to Thomas Bigley, then Acting Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense for East Asia and Pacific Affairs, of July 9, 1974 providing comments on Defense’s memorandum entitled “Long-Term U.S. Military Force Levels in Thailand (FY 1976 and Beyond).” (Ibid., Box 245, Folder 4, NSDM 249)

[397] National Security Decision Memorandum 286, Washington, February 7, 1975.

Washington, February 7, 1975

Kissinger issued NSDM 286 concerning long-term U.S. military force levels in Thailand.

Source: Ford Library, National Security Decision Memoranda and Study Memoranda, Box 1. Secret. Copies were sent to the Director of the Office of Management and Budget and to the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff.

[398] Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, April 25, 1975, 4:30 p.m.

Washington, April 25, 1975, 4:30 p.m.

[not declassified in time for publication]

Source: Ford Library, National Security Adviser, Memoranda of Conversation, Box 11. Secret.

[399] Telegram 8690 From the Embassy in Thailand to the Department of State, May 13, 1975, 1315Z.

May 13, 1975, 1315Z

The Embassy in Bangkok complained about the lack of information on the use of U.S. forces stationed in Thailand during the Mayaguez incident.

Source: Ford Library, National Security Adviser, Country Files, Box 18, Far East, Thailand, State Department Telegrams to SECSTATE, NODIS (1). Secret; Flash; Nodis. The same day, at 1454Z, Zurhellen replied, “Regret fast moving situation here has made it impossible to keep you fully informed as we would otherwise intend. Matters you raise are currently under discussion and we hope to have word for you soon. Meantime, please do not, repeat not, raise this matter further with Thais.” (Telegram 110792 to Bangkok; National Archives, Record Group 59, Central Foreign Policy Files) Earlier in the month, Masters sent a telegram to Washington warning that the “often secret agreements we have with the RTG relating to our military presence here is coming unraveled because of Thai nationalistic sentiment, Thai popular mistrust of the old military governments that concluded the agreements with us, and a deep concern over the effectiveness of the U.S. military presence.” (Telegram 7857 from Bangkok, May 1; ibid.)

[400] Minutes of the Secretary of State’s Staff Meeting, Washington, May 16, 1975, 8:08 a.m.

Washington, May 16, 1975, 8:08 a.m.

Kissinger and his staff discussed force levels in Thailand, the aftermath of the Mayaguez incident, and the basis for the U.S. military presence in Thailand.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Transcripts of Secretary of State Kissinger’s Staff Meetings, 1973–1977, E5177, Box 6. Secret. An undated paper on “Secret Agreements with Thailand Relating to the U.S. Military Presence in Thailand” is at the Ford Library, National Security Adviser, Presidential Country Files for East Asia and the Pacific, Box 17, Thailand, Senator Mansfield’s Request for Agreements with Thailand (1). On May 19, Masters delivered a note, which the Thai government took as an apology, stating “The United States regrets the misunderstandings that have arisen between Thailand and the United States in regard to the temporary placement of Marines at Utapao to assist in the recovery of the SS Mayaguez.” Telegrams 115952 to Bangkok, May 18, and 4359 from Bangkok, May 19; ibid., Central Foreign Policy Files)

[401] National Security Study Memorandum 225, Washington, May 27, 1975.

Washington, May 27, 1975

NSSM 225 directed the CIA and the Departments of State and Defense to review U.S. policy toward Thailand.

Source: Ford Library, National Security Decision Memoranda and Study Memoranda, Box 2. Secret; Nodis. A copy was sent to the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff.

[402] Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to Deputy Secretary of State Ingersoll, Deputy Secretary of Defense Clements, and Director of Central Intelligence Colby, Washington, July 1, 1975.

Washington, July 1, 1975

Kissinger asked DOD, DOS, and CIA to make recommendations on U.S. force reductions in Thailand.

Source: Library of Congress, James Schlesinger Papers, Box 22. Secret; Nodis. Scowcroft signed the memorandum for Kissinger. In response to this memorandum, the USIB approved a memorandum, July 31, on the “Future of US Military Intelligence Installations and Units in Thailand,“ which was prepared under the auspices of the National Intelligence Officer for South and Southeast Asia, and reflected the views of CIA, DIA, INR, and NSA. (Library of Congress, Henry Kissinger Papers, TS 10, 8/75) Scowcroft received this memorandum under a covering memorandum, August 7, from Quinn. (Ford Library, National Security Adviser, Presidential Country Files for East Asia and the Pacific, Box 17, Thailand [12])

[403] Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to Secretary of Defense Schlesinger, Deputy Secretary of State Ingersoll, and Director of Central Intelligence Colby, Washington, August 5, 1975.

Washington, August 5, 1975

Kissinger asked the Departments of Defense and State, and the CIA to develop a plan for the permanent resettlement of the Meo refugees in Thailand.

Source: Ford Library, National Security Adviser, Presidential Country Files for East Asia and the Pacific, Box 17, Thailand [12]. Secret. Sent for action. Copies were sent to the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff and the Director of the Office for Management and Budget.

[404] Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to President Ford, Washington, September 22, 1975.

Washington, September 22, 1975

Kissinger recommended that Ford approve the signing of a memorandum to implement a plan to resettle Meo refugees in Thailand.

Source: Ford Library, National Security Adviser, Presidential Subject File, 1974–1977, Box 16, Presidential Determinations, FY 1976 (1), August-October 1975. Secret; Nodis. Sent for action. Scowcroft initialed the memorandum for Kissinger. Ford initialed his approval of Kissinger’s recommendation. Tab A, a Determination transferring $6.8 million to finance the plan, was not attached. Tab B, the memorandum from Kissinger directing implementation of the plan, is attached and published as Document 406.

[405] Memorandum From Secretary of Defense Schlesinger to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger), Washington, September 23, 1975.

Washington, September 23, 1975

Schlesinger presented Kissinger with options for U.S. force reduction in Thailand.

Source: Library of Congress, James Schlesinger Papers, Box 22. Top Secret. Tabs A, B, and C, the withdrawal rate schedules for options I, II, and III, are attached but not published. Schlesinger received this memorandum, with a recommendation that he sign it, under a covering memorandum, September 2, from Ellsworth.

[406] Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to Secretary of Defense Schlesinger, Deputy Secretary of State Ingersoll, and Director of Central Intelligence Colby, Washington, September 24, 1975.

Washington, September 24, 1975

Kissinger informed DOD, DOS, and CIA about the President’s decision regarding Meo refugees in Thailand.

Source: Ford Library, National Security Adviser, Presidential Subject File, 1974–1977, Box 16, Presidential Determinations, FY 1976 (1), August-October 1975. Secret; Nodis. Scowcroft signed the memorandum on behalf of Kissinger. Copies were sent to the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff and the Director of the Office for Management and Budget.

[407] Note from the Deputy Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs (Scowcroft) to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger), Washington, October 4, 1975.

Washington, October 4, 1975

Scowcroft criticized a paper on force levels in Thailand and recommended that Kissinger convene an SRG meeting on this subject.

Source: Library of Congress, Henry Kissinger Papers, Geopolitical File, Container CL 238, Thailand, 1974–1976. No classification marking. Kissinger checked the option to hold an SRG meeting. Scowcroft’s note was probably in reference to Schlesinger’s memorandum to Kissinger of September 23 (Document 405).

[408] Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, October 4, 1975, 2:40 p.m.

Washington, October 4, 1975, 2:40 p.m.

[not declassified in time for publication]

Source: National Archives, Record Group 59, Central Foreign Policy Files, P–820123–2306. Secret; Nodis.

[409] Paper Prepared by the NSSM 225 Working Group, Washington, undated.

Washington, undated

The NSSM 225 Working Group summarized its review of U.S. policy toward Thailand.

Source: Ford Library, NSC Institutional Files (H-Files), Box H–15, Senior Review Group Meeting, U.S. Force Reductions in Thailand, October 17, 1975 [1]. Secret. Habib sent the summary and the paper with three annexes to Kissinger under his covering memorandum of October 8. The paper is attached, but not published. (Ibid.)

[410] Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, October 17, 1975, 11:21–11:40 a.m.

Washington, October 17, 1975, 11:21–11:40 a.m.

The Senior Review Group met to discuss force reductions in Thailand.

Source: Ford Library, NSC Institutional Files (H-Files), Box H–24, Meeting Minutes, SRG, June–October 1975. Top Secret. The text of Colby’s briefing on the situation in Thailand, October 16, is attached but not published. A message from Scowcroft to Kissinger, October 20, contains the response to Kissinger’s request to Colby for an analysis of the likely Thai reaction to a continued U.S. combat presence. Colby estimated that Thailand would reject a U.S. combat presence beyond March 1976. (Backchannel telegram 51999, October 21, from Scowcroft to Kissinger; ibid., National Security Adviser, Trip briefing Books and Cables for HAK, Kissinger Trip File, Box 15, October 19–23, 1975, People’s Republic of China, TOSEC [5])

[411] Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to Secretary of Defense Schlesinger, Deputy Secretary of State Ingersoll, and Director of Central Intelligence Colby, Washington, October 24, 1975.

Washington, October 24, 1975

Kissinger outlined the U.S. position for negotiations on U.S. force reductions in Thailand.

Source: Ford Library, NSC Institutional Files (H-Files), Box H–36, NSSMs, NSSM 225 (2), Review of U.S. Policy toward Thailand (2). Top Secret; Sensitive. The Chairman of the JCS and the Director of OMB also received copies. Scowcroft signed the memorandum for Kissinger.

[412] Telegram 282411 From the Department of State to the Embassy in Thailand, November 29, 1975, 0120Z.

November 29, 1975, 0120Z

The Department of State reported on Kissinger’s lunch with Chatchai.

Source: Library of Congress, Henry Kissinger Papers, Geopolitical File, Container CL 238, Thailand, June 1974–February 1976. Secret; Immediate; Nodis.

[413] Memorandum From Thomas J. Barnes of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Scowcroft), Washington, February 5, 1976.

Washington, February 5, 1976

[3 pages not declassified.]

Source: Ford Library, National Security Adviser, Presidential Country Files for East Asia and the Pacific, Box 17, Thailand (16). Secret; Nodis; Sensitive.

[414] Memorandum From Thomas J. Barnes of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Scowcroft), Washington, February 20, 1976.

Washington, February 20, 1976

Barnes described political events in Thailand.

Source: Ford Library, National Security Adviser, Presidential Country Files for East Asia and the Pacific, Box 17, Thailand (17). Secret. Sent for information. Scowcroft initialed the memorandum. Attached but not published are Tab A, an Interagency Intelligence Memorandum, February 1976, on “The Thai Election and Its Implications for the US,” and Tab B, a covering memorandum, February 4, from Bush to Scowcroft.

[415] Memorandum From Thomas J. Barnes of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Scowcroft), Washington, March 4, 1976.

Washington, March 4, 1976

Barnes reported Whitehouse’s claim that the Thai government has withdrawn its support for a significant U.S. military presence in Thailand.

Source: Ford Library, National Security Adviser, Presidential Country Files for East Asia and the Pacific, Box 17, Thailand (18). Secret. Sent for urgent information. At the end of the memorandum, Scowcroft wrote, “Whitehouse’s position doesn’t surprise me at all. What is present status?” Attached but not published is Tab A, telegram 5023 from Bangkok, March 4, in which Whitehouse analyzed opinion within the Thai government toward U.S. residual forces. Also attached but not published is Tab B, Intelligence Information Cable DB-315/02282–76 from March 4.

[416] Minutes of the Secretary of State’s Staff Meeting, Washington, March 5, 1976, 8:05 a.m.

Washington, March 5, 1976, 8:05 a.m.

Kissinger and his staff discussed residual military force levels in Thailand.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Transcripts of Secretary of State Kissinger’s Staff Meetings, 1973–1977, E5177, Box 9. Secret.

[417] Memorandum From Thomas J. Barnes of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Scowcroft), Washington, March 20, 1976.

Washington, March 20, 1976

Barnes outlined the consensus U.S. government view on how to respond to Thailand’s request to withdraw U.S. forces.

Source: Ford Library, National Security Adviser, Presidential Country Files for East Asia and the Pacific, Box 17, Thailand (19). Confidential. Urgent; Sent for information. According to the correspondence profile, Scowcroft saw this memorandum on March 22. Tab A, the questions and answers from EA, was not attached.

[418] Minutes of the Secretary of State’s Staff Meeting, Washington, April 2, 1976, 8:09 a.m.

Washington, April 2, 1976, 8:09 a.m.

Kissinger and his staff discussed residual military force levels in Thailand.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Transcripts of Secretary of State Kissinger’s Staff Meetings, 1973–1977, E5177, Box 9. Secret.

[419] National Security Study Memorandum 240, Washington, April 9, 1976.

Washington, April 9, 1976

Scowcroft asked the Secretary of State, the Secretary of Defense, and the Director of the CIA to examine alternative locations for U.S. activities formerly conducted in Thailand.

Source: Ford Library, National Security Decision Memoranda and Study Memoranda, Box 2. Confidential. A copy was sent to the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff.

[420] Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Scowcroft) to President Ford, Washington, April 20, 1976.

Washington, April 20, 1976

In response to NSSM 225, Scowcroft recommended that Ford approve a memorandum setting U.S. policy toward Thailand.

Source: Ford Library, NSC Institutional Files (H-Files), Box H–65, NSDMs, NSDM 327, U.S. Policy Toward Thailand (1). Secret. Sent for action. Ford initialed his approval of Tab A, not attached, which, once signed, became NSDM 327. (See Document 421) Not published are Tab B, attached, the undated NSSM 225 paper, which is summarized in Document 409; and Tab C, not attached, which is likely Kissinger’s memorandum of October 24, 1975 on force reductions in Thailand, printed as Document 411. Not published are Tab D, attached, a memorandum from Colby to Kissinger of October 23; Tab E, attached, a memorandum from Ingersoll to Kissinger of October 27; and Tab F, not attached, a memorandum from Clements to Scowcroft of November 4. (Ibid., Box 36, NSSMs, NSSM 225, Review of U.S. Policy Toward Thailand [3])

[421] National Security Decision Memorandum 327, Washington, April 21, 1976.

Washington, April 21, 1976

Scowcroft issued NSDM 327 outlining U.S. policy toward Thailand.

Source: Ford Library, National Security Decision Memoranda and Study Memoranda, Box 1. Secret. A copy was sent to the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff.

[422] Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Scowcroft) to President Ford, Washington, May 3, 1976.

Washington, May 3, 1976

In response to NSSM 240, Scowcroft recommended that Ford approve a memorandum on alternative locations for US activities based in Thailand.

Source: Ford Library, NSC Institutional Files (H-Files), Box H–65, NSDMs, NSDM 329, U.S. Political Operations and Intelligence Activities Based in Thailand [2 of 2]. Top Secret; Sensitive; Umbra. Sent for Action. Ford initialed his approval of Tab A, not attached, which, once signed, became NSDM 329 (Document 423). Tab B, not attached, is the undated interagency paper prepared in response to NSSM 240, which the NSC staff sent out under a covering memorandum, April 21, from Davis to DOS, DOD, and CIA. (Ibid.) Tab C, attached, is a memorandum, April 24, from Springsteen to Scowcroft. Tab D, attached, is a memorandum, April 24, from Ellsworth to Scowcroft. Tab E, attached, is a memorandum, April 23, from Bush to Scowcroft.

[423] National Security Decision Memorandum 329, Washington, May 5, 1976.

Washington, May 5, 1976

Scowcroft issued NSDM 329 outlining military and intelligence activities that the United States seeks to continue in Thailand.

Source: Ford Library, NSC Institutional Files (H-Files), Box H-69, NSDM originals [2 of 2], NSDM 316–NSDM 330. Top Secret; Sensitive. A copy was also sent to the Chairman of the JCS.

[424] Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, September 16, 1976, 3:30 p.m.

Washington, September 16, 1976, 3:30 p.m.

Scowcroft and Whitehouse discussed US-Thai relations and Thailand’s prospects.

Source: Ford Library, National Security Adviser, Memoranda of Conversation, Box 21. Secret; Sensitive. Scowcroft saw a briefing memorandum, September 15, from Gleysteen before this meeting. (Ibid., Presidential Country Files for East Asia and the Pacific, Box 17, Thailand [19])

[425] Telegram 28513 From the Embassy in Thailand to the Department of State, October 14, 1976, 1117Z.

October 14, 1976, 1117Z

The Embassy analyzed Thai politics.

Source: National Archives, Record Group 59, Central Foreign Policy Files. Confidential. Repeated for information to Hong Kong, Jakarta, Kuala Lumpur, Manila, Rangoon, Tokyo, Singapore, CINCPAC Honolulu, Beijing, Vientiane, and CINCPAC for Polad.

Memorandum From the Military Assistant to the President (Scowcroft) to President Nixon, Washington, February 11, 1973. [Document 363]

Memorandum From the Military Assistant to the President (Scowcroft) to President Nixon, Washington, February 11, 1973.1

Washington, February 11, 1973

MEMORANDUM
THE WHITE HOUSE
WASHINGTON
INFORMATION

February 11, 1973

MEMORANDUM FOR: THE PRESIDENT
FROM: BRENT SCOWCROFT
SUBJECT: Dr. Kissinger's Meetings in Bangkok and Vientiane

Dr. Kissinger has sent you the following report on his meetings in Bangkok and Vientiane:

"I apologize for the slowness of the first report. However, the combined stop of Bangkok and Vientiane turned into an 18-hour day. The first day in Hanoi involved communication problems. We will cable daily report from now on.

"Bangkok was in slightly jittery mood partly due to misleading reports out of Defense and CINCPAC that we were planning a rapid pull-out from the area and concern about Chinese and North Vietnamese pressures. I had a very good session with Thanom who spoke of you with very great warmth. I explained to him our general approach to foreign policy and the place your of Southeast Asia in it. We had a long talk about the roles of China and the USSR. The Thai's were especially interested in the proposition that Peking's and Hanoi's objectives in Southeast Asia were not necessarily compatible and that we should use this fact to create a regional balance. I stressed the carrot and stick approach we were planning to use. They expressed admiration for your decisiveness and strength in Vietnam. I assured them that you had not fought down the doves for four years in order to adopt their program now. We will have to decide on the level of our forces in Thailand over an intermediate period soon. The Thais seem torn between the desire to maintain our presence and their fear of drawing lightning.

[Omitted is material unrelated to Thailand.]

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, HAK Office Files, Box 29, HAK Bangkok, Vientiane, Hanoi, Hong Kong, Peking, Tokyo Trip, February 7-20, 1973. Top Secret; Sensitive. Sent for information. A notation on the first page reads, “The President has seen.” The full memorandum of conversation from Kissinger’s meeting with Chartchai on February 9 is ibid., Box 1026, Presidential/HAK Memcons, January–March 1973, Folder 23.

Memorandum From Richard T. Kennedy of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger), Washington, March 7, 1973. [Document 364]

Memorandum From Richard T. Kennedy of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger), Washington, March 7, 1973.1

Washington, March 7, 1973

MEMORANDUM
NATIONAL SECURITY COUNCIL
URGENT ACTION

March 7, 1973

MEMORANDUM FOR: MR. KISSINGER
FROM: RICHARD T. KENNEDY
SUBJECT: Additional MAP for Thailand

Since returning from the trip I have been pursuing the problem of how to increase our MAP for Thailand.

There is simply no way in which we could get any additional funds unless we took them from Turkey, Korea or Cambodia. None of these options would be desirable — in each case the funds have been cut to the bare minimum and we are already having problems with Korea and Turkey. We are now forced to live with the CRA levels through June 30 as Congress will not take up a FY 1973 bill.

Accordingly I have sought other means to solve the problem. I have AID's agreement to provide $5 million in Development Loan funds which can be provided in a way that will accomplish the same purpose as PL-480, thus enabling the Thai to further support their counterinsurgency and military effort. In addition, I ascertained that there are a number of C-123 aircraft from Vietnam now at Clark AFB. The Thai included C-123's in the list of items they desired which they presented to the Vice President. They wanted eight initially with more in later years.

— Eight C-123's could be made available with a little pressure from Defense on the Air Force. They would be declared excess and thus require little or no additional funding.

— I spoke to Mr. Clements about this after ascertaining that in fact the aircraft could be made available. He called you (Tab A) and is awaiting your return call.

I wanted to be sure that these aircraft could be freed up prior to going to Unger to get his reaction. (A draft message for that purpose is at Tab B.)

Today we received another cable from Unger which again emphasized a strong reaction on the part of the Thai to the cutback in MAP which was required by the CRA this year. Unger is convinced that we must do something. (Tab C.)

The package of $5 million Development Loan and 8 C-123's seems the best possible in the circumstances. I recommend therefore that you call Clements and tell him that we really would like to move on this. You want his assurance that the aircraft can be made available if Unger is satisfied that they will do the job.

[HK initialed] APPROVE (HAK called Clements)
Other

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 565, Country Files, Far East, Thailand, Volume 10, 1973–. Secret. Sent for urgent action. Kissinger initialed the “approve” option, and a notation from Scowcroft indicates that Kissinger followed up by calling Clements. A notation on the first page indicates that Tab B, attached, the proposed telegram to Unger, was given to the situation room for dispatch on March 9. Tab A, a telephone conversation between Kissinger and Clements from March 5, is attached but not published. Tab C, telegram 3675 from Bangkok, March 7, is attached but not published. On March 16, Kissinger asked Richardson to make twelve 105 mm howitzers available for Thailand in addition to the eight C–123 aircraft. (Memorandum from Kissinger to Secretary of Defense; ibid.)

Telegram 4623 From the Embassy in Thailand to the Department of State, March 22, 1973, 1236Z. [Document 365]

Telegram 4623 From the Embassy in Thailand to the Department of State, March 22, 1973, 1236Z.1

March 22, 1973, 1236Z

TELEGRAM
Department of State
BANGKOK 4623

P 221236Z MAR 73

FM AMEMBASSY BANGKOK
TO SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 1702

RECD: 22 MAR 15 17Z

E.O. 11652: GDS 1981
TAGS: PINT, PFOR, MARR, MOPS, TH

SUBJECT: THAILAND POLITICAL CLIMATE AND US MILITARY PRESENCE
REF: A. BANGKOK 3313
B. BANGKOK 2643
C. BANGKOK 4622

SUMMARY: I AM PERSUADED THAT OUR OVERALL POLICY INTERESTS AND OBJECTIVES IN THAILAND WOULD BE BEST SERVED BY ANNOUNCING BEFORE THE END OF APRIL A MODEST, INITIAL REDUCTION IN US FORCES STATIONED HERE. I FULLY RECOGNIZE THE IMPERATIVES OF MAINTAINING A STRONG DETERRENT/RETALIATORY POSTURE IN THAILAND TO HELP ASSURE NVN ADHERENCE TO CEASEFIRE AGREEMENTS, AS WELL AS NEED TO AVOID GIVING "WRONG SIGNAL" TO HANOI. HOWEVER, OUR COMBAT POSTURE HERE WOULD NOT BE MATERIALLY AFFECTED BY A MODEST CUTBACK AND RAPID REINTRODUCTION COULD BE EFFECTED IF REQUIRED. ON OTHER HAND, IN CURRENT THAI CLIMATE POLITICAL BENEFITS OF FIRST CUTBACK, HOWEVER MODEST, WOULD BE VERY SUBSTANTIAL. WITHOUT COMMITTING OURSELVES AT THIS TIME TO ANY FURTHER WITHDRAWALS WE WOULD INDICATE A TREND FULLY IN ACCORD WITH RTG THINKING. THIS WOULD MATERIALLY ASSIST RTG IN COPING WITH DOMESTIC DISSENT WHICH CONTINUES TO FOCUS ON US PRESENCE. ACTION REQUESTED: THAT WASHINGTON GIVE SERIOUS CONSIDERATION TO WITHDRAWAL ANNOUNCEMENT PRIOR TO END OF APRIL. FURTHER, THAT UNIT FOR THIS WITHDRAWAL BE THE MARINE WING AT NAM PHONG, FOR DEPARTURE BEFORE THE END OF MAY. WITHDRAWAL OF THIS UNIT, ONLY ABOUT 5 PERCENT OF US MILITARY PRESENCE, WOULD ENTAIL SIGNIFICANT ADDED BONUS BOTH IN POLITICAL TERMS AND IN ACCOMMODATING RETURNING THAI VOLUNTEERS WHICH WILL OTHERWISE REQUIRE COSTLY CONSTRUCTION. END SUMMARY.

1. IN A NUMBER OF MESSAGES WE HAVE REPORTED ON THAI ATTITUDES TOWARD THE US MILITARY PRESENCE. IN REF A WE HAVE ANALYZED ITS POLITICAL RAMIFICATIONS WHICH CUT ACROSS DOMESTIC AND FOREIGN ASPECTS OF THAI POLICY. THE US PRESENCE IS PROBABLY THE MOST IMPORTANT AND POTENTIALLY DIFFICULT ISSUE IN US-THAI RELATIONS TODAY. HARDLY A DAY GOES BY WITHOUT SOME REFERENCE TO 17 IN THE PRESS OR BY PUBLIC FIGURES. HOW WE MANAGE THIS ISSUE WILL AFFECT OUR RELATIONSHIPS HERE AND IN SEA GENERALLY FOR A LONG TIME TO COME. WITH THIS IN MIND, WE SUGGESTED (REF A PARA 17) THE DEVELOPMENT OF A POLICY FRAMEWORK WITH THE PURPOSE OF MAKING IT CLEAR THAT WE WILL GRADUALLY REDUCE OUR FORCES HERE FROM THEIR PRESENT HIGH LEVELS, CIRCUMSTANCES PERMITTING, I.E., THE MILITARY SITUATION IN SEASIA AND HANOI'S ADHERENCE TO THE PARIS AGREEMENTS AND THE LAOS CEASEFIRE.

2. WHILE THAI DOMESTIC DEBATE HAS BEEN SOMEWHAT DEFUSED BY DEPFONMIN CHARTCHAI'S STATEMENT THAT US PRESENCE IS NOT TO BE CONSIDERED PERMANENT (REF B), WE HAVE NUMEROUS INDICATIONS THAT ISSUE CONTINUES TO SMOLDER AND MAY FLARE UP ANY TIME (REF C). NVN DECISION TO INTRODUCE IT MORE SPECIFICALLY INTO VIENTIANE REPATRIATION NEGOTIATIONS OR AN ATTACK ON A BASE HERE NO DOUBT WOULD REOPEN ISSUE PERHAPS IN ACUTE FORM. (BASE ATTACK, OF COURSE, WOULD POIGNANTLY DRIVE HOME WHITLAM'S REMARKS WHICH CONTINUE TO PROVIDE FOOD FOR THOUGHT IN POLITICAL AND PRESS CIRCLES HERE.)

3. IN MY VIEW, TIME HAS NOW REPEAT NOW COME TO CONSIDER SERIOUSLY A FIRST REDUCTION IN THE US COMBAT PRESENCE AS A CLEAR DEMONSTRATION THAT WE DO NOT INTEND TO MAINTAIN PERMANENTLY OUR STRENGTH AT PRESENT LEVELS. I RECOMMEND THAT, BARRING A SERIOUSLY ADVERSE TURN OF EVENTS IN INDOCHINA, WE ANNOUNCE NOT LATER THAN THE END OF APRIL OUR INTENTION TO REMOVE SOME FORCES FROM LAND AND THAT THIS BE CARRIED OUT BEFORE THE END OF MAY.

4. I THOROUGHLY APPRECIATE WASHINGTON THINKING THAT HANOI MUST BE LEFT IN NO DOUBT ABOUT OUR CAPABILITY AND DETERMINATION TO USE FORCE IF CEASEFIRE ARRANGEMENTS ARE TO BE MADE TO WORK. NEVERTHELESS, I AM PERSUADED THAT NECESSITY TO CONVEY THIS POLITICAL SIGNAL DOES NOT REPEAT NOT REQUIRE THE RETENTION OF FULL AUGMENTATION FORCE BROUGHT IN LAST SPRING. MODEST (ABOUT 5 PERCENT) REDUCTION OF PRESENT FORCE LEVELS CAN BE CARRIED OUT WITHOUT GIVING RISE TO INTERPRETATIONS WE WISH TO AVOID, ESPECIALLY WHEN PRESENTED IN CONTEXT OUR ABILITY TO REINTRODUCE FORCES RAPIDLY, AS WE DID MOST EFFECTIVELY LAST SPRING.

5. ON OTHER HAND, A MODEST REDUCTION WOULD GO A LONG WAY TOWARD ALLEVIATING PRESENT AND ANTICIPATED POLITICAL PRESSURES HERE IN VERY COMPLEX SITUATION DESCRIBED REF A. BY POINTING A TREND TOWARD FORCE REDUCTION, WITHOUT ACTUALLY COMMITTING OURSELVES TO SPECIFIC FURTHER REDUCTION AT ANY PARTICULAR TIME OR TO ANY ULTIMATE FORCE POSTURE IN THAILAND, WE WOULD ENABLE RTG LEADERS TO DEFUSE THE ARGUMENTS OF THE CRITICS, WHILE GIVING SUBSTANTIAL SUPPORT TO THOSE WHO ARE BASICALLY WELL-DISPOSED TOWARD US, BUT HESITATE TO TAKE A POSITION IN IGNORANCE OF OUR ULTIMATE INTENTIONS (SEE REF C).

6. SPECIFICALLY, I PROPOSE THAT PROMPT CONSIDERATION BE GIVEN TO THE IDENTIFICATION OF A UNIT FOR EARLY REDEPLOYMENT AND I RECOMMEND AS MOST SUITABLE FOR THIS PURPOSE THE MARINE WING (TASK FORCE DELTA) AT NAM PHONG.

7. THERE ARE AT LEAST FOUR GOOD REASONS FOR REMOVING THE MARINES AND TO DO SO WITHIN TIME FRAME SUGGESTED ABOVE: A. WITH ABOUT 2,300 PERSONNEL AND ONLY 39 COMBAT AIRCRAFT IN ITS THREE SQUADRONS, TASK FORCE DELTA IS THE SMALLEST, MOST READILY IDENTIFIABLE UNIT WHOSE REMOVAL WILL VACATE AN ENTIRE BASE, THUS YIELDING OPTIMUM POLITICAL RETURN FOR THE LEAST DIMINUTION OF REAL COMBAT STRENGTH.

B. THE MARINES HAVE FLOWN NO COMBAT SORTIES SINCE 25 FEBRUARY. THEIR UTILIZATION IN THE ONLY CURRENT COMBAT AREA (CAMBODIA) WOULD NOT BE COST-EFFECTIVE IN VIEW OF MUCH GREATER PROXIMITY OF COMPARABLE USAF UNITS BASED AT UBON AND KORAT. MARINES HAVE BEEN FLYING SOME TRAINING MISSIONS; WE MUST ASSUME THEIR CONTINUING TRAINING REQUIREMENTS WILL COMPETE WITH THOSE OF USAF FOR EXTREMELY SCARCE TRAINING AIR SPACE IN THAILAND, THUS COMPOUNDING ANOTHER TROUBLESOME PROBLEM ASSOCIATED WITH AN UNEMPLOYED COMBAT FORCE.

C. NAM PHONG IS LARGEST AND MOST SUITABLE OF ONLY THREE FACILITIES WHERE THAI VOLUNTEERS RETURNING FROM LAOS CAN BE ACCOMMODATED WITHOUT INCURRING ADDITIONAL CONSTRUCTION EXPENDITURES WHICH U.S. WOULD HAVE TO UNDERWRITE IF VOLUNTEERS ARE BE KEPT IN A READINESS POSTURE. ASSUMING MAY 23 (I.E., 60 DAYS AFTER FORMATION OF NEW RLG) IS MAGIC DATE BY WHICH FOREIGN FORCES IN LAOS WILL HAVE TO HAVE FADED AWAY, REQUIREMENT FOR FACILITY TO ACCOMMODATE SOME VOLUNTEER UNITS IN THAILAND MUST BE ANTICIPATED DURING MAY.

D. MARINES LIVE IN TENTS AND CONDITIONS AT NAM PHONG ARE MOST AUSTERE OF ANY US-TENANTED BASE; DESPITE USMC PRIDE IN ROUGHING IT UNDER MOST ADVERSE CIRCUMSTANCES AND EXCELLENT LEADERSHIP, CONDITIONS AT NAM PHONG MAY LEAD TO MORALE PROBLEMS WITH ATTENDANT RISE IN INCIDENTS, DRUG ABUSE, ETC.

8. I AM PERSUADED THAT AN INITIATIVE OF THE KIND RECOMMENDED ABOVE WILL PAY US GREAT DIVIDENDS IN HELPING THE THAI LEADERSHIP TO HANDLE THE GROWING QUESTIONING OF CONTINUED US MILITARY PRESENCE HERE WITHOUT OUR IN ANY SIGNIFICANT WAY REDUCING THE EFFECTIVENESS OF OUR DETERRENT ON HANOI.

9. DEPARTMENT PLEASE PASS EMBASSIES VIENTIANE, SAIGON AND PHNOM PENH, CINPAC, CINCUSSAG FOR INFO.

UNGER

#4623

NOTE: NOT PASSED VIENTIANE, SAIGON, PHNOM PENH, CINCPAC AND CINCUSSAG BY OC/T— 3/22/73

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 565, Country Files, Far East, Thailand, Volume 10, 1973–. Secret; Priority; Nodis.

Letter From Secretary of Defense Richardson to Secretary of State Rogers, Washington, April 3, 1973. [Document 366]

Letter From Secretary of Defense Richardson to Secretary of State Rogers, Washington, April 3, 1973.1

Washington, April 3, 1973

THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE
WASHINGTON D.C. 20301

3 APR 1973

Honorable William P. Rogers
Secretary of State
Washington, D.C. 20520

Dear Bill:

(S) I have been following the recent messages from Ambassador Unger in Bangkok reporting strong expressions of dissatisfaction from Thai leaders over reduced MAP program levels, particularly in light of the increased US military presence in Thailand. I can appreciate the heightened vulnerability to PRC/NVN hostility which the Thai now feel; I can also understand their desire to share in what has been touted as a large US reconstruction program for Indochina.

(S) On the other hand, these discussions do not appear to reflect full appreciation on the part of the Thais for the sacrifices by the US over the last 8 years to sustain, inter alia, a free and independent Thailand. It is also evident from the record that their willingness to agree to additional US deployments to Thailand in recent months, including the establishment of USSAG there, was based on a perception of Thai national interests which coincided with US interests, namely, to be prepared to resist NVN ceasefire violations.

(C) As you know, military aid to Thailand is only one aspect of DOD resource inputs. The enclosed table reflects our best estimates of DOD resources transferred to Thailand, which are considerable. DOD spending in Thailand over the last seven years has averaged $230 million a year. This has been an important element in Thailand's continued economic health and strong foreign exchange position despite annual adverse trade balances.

(C) I recommend that Ambassador Unger be encouraged to use these figures as appropriate in future discussions with the Thai leadership to place the MAP issue in its proper perspective. It is my hope that this may have some positive effect in reducing the current tensions over this issue.

(U) With warm regard,

Sincerely,
[signed Elliot]

1 Source: Washington National Records Center, OASD/ISA Files: FRC 330–76–117, Thailand 121, 1973 April 3. Secret. On April 12, Rogers replied, “the tendency of Thai leaders to view bilateral assistance levels as perhaps the primary indicator of U.S. interest in Thailand’s security has long posed problems in our mutual discussions. Although we may never be able to eliminate this tendency completely, I am sure Ambassador Unger and his staff will appreciate and make good use of the newly-developed figures, which we are cabling out to Bangkok today. (Rogers to Richardson; National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970–1973, DEF 19 US–THAI)

Executive Summary of an Intelligence Memorandum, Washington, April, 1973. [Document 367]

Executive Summary of an Intelligence Memorandum, Washington, April, 1973.1

Washington, April 1973

PEKING'S SUPPORT OF INSURGENCIES IN SOUTHEAST ASIA

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

This study establishes the facts and examines the purposes of China's support of insurgencies in Southeast Asia.

It is a fact that, despite China's overall policy of friendly relations, and despite the passage of some four years since the general ending of Cultural Revolution militancy, China continues to sponsor and support insurgencies against certain governments in Southeast Asia. Furthermore, in the cases of Burma and Thailand, such covert assistance has significantly expanded: high-ranking officers from the PLA's 11th Army perform command roles in insurgent headquarters; PLA officers and non-coms help fill out the ranks of insurgent combat forces; PLA units in nearby Yunnan Province train and supply the rebels; and China-based "insurgent" radio stations beam operational guidance and antigovernment propaganda support into Burma and Thailand. These remote insurgencies are not likely to threaten the Rangoon or Bangkok governments, but the fact remains that China's covert sponsorship of these insurrections is clearly impeding China's diplomatic attempts to elicit further responsiveness from these same governments.

This study examines various possible purposes behind this self-defeating course — "two faced," as the Burmese call it. Is the Chinese purpose essentially that of attempting to exert added pressure on certain of China's small neighbors? Or a concern not to be up-staged by any new Soviet presence in Southeast Asia and in the support of revolutionary movements? Or an unwillingness or inability to cease supporting insurgencies once begun? Or bureaucratic disarray in the conduct of Chinese foreign relations? Or, a reflection of Maoist impulses? The study concludes that it is the latter of these purposes which carries the greatest force: China supports certain insurgencies in Southeast Asia largely because that's the way the boss, Mao Tse-tung, wants it — for his own mix of stubbornly-held ideological and personal reasons.

This study has received constructive assistance from a number of CIA offices. The study's interpretations are those of its author, Arthur A. Cohen, and of this Staff.

Hal Ford
Chief, DD/I Special Research Staff

1 Source: Central Intelligence Agency, OPI 16 (Office of Current Intelligence), Job 80T00039A, Box 4, Item Number 13. Secret; No Foreign Dissem; Background use only.

Memorandum From President Nixon to Secretary of State Rogers, Washington, April 19, 1973. [Document 368]

Memorandum From President Nixon to Secretary of State Rogers, Washington, April 19, 1973.1

Washington, April 19, 1973

THE WHITE HOUSE
WASHINGTON

April 19, 1973

MEMORANDUM FOR
THE SECRETARY OF STATE

I have decided to appoint Ambassador Henry A. Byroade as United States Ambassador to Thailand, to replace Ambassador Leonard Unger, and Dr. William A. Kintner as Ambassador to Cambodia, to replace Ambassador Emory C. Swank. I am aware of the objection to these changes from the Foreign Service, but I feel very strongly the need to have men in these very important and sensitive posts in whom I have personal confidence.

[signed Richard Nixon]

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 286, Agency Files, State, Vol. 18. Confidential.

Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to Secretary of Defense Richardson, Washington, May 3, 1973. [Document 369]

Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to Secretary of Defense Richardson, Washington, May 3, 1973.1

Washington, May 3, 1973

THE WHITE HOUSE
WASHINGTON

May 3, 1973

MEMORANDUM FOR
THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE

SUBJECT: Thai SGU Program, FY 1974

The President agrees with the plan described in your memorandum of April 6, 1973, to maintain 15 Thai SGU infantry battalions after withdrawal from Laos through the first half of FY 74. He wants to be certain, however, that the Thai SGU force reductions involved are not made prior to actual withdrawal of the forces from Laos under the terms of the Laos agreement. Until that time the Thai SGU forces should be supported at the existing level of 30 combat effective battalions.

To assure that these units can be fully effective should circumstances require their employment, artillery fire-support should also be provided. Therefore, it would be appreciated if your plan could be revised to add to the force to be retained in the initial phase two of the existing SGU artillery battalions. One of these units could be disbanded at mid-year when the infantry force is reduced.

[signed]
Henry A. Kissinger

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 565, Country Files, Far East, Thailand, Volume 10, 1973–. Secret; Sensitive. Richards’s memorandum of April 6 is attached but not published.

Memorandum From Secretary of Defense Richardson to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger), Washington, May 10, 1973. [Document 370]

Memorandum From Secretary of Defense Richardson to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger), Washington, May 10, 1973.1

Washington, May 10, 1973

THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE
WASHINGTON, D.C. 20301

MEMORANDUM FOR THE ASSISTANT TO THE PRESIDENT FOR NATIONAL SECURITY AFFAIRS

SUBJECT: Thai SGU Program, FY 1974 (U)

(S) Pursuant to your 3 May 1973 memorandum, subject as above, I have concurred in a [text not declassified] message which directs resumption of Thai SGU recruitment.

(S) Start-up of full recruitment at this time eliminates the possibility of beginning a phase-down/termination program early in FY 1974; and it was on this basis that the legal rationale was developed and our agreements with the Committees were concluded. [text not declassified] recruitment and training necessary to man fully the 30 battalions will be completed by October 1973. I believe the President should be informed that the effect of the resumption of recruitment is to void the pre-funding agreement made by the DOD General Counsel, J. Fred Buzhardt, with the concerned Congressional Committees as described in my 6 April 1973 memorandum.

(S) FY 1974 SGU requirements must now rely upon Congressional approval of the President's Laos MASF budget request ($107.3 million for Thai SGUs). Unfortunately, bills have been introduced in the House and Senate to return Laos to MAP and the chances for approval of our FY 1974 MASF budget request are poor. I am sure that you will agree that support of the Thai SGU program during FY 1974 under MAP (and the Laotian irregulars, now cosmetically integrated with the FAR) is virtually impossible.

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 565, Country Files, Far East, Thailand, Volume 10, 1973–. Secret; Sensitive. In an attached memorandum, May 14, to Kissinger, Schlesinger stated that the 30 battalions must be retained through FY 1974, and provided options for doing so.

Memorandum From Acting Secretary of State Rush to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger), Washington, May 18, 1973. [Document 371]

Memorandum From Acting Secretary of State Rush to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger), Washington, May 18, 1973.1

Washington, May 18, 1973

DEPARTMENT OF STATE
WASHINGTON

May 18, 1973

The Honorable
Henry A. Kissinger,
Chairman, Senior Review Group for NSSM-159,
The White House

Dear Henry:

Pursuant to the provisions of National Security Study Memorandum 159, dated September 9, 1972, I am submitting the enclosed study on "U.S. Counter—insurgency Support for Thailand."

As directed by NSSM-159, an interagency ad hoc group was organized by Under Secretary of State Curtis W. Tarr to oversee and direct the preparation of this study. Representatives from the National Security Council Staff, the Departments of State and Defense, the Agency for International Development, OMB and the Central Intelligence Agency served as members of the ad hoc group. In addition, they provided staff support both for the preparation of the study and for consultations which took place with the Country Team in Bangkok during the month of November 1972.

The enclosed assessment of the dimensions of the insurgency problem and policy and program choices available to the U.S. Government has been reviewed and endorsed by the participating representatives from the Departments and Agencies having an operational concern with Thailand. All support the primary conclusion of the study — to wit, the insurgency is basically one which the Thais themselves must solve and the U.S. role should be supplementary. The decisive factor in bringing about an effective Thai performance against the insurgency in the future will be the attitude of the Thai leadership. The resources and organization are at hand; the critical element has been and will continue to be the willingness of the Thai leadership to give due attention, emphasis and action to the process of countering the insurgency.

With respect to the nature of the threat from the insurgents, the Central Intelligence Agency has prepared a special study which concludes that the insurgency after seven years of communist effort "remains small, vulnerable and, for the most part, limited to the periphery of the Thai nation and society." The CIA also notes that future prospects for the insurgency and movement depend in large part on how the Thai Government views and treats it.

As pointed out in the NSSM terms of reference relating to the U.S. role in promoting a more effective Thai counter-insurgency effort, the study concludes that we possess an "uncertain ability to leverage even marginal changes in Thai" direction and performance. The paper assesses various priorities that could be established by the Royal Thai Government in attempting to cope with the problem, future levels of U.S. Government assistance, and possible changes in program emphasis.

I forward this study to you with the recommendation that it be given the earliest possible consideration by the Senior Review Group.

Kindest regards,
Sincerely,
[signed]
Kenneth Rush
Acting Secretary

Enclosure:
Study on U.S. Counter-insurgency Support for Thailand

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Institutional Files (H-Files), Box H–193, NSSM 159. Secret; Nodis. The paper, dated March 30, is attached but not published. For NSSM 159, see Foreign Relations, 1969–1976, Vol. XX, Southeast Asia, 1969–1972, Document 174.

Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to the Acting Secretary of Defense and the Director of Central Intelligence (Schlesinger), Washington, June 18, 1973. [Document 372]

Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to the Acting Secretary of Defense and the Director of Central Intelligence (Schlesinger), Washington, June 18, 1973.1

Washington, June 18, 1973

THE WHITE HOUSE
WASHINGTON

June 18, 1973

MEMORANDUM FOR
THE ACTING SECRETARY OF DEFENSE
[text not declassified]

SUBJECT: Thai SGU Program, FY 1974

The memorandum of May 10 from the Secretary of Defense on this subject has been reviewed. In light of the considerations raised therein, the plan to maintain 17 battalions during the first half of Fiscal Year 1974 and 10 battalions in the second half should be implemented using the [text not declassified]. Action to withdraw the Thai SGUs from Laos should not be taken until further advised.

Henry A. Kissinger [signed]

cc: The Secretary of State

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 565, Country Files, Far East, Thailand, Volume 10, 1973–. Secret; Sensitive. The Secretary of State also received a copy of this memorandum.

Memorandum From John A. Froebe and William L. Stearman of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger), Washington, July 20, 1973. [Document 373]

Memorandum From John A. Froebe and William L. Stearman of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger), Washington, July 20, 1973.1

Washington, June 20, 1973

MEMORANDUM
NATIONAL SECURITY COUNCIL
ACTION

July 20, 1973

MEMORANDUM FOR: MR. KISSINGER
FROM: JOHN A. FROEBE, JR. [JAF initialed]
WILLIAM L. STEARMAN [WLS initialed]

SUBJECT: U.S. Military Presence in Thailand

At Tab A is a draft State cable instructing Embassy Bangkok to respond to recent increasing Thai Government (RTG) pressures for a reduced U.S. military presence after the Cambodia bombing halt August 15 by undertaking a dialogue with the RTG on this question.

Since the August 15 Congressional moratorium on bombing in Cambodia was passed, the RTG has made increasingly clear to us, both publicly and privately, that they want a reduction in our military presence in Thailand to follow the bombing halt.

— About two weeks ago a high-level RTG Foreign Ministry official told our Charge that the RTG, while not wanting to eliminate the U.S. military presence, did want to "regularize" it, and, as soon as possible, to reduce it.

— On July 11 the Deputy Foreign Minister stated RTG policy on this point: "Should there be a cessation of bombing, the strength of American military forces would have to be reduced."

— On July 18, the RTG formally asked for our response to three questions (Bangkok 11025 at Tab B):

— What are U.S. intentions regarding Cambodia after August 15?

— What are U.S. intentions regarding future use of air bases in Thailand?

— What are U.S. plans for re-equipping Thai armed forces? (This development occurred after the State draft cable came to us for clearance. State is preparing a separate reply to the first and third questions, but believes strongly that a reply on our military presence in Thailand should not be delayed. We agree.)

The RTG has not been specific as to the size, timing or rate of a reduction in our military presence, noting only that it should be "orderly and gradual."

RTG motivation for the requested reduction probably centers on: — The need to dampen domestic political criticism, which has been on the increase since early this year. Our continued sizeable military presence in the face of the Vietnam settlement has provided one issue that former officials such as Thanat and students have seized on to attack the government.

— Our military presence as one factor in the current RTG reassessment of Thai foreign policy in the light of the Indochina settlement, U.S. Congressional restrictions on our military efforts there and military assistance generally, and Thai efforts to normalize relations with Peking and Hanoi.

— A continued RTG effort to extract a higher price for our military presence, particularly in the face of decreasing U.S. military assistance.

The draft State cable instructs Ambassador Unger to initiate a dialogue with the RTG on a possible reduction in our military presence after August 15 to avoid having the RTG levy specific demands for a reduction on us. He is cautioned that we must not give Hanoi indications subject to misinterpretation. The specific points to be made to the RTG are: — The USG is presently reviewing the level of our military presence in Thailand, not wanting to maintain a level in excess of that required by our common interests.

— In light of changing security conditions in the area, we are tentatively considering the removal from Thailand of a few units for reasons of economy and efficiency, but do not want to do so in a way that will be misinterpreted by Hanoi. (We have made a minor change in the wording of State's draft on this point to remove the implication that we now have units in Thailand that are of questionable ("marginal") military value.)

— We have not yet decided on more substantial future reductions, but contemplate these as soon as security conditions in the area permit. We do, however, want to retain a sufficient capability to respond to foreseeable contingencies.

— Looking toward the emergence of a more peaceful, stable situation, we believe it is in both our interests to retain some form of limited U.S. presence or contingency basing arrangement in Thailand.

The State draft is acceptable, except that it does not emphasize strongly enough that the maintenance of a U.S. military presence is in Thailand's security interest as well as that of the U.S. The Thai have a tendency to downplay their own interest in our military presence, probably in order to extract a higher price for this presence. We have included additional language to take care of this defect.

Recommendation:

That you approve the State draft cable at Tab A as amended.
Approve
Disapprove

Concurrences:
Mr. Eagleburger
Col. Pinckney

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 565, Country Files, Far East, Thailand, Volume 10, 1973–. Secret; Nodis. Sent for action. Concurred in by Eagleburger and Pinckney. Kissinger initialed the “approve” option. The Department of State sent Tab A, attached but not published, to the Embassy in Bangkok as telegram 144716, dated July 23. Tab B, July 18, is also attached but not published.

Memorandum of Conversation, New York, September 26, 1973, 10 a.m. [Document 374]

Memorandum of Conversation, New York, September 26, 1973, 10 a.m.1

New York, September 26, 1973, 10 a.m.

MEMORANDUM OF CONVERSATION

Date: September 26, 1973 10 a.m.
Place: USUN

Subject: Secretary's Conversation with Thai Deputy Foreign Minister

Participants:
Thailand:
H.E. Chatchai Chunawan
Deputy Foreign Minister
H.E. Anand Panyarachun
Thai Ambassador to the UN
Mr. Phan Wanamatee
Director General Political Department
Ministry of Foreign Affairs
Mr. Asa Sarasin
Private Secretary to the Minister

United States:
The Secretary
Ambassador Leonard Unger
Acting Assistant Secretary
Arthur W Hummel, Jr. - EA
Ambassador Robert McCloskey
L. Nicholas Ruwe
Assistant Chief of Protocol
Alf E. Bergesen
Deputy Director, EA/TB

Minister Chatchai opened the conversation by extending greetings to the Secretary from Prime Minister Thanom Kittikachorn, which the Secretary reciprocated. He gave the Secretary a wrapped gift.

Cambodia

The Secretary (in reply to Chatchai's question): In Cambodia everything depends on the military situation there. If the government holds, we believe negotiations will start. We are giving all the help now that we can. This is the key; they should be given all possible support. There is no negotiation now going on and we will tell you if negotiations start.

We are not interested in Sihanouk now. He keeps announcing he won't see me. I have news for him: I won't see him. Either there is a stalemate that leads to negotiations, or one side wins. There are no contacts between us and Sihanouk. If, when I am in Peking, the Chinese offer a solution preserving the basic interests of the Phnom Penh government along the lines of the Laotian solution, I might consider seeing him. We are not now talking to the Chinese (about Cambodia) either, and you should not look for any dramatic developments.

Deputy Foreign Minister Chatchai: I might explain why, in the Thai government's opinion, the insurgents have not yet taken Phnom Penh. After the bombing ended, they were disorganized; it will take them six months to get back in shape. They (the insurgents) lack the food to feed two million people. Most of the area is now flooded and it is hard to move troops. We believe they could seize Phnom Penh if they wanted to.

The Secretary: In the Thai view, can the Phnom Penh Government get strong enough so that the insurgents could not seize Phnom Penh?

Chatchai: Yes, if the US continues to help.

The Secretary: The Chinese are practical and realistic. They dealt with me when the US was bombing. Hanoi. The reason the Chinese deal with you (the Thai) is that they are afraid of Thai participation in the Soviet collective security system. Under present circumstances you can't really offend them. The Soviets want a collective security system partly to encircle China. We do not favor this. Europe is a different situation. In Europe there are two groupings, more or less equal in strength. In Asia there is a variety of governments, but not a balance of power. I am not sure what the Soviet collective security proposal means in Asia.

Chatchai: (Cambodian Foreign Minister) Long Boret has told us that among the insurgents roughly 40% are pro-Moscow, 20% pro-Hanoi, and 40% pro-Sihanouk. We are concerned about the extension of Soviet influence in the South China Sea and the Gulf of Thailand.

The Secretary: We are not very concerned about the Soviets in Southeast Asia. Frankly, in the long run, we can jointly handle the Soviets there. The Chinese could be a problem if they become aggressive , hut they are not now, because they are weak.

U.S. Forces in Thailand

Chatchai inquired about the withdrawal of us forces from Thailand.

The Secretary: Tell me, who is it that wants the troops out? Both Thailand and the US keep psychoanalyzing the other, and guessing what the other side might want. Our position is that if it would help the Thai domestic situation, we are willing to reduce our forces. If it would help the Thai internationally, we will keep them there. Please tell us what you really want. Don't decide on the basis of trying to guess what we want.

Chatchai: We are not asking for withdrawals while the situation is uncertain. If there is no North Vietnamese withdrawal from Laos then the US should not withdraw from Thailand. The Thai people wonder whether it is the US that wants to stay on, or is the Thai Government asking the US to stay (i.e. in the latter case there would not be a problem.)

The Secretary: The US is willing to make adjustments. There will be Congressional pressure for reductions but we can handle that.

Ambassador Anand: We would like to see a modest withdrawal, down to 32,000.

The Secretary: Where do we stand now?

Ambassador Unger: There are about 38,500 US forces now in Thailand.

The Secretary: Do you want us to reduce our forces to 32,000 and do you also want us to pull out some strategic forces?

Chatchai: Yes, we wish for you to return to the pre-NVN offensive (1972) level, and to pull out some of rho strategic forces.

Relations with Hanoi

Chatchai: What are US contacts with Hanoi?

The Secretary: There is some dialogue, but it is mostly about prisoners and occasionally about economic aid. We won't give them aid as long as there are Vietnamese troops in Laos and Cambodia and there is no cease-fire in Cambodia. We have exchanges with them about the ICCS. But there are and will be no secret negotiations with Hanoi that affect you (the Thai). We will keep you informed. We trust you will do the same. There are also lots of exchanges on Laos.

Chatchai: What about the SGU's?

The Secretary: We have an almost unmanageable Congressional problem.

Ambassador Unger: We are OK on this issue through June 1974. (It was noted that there may be a problem about these forces after that.)

Chatchai: What should be done if North Vietnam does not withdraw from Laos? Should the Thai withdraw (the SGU's) completely?

The Secretary: Speaking frankly, I would prefer that you did not. I need to talk to Senator Stennis about this, however.

U.S. Bilateral Assistance to Thailand

Chatchai: What about US aid to Thailand; both military and economic assistance?

The Secretary: Be assured that we will do the maximum Congress will permit. Deputy Secretary (of Defense) Clements is looking into the question of what equipment can left behind (by US forces withdrawing from Thailand) and he will have full State and White House backing on this.

We will do the absolute maximum Congress permits. We have no problem (between Thailand and the US) of substance; we fully understand Thai needs, but we face a difficult Congressional situation.

Further Meetings

The Secretary: I am sorry to have to leave to hear Chancellor Brandt's address. Later I am giving a dinner for all delegations; I hope to see you (Chatchai) there.

Chatchai: I look forward to it. I would like to see Gen. Haig in Washington.

The Secretary: Yes, I would like far you to see Gen. Haig.

Note: It was agreed that the two principals would try to meet again, perhaps the first part of next week in Washington.

Distribution:
S
D
P
T
S/S
INR/OD
WH
EA
PM
Bangkok
Moscow
Peking
Phnom Penh
Vientiane

Drafted:
POL: AHBergensen
Cleared:
EA: AWHummel
Amb. Unger

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 565, Country Files, Far East, Thailand, Volume 10, 1973–. Secret; Exdis. The meeting occurred at the U.S. Mission to the United Nations. Drafted by Bergesen; cleared by Hummel and Unger; and approved in S.

Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to President Nixon, Washington, October 15, 1973. [Document 375]

Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to President Nixon, Washington, October 15, 1973.1

Washington, October 15, 1973

MEMORANDUM
THE WHITE HOUSE
WASHINGTON
URGENT INFORMATION

October 15, 1973

MEMORANDUM FOR: THE PRESIDENT
FROM: HENRY A. KISSINGER
SUBJECT: Thai Change of Government Portends No Likely Adverse Effects on U.S. Interests

The Government of Prime Minister Thanom resigned early this morning Washington time, and the King has appointed the widely-respected Rector of Thammasat University to form a new government. The change likely portends no significantly adverse effects for U.S. interests in Thailand.

The Thanom Cabinet stepped down following a night of widespread student-instigated violence in Bangkok, probably the most severe in the past two decades in Thailand. Most importantly, some 100 persons — largely students but also some police — were killed in the course of police attempts to bring the riots under control. In Thai political practice, the deaths represent unforgivable incompetence on the part of the government, and almost requires its resignation. The original causes of the student discontent, which has been manifest sporadically on a small scale since last spring, involve their protests of continued military government; only in the past week has the government handling of the latest round brought large numbers of usually apolitical technical and normal school students to the ranks of the university students. Before resigning, the Thanom Government promised to promulgate a new constitution next October.

The King has appointed widely-respected Judge Sanya Thammasak to form what will be at least an interim government. Sanya is presently Rector of one of Bangkok's two leading universities, a member of the Kings Privy Council, and a Vice President of the World Buddhist Federation (which adds considerably to his stature in Buddhist Thailand). He is also a former presiding judge of the Thai Supreme Court. Sanyo is basically well-disposed toward the U.S. Despite his credentials, however, Sanya must of course secure the support of the Army, which remains the source of real power — and which continues to be controlled by Thanom and the top leadership of the recent government.

Some violence continues. However, it does not appear that there is any well-organized conspiracy. There is no evidence that the Thai Communist Party is responsible for the current situation, although at least some of its elements probably have tried to join the ranks of the rioters.

Embassy Bangkok has reported that they are aware of no harm to U.S. citizens or property.

Implications for U.S. Interests — No change in basic Thai foreign policy, either as regards its normalization or relations with the PRC or as to its support of our effort in Indochina, seems in prospect.

— We should have a respite, for at least the next month, from pressures for further reduction of our forces in Thailand. The Thai crisis centers very largely on domestic issues; the students have given very secondary attention to our military presence in Thailand. In addition, the new government will be preoccupied with organizing itself for at least the next several weeks.

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 566, Country Files, Far East, Thailand, Volume 11, October 1973–. Secret. Urgent; Sent for information. Scowcroft initialed the memorandum on behalf of Kissinger. Near the top of the first page, Nixon wrote, “K—Maybe not so bad as we first thought.”

Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to the Deputy Secretary of State (Rush), Washington, October 15, 1973 [Document 376]

Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to the Deputy Secretary of State (Rush), Washington, October 15, 19731

Washington, October 15, 1973

THE WHITE HOUSE
WASHINGTON

October 15, 1973

MEMORANDUM FOR

THE DEPUTY SECRETARY OF STATE
THE DEPUTY SECRETARY OF DEFENSE
CHAIRMAN, JOINT CHIEFS OF STAFF
[text not declassified]

SUBJECT: Withdrawal of Thai Volunteer Forces from Laos

After a review of the recommendations for the withdrawal of Thai SGU forces from Laos, it has been decided to proceed as follows: — During the first twenty days following establishment of the new government, the RLG will notify the LPF that 13 battalions already have been withdrawn and that three additional battalions will be withdrawn in the initial period.

— During the next twenty day period, four additional battalions will be withdrawn.

The remaining ten battalions will begin to be withdrawn when it has been determined that the North Vietnamese have withdrawn a corresponding percentage (2/3) of their forces from Laos. They will then be withdrawn at a rate corresponding to that of subsequent NVA withdrawals.

You are requested to take appropriate action to carry out this course of action.

[signed] Henry A. Kissinger

1 Source: [text not declassified]. Secret; Sensitive. Kissinger received this memorandum under a covering memorandum, October 10, from William Stearman of the NSC staff.

Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to President Nixon, Washington, October 29, 1973. [Document 377]

Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to President Nixon, Washington, October 29, 1973.1

Washington, October 29, 1973

MEMORANDUM
THE WHITE HOUSE
WASHINGTON
INFORMATION

October 29, 1973

MEMORANDUM FOR: THE PRESIDENT
FROM: HENRY A. KISSINGER [BS initialed for HK]
SUBJECT: Thailand: Reappraisal of Fall of Thanom Government

The events of the past week and additional evidence of the circumstances surrounding the fall of the Thanom Government on October 15 permit the following tentative appraisal of the upheaval — which has brought with it the first realignment of basic political power in Thailand since 1932.

The immediate cause of Thanom's ouster was quite clearly his Government's mishandling of the latest and largest student demonstration of the past year — which this time turned violent when the Government struck forcefully against them.

The underlying cause probably lies in the slowly accumulated frustrations of Thailand's urban population over the Thanom Government's failure to deal with basic problems, such as inflation and excessive official corruption. Urban resentment probably was heightened by the paradox of the Thanom Government: it had, in its "coup" of late 1971, forcefully set aside the constitution and parliament — ending Thailand's three-year experiment in representative government — claiming that the urgent need to find solutions to the nation's basic problems made the encumbrances of representative government intolerable. ^he students, increasingly in the past year, have given voice to the frustrations of bureaucrats, intellectuals, former politicians, and the urban population of Bangkok generally.

New realignment of power

The manner of the Thanom Government's quick demise has brought the King to the fore as probably the single most powerful individual in Thailand — thus possibly ending the figurehead role to which the military relegated the monarchy in 1932. The Thai Army, which has since 1932 been the arbiter of politics, is at least temporarily on the defensive but remains the other basic political force. For the moment the Army seems content to let the King's appointee, Prime Minister Sanya, try to put the situation back together again.

Sanya, who though widely respected has no independent political base of his own and is beholden to the King, must also get the support of the Army in order to move forward on the primary problem confronting his caretaker government — the drafting of a new constitution and holding new elections in the next six months. Sanya has formed a moderate cabinet, which, however, gives only three out of 13 portfolios to military men. He will be helped on the economic front by the excellent rice harvest in prospect, while Thailand's internal insurgency should not pose a serious problem for him in this time frame.

The students, having succeeded in bringing down the Thanom Government, are for the moment quiescent. But having for the first time in Thai history made themselves a significant political force, they will likely be heard from again before long — probably on the issues of Thailand's internal political future posed by the drafting of the new constitution.

Implications for U.S. interests — Foreign policy issues did not figure significantly in the upheaval, and, with the focus still on the internal scene, are less than likely to become a major issue in the immediate future.

— The King, the Army, and Prime Minister Sanya share an essential consensus that the basic direction of Thailand's foreign policy should continue.

— There may be some pressure among Bangkok's elite and the students for further U.S. force reductions and for accelerating the normalization of Thailand's relations with the PRC. The Sanya Government is likely to be more sensitive to such pressures than its predecessors, although it should be capable of containing them.

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 566, Country Files, Far East, Thailand, Volume 11, October 1973–. Secret. Sent for information. Scowcroft initialed the memorandum on behalf of Kissinger. A notation on the memorandum indicates, “The President has seen.”

Memorandum From the Executive Secretary of State (Pickering) to the Deputy Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs (Scowcroft), Washington, November 29, 1973. [Document 378]

Memorandum From the Executive Secretary of State (Pickering) to the Deputy Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs (Scowcroft), Washington, November 29, 1973.1

Washington, November 29, 1973

DEPARTMENT OF STATE
Washington, D.C. 20520

November 8, 1973

MEMORANDUM FOR MAJOR GENERAL SCOWCROFT
THE WHITE HOUSE

Subject: NSSM 171 Follow-On — Analysis of U.S.

We have reviewed the Defense Department's study of United States deployments in Thailand which was transmitted to members of the Defense Program Review Committee with Deputy Secretary Clements' memorandum of October 13. We concur in general in the analysis presented in that memorandum and agree that the options set forth for both short and long-term deployments are conceptually valid.

Additional comment is called for on political considerations relevant to decisions on this subject. The DOD study stresses political factors indicating the general acceptability in Thailand of a substantial United States militancy presence. The implication is that, if non-political considerations dictate drawdown of United States forces, purely Thai political considerations suggest only that the drawdown should be gradual.

We believe attention should be given to political circumstances in Thailand that argue in favor of continuing reductions and that should affect the timetable. Recent reporting from Bangkok is reassuring. The new government has not expressed a desire to accelerate United States withdrawals and in general appears to accept the position of the previous government which, in essence, would permit us, as the DOD study states, "to withdraw our forces on our own timetable." On the other hand, it is a political fact that the Thai have all along expected and desired that withdrawals continue.

In addition, we should keep in mind that the new government must be responsive to public pressures, especially from the students, to a greater degree than the previous government. While the United States presence was not a major issue in the recent overthrow of the Thanom regime, it is one that we know is on the minds of many student and public opinion leaders. As a result we would anticipate that, before long, we will see this issue brought again to prominence. We would expect the government to react by pressing for United States withdrawals to relieve these public pressures. The heat is off for the moment, but it will not necessarily remain off unless pre-emptive action is taken.

We believe, therefore, that from a purely political standpoint, we should not delay discussing with the RTG a timetable for further withdrawals down to a politically defensible target level. That level we judge to be the pre-1972 figure of 32,200 personnel, including TDY B-52's that were part of the 1972 augmentation. We should not wait for overt public pressures to develop or appear to be influencing the new government to resist the popular will on this matter. If we do, we may be forced into more precipitate action than we wish, and our image in Thailand could be damaged.

The main issue raised in the DOD study is one of timing for withdrawals down to 32,200. In effect the DOD study asks us to decide whether to reach this level by January 1, 1974 or by July 1, 1974. We note that DOD does not have a united position on this question. The Secretary of Defense favors the slower schedule; both JCS and ISA favor the faster.

We do not believe that purely Thai political considerations as we know them point strongly toward either option. More important, perhaps, is our assessment of security conditions in Indochina and the symbolic effect upon Hanoi. Indochina circumstances of today do not, however, weigh the scales decisively in favor of either of the short-term deployment options set forth in the DOD study. The uncertainty of developments during the coming dry season suggests only that we approach our deployments in Thailand with caution and flexibility.

Because the main issue is one of timing, because relevant political and regional security circumstances are murky, and because both of the short-term deployment options permit considerable flexibility in execution, we believe no firm decision is necessary at this time. What is important is that we begin talking with the RTG about our plans and put it in a position to assure the Thai public that the subject is, in fact, being addressed in a manner consistent with RTG sovereign rights and Thai interests. It is also important that these discussions lead within a reasonably short period of time to actual movements of some additional United States forces out of Thailand. It is also desirable from the RTG point of view that we explicitly accept, as an interim goal, reduction to the pre-1971 level of 32,200, including the 8 TDY B-52's. As for the timing, however, we believe that question should be left open for discussion with the RTG. RTG desires, based upon its interpretations of domestic political forces and Thai security concerns, should be reflected in the schedule we finally decide upon, whether that schedule be one of the options suggested by DOD, or perhaps something in between.

We agree with Deputy Secretary Clements that a decision on longer-term deployments can be deferred until the Southeast Asia military situation stabilizes. Our primary objective for the moment should be to keep our options open. The new RTG leadership has indicated that it expects eventually to have all United States forces withdrawn, but under optimum condition this might be pushed into the future beyond the longer-term timeframe of FY 1975-79 mentioned in the DOD study. The manner in which we carry out our short-term redeployments will have an important bearing on whether we will have any choice for the longer-term.

[signed for]
Thomas Pickering
Executive Secretary

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Subject-Numeric Central Files, Top Secret Files, Box 4, DEF 1–1 US, 1970–1973. Secret. Barnes signed the memorandum for Pickering. Drafted by Dexter. Concurred in by Rush, Sneider, PM, and EA/RA. The DOD analysis of U.S. Deployments in Thailand, transmitted under Clements memorandum of October 13, is attached but not published. Kissinger requested this DOD study in a memorandum, attached but not published, from August 28. For NSSM 171, see Document 2.

Telegram 1667 From the Embassy in Thailand to the Department of State, January 30, 1974, 1248Z. [Document 379]

Telegram 1667 From the Embassy in Thailand to the Department of State, January 30, 1974, 1248Z.1

January 30, 1974, 1248Z

TELEGRAM
Department of State
BANGKOK 1667

R 301248Z JAN 74

FM AMEMBASSY BANGKOK TO SECSTATE WASHDC 0200
INFO AMEMBASSY JAKARTA
AMEMBASSY KUALA LUMPUR
AMEMBASSY MANILA
AMEMBASSY PARIS
AMEMBASSY PHNOM PENH
AMEMBASSY RANGOON
AMEMBASSY SAIGON
AMEMBASSY SINGAPORE
AMEMBASSY VIENTIANE
AMCONSUL CHIANG MAI
AMCONSUL UDORN
USSAG NKP
13TH ADVON UDORN
CINCPAC
DIA

BANGKOK 1667

E. O. 11652: GDS
TAGS: PFOR, TH

SUBJ: ASSESSMENT OF TRENDS AND DEVELOPMENTS IN THAILAND

CINCPAC FOR POLAD

SAIGON PLEASE PASS ASSISTANT SECRETARY INGERSOLL

INTRODUCTION: THE FOLLOWING REPORT IS IN RESPONSE TO ASSISTANT SECRETARY INGERSOLL'S LETTER OF 20 DECEMBER 1973 CALLING FOR PERIODIC ANALYTICAL REPORTING OF TRENDS AND DEVELOPMENTS.

SUMMARY: THE SUCCESSION OF EVENTS FOLLOWING THE OCTOBER OVERTHROWN OF THE THANOM GOVERNMENT PRECIPITATED AN UPSURGE OF ANTI-AMERICAN SENTIMENT. THERE HAVE ALSO BEEN A SPATE OF CONFLICTING RUMORS ALLEGING US/CIA INVOLVEMENT IN PLOTS TO ASSASSINATE THE KING, TO OVERTHROWN THE SANYA GOVERNMENT, AND TO BRING BACK TO POWER ONE OR MORE OF THE OUSTED TRIO. OTHER FAMILIAR SENSITIVITIES TO THE AMERICAN MILITARY PRESENCE REEMERGED WITH NEW VIRULENCE, TO WIT COMPLAINTS OF TAX FREE PX IMPORTS, AND ALLEGATIONS THAT AMERICAN BASES INFRINGED ON THAI SOVEREIGNTY AND HINDERED THAILAND'S FREEDOM OF MOVEMENT TOWARDS IMPROVING RELATIONS WITH THE DRV AND PRC. ANTI-AMERICAN COMMENTARY ON THESE THEMES ALSO FOCUSED ON AMBASSADOR KINTNER'S FORMER BRIEF AND ALLEGED CURRENT CIA CONNECTION AND HIS MILITARY BACKGROUND. JUST WHEN IT APPEARED THAT THE FEVER WAS ABOUT TO BREAK, THE SAKON NAHON LETTER INCIDENT PLAYED DIRECTLY INTO THE HANDS OF OUR CRITICS AND STIMULATED AN OUTBURST OF VITUPERATIVE ANTI-AMERICAN HOSTILITY THAT SEEMS UNLIKELY TO SUBSIDE IN THE NEAR FUTURE. THE MOST RECENT AMERICAN FAUX PAS, INVOLVING AMERICAN TEENAGE VISITORS CLIMBING ON A SACRED BUDDHA IMAGE, PRESENTS THE SO FAR UNEXPLOITED POTENTIAL OF EXACERBATING ANTI-WESTERN CULTURAL PARANOIA AMONG THE THAI AND ADDING TO OUR PROBLEMS HERE. THE KING, THE PRIME MINISTER AND HIS CIVILIAN MINISTERS, AND THE MILITARY PLACE HIGH VALUE ON THE MANIFOLD ASPECTS OF THE AMERICAN RELATIONSHIP. YET THE SANYA GOVERNMENT, RELUCTANTLY GRAPPLING WITH A HOST OF PROBLEMS LIKE INFLATION, THE ENERGY CRISIS, THE PORK SHORTAGES, IS BEING BUFFETED BY CONTINUING STUDENT PROTESTS AND A CRITICAL PRESS WHICH FOCUS, INTER ALIA, ON THE ALLEGED BANEFUL IMPACT OF THE UBIQUITOUS AMERICAN PRESENCE ON THAI CULTURE, SOVEREIGNTY, AND EVEN INDEPENDENCE. THE PRIMARY SOURCE OF THIS HARPING CHORUS LIES IN A COMBINATION OF NATIONALISTIC UNIVERSITY AND TEACHER TRAINING COLLEGE PROFESSORS, SOME STUDENT LEADERS, AND A FEW JOURNALISTS. FINANCIAL AND INTELLECTUAL SUPPORT MAY WELL REINFORCE THIS CAMPAIGN, BUT WE CANNOT YET IDENTIFY THE SOURCE. AT THE SAME TIME, WE HAVE MANY FRIENDS IN THAILAND WHO WANT TO MAINTAIN A SPECIAL US-THAI RELATIONSHIP. IF WE HEED THE NOW ABUNDANT AND SOMETIMES VULGAR HANDWRITING ON THE WALL BY LOWERING OUR PROFILE, WE OUGHT TO BE ABLE TO RIDE OUT THE CURRENT STORM AND ALLOW THE STRONG INSTITUTIONAL FACTORS FAVORING CLOSE BILATERAL COOPERATION TO REASSERT THEMSELVES. IF HOWEVER SOME OTHER PUBLIC RELATIONS CALAMITY BEFALLS US BEFORE THE PRESENT WOUNDS ARE HEALED, IT COULD CREATE A CRISIS FOR THE RTG WITH SERIOUSLY ADVERSE CONSEQUENCES FOR OUR INTERESTS IN THAILAND.

END SUMMARY.

1 Source: National Archives, Record Group 59, Central Foreign Policy Files. Secret; Limdis. Repeated to Jakarta, Kuala Lumpur, Manila, Paris, Phnom Penh, Rangoon, Saigon, Singapore, Vientiane, the Consulates of Chiang Mai and Udorn, USSAG at Nakhon Khanom Royal Thai air force base, the 13th Advanced Echelon at Udorn, CINCPAC, and DIA.

Memorandum From the National Intelligence Officer for South and Southeast Asia at the Central Intelligence Agency (Christison) to the Director of Central Intelligence (Colby), Washington, March 8, 1974. [Document 380]

Memorandum From the National Intelligence Officer for South and Southeast Asia at the Central Intelligence Agency (Christison) to the Director of Central Intelligence (Colby), Washington, March 8, 1974.1

Washington, March 8, 1974

Office of the Director of Central Intelligence

DATE: 8 March 1974

TO: The Director

SUBJECT: Contingency Planning for a Military Coup in Thailand

1. The attached memorandum, prepared at your request, addresses the question of how the U.S. should respond in the event of a coup or attempted return to power by the military in Thailand. As you will note, we take an appreciably different tack from that taken by Ambassador Kintner.

2. [text not declassified]

William A. Christison
DCI/NIO/SEA

Attachment

9 April 1974

MEMORANDUM FOR THE DIRECTOR OF CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE

SUBJECT: Contingency Planning for a Possible Military Coup in Thailand

The Key Points

The U.S. response to a military coup or attempted coup in Thailand should be governed by the following guidelines: - We should recognize that it is in our interest to continue a close relationship with almost any Thai government that might emerge from a coup.

- If coup plotters tell us in advance of their plans and seek our support, we should withhold that support. [text not declassified]

- If we intervene in any way to prevent a coup, and that coup then succeeds, we would merely prejudice our future relations with a new Thai government.

- During any coup attempt the U.S. should maintain a low profile and remain detached from the situation, but should continue all assistance programs and contacts with the government at present levels.

- Once a coup has succeeded and the dust has settled, the U.S. should in low key express acceptance of the situation.

1 Source: Central Intelligence Agency, OPI 122 (National Intelligence Council), Job 79R01099A, Box 11, Folder 7, Contingency Planning for a Possible Military Coup in Thailand. Secret. On the routing slip attached to the memorandum, an unknown hand wrote, “Excellent memo. Let’s hold it for possible use at a WSAG or elsewhere.”

Memorandum From Deputy Secretary of State Rush to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger), Washington, March 14, 1974. [Document 381]

Memorandum From Deputy Secretary of State Rush to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger), Washington, March 14, 1974.1

Washington, March 14, 1974

THE DEPUTY SECRETARY OF STATE
WASHINGTON

March 14, 1974

MEMORANDUM TO THE ASSISTANT TO THE PRESIDENT FOR NATIONAL SECURITY AFFAIRS

Subject: U.S. Deployments in and Equipment Turnover in Thailand

By memoranda of March 9 and 12 from the National Security Council Staff Secretary, the Department was asked to comment on the implications of Defense Department proposals concerning U.S. deployments in Thailand and the turnover to Thailand of equipment attached to U.S. forces now there.

With regard to deployments, the March 9 memorandum transmitted a plan for reduction of our force level from 36,000 to 32,200 in the 12 months beginning May 1974, with further reduction to 24,700 by the end of FY 75. The March 12 memorandum transmitted an alternative plan for withdrawal of 10,000 personnel in May and June of this year, but made no mention of FY 75 reductions.

Public criticism of U.S. military presence in Thailand continues, but the Thai government has not objected to retaining the present force level through the end of this dry season. The Thai have been informed, however, that we intend to resume withdrawals after May 1 and we are certain that they will expect us to do so, after advance consultation with them.

The desires of the RTG with regard to the rate of withdrawals after May 1 are not known. The Thai Prime Minister indicated to me during my recent visit to Bangkok that the ultimate disposition of forces at Thai bases would depend upon the views of the next government. The psychological climate in the meanwhile is likely to be colored by the political campaigning which will precede the coming Thai national elections, which may be held as early as mid-year. During that campaigning we can expect the U.S. military presence to be a major issue. We anticipate that the Thai public will want a more rapid redeployment rate than the proposed reduction to 24,700 by the end of FY 75. Thus the RTG can be expected to prefer the alternative, i.e., 10,000 withdrawn by the end of this fiscal year. However, this is likely immediately to raise questions concerning our plans thereafter and we should be prepared to discuss the longer range as soon as possible after consulting with RTG on the initial May-June withdrawals.

The only argument on Thai political grounds for the slower withdrawal rate relates to the feasibility of re-entry if Indochina circumstances should so require. The Defense Department plan asserts that "we can easily institute a plan to periodically deploy additional combat units to Thailand on a temporary basis in order to continue sending the 'right signals' to Hanoi." We doubt that political circumstances in Thailand would permit this in the absence of a direct and immediate threat to Thailand and of assurance that the U.S. would actually employ its forces against that threat.

In discussions with the Thai, we should be prepared to take into account their views not only on the political exigencies within Thailand, but also on the economic impact of withdrawals. The plan for accelerated withdrawal envisions the closing of two bases, Takhli and probably Ubon, and this will inevitably have an economic impact on areas immediately adjacent to the bases. Our experience when we closed Takhli in 1971 indicates that dislocations resulting from closure can be minimized through consultation with the Thai. It is therefore essential that we begin discussions with the RTG at an early date and be prepared to work with them to reduce the local economic dislocations.

Whichever plan is adopted, it is important that we begin our discussions with the RTG and reach agreement as soon as possible for three reasons: First, Deputy Foreign Minister Chatchai recently went on the public record regarding your position on the U.S. military presence in Thailand taken during your meeting with Chatchai in New York last September. Chatchai quoted you as saying that the United States will be guided by Thai desires. Second, if agreement extending through the 1975 dry season can be reached with the present government it will be more difficult for the next government, whatever its inclinations, to reopen the issue and dictate a schedule that we might find unsatisfactory. Third, early announcement of agreement on force reductions could help reduce the heat of criticism that we expect during the upcoming election campaigns and would avoid giving the impression that we were acting in response to political pressures.

With respect to that portion of our personnel withdrawals that would result from reductions in headquarters and support elements, we have seen the Defense Department memorandum of February 27 on this subject. We believe it is consistent with current Thai political circumstances that dictate a lowering of the U.S. military profile. We are pleased to note that it calls for planning on the phase down and elimination of USSAG/7AF. This is a particularly sensitive organization in Thailand and is likely to become a subject of increasing controversy during the next several months. Also important is the interest expressed in the memorandum in reducing our intelligence presence.

We have also reviewed the Defense Department memorandum transmitted with the March 12 NSC Staff Memorandum, regarding turnover of U.S. equipment. We do not believe it is fully responsive to your memorandum of November 21, 1973, in that it does not make specific recommendations for equipment transfer other than O-2s (in which the Thai appear to be uninterested), EC-47s, and some medical equipment. We believe DOD should be tasked to come up with additional specific recommendations. In addition, we urge that decisions on specific items that may become available as bases close be made with maximum flexibility. This will help create a climate favorable to retention of a reduced presence in Thailand after FY 75 and might improve prospects for re-entry should such action become necessary later on.

Recommendations 1. That you approve the accelerated redeployment plan transmitted with the NSC Staff memorandum of March 12, 1974.

2. That you ask the Defense Department to develop urgently a further plan to cover redeployment during FY 75.

3. That Ambassador Kintner be authorized to consult with the RTG on a basis that will (a) allow for possible alteration in our redeployment plan to meet any Thai problems and (b) permit cooperative arrangements to minimize economic dislocations.

4. That Ambassador Kintner be authorized subsequently to consult with the RTG on plans for FY 75.

5. That you task the Defense Department to reexamine the subject of equipment which can be turned over to Thailand as we withdraw our forces.

[signed]
Kenneth Rush

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 566, Country Files, Far East, Thailand, Volume 11, October 1973–. Secret. Davis’s memorandum of March 9, on U.S. deployments in Thailand, and March 12, on U.S. force reductions in Thailand, and their accompanying DOD attachments are attached but not published.

National Security Decision Memorandum 249, Washington, March 23, 1974. [Document 382]

National Security Decision Memorandum 249, Washington, March 23, 1974.1

Washington, March 23, 1974

NATIONAL SECURITY COUNCIL
WASHINGTON, D.C. 20506

March 23, 1974

National Security Decision Memorandum 249

TO: The Secretary of Defense
The Director of Central Intelligence
The Deputy Secretary of State

SUBJECT: U.S. Deployments in Thailand

The President has reviewed the studies submitted in response to NSSM 171, related studies, and the views of the concerned Departments and Agencies. He has directed that the following actions be taken:

The Secretary of Defense should: — Withdraw unessential non-strike aircraft (EC-121's and C-130's) by June 1, 1974.

— Withdraw US combat forces between May 15 and December 31, 1974, to a residual level of nine tactical air squadrons, one AC-130 gunship squadron and 17 B-52's, as outlined in the plan presented by the Secretary of Defense. These withdrawals should be spaced over the period in question, with the precise timing of the withdrawals to be determined in consultation with the Thai Government.

— Reduce MACTHAI/JUSMAGTHAI and U.S. Army Support Command manpower by 30 percent by August 31, 1974, consolidate headquarters wherever possible and eliminate all unessential headquarters and support units.

The Deputy Secretary of State should:

— Immediately initiate consultations with the Royal Thai Government on the foregoing withdrawal plans, on means of reducing the economic dislocation caused by these withdrawals, and on securing re-entry rights.

The Secretary of Defense, in coordination with the Deputy Secretary of State, should prepare and submit for the President's consideration no later than May 1, 1974, recommendations as to equipment and facilities associated with US forces in Thailand that can be made available for turnover to the Thai as US forces are withdrawn.

The Secretary of Defense should also prepare and submit for the President's consideration no later than May 1, 1974, alternative plans and recommendations on the transfer of EC-47 aircraft to either South Vietnam or Thailand or some combination of the two.

The Secretary of Defense in coordination with the Director of Central Intelligence and the Deputy Secretary of State should submit recommendations on alternative long term (FY 76 and beyond) US military force levels in Thailand and proposed withdrawal plans to support each of the alternatives. These recommendations should be submitted not later than June 30, 1974, for consideration by the NSC Senior Review Group.

[signed]
Henry A. Kissinger

cc: Director, Office of Management and Budget
Chairman, Joint Chiefs of Staff

1 Source: Ford Library, National Security Adviser, Presidential Country Files for East Asia and the Pacific, Box 16, Thailand (2). Secret. Copies were sent to the Director of the Office of Management and Budget and to the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff. Attached to a Defense copy of NSDM 249 is a message written in red pencil by an unknown hand on OSD letterhead: “Sec Def said, ‘not sure I’ll do anything about this one.’ ‘More crap just to keep us busy.’ Suggest we tell Doolin to go slow + check with us at each step. T.” (Washington National Records Center, OSD Files: FRC 330-78-0011, Thailand, 370.02)

Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, May 22, 1974, 10 a.m. [Document 383]

Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, May 22, 1974, 10 a.m.1

Washington, May 22, 1974

NATIONAL SECURITY COUNCIL
WASHINGTON, D.C. 20506

June 21, 1974

MEMORANDUM OF CONVERSATION
PARTICIPANTS: Ambassador William Kintner
General Brent Scowcroft
W.R. Smyser

DATE, TIME, PLACE: May 22, 1974; 10:00 a.m.
The White House

Ambassador Kintner said that he had been very disturbed when he had learned that the press had found out about our P–3's flying from Thailand to Diego Garcia. He said we had told some Thai about this but not very many, so that it came as a surprise in Bangkok. He said he would worry because there were lots of skeletons in the closets in Thailand where one or another office had made some arrangement which only a few Thai officials knew. Any of those skeletons might pop up at any moment and it was impossible to control them because there was no central office in the Mission or in the Thai government that had a complete record.

Ambassador Kintner thought it might be better for the P–3's to fly out of Singapore. He thought the Singapore government was more interested in Diego Garcia than the Thai, and might therefore be more receptive.

General Scowcroft said that the NSC had not been advised of the P–3 flights. We were in the dark on this and were very surprised when it came up.

In a more general vein, Ambassador Kintner observed that there was a large gap between what we asked of Thailand and what we were prepared to offer. He said we were pouring a lot of money into Indochina but much less into Thailand and the Thai were well aware of the difference.

General Scowcroft said that he agreed there was a gap between our aid to Thailand and our expectations or our hopes for Thai cooperation. He said he hoped the Thai would understand that the Indochina countries were at war and therefore had larger needs.

Ambassador Kintner said that the cutback in our MAP program was a particular problem. It looks as though we will be cutting Thai money very drastically.

General Scowcroft said that we were at the bottom of the barrel with our aid money and were simply not in a position to give more. We had the same problem everywhere, not just in Thailand.

Ambassador Kintner observed that we were now even being difficult about giving Thailand formal title to a destroyer escort vessel that they had been using on loan for years. He said this seemed particularly questionable, since the amount involved was only $84,000.

General Scowcroft said we were looking into this and would try to help.

Ambassador Kintner also said he would like to be able to have Thailand get another squadron of OV–10's.

General Scowcroft said this was difficult because the Air Force was still buying OV–10's.

Ambassador Kintner wondered whether it might be possible for the Air Force to shift its planning requirements, temporarily reducing the number of OV–10's in its planning inventory for one year and then raising them again after we have given some of the aircrafts to Thailand.

General Scowcroft observed he was not certain that this would work.

Ambassador Kintner asked if we had yet made our plans on how many forces we would pull out of Thailand over the next dry season. He felt that by 1976 we should have closed or put on a standby basis all our bases except Utapao and Sattahip. He thought that we could get reentry rights if we need them and that we should be planning for a considerable reduction next year. He asked if this was in accord with NSC views.

General Scowcroft said that he believed we might want to rotate units in and out and that this might be even better than keeping them in Thailand.

Ambassador Kintner asked if Dr. Kissinger agreed with this. He also thought it should be discussed with Secretary Schlesinger.

General Scowcroft agreed.

Ambassador Kintner said he felt we should also make up our minds what we wanted for a permanent presence in Thailand. He asked if any studies had been done on this.

General Scowcroft observed that we were asking for some figures on this.

Ambassador Kintner then outlined a plan for using hydrogen as an energy source. The plan had been developed by a Thai inventor. He said that he had sent General Haig a note on it and hoped that it would be taken seriously.

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 566, Country Files, Far East, Thailand, Volume 11, October 1973–. Secret. Drafted by Smyser. Froebe’s talking points for Scowcroft, May 21, are ibid.

Memorandum From the Director of the Central Intelligence Agency (Colby) to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger), Washington, May 23, 1974. [Document 384]

Memorandum From the Director of the Central Intelligence Agency (Colby) to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger), Washington, May 23, 1974.1

Washington, May 23, 1974

[1 page not declassified.]

1 Source: Ford Library, National Security Adviser, Kissinger and Scowcroft West Wing Office Files, Box 2, Folder 16, Central Intelligence Agency, Communications, 3/8/74–5/31/74. Secret.

Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, May 24, 1974, 10:30–11 a.m. [Document 385]

Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, May 24, 1974, 10:30–11 a.m.1

Washington, May 24, 1974, 10:30–11 a.m.

ASSISTANT SECRETARY OF DEFENSE
WASHINGTON D.C. 20301

In reply refer to: I-22720/74

MEMORANDUM OF CONVERSATION

SUBJECT: Thailand Matters (U)

Participants:
Visitors
US Ambassador to Thailand - William R. Kintner
Director, Thailand & Burma Affairs, Department of State - John B. Dexter
DOD
Secretary of Defense - James R. Schlesinger
Director, Defense Security Assistance Agency - VADM Ray Peet
Director, East Asia & Pacific Region, ISA - RADM Thomas J. Bigley
Military Assistant to the Secretary of Defense - Maj Gen John A, Wickham, Jr.
Military Assistant to the Secretary of Defense - Brig Gen Robert C. Taylor
Assistant for Thailand & SEATO, ISA - John H. Kelly

Time: 1030 - 1100, 24 May 1974.
Place: Secretary Schlesinger's Office, Pentagon

I. (C) Military Assistance

Ambassador Kintner observed that in a time of declining MAP levels, the Thai are becoming uncertain as to how much they can rely on the USG. SecDef responded that it is important that the Thai understand the limits which the Congress has set on the military assistance program. Unfortunately, it may be difficult to attain the figure of $35 million in grant aid which had been established for Thailand during FY74. Ambassador Kintner said that a reduction below the figure of $35 million could have serious repercussions since the Thai Armed Forces are our strongest allies in defending the use of Thai territory by US forces. SecDef said that there is little prospect for relief from Cambodian are Middle Eastern requirements for larger shares of the military assistance program. Ambassador Kintner noted that Thailand is our main base of operations in Southeast Asia. The Thai have received some $2 billion since the inception of the military and economic assistance programs. Yet they look elsewhere and see that South Vietnam, Laos and Cambodia are receiving much larger amounts. SecDef responded that surely the Thai cannot envy the situation in which the Cambodians find themselves. Ambassador Kintner said that if we intend to maintain US forces over the longer term, we will have to be prepared to pay for base rights. SecDef asked how much of a MAP level would be required. Ambassador Kintner replied that the sum has not been identified but it would be sizable. Ambassador Kintner continued that he hoped the US could compensate for declining MAP levels by transfer of excess defense articles (EDA). VADM Peet pointed out that there are statutory constraints on EDA transfers. SecDef asked if FMS credits are a possible solution in the Thai context. Ambassador Kintner answered that the Thai have not heretofore availed themselves of available FMS credit. He doubted that they would use significant amounts.

2. (C) Reductions in US Forces

SecDef inquired whether the RTG is satisfied with the announced reductions which will result in a level of 27,000 authorized military manpower spaces in Thailand by the end this calendar year. Ambassador Kintner said that the RTG is generally satisfied with this reduction. The RTG will seek additional reductions next ear at about this time. By 1976 the US should be prepared to consolidate its remaining presence at the U-Tapao/Sattahip complex. SecDef agreed that it is important to reduce the US military presence in the Bangkok metropolitan area where it is politically very visible. Ambassador Kintner stated that once the USG has decided on its desired long-term presence, the proposal must be put to the RTG. Whether or not the current interim government would be prepared to address the long-term question is doubtful. Ambassador Kintner added that it is important to maintain evenly spaced withdrawals during this calendar year so that the Thai public will feel that this is an on-going process. SecDef noted that Congressional considerations require us to demonstrate our willingness to reduce significant numbers of US forces. The alternative is legislatively mandated reductions. The late March announcement of a reduction of 10,000 spaces from Thai land was helpful in alleviating pressure from the Hill for legislated reductions.

3. (S) Indian Ocean Surveillance

Ambassador Kintner stated that USN P–3 operations out of U-Tapao into the Indian Ocean surfaced last meek in the Thai press. This is a matter of concern, as a Foreign Ministry spokesman has stated that all US forces in Thailand were authorized only in connection with the Indochina conflict. Ambassador Kintner felt that there will be difficulty in obtaining continued PTO acquiescence in the P–3 Indian Ocean flights. SecDef stated that over the long haul we need Indian Ocean surveillance by the P–3 aircraft. Surveillance levels may fluctuate, but we must retain the option to perform surveillance from U-Tapao when it is needed. Ambassador Kintner said that solid rationale for the flights is required in order to regularize these operations with the RTG. Over the long term, the RTG is betting on ASEAN as a substitute tor SEATO. This causes a basic ambivalence in Thai attitudes because ASEAN has generally emphasized the long-term benefits of neutralization of Southeast Asia. SecDef said that he hoped Ambassador Kintner would be successful in preserving the P–3 operations from U-Tapao.

4. (C) OV–10 Aircraft

Ambassador Kintner said that It appeared that senior officials of the RTG still hoped to receive a squadron of OV–10 aircraft from among those OV–10's which will be redeployed out of Thailand. VADM Peet pointed out that there are no excess of OV–10's and that Congress would eye any such transfer with grave misgivings. Ambassador Kintner said that he would be discussing this issue with the Air Force in an attempt to convince the Air Force that it should reduce its requirements for OV–10's by 16. SecDef said that he understood Ambassador Kintner's position.

NOTE: On 24 May, DepSecDef signed a memorandum addressed to the Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs which discusses equipment and facilities in Thailand. The memorandum states inter alia that there are no OV–10 aircraft excess to USAF requirements.

Approved by:
[signed] Ray Peet
Date: 5/30/74

Memorandum of Conversation Prepared by:
John H. Kelly

Distribution:
SecDef (1)
DepSecDef (1
OSD/CCS (1)
CJCS (I)
CSAF (1)
DSAA (1)
State Dept-EA/TB (1)
State Dept-PM (I)
Arab Kintner (1)
ASD/lSA (1)
R&C (ISA) (1)

1 Source: Washington National Records Center, OSD Files: FRC 330–78–0011, Thailand, 091.112, 30 May 1974. Secret. Drafter by Kelly and approved by Peet. Schlesinger’s talking points from Kelly, May 23, are ibid.

Telegram 9350 From the Embassy in Thailand to the Department of State, June 7, 1974, 1156Z. [Document 386]

Telegram 9350 From the Embassy in Thailand to the Department of State, June 7, 1974, 1156Z.1

June 7, 1974, 1156Z

TELEGRAM
Department of State
BANGKOK 9350

O 071156Z JUN 74

FM AMEMBASSY BANGKOK
TO SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 3993

NODIS
FOR SECRETARY KISSINGER

E.O. 11652: XGDS-IMPOSSIBLE TO DETERMINE
TAGS: MILI, EAID, TH
SUBJ: THE DILEMMA IN U.S.-THAI RELATIONS; CONTINUED DEMANDS BUT DWINDLING RESOURCES

1. I HAD HOPED TO MEET YOU IN WASHINGTON, BUT ONLY THE LAST DAY OF MY RECENT CONSULTATION COINCIDED WITH THE FIRST DAY OF YOUR RETURN FROM YOUR HIGHLY SUCCESSFUL FOUR WEEK MARATHON ON THE DAMASCUS-TEL AVIV SHUTTLE. CONGRATULATIONS! BECAUSE I BELIEVE YOU SHOULD BECOME PERSONALLY AWARE OF TRENDS POTENTIALLY ADVERSE TO U.S. INTERESTS IN THAILAND, I AM SENDING THIS PERSONAL MESSAGE TO YOU IN THE HOPES THAT, DESPITE ITS NECESSARY LENGTH, YOU WILL READ IT BEFORE YOU TAKE OFF MONDAY ON YOUR NEXT JOURNEY. IN BRIEF, MY MESSAGE IS THAT YOUR PARIS ACCORDS COULD BECOME UNSTUCK IF THE THAIS BECOME DISENCHANTED WITH OUR LACKADAISICAL RESPONSE THEY PERCEIVE TO BE LEGITIMATE REQUESTS LEVIED ON THE U.S.

2. WHILE IN WASHINGTON I TALKED WITH WINSTON LORD, HAL SONNENFELDT, LARRY EAGLEBERGER AND BRENT SCOWCROFT IN YOUR IMMEDIATE ENTOURAGE. IN ADDITION TO BOB INGERSOLL AND OTHERS IN EA, I TALKED TO JIM SCHLESINGER, THE JOINT CHIEFS AND OTHERS IN DOD AND COLBY AND HIS TOP EA CREW IN THE AGENCY. THE ONE IMPRESSION I TRIED TO CONVEY TO ALL THESE WORTHIES IS THAT THERE IS A SERIOUSLY WIDENING GAP BETWEEN WHAT THE PRESIDENT AND YOU WOULD LIKE US TO BE ABLE TO DO IN THAILAND AND THE MEANS THE U.S. GOVERNMENT IS MAKING AVAILABLE TO THE BANGKOK MISSION TO KEEP THE THAIS WITH US. MY MAIN TASK IS TO CONVINCE THE THAIS THAT THE U.S. CONSIDERS THAILAND'S COOPERATION WITH US TO BE SUFFICIENTLY HIGH ON THE EXISTING U.S. VALUE SCALE IN SOUTHEAST ASIA AND ELSEWHERE IN THE GLOBE, TO JUSTIFY THEIR TOLERATING A STILL LARGE, FREQUENTLY IRRITATING AND PSYCHOLOGICALLY DISTURBING U.S. PRESENCE IN THEIR MIDST.

3. THIS GAP PROBLEM IS BECOMING ACUTE AT THE VERY TIME WHEN A DECENT GROUP OF POLITICALLY INEXPERIENCED CIVILIANS IS ATTEMPTING TO STEER THAILAND TOWARD DEVELOPING THEIR VERSION OF REPRESENTATIVE DEMOCRACY, WHILE BEING SUBJECTED TO CONSTANT CRITICAL BARRAGES FIRED BY A FREE (THE ONLY ONE IN A MAJOR EAST ASIA COUNTRY EXCEPT JAPAN) AND HIGHLY IRRESPONSIBLE PRESS. THE SENSITIVE SKINS OF THE PRESENT GOVERNMENT OFFICIAL IN THAILAND ARE NOT SOOTHED BY THE FACT THAT MUCH PRESS AND STUDENT CRITICISM AGAINST THEM FOCUSES ON THEIR WILLINGNESS TO CONTINUE "SPECIAL" ARRANGEMENTS MADE IN CAMERA WITH THE USG BY THE DEPOSED MILITARY LEADERS. MANY OF THESE ARRANGEMENTS NOW SEEM PREJUDICIAL TO THAI SOVEREIGNTY.

4. THE PSYCHOLOGICAL TRAUMA OF THE PRESENT THAI LEADERS (WHO THUS FAR HAVE REMAINED REMARKABLY FRIENDLY TOWARD US) IS ENHANCED BY SOME INEXCUSABLE GAFFES COMMITTED BY MANY ELEMENTS OF THE MISSION. THE OPERATING STYLE DEVELOPED IN THE PRE-OCTOBER 1973 ENVIRONMENT IN THAILAND WAS ONE WHICH OFFICIALLY BELIEVED THAT AMERICANS COULD DO NO WRONG. A RECENT NOTABLE EXAMPLE WAS THE SCHEDULING OF A NAVY P–3 DEPARTURE FOR AN INDIAN OCEAN RECCE FLIGHT AT THE TIME NEWSMEN WERE ASSEMBLED AT U-TAPAO TO REPORT THE INITIAL DEPARTURE OF B-52'S. THIS BLOOPER NECESSITATES ME, PURSUANT TO A STATE-DOD CABLETO REQUEST OFFICIAL THAI GOVERNMENT APPROVAL OF THESE FLIGHTS SEVERAL MONTHS AFTER THE THAI MFA HAD GONE ON PUBLIC RECORD THAT ALL U.S. FORCES WERE IN THAILAND SOLELY TO SUPPORT MUTUALLY-AGREED UPON OPERATIONS IN INDOCHINA. I NEED NOT OBSERVE THAT THIS IS NOT THE IDEAL MOMENT TO PRESENT THIS PARTICULAR REQUEST.

5. AS YOU ARE ALL WELL AWARE, THAILAND HAS BECOME THE MAIN RESIDUAL U.S. OPERATING BASE IN SOUTHEAST ASIA. IF THAILAND SHOULD THIS DAY END ITS PERMISSION FOR U.S. SUPPORT ACTIVITIES INTO LAOS AND CAMBODIA, OUR FRIENDS IN THE COALITION GOVERNMENT IN LAOS WOULD COLLAPSE AND THE KHMER ROUGE WOULD TAKE OVER CAMBODIA. YOU PERSONALLY HAVE ENDORSED THE CONTRIBUTION WHICH THE U.S. AIR ARMADA, BASED ON ROYAL THAI AIR BASES, MAKES TOWARD THE DETERRENCE OF ANY FULL-SCALE RESUMPTION BY HANOI OF MILITARY OPERATIONS AGAINST SOUTH VIETNAM WHICH COULD RESULT IN THE COMPLETE WRECKAGE OF THE 1973 PARIS ACCORDS.

6. WHILE THE OPERATIONAL RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN THAILAND AND CONTINUING U.S. OPERATIONS IN INDOCHINA IS WELL KNOWN, THE BOOKKEEPING RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN U.S. DIRECT SUPPORT COSTS IN THAILAND AND THE INDOCHINA COUNTRIES IS STUDIOUSLY IGNORED BY MOST AMERICANS IN RESPONSIBLE POSITIONS, BUT IS ACUTELY OBSERVED BY COMPARABLE THAI OFFICIALS. IN SIMPLE ARITHMETIC THAILAND HAS RECEIVED SOME $2 BILLION IN U.S. MILITARY AND ECONOMIC AID SINCE 1951. THE INDOCHINA COUNTRIES RECEIVED OVER $135 BILLION. IN FY 1974 ALONE THE U.S. POURED OVER $1.2 BILLION INTO SOUTH VIETNAM, $420 MILLION INTO CAMBODIA AND SOME $200 MILLION INTO LAOS—ALMOST AS MUCH AS THAILAND HAS GOTTEN IN 23 YEARS. OUR GRANT MILITARY AND ECONOMIC AID TO THAILAND IN FY 74 WILL TOTAL ABOUT $45 MILLION (INCLUDING NAPCOTICS AND OTHER SPECIALIZED ITEMS). THUS THE INDISPENSABLE THAI BASES HAVE BEEN AND ARE BEING RETAINED AT BARGAIN PRICES.

7. THIS OBSERVATION PROVOKES OTHERS: TO WIT THAILAND HAS BEEN "SPARED THE SUFFERING OF WAR." TO THIS THE THAI RESPOND, "WE OPENED UP OUR COUNTRY TO THE AMERICANS IN THE EARLY AND MID-SIXTIES BECAUSE THEY APPEARED TO BE ABLE TO DO WHAT THEY SET OUT TO DO. IN REALITY WE ARE WORSE OFF NOW AND OUR SECURITY WEAKER IN 1974 THAN IT WAS IN 1965. CAMBODIA IS ALMOST ENGULFED BY THE KHMER ROUGE: THE LAOTIAN COALITION IS FRAGILE—THE PATHET LAO APPEAR TO BE CALLING THE SHOTS, WHILE THE NVA ARE IN PLACE ALONG 100 MILES OF THE MEKONG BORDER BETWEEN LAOS AND THAILAND. THROUGH THIS BORDER THE NORTH VIETNAMESE BACK THE COMMUNIST INSURGENCY IN NORTHEAST THAILAND AND THIS INSURGENCY GROWS STRONGER YEAR BY YEAR. AS TO THE TWO VIETNAMS, WHO CAN TELL? WE KNOW WHAT WOULD HAPPEN TO US IF THE U.S. WITHDRAWS FROM THIS PART OF THE WORLD WITHOUT FIRST MAKING US STRONG ENOUGH TO TAKE CARE OF OURSELVES."

8. THE FOREGOING NOTWITHSTANDING, THAILAND IS TREATED AS A NORMAL DEVELOPING COUNTRY IN MOST AID PLANNING AND A MINOR ALLY IN MOST MAP PROGRAMMING. IN THE LAST TWO YEARS BOTH MAP AND ECONOMIC AID TO THAILAND HAVE DROPPED PRECIPITOUSLY. TO MAKE MATTERS WORSE, WE HAVE ALREADY RENEGED ON FIRM COMMITMENTS MADE ON BOTH PROGRAMS. MAP FUNDS DIVERTED ELSEWHERE HAVE REDUCED A "FIRM" COMMITMENT OF $35.7 MILLION TO $29.7 MILLION. THE 1974 AID PROGRAMMING AMOUNTED TO $6.4 MILLION SUPPORTING ASSISTANCE AND SOME $7 MILLION IN OTHER TYPES OF AID. PERHAPS YOU DO NOT KNOW THAT $2 MILLION OF THE SUPPORTING ASSISTANCE GRANTS PROMISED TO THAILAND HAVE BEEN LOPPED OFF TO PAY FOR THE OPERATING COSTS OF ICC'S IN VIETNAM.

9. I HESITATE TO RAISE PUBLIC ANNOUNCEMENTS OF AID PLEDGES MADE BY YOU TO EGYPT AND SYRIA. I RECOGNIZE THE ESSENTIALITY OF PEACE IN THAT REGION AND THE PRICES THAT MUST BE PAID TO ACHIEVE IT. YET, ON THE DAY THE BANGKOK NEWSPAPERS REPORTED YOUR PLEDGE THAT THE USG WOULD SEEK $250 MILLION ECONOMIC AID FOR EGYPT, I HAD LUNCH WITH THANAT KHOMAN—FOR MORE THAN TEN YEARS THAILAND'S FOREIGN MINISTER AND CURRENTLY ADVISOR TO PRIME MINISTER SANYA ON FOREIGN POLICY. THANAT, WHO IS VERY INTELLIGENT, EXTREMELY WELL-INFORMED, AND AN ABRASIVE CRITIC OF MANY, BUT NOT ALL U.S. POLICIES, IS ONE OF THE VARIED THAI LEADERS I HAVE SOUGHT TO CULTIVATE. ON THE DAY ALLUDED TO, SHORTLY AFTER WE HAD EXCHANGED PLEASANTRIES, HE COMMENTED SARCASTICALLY, "AND WHAT HAS EGYPT DONE FOR YOU RECENTLY?" SOON I WILL HEAR, "AND WHAT HAS SYRIA DONE FOR YOU, MR. AMBASSADOR?"

10. I NEED NOT TELL YOU THAT PEACE IN THE MIDDLE EAST IS A PEARL WORTH ALMOST ANY PRICE—BUT YOU KNOW THAT THE WORLD IS ROUND AND THAT MOST OF THE TOP PEOPLE IN GOVERNMENTS EVERYWHERE CAN READ AND WRITE AND ADD AND SUBTRACT. THEY KNOW WHAT WE ARE DOING FOR SOME NATIONS AND THEY KNOW THE RELATIVE WELL-BEING OF OTHER COUNTRIES. THEY SENSE SOME ROUGH CORRELATION BETWEEN OUR MONETARY COMMITMENTS AND OUR VALUE SCALE OF IMPORTANCE. THE THAIS ARE A PROUD PEOPLE; THEY BELIEVE THEY DESERVE BETTER TREATMENT FROM US BECAUSE THEY STUCK OUT THEIR NECKS SO FAR ON OUR SIDE OF THE INDOCHINA STRUGGLE. I HAVE ONLY READ NEWSPAPER ACCOUNTS OF YOUR PRESENTATION TO CONGRESS ON THE AID BILL BUT I WONDER IF THAILAND RECEIVED ANY RECOGNITION FOR THE CONTRIBUTION THEY ARE MAKING VIA-A-VIS VIETNAM. THE THAI DO NOT WISH TO BE DEPENDENT UPON U.S.; A RECURRENT THEME IN MY DISCUSSIONS WITH THE PRESENT THAI LEADERS IS THEIR DESIRE TO REDUCE THE MILITARY COMPONENT OF OUR RELATIONS AND TO INCREASE THE CONOMIC PARTNERSHIP BY TRADE RATHER THAN BY ADDITIONAL AID; BUT WE NEED AT THE VERY LEAST TO KEEP AID AT THE LEVEL WE PROMISED THE THAI AT THE BEGINNING OF THIS FISCAL YEAR. THEY HAVE REQUESTED INCREASES IN TEXTILE AND SUGAR QUOTAS FOR THEIR EXPORTS INTO THE U.S. WE RECENTLY ACCORDED 2 MILLION SYE IN TEXTILES AND A SMALL (9,000 TON) INCREASE IN SUGAR. PERCENTAGE-WISE THE INCREASE SEEMED LARGE- 50PC, BUT SINCE THAILAND HAS ONLY RECENTLY BECOME A SUGAR EXPORTER SHE RANKS FAR DOWN THE QUOTA LIST IN THE AREA OF SWAZILAND.

11. THE OBVIOUS SOMETIMES NEEDS RESTATING—WE CANNOT NEGLECT THE OBLIGATIONS OF THE PAST TO WIN THE GAINS OF THE PRESENT. IF WE DO, WE RISK LOSING MUCH. PARTICULARLY IS THIS TURE IN THAILAND. THE THAIS HAVE A REMARKABLE SKILL FOR SENSING CHANGE IN THE MANNER IN WHICH OTHER NATIONS RELATE TO THEM. IF THE THAI LEADERS ARE CONVINCED THAT WE HAVE DECIDED TO THROW THEM ASIDE AS A USED TOOL—AND MANY OF THE ALREADY BELIEVE THIS—THEY WILL ASK US TO LEAVE, AND VERY UNCEREMONIOUSLY.

12. THE ISSUE REALLY COMES DOWN TO THIS, MR. SECRETARY. HOW MUCH DOES THE USG WANT IN THAILAND AND AT WHAT PRICE. WHY DON'T YOU AND YOUR POLICY PEOPLE PUT ON YOUR LONG-RANGE PLANNING HATS AND TELL ME? AND GIVE THE SAME WORD TO OTHER WASHINGTON AGENCIES. TO PARAPHRASE THE OLD AIR FORCE SLOGAN, THE IMPOSSIBLE I CAN DO RATHER EASILY, BUT MIRACLES REQUIRE A LITTLE WHEREWITHAL. KINTNER

1 Source: Library of Congress, Henry Kissinger Papers, Geopolitical File, Container CL 238, Thailand, 1974–1976. Secret; Immediate; Nodis. An unknown person marked up the telegram and sent an attached note about it to Eagleburger: “LSE A rough message which you should read. Kintner’s pulled out all the stops—and in the process overstated his case. One point—a key one—he seems to forget: our expenditures in Indochina are as much in Thailand’s interest as they are in our own. Kintner does make a valid point, however: can’t we do something more for the Thais on such aspects as sugar quotas, textiles, etc.?”

Memorandum From W.R. Smyser of the NSC Staff to Secretary of State Kissinger, Washington, August 16, 1974. [Document 387]

Memorandum From W.R. Smyser of the NSC Staff to Secretary of State Kissinger, Washington, August 16, 1974.1

Washington, August 16, 1974

MEMORANDUM
NATIONAL SECURITY COUNCIL
ACTION

August 16, 1974

MEMORANDUM FOR: SECRETARY KISSINGER
FROM: W.R. SMYSER [WRS initialed]
SUBJECT: Renewed U.S. Economic Assistance to Burma

The Burmese Government last May asked for a long-term, low-interest dollar loan of approximately $2.5 million to purchase equipment for two irrigation projects. It also expressed interest in an additional loan for at least $10 million to procure U.S. manufactured equipment also for the Burmese State Timber Board, the Construction Corporation, and the state oil corporation. This in effect would amount to a resumption of U.S. economic assistance to Burma, which effectively ended in 1969. The Burmese Government at the same time also approached India, Japan, Canada, West Germany, and the PRC for similar aid.

At Tab A is a draft State instruction to Embassy Rangoon, concurred in by the concerned agencies, which would inform the Burmese Government that: — We are sympathetic to the Burmese request, but are constrained by the limited availability of assistance funds at this time.

— We would want to channel any U.S. economic assistance that might become available through an international aid consortium, which the Burmese Government may wish to take the initiative in forming.

— We would be willing to discuss the Burmese request further with the Burmese delegates to the annual IBRD/IMF meeting next month in Washington.

The State cable also informs Embassy Rangoon — but would not pass on to the Burmese Government at this time — that we believe Burma's economic assistance requests would be strengthened by serious Burmese efforts to undertake basic structural reform of its ailing economy.

I agree with the State cable as drafted — in particular that any renewed U.S. economic assistance to Burma should be channeled through a multilateral aid mechanism and should be linked in some appropriate fashion to structural reform of Burmese economy.

I also think it would be good for us to respond as positively as we can to Burmese overtures, even though we cannot do much.

Recommendation:

That you approve the State cable at Tab A.
Approve [BS initialed]
Disapprove

Concurrence:
Mr. Ellerman

1 Source: Ford Library, National Security Adviser, Country Files, Box 2, Far East, Burma. Confidential. Sent for action. Scowcroft initialed his approval of the State cable as drafted. Concurred in by Ellerman. Tab A, the attached draft telegram, was sent to Rangoon as telegram 181158, August 18. (National Archives, Record Group 59, Central Foreign Policy Files) On August 17, Smyser sent Scowcroft another memorandum arguing for the superiority of working through an international aid consortium rather than giving bilateral aid to Burma. (Ibid.)

Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, September 12, 1974, 4 p.m. [Document 388]

Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, September 12, 1974, 4 p.m.1

Washington, September 12, 1974, 4 p.m.

MEMORANDUM
NATIONAL SECURITY COUNCIL

MEMORANDUM OF CONVERSATION:

PARTICIPANTS: Anand Panyarachun, Ambassador of Thailand
Henry A. Kissinger, Secretary of State
Arthur Hummel, Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian and Pacific Affairs
W.R. Smyser, Senior Staff Member, NSC

DATE, TIME PLACE: September 12, 1974; 4:00 p.m.
The Secretary's Office, State Department

SUBJECT: U.S.-Thai Relations

Kissinger: Your Foreign Minister is coming to New York, I understand.

Panyarachun: Yes.

Kissinger: I hope to see him there.

Hummel: Anand will also be there. He has a double position, as Ambassador here and as Ambassador at the UN.

Kissinger: If more people did that, there would be more serious work done at the UN.

Panyarachun: Some Ambassadors welcome the chance to get away from Washington to go to the UN. I do not. I find my work in Washington very important.

Hummel: Ambassador Panyarachun will again be Chairman of the group that will coordinate and make decisions on our tactics for the Cambodian representation questions.

Kissinger: What are the chances?

Panyarachun: We are changing our tactics. Last year we were able to postpone it. Since that will not work again, we are asking this year for a fact-finding committee to go to Cambodia.

Under that arrangement, the present government would stay at the UN is that correct?

Panyarachun: That depends on the military situation. Will they hold on?

Kissinger: Certainly until the vote. I do not expect a collapse in Cambodia. If our aid holds up, the stalemate will continue.

Panyarachun: Aid is the big question.

Kissinger: This morning we had a meeting with the Congressional leadership. We will try for a continuing resolution rather than to have a vote on aid before the election. That will give us the same money as last year.

Panyarachun: My government has instructed me to give full cooperation New York on this matter.

Kissinger: Good.

Hummel: Anand called on Mr. Habib this morning. They exchanged views very frankly.

Kissinger: What came out?

Panyarachun: I gave my personal views, different in some ways from my government.

Hummel: We also gave some personal judgments.

Kissinger: What is your view?

Panyarachun: We think that the relationship needs a new basis. You have cooperated with the military faction. This was understandable since the military ran the government. Now that image needs to be rectified. There are some irritants in the relationship that need to be removed.

Kissinger: Like what?

Panyarachun: Your military presence. Not the military presence itself, but the number and the way they came in. It gave the impression that Thailand is not master in its own house. We need to adjust to the new realities of the situation. There is a constitutional process now going on, with elections to be held next year and a new government to come into power. We do not want to push the United States out of the area, at least not completely or immediately. But we want to plan ahead together.

Kissinger: What do you mean?

Panyarachun: Each time you want to withdraw a few thousand men from Thailand, you tell us and we agree. It does not seem as though we have a full discussion. People know this.

Kissinger: I agree. We should have a full discussion. If you want us to stay, you should let us know, or the reverse.

Panyarachun: Right now, my government does not want you to leave. You do not want to leave. So we agree.

But the media and the academicians want to know what is going to happen. They think we should agree on a five-year plan.

Kissinger: Is that what you want? I do not always respect academicians' views.

Panyarachun: The role they will play in Thailand will be quite important.

The trouble in Thailand is that we have not thought it through ourselves. I am not speaking on instructions now. I am giving you my personal views of what I think we need to do.

Kissinger: Why can we not have a discussion?

Hummel: We did last year. It was good. We find difficulties in deciding on a terminal date because Thailand now has only a caretaker government. The new government might cut the period in half just as a matter of principle.

Panyarachun: Most Thai agree on gradual withdrawal, but my people worry that you will leave completely.

Kissinger: When will there be a government?

Hummel: Elections are planned for January.

Panyarachun: We should have a new government in March or April. I want you to assure us that we agree on gradual withdrawal. But no terminal date.

Kissinger: You can tell them that.

Panyarachun: Even better, have your Ambassador tell us. I think it makes more impact in Bangkok if it comes directly from your government. Have him say that you will withdraw gradually, but that you want to stay at this or that base.

Kissinger: That we will do.

What other problems do we have?

Panyarachun: We have no other problems. That is our problem.

Hummel: Many things that Thailand wants from us are in the economic sphere where we cannot do much. They want fertilizer, which we cannot export, and steel scrap, which is also short. But we have had good and constructive dialogue in these areas even when we have not been able to help.

Panyarachun: We also have a problem on food. There is a world food shortage. Food surplus nations are both rich, like the U.S., or poor and dependent on food exports, like Thailand. When the rich food exporting countries sell their food or give it away in our markets, they take away our export chances at a time when our import costs, as for oil, are going up.

We cannot lower our prices. We have to get full prices for our commodities these days.

Kissinger: What are you asking? That we should not harass you or that we should not give it away?

Panyarachun: We want you to try not to undersell us or to cut our markets.

Kissinger: How? What do we do now?

Hummel: We notify other countries of our sales but we do not consult with them in advance.

Kissinger: Could somebody do a paper on whom we should consult and how we should do this? I would be interested.

Panyarachun: What is your assessment of the prospects for U.S. relations with the PRC?

Kissinger: I think they are on course. The main lines of policy continue. The only problem is the Chinese domestic situation.

Panyarachun: Do you think the PRC and North Vietnam will have differences in Southeast Asia?

Kissinger: Yes, I do.

Panyarachun: There may be detente around the world but, with North Vietnam, there is no detente in Southeast Asia.

1 Source: National Archives, Record Group 59, Central Foreign Policy Files, P–770087–0333. Secret; Exdis.

Memorandum From Richard Kennedy and W.R. Smyser of the NSC Staff to the Deputy Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs (Scowcroft), Washington, September 28, 1974. [Document 389]

Memorandum From Richard Kennedy and W.R. Smyser of the NSC Staff to the Deputy Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs (Scowcroft), Washington, September 28, 1974.1

Washington, September 28, 1974

MEMORANDUM
NATIONAL SECURITY COUNCIL

September 28, 1974

MEMORANDUM FOR: BRENT SCOWCROFT
FROM: RICHARD T. KENNEDY [RTK initialed]
W.R. SMYSER

SUBJECT: Thai Force Level Plans

NSDM 249 of March 23, 1974 required:

"The Secretary of Defense in coordination with the Director of Central Intelligence and the Deputy Secretary of State should submit recommendations on alternative long term (FY 76 and beyond) U.S. military force levels in Thailand and proposed withdrawal plans to support each of the alternatives. These recommendations should be submitted not later than June 30, 1974, for consideration by the NSC Senior Review Group. "

Defense has been dragging its feet with the acquiescence and support of State. Meanwhile, Kintner has proposed in a recent cable a plan to draw down to no more than 7,000 U.S. personnel.

We must get a handle on this to get a genuine examination of the options taking into account all of our interests in Southeast Asia (which would include but not be limited to those involving Kintner's perception of our relationship with the Thai). The paper which the three agencies have worked on and on which they apparently have reached substantial agreement, would by "coincidence" almost exactly parallel the Kintner proposal and would offer no real options or analysis.

The memorandum at Tab A to Wickham would call attention to the NSDM requirement, express the President's interest in reviewing the force levels and the issues prior to the decision and request that the paper be submitted no later than October 4, 1974.

RECOMMENDATION

That you sign the attached memorandum at Tab A to General Wickham.

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Institutional Files (H-Files), Box H–245, NSDM 249, Folder 4. Secret. A handwritten notation from Scowcroft indicates that he handled the matter by phone. Tab A to Wickham was not found. In a memorandum to Scowcroft from September 30, Froebe wrote, “I understand that you have asked Defense (General Wickham) to forward the options study of our residual force presence in Thailand requested by NSDM 249 to the NSC staff by October 4.” (Ibid.)

Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, October 9, 1974, 4:30 p.m. [Document 390]

Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, October 9, 1974, 4:30 p.m.1

Washington, October 9, 1974, 4:30 p.m.

THE WHITE HOUSE
WASHINGTON
MEMORANDUM OF CONVERSATION

PARTICIPANTS: William R. Kintner, Ambassador to Thailand
Brent Scowcroft, Lieutenant General, USAF, Deputy Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs
John A. Froebe, Jr., Staff Member, NSC

DATE, TIME, AND PLACE: October 9, 1974, 4:30 p.m.
The White House

SUBJECT: Thailand's Political Outlook; U.S. Military Presence in Thailand; Growing Congressional Opposition to Foreign Assistance; Force Withdrawals; U. 5. Military Assistance to Thailand; U.S. Residual Force Presence in Thailand

Ambassador Kintner: I was able to get a ride back on SAC aircraft. I arrived in the States last Sunday. I spent last week in New York, and am now down here.

Thailand's Political Outlook

General Scowcroft: What's going on in Thailand and where is the country headed?

Ambassador Kintner: It's not yet clear. The technical school students have been helpful in the latest round in quieting the other students down. The Constitution was passed by a resounding majority.

As to the King's view of the new Constitution, he has gotten what he wanted: the Parliament will be bicameral, and he will have a Privy Council. His basic concern is that he doesn't want to walk too far away from the throne. When he did so in intervening in the overthrow of the Thanom Government he was severely criticized. Thus, he feels that if he can work through a Privy Council, his position will be much better.

U.S. Military Presence in Thailand

I want to kick around two problems. First, the question of the contract to Bird and Son for air resupply to Cambodia. I wasn't fully informed on the handling of this matter. There are quite a few things that originate in the Pentagon that I'm not fully informed on.

General Scowcroft: Jack, were we in on this and were we kept fully informed?

Mr. Froebe: For the most part we were.

Ambassador Kintner: I was also surprised by the execute order on the F-105 squadron. It came just at the time that the Secretary was sitting down with Charunphan for his bilateral at the UNGA in New York. The Secretary had told Charunphan that we would definitely consult with the Thai Government on any changes in our force levels, that we would not merely inform them of such plans. The Secretary turned to me specifically and told me to be sure that this was the case.

General Scowcroft: I'm afraid this is nothing more than a case that Defense fouled up.

Ambassador Kintner: I also understand that Clements when he was in Bangkok recently told the Thai that there would be a considerable reduction in SAC maintenance personnel at Utapao. I believe the figure involved is 650. General McGhee has told me that there would be some reduction — he mentioned a figure of 2,000 — but that he would let me know more definitely later. I understand that Clements passed this word to Chantchai.

Mr. Froebe: My understanding was that Clements had intended to pass this word to the Thai, but that he agreed with Ed Masters to let him do it, I am not aware that Ed has done so yet. [Actually, Masters consulted with the RTG during the first week in October on the withdrawal of both the F-105 squadron and the 650 personnel.]

General Scowcroft: Defense has in mind what it wants to do, and our problem is one of keeping them in line with our larger plans.

I notice that you have supported a residual force level of 7,000.

Ambassador Kintner: A level something like this.

General Scowcroft: This seems to be pretty low, one that would allow practically no combat capability.

Ambassador Kintner: I think it would depend on the composition of the package.

Also, there is a question of re-entry rights. If we could have one base in addition to Utapao, we would be in good shape, and would be able to rotate a squadron in periodically from a location such as Okinawa or even from the U.S.

General Scowcroft: There is no question about that.

Ambassador Kintner: I haven't talked with the Thai about re-entry. If the concept gets approval back here, I could work out the details with the RTAF. Under this arrangement, the bases would clearly be theirs, and we would maintain a small group as now is the case with Ubon. A basic question is how many bases we want to keep on 24 hour notice. I believe this has to be decided in Washington.

General Scowcroft: What do you see as the chance that the Thai will agree to such re-entry rights?

Ambassador Kintner: Pretty good. But MAP will probably go down further. AID now is thinking of cutting off all concessional loans. The Thai under these circumstances may say "to hell with the Americans." But if we can give the Thai things that they can't get through grant MAP, then I think we have a good chance of securing these rights.

General Scowcroft: Is there a chance that the Thai really don't want any U.S. presence at all?

Ambassador Kintner: No. Have you seen my message on our basic strategy toward Southeast Asia?

Mr. Froebe: We received it only today.

Ambassador Kintner: I spent a good deal of the summer writing it. (General Scowcroft received a call that Mr. Rumsfeld could see him. He suggested that Ambassador Kintner at the same time drop by Mr. Marsh's office, since Mr. Marsh had said that he wanted to see him when he came to meet with General Scowcroft. The meeting resumed after about 15 minutes.)

Growing Congressional Opposition to Foreign Assistance

Ambassador Kintner to Mr. Froebe: I mentioned my Southeast Asia cable to Mr. Marsh, and I would appreciate it if you would send him a copy.

I think we need to conduct an educational campaign back here on the Hill and with others, and I think this kind of cable might be helpful.

General Scowcroft: Congress is being extremely difficult these days. It wants to cut off aid to Turkey. We on the other hand want to negotiate with the Turks to get something back for the Greeks, and we need an AID package to do so. The Congressional leadership understands our strategy. But with the rest of Congress, we are up against the Greek lobby. It makes no sense whatever to cut off aid to Turkey — except for spite. At this point, the situation with the foreign aid bill is just hopeless. That's the current atmosphere. With new members after the election, we may be able to talk in serious national interest terms.

Ambassador Kintner: I have found the attitude on the Hill worse now than it was last May. I thought that Mr. Ford with his own extensive experience up there might be able to turn this around.

General Scowcroft: We have even succeeded in turning the Washington Post around on aid to Vietnam, but we can't persuade the Hill.

U.S. Force Withdrawals

On the question of the 650 SAC maintenance personnel at Utapao, we will clarify this situation. Do we need to pull anything out right now?

Ambassador Kintner: We want to keep something in reserve to be able to announce, if necessary, during the election campaign. It was useful to have the F-105 squadron come out now. We should keep in close touch on this problem. I was told by General McGhee that he wants to reduce the maintenance personnel at Utapao by 1,000-1,500. This is fine, but...

General Scowcroft: It's not fine. We definitely want to consult with you first. But would this 1,000-1,500 be in addition to the 650?

Ambassador Kintner: I don't know. McGhee's plan is to do most of the maintenance on Guam. He has been keeping me informed on this through SAC channels. I think the withdrawal of these additional personnel could be useful during the campaign.

General Scowcroft: We told Defense that it was okay on the F-105s, but absolutely no more until we receive their overall plan for a residual force level, and one that made some sense. We asked Defense why they didn't put this F-105 squadron in the 1974 package that they sent over for the President's approval last spring. We got a vague answer, something to the effect that they didn't think of it at the time.

U.S. Military Assistance to Thailand

What about the question of OV–10s? (To Mr. Froebe): Didn't Clements discuss this when he was in Bangkok recently?

Mr. Froebe: The cable report indicated that Deputy Secretary Clements brought this up with the Thai. I have learned informally, however, that he told the Thai that he would "look favorably on the transfer of 16 OV–10s when the question came up back here. You will recall that Mr. Clements told the Thai when he was there a year ago that they had a good chance of getting the OV–10s, but was overruled by Secretary Schlesinger. I hope that we are not going to mislead them twice in a row on this question.

General Scowcroft: Is there anything else?

Ambassador Kintner: I met with the Thai Defense Minister, General Khruan, for the first time about two weeks ago. He is rather elderly — in his mid 70 s — and was Army Chief of Staff about ten years ago. I talked with him and his two deputies first alone for a half an hour, and then was joined by Ed Masters and General Aderholdt. General Khruan said that they want an aircraft maintenance facility, and assistance in establishing an ammunition activity.

In response, I told them for the 55th time that we first wanted to discuss the basic internal insurgency question. Subsequently, Kriangsak gave me this paper. (General Scowcroft had a xeroxed copy of the paper made.) It is not a shopping list, and it makes sense.

My basic approach is that, if MAP goes to zero, and if we have excess defense equipment that would be useful to the Thai, this would be of considerable assistance on the problems raised in this paper. I wonder if Dick Kennedy can do anything on this? I have discussed this with Todd, the Inspector General of Foreign Assistance He seems to have been quite effective in finding excess defense equipment in various locations in the Pacific. For example, he located approximately 400 tanks in Japan recently. (To Mr. Froebe): Does this ring a bell?

Mr. Froebe: These may have been the tanks that created something of a political furor about 10-12 months ago when, after rehabbing in Japan, our Army tried to move them out back to Vietnam again. But I'm not sure whether these are the same ones you are talking about.

General Scowcroft: My general feeling is that we are at the bottom of the barrel on excess defense equipment. In the new foreign aid bill as it now stands, there is even a provision prohibiting all further transfers of excess equipment.

Ambassador Kintner: What do they want us to do — quit worldwide?

General Scowcroft: We have some hope for after the election. But our excess defense equipment is vanishing rapidly.

Ambassador Kintner: I am deeply concerned about the situation in Southeast Asia, with Vietnam in trouble and the situation in Laos looking darker.

Mr. Froebe: What do you think the chances are for turning over a substantial part of the equipment belonging to our units departing Thailand?

Ambassador Kintner: Very poor, given the statutory and regulatory prohibitions on DOD's parting with its equipment under these circumstances.

What about the transfer of the Army communications facility that I wrote you about recently?

General Scowcroft: We arc working on this.

Ambassador Kintner: This operation contains much equipment that would be useful to the Thai.

General Scowcroft to Mr. Froebe): Do you know where this stands?

Mr. Froebe: No sir, but I will check. We received the Ambassador's letter only very recently.

Ambassador Kintner: Someone told me that this has been in the NSC Staff since last January,

Mr. Froebe: I know that this is definitely not the case.

U.S. Residual Force Presence in Thailand

General Scowcroft: We are supposed to get the long-range residual force level plan shortly.

Ambassador Kintner: I talked with Habib about this today. He told me that state is sending the plan back to Defense. I believe the level should be somewhere between 7,000 and 10,000 If we are to make the deterrent more effective, we should keep at least one base such as Udorn operational and rotate units in and out.

I hope we can be more successful on the foreign aid problem.

General Scowcroft: It doesn't look too hopeful. We may not even get an aid bill.

Ambassador Kintner: Has Haig packed up for departure to his new post?

General Scowcroft: He is now on two weeks vacation. When he comes back, he will have briefings. November 1 is his reporting date. (There followed a discussion on General Goodpaster's quick retirement.)

Ambassador Kintner: When you get the final version of the long-range force plan over here, would you send me a backchannel informing me?

General Scowcroft: Yes.

What do you see as the prospect for the elections?

Ambassador Kintner: They will stay on schedule. Krit will help keep the situation on track.

General Scowcroft: Is it a working system?

Ambassador Kintner: I don't know at this point. They must get someone who can keep the country on an even keel. Dawee may run. Krit doesn't want to become a political leader now. We have others who are interested, however, such as Kasem, head of the Committee of 99, and Seni, although he is too old.

General Scowcroft: What is the attitude of the Thai military toward us?

Ambassador Kintner: Very good. But they don't think that we are giving them enough to enable them to stick their necks out for us. They think that they're doing more for us than we are for them. We must continue supporting them, now is not the time to try to wean them away from the level of support that we are currently furnishing.

(After a final exchange of amenities, Ambassador Kintner took his leave of General Scowcroft.)

1 Source: Library of Congress, Memoranda of Conversations, Container CL 284, Staff and Others, 1974. Secret; Sensitive. On September 27, in telegram 15626 from Bangkok, Kintner expostulated on “Southeast Asia in a Global Context.” (National Archives, Record Group 59, Central Foreign Policy Files)

Minutes of the Secretary of State’s Staff Meeting, Washington, November 14, 1974, 8:11 a.m. [Document 391]

Minutes of the Secretary of State’s Staff Meeting, Washington, November 14, 1974, 8:11 a.m.1

Washington, November 14, 1974, 8:11 a.m.

In Attendance (Thurs., 11/14/74)

Secretary of State Kissinger (presiding as Chairman)

D - Mr. Ingersoll
P - Mr. Sisco
T - Mr. Maw
M - Mr. Brown
C - Mr. Sonnenfeldt
AP - Mr. Mulcahy (Acting)
ARA - Mr. Rogers
EA - Mr. Habib
EUR - Mr. Hartman
NEA - Mr. Atherton
INR - Mr. Hyland
S/P - Mr. Lord
EB - Mr. Enders
S/PRS - Mr. Anderson
S/AM - Mr. McCloskey
PM - Mr. Stern (Acting)
IO - Mr. Buffum
H - Mr. Holton
L - Mr. Aldrich (Acting)
S/S - Mr. Springsteen

[Omitted is material unrelated to Thailand.]

SECRETARY KISSINGER: Phil?

MR. HABIB: Thanom, the former Prime Minister of Thailand, is in the United States in Boston.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: But we should call him —

MR. HABIB: But the Thai Government approached us on a most urgent basis - the Thai Government, at their request.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: I understand. I thought he came — I understand the problem.

MR. HABIB: Of course, the fact that he's not going back at this time is significant enough. I thought we ought to transmit the message to him. I think this may have some impact — I think, given the attitude of the Thai Government and the formal request they made of us —

SECRETARY KISSINGER: Yes, but given the fact that Thanom was a close friend of ours for 10 years—

MR. HABIB: If he's still a close friend of ours he wouldn't go back to Thailand at this time because the Embassy and his following are absolutely convinced that Thanom would be extremely disturbing.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: Then why is he going back?

MR. HABIB: The reason he gives is his father is ill; he wants to pay his respects to his father.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: And for what reason do you think he's going back?

MR. HABIB: I think it's because of this hiatus between the previous government and the elections of next month. I mean there are elections in Thailand in January. The campaign will soon be beginning.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: I mean why should we keep him out?

MR. HABIB: I was suggesting —

SECRETARY KISSINGER: We don't suggest anything. We're going to transmit the request of the Thai Government and we'll stay out of it.

MR. HABIB: Well, we'll transmit the request, but supposing he asks what you think.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: Well, look, he knows. The next thing we know, we're going to have an anti-American government which is going to ask us to keep all persons out on the basis that it's going to be highly disturbing to him should we do that too.

MR. HABIB: No. It's not in our interest for him to go back. The government with whom we've working closely with —

SECRETARY KISSINGER: Well, wait a minute. It's one thing to say we shouldn't bring him back — no question about it. The next question is whether a man who's a close ally of ours for 10 years, or whatever period it was — certainly for the period I was here — he was in office a few years before — we shouldn't tell him to go back to his own country. That's a totally different proposition; we should never have initiated it. I wouldn't bet my —

MR. HABIB: At least from the cable traffic I can't determine — we didn't initiate it, no. The cable traffic makes it quite clear this came to us first, and then they came to us very formally at cabinet request.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: And we will transmit that request.

MR. HABIB: Well, we're trying to do two things. We're trying to get them to do part of their own business also, but as usual in these cases — and it's true they know that, the fact that we transmit the request for them that's why they asked us to. It has a certain impact on Thanom himself.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: Look, they've got an Embassy. Their Ambassador could easily call on Thanom himself to do it. We're already getting ourselves involved by acting as intermediary. I do not believe this is something we should —

MR. HABIB: We have a definite interest in him not going back.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: Why?

MR. HABIB: Because it would be a very disturbing factor at a time when you're going through a very touchy process of trying to re-establish a government.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: Why does he think then he's got something to gain?

MR. HABIB: Because he wants to go back. There's constant talk about the army being dissatisfied with the process laid down with this new constitution — that the army might step in and do this. He still has his supporters, his cohorts.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: Well, we were one of his supporters. Let's have a little minimum of decency about the relationship here. For 10 years we were his supporters.

MR. HABIB: We today are firm on that — the opposition to his coming here for 10 years. I don't think it's a question —

SECRETARY KISSINGER: For God sakes, here's a government that let us use the country when we were fighting a war in North Viet-Nam — with less conditions than almost anyone else. I mean you can't be nice to a leader of such a country that exposed himself for us by letting him come to the United states.

MR. HABIB: I said there was a great deal of opposition to his coming. I think we're also dealing with a government which is still providing facilities that we require and will continue to do so if we develop and maintain the kind of relationship with him that we need to. And, as I say, this is a very, very shaky period, in my opinion — the idea of going from what you now have to elections and to some form of constitutional —

SECRETARY KISSINGER: Well, they're clearly going to neutralism, which, under the present conditions of Southeast Asia, is probably not the best.

MR. HABIB: Not quickly, because of their recognition of their dependence upon us.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: Well, you better let me know what you're doing with Thanom.

MR. HABIB: Well, that's what we're doing today — just to pass the message, if he asks our opinion. If you want to leave the latter part of the instruction off, we'll cancel it. We have somebody who knows him very well.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: Who? How about giving me the the name?

MR. HABIB: I don't know him.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: My inclination is to pass the message and not to add our opinion. I don't think he'll ask our opinion.

MR. HABIB: It will make more of a difference if we answer his question — yes.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: He hasn't asked it yet.

MR. HABIB: Well, the presumption is he will.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: The presumption is if I authorize it we'll have it before he asks the question.

MR. HABIB; Well, I don't think you ought to do things halfway. If you pass the message, you ought to be willing to indicate the very process of passing the message, associate yourself with the content of the message — and, given the complete unanimity of the feeling, that if he returns it will be an extremely disturbing factor and could undo the very careful step-by-step process over one whole year that this thing has been working out in Thailand. For a year —

SECRETARY KISSINGER How do we know he's coming back at all — or is that another —

MR. HABIB: No, that is not. That's a firm report that he's thinking seriously of returning — immediately.

MR. LORD: Is there a chance his father is sick, I mean?

MR. HABIB: Yes, his father is sick. I mean that's one problem: His father is sick.

There's a major issue at stake: It's the stability of a system that you carefully constructed for over a year. I mean now everything — no decision is easy in these matters; it's a tough decision. But the decision — everybody agrees, from the Thais to the Embassy to the people who have been following this and Thanom's career — is if he goes back, it's going to put the cat among the birds. Now, if you want to put the cat among the birds, O.K. It's their country; let it happen. But if that happens, you then go back to a chaotic situation.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: Let's put it this way.

MR. HABIB: Now, that's the estimate. I don't know what your people (addressing Mr. Hyland) estimate.

MR. HYLAND: I don't know either.

SECRETARY KISSINGER Well, why don't we see what you people estimate?

MR. HABIB: Well, the CIA estimates the same thing. That guy's an operator.

MR. ATHERTON: He's an operator.

MR. HABIB: Well, everybody who worked in that place is an operator! (Laughter.)

SECRETARY KISSINGER: If it would drag the students right out in the street, how much stability have we constructed?

MR. HABIB: it's an inherently unstable situation. You have the army sitting, waiting to see what happens. The assumption is the army will continue to sit in the wings and see what happens. Let the elections take place; let the new government be installed. And then if the new government fails over a period of time, then presumably other arrangements will be made. But nobody wants the army to decide that they're going to short-circuit.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: Why is it so violently against the American interests to have the army take over?

MR. HABIB: I don't think they can govern.

SECRETARY KISSINGER Well, have we seen if anyone else can govern?

MR. HABIB: Yes — for over a year.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: Well, how do you know the army can't govern? They governed for 10 years and more.

MR. HABIB: The careful arrangement was it would not deteriorate —

SECRETARY KISSINGER: Which government in Southeast Asia hasn't been overthrown in a 10-year period?

MR. HABIB: Plus the fact if the army takes over, you may get a period of short-term stability, in which you apparently discover you've got a situation in which there's constant pressure against it. We've been thrown once again with the position — what do we do with our own requirements, our own relations with that country?

SECRETARY KISSINGER: We'll have trouble in Congress.

MR. HABIB: More than trouble in Congress. Trouble in Thailand.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: Well, we'll apparently have trouble in Thailand either way, because if the army is out —

MR. HABIB: You've got to have some direction in which you try to go — some objectivity. The best hope would be for this constitution process, which so far has moved along rather well. As a matter of fact, it exceeded the expectations of those who expected it to flounder a year ago, had the army taken over. What has happened is it has not floundered, but it's in that crucial transitional period between that appointed government and the successor elected government.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: I think it's too early to tell.

MR. HABIB: Well, you'd like us then not to follow the second part of the scenario.

SECRETARY KISSINGER Yes. I'd just as soon not have him go back.

MR. HABIB: I don't like to go halfway and then have him go back.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: Well, I'd like to talk to you at some point about that whole perception of the problem. I just don't think we're in the business of installing governments around the world; it is just not our job. We're in the business of conducting foreign policy; we're not a social reform school.

MR. HABIB: Yes, but we have certain objectives in Thailand. And those objectives would include at least the motive of a stable government with which we could deal —

SECRETARY KISSINGER: That's right.

MR. HABIB: — and which pursues objectives synonymous with our own, or coincident to our own.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: I have never heard the argument, through our associations with Thailand, that this was better achieved by a civilian government — never. That's a new argument that came up within a year after they got a civilian government.

MR. HABIB: On the contrary. The people would say the best way to achieve it would be to deal with the government they had. That government was no longer able to govern. There's a new evolution in Thailand which could fit our objectives just as well.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: Well, the new evolution is going to go to neutralism, to which I have no objection. I mean it's obvious what the Thais are doing. They're going to go towards neutralism.

MR. HABIB: Within certain structures, that's not necessarily the worst thing that could happen.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: No. I'm not saying it is. And we certainly shouldn't resist it. But we shouldn't kid ourselves either.

MR. HABIB: They're cautious.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: They're always cautious. They're going to have ties with others before they break their ties with us. But they're inevitably moving in that direction.

MR. HABIB: No — we're no longer interested in a long-term presence in Thailand.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: Then we shouldn't kid ourselves as to what's happening. What's happening is a Southeast Asian neutralist regime that will move into the general —

MR. HABIB: Well, I think you get kind of upset with what people are predicting. We could get an accelerated move, which would be more than neutralism.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: The only dispute is how much arm we should put on him to keep him out.

MR. HABIB: You ought to make it a little lighter.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: But I don't think it going to be so light when we get through with him! (Laughter.)

MR. HABIB: Well, let me control the heaviness of the arm. If you want it to be a light arm, it would be a light arm.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: I would like to see first what happens after we transmit the message —

MR. HABIB: All right.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: — and maybe on that basis alone, after transmitting the message — he's not stupid —

MR. HABIB: No. A light message. It appeals to his patriotism; it's for his own government.

[Omitted is material unrelated to Thailand.]

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Transcripts of Secretary of State Kissinger’s Staff Meetings, 1973–1977, E5177, Box 5. Secret.

Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to Secretary of Defense Schlesinger, Washington, November 14, 1974. [Document 392]

Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to Secretary of Defense Schlesinger, Washington, November 14, 1974.1

Washington, November 14, 1974

THE WHITE HOUSE
WASHINGTON

November 14, 1974

MEMORANDUM FOR: THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE
SUBJECT: Long-Term US Military Force Levels in Thailand (FY 1976 and Beyond)

Your October 11, 1974, response to NSDM 249 concerning alternative U.S. military force levels in Thailand has been reviewed. As you have indicated, Options 1 and 4 do not represent viable alternatives for our long-term presence in Thailand. The remaining two options both call for a residual level of 7,000 spaces but differ by three months in arriving at that figure.

In order to consider a broader range of alternatives the President requests you forward an additional option, including manpower requirements, that would fall between the end CY-1974 force level in Thailand of 27,000 personnel and the 7,000 man level proposed in Options 2 and 3. As an illustrative force this level might include 4 tactical fighter squadrons, an AC-130 squadron, a tactical reconnaissance element, a B-52 force of about nine aircraft, and an appropriate number of supporting aircraft.

[signed]
Henry A. Kissinger

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Institutional Files (H-Files), Box H–245, NSDM 249, Folder 4. Secret. Kissinger received this memorandum to sign under a covering memorandum, November 1, from Kennedy, which stated, “It is apparent that a basic difference of opinion exists between Defense and State, on one hand, and the CIA and ourselves on the other, concerning the ability of US combat air units in Thailand to exert any meaningful influence vis-à-vis the Hanoi leadership.” Schlesinger’s October 11 memorandum to Kissinger on “Long-Term US Military force Levels in Thailand (FY 1976 and Beyond),” is attached but not published.

National Intelligence Estimate 52–1–75, Washington, January 9, 1975. [Document 393]

National Intelligence Estimate 52–1–75, Washington, January 9, 1975.1

Washington, January 9, 1975

PROSPECTS FOR THAILAND AND IMPLICATIONS FOR THE US

PRECIS

— The government which emerges from the elections this January will be a weak and unstable coalition that is likely to undergo frequent changes of alignment and personalities in the next year or so.

— Whatever the changes, the government will remain conservative in orientation and will be strongly influenced by the Thai military.

— It will, however, be more responsive to public opinion than was the former military regime.

— For the next year or so, there is no chance of a government emerging that would move Thailand significantly to the left.

— The Thai Government will face domestic economic problems which are in part a reflection of recent global economic difficulties, but in Thailand's case the economy has the basic strength to weather the problems ahead.

— In the course of the next year, it is likely that the weakness and instability of the new parliamentary system will lead the military to play a stronger behind-the-scenes role in the government.

— There would have to be a marked deterioration of public order and governmental effectiveness, however, before the military would attempt an open return to military rule.

— For security reasons the Thai will continue to accept the need for a limited US military presence in Thailand, at least for the next year. But they will probably urge that the gradual reduction of US forces continue, while accepting US recommendations on the scope and pace of those reductions.

— The Thai will continue to see value in a close relationship with the US, but they will seek significant readjustments of that relationship.

— They will be less willing to cooperate across-the-board on US policy matters in Asia in the next year because of a resurgence of nationalistic sentiment that maintains Thailand has become too dependent on the US.

— They will seek to reduce US special privileges in Thailand.

— There is a chance now that the Thai might impose restrictions on the use of Thai bases for air combat or combat support missions over Indochina. As US aid levels and military strength in Thailand are further reduced that chance will increase.

— Over the longer term, Thai foreign policy is likely to move further away from its close relationship with and dependence on the US.

[Omitted here is the body of the paper.]

1 Source: Central Intelligence Agency, OPI 122 (National Intelligence Council), Job 79R01012A, Box 497, Folder 6, NIE 52–1–75. Secret. Concurred in by all members of the U.S. Intelligence Board except the FBI, who abstained. Thailand’s election occurred on January 26.

Memorandum From Richard T. Kennedy of the NSC Staff to the Deputy Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs (Scowcroft), Washington, January 15, 1975. [Document 394]

Memorandum From Richard T. Kennedy of the NSC Staff to the Deputy Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs (Scowcroft), Washington, January 15, 1975.1

Washington, January 15, 1975

MEMORANDUM
NATIONAL SECURITY COUNCIL
ACTION

January 15, 1975

MEMORANDUM FOR: BRENT SCOWCROFT
FROM: RICHARD T. KENNEDY [RTK initialed]
SUBJECT: Long Term U.S. Military Force Levels in Thailand

As you know, we have been unable to pry loose the additional option on U.S. military force levels in Thailand that we requested in November. This has not only precluded us from making a recommendation on the Thailand question but also on the broader overseas base realignment package that was submitted to Secretary Kissinger by Deputy Secretary Clements on December 9, 1974. The additional Thailand option was due back to us by December 5th. After repeated phone calls and conversations with various Defense representatives we have been able to learn only that Secretary Schlesinger refuses to forward the option because he thinks he already has a decision made by Secretary Kissinger at their last breakfast meeting. In the meantime, it is impossible for us to go forward without a Defense paper.

RECOMMENDATION

That you sign the attached memorandum to General Wickham or alternatively, convey the request via a telephone call.

Dick Smyser concurs

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Institutional Files (H-Files), Box H–245, NSDM 249, Folder 4. Secret. Sent for action. Concurred in by Smyser. Scowcroft wrote, “Done,” near the bottom of the page, indicating that he handled the matter by phone. The attached memorandum to Wickham on “Long Term U.S. Military Force Levels in Thailand” is not published.

Minutes of the Secretary of State’s Staff Meeting, Washington, February 6, 1975, 8 a.m. [Document 395]

Minutes of the Secretary of State’s Staff Meeting, Washington, February 6, 1975, 8 a.m.1

Washington, February 6, 1975, 8 a.m.

Secretary's 8:00 a.m. Staff Meeting
Thursday, February 6, 1975

PRESENT:
THE SECRETARY OF STATE - HENRY A. KISSINGER
D - Mr. Ingersoll
E - Mr. Robinson
T - Mr. Maw
M - Ambassador Brown
C - Mr. Sonnenfeldt
AF - Mr. Mulcahy, Acting
ARA - Mr. Rogers
EA - Mr. Habib
EUR - Mr. Hartman
NEA - Mr. Atherton
INR - Mr. Hyland
S/P - Mr. Lord
EB - Mr. Boeker, Acting
S/PRS - Mr. Anderson
PM - Mr. Vest
IO - Ambassador Blake, Acting
H - Mr. Jenkins, Acting
L - Mr. Leigh
S/S - Mr. Springsteen

[Omitted is material unrelated to Thailand and Burma.]

MR. HABIB: I have got a lot of other things. But I just want to say one short thing. While our attention is focused on Cambodia and Vietnam — we should also be aware that there are all sorts of things going on in places like Korea, the Philippines, Thailand and Burma, which are all in some position of impending difficultly.

In Thailand, for example, you are about to get the greatest rip-off of an election I have ever seen with the military-backed parties ganging up and appearing to be — they are going to exclude the party that won the greatest share of the votes. That is not yet firm. But that looks to be in the making.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: Can we stay out of that one?

MR. HABIB: We not only can but we must stay out of it. But by staying out it means we must not support any of the military efforts to make this kind of rigmarole.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: What does that mean?

MR. HABIB: I always worry about who is talking to the military in a place like that. But I will follow up on it — who might be urging them on. We have always had a very friendly relationship with the military in Thailand. They are easier to see. They all speak English.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: But why the hell can't we — why is it such a disaster for us if the military —

MR. HABIB: It is not going to be a disaster for us. What will probably happen is you will get this new government on some basis of stable internal support. It is going to be immediately launched in a period in which it will receive considerable and substantial resistance from within the entire body politic. It is their problem.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: That depends on the perception of the Thai body politic — which may not be true.

MR. HABIB: No. I think the party that did as well as that democratic party in the election, if it is frozen out of power, will not sit still.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: What is it going to do f it does not sit still?

MR. HABIB: You have the whole business of students, who are sitting and waiting in the wings.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: Only as long as they are not opposed. I don't think Thai students are more heroic than ours. This is the first time I hear of it. It is one of the great values of these staff meetings —- that I get informed on current problems.

MR. HABIB: Well, the latest development happened last night. Unless you got up seven o'clock in the morning and read the cable, you would not know about this one. Until today the coalition has been put together, including the major party. Last night there was a rapid move, including the purchase of a substantial number of votes in the National Assembly by —

SECRETARY KISSINGER: Outrageous. We cannot sit still for this.

MR. HABIB: I think it is fascinating.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: The first time in history this has happened.

MR. HABIB: Yes— in some ways you are right, It is the first time in Thai history it happened because they have not had the kind of circumstances, not because they haven't got the proclivities.

But the Philippines is another problem.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: What is going on there?

MR. HABIB: The rebellion is getting serious. Marcos is quite concerned. They are now approaching us for arms to equip separate battalions.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: What is our position — conciliation and not confrontation?

MR. HABIB: That cable also came in just early this morning.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: Do we say conciliation and not confrontation with the rebels?

MR. HABIB: He tried conciliation in a meeting.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: No — just to get you know my sympathy. I was being sarcastic. I am in favor of giving him arms.

MR. HABIB: I would be prepared to promote conciliation if possible.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: I want you to promote giving him arms.

MR. HABIB: This is one of those circumstances that unless he shows a bit of strength —

SECRETARY KISSINGER: I agree with you.

MR. HABIB: — he is not going to resolve this question; especially when the rebels are getting their arms from Libya.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: Sullivan can't be ambassador somewhere without having a war. Did you ship him his uniform?

MR. HABIB: He doesn't get any uniform for this.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: What are you doing about arms?

MR. HABIB: These are battalion level, small arms. They are willing to pay cash for them.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: In what time frame can you do it?

MR. HABIB: Tomorrow.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: What is going on in Korea?

MR. HABIB: In Korea you have the referendum due on 12 February, a referendum in which everybody stands up and says "We think he is just great." The referendum is very interesting. Nobody can stand up and say that you cannot vote for that referendum. Everybody is allowed to vote. By law you are prohibited to campaign against the referendum, to make any public statement against it, to have a meeting against it.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: Like the Democratic caucus.

MR. HABIB: So we have about ten days to two weeks of some problems of internal politics. But he will keep the Army tight enough so it won't get completely out of hand.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: But what is the point of a referendum?

MR. HABIB: It shows that it is democratic and the people support him.

MR. MAW: He wouldn't tell anybody what day it was going to be.

MR. HABIB: By law you only have to tell them ten days in advance. He gave them eleven days. That's not bad. But in any event, quietly, in its own little way, Burma is also under martial law. But nobody pays much attention to Burma. And we really don't worry much about that. Except for Congressman Wolfe who worries about the narcotics.

I always talk to you about Vietnam and Cambodia. I thought I would talk to you about something else.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: But you start from the presupposition that it is in American foreign policy interest to intervene in martial law cases.

MR. HABIB: I never said that. I just wanted to add to the current briefing. As a matter at fact, I think in every one of these cases, except in the case of the Philippines, where there is some action for us to take, in all the others there is no action for us to take.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: Who is our Ambassador in Burma?

MR. HABIB: Dave Osborn

SECRETARY KISSINGER: Oh, yes.

[Omitted is material unrelated to Thailand, Burma, the Philippines, and Korea.]

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Transcripts of Secretary of State Kissinger’s Staff Meetings, 1973–1977, E5177, Box 6. Secret.

Memorandum From the Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to President Ford, Washington, February 6, 1975. [Document 396]

Memorandum From the Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to President Ford, Washington, February 6, 1975.1

Washington, February 6, 1975

THE WHITE HOUSE
WASHINGTON
ACTION

February 6, 1975

MEMORANDUM FOR: THE PRESIDENT
FROM: HENRY A. KISSINGER [HAK initialed]
SUBJECT: Long- Term US Military Force Levels in Thailand

In response to NSDM 249 on US Deployments in Thailand, the Secretary of Defense has forwarded five options for a US residual force level in Thailand (Tab B). The Thai have been exerting almost constant pressure since the overthrow of the military regime in October 1973 for us to present our long-term US military force plan. The recent election of a non-military coalition to the Thai National Assembly would indicate that this pressure will intensify until our decision is announced. The Thai are not opposed to a long-term US military presence but they do feel that it should be considerably less than our current force of approximately 27,000 military manpower spaces. At the same time, they believe we have been slow in bringing them in on our withdrawal intentions.

The key considerations are (1) the residual force level appropriate to support continuing US interests in the area and (2) the pace at which we make our reductions. It is important that we accomplish our force reductions in a manner that will not be misinterpreted by Hanoi as a diminution of our resolve and readiness to carry out military operations in the area. To do this we must have a credible force and facilities available through the period that has the highest potential for an all-out North Vietnamese offensive — the 1975-76 dry season (November 1975-April 1976) — and the months preceding our own national election.

A decision on our long-range force plan at this time, followed by US-Thai consultations, will do much to defuse the issue in Bangkok and preserve the degree of flexibility which we will need as we execute the plan.

The chart below summarizes the five options presented by Defense:

Personnel A/C Air Bases

Option 1 21,300 (Indefinitely) 15 B-52s 3 Bases

4 Tac Air Squadrons

1 AC-HO Squadron

17 KC-135 Tankers

USN P–3 Detachment

Option 2 12,000 (by May 1, 1976) 6 B-52s 1 Base

2 Tac Air Squadrons

1 AC-130 Squadron

7,000 (by Sept 30, 1976) 1 F-4 Squadron

Option 3 7,000 (by June 30, 1976) 1 F-4 Squadron 1 Base 1 Base

6 RF-4s

Option 4 3,300 (by June 30, 1976) No combat A/C 1 Base

Then reduce further if Thai agree to manage bases and to let us rotate combat aircraft.

Option 5* 10,000 (by the end of FY 76) 2 Fighter Squadrons 2 Bases

6 Tac Rec Aircraft

4 U-2 Rs

3 P–3 Aircraft

*Not originally submitted.

Defense now favors Option 5, reducing US forces to a level of 10,000 spaces by July 1, 1976. All airbases except Utapao and Korat would be closed by the end of FY 76. State also favors Option 5 but would delay reaching the 10, 000 level until October 1, 1976.

After reviewing alternative force levels, I recommend a modified version of the favored Defense option in combination with the retention of Udorn Airbase in caretaker status at least through FY 77. This option would include the following: — Reduction of military manpower spaces from 21,300 on June 30, 1975 (after the current dry season) to 12, 000 on June 30, 1976 (end of the next dry season). The largest portion of the reduction in actual combat elements would take place in the fourth quarter of FY 76. This level would provide six B-52s, two fighter squadrons, one AC-130 gunship squadron, six RF-4s, three UN P–3s, four U-2Rs, and necessary support aircraft.

— Further reduction to 10,000 spaces by December 31, 1976 by withdrawal of the six B-52s and the AC-130 gunship squadron. The bulk of the reduction would take place in the second quarter of FY 1977.

— Retention of Udorn Airbase in caretaker status at least through FY 77. (Specific timing for termination of US operations at Utapao and Korat Airbases would be decided later. Operations at Udorn would be terminated in the second quarter of FY 1976. )

The purpose of this option would be to leave a reasonably effective fighting force in place together with sufficient facilities and access rights during the present dry season, the 1975-76 dry season, and the months preceding our own national election. These are periods during which we expect high levels of North Vietnamese military activity and we need to be prepared for them as well as to have enough forces to serve as a deterrent. The CIA also believes that the extent and rate of our Thailand drawdown could affect the timing of a North Vietnamese decision to launch a major offensive (Tab C). At the same time, we want to reduce our forces for very real political and budgetary reasons. This option would meet those concerns. It would also leave a sufficiently large residual force and enough active and caretaker bases to give us some flexibility through the end of FY 77.

RECOMMENDATION

That you authorize me to sign the attached National Security Decision Memorandum. (Tab A)
Approve [GRF initialed]
Disapprove

1 Source: Ford Library, NSC Institutional Files (H-Files), Box H–57, NSDMs, NSDM 286, Long-Term U.S. Military Force Levels in Thailand (2). Secret. Sent for Action. Ford initialed his approval of Tab A, not attached, which became NSDM 286. Tab B apparently refers to two memoranda from Schlesinger to Kissinger on “Long-Term US Military Force Levels in Thailand (FY 76 and Beyond),” the first, which presented four options, dated October 11, 1974 and the second, presenting a fifth option, dated January 18, 1975. Both are attached but not published. Tab C, not attached, is apparently a reference to Colby’s Memorandum to Thomas Bigley, then Acting Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense for East Asia and Pacific Affairs, of July 9, 1974 providing comments on Defense’s memorandum entitled “Long-Term U.S. Military Force Levels in Thailand (FY 1976 and Beyond).” (Ibid., Box 245, Folder 4, NSDM 249)

National Security Decision Memorandum 286, Washington, February 7, 1975. [Document 397]

National Security Decision Memorandum 286, Washington, February 7, 1975.1

Washington, February 7, 1975

NATIONAL SECURITY COUNCIL
WASHINGTON, D.C. 20506

February 7, 1975

National Security Decision Memorandum 286

TO: The Secretary of Defense
The Deputy Secretary of state
The Director of Central Intelligence

SUBJECT: Long-Term US Military Force Levels in Thailand

The President has reviewed the options for long-term US military force levels in Thailand submitted in response to NSDM 249, US Deployments in Thailand.

In order to retain a credible and flexible combat capability at an acceptable cost during the next two years, the President has decided the following: 1. After the current dry season is over, reduce the US military force level in Thailand from the present 27,000 military spaces clown to 21,300 by the end of FY 1975.

2. Reduce military manpower spaces from 21,300 on July 1, 1975 to 12,000 on June 30, 1976. The bulk of the combat forces involved in this reduction are to be withdrawn in the fourth quarter of FY 1976. This level should provide for a combat force of six B-52s, two fighter squadrons, one AC-130 squadron, six RF-4s, three USN P–3s, four U-2Rs, and necessary support aircraft.

3. Reduce to 10,000 military manpower spaces by December 31, 1976, with the bulk of this reduction taking place in the second quarter of FY 1977. This level should provide for a combat force of two fighter squadrons, six RF-4s, three USN P–3s, four U-2Rs, and necessary support aircraft.

4. Retain Udorn Airbase in caretaker status at least through FY 1977. Specific timing for termination of U.S. operations at Utapao and Korat Airbases will be determined later. Plan on using Udorn for training operations by tactical air units on temporary deployment from other bases in the Pacific area.

5. The Department of state, in coordination with the Department of Defense arid the United States Embassy Bangkok, should begin discussions with the Royal Thai Government to inform them of our Thailand residual force planning, to negotiate an acceptable contract arrangement for maintaining Udorn Airbase in caretaker status, and to negotiate reentry and rotation rights at that base. If those rights cannot be negotiated, this decision on size and pace of withdrawals remains subject to review.

6. No public announcements on these withdrawals will be made until after the respective dry seasons.

[signed]
Henry A. Kissinger

cc: Chairman, Joint Chiefs of Staff
Director, Office of Management and Budget

1 Source: Ford Library, National Security Decision Memoranda and Study Memoranda, Box 1. Secret. Copies were sent to the Director of the Office of Management and Budget and to the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff.

Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, April 25, 1975, 4:30 p.m. [Document 398]

Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, April 25, 1975, 4:30 p.m.1

Washington, April 25, 1975, 4:30 p.m.

[not declassified in time for publication]

1 Source: Ford Library, National Security Adviser, Memoranda of Conversation, Box 11. Secret.

Telegram 8690 From the Embassy in Thailand to the Department of State, May 13, 1975, 1315Z. [Document 399]

Telegram 8690 From the Embassy in Thailand to the Department of State, May 13, 1975, 1315Z.1

May 13, 1975, 1315Z

TELEGRAM
Department of State
BANGKOK 8690

Z 131315Z MAY 75

FM AMEMBASSY BANGKOK
TO SECSTATE WASHDC FLASH 4155
BANGKOK 8690
NODIS

E.O. 11652: XGDS-3 INDEFINITE
TAGS: PFOR, TH, US

SUBJECT: MEASURES TO OBTAIN RELEASE OF THE MAYAGUEZ
REF: BANGKOK 8684

1. AS THE DEPARTMENT IS AWARE, I HAD ABSOLUTELY NO ADVANCE WORD THAT MILITARY ACTION WAS TO BE TAKEN BY U.S. AIRCRAFT BASED IN THAILAND TO OBTAIN THE RELEASE OF THE MAYAGUEZ. AT 1730 HOURS BANGKOK TIME AN INFORMATION COPY OF A JCS MESSAGE ADDRESSED TO OUR DEFENSE ATTACHE (131017Z MAY 75) FIRST REVEALED TO ME THAT SOMETHING WAS GOING ON. BY TRACKING BACK, I HAVE NOW LEARNED THAT U.S. AIRCRAFT WERE LAUNCHED FROM BASES IN THAILAND AT ABOUT 1330 HOURS BANGKOK TIME. THIS IS AN HOUR AND A HALF BEFORE I MET THE PRIME MINISTER AT HIS REQUEST TO DISCUSS THE MATTER.

2. I CANNOT STRESS TO STRONGLY THE DAMAGE TO U.S.-THAI INTERESTS WHICH IS LIKELY TO RESULT FROM THIS UNILATERAL ACTION. HAD I KNOWN WHAT WAS CONTEMPLATED I COULD HAVE TAKEN STEPS TO CONTAIN THE DAMAGE. WHEN THE THAI LEARN THAT U.S. AIRCRAFT HAD ALREADY BEEN LAUNCHED BEFORE I SAW THE PRIME MINISTER AND, OF COURSE, MADE NO MENTION OF IT, THEY WILL ASSUME THAT THIS IS A DELIBERATE, HEAVY-HANDED U.S. EFFORT TO CUT THEM OUT, NOT THAT IT RESULTS FROM AN UNBELIEVABLE LACK OF COORDINATION AND FORESIGHT IN FAILING TO KEEP ME INFORMED.

3. I HAVE JUST TOLD PRIME MINISTER KHUKRIT BY TELEPHONE THAT A NUMBER OF AIRCRAFT HAVE BEEN LAUNCHED FROM THAI BASES TO KEEP THE MAYAGUEZ UNDER SURVEILLANCE. I HAVE TOLD HIM, AND I HOPE I AM CORRECT, THAT NO ORDNANCE HAS BEEN EXPENDED. THE PRIME MINISTER EXPRESSED HIS APPRECIATION FOR THIS INFORMATION (MY GUESS WOULD BE HE ALREADY KNEW SOMETHING WAS AFOOT BECAUSE OF ACTIVITY AT THE BASES). THE PRIME MINISTER URGED THAT WE KEEP ABSOLUTELY SILENT ABOUT ANY INVOLVEMENT OF THAI BASES IN THIS OPERATION. IF WE CAN DO SO, HE BELIEVES WE MAY GET BY; OTHERWISE HE ANTICIPATES A GREAT DEAL OF TROUBLE FROM POLITICAL PARTIES, STUDENTS AND OTHERS. THEY WAY KHUKRIT HAS PLAYED THIS, HE IS IN THE CLEAR. HE HAS PUBLICLY ANNOUNCED THAT HE TOLD US NOT TO USE THAI BASES. WE ARE THE ONES ON THE HOT SEAT.

4. I UNDERSTAND FURTHER MOVES ARE CONTEMPLATED INVOLVING THE ARRIVAL AT UTAPAO TONIGHT OF A BATTALION OF MARINES AND THEIR MOVEMENT INTO ACTION TOMORROW MORNING. THIS WILL INVOLVE THAILAND EVEN MORE DIRECTLY IN THE CONFRONTATION BETWEEN THE U.S. AND THE CAMBODIANS. AND, OF COURSE, THIS AGAIN IS NOT BEING COORDINATED WITH THE RTG. IT IS, OF COURSE, UP TO THE POLICYMAKERS IN WASHINGTON TO DECIDE ON OUR RESPONSE TO THIS ACT OF PIRACY, BUT I MUST POINT OUT THAT THESE FURTHER STEPS ARE LIKELY TO BE VERY COSTLY FOR U.S.-THAI RELATIONS AT A TIME WHEN THE THAI ARE ALREADY MOVING RAPIDLY TO REASSESS THEIR FOREIGN POLICY. I TRUST WE HAVE FACTORED THESE COSTS INTO OUR DECISION MAKING.

5. MAY I KNOW WHAT IS GOING ON?

MASTERS

1 Source: Ford Library, National Security Adviser, Country Files, Box 18, Far East, Thailand, State Department Telegrams to SECSTATE, NODIS (1). Secret; Flash; Nodis. The same day, at 1454Z, Zurhellen replied, “Regret fast moving situation here has made it impossible to keep you fully informed as we would otherwise intend. Matters you raise are currently under discussion and we hope to have word for you soon. Meantime, please do not, repeat not, raise this matter further with Thais.” (Telegram 110792 to Bangkok; National Archives, Record Group 59, Central Foreign Policy Files) Earlier in the month, Masters sent a telegram to Washington warning that the “often secret agreements we have with the RTG relating to our military presence here is coming unraveled because of Thai nationalistic sentiment, Thai popular mistrust of the old military governments that concluded the agreements with us, and a deep concern over the effectiveness of the U.S. military presence.” (Telegram 7857 from Bangkok, May 1; ibid.)

Minutes of the Secretary of State’s Staff Meeting, Washington, May 16, 1975, 8:08 a.m. [Document 400]

Minutes of the Secretary of State’s Staff Meeting, Washington, May 16, 1975, 8:08 a.m.1

Washington, May 16, 1975, 8:08 a.m.

In Attendance - Friday, May 16, 1975

Secretary of State Kissinger - Chairman
D - Mr. Ingersoll
P - Mr. Sisco
E - Mr. Robinson
T - Mr. Maw
M - Mr. Eagleburger
AF - Mr. Mulcahy (Acting)
ARA - Mr. Rogers
EA - Mr. Habib
EUR - Mr. Hartman
NEA - Mr. Atherton
INR - Mr. Hyland
S/P - Mr. Lord
EB - Mr. Katz (Acting)
S/PRS - Mr. Anderson
PM - Mr. Vest
IO - Mr. Buffum
H - Mr. McCloskey
L - Mr. Leigh
S/S - Mr. Springsteen
S - Mr. Bremer
S - Mr. Adams

PROCEEDINGS

(The Secretary's Staff Meeting was convened at 8:08 a.m., Secretary of State Kissinger presiding as Chairman.)

MR. INGERSOLL: Henry, I think you have a telegram that sets out a schedule for withdrawal of the already agreed upon —

SECRETARY KISSINGER: Yes. It's not effective. I will — that's right. First of all, I want that panic to stop about Thailand.

MR. INGERSOLL: No, no. This was before the Mayaguez. It was entirely just —

SECRETARY KISSINGER: We're withdrawing over half of our strike forces and over a quarter of our troops. I'd much rather do it the other way around. It's our troops that are annoying people.

MR. INGERSOLL: All right.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: I mean I don't see that there's any sense, if we are in Thailand at all, not to be with forces to do anything. The worst presence to have is one that can't fight and is just there to annoy people.

I only saw it last night. I'd like the strike forces to be withdraw last. At least, that way we can get something for our presence.

MR. INGERSOLL: All right.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: You can take more personnel if you want to. You can take the PX out first. (Laughter.)

MR. INGERSOLL: They didn't get their supplies anyway. The Mayaguez had some.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: Why? The Mayaguez went back to Singapore.

MR. INGERSOLL: I don't know. I don't think they wanted to go back to Thailand right now.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: Did we advise that?

MR. HABIB: The owners, as far as we know.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: Can we send a few tranquilizers to Masters? I think the Thais are basically —

MR. HABIB: They need a tranquilizer — Masters.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: Let them scream.

MR. HABIB: I think they're going to be in a position — the latest report we have is they're going to withdraw their Ambassador from Washington.

MR. LORD: That was on the radio about five minutes ago.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: All right. That's not going to be effective by our being nervous.

MR. HABIB: I haven't seen any nervousness in any part or any form, either in the Embassy or here — nor have they said nor done anything. I think the problem is that the Thais have their sovereignty infringed, from their standpoint. And they are a weak government that has that habit. And a government that has nothing available to it except its big mouth is going to use its big mouth. And the question comes up now: What do we do to restore some semblance of reasonableness in our relationship with Thailand?

And there's no question of something we have done to them — or have them just lie there. They can't get too weak, so they're buffeted from many sides — not only from their neighbors but from within their own society.

I think that there are things that we can do. I think, for example, we should consider very carefully what we say to them and how we say it at this time.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: But, above all, I want to consider it.

MR. HABIB: Well, I said we might have a share in in.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: And I have to see if I can't find time to see you today. We have to delay your departure. I have to know exactly what's up.

MR. HABIB: Well, I've been trying to see you for that reason. I want to talk to you about a couple of things.

I think in the case of Thailand, for example, we ought to consider the question of whether we owe them an apology.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: Don't be absurd.

MR. HABIB: I'm not being absurd. How do you regard a situation in which we deliberately disregard their view or we didn't take them into account?

Now, there are ways of doing this in your way and style which would be helpful.

I'd like to get a chance to get out and work something up. We've asked the Embassy to take a look and see what there is that might be done in a form that it is — that they want.

For example, we have the remaining Vietnamese equipment, which we were thinking of giving them anyway. There's no question but that the Thais don't want to stand naked in Southeast Asia without any protection — or any protection from anybody.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: Look, if the Thais want to make an issue out of it and if they want to force us out on that issue, I prefer that to being crawled out all over the place. We're going to do that within a year.

MR. HABIB: Nobody is suggesting that we crawl — disregard all history and relationship with Thailand that we've had in this regard? I don't think it's necessary now. We can find a way in which we can deal with the problem, restore some semblance of the proper relationship with the Thais — not —

SECRETARY KISSINGER: I don't accept the phrase "proper relationship." We had 8,000 Marines in there under Kennedy. We were bombing these countries from Thai bases. Let's not be absurd.

MR. HABIB: We've always done it with the authority and the approval but with the active participation of the government. This is a weak government, and I think that's an important factor in judging their reaction.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: It won't be helped by apologizing though.

MR. HABIB: Well, I think the probability of sort of a public reaction in Thailand is quite clear. That's one of their problems.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: Then we get out — which we have to do within a year anyhow.

MR. HABIB: All — everything?

SECRETARY KISSINGER: Then we'll see that when it develops.

MR. HABIB: We have something that we'd like — that are rather significant to us there in terms of assets: intelligence, presence, and otherwise.

SECRETARY KISSINGER We will not apologize.

[Omitted is material unrelated to Thailand.]

committees — did you know that? (Laughter.)

MR. HABIB: It was a Department cable.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: No, no, no.

MR. HABIB: There was a summary in one of the daily CIA reports.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: The State Department cable was summarized in that newspaper, which I never look at.

MR. HABIB: That's right; and I remember that article in it.

MR. HYLAND: And the next day they published a correction.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: But, at any rate, that goes to six Congressional committees.

MR. HABIB: Yes. I've been up there before them, and I see their staff is reading it in front of everybody. We're not allowed to give it to our Deputies, it's so secret. But, in any event, the Thai arrangements are very, very ambiguous, in many respects; and they've never been formalized in a mutual security treaty the way they are in other countries.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: Can I get a list?

MR. HABIB: We'll get a list for you.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: And, also, what is secret on this? — Because Mansfield is sure to hit us on that. I think all of the secret things are status of forces agreements, aren't they?

HABIB: No. We don't have a formal status of forces agreements with Thailand. That is one of the things. There are certain arrangements made with respect —

SECRETARY KISSINGER: But there are no secret agreements made with American obligations, are there?

MR. HABIB: No, not that I know of. The only obligation I know of is with SEATO.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: What about Rusk?

MR. HABIB: Well, the Rusk one is based upon SEATO.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: That's public anyway.

MR. McCLOSKEY: Oh, that's public.

MR. HABIB: It's an interpretation of what our actions will be under the SEATO treaty, if the other members don't act. That's what it amounts to.

MR. INGERSOLL: Phil, I think some of the levels of forces there became secret as we got formal with the Foreign Ministry. We've drawn down now, so I don't think it's a violation with the Foreign Ministry.

MR. HABIB: Well, I don't think it's a question of violation. The agreement has always been perfect with the Thais — it always has been.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: Senator Mansfield asked me in testimony about the agreement — to produce the secret agreements or tell him what it was. I've got to do that very soon, and just give me the subject of these agreements. And I think — I was told; I have no independent knowledge — that they all concern the secret amendments — all concern status of forces, type arrangements.

MR. HABIB: That is secret. For example, they cover such things as how the [unclear] will be treated in terms of criminal jurisdiction, things like that.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: That's right.

MR. HABIB: But I wouldn't call them really secret. They were just arrangements that were made outside of the normal system of status of forces agreements. We've done that before in other areas.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: You didn't mean any particular harm. He just read this intelligence report.

[Omitted is material unrelated to Thailand.]

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Transcripts of Secretary of State Kissinger’s Staff Meetings, 1973–1977, E5177, Box 6. Secret. An undated paper on “Secret Agreements with Thailand Relating to the U.S. Military Presence in Thailand” is at the Ford Library, National Security Adviser, Presidential Country Files for East Asia and the Pacific, Box 17, Thailand, Senator Mansfield’s Request for Agreements with Thailand (1). On May 19, Masters delivered a note, which the Thai government took as an apology, stating “The United States regrets the misunderstandings that have arisen between Thailand and the United States in regard to the temporary placement of Marines at Utapao to assist in the recovery of the SS Mayaguez.” Telegrams 115952 to Bangkok, May 18, and 4359 from Bangkok, May 19; ibid., Central Foreign Policy Files)

National Security Study Memorandum 225, Washington, May 27, 1975. [Document 401]

National Security Study Memorandum 225, Washington, May 27, 1975.1

Washington, May 27, 1975

NATIONAL SECURITY COUNCIL
WASHINGTON, D.C. 20506

May 27, 1975

National Security Study Memorandum 225

TO: The Secretary of Defense
The Deputy Secretary of State
The Director of Central Intelligence

SUBJECT: Review of U.S. Policy Toward Thailand

The President has directed an assessment of U S. policy toward Thailand. The study should examine U.S. interests in Thailand, the U.S. objectives that flow from these interests over the next three to five years, and U.S. policy options designed to support these interests and objectives.

The study's consideration of factors bearing on U.S. interests and objectives should include, but should not necessarily be limited to, the following: — The current trends in basic Thai foreign policy, particularly as those trends affect the balance of power in Southeast Asia and the U.S. presence in Thailand.

— The strength of significant factions within the Thai Government and their probable relative influence over Thai foreign policy,

— Thailand's perception of the North Vietnamese and Chinese threats in the mid-term, and Thailand's probable approach to these threats.

— Thailand's perception of its insurgency, and its probable efforts to cope with this problem.

— Thailand's attitude towards American and other foreign investment, and its interests in trade with the United States.

— The probable strategy toward Thailand of the Peoples Republic of China, North Vietnam and Cambodia.

The study's examination of policy issues should include, but should not necessarily be limited to, the following: — The U.S. security commitment to Thailand.

— The U.S. force presence in Thailand, as it relates to regional security.

— U.S. security assistance to Thailand.

— Thailand's relations with other Southeast Asian states, and its position on Southeast Asian regional issues.

— Thailand's relations with North Vietnam, the Peoples Republic of China and the Soviet Union, and the U.S. attitude toward these relations.

- U.S.-Thai economic relations.

— The U.S. position towards Thai internal political developments.

The study should be prepared by the NSC Inter-Departmental Group for East Asia, and should be submitted no later than June 30, 1975 for consideration by the Senior Review Group.

[Brent Scowcroft signed for]
Henry A. Kissinger

cc: The Chairman, Joint Chiefs of Staff

1 Source: Ford Library, National Security Decision Memoranda and Study Memoranda, Box 2. Secret; Nodis. A copy was sent to the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff.

Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to Deputy Secretary of State Ingersoll, Deputy Secretary of Defense Clements, and Director of Central Intelligence Colby, Washington, July 1, 1975. [Document 402]

Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to Deputy Secretary of State Ingersoll, Deputy Secretary of Defense Clements, and Director of Central Intelligence Colby, Washington, July 1, 1975.1

Washington, July 1, 1975

THE WHITE HOUSE
WASHINGTON

July 1, 1975

MEMORANDUM FOR
THE DEPUTY SECRETARY OF STATE
THE DEPUTY SECRETARY OF DEFENSE
THE DIRECTOR OF CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE

SUBJECT: U.S. Force Reductions in Thailand

NSDM 286 provided guidance for the withdrawal of U.S. forces from Thailand to include end strength objectives for the end of FY 1976 and by December 31, 1976.

Events since the instance of NSDM 286, including expressed desires of the Royal Thai Government for total withdrawal of U.S. military forces and the collapse of South Vietnam, indicate a need for review of the schedule for the withdrawal of U.S. forces from Thailand.

It is requested that, in coordination with the Department of State and the Director of Central Intelligence, the Department of Defense forward recommendations on the rate and composition of the U.S. force withdrawals from Thailand. The withdrawal increments should be spaced over the time periods in question. Options should be presented for withdrawal of all U.S. forces by March 31, 1976, as well as for retention of residual assets, which would be subject to negotiation with the Government of Thailand. Residual options should include consideration of such intelligence as well as military assets as are considered desirable, and in such form as to be most negotiable. Each withdrawal increment should balance, to the extent possible, support and combat personnel.

Force reduction recommendations should be based on the statement of U.S. interests and objectives developed in the response to NSSM 225. Recommendations should be forwarded to the Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs by July 21, 1975.

[Brent Scowcroft signed for]
Henry A. Kissinger

1 Source: Library of Congress, James Schlesinger Papers, Box 22. Secret; Nodis. Scowcroft signed the memorandum for Kissinger. In response to this memorandum, the USIB approved a memorandum, July 31, on the “Future of US Military Intelligence Installations and Units in Thailand,“ which was prepared under the auspices of the National Intelligence Officer for South and Southeast Asia, and reflected the views of CIA, DIA, INR, and NSA. (Library of Congress, Henry Kissinger Papers, TS 10, 8/75) Scowcroft received this memorandum under a covering memorandum, August 7, from Quinn. (Ford Library, National Security Adviser, Presidential Country Files for East Asia and the Pacific, Box 17, Thailand [12])

Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to Secretary of Defense Schlesinger, Deputy Secretary of State Ingersoll, and Director of Central Intelligence Colby, Washington, August 5, 1975. [Document 403]

Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to Secretary of Defense Schlesinger, Deputy Secretary of State Ingersoll, and Director of Central Intelligence Colby, Washington, August 5, 1975.1

Washington, August 5, 1975

THE WHITE HOUSE
WASHINGTON
ACTION

August 5, 1975

MEMORANDUM FOR:
SECRETARY OF DEFENSE
DEPUTY SECRETARY OF STATE
DIRECTOR OF CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE

SUBJECT: Indochina Refugees in Thailand

As a result of Pathet Lao actions to gain complete control of the Provisional Government of National Union in Laos, approximately 23,000 Meo tribesmen have been forced to seek refuge in Thailand. There is every reason to believe that these Meo refugees will desire to remain in Thailand as long as the Communists control Laos.

Spokesmen for the Royal Thai Government have indicated Thai willingness in principle to permit the Meo to remain in Thailand if adequate financial assistance is provided by the United States.

It is requested that a working group comprising representatives of the addressees, and under the chairmanship of the representative of the Department of State, on a priority basis develop a plan for the permanent resettlement of the Meo refugees in Thailand. Knowledge of this plan should be limited to a strictly need-to-know basis. This plan should be forwarded for the President's review no later than August 15, 1975.

[signed]
Henry A. Kissinger

cc: Chairman, Joint Chiefs of Staff
Director, Office of Management and Budget

1 Source: Ford Library, National Security Adviser, Presidential Country Files for East Asia and the Pacific, Box 17, Thailand [12]. Secret. Sent for action. Copies were sent to the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff and the Director of the Office for Management and Budget.

Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to President Ford, Washington, September 22, 1975. [Document 404]

Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to President Ford, Washington, September 22, 1975.1

Washington, September 22, 1975

MEMORANDUM
THE WHITE HOUSE
WASHINGTON

ACTION

September 22, 1975

MEMORANDUM FOR: THE PRESIDENT
FROM: HENRY A. KISSINGER [BS initialed]

SUBJECT: Indochina Refugees in Thailand

Attached for your approval are (1) a Determination transferring $6.8 million of foreign assistance appropriations to the Department of State to finance the plan they proposed for the resettlement of Meo refugees in Thailand (Tab A), and (2) a memorandum from me directing State, Defense and CIA to implement the plan (Tab B).

The key points of the resettlement plan are: -- We will make available up to $10 million through Presidential Determinations to finance resettlement programs which will be carried out by the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) and the Royal Thai Government (RTG). Some of this money will also be available for ethnic Lao refugees who are also presently in Thailand, some of whom will be resettled in the U.S. and other third countries.

-- The CIA, which has already provided goods for short-term assistance, will stand by to provide interim help should the UNHCR program falter.

-- Our Ambassador in Bangkok will make a special effort to insure that the Meo receive all resources allocated to them.

There are 30,000 to 40,000 ethnic Meo refugees from Laos now in Thailand who are in need of immediate relief assistance. To date some of these refugees have received minimal amounts of aid from the CIA with whom they have a long association, but most are existing in deplorable conditions.

All agencies agree that for political reasons, long-term U.S. assistance to the Meo and other Lao refugees should be channeled through the UNHCR/RTG program to the fullest extent possible. To prevent further suffering on the part of the Meo, however, all agencies agree also that the CIA should continue to provide interim CIA funding up to a level of [text not declassified] through December 1975, when the UNHCR/RTG program is expected to be well underway.

In order to carry out the above plan you are asked to approve the transfer of up to an additional $6.8 million of foreign assistance appropriations to the Department of State. On August 5 you determined that up to $3 million of funds previously made available to the Department of State could be used to assist the Lao. This total of $9.8 million, with a supplement from other countries amounting to $2.6 million, should carry the program to December 1976. While the UN High Commissioner intends to make every effort to resolve the refugee problem by that time, some continued international assistance will probably be necessary.

There are some doubts about the effectiveness of the UNHCR/RTG program as it affects the Meo. The CIA has therefore requested that it be authorized to provide limited direct relief to the Meo in an emergency situation after December 1975. This capability will be exercised only with the approval of our Ambassador in Bangkok.

In view of Thai sensitivities about the Resettlement of Meo in Thailand, the program should probably not be designated as such. Rather, it will be termed "relief and assistance," which would last until the end of calendar year 1976. It is anticipated that at the end of this time those Meo who may decide to return to Laos to take their chance with the Provisional Government of National Union (PGNU) would have made such a decision, and that after that time the Thai would treat the remainder in the same fashion that they handle other tribespeople who have long been settled in Thailand.

RECOMMENDATION:

That you sign the Presidential Determination at Tab A transferring $6.8 million of foreign assistance appropriations to the State Department to finance this plan.

That you approve my signing the memorandum at Tab B instructing State, Defense and CIA to implement this plan.

Approve [GRF initialed
Disapprove

Max Friedersdorf and OMB concur in both of these recommendations.

1 Source: Ford Library, National Security Adviser, Presidential Subject File, 1974–1977, Box 16, Presidential Determinations, FY 1976 (1), August-October 1975. Secret; Nodis. Sent for action. Scowcroft initialed the memorandum for Kissinger. Ford initialed his approval of Kissinger’s recommendation. Tab A, a Determination transferring $6.8 million to finance the plan, was not attached. Tab B, the memorandum from Kissinger directing implementation of the plan, is attached and published as Document 406.

Memorandum From Secretary of Defense Schlesinger to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger), Washington, September 23, 1975. [Document 405]

Memorandum From Secretary of Defense Schlesinger to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger), Washington, September 23, 1975.1

Washington, September 23, 1975

THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE
WASHINGTON, D.C. 20301

23 SEP 1975

MEMORANDUM FOR THE ASSISTANT TO THE PRESIDENT FOR NATIONAL SECURITY AFFAIRS

SUBJECT: U.S. Force Reduction in Thailand

(U) In response to your memorandum of 1 July 1975, subject as above, the following force withdrawal options and intelligence facilities/activities have been identified,

Withdrawal Options (S) Option I. A phased drawdown to a residual force level which includes a combat element. Combat and support aircraft would be withdrawn to the residual level between September and December 1975 to permit the retrograde of US assets and the orderly turnover of excess materiel and facilities to the Royal Thai Government. By 31 March 1976 military manpower requirements for the residual force would be reduced to about 3,800 spaces. Approximately 1,000 additional logistical support personnel will remain after 31 March 1976 to complete the retrograde of materiel. It is anticipated that retrograde actions will be completed and the associated personnel will depart by early summer 1976, The withdrawal rate schedule and composition for this option are listed at Tab A.

(S) Option II. The accelerated drawdown of all US forces from Thailand, except the Defense Attache Office, the Joint US Military Advisory Group (JUSMAG), and the SEAT0 Medical Research Laboratory, by the end of March 1976. The residual US military presence would be about 300 spaces. The withdrawal rate schedule and composition for this option are listed at Tab B.

(S) Option III. The phased drawdown to a residual level which excludes a combat element. Military manpower requirements for the residual force would total 3,000 spaces. Approximately 1,000 additional logistical support personnel will remain after 31 March 1976 to complete the retrograde of materiel and would depart, upon completion of retrograde actions, by early summer 1976. The withdrawal rate schedule and composition for this option are listed at Tab C.

(S) Under both Options I and III additional savings of approximately 700 military manpower spaces could be realized by September 1976 through partial civi1ianization, combined US-RTG operation and demoting of selected intelligence activities. If such procedures are undertaken the residual force totals for Options I and III would be further reduced to 3,100 and 2,300 respectively.

(S) Under all three options USMACTHAI would be disestablished. Timing for the disestablishment and arrangements for the assumption of USMACTHAI's residual function are currently under reexamination in light of recent discussions with the RTG.

Intelligence Facilities/Activities

(TS) The Assistant Secretary of Defense (Intelligence), with the concurrence of the Director Central Intelligence, has recommended that certain facilities and activities be retained in Thailand. In order of priority for retention they are: Priority 1. [text not declassified]

Priority 2. Continue the Atomic Energy Detection System (AEDS) mission at Chiang Mai.

Priority 3. Continue the SPACETRACK (COBRA TALON) radar facility at Ko Kha; retain the ability to conduct P-3 Ocean Surveillance Air Patrols out of U-Tapao; continue HUMINT activities under the Defense Attache Office Bangkok.

(TS) It is the position of the Department of Defense that Option III provides for the most realistic long-term presence of US forces in Thailand, other than intelligence. With regard to the intelligence activities it is the position of the Department of Defense that we should attempt to retain all facilities and activities identified as priority 1 and 2. Additionally, the capability to conduct P-3 operations should be considered a priority 2. The retention of Ko Kha and HUMINT activities will be difficult to explain to the Royal Thai Government. Therefore we do not recommend their retention. To optimize the effectiveness of potential JCRC operations its location should be as close as possible to crash/grave sites, therefore this humanitarian activity should be retained in Thailand for the interim.

(TS) Regardless of the option selected, it is imperative that the decision be made as soon as possible so that negotiations can commence with the Royal Thai Government. A prolonged delay will compound our problem with Thailand and, in the end, our departure will appear to be a precipitous withdrawal.

(U) The Department of State and Director Central Intelligence concur.

James R. Schlesinger [signed]

Attachments
Tabs A, B, C (Secret)

1 Source: Library of Congress, James Schlesinger Papers, Box 22. Top Secret. Tabs A, B, and C, the withdrawal rate schedules for options I, II, and III, are attached but not published. Schlesinger received this memorandum, with a recommendation that he sign it, under a covering memorandum, September 2, from Ellsworth.

Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to Secretary of Defense Schlesinger, Deputy Secretary of State Ingersoll, and Director of Central Intelligence Colby, Washington, September 24, 1975. [Document 406]

Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to Secretary of Defense Schlesinger, Deputy Secretary of State Ingersoll, and Director of Central Intelligence Colby, Washington, September 24, 1975.1

Washington, September 24, 1975

THE WHITE HOUSE
WASHINGTON

September 24, 1975

MEMORANDUM FOR:
THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE
THE DEPUTY SECRETARY OF STATE
THE DIRECTOR OF CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE

SUBJECT: Indochina Refugees in Thailand

The President has reviewed the plan for the relief and resettlement of Meo refugees in Thailand and has decided the following: — Full USG support will be given to the United Nations Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR)/Royal Thai Government (RTG) refugee program.

— The American Ambassador to Thailand will take all necessary actions to insure that the Meo refugees receive an adequate share of the resources allotted to the UNHCR/RTG program.

— The Central Intelligence Agency is authorized to maintain on a standby basis the capability to provide limited support to the Meo refugees should the UNHCR/RTG program prove temporarily inadequate to meet the basic survival needs of the Meo refugees. This capability will only be exercised with the approval of the American Ambassador, Bangkok.

— The program will be known as the Meo Refugee Relief and Assistance Program and will be terminated no later than January 1, 1977.

[Brent Scowcroft signed for]
Henry A. Kissinger

cc: The Director, Office of Management and Budget
The Chairman, Joint Chiefs of Staff

1 Source: Ford Library, National Security Adviser, Presidential Subject File, 1974–1977, Box 16, Presidential Determinations, FY 1976 (1), August-October 1975. Secret; Nodis. Scowcroft signed the memorandum on behalf of Kissinger. Copies were sent to the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff and the Director of the Office for Management and Budget.

Note from the Deputy Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs (Scowcroft) to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger), Washington, October 4, 1975. [Document 407]

Note from the Deputy Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs (Scowcroft) to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger), Washington, October 4, 1975.1

Washington, October 4, 1975

THE WHITE HOUSE
WASHINGTON

October 4, 1975

Henry,

Here is another in our long series of analyses about residual force levels in Thailand. I have the same problem with this one that I have had with all the others; namely, (1) it does not start from any strategic premise of what we think we would really like to retain in that area and (2) it takes as gospel political statements by the Thais about what they are willing to tolerate in the way of U.S. military presence.

On the first point, I just have a gut feeling that we should at least attempt to retain some sort of combat capability in SEA. Mayaguez was a good example of the completely unforeseen contingences which can arise.

On the second point, the Thai initially told us some time ago that we had to remove all of our forces. State and Defense—including the Ambassador—took that as immutable. Now we apparently are doing the same thing on the basis of the recent statement by Khukrit. I am not at all sure that this is the last word nor that the Thai military necessarily concur in it.

In sum, I don't like the paper. My inclination would be to hold an SRG meeting on it to try to sort out once and for all just where we would like to end up in Thailand.

Paper okay as is
Schedule SRG [HK indicated his approval]
See me

[signed Brent]

1 Source: Library of Congress, Henry Kissinger Papers, Geopolitical File, Container CL 238, Thailand, 1974–1976. No classification marking. Kissinger checked the option to hold an SRG meeting. Scowcroft’s note was probably in reference to Schlesinger’s memorandum to Kissinger of September 23 (Document 405).

Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, October 4, 1975, 2:40 p.m. [Document 408]

Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, October 4, 1975, 2:40 p.m.1

Washington, October 4, 1975, 2:40 p.m.

[not declassified in time for publication]

1 Source: National Archives, Record Group 59, Central Foreign Policy Files, P–820123–2306. Secret; Nodis.

Paper Prepared by the NSSM 225 Working Group, Washington, undated. [Document 409]

Paper Prepared by the NSSM 225 Working Group, Washington, undated.1

Washington, undated

National Security Study Memorandum 225

REVIEW OF U.S. POLICY TOWARD THAILAND
SUMMARY

In the wake of the collapse in Indochina, Thai-U.S. relations remain friendly but are becoming less intimate. In this new situation, we still believe it is in our interest that Thailand be independent, stable, and prosperous. We also think that we have an interest in Thailand's playing a constructive role in Southeast Asia, that she support our efforts to build a peaceful world, that we be able to trade with and invest in Thailand, and that the flow of illicit narcotics from and through Thailand be reduced.

Since Thailand no longer thinks it is in her interest to be closely aligned with the U.S. as she has been in the past, several issues arise on which policy decisions are needed. There is the question of our force levels in Thailand, our use of intelligence facilities in Thailand, our attitude toward the Thai constitutional experiment, and our attitude toward Thai efforts to work out new international relationships.

In making decisions on these issues several specific U.S. objectives should be kept in mind. In the political and security field, we would like to be able to use military bases in Thailand with the least possible restrictions, we would similarly like to be able to use our intelligence facilities on Thai soil, we would like Thai support in international fora, and we would like Thai support for peaceful change and general stability in Southeast Asia. In the economic field we would like Thailand to remain a major food exporter, while in the economic and commercial area we would like to have continued and even expanded trade and investment relations with Thailand. In the fight against illicit narcotics, we would like to have Thai cooperation in bilateral and multilateral anti-narcotics programs, and we would like to have access to Thailand for unilateral U.S. anti-narcotics intelligence programs. On ideological grounds, we would like to have good relations with Thailand not only because it is one of Asia's few representative governments but also as an example to other Third World countries that a good relationship with the U.S. can be beneficial.

The Thai internal setting — an important part of the environment in which U.S. policy decisions must be made — is characterized by some basic long-term strengths. The country did not undergo a formal colonial experience, and its fundamental political and religious institutions are still intact. The Thais are thus less susceptible to "revolutionary" blandishments. The economy is in better shape than most developing countries; Thailand is a food exporter. On the other hand, modernization is creating social and psychological strains. The unevenness of income distribution is a major problem. After almost thirty years of relatively benevolent military dictatorship, the country is experimenting with parliamentary democracy, and political system is still fragile. Thailand has had to cope with small-scale, communist-inspired insurgency in rural areas for over ten years.

Externally, the Thais are trying to adapt to the new situation in Southeast Asia. They see the need for accommodation with the Vietnamese, but they have been encouraged by what they consider to be indications of possible Chinese Communist support in a military confrontation Hanoi. They still value their connections with the United States, since they know that a Washington connection is an essential part of a balancing diplomacy in today's world.

1 Source: Ford Library, NSC Institutional Files (H-Files), Box H–15, Senior Review Group Meeting, U.S. Force Reductions in Thailand, October 17, 1975 [1]. Secret. Habib sent the summary and the paper with three annexes to Kissinger under his covering memorandum of October 8. The paper is attached, but not published. (Ibid.)

Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, October 17, 1975, 11:21–11:40 a.m. [Document 410]

Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, October 17, 1975, 11:21–11:40 a.m.1

Washington, October 17, 1975, 11:21–11:40 a.m.

Senior Review Group Meeting

October 17, 1975

Part II of II

Time and Place: 11:21 a.m. - 11:40 a.m., White House Situation Room

Subject: Force Reductions in Thailand Participants:

Chairman: Henry A. Kissinger
STATE: Robert Ingersoll
Philip Habib
Robert Miller
Richard B. Finn
DOD: William Clements
Amos Jordan
Morton Abramowitz
JCS: Gen. George S. Brown
Lt. Gen. William E. Smith
CIA: William Colby
William Christison
Theodore Shackley
NSC: Lt. Gen. Brent Scowcroft
Thomas J. Barnes
Col. Clinton E. Granger
Michael Hornblow

Secretary Kissinger: We do not need a long session. In our discussions we don't want to be driven by the Embassy and the latest hysterical outburst by the Thais. I just want us to understand what we want to do. Bill, do you have a briefing?

(Mr. Colby briefed from the attached text. )

Secretary Kissinger: As I understand it this paper gives three options. The first provides for 3800 personnel spaces, the second for 300 spaces and the third for 3000 spaces. The first two do not seem to be real options. My first question is -- what are we trying to accomplish in Thailand?

Mr. Colby: [text not declassified]

Gen. Brown: [text not declassified]

Secretary Kissinger: The option for 300 spaces is an eyewash option -- right?

Gen. Brown: I hope option two is not a serious option.

Secretary Kissinger: Option #1 you don't want to do. Option #2 is absurd and thus we are driven to Option #3.

Mr. Habib: Everybody agrees that Option #3 is the most desirable option. We have been saying this for months.

Secretary Kissinger: Why is it wrong to keep a small combat unit?

Mr. Colby: The Prime Minister doesn't want it.

Gen. Scowcroft: The problem is that he has publicly said it.

Mr. Habib: In fact they don't want all of us out.

Secretary Kissinger: What would we get out of 6 F-4's at Utapao?

Gen. Brown: If we were to have another Mayaguez incident or something else the capabilities of expansion would be there if we ever wanted it.

Secretary Kissinger: Why not try for it?

Gen. Brown: Our druthers would be to keep it there. However, its utility is not high and the conditions under which we use it are not good.

Mr. Habib: In negotiating with the Thais we should go in only for what we really want. They may resist our keeping U-2's at Utapao but they could be brought around.

Secretary Kissinger: Option #2 is absurd and I don't understand why it is in there.

Mr. Habib: The options were set up four months ago.

Secretary Kissinger: The difference between Options 1 and 3 is that Option 3 calls for [text not declassified] 6 F-4's. The F-4's are the only issue. The question is do we maintain a small combat capability if the Thais let us. Phil says that even asking the Thais this would cost us.

Mr. Habib: There is no point in asking for something we don't use. The P-3's are more important.

Secretary Kissinger: Do we want to stand by and drop our combat capability in East Asia? Why do we have to lead the charge of getting our combat units out of Southeast Asia? If the Thais asked us we would have no choice.

Mr. Habib: They have asked us.

Secretary Kissinger: About the F-4's?

Mr. Habib: We should not let the F-4's interfere with other more significant things we need.

Secretary Kissinger: Should we work through the Foreign Minister when he comes here on a visit?

Mr. Habib: No. We should work through Khukrit. Ambassador Whitehouse will go in for a talk.

Secretary Kissinger: Would the discussion be based on Option #3 or #1.

Mr. Colby: I am principally concerned with Ramasun.

Secretary Kissinger: Shouldn't we assume the initiative and bring this up quietly with the Thais?

Mr. Colby: You always have the danger of [text not declassified] Chatchai going to the press.

Mr. Habib: I agree. [text not declassified]

Gen. Scowcroft: How about an approach to the military?

Mr. Habib: Yes, but what would the traffic bear regarding a U.S. military presence, and what would the Thai reaction be to our approach? The 6 F-4's just don't give us anything.

Gen. Brown: Don't forget we still have the 7th Fleet and that is much more important that the F-4's.

Secretary Kissinger: Bill, could you get us a study analyzing what the Thai reaction would be to our approach on the F-4's.

Mr. Colby: Their perception of the situation is not dictated by the 6 F-4's. I can get something to you in a few days. But speaking off the top of my head I can tell you if we were to approach Khukrit he would be concerned about the combat presence and would be worried also because he does not want to stir up the streets.

Mr. Habib: We are now in a good position to get the things we want. Let's not mess things up by asking for things we don't want. Option #3 has some very plausible arguments in it. Now is the time to move.

Gen. Brown: Yes. I read a cable from Whitehouse saying that time is working against us.

Mr. Habib: The quickest and best deal we can get is Option #3.

Secretary Kissinger: Let me think about it for a couple of days.

1 Source: Ford Library, NSC Institutional Files (H-Files), Box H–24, Meeting Minutes, SRG, June–October 1975. Top Secret. The text of Colby’s briefing on the situation in Thailand, October 16, is attached but not published. A message from Scowcroft to Kissinger, October 20, contains the response to Kissinger’s request to Colby for an analysis of the likely Thai reaction to a continued U.S. combat presence. Colby estimated that Thailand would reject a U.S. combat presence beyond March 1976. (Backchannel telegram 51999, October 21, from Scowcroft to Kissinger; ibid., National Security Adviser, Trip briefing Books and Cables for HAK, Kissinger Trip File, Box 15, October 19–23, 1975, People’s Republic of China, TOSEC [5])

Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to Secretary of Defense Schlesinger, Deputy Secretary of State Ingersoll, and Director of Central Intelligence Colby, Washington, October 24, 1975. [Document 411]

Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to Secretary of Defense Schlesinger, Deputy Secretary of State Ingersoll, and Director of Central Intelligence Colby, Washington, October 24, 1975.1

Washington, October 24, 1975

THE WHITE HOUSE
WASHINGTON

October 24, 1975

MEMORANDUM FOR

THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE
THE DEPUTY SECRETARY OF STATE
THE DIRECTOR OF CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE

SUBJECT: U.S. Force Reductions in Thailand

The President has decided that we should attempt to retain the following intelligence activities in Thailand after March 1976: [text not declassified] Chiang Mai Seismic Station; U-2R operations; and P-3 Air Surveillance Patrols. The President also wishes to retain an aircraft operational capability at Utapao and to gain permission for the re-entry of U.S. aircraft. This residual presence should be the minimum necessary to accomplish the mission, but should not exceed 3000 personnel spaces.

The President also wishes to attempt to retain the Ko Kha Spacetrack facility, but does not consider it an essential item in the negotiating package. Thai intelligence agencies have maintained close liaison with the 500th MI and the 7602AI Groups. If the retention of either one would, in the judgment of the U.S. Mission in Bangkok, [text not declassified] then one of the other should continue at a minimum staffing level. Otherwise, both Groups should phase out by March 1976.

The State Department is directed to prepare, in conjunction with the Defense Department and CIA, a negotiating instruction for our Embassy in Bangkok to use in approaching the Thai Government on this subject. These instructions should be completed by October 30, 1975.

[Brent Scowcroft signed for] Henry A. Kissinger

cc: The Chairman, Joint Chiefs of Staff
The Director, Office of Management and Budget

1 Source: Ford Library, NSC Institutional Files (H-Files), Box H–36, NSSMs, NSSM 225 (2), Review of U.S. Policy toward Thailand (2). Top Secret; Sensitive. The Chairman of the JCS and the Director of OMB also received copies. Scowcroft signed the memorandum for Kissinger.

Telegram 282411 From the Department of State to the Embassy in Thailand, November 29, 1975, 0120Z. [Document 412]

Telegram 282411 From the Department of State to the Embassy in Thailand, November 29, 1975, 0120Z.1

November 29, 1975, 0120Z

TELEGRAM
Department of State
282411

DRAFTED BY EA/TB:GBROBERTS
APPROVED EA:PCHABIB
S/S - OJ. HOGANSON
S - J. COVEY

0 290120Z NOV 75 ZFF4

FM SECSTATE WASHDC
TO AMEMBASSY BANGKOK IMMEDIATE

NODIS
E.O. 11652: GDS
TAGS: PFOR, TH, US

SUBJECT: FOREIGN MINISTER CHATCHAI'S LUNCH WITH THE SECRETARY

1. SUMMARY: THE SECRETARY EXPLAINED TO CHATCHAI OUR CONTINUING INTEREST IN THAILAND AND OUR POLICY OF SUPPORTING NATIONAL INDEPENDENCE IN SOUTHEAST ASIA. CHATCHAI ASKED FOR ASSISTANCE IN MODERNIZING, REORGANIZING, AND RE-EQUIPPING THE THAI ARMED FORCES. HE ASKED THAT THE PRESIDENT MAKE A SHORT REFUELING STOP ON HIS WAY FROM PEKING TO INDONESIA. END SUMMARY

2. IN HIS NOV. 26 LUNCH FOR THAI FOREIGN MINISTER CHATCHAI, THE SECRETARY EMPHASIZED THAT THE U.S. WAS STILL INTERESTED IN THAILAND AND VERY MUCH APPRECIATED THE SUPPORT THAILAND HAD GIVEN DURING THE VIET-NAM WAR. HE REGRETTED THE OUTCOME OF THAT WAR. HE SAID THAT U.S. POLICY WAS STILL TO SUPPORT THE INDEPENDENCE OF THE SOUTHEAST ASIAN NATIONS. WE SAW VIET-NAM AS THE MAIN THREAT TO THAT INDEPENDENCE.

WE WOULD THUS SUPPORT THE GROWTH OF CHINESE INFLUENCE IN CAMBODIA AND LAOS AS A BARRIER TO VIETNAMESE DOMINANCE. CHATCHAI SAID HE AGREED WITH THIS TACTIC AND WITH THE SECRETARY'S SUGGESTION THAT THE CHINESE BE URGED TO EXPAND THEIR INFLUENCE IN LAOS AND CAMBODIA.

3. THE SECRETARY ASKED THAT CHATCHAI MAKE CLEAR TO THE CAMBODIANS THAT THE U.S. WAS PREPARED TO HAVE GOOD RELATIONS WITH THEM. THE EVENTS IN CAMBODIA IMMEDIATELY AFTER THE END OF THE WAR WERE UNFORTUNATE, BUT WE WERE STILL INTERESTED IN REPAIRING OUR RELATIONSHIP IN AN EFFORT TO SUPPORT CAMBODIAN INDEPENDENCE.

4. CHATCHAI ASKED FOR U.S. SUPPORT IN EQUIPPING THE THAI ARMED FORCES, PARTICULARLY IN THE AREA OF AMMUNITION MANUFACTURING SELF-SUFFICIENCY. THE SECRETARY SAID THAT WE INTENDED TO MAINTAIN OUR MAP AND FMS CREDIT PROGRAMS, AND THAT HE SAW NO REASON WHY THESE RESOURCES COULD NOT BE USED IN THE WAY CHATCHAI SUGGESTED. CHATCHAI SAID THAT THAILAND WAS PARTICULARLY INTERESTED IN ESTABLISHING AN AMMUNITION FACTORY WHICH COULD SUPPLY ALL THE ASAEN COUNTRIES. HE ALSO ASKED FOR ASSISTANCE IN TURNING UTAPAO INTO AN INTERNATIONAL AIRPORT AND MENTIONED THE COLLINS AND LOCKHEED INVESTMENT PROPOSALS. THE SECRETARY EXPLAINED OUR PROBLEMS WITH CONGRESS, BUT STRESSED THAT WE WERE INTERESTED IN THAILAND AND WOULD DO WHAT WE COULD WITHIN THE CONSTRAINTS PLACED UPON US.

5. CHATCHAI ASKED IF THE PRESIDENT COULD MAKE A SHORT REFUELING STOP AT BANGKOK ON HIS WAY FROM PEKING TO INDONESIA. HE SAID THAT WHEN THE THAI PEOPLE SAW THAT THE PRESIDENT WAS ONLY GOING TO THE PHILIPPINES AND INDONESIA, THE IMMEDIATE REACTION WAS THAT WE WERE RE-DRAWING OUR DEFENSE LINE SO AS TO EXCLUDE THAILAND. THE SECRETARY ASSURED CHATCHAI THAT THE THAI PEOPLE SHOULD DRAW NO SUCH CONCLUSION. HE SAID THAT HE WOULD LOOK INTO THE SUGGESTION OF A BANGKOK REFUELING STOP BUT THAT IT WOULD BE VERY DIFFICULT. HE DID NOT THINK IT WOULD BE POSSIBLE. THE PRESIDENT'S SCHEDULE WAS VERY TIGHT.

7. THE SECRETARY MADE IT CLEAR THAT NONE OF THE FORMER INDOCHINESE MILITARY EQUIPMENT SHOULD BE RETURNED TO CAMBODIA, LAOS, OR VIET-NAM. CHATCHAI DID NOT INDICATE HE WAS THINKING OF DOING SO. HE SUGGESTED THAT WE TALK TO THE OTHER SIDE ABOUT THE AIRCRAFT. HE DID NOT OBJECT WHEN THE SECRETARY ASKED IF WE COULD TAKE SOME OF THE EQUIPMENT OUT OF THAILAND BUT DID COMMENT THAT IT WAS ALL IN POOR CONDITION.

8. CHATCHAI ASKED FOR U.S. HELP IN INCREASING FOREIGN INVESTMENT IN THAILAND AND ALSO ASKED THAT THE U.S. NOT COMPETE WITH THAILAND FOR RICE EXPORT SALES TO SOUTH ASIA. THE SECRETARY MADE NO SPECIFIC COMMITMENTS OTHER THAN TO RE-EMPHASIZE OUR CONTINUING INTEREST IN THAILAND AND OUR DESIRE TO DO WHAT WE COULD TO BE OF ASSISTANCE.

9. THE SECRETARY AND CHATCHAI AGREED THAT THE PRESS SHOULD BE TOLD THAT THE TALKS HAD BEEN VERY FRIENDLY AND HAD COVERED THE FULL RANGE OF THAI-US RELATIONS. IN A CURBSIDE INTERVIEW WITH AP, CHATCHAI SAID THAT THE TALKS WERE VERY FRIENDLY, THAT THAI-US RELATIONS WERE GOOD, AND THAT THE US WAS HIS "SECOND HOME." KISSINGER

1 Source: Library of Congress, Henry Kissinger Papers, Geopolitical File, Container CL 238, Thailand, June 1974–February 1976. Secret; Immediate; Nodis.

Memorandum From Thomas J. Barnes of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Scowcroft), Washington, February 5, 1976. [Document 413]

Memorandum From Thomas J. Barnes of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Scowcroft), Washington, February 5, 1976.1

Washington, February 5, 1976

[3 pages not declassified.]

1 Source: Ford Library, National Security Adviser, Presidential Country Files for East Asia and the Pacific, Box 17, Thailand (16). Secret; Nodis; Sensitive.

Memorandum From Thomas J. Barnes of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Scowcroft), Washington, February 20, 1976. [Document 414]

Memorandum From Thomas J. Barnes of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Scowcroft), Washington, February 20, 1976.1

Washington, February 20, 1976

MEMORANDUM
NATIONAL SECURITY COUNCIL

INFORMATION

February 20, 1976

MEMORANDUM FOR: BRENT SCOWCROFT [initialed]

FROM: THOMAS J. BARNES

SUBJECT: Thai Elections and Its Implications for the U.S.

The Intelligence Community has prepared an inter-agency memorandum (Tab A) assessing the current Thai election campaign and its implications for the United States. We have already briefed the key points of this assessment to you and the President. Because the memorandum indicates that there is a strong possibility that the Thai military may assume control of the government at some point before the elections or sometime soon thereafter, we are sending it to you again to insure that you are familiar with it.

In his covering memo transmitting the study to you (Tab B), George Bush states that the Intelligence Community gave serious consideration to issuing the study as an alert memorandum. It states further that the decision not to do so should not be construed as a sign of complacency about affairs in Thailand. He added that the situation in Thailand is fluid, and subject to quick and dramatic changes.

Coup plotting has continued since the Intelligence Community issued the memo. Two Americans have approached our Embassy on behalf of groups allegedly ready to attempt a military takeover of the government. [text not declassified] several military officers have been actively discussing this possibility. Ambassador Whitehouse's most recent judgment on this subject is that, while several groups are actively considering a coup, there is nothing to indicate an imminent attempt.

The key points of the intelligence study are: -- Thailand is experiencing a growing sense of malaise concerning the country's experiment with parliamentary democracy.

-- In this circumstance, there is a strong possibility that the military might decide to assume control.

-- A sharp deterioration of security, a breakdown in public order, or the prospect of a left-of-center coalition government coming to power after the election would increase the likelihood of a coup.

-- The election campaign will probably complicate Thai-U.S. relations. The U.S. presence is likely to become an issue in the campaign, and some pressures may force candidates to insist on a total U.S. military withdrawal.

-- The U.S. will probably be able to complete the negotiations now in train with the Khukrit government regarding the residual U.S. military presence.

-- But there is no assurance that a new government will honor what Khukrit agrees to.

-- If the election goes ahead as scheduled, another centrist-conservative government would likely come into power.

-- Such a government would probably keep Thai policy toward the U.S. more or less along present lines.

-- A less likely possibility is either a coalition based exclusively on rightist elements, or one which included the Socialists.

-- A government in which the Socialists had a strong voice would make it difficult, if not impossible, for the U.S. to maintain any military presence in Thailand. Such a government could prompt the military either to force the government to resign or to overthrow it.

-- In the event of a military takeover, the resultant government would be sympathetic to U.S. interests.

1 Source: Ford Library, National Security Adviser, Presidential Country Files for East Asia and the Pacific, Box 17, Thailand (17). Secret. Sent for information. Scowcroft initialed the memorandum. Attached but not published are Tab A, an Interagency Intelligence Memorandum, February 1976, on “The Thai Election and Its Implications for the US,” and Tab B, a covering memorandum, February 4, from Bush to Scowcroft.

Memorandum From Thomas J. Barnes of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Scowcroft), Washington, March 4, 1976. [Document 415]

Memorandum From Thomas J. Barnes of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Scowcroft), Washington, March 4, 1976.1

Washington, March 4, 1976

MEMORANDUM
NATIONAL SECURITY COUNCIL

URGENT INFORMATION

March 4, 1976

MEMORANDUM FOR: BRENT SCOWCROFT
FROM: THOMAS J. BARNES [initialed]

SUBJECT: U.S. Residual Forces in Thailand

The Problem

Ambassador Whitehouse has significantly altered his assessment of the likely outcome of our negotiations with the RTG over our residual force presence in Thailand after March 20. Whitehouse now concludes that no segment of the RTG is prepared to publicly or privately support the type of presence we wish to have. He therefore recommends that we authorize him to inform the Thai that we will withdraw from Ko Kha and Chiang Mai, accelerate the reduction of personnel at Utapao, and hold on to Ramasun only if the RTG accords its personnel MAAG-like privileges and immunities. We think Whitehouse has underestimated the degree of support among the Thai hierarchy for our residual presence.

Background

Whitehouse met March 3 with Thai Foreign Ministry Undersecretary Anan Panyarachun. Anan repeated his earlier insistence that all of our residual military forces, except JUSMAG, be subject to Thai legal jurisdiction. Anan threatened that if we do not accept this principle by March 20, all U.S. forces would have to leave Thailand. Whitehouse previously discussed this problem with Prime Minister Khukrit, who expressed agreement with our position that such changes in status need to be carefully negotiated over time.

Whitehouse now believes Khukrit and others in the RTG have done a complete reversal on their position toward our residual presence. In analyzing this confrontation with Anan in a March 4 telegram (Tab A), Whitehouse concludes that: -- (Based in part on the CIA report at Tab B), neither the Prime Minister nor any significant segment of the Thai leadership is prepared to support publicly or within the Thai Government the kind of residual presence we have in mind and to which they have previously agreed.

--It would not be wise to charge back to Khukrit to try to get him to reaffirm the positions he has previously taken.

-- Significant elements of the Thai hierarchy will now view favorably the retention only of MAAG and possibly Ramasun.

-- The Thai simply do not believe that they have a vital stake [text not declassified]

-- The Thai seem to have lost faith in the value of our presence as a counter-weight (to Vietnam).

Residual Force Possibilities

Whitehouse then says that the following possibilities represent about the maximum we could hope to retain: -- Refueling and transit rights for U.S. military aircraft, possibly involving the presence in Thailand of a small number of American personnel (presumably at Utapao).

-- Participation in combined operations at Ramasun.

-- JUSMAG itself, the Defense Attache Office, Marine Security Guards, and possibly a few other specialized operations.

-- Training personnel, if we decide on the turnover of the Integrated Communications Systems to the Thai.

Embassy Recommendations

Whitehouse makes the following recommendations: -- That he present to Anan as soon as possible the Washington revision of Anan's Seven Principles governing the U.S. residual presence (State hopes to be able to send these instructions March 5).

-- That he be authorized to tell Anan that we will be ordering at once a U.S. withdrawal from Ko Kha and Chiang Mai, and the accelerated reduction of U.S. personnel at Utapao.

-- That we maintain Ramasun provided that Americans stationed there will enjoy MAAG-like privileges and immunities. Otherwise, that he be authorized to tell Anan that Ramasun will be closed.

-- That JUSMAG will stay on if the Thai so desire.

Expecting that Anan will stick to his position that the Thai must have legal jurisdiction over all residual forces except Ramasun, and that we cannot accept this condition, Whitehouse proposes to follow up his next meeting with Anan by another with the Prime Minister. He says that if there is support for a residual presence, the shock treatment that we will be leaving will bring it out. If there is no support, he claims that nothing will have been lost.

My View

I think Whitehouse has insufficient basis for concluding that Thai negativism is this extreme. Even acknowledging that Ko Kha and some of our Utapao activities (like ammunition storage) are dispensable, we should not go out under a blaze of Thai pressure. Defense and CIA share my view that Whitehouse should go back to Khukrit rather than first see Anan separately. It would be particularly helpful to have Anan present at the Whitehouse-Khukrit meeting so that Anan can make no false claims about speaking for Khukrit. CIA believes that we have sufficient support in the Thai hierarchy to work up Thai resistance to Anan's hard line. We have recommended that Phil Habib chair a meeting March 5 to discuss our reply to the Whitehouse stance.

1 Source: Ford Library, National Security Adviser, Presidential Country Files for East Asia and the Pacific, Box 17, Thailand (18). Secret. Sent for urgent information. At the end of the memorandum, Scowcroft wrote, “Whitehouse’s position doesn’t surprise me at all. What is present status?” Attached but not published is Tab A, telegram 5023 from Bangkok, March 4, in which Whitehouse analyzed opinion within the Thai government toward U.S. residual forces. Also attached but not published is Tab B, Intelligence Information Cable DB-315/02282–76 from March 4.

Minutes of the Secretary of State’s Staff Meeting, Washington, March 5, 1976, 8:05 a.m. [Document 416]

Minutes of the Secretary of State’s Staff Meeting, Washington, March 5, 1976, 8:05 a.m.1

Washington, March 5, 1976, 8:05 a.m.

In Attendance - Friday, 3/5/76

Secretary of State Kissinger - Chairman

D - Mr. Ingersoll
P - Mr. Sisco
E - Mr. Robinson
T - Mr. Maw
M - Mr. Eagleburger
C - Mr. Sonnenfeldt
AF - Mr. Schaufele
ARA - Mr. Rogers
EA - Mr. Habib
EUR - Mr. Lowenstein (Acting)
NEA - Mr. Atherton
INR - Mr. Saunders
S/P - Mr. Lord
EA - Mr. Greenwald
S/PRS - Mr. Funseth
PM - Mr. Vest
IO - Mr. Lewis
H - Mr. McCloskey
L - Mr. Leigh
S/S - Mr. Borg
S - Mr. Barbian

[Omitted is material unrelated to Thailand.]

MR. SCHAUFELE: Phil?

MR. HABIB: We have an incipient problem developing in Thailand, which you're aware of. The Thai are setting certain conditions for the retention of our residual force in Thailand which are just not acceptable, and we're going to have to do something.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: Like what?

MR. HABIB: They're wanting us to agree to their definition of what community troops we would retain before they will agree to their retention.

Now, this is in effect a welching on a previous agreement they made with us. The Prime Minister indicated himself the procedures that we're following that are acceptable, but the bureaucrats have gotten into the act and it's an attempt to sort of wipe the slate clean on previous agreements and say that they want new agreements governing the presence of our troops.

(Secretary Kissinger is handed message and thereupon leaves room. He returns to conference room several minutes later.)

MR. HABIB: Further on that, what we're doing is convening sort of a stump group from Defense and ourselves to go over this today to see just how far we can go to meet their needs on the privileged remaining community troops.

In other words, what we can't do is have any conditions under which our troops are there. Otherwise they could just arrest them; we would have no juridical basis for the privileges and amenities of our men. And it could be a substantial problem in terms of a residual force.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: But why are they doing it? What's their real reason?

MR. HABIB: We have a strong feeling that the bureaucracy is not satisfied with what has been negotiated politically on the residual force. They haven't been satisfied for many years in the way we deal with the Thai Government. They're trying to regularize —

SECRETARY KISSINGER: Ours or theirs?

MR. HABIB: Theirs — very definitely theirs. (Laughter.) There's no question it's theirs. We thought it was all nailed down, and what they're trying to do is to require us to agree to their version of what privileges and amenities will be granted to our troops. And they're just not acceptable because what it would do is to allow them to be tried quite freely by the Thai courts. It would remove all free privileges. It could create a situation which our people are not prepared to handle there on the troops question. And it could, in effect, threaten the continuing presence of the residual force there.

There's no question about that because at least the Thai bureaucracy is being very hard-nosed. They're saying, "If you don't agree to this by March 20th, then all the troops will have to go." Now, the Prime Minister — we can't believe they mean it. The Prime Minister is saying that.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: The Ambassador doesn't want to go to the Prime Minister?

MR. HABIB: No. As a matter of fact, he did go to him and he did get the Prime Minister to agree to what he wants.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: Just a minute. Three weeks ago?

MR. HABIB: No. He went four days ago.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: Did he go back?

MR. HABIB: Well, that's the first thing we're going to do — have him go back to the Prime Minister and tell the Prime Minister what's going on and see if he can get him to enforce the different —

SECRETARY KISSINGER: Well, if the Prime Minister agreed to it, what's the sense of fighting with the bureaucracy?

MR. HABIB: That's the problem, because you're in the midst of an election and the Prime Minister is reluctant to fight the bureaucracy because in the meantime the bureaucracy is leaking the thing to the press.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: It's almost inconceivable. (Laughter.) It's so hard to feel your way into such a system of government.

MR. HABIB: The leader of the bureaucratic group got in touch with the Ambassador to Washington, who learned a few lessons. (Laughter.)

It's going to be a difficult thing, but we'll have a paper up to you before the day is over indicating what we think should be the initial step. And the first step should be to go back to the Prime Minister. At least, that's my feeling.

Defense and CIA are very much involved in this thing because of the nature of the residual force, and we'll consult with them.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: But you will have a recommendation by the end of the day.

MR. HABIB: I hope so. We're meeting this afternoon, and I'll get something up to you by the end of the day or the first thing in the morning.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: The first thing in the morning I won't be here.

MR. HABIB: Then we'll get it up to you later.

[Omitted is material unrelated to Thailand.]

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Transcripts of Secretary of State Kissinger’s Staff Meetings, 1973–1977, E5177, Box 9. Secret.

Memorandum From Thomas J. Barnes of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Scowcroft), Washington, March 20, 1976. [Document 417]

Memorandum From Thomas J. Barnes of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Scowcroft), Washington, March 20, 1976.1

Washington, March 20, 1976

MEMORANDUM
NATIONAL SECURITY COUNCIL
URGENT INFORMATION

March 20, 1976

MEMORANDUM FOR: BRENT SCOWCROFT
FROM: THOMAS J. BARNES [TJB initialed]

SUBJECT: Stance Toward Thailand in View of the RTG Request to Withdraw All our Forces

Deputy Assistant Secretary for East Asia Robert Miller chaired a meeting at State March 20 on the Thai situation. Defense, CIA, NSA, and the NSC participated. Defense indicated that it could meet the four-month deadline that the Thai have set for withdrawal of our residual forces. The East Asian Bureau is preparing a memo to the Secretary recommending the following U.S. stance, on which there was general consensus at the meeting: — Comply with the Thai desire for us to shut down all non-retrograde operations as of March 20, but continue on a case-by-case basis to request permission for Diego Garcia support flights.

—Withdraw the some $60 million worth of ammunition in Thailand (AIT) unless the Thai purchase for cash some or all of it.

— Pull out the Integrated Communication System (ICS) rather than turn it over to the Thai (who have minimal use for it, and would have trouble operating and maintaining it).

— Make no change in the FY 76 and FY 77 military aid request for Thailand currently before the Congress. (An announcement that we would reduce or cut out aid could precipitate a coup.)

— Continue JUSMAG personnel drawdowns. (The Thai will allow us 270 spaces, We currently have 161 assigned personnel with JUSMAG, and plan to cut that figure by 60 before the end of the calendar year.)

— Stop pleading for the Thai against U.S. domestic pressures for rice sales in traditional Thai markets. (The U.S. has almost a million tons of surplus rice.)

— If the new Government that comes in as a result of the April 4 elections invites us to stay, settle for a scaled down Ramasun operation and a small Utapao support group.

The EA Bureau has prepared the Q's and A's on the Thai situation at Tab A.

1 Source: Ford Library, National Security Adviser, Presidential Country Files for East Asia and the Pacific, Box 17, Thailand (19). Confidential. Urgent; Sent for information. According to the correspondence profile, Scowcroft saw this memorandum on March 22. Tab A, the questions and answers from EA, was not attached.

Minutes of the Secretary of State’s Staff Meeting, Washington, April 2, 1976, 8:09 a.m. [Document 418]

Minutes of the Secretary of State’s Staff Meeting, Washington, April 2, 1976, 8:09 a.m.1

Washington, April 2, 1976, 8:09 a.m.

In Attendance - Friday, April 2, 1976
Secretary of State Kissinger - Chairman

P - Mr. Sisco
M - Mr. Eagleburger
AF - Mr. Schaufele
ARA - Mr. Rogers
EA - Mr. Habib
EUR - Mr. Hartman
NEA - Mr. Atherton
INR - Mr. Saunders
S/P - Mr. Lord
EB - Mr. Greenwald
S/PRS - Mr. Funseth
IO - Mr. Lewis
H - Ambassador McCloskey
L - Mr. Leigh
S/S - Mr. Springsteen
S - Mr. Aherne
S - Mr. Passage

PROCEEDINGS

(The Secretary's Staff Meeting was convened at 8:09 a.m., Secretary of State Kissinger presiding as Chairman.)

SECRETARY KISSINGER: It's a distinguished group I've got here.

MR. EAGLEBURGER: I don't want you to think, Mr. Secretary, that we want to stay away from you. (Laughter.)

MR. HABIB: The Philippine ex-President situation has calmed down. There will be, of course, some after-effects; but I think that everybody realized that we handled ourselves in an appropriate manner, so I don't think we'll get much of a kickback from the French and so on. The Philippine Government authoritatively told us that we were going to arrest him. He could leave the country if we wanted to. But I would take those assurances with some grain of salt.

We're continuing to get out of Thailand on a proper pace, and we finally got all the agencies of Government to decide that they ought to coordinate their activities — CIA, NSA, Defense, State, and all other assorted representatives — in Bangkok.

The election there takes place on the 4th, but it's quite likely that it — well, nobody knows how it will turn out, but it undoubtedly involves some kind of coalition government. Who makes the coalition, who will be able to put it together — hold it together — is not certain. Whether the military will be fed zip with the thing and take a move, I think is just due for a period of uncertainty; and it could, according to Embassy estimates, run as long as three or four weeks before you know what kind of government you have in Thailand.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: Well, we're staying out of it, I trust?

MR. HABIB: Oh, yes, sir. We're staying so far out of it we probably don't know what the hell is going on. (Laughter.)

Nobody is playing any games on that, I'm sure. We've told them half a dozen times; it would not work to our advantage if we played games. We'd make a bigger mess.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: Certainly on this item this Embassy would have played around.

MR. HABIB: No. I say the military and the CIA instinctively tried to put a general in charge and it would have caused us immeasurable difficulty.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: I'm not in favor of that, but that's the platitude I always here. Why exactly would a general in Thailand cause us immeasurable difficulty?

MR. HABIB: Because he cannot rule the government unless he did with absolute force of arms, and even then he couldn't get away with it — let's say a combination of what Kittikachorn did or Sarit did in the old days. This is the bunch that they have now that are venal and corrupt, a recognizably incapable group.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: Well, the other ones were venal and corrupt.

MR. HABIB: Well, they were venal, but they weren't incapable.

MR. EAGLEBURGER: Corrupt. (Laughter.)

MR. HABIB: Prapas was very capable, and also Tanot. And the King in this case has been holding back. And I think, in fact, his attitude has influenced me very much. He is not in favor of the military coup. I think he knows his people better than we do.

SECRETARY KISSINGER: I'm not saying we should favor a military coup. I'm just saying we shouldn't use the usual platitudes about what the effect of a military coup would be or what democracy in Thailand means.

MR. HABIB: I don't think they're going to have democracy in Thailand, but I think we can avoid a situation where you have complete disarray. It's either some measure of orderliness, using the stability of the Crown and the religion and the national identity as a point of cohesion — as an element of cohesion — or creating — having a situation of complete disarray, which I think would always serve the purposes of Hanoi.

[Omitted is material unrelated to Thailand.]

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Transcripts of Secretary of State Kissinger’s Staff Meetings, 1973–1977, E5177, Box 9. Secret.

National Security Study Memorandum 240, Washington, April 9, 1976. [Document 419]

National Security Study Memorandum 240, Washington, April 9, 1976.1

Washington, April 9, 1976

NATIONAL SECURITY COUNCIL
WASHINGTON, D.C. 20506

April 9, 1976

National Security Study Memorandum 240

TO: THE SECRETARY OF STATE
THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE
THE DIRECTOR OF CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE

SUBJECT: Alternative Siting for Thai-based Operations

The withdrawal of us forces from Thailand necessitates a prompt determination of which activities formerly conducted there should be continued and where they should be relocated. A study should therefore be undertaken which will identify activities now carried on in Thailand which should be continued and make recommendations as to where these activities should be transferred. In view of the apparent suitability of Singapore as a location for some of these activities and of recent indications of interest by the Government of Singapore in closer cooperation with the United States on facilities and arms matters, the study should examine in particular the possibility and desirability of relocating Thai-based activities in Singapore.

The study should examine the advantages and disadvantages and present options and recommendations for each relocation site. The study should also make recommendations as to the approach to be taken toward the government of each country proposed as a relocation site to include the role and content of military assistance or sales programs.

The study should he prepared by a working group consisting of representatives of the addressees and chaired by the representative of the Department of Defense. It should be submitted to the Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs by April 19 for review by principals prior to submission to the President.

[signed]
Brent Scowcroft

cc: Chairman, Joint Chiefs of Staff

1 Source: Ford Library, National Security Decision Memoranda and Study Memoranda, Box 2. Confidential. A copy was sent to the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff.

Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Scowcroft) to President Ford, Washington, April 20, 1976. [Document 420]

Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Scowcroft) to President Ford, Washington, April 20, 1976.1

Washington, April 20, 1976

MEMORANDUM
THE WHITE HOUSE
WASHINGTON
6846 (redo)
ACTION

April 20, 1976

MEMORANDUM FOR THE PRESIDENT
FROM: BRENT SCOWCROFT [BS initialed]

SUBJECT: NSSM 225: U.S. Policy Toward Thailand

In response to NSSM 225, a review of U.S. policy toward Thailand has been completed. The resulting inter-agency study (Tab B, with Agency views at Tabs D, E, F) outlines U.S. interests and objectives, and presents policy options aimed at achieving these objectives. (You have already decided the policy questions on the retention of military forces and intelligence facilities in Thailand after March 20, 1976 [Tab C]).

Current Situation in Thailand

In apparent response to domestic political pressure, the Thai Government asked us to withdraw all our remaining military forces by July 20, 1976. In the April 4 Parliamentary elections, Prime Minister Khukrit lost his seat and a new Prime Minister will come to power. Despite this change, Embassy Bangkok considers a reversal of the Thai decision on our force withdrawal unlikely. Even were that to take place, the Embassy believes our remaining would spark violent demonstrations in Bangkok which could force us to leave anyway. Should the new coalition government prove weak and unable to provide firm leadership, it is probable that the Thai military, after a decent interval, will take control of the government by force. While these military leaders would most likely permit at least some of our forces to remain, our withdrawals should be well advanced by then and complete reversal would be difficult. Additionally, a military takeover, let alone an RTG decision to permit U.S. forces to stay in Thailand, could cause political violence in Bangkok.

U.S. Objectives

In the wake of events in Indochina, the study has identified the following U.S. objectives which remain valid even though the Thai have asked us to withdraw our remaining military forces: — An independent and non-Communist Thailand.

— Increased Thai support for U.S. positions in international fora, such as the UN and such specialized assemblies as the Law of the Sea conference.

— Continued Thai support for peaceful change and general stability in Asia.

— Continued access to Thai markets for U.S. suppliers and investors Expanded Thai-U.S. trade.

— Continued and increased Thai interest in anti-narcotics programs; and access to Thailand for U.S. anti-narcotics intelligence programs.

— Friendly and mutually beneficial Thai-U.S. relations.

Policy Options

All agencies agree that we should adopt the following policies toward Thailand: — Continue a security assistance program whose grant MAP component will decline from the FY 75 level.

— Not hinder the Thai in their efforts to adjust to new relationships with their Communist and non-Communist neighbors, and with us.

— Focus our bilateral economic aid program on problems of the poorer rural areas.

— Improve U.S.-Thai trade and access for U.S. businessmen and investors in the Thai market through the following:

- Point out to the Thai those steps necessary to create a favorable investment climate.

- Insist on a genuinely reciprocal aviation agreement, and not attempt to compensate the Thai for their own failure to exploit fully their aviation rights and opportunities.

- Continue to advise the Thai of our stockpile disposals and of our PL-480 sales in traditional Thai markets.

— Support anti-narcotics activities in Thailand through the following:

- Gather intelligence to the fullest extent possible on narcotics trafficking in Thailand.

- Work with the Thai to reduce the amount of illicit opium produced in Thailand.

- Cooperate with the Thai in suppressing narcotics traffic in and through Thailand.

— Continue to conduct information, cultural, and Peace Corps programs designed to demonstrate that good relations with the United States are advantageous to Thailand.

— Reduce the size and tighten up the organization of our official presence to make it more in tune with our reduced activities in Thailand.

Decision Memorandum

At Tab A is a proposed directive outlining our policy toward Thailand based on the agreed study.

RECOMMENDATION:

That you approve my signing the memorandum at Tab A.
APPROVE [GRF initialed]
DISAPPROVE

1 Source: Ford Library, NSC Institutional Files (H-Files), Box H–65, NSDMs, NSDM 327, U.S. Policy Toward Thailand (1). Secret. Sent for action. Ford initialed his approval of Tab A, not attached, which, once signed, became NSDM 327. (See Document 421) Not published are Tab B, attached, the undated NSSM 225 paper, which is summarized in Document 409; and Tab C, not attached, which is likely Kissinger’s memorandum of October 24, 1975 on force reductions in Thailand, printed as Document 411. Not published are Tab D, attached, a memorandum from Colby to Kissinger of October 23; Tab E, attached, a memorandum from Ingersoll to Kissinger of October 27; and Tab F, not attached, a memorandum from Clements to Scowcroft of November 4. (Ibid., Box 36, NSSMs, NSSM 225, Review of U.S. Policy Toward Thailand [3])

National Security Decision Memorandum 327, Washington, April 21, 1976. [Document 421]

National Security Decision Memorandum 327, Washington, April 21, 1976.1

Washington, April 21, 1976

NATIONAL SECURITY COUNCIL
WASHINGTON D.C., 20506

APRIL 21, 1976

National Security Decision Memorandum 327

TO: The Secretary of State
The Secretary of Defense
The Director of Central Intelligence

SUBJECT: U.S. Policy Toward Thailand

The President has reviewed the inter-agency study on Thailand in response to NSSM 225. Having reviewed the options which the study proposes, the President has decided that the following will constitute our future policy toward Thailand. We will: — Continue a security assistance program whose grant MAP component will decline from the FY 75 level.

— Not hinder the Thai in their efforts to adjust to new relationships with their Communist and non-Communist neighbors, and with us.

— Focus our bilateral economic aid program on problems of the poorer rural areas.

— Seek to improve U.S.-Thai trade and access for U.S. businesses and investors in the Thai market through the following:

- Point out to the Thai those steps necessary to create a favorable investment climate.

- Insist on a reciprocal aviation agreement, and not attempt to compensate the Thai for their own failure to exploit fully their aviation rights and opportunities.

- Continue to advise the Thai of our stockpile disposals and of our PL-480 sales in traditional Thai markets.

— Support anti-narcotics activities in Thailand through the following:

- Gather intelligence to the fullest extent possible on narcotics trafficking in Thailand.

- Work with the Thai to reduce the amount of illicit opium produced in Thailand.

- Cooperate with the Thai in suppressing narcotics traffic in and through Thailand.

— Continue to conduct information, cultural, and Peace Corps programs designed to demonstrate that good relations with the United States are advantageous to Thailand.

— Reduce the size and tighten up the organization of our official presence to make it more in tune with our reduced activities in Thailand.

This NSDM supplements earlier Presidential decisions made regarding retention of U.S. military facilities in Thailand.

[signed]
Brent Scowcroft

cc: The Chairman, Joint Chiefs of Staff

1 Source: Ford Library, National Security Decision Memoranda and Study Memoranda, Box 1. Secret. A copy was sent to the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff.

Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Scowcroft) to President Ford, Washington, May 3, 1976. [Document 422]

Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Scowcroft) to President Ford, Washington, May 3, 1976.1

Washington, May 3, 1976

MEMORANDUM
THE WHITE HOUSE

WASHINGTON

ACTION

May 3, 1976

MEMORANDUM FOR: THE PRESIDENT
FROM: BRENT SCOWCROFT [initialed]

SUBJECT: Alternative Siting for Thailand Based Operations

The Problem

The Thai Government has given us until July 20 to remove our military and intelligence facilities from that country. An inter-departmental study has evaluated the need to continue these activities elsewhere and provided recommendations on possible relocation sites (Tab B).

Background

U.S. objectives in the negotiations which began last Fall with the Thai Government were to attempt to retain the following military and intelligence activities in Thailand:

[text not declassified]

-- Chiang Mai Seismic Station (Detachment 415) [text not declassified]

-- U-2R Operations, [text not declassified]

-- P-3 Air Surveillance Patrols, which fly between Thailand and Diego Garcia and search the Indian Ocean and the Malacca Straits to identify the presence of naval combatants and merchant ships, particularly those of the Soviet Union.

-- Ko Kha Spacetrack Facility, [text not declassified] During a December review of the Intelligence Community budget, you terminated funding for the Ko Kha facility beginning in FY 77, as an economy measure.

— Utapao Airfield Facility, which supports U.S. aircraft transiting Thailand while re-supplying Diego Garcia and supporting other U.S. operations.

From November 1975 until March 20, 1976, our Embassy in Bangkok attempted to negotiate such a residual presence with the Royal Thai Government of Prime Minister Khukrit Pramot. Unfortunately, the discussions became deadlocked over the question of Thai jurisdiction over U.S. military forces. When this problem could not be resolved, the Khukrit government announced March 20 that all U.S. forces would have to withdraw from Thailand within four months (by July 20, 1976). The Thai did stipulate that we could retain 270 military spaces within our Military Advisory Group and our Defense Attache Office. On April 4, a new coalition government headed by the Democratic Party came to power in Thailand. While there seemed some prospect that this new government would reverse the Khukrit government's decision, it now appears that it will allow the decision to stand.

Retention of Some Activities in Thailand

Both the Departments of State and Defense believe that despite the Thai decision to have all U.S. forces withdraw it may still be possible to obtain their agreement to allow us [text not declassified] to permit U.S. aircraft to transit Thai military airfields. The study recommends that we approach the new Thai Government to seek this agreement.

Alternative Sites

Air Operations

Should the Thai refuse us permission to use their airfields for our operations, the study recommends that we seek another transit point between the Philippines and Diego Garcia. While it would be possible to conduct both Diego Garcia support operations and P-3 patrols directly from the Philippines, technical considerations and risks make it preferable to have an intermediate transit point. But, even if the Thai should allow us to continue to use Utapao or another Thai airfield on a limited basis, the study recommends that we still attempt to find another location as a hedge against any future Thai decision to completely bar us from their country.

Australia and Cocos Island are geographically disadvantageous locations for flight operations. The political climate in Malaysia and Indonesia would probably not allow any favorable consideration of a U.S. request to operate from there. Only Singapore emerges as being a geographically and politically viable alternative to a base in Thailand. Lee Kuan Yew has indicated he wishes to move closer to us. Singapore's existing air facilities have the capabilities to meet our immediate operational requirements. Its geographic location is convenient and its work force has the relatively high technological sophistication necessary to support and maintain our aircraft.

In approaching Singapore, the interagency study recognizes that Singapore may seek increases in our security assistance in response to our request. The study proposes that we attempt to remain within the bounds of Singapore's current requests for security assistance. But it acknowledges that if we are unable to operate out of Thailand, an increase in our assistance would be justified as long as it did not unduly upset Singapore's neighbors who are sensitive to Singapore's growing military strength.

[text not declassified]

The study also recommends that we make no attempt to bring the U-2 program back to Thailand, because it has provided little information of current value.

Other Facilities

The interagency study also addresses the relocation of two other acti¬vities: the Joint Casualty Resolution Center (JCRC) and the SEATO Medical Lab. The mission of the JCRC is to conduct investigations of crash sites and grave sites to determine the fate of American men still unaccounted for in Indochina. The study points out that the recovery operations are not likely to resume in the foreseeable future but adds that the continuation of some form of recovery mechanism is politically important to the United States because it demonstrates that we are serious in our efforts to resolve this problem. The study therefore recommends that we attempt to retain in Thailand a small JCRC office within the 270 spaces allocated to our Defense Attache Office. The remaining JCRC personnel should be trans¬ferred back to the United States. Should the activity be forced to leave Thailand entirely the study recommends that we not attempt to relocate it in any other part of Southeast Asia but move it in toto back to the United States.

The SEATO Medical Lab conducts tropical disease research. If the Thai Government does not request that the medical laboratory remain in Thailand, the study recommends that it be disestablished.

Agency Positions

The Departments of State and Defense and the Director of Central Intelli¬gence (Tabs Cj_ D^ and EJ all agree that we should adopt the policies which the study recommends.

I concur fully with the recommendations of the agencies involved. If you approve these policies, I will sign the National Security Decision Memoran¬dum at Tab A.

RECOMMENDATION:

That you authorize my signing the NSDM at Tab A.

APPROVE

DISAPPROVE

1 Source: Ford Library, NSC Institutional Files (H-Files), Box H–65, NSDMs, NSDM 329, U.S. Political Operations and Intelligence Activities Based in Thailand [2 of 2]. Top Secret; Sensitive; Umbra. Sent for Action. Ford initialed his approval of Tab A, not attached, which, once signed, became NSDM 329 (Document 423). Tab B, not attached, is the undated interagency paper prepared in response to NSSM 240, which the NSC staff sent out under a covering memorandum, April 21, from Davis to DOS, DOD, and CIA. (Ibid.) Tab C, attached, is a memorandum, April 24, from Springsteen to Scowcroft. Tab D, attached, is a memorandum, April 24, from Ellsworth to Scowcroft. Tab E, attached, is a memorandum, April 23, from Bush to Scowcroft.

National Security Decision Memorandum 329, Washington, May 5, 1976. [Document 423]

National Security Decision Memorandum 329, Washington, May 5, 1976.1

Washington, May 5, 1976

NATIONAL SECURITY COUNCIL
WASHINGTON, D.C. 20506

May 5, 1976

National Security Decision Memorandum 329

TO: The Secretary of State
The Secretary of Defense
The Director of Central Intelligence

SUBJECT: U.S. Military Operations and Intelligence Activities Based in Thailand

The President has reviewed the interagency study on alternative siting for U.S. military operations and intelligence activities based in Thailand. He has decided that the United States will continue to seek Thai agreement for continuation of the following activities: -- Use of an airfield for supply flights and P-3 operations;

-- [text not declassified]

-- Incorporation of Joint Casualty Resolution Center (JCRC) activities and a reduced staff into our Defense Attache Office. Should the Thai Government refuse to allow the JCRC to remain in Thailand, it will be relocated to U.S. territory;

-- Continued operation of the seismic station in Chiang Mai or transfer of its operations to the Thai. This activity will be discontinued if neither of these alternatives is possible.

The U.S. Government will also seek agreement from the Government of Singapore to conduct P-3 patrols and Diego Garcia support operations from Singapore. This approach should be made regardless of the Thai decision on granting access to Thai airbase facilities.

No attempt will be made to retain U-2 intelligence gathering operations in Thailand.

[text not declassified]

Operation of the SEATO Medical Laboratory will be discontinued unless the Thai Government requests that it remain in Thailand,

To implement these decisions, the Department of State, in coordination with the Department of Defense and the Director of Central Intelligence, will: -- Seek agreement from the new Thai Government to retain the military and intelligence activities listed above.

-- Develop a strategy for approaching the Government of Singapore to obtain access for U.S. military aircraft and agreement to allow us to conduct P-3 operations. In developing this approach, we should attempt to remain within the limits of our current levels of security assistance.

-- Determine the political impact of moving [text not declassified]

-- [text not declassified]

[signed] Brent Scowcroft

cc: The Chairman, Joint Chiefs of Staff

1 Source: Ford Library, NSC Institutional Files (H-Files), Box H-69, NSDM originals [2 of 2], NSDM 316–NSDM 330. Top Secret; Sensitive. A copy was also sent to the Chairman of the JCS.

Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, September 16, 1976, 3:30 p.m. [Document 424]

Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, September 16, 1976, 3:30 p.m.1

Washington, September 16, 1976, 3:30 p.m.

THE WHITE HOUSE
WASHINGTON

MEMORANDUM OF CONVERSATION

PARTICIPANTS: Brent Scowcroft
Ambassador Charles Whitehouse
William Gleysteen

DATE AND TIME: September 16, 1976; 3:30 p.m.

SUBJECT: U.S.-Thai Relations, and Thailand's Prospects

In answer to General Scowcroft's question, Ambassador Whitehouse described our situation in Thailand as "pretty well settled in." He stressed that the Thai want to be friendly with us. Even during the final paroxysm of the struggle over our residual military presence, the contest was between two groups friendly to us. One group feared that a continuing presence at Ramasun would be too much "like a thumb in the Vietnamese eye," while the other thought a modest U.S. presence would be useful. Both were basically well disposed to the United States. Scowcroft said he had not realized this. In any event, he said, we had lanced the boll and there was no longer anything to get upset about. Whitehouse added that it was conceivable that if we had not pushed so heavily, we might have been able to retain a somewhat smaller military presence than we were seeking at the time.

Scowcroft asked about the outlook in Thailand. Whitehouse said that the Thai want Americans around but not on their turf. The new arrangements at Takli were a good example of what the Thai found satisfactory. He went on to say that here was considerable stability in the domestic situation. Seni was, in his opinion, very representative, and his government accurately reflected the reduced clout of the military in Thailand. The government was not very quick nor very decisive, but it worked. Whitehouse noted that he himself had never expected a coup in recent months and expected general calm at least for the near future. He emphasized that apart from security we have substantial interests in Thailand, including trade and a far greater cultural involvement than he had imagined before arrival on post. There were enormous numbers of American trained individuals with a substantial stake in the U.S.

Whitehouse mentioned that although he had expected a significant increase in Vietnam's subversive involvement in Northeast Thailand, he had been unable to find evidence of a significant expansion of the Vietnamese role. He agreed with Scowcroft that there might be some increase in small arms and ammunition deliveries but the insurgent requirements for these items were very small. In the south the insurgent situation was more serious, involving more violence and potential for trouble.

Scowcroft asked how the Thai perceived their security situation. Intellectually, Whitehouse replied, they could sound just like Sir Robert Thompson, yet their anti-insurgency operations lacked any zip. Their real concern was that some day the Vietnamese dead-end kids were going to come across the border. This prompted the Thai military to make some fairly expensive purchases, such as F-5E's. Once they did so, however, they more or less sat back from active concern. The net effect was hardly helpful in countering insurgency. The Thai were a fun-loving, indolent, and slack society.

Whitehouse responded to Scowcroft's question about the adequacy of our programs with a comment that economic assistance was properly a thing of the past but that in the case of military assistance there was still some need for help. Psychologically, the Thai felt we should be aiding them since this was the moment of their peril; i.e., we were no longer in Thailand providing a shield. Given the prospect that the current Thai authorities, while not being able to hold on forever, could at least put off the evil day for a substantial period, Whitehouse suggested that we try to help in limited ways such as more generous terms for the sale of the AIT.

Noting Whitehouse's long-term assessment, Gleysteen asked how the demise of the current structure might occur. Whitehouse suggested that one obvious possibility would be a Vietnamese style insurgency moving to large scale military and logistical operations. If that were to happen, the government would collapse because it was soft whereas the opposition was lean, tough, and dynamic. Scowcroft concluded that Whitehouse was basically pessimistic, and Whitehouse agreed he was gloomy about the long run. Nevertheless, he did not rule out hope for heading off a collapse, and certainly Thailand was not about to collapse like a domino.

Scowcroft suggested Thailand's problems appeared primarily social and political rather than economic. Whitehouse agreed, citing Thailand's more than $1.4 billion foreign exchange as evidence of a reasonably good economic situation. Thailand's difficulties consisted of a social problem, a leadership problem, and an integrity problem. Scowcroft noted that changes of this kind were hard for any society. Whitehouse said hopefully that while this was so, there was a tough, bright, new generation in Bangkok coming along after the current generation of leaders. Men like Anan might be able to break the debilitating pattern of their elders.

Whitehouse described his current mission problem as a need to pull things together, get people into one building, cut operations down in size, and clear up lines of authority. Scowcroft asked if he were worried about the visibility of our presence, and when he said he was not, Scowcroft asked why he wanted a cutdown in the U.S. presence. Whitehouse said it was simply a question of management control.

Scowcroft summed up Whitehouse's views as conveying a picture that was "not bad, at least for the moment." Whitehouse said that was a fair characterization. The Thai saw Vietnam as the real threat and China as a rather benevolent power even if some Thai also recognized that this benevolence stemmed from China's self-interest. While Thai views of China were a bit naive, the Russians were not making headway in Thailand. If a Russian were to jump up on the hood of Whitehouse's car, all the Thai would assume that the Soviet KGB had paid him to do it.

1 Source: Ford Library, National Security Adviser, Memoranda of Conversation, Box 21. Secret; Sensitive. Scowcroft saw a briefing memorandum, September 15, from Gleysteen before this meeting. (Ibid., Presidential Country Files for East Asia and the Pacific, Box 17, Thailand [19])

Telegram 28513 From the Embassy in Thailand to the Department of State, October 14, 1976, 1117Z. [Document 425]

Telegram 28513 From the Embassy in Thailand to the Department of State, October 14, 1976, 1117Z.1

October 14, 1976, 1117Z

TELEGRAM
Department of State
BANGKOK 28513

R 141117Z OCT 76

FM AMEMBASSY BANGKOK TO SECSTATE WASHDC 4685
INFO AMCONSUL HONG KONG
AMEMBASSY JAKARTA
AMEMBASSY KUALA LUMPUR
AMEMBASSY MANILA
AMEMBASSY RANGOON
AMEMBASSY TOKYO
AMEMBASSY SINGAPORE
CINCPAC HONOLULU
USLO PEKING
AMEMBASSY VIENTIANE

BANGKOK 28513

CINCPAC ALSO FOR POLAD

EO 11652: GDS
TAGS: PGOV TH

SUBJECT: THE END OF THE DEMOCRATIC EXPERIMENT IN THAILAND
REF: BANGKOK 28368

SUMMARY: THAILAND'S THREE-YEAR-OLE EXPERIMENT WITH DEMOCRACY ENDED WITH THE COUP D'ETAT OF OCT 6. THE DEMOCRATIC GOVERNMENTS IN POWER DURING THE PAST THREE YEARS WERE UNABLE TO PROVIDE THAILAND THE LEADERSHIP THE COUNTRY NEEDED. THE CONFUSED AND COMPLEX EVENTS WHICH LED TO THE CHANGE IN GOVERNMENT WERE CERTAINLY TRIGGERED BY THE RETURN OF FORMER PRIME MINISTER THANOM TO THAILAND ON SEPT 19, BUT THE FACT IS THAT THE THAI MILITARY DID NOT TAKE OVER FROM A SUCCESSFUL, FUNCTIONING DEMOCRATIC GOVERNMENT. THAILAND'S FLIRTATION WITH DEMOCRATIC GOVERNMENT HAS NOT ENTIRELY ENDED, AND THE SIGNS ARE THAT AN ESSENTIALLY CIVILIAN CABINET WILL BE CONSTITUTED IN THE NEAR FUTURE. THE 24-MEMBER NARC, AS PRESENTLY CONSTITUTED, IS PROBABLY TOO LARGE TO FUNCTION EFFECTIVELY, AND IT WILL TAKE SOMETIME FOR THE MILITARY-DOMINATED GOVERNMENT TO SETTLE DOWN. END SUMMARY.

1. THE TAKEOVER OF POWER BY THE NATIONAL ADMINISTRATIVE REFORM COUNCIL (NARC) IN THAILAND ON OCT 6 MARKS THE END OF THE KINGDOM'S THREE-YEAR "DEMOCRATIC EXPERIMENT". THAILAND MAY GO THROUGH FUTURE PERIODS OF RELATIVELY OPEN AND EVEN FREE GOVERNMENT, BUT THERE CAN BE FEW ILLUSIONS ABOUT THE TEMPORARY CHARACTER OF SUCH EPISODES. IN LARGE MEASURE, THE RESULTS OF THIS EXPERIMENT WERE FOREORDAINED IN THE SENSE THAT DEMOCRATIC GOVERNMENT OF THAILAND STANDS OUT AS A BREAK IN THE PATTERN OF AUTOCRATIC OR OLIGARCHIC RULE WHICH HAS CHARACTERIZED THIS COUNTRY'S HISTORY. IN THE 40-SOME YEARS THAT HAVE PASSED SINCE THE OVERTHROW OF THE ABSOLUTE MONARCHY IN 1932, THERE HAVE BEEN ONLY ABOUT THREE YEARS OF DEMOCRATIC GOVERNMENT, MOST OF IT SINCE OCTOBER 1973.

2. BACKGROUND: THE THREE CABINETS THAT SPANNED THE THAI DEMOCRATIC EXPERIMENT (EACH WAS SLIGHTLY RESHUFFLED DURING ITS PERIOD OF OFFICE) HAD THEIR UNIQUE QUALITIES, BUT NONE OF THEM WAS ABLE TO PROVIDE THE KIND OF IMAGINATIVE AND STRONG LEADERSHIP WHICH THAILAND REQUIRES IN THE PRESENT PERIOD. IN SEVERAL RESPECTS THE TWO CABINETS OF PRIME MINISTER SANYA THAMMASAK (OCT 1973, TO MARCH 1975) WERE PROBABLY THE MOST MEMORABLE, IN THE SENSE THAT SANYA PRESIDED SUCCESSFULLY OVER THE TRANSITION FROM AUTHORITARIAN TO DEMOCRATIC GOVERNMENT. SANYA'S ROLE HAD TO BE A TEMPORARY ONE, HOWEVER, AS HE WAS APPOINTED DIRECTLY BY THE KING, HAD NO SPECIFIC POLITICAL BASE, AND HAD A FUNCTION LIMITED TO SETTING OUT THE FOUNDATIONS OF FUTURE DEMOCRATIC GOVERNMENT. THE CABINET OR PRIME MINISTER KHUKRIT PRAMOT (MARCH 17, 1975, TO APRIL 20, 1976) WAS HOBBLED BY A BADLY-SPLIT PARLIAMENT ISSUING FROM THE ELECTIONS OF JANUARY, 1975, AND THE 16 POLITICAL PARTIES THAT MADE IT UP FOCUSED MUCH OF THEIR ATTENTION ON POLITICAL INFIGHTING, RATHER THAN OF DEALING WITH THE MAJOR PROBLEMS FACING THAILAND. THE CABINET OF PRIME MINISTER SENI PRAMOT (APRIL 21, 1976, TO OCTOBER 6, 1976) IN SEVERAL WAYS APPEARED TO HAVE THE MOST PROMISE, AS IT WAS A COALITION CONSISTING OF ONLY FOUR PARTIES, WITH A HUGE MAJORITY IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES. THERE WAS LITTLE OVERT FRICTION BETWEEN THE FOUR PARTIES, BUT THERE WAS DISASTROUS DISAGREEMENT BETWEEN FACTIONS WITHIN THE DEMOCRAT PARTY, PARTICULARLY OVER THE HANDLING OF THE RETURN OF FORMER PRIME MINISTER THANOM. IT WAS ON THE CONSEQUENCES OF THIS ISSUE THAT THE FINAL BLOWUP OCCURRED.

3. THE DETAILS OF HOW THE MILITARY TAKEOVER WAS PLANNED AND EXECUTED ARE ONLY OF ACADEMIC INTEREST NOW, BUT IT MAY BE WORTHWHILE TO MAKE A FEW POINTS IN THIS CONNECTION. THERE WERE SEVERAL INDICATIONS OF COUP PLOTTING DURING THE PAST YEAR. THE ROYAL THAI ARMED FORCES PROBABLY HAD THE CAPABILITY TO MOUNT AND EXECUTE A SUCCESSFUL COUP THROUGHOUT THIS PERIOD. HOWEVER, IT WAS NOT UNTIL LAST WEEK THAT THE ELEMENTS ESSENTIAL TO A FINAL DECISION WERE BROUGHT TOGETHER. SUCH A TAKEOVER PROBABLY CAME CLOSE TO OCCURRING LAST FEBRUARY, AND, INDEED, THE THEN COMMANDER-IN-CHIEF OF THE ROYAL THAI ARMY, GENERAL BUNCHAI BAMRUNGPHONG, ORDERED A MILITARY ALERT TO PREVENT A COUP FROM TAKING PLACE. MOREOVER, THE KING CLEARLY OPPOSED A COUP LAST FEBRUARY. FINALLY, MOST MILITARY LEADERS WERE CONCERNED THAT A COUP WOULD REQUIRE THE INFLICTING OF MANY THOUSANDS OF CASUALTIES TO RESTORE ORDER. BY CONTRAST, LAST WEEK THERE WAS AGREEMENT AMONG THE MILITARY LEADERS, THE KING APPARENTLY APPROVED, AND THE STUDENT AND LABOR LEADERS WERE NEUTRALIZED EITHER BY ARREST OR BY CONCERN OVER THE INVOLVEMENT OF THE STUDENTS IN AN INSULT TO THE ROYAL FAMILY.

4. SOME OBSERVERS--PARTICULARLY AMONG JOURNALISTS AND SOME FOREIGN RESIDENTS OF THAILAND--HAVE TRIED TO CONNECT THE EVENTS OF LAST WEEK WITH THE RETURN OF FORMER PRIME MINISTER THANOM TO THAILAND ON SEPT 19 AS PART OF A DEEP-DYED PLOY TO OVERTHROW DEMOCRATIC GOVERNMENT. THIS "PLOT" THEORY, IN SOME VERSIONS, EVEN ALLEGES THAT THE MOCK HANGING EPISODE AT THAMMASAT UNIVERSITY ON OCT 4, INVOLVING A STUDENT WHO RESEMBLED THE CROWN PRINCE, WAS ARRANGED BY THE COUP PLOTTERS TO BRING ON DISORDERS AND SO PROVIDE AN EXCUSE FOR THE MILITARY TAKEOVER. A "PLOT" THEME WITHOUT SPECIFIC DETAIL IS PLAYED IN THE COMMENTARIES ON THE MILITARY TAKEOVER IN RADIO BROADCASTS FROM MOSCOW, VIENTIANE, AND HANOI.

5. BEYOND A CLOSENESS IN TIMING, THERE IS NO EVIDENCE FOR ANY OF THIS. THOUGH THANOM MAY BE PERMITTED TO REMAIN IN THAILAND, HE IS NOT ON PARTICULARLY GOOD TERMS WITH ADMIRAL SA-NGAT AND OTHER MILITARY LEADERS, AND MOST THAI MILITARY FIGURES NOW APPEAR TO FEEL THAT THANOM'S TIME IS PAST IN ANY CASE. THANOM'S RETURN RELEASED TENSIONS WHICH LED INITIALLY TO THE RESIGNATION OF PRIME MINISTER SENI ON SEPT 23 AND TO THE DECISION BY SENI ON OCT 5 TO SEND POLICE INTO THAMMASAT U. CAMPUS TO ARREST SOME OF THE STUDENTS. HOWEVER, THANOM'S RETURN DID NOT RPT NOT PROVIDE THE PRIMARY MOTIVE FORCE TO THE EVENTS OF LAST WEEK. THE MILITARY LEADERS MAY HAVE USED A LONG-PREPARED CONTINGENCY PLAN IN STAGING THE COUP, BUT THIS APPEARS TO HAVE BEEN THE MOST THAT WAS DONE IN ADVANCE. THE COUP ITSELF APPEARS TO HAVE BEEN DECIDED ON IN REACTION TO THE EVENTS OF OCT 6.

6. WHILE THE DECISION TO STAGE THE COUP WAS MADE BY THE MILITARY LEADERS THEMSELVES, IT IS A SAD COMMENTARY ON THE DEMOCRATIC EXPERIMENT TO NOTE THEY DID NOT RPT NOT TAKE OVER FROM A SUCCESSFUL, FUNCTIONING DEMOCRATIC GOVERNMENT. RATHER, DEMOCRATIC GOVERNMENT WAS SEEN BY A SIGNIFICANT PROPORTION OF THAI--NOT ALL OF THEM MILITARY OFFICERS--AS BEING UNSUITED TO THAILAND'S NEEDS. A LARGE SHARE IN THE RESPONSIBILITY FOR THE EVENTS THAT LED TO THIS END TO THE DEMOCRATIC EXPERIMENT MUST LIE WITH THE LEADERSHIP OF THE NATIONAL STUDENT CENTER OF THAILAND (NSCT) AND WITH THE PROGRESSIVE FACTION OF THE DEMOCRAT PARTY. THE STUDENT LEADERS, PERHAPS INITIALLY CONCERNED OVER THE IMPLICATIONS OF THANOM'S RETURN, APPEARED TO BE USING THE DEMONSTRATIONS AGAINST THANOM TO CONSOLIDATE THEIR ASCENDANCY OVER THAI UNIVERSITY STUDENTS AND TO REACH BEYOND THEM TO THE COMMUNITY AS A WHOLE. THE PROGRESSIVE FACTION OF THE DEMOCRAT PARTY EVIDENTLY SAW IN THE RETURN OF THANOM A MEANS OF PRESSURING PRIME MINISTER SENI INTO INCREASING ITS SHARE OF CABINET POSTS IN EXCHANGE FOR RELENTING IN ITS CAMPAIGN TO FORCE THANOM TO LEAVE THAILAND.

7. IF IT IS CORRECT TO SPEAK OF THE END OF THE DEMOCRATIC EXPERIMENT, THAILAND'S FLIRTATION WITH DEMOCRATIC INSTITUTIONS AND PRACTICES HAS NOT RPT NOT ENTIRELY ENDED. MANY THAI ARE CLEARLY DEVOTED TO THE PRACTICES AND OUTLOOKS OF THE OPEN SOCIETY AND VALUE THE SUBSTANCE OF DEMOCRATIC GOVERNMENT, WITH ITS CONSTITUTIONAL GUARANTEES OF PERSONAL FREEDOM. INDEED, THE INITIAL MANIFESTO OF THE NARC ON OCT 6, IN ITS FINAL PARAGRAPH, STATED THAT, "THE COUNCIL AFFIRMS THAT IT WILL UPHOLD THE DESIRE OF THE THAI PEOPLE FOR DEMOCRATIC GOVERNMENT WITH THE KING AS HEAD OF STATE AND WILL DO EVERYTHING IT CAN TO GIVE FIRM FOUNDATIONS TO THIS SYSTEM OF GOVERNMENT, BY STAGES, UNTIL WE HAVE A DEMOCRATIC GOVERNMENT WITH THE KING AS HEAD OF STATE THAT IS APPROPRIATE TO THE PRESENT CIRCUMSTANCES." SUCH A STATEMENT MAY BE REGARDED AS CYNICAL LIP-SERVICE, BUT ITS INCLUSION IN THE INITIAL MANIFESTO AT LEAST INDICATES AN AWARENESS ON THE PART OF THE NARC THAT THERE IS A CONSIDERABLE ATTACHMENT IN THAILAND TO THE CONCEPT OF DEMOCRATIC GOVERNMENT.

8. THE APPOINTMENT OF THANIN KRAIWICHIAN AS PRIME MINISTER ON OCT 8, THE ANNOUNCEMENT THAT A FULL CABINET WILL BE APPOINTED WITHIN TWO WEEKS, AND THE APPOINTMENT OF A CONSTITUTION DRAFTING COMMITTEE ON OCT 11 INDICATES THAT THE NARC APPRECIATES THAT IT CANNOT GOVERN THE COUNTRY DIRECTLY AND THAT A NORMAL STRUCTURE OF GOVERNMENT NEEDS TO BE COMPLETED QUICKLY. HOWEVER, THANIN'S SPEECH OF OCT 13 (REFTEL) INDICATES THAT CONSIDERABLE EXPERIMENTATION IN GOVERNMENTAL STRUCTURES LIES AHEAD.

9. AS FOR THE 24-MEMBER NARC ITSELF, IT PROBABLY CANNOT CONTINUE IN ITS PRESENT FORM INDEFINITELY. IT IS TOO LARGE TO FUNCTION EFFECTIVELY, AND SEVERAL OF ITS MEMBERS, PARTICULARLY THE COMMANDERS OF THE FIELD ARMIES WHOSE HEADQUARTERS ARE OUTSIDE OF BANGKOK, WILL PROBABLY ATTEND ITS SESSIONS ONLY FROM TIME TO TIME. THE NARC LACKS A SINGLE, STRONG LEADER. THE CHAIRMAN, ADMIRAL SA-NGAT, IS WELL-RESPECTED IN THE THAI ARMED FORCES, BUT HIS CAREER SERVICE IN THE NAVE IS AN ANOMALY IN A MILITARY GOVERNMENT, TRADITIONALLY DOMINATED BY THE MUCH LARGER ROYAL THAI ARMY. THERE ARE INDICATIONS THAT, IF THE COUP OF OCT 6 HAD BEEN DELAYED ANOTHER COUPLE OF DAYS, THERE WOULD HAVE BEEN A DIFFERENT COUP, WITH A DIFFERENT SET OF LEADERS, AMONG WHOM THE THAI ARMY WOULD HAVE PREDOMINATED. THE ABRUPT DISMISSAL OF GENERAL CHALAT ON OCTOBER 10, UNDER CIRCUMSTANCES WHICH INDICATE HE WAS ENGAGED IN COUP PLOTTING, AND THE SUDDEN DISPATCH OF LTG WITHUN YASAWAT TO JAPAN ON OCT 13 TO "SUPERVISE THAI STUDENTS" IN THAT COUNTRY, SIMPLY UNDERLINE THE CONCERN OF THE NARC LEADERSHIP TO HEAD OFF FURTHER COUP ACTIVITY.

10. IT IS TOO EARLY TO ANTICIPATE WHAT THE NARC WILL DO ABOUT ISSUES DIRECTLY RELATED TO THE MILITARY TAKEOVER, INCLUDING THE FOLLOWING, WHICH WILL DOMINATE THE EVENTS OF THE NEXT FEW MONTHS: A) POLITICAL - HOW MUCH FREEDOM TO ALLOW, PARTICULARLY TO THE MEDIA. HOW QUICKLY TO MOVE TOWARDS DRAFTING A NEW CONSTITUTION. WHAT TO DO ABOUT THE INSURGENCY. HOW TO IMPROVE CONDITIONS OF LAW AND ORDER. WHAT TO DO ABOUT CORRUPTION, A PERVASIVE EVIL OF LONGSTANDING SIGNIFICANCE.

B) ECONOMIC - WHAT TO DO ABOUT INVESTMENT, INCLUDING BOTH FOREIGN AND DOMESTIC INVESTMENT, AND WHAT IS A DESIRABLE MIX OF BOTH. HOW MUCH INTEREST IS THERE IN LAND REFORM.

C) FOREIGN POLICY - WHAT TO DO ABOUT RELATIONS WITH THAILAND'S COMMUNIST NEIGHBORS (BOTH THE SRV AND LAOS HAVE STRONGLY DENOUNCED THE COUP, AS MIGHT HAVE BEEN EXPECTED). WHAT ABOUT RELATIONS WITH THE U.S. (THE THAI MILITARY HAVE BEEN RESTIVE AT THE CHANGES IN RELATIONS WITH THE U.S. OVER THE PAST YEAR AND THEIR EXCLUSION FROM THE NEGOTIATIONS IN EARLY 1976 ON THE RESIDUAL US MILITARY AND INTELLIGENCE PRESENCE ISSUE.) WHAT VALUE WILL THE MANILA TREATY HAVE FOR THAILAND'S SECURITY INTERESTS, PARTICULARLY AFTER THE FINAL LIQUIDATION OF SEATO IN JUNE, 1977.

11. AT THIS POINT IT IS EASIER TO ASK QUESTIONS THAN TO PROVIDE ANSWERS. ON THE WHOLE, WE BELIEVE THAT A PERIOD OF SOME INSTABILITY AND CONFUSION LIES AHEAD, UNTIL THE LEADERSHIP OF THE GOVERNMENT DOMINATED BY THE MILITARY SETTLES DOWN. GIVEN THE BACKGROUND AND EXPERIENCE OF THE FIGURES IN THE NARC, IT IS QUESTIONABLE THAT THE NARC AS PRESENTLY CONSTITUTED CAN PROVIDE THE LEADERSHIP THAT THAILAND NEEDS IN THE PERIOD AHEAD.

WHITEHOUSE

1 Source: National Archives, Record Group 59, Central Foreign Policy Files. Confidential. Repeated for information to Hong Kong, Jakarta, Kuala Lumpur, Manila, Rangoon, Tokyo, Singapore, CINCPAC Honolulu, Beijing, Vientiane, and CINCPAC for Polad.

Errata Errata

The following change has been made to Foreign Relations, 1969–1976, Volume E–12, Documents on East and Southeast Asia, 1973–1976.

1. Document 86 (date of correction: October 14, 2012)

The date in the document's heading has been corrected from "March 6, 1976" to "February 27, 1976."
