Foreign Relations of the United States, 1961–1963, Volume III, Vietnam, January–August 1963 (U.S. Department of State, Office of the Historian, 1991)
Public domain. Sourced from the U.S. Department of State, Office of the Historian: Foreign Relations of the United States (https://history.state.gov/historicaldocuments/frus1961-63v03).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

================================================================================

Vietnam, January–August 1963 (Foreign Relations of the United States, 1961–1963, Volume III)

Title pageForeign Relations of the United States, 1961–1963

Volume III

Vietnam, January–August 1963

United States Government Printing Office
Washington

U.S. Department of State
Office of the Historian
Bureau of Public Affairs

This ebook was generated on May 30, 2018.
Please visit the Office of the Historian ebooks web page to access updates.

About the Electronic Edition About the Electronic Edition

The Office of the Historian at the U.S. Department of State has embarked on a program to release an ebook edition of the Foreign Relations of the United States (FRUS) series, which was established in 1861. Far lighter and more portable than printed editions of FRUS, the ebook edition offers the full content of each volume and makes use of the full-text search and other reading features of most ebook devices and applications, including bookmarking and note-taking. Unlike the web-based edition of FRUS, the ebook edition, once downloaded, can be accessed even without internet connectivity.

In creating the FRUS ebook edition, we endeavored to maintain fidelity with the original printed edition. One challenge in this respect is representing original page numbers from printed editions in ebooks. For readers who need to cite material in this ebook, we recommend citing document numbers instead of page numbers, since document numbers are persistent, media-neutral identifiers. In older FRUS volumes (before the subseries covering the Johnson administration), where cross references use page numbers rather than document numbers, we append to each page number a bracketed list of the document numbers that correspond to it.

The Office of the Historian has worked to ensure that this ebook is error-free and works on a broad range of devices. Please email history_ebooks@state.gov with any feedback.

To learn about updates to this ebook, other ebooks, and the ebook initiative in general, visit our ebooks homepage, and follow us on Twitter at @HistoryAtState and Tumblr at HistoryAtState.

Office of the Historian
Bureau of Public Affairs
U.S. Department of State
May 2018

Vietnam, January–August 1963 (Foreign Relations of the United States, 1961–1963, Volume III)Contents

Preface

List of Sources

List of Abbreviations

List of Persons

Vietnam, January-August 1963I. Reassessment, January 1-March 14, 1963: Hilsman-Forrestal Report, Wheeler Mission, Mansfield Report, Comprehensive Plan, Thompson Report (Documents 1-59)

II. Increasing Tensions Between the United States and South Vietnam, March 15-May 8, 1963: Reaction to the Mansfield Report, the “Press Problem,” the Number and Role of U.S. Advisers in Vietnam, Differences Over the Joint Counterinsurgency Fund (Documents 60-111)

III. Beginning of the Buddhist Crisis, May 9-June 16, 1963: Incident in Hue, the Five Buddhist Demands, Use of Tear Gas in Hue, Self Immolation of Quang Duc, Negotiations in Saigon To Resolve the Crisis, Agreement on the Five Demands (Documents 112-179)

IV. The Deepening Crisis, June 17-August 20: Repudiation of the June 16 Agreement, U.S. Efforts To Promote Conciliation, Press Coverage and International Opinion, July 18 Address by Diem, Renewed Denunciation of the Buddhists by the Nhus (Documents 180-260)

V. Raids on the Pagodas and a Possible Coup, August 21-28, 1963: Martial Law, Lodge’s Arrival, Responsibility for the Crackdown on the Buddhists, the Cable of August 24, NSC Subcommittee Meetings on Vietnam, New Assessments From the Field, U.S. Support of the Coup (Documents 261-309)

Index

Preface Preface

The publication Foreign Relations of the United States constitutes the official record of the foreign policy of the United States. The volumes in the series include, subject to necessary security considerations, all documents needed to give a comprehensive record of the major foreign policy decisions of the United States together with appropriate materials concerning the facts that contributed to the formulation of policies. Documents in the files of the Department of State are supplemented by papers from other government agencies involved in the formulation of foreign policy. This volume also includes documents from the private collections of various government officials connected with U.S. policy toward Vietnam.

The basic documentary diplomatic record printed in the volumes of the series is edited by the Office of the Historian, Bureau of Public Affairs, Department of State. The editing is guided by the principles of historical objectivity and in accordance with the following official guidance first promulgated by Secretary of State Frank B. Kellogg on March 26, 1925:

There may be no alteration of the text, no deletions without indicating the place in the text where the deletion is made, and no omission of facts which were of major importance in reaching a decision. Nothing may be omitted for the purpose of concealing or glossing over what might be regarded by some as a defect of policy. However, certain omissions of documents are permissible for the following reasons: a. To avoid publication of matters that would tend to impede current diplomatic negotiations or other business.

b. To condense the record and avoid repetition of needless details.

c. To preserve the confidence reposed in the Department by individuals and by foreign governments.

d. To avoid giving needless offense to other nationalities or individuals.

e. To eliminate personal opinions presented in despatches and not acted upon by the Department. To this consideration there is one qualification: in connection with major decisions it is desirable, where possible, to show the alternative presented to the Department before the decision was made.

Principles of Selection for Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, Volume III

Preparation of this volume proceeded in 1984 on the basis of a research plan developed by the editors after a preliminary review of repositories in both governmental and private agencies. From the outset the editors approached their research realizing the need to supplement the written record of U.S. policy during the Vietnam war with interviews of officials who participated in the policy process. They also reviewed those oral history interviews of participants already in existence and available in various locations. Oral history citations are provided in the footnotes to the text.

On the basis of their preliminary research and review of already published documentation, including the 1971 “Pentagon Papers,” the editors developed the following six areas of focus for further research and the selection of documents for inclusion in this volume: 1) Discussion and formulation of policy in Washington; 2) Policy implementation in South Vietnam; 3) The relationship among the United States Government, the Diem government, and dissident elements in South Vietnam; 4) The implications of the Buddhist crisis which developed in May; 5) U.S. intelligence assessments of the situation in Vietnam and the viability of the Diem government and the prospects of a potential coup; and 6) U.S. military involvement in Vietnam. The editors did take careful account of the documentation in the “Pentagon Papers,” but have, in general, sought to avoid reprinting documents already published there.

Discussion and formulation of policy in Washington: President John F. Kennedy made the important policy decisions on Vietnam, based on advice from the Washington foreign affairs community, either orally at meetings or in documents submitted to him. The records of these meetings with the President and advice provided to him in writing are a focus of this volume. The editors are confident that they have had complete access to all the Presidential written records bearing on Vietnam.

The most important repository for records on high-level policy formulation is the John F. Kennedy Presidential Library. The records of the Department of State, to which the editors had complete access, also include a large collection of Presidential and National Security Council documentation. The papers of the President’s Military Representative, General Maxwell D. Taylor, at the National Defense University in Washington, D.C., were also of unusual importance. The documents in the Taylor Papers provide a unique record of Taylor’s advice to the President on Vietnam and records of some meetings both at the White House and at the Department of Defense for which there are no other accounts. Department of Defense records, especially files and papers of Secretary of Defense Robert S. McNamara, located at the Washington National Records Center, were an important subsidiary source. A private collection, the W. Averell Harriman Papers, were also of considerable utility. Used with the late Ambassador Harriman’s permission when they were still in his possession, these papers are now housed at the Library of Congress, Manuscript Division. The Roger Hilsman papers, located at the Kennedy Library, also proved an important source of documents not found in official files.

Policy implementation in South Vietnam: The editors also selected documentation that covered the implementation of Presidentially-established policy and a small range of lesser policy decisions that did not reach the White House or were resolved in the Department of State or other agencies of the foreign affairs community. The files of the Department of State, the Department of Defense, the Kennedy Library, and the United States Information Agency are the primary documentary sources for these decisions.

The relationship among the United States Government, the Diem government, and dissident elements in South Vietnam: From the development of the Buddhist crisis in May 1963 to late August 1963 when this volume concludes, relations between the United States and the Republic of Vietnam were strained. The extensive reports of U.S. Embassy relations with the Diem government come primarily from the central files of the Department of State.

The fact that the United States was in close contact with dissident elements in South Vietnam makes events in Saigon crucial to understanding U.S. policy. The editors have, therefore, included a considerable number of telegraphic reports from the Embassy and the Central Intelligence Agency Station in Saigon on relations with dissident Vietnamese. Central Intelligence Agency records were obtained from the Kennedy Library, Department of State files, the Taylor Papers, Department of Defense records, and the Joint Chiefs of Staff files. The CIA provided full access to the Department historians to Agency documents in the Presidential libraries, and many of these documents are printed here. Some access was eventually provided to documentation retained by the Agency itself, but too late for documents to be included in this volume. Significant declassified material obtained from the CIA archives for 1963 will be printed in a subsequent volume in the Foreign Relations series.

The implications of the Buddhist crisis which developed in May: The Buddhist crisis had a profound effect on political developments in Vietnam, and a corresponding important effect upon U.S. assessments and U.S. policy toward Vietnam. Telegraphic reports from the Embassy in Saigon, the Consulate in Hue, and the Central Intelligence Agency Station in Saigon were the primary source of information on the unfolding of the crisis. Much of the material relating to the Buddhist crisis was found in the central files of the Department of State.

U.S. intelligence estimates of the situation in Vietnam and the viability of the Diem government and the potential prospects of a coup: The ability of the U.S. Government to assess the political and military situation in Vietnam, and to estimate the viability of the Diem government when confronted with a potential coup are of central importance during this period. This volume and its companion, which documents the latter part of 1963 (volume IV), include communications between the Central Intelligence Agency and its Station in Saigon. In addition to these telegrams, a representative selection of finished intelligence assessments prepared by the U.S. intelligence community is printed.

U.S. military involvement in Vietnam: The editors sought to include documentation that illustrated the relationship between military planning and strategy and the conduct of relations with the Republic of Vietnam and other countries. No attempt was made ot document operational details of U.S. military involvement in Vietnam. The Taylor Papers, the files of the Secretary of Defense and the Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs at the Washington National Records Center, and the decentralized files of the Department of State’s Vietnam Working Group are the principal sources for this topic.

The editors also devoted significant attention to the sensitive question of press coverage of developments in Vietnam. For documentation relating to public affairs and press relations, the files of the United States Information Agency are important.

The editors of the volume are confident that the documents printed here provide a comprehensive and accurate foreign affairs record of United States policy toward and involvement in Vietnam during the first eight months of 1963. The declassification review process for the documents selected for this volume, outlined in more detail below, resulted in withholding from publication only 1.2 percent of the original manuscript.

The editors wish to acknowledge the assistance of officials at the National Archives and Records Administration’s John F. Kennedy Library, in particular Suzanne Forbes. Susan Lemke at the National Defense University and Sandra Meagher at the Department of Defense deserve special thanks, as do former government officials who consented to oral history interviews for this volume.

Editorial Methodology

The documents are presented chronologically according to Washington time. Incoming telegrams from U.S. missions are placed according to time of receipt in the Department of State or other receiving agency, rather than the time of transmission; memoranda of conversation are placed according to the time and date of the conversation, rather than the date the memorandum was drafted. The editors were not always able to determine the precise chronological order of documents produced during periods of crisis and intense activity, particularly during the Buddhist crisis. In these cases they used their best judgment.

Editorial treatment of the documents published in the Foreign Relations series follows Office style guidelines, supplemented by guidance from the Editor in Chief and the chief technical editor. The source text is reproduced as exactly as possible, including marginalia or other notations, which are described in the footnotes. Obvious typographical errors are corrected, but other mistakes and omissions in the source text are corrected by bracketed insertions: a correction is set in italic type; an omission in roman type. Bracketed insertions are also used to indicate text that has been omitted because it deals with an unrelated subject (in roman type) or because it remained classified after the declassification review process (in italic type). The amount of material not declassified has been noted by indicating the number of lines or pages of source text that were omitted. All ellipses and brackets that appear in the source text are so identified by footnotes.

The first footnote to each document indicates the document’s source, original classification, distribution, and drafting information. The source footnote also provides the background of important documents and policies and indicates if the President and/or his major policy advisers read it. Every effort has been made to determine if a document has been previously published and this information has been included in the source footnote. If two or more different accounts of a meeting or event of comparable value are available and one or more is already declassified and published, the editors chose to print the still unpublished one and obtain its declassification.

Editorial notes and additional annotation summarize pertinent material not printed in this volume, indicate the location of additional documentary sources, provide references to important related documents printed in other volumes, describe key events, and summarize and provide citations to public statements that supplement and elucidate the printed documents. Information derived from memoirs and other first-hand accounts has been used when applicable to supplement the official record.

Declassification Review Procedures

Declassification review of the documents selected for publication was conducted by the Division of Historical Documents Review, Bureau of Diplomatic Security, Department of State. The review was made in accordance with the Freedom of Information Act, the Privacy Act, and the criteria established in Executive Order 12356 regarding: 1) military plans, weapons, or operations;

2) the vulnerabilities or capabilities of systems, installations, projects, or plans relating to the national security;

3) foreign government information;

4) intelligence activities (including special activities), or intelligence sources or methods;

5) foreign relations or foreign activities of the United States;

6) scientific, technological, or economic matters relating to national security;

7) U.S. Government programs for safeguarding nuclear materials or facilities;

8) cryptology; and

9) a confidential source.

Declassification decisions entailed concurrence of the appropriate geographic and functional bureaus in the Department of State, other concerned agencies of the U.S. Government, and appropriate foreign governments regarding documents of those governments. The principle guiding declassification review is to release as much information as is consistent with contemporary requirements of national security and sound foreign relations.

Louis J. Smith and Edward C. Keefer of the Office of the Historian compiled and edited this volume under the supervision of Charles S. Sampson, the Vietnam project leader, and Editor in Chief John P. Glennon. Suzanne E. Coffman prepared the lists of names and abbreviations. Rita M. Baker performed the technical editing. Barbara A. Bacon of the Publishing Services Division (Paul M. Washington, Chief) oversaw production of the volume. Max Franke prepared the index.

William Z. Slany
The Historian
Bureau of Public Affairs

List of Sources List of Sources

Unpublished Sources

Department of State 1. Subject-Numeric Indexed Central Files: Through January 1963, the Department of State continued to use the decimal central file system familiar to users of previous volumes of the Foreign Relations series. In February 1963, the Department changed its decimal central files to a subject-numeric central file system. This is the first volume to be published in the Foreign Relations series in which documents selected from the Department’s central files come primarily from the new system. As part of the transition to the new system, the Department of State encouraged its indexers to cross-reference extensively and to include the first page of the referenced document in the cross-referenced file. The system allows the researcher to use a basic file and find other pertinent files by noting the cross references.

The subject-numeric system was divided into broad categories: Administration, Consular, Culture and Information, Economic, Political and Defense, Science, and Social. Within each of these divisions were subcategories. For example, Political and Defense contained four subtopics: POL (politics), DEF (Defense), CSM (Communism), and INT (Intelligence). Numerical subdivisions further defined them. An important file for the Buddhist crisis is SOC 14-1 S VIEI SOC is the general category for social conditions, 14 relates to human rights and race relations, 14-1 concerns religious discrimination, and S VIET is the country designator for South Vietnam.

The following were the principal files used in this volume: POL S VIET, containing background material for general policy;

POL 2 S VIET, general reports and statistics;

POL 2-4 S VIE T, political-military reports;

POL 13-6, religious groups;

POL 15 S VIET, government;

POL 15-1 S VIET, head of government/Executive branch;

POL 23 S VIET, internal security/counterinsurgency;

POL 26 and 26-1 S VIET, undesignated but used in Vietnam for coup planning;

POL 27 S VIET, military operations;

POL 27-10 S VIET, chemical weapons;

POL 27-14 S VIET, truce/cease-fire/armistice.

The system could also combine two countries or a country and an individual. Files of these types from the POL series cited in this volume include: POL S VIET-US, general policy documents relating to U.S. relations with South Vietnam.

POL 1-1 S VIET-US, contingency planning concerning U.S. policy toward South Vietnam;

POL 17-2 US-S VIET, documents concerning immunities and privileges;

POL US-MANSFIELD, correspondence between Senator Mansfield and other U.S. officials.

The POL Files are frequently cited in the volume. Other extensively cited files include the key SOC 14-1 S VIET file, which contains much of the material relating to the Buddhist crisis. The SOC 12 and 12-1 files also relate to religious matters and pertain to the Buddhist crisis. Most military-related documents were in DEF 19 US-S VIET, the general file for U.S. military assistance to Vietnam or in DEF 19-2 and 19-3 US-S VIET files, relating to reports and conferences dealing with military assistance. The CSM S VIET file was surprisingly sparse, indicating that it was little used by indexers during this period, but there is documentation from the CSM 9-6 S VIET file. Documentation on economic assistance was found almost exclusively in AID (US) S VIET PER-LODGE, HENRY CABOT is Ambassador Lodge’s personnel file. Documents concerning press coverage are in files PPV 1-2 S VIET and PPV 7 S VIET-US. These files are miscited and should read PPB rather than PPV.

2. Lot Files. Documents from the central files have been supplemented by materials from decentralized office files, the lot files of the Department of State. A list of the major lot files used or consulted for this volume follows Conference Files: Lot 66 D 110 Collection of documentation on international conferences abroad attended by the President, the Secretary of State, and other U.S. officials, May 1961-December 1964

Har-Van Files Files created for Ambassador Averell Harriman and Cyrus Vance, U.S. Delegates to the Paris Peace Conference in 1968, including background documents beginning in the early 1960s. The file contains texts of documents found nowhere else.

Presidential Memoranda of Conversation: Lot 66 D 149 Cleared memoranda of Presidential conversations with foreign victors, 1956-1964, as maintained by the Executive Secretariat of the Department of State.

Presidential Correspondence: Lot 66 D 476 Correspondence of the President with various heads of foreign governments, 1961-1966, as maintained by the Executive Secretariat.

Secretary’s Memoranda of Conversation: Lot 65 D 330 Memoranda of the Secretary of State and Under Secretaries of State, 1961-1964

Secretary’s Staff Meetings: Lot 66 D 147 Records of the Secretary of State’s Staff Meetings, 1961-1963, and additional ad hoc meetings, reports, papers, and memoranda of Chester Bowles’ telephone conversations.

S/P Files: Lot 70 D 199 Files of the Policy Planning Council for 1963-1964.

Special Group, Counterinsurgency Files: Lot 68 D 451 Minutes and memoranda of the Special Group, Counterinsurgency, January 1962-Decmber 1963

S/S-NSC Files: Lot 72 D 316 Master File of National Security Action Memoranda (NSAMs), 1961-1968, as maintained by the Executive Secretariat.

S/S-NSC (Miscellaneous) Files: Lot 66 D 95 Administrative and miscellaneous National Security Council documentation, including NSC Records of Action, 1947-1963, as maintained by the Executive Secretariat.

Top Secret and Secret Summaries: Lot 65 D 142 Top Secret and Secret Summaries, 1962-1963.

Vietnam Working Group Files: Lot 67 D 54 Files of the interagency Vietnam Working Group, 1963-1964

National Archives and Records Administration, Washington, D.C. Record Group 59, General Records of the Department of State Public Opinion Studies Files of the Office of Public Opinion Studies, Bureau of Public Affairs, Department of State

S/PRS Files Record set of volumes of Department of State Daily Press Briefings for the years 1977-1978

Washington National Records Center, Suitland, Maryland Record Group 84, Records of the Foreign Service Posts of the United States Saigon Embassy Files: FRC 67 A 677 Classified records of the Embassy in Saigon for 1962-1963 (formerly Lot 66 F 57).

Saigon Embassy Files: FRC 68 A 5159 Top Secret files of the Embassy in Saigon, 1955-1963

Record Group 306, Records of the United States Information Agency USIA/TOP Files: FRC 67 A 222 Subject files of the Office of Policy, 1963-1965.

USIA/IAF Files:FRC 68 A 1415 Files of the Office of the Director of the U.S. Information Agency, 1961-1962; action copies retained by the Assistant Director for the Far East, 1963-1964.

USIA/IAF/VN Files: FRC 68 A 4933 Files of the Vietnam Working Group, 1963-1965

USIA/Vietnam Working Group Files: FRC 68 A 5160 Files of the Vietnam Working Group, 1963-1965

Record Group 330, Records of the Office of the Secretary of Defense McNamara Files: FRC 31 A 3470 Files of Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara, 1961-1968

OASD/ISA Files:FRC 67 A 4564 Country files of the Office of the Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs, 1962-1963.

OASD/ISA Files:FRC 69 A 6214 Miscellaneous files of the Office of the Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs, 1962-1965.

OASD/ISA Files:FRC 75-163 Records of the OASD/ISA representative on the Vietnam Task Force, 1963-1971

OSD Files: FRC 66 A 3542 Records of the Secretary of Defense and Deputy Secretary of Defense and their Special Assistant, 1963.

OSD Files: FRC 69 A 3131 Official records of the Secretary of Defense, Deputy Secretary of Defense, and Special Assistant to the Secretary and Deputy Secretary for 1963.

Record Group 334, Records of Interservice MAC/V Files: FRC 69 A 702 Records of the Military Assistance Command, Vietnam, 1962 and after.

National Defense University, Fort McNair, Washington, D.C. Taylor Papers Papers of General Maxwell D. Taylor, Chief of Staff of the Army, 1955-1959; Military Adviser to the President, 1961-1962; and Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, 1962-1964.

U.S. Army Military Historical Institute, Carlisle, Pennsylvania Kraemer Papers Papers of Fritz Kraemer, adviser to the Army Chief of Staff.

John F. Kennedy Library, Boston, Massachusetts National Security Files Chester V. Clifton Series

Departments and Agencies Series

Meetings and Memoranda Series

Regional Security Series

Trip and Conference Series

Country Series, Vietnam

President’s Appointment Book (cited as President’s Log Book)

President’s Office Files Staff Memoranda

Vietnam Security

Hilsman Papers

Schlesinger Papers

Sorensen Papers

Thompson Papers

Library of Congress, Manuscript Division, Washington, D.C. Harriman Papers Special Files of W. Averell Harriman, Public Service, Kennedy and Johnson Administrations

University of Montana, Missoula, Montana Mansfield Papers Papers of Senator Mike Mansfield

Hoover Institution, Palo Alto, California Lansdale Papers Papers of Major General Edward G. Lansdale, USAF, pertaining to his entire career.

Published Sources

Documentary Collections, Congressional Documents, and Periodicals The Declassified Documents Quarterly Catalog and microfiche. Woodbridge, CT: Research Publications (formerly Washington: Carrollton Press), 1977 onwards.

The Pentagon Papers: The Department of Defense History of United States Decisionmaking on Vietnam [The Senator Gravel Edition]. 4 vols. Boston, MA: Beacon Press, 1971.

U.S. Department of Defense. United States-Vietnam Relations, 1945-1967 [The Pentagon Papers]. 12 vols. Washington: U.S. Government Printing Office, 1971.

U.S. Department of State. American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1963. Washington: U.S. Government Printing Office, 1967.

——. Department of State Bulletin, 1963. Washington: U.S. Government Printing Office, 1963.

U.S. National Archives and Records Administration. Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: John F Kennedy, 1963. Washington: U.S. Government Printing Office, 1964.

U.S. Senate. Alleged Assassination Plots Involving Foreign Leaders. An Interim Report of the Select Committee To Study Government Operations With Respect to Intelligence Activities. U.S. Senate, 94th Congress, 1st Session, Report No. 94-465. Washington: U.S. Government Printing Office, 1975.

Memoirs

Note: The Department of State takes no responsibility for the accuracy of these memoirs nor endorses their interpretation of the events.

Ball, George. The Past Has Another Pattern: Memoirs. New York: W.W. Norton & Company,1982.

Colby, William, and Forbath, Peter. Honorable Men: My Life in the CIA. New York: Simon and Schuster, 1978.

Hilsman, Roger. To Move a Nation. Garden City, NY: Doubleday & Co., 1967.

Mecklin, John. Mission in Torment. Garden City, NY: Doubleday & Co., 1965.

Nolting, Frederick. From Trust to Tragedy: The Political Memoirs of Frederick Nolting, Kennedy’s Ambassador to Diem’s Vietnam. Westport, CT: Praeger Publishers, 1988.

Salinger, Pierre. With Kennedy. Garden City, NY: Doubleday & Co., 1966.

Schlesinger, Arthur M., Jr. A Thousand Days: John F Kennedy in the White House. Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1965.

Sorensen, Theodore C. Kennedy. New York: Harper & Row, 1965.

Taylor, Maxwell D. Swords and Plowshares: A Memoir. New York: W.W. Norton & Co., 1972.

Tran Van Don. Our Endless War: Inside Vietnam. San Raphael, CA: Presidio Press, 1978.

List of Abbreviations List of Abbreviations

AAA, anti-aircraft artillery

ABN, airborne

AC&W, aircraft control and warning

ACSI, Assistant Chief of Staff (Intelligence)

addee, addressee

Admino, series indicator for administrative telegrams from CINCPAC

AF, Air Force

AFCIN, Air Force Chief of Intelligence

AFRS, Armed Forces Radio Service

AID, Agency for International Development

Aidto, series indicator for telegrams from the Agency for International Development to its missions abroad

Amb, Ambassador

ammo, ammunition

AP, Associated Press

APC, armored personnel carrier

ARPAC, U.S. Army, Pacific

ARVN, Army of the Republic of Vietnam

BG, Brigadier General

bn, battalion

CAS, Controlled American Source

CG, Civil Guard

ChiCom, Chinese Communists ChiNat Chinese Nationalist

CHMAAG, Chief, Military Assistance Advisory Group

CI, counterinsurgency; commercial imports

CIA, Central Intelligence Agency

CIB, Combined Intelligence Board

CIDG, Citizen’s Irregular Defense Group

CINCPAC, Commander in Chief, Pacific

CINCPACAF, Commander in Chief, Pacific Air Force

CINCPACFLT, Commander in Chief, Pacific Fleet

CINCUSAPAC, Commander in Chief, United States Army, Pacific

CIP, Commercial Import Program CM. Chairman’s Memorandum

Cmdr, Commander

CNO, Chief of Naval Operations

CO, Commanding Officer

COMUSARPAC, Commander, United States Army, Pacific

COMUSMACV, Commander, U.S. Military Advisory Command, Vietnam

CONUS, continental United States

COPROR, Committee on Province Rehabilitation

CPSVN, Comprehensive Plan for South Vietnam

CSA, Chief of Staff, Army

CSAF, Chief of Staff, Air Force

CSCC, Coastal Surveillance Command Center

CT, Country Team

CVN, Central Vietnam

CVTC, Confederation of Vietnamese Trade Congresses

CY, calendar year

DA, Department of the Army; Defense Attaché; defense assistance

DAC, Development Assistance Committee, Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development

DCFBA, Director General of Budget and Foreign Aid

DCI, Director of Central Intelligence

DCM, Deputy Chief of Mission

Deptel, Department of State telegram

desp, despatch

DGI, Director General of Information

DIA, Defense Intelligence Agency

dissem, dissemination

DLF, Defense Loan Fund

DMZ, demilitarized zone

DOD, Department of Defense

DOD/PRO, Public Relations Office, Department of Defense

DRV, Democratic Republic of Vietnam

DTG, date-time-group

E & E, emergency and evacuation

ECCO, Eastern Construction Company

Embtel, Embassy telegram

FAR, Forces Armees Royales (Royal Armed Forces, Laos)

FBIS, Foreign Broadcast Information Service

FE, Far East; Bureau of Far Eastern Affairs, Department of State

FOS, follow-on spares

FRC, Federal Records Center

FSO, Foreign Service officer

FY, fiscal year

FYI, for your information

G, Office of the Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs

GAO, General Accounting Office

G/PM, Office of the Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Politico-Military Affairs

GVN, Government of Vietnam

helo, helicopter

HQS, headquarters

HSAS, Headquarters, Support Activity, Saigon

IAF, Far East Branch, United States Information Agency

ICA, International Cooperation Administration

ICC, International Control Commission

ICSH, International Committee on Strategic Hamlets

ILO, International Labor Organization

INR, Bureau of Intelligence and Research, Department of State

IOP, Office of Policy and Research, United States Information Agency

ISA, Office of the Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs

JAOC, Joint Air Operation Center

JCS, Joint Chiefs of Staff

JGS, Joint General Staff

JOC, Joint Operations Center

KIA, killed in action

LAS, Long-Range Assistance Strategy

LOC, lines of communication

MA, military assistance

MAAG, Military Assistance Advisory Group

MACV, Military Assistance Command, Vietnam

MAP, Military Assistance Program

MEC, Military Executive Committee

MRC, Military Revolutionary Council

MSP, Mutual Security Program

NACO, National Agricultural Credit Office

NBC, National Broadcasting Company

NCO, non-commissioned officer

NCP, National Campaign Plan

NEA, Near East and Africa; Bureau of Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs, Department of State

NFLSVN, National Front for the Liberation of South Vietnam

Niact, night action

NIE, National Intelligence Estimate

NLHX, Neo Lao Hak Xat

NOA, new obligational authority

Noforn, no foreign dissemination

NRM, National Revolutionary Movement

NSA, National Security Agency

NSAM, National Security Action Memorandum

NSC, National Security Council

NVN, North Vietnam

OASD, Office of the Assistant Secretary of Defense

OCI, Office of Current Intelligence

ODMA, Office of the Director for Military Assistance

OPCON, operational control

OPNL, operational

OPSUM, Operations Summary

P, piaster; Bureau of Public Affairs, Department of State

PACAF, Pacific Air Force

PACFLT, Pacific Fleet

PACOM, Pacific Command

PAO, Public Affairs Officer

PCHT, packing, crating, handling, and transportation

PIC, person in command

PIO, Public Information Officer

PIOPS, public information operations

PL, Pathet Lao; Public Law

plt, platoon

PNG, persona non grata

POL, petroleum, oil, and lubricants

POLAD, Political Adviser

POW, prisoner of war

psywar, psychological warfare

psyops, psychological operations

PTT, post, telephone, telegraph

reftel, reference telegram

RG, Record Group

rgt, regiment

RKG, Royal Khmer Government

RLG, Royal Lao Government

RVN, Republic of Vietnam

RVNAF, Republic of Vietnam Armed Forces

S, Office of the Secretary of State

SACSA, Special Assistant for Counterinsurgency and Special Activities, Joint Chiefs of Staff SDC, Self Defense Corps

SEA, Southeast Asia; Office of Southeast Asian Affairs, Department of State

SEATO, Southeast Asia Treaty Organization

SecDef, Secretary of Defense

Secto, series indicator for telegrams from the Secretary of State or his party to the Department of State

Secy, Secretary

SEPES, Service des Etudes Politiques et Sociales (Political and Social Studies Service)

septel, separate telegram

SFHCVN, Special Forces, High Command, Vietnam

SH, Strategic Hamlet

sitrep, situation report

SOA, Office of South Asian Affairs, Department of State

S/P, Policy Planning Staff, Department of State

sqdn, squadron

S/S, Executive Secretariat, Department of State

Stat., United States Statutes at Large

SVN, South Vietnam

TF/Saigon, Task Force in Saigon

TF/SEA, Task Force on Southeast Asia

TF/VN, Task Force on Vietnam

TIAS, Treaties and Other International Agreements Series

Toaid, series indicator for telegrams to the Agency for International Development from its missions abroad

TOC, Tactical Operations Center Tousi series indicator for telegrams to the United States Information Agency from its missions abroad

UN, United Nations

UNESCO, United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization

UNTS, United Nations Treaty Series

UPI, United Press International

USAF, United States Air Force

USASGV, United States Army Support Group, Vietnam

USC, United States Code

USIA, United States Information Agency

USIB, United States Intelligence Board

USIS, United States Information Service

Usito, series indicator for telegrams from the United States Information Agency to its missions abroad

USMACV, United States Military Assistance Command, Vietnam

USMC, United States Marine Corps

USOM, United States Operations Mission

USSR, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics

UST, United States Treaties

VC, Viet Cong

VM, Viet Minh

VN, Vietnam

VNAF, Vietnamese Armed Forces; Vietnamese Air Force

VNMC, Vietnamese Marine Corps

VNN, Vietnam Navy

VNQDD, Viet Nam Quoc Dan Dang (National Party of Vietnam)

VNSF, Vietnamese Special Forces

VNSFHC, Vietnamese Special Forces High Command

VOA, Voice of America

WG/VN, Working Group on Vietnam

WSM, Women’s Solidarity Movement

List of Persons List of Persons

Anthis, Brigadier General Roland H., USAF, Commander U.S. Second Air Division; Chief, U.S. Air Force Advisory Group, Vietnam

Bagley, Lieutenant Commander Worth H., USN, Naval Aide to the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff

Ball, George W., Under Secretary of State

Barnett, Robert W., Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Economic Affairs from February 3, 1963

Bell, David E., Administrator of the Agency for International Development and member of the Counterinsurgency Group

Bowles, Chester A., President’s Special Representative; Adviser on African, Asian, and Latin American Affairs; and Ambassador at Large until July 19, 1963; thereafter Ambassador to India

Brent, Joseph L., Director, Operations Mission in Vietnam

Browne, Malcolm, Associated Press correspondent

Bui Van Lueng, Vietnamese Minister of the Interior

Bundy, McGeorge, President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs

Bundy, William P., Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs

Buu Hoi, Vietnamese Ambassador to the United States

Carroll, Lieutenant General Joseph F., USAF, Director of the Defense Intelligence Agency

Carter, Lieutenant General Marshall S., USA, Deputy Director of the Central Intelligence Agency

Clifton, Major General Chester V., USA, President’s Military Aide

Colby, William, Director of the Far East Division, Operations Directorate, Central Intelligence Agency

Conlon, Thomas F., Office of Southeast Asian Affairs, Bureau of Far Eastern Affairs Department of State, after September 1, 1963, and member of the Vietnam Working Group

Cooper, Chester L., Assistant for Policy Support to the Deputy Director for Intelligence, Central Intelligence Agency, until November 1963; thereafter Assistant Deputy Director for Policy Support

Couve de Murville, Maurice, French Foreign Minister

De Gaulle, Charles, President of France

Denney, George C., Deputy Director of the Bureau of Intelligence and Research, Department of State, from April 28, 1963

Diem, see Ngo Dinh Diem

Dingeman, Major James W., USA, Executive Secretary of the Special Group for Counterinsurgency

Dinh, see Ton That Dinh

Don, see Tran Van Don

Dungan, Ralph A., President’s Special Assistant

Duong Van (“Big”) Minh, Major General, 1963, Lieutenant General), ARVN, Military Adviser to President Diem until November 1, 1963; thereafter Chairman of the Executive Committee of the Revolutionary Council; President of the Provisional Government of the Republic of Vietnam after November 4, 1963

Dutton, Frederick G., Assistant Secretary of State for Congressional Affairs

Felt, Admiral Harry D., USN, Commander in Chief, Pacific

Forrestal, Michael V., member, National Security Council Staff

Gilpatric, Roswell L., Deputy Secretary of Defense and member of the Special Group for Counterinsurgency

Halberstam, David, New York Times correspondent in Vietnam

Harkins, General Paul D., USA, Commander, U S. Military Assistance Command, Vietnam

Harriman, W. Averell, Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs until April 3, 1963; thereafter Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs and Chairman of the Special Group for Counterinsurgency

Heavner, Theodore J., Deputy Director of the Vietnam Working Group, Department of State, until August 4, 1963

Heinz, Rear Admiral Luther C., USN, Regional Director for the Far East, Office of the Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs

Helble, John J., Consul in Hue

Hieu, see Ngo Trong Hieu

Higgins, Marguerite, New York Herald Tribune correspondent

Hilsman, Roger, Director of the Bureau of Intelligence and Research until April 25, 1963; thereafter Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs

Ho Chi Minh, President of the Democratic Republic of Vietnam; also Chairman and General Secretary of Dang Lao Dong, Workers’ Party of Vietnam

Hoang Van Lac, Colonel, ARVN, Permanent Commissioner, Interministerial Committee for Strategic Hamlets; Special Commissioner for Strategic Hamlet Program

Hughes, Thomas L., Deputy Director of the Bureau of Intelligence and Research until April 28, 1963; thereafter Director

Huynh Van Cao, Brigadier General, ARVN, IV Corps Commander

Janow, Seymour J., Assistant Administrator for the Far East, Agency for International Development

Johnson, U. Alexis, Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs

Jorden, William, Special Assistant to the Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs

Kalischer, Peter, CBS News correspondent

Kattenburg, Paul M., Deputy Director of the Office of Southeast Asian Affairs, Bureau of Far Eastern Affairs, Department of State, and Chairman of the Vietnam Interdepartmental Working Group from August 4, 1963

Kaysen, Carl, President’s Deputy Assistant for National Security Affairs

Kennedy, John F., President of the United States until November 22, 1963

Kennedy, Robert F., Attorney General

Kent, Colonel J. R., USA, Assistant Director, Far East Region, Office of the Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs

Khanh, see Nguyen Khanh

Khiem, see Tran Thien Khiem

Khiet, see Tien Khiet

Kim, see Le Van Kim

Koren, Henry L. T., Director of the Office of Southeast Asian Affairs, Bureau of Far Eastern Affairs. Department of State

Krulak, Major General Victor H., USMC, Special Assistant for Counterinsurgency and Special Activities, Joint Staff of the Joint Chiefs of Staff

Ky, see Nguyen Cao Ky

La, see Nguyen Van La

Lac, see Hoang Van Lac

Lansdale, Major General Edward G., USAF, Assistant to the Secretary of Defense

Le Quang Tung, Colonel, ARVN, Special Forces Commander until November 1, 1963

Le Van Kim, Brigadier General, (after November 1, 1963, Major General), ARVN, Secretary General and Foreign Affairs member, Executive Committee of the Military Revolutionary Council, after November 1, 1963

Lodge, Heriry Cabot, Jr., Ambassador to South Vietnam from August 26, 1963

Luong, see Bui Van Luong

Mai Huu Xuan, Brigadier General, (after November 1, 1963, Major General), ARVN, Commander, Quang training camp; member, Executive Committee of the Military Revolutionary Council, after November 1, 1963; Chief of National Police

Manfull, Melvin L., Counselor for Political Affairs at the Embassy in Vietnam

Manning, Robert J., Assistant Secretary of State for Public Affairs

Mansfield, Mike, Democratic Senator from Montana; Majority Leader and member of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee

Mau, see Vu Van Mau

McCone, John A., Director of Central Intelligence

McGarr, Lieutenant General Lionel C7 USA, Chief of the Military Assistance Advisory Group, Vietnam

McNamara, Robert S., Secretary of Defense

Mecklin, John, Counselor for Public Affairs at the Embassy in Vietnam

Minh, see Duong Van Minh

Montgomery, James M., Office of Southeast Asian Affairs, Bureau of Far Eastern Affairs, Department of State, and member of the Vietnam Working Group

Murrow, Edward R., Director, United States Information Agency

Ngo Dinh Can, brother of President Diem

Ngo Dinh Diem, President of the Republic of Vietnam until November 1, 1963

Ngo Dinh Luyen, brother of President Diem; Vietnamese Ambassador to the United Kingdom until November 2, 1963

Ngo Dinh Nhu, brother of President Diem; Presidential Counselor and Head of the Interministerial Committee for Strategic Hamlets until November 1, 1963

Ngo Dinh Nhu, Madame (Tran Le Xuan), wife of Ngo Dinh Nhu and member of the Vietnamese National Assembly; official hostess for President Diem

Ngo Dinh Thuc, brother of President Diem; Archbishop of Hue

Ngo Trong Hieu, Vietnamese Minister of Civic Action until November 1, 1963

Nguyen Cao Ky, Lieutenant Colonel, Vietnamese Air Force, Transport Squadron Commander; Air Force Commander from December 17, 1963

Nguyen Dinh Thuan, Vietnamese Secretary of State at the Presidency and Assistant Secretary of State for National Defense

Nguyen Khanh, Major General, ARVN, Commander of II Corps until November 29, 1963; thereafter Commander of IV Corps

Nguyen Ngoc Tho, Vietnamese Vice President until November 4, 1963; thereafter Prime Minister and Minister of Finance and National Economy of the Provisional Government

Nguyen Van La, Major General, ARVN, Civil Guard Commander

Nguyen Van Thien, Colonel, (Brigadier General after November 1, 1963), ARVN, Commanding Officer of the 5th Infantry Division

Nhu, see Ngo Dinh Nhu

Nhu, Madame, see Ngo Dinh Nhu, Madame

Nitze, Paul H., Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs

Nolting, Frederick E., Jr., Ambassador to Vietnam until August 15, 1963

Pell, Clalborne H., Democratic Senator from Rhode Island

Pham Van Dong, Prime Minister of the Democratic Republic of Vietnam

Phan Huy Quat, former Vietnamese Defense Minister under Bao Dai and leader of Dai Viet Party

Phillips, Rufus C., Assistant Director for Rural Affairs, Operations Mission in Vietnam

Quang Duc, bonze who committed suicide on June 11, 1963

Rice, Edward E., Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs

Rostow, Walt W., Counselor of the Department of State and Chairman of the Policy Planning Council

Rusk, Dean, Secretary of State

Salinger, Pierre, President’s Press Secretary

Schlesinger, Arthur, Jr., President’s Special Assistant

Sheehan, Neil, United Press International correspondent in Vietnam

Sihanouk, Prince Norodom, Cambodian Chief of State

Smith, Benjamin A., former Senator from Massachusetts

Smith, Bromley, Executive Secretary of the National Security Council Souvanna Phouma, Laotian Prime Minister

Stoneman, Walter G., Director of the Office of Vietnam Affairs, Bureau for the Far East/Vietnam, Agency for International Development

Sullivan, William H., U.N. Adviser, Bureau of Far Eastern Affairs, Department of State, until April 28, 1963; thereafter Assistant to the Under Secretary of State

Sully, Francois, Newsweek correspondent

Sylvester, Arthur, Assistant Secretary of Defense for Public Affairs

Tam Chau, bonze, member of Buddhist delegation from Hue; became Chairman of the Intersect Committee for the Defense of Buddhism

Taylor, General Maxwell D., USA, Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff

Thien Minh, bonze, leader of the Buddhist delegation from Hue

Tho, see Nguyen Ngoc Tho

Thompson, Brigadier Robert G. K., head of the British Advisory Mission in Vietnam

Thuan, see Nguyen Dinh Thuan

Thuc, see Ngo Dinh Thuc

Tien Khiet, chief bonze in Hue

Ton That Dinh, Major General, ARVN, Military Governor of Saigon, August 21-November 1, 1963; thereafter Commander of III Corps, Second Deputy Chairman of the Executive Committee of the Military Revolutionary Council, and Minister of Public Security of the Provisional Government

Tran Kim Tuyen, head of the Service des Etudes Politiques et Sociales

Tran Le Quang, Vietnamese Minister of Rural Affairs until November 4, 1963; thereafter Minister of Rural Affairs of the Provisional Government

Tran Le Xuan, see Ngo Dinh Nhu, Madame

Tran Thien Khiem, General, ARVN, Chief of Staff after November 1, 1963; Military Affairs member, Executive Committee of the Military Revolutionary Council

Tran Tu Oai, Brigadier General, ARVN, Director of Psychological Warfare, Vietnamese Ministry of Defense; Chief of Public Information; Minister of Information in the Provisional Government after November 4, 1963

Tran Van Chuong, Vietnamese Ambassador to the United States until August 22, 1963

Tran Van Don, Major General, ARVN, Commander of III Corps until July 1963; thereafter Commander of the Army of the Republic of Vietnam; Acting Chief of the Joint General Staff after August 1963; First Deputy Chairman of the Executive Committee of the Military Revolutionary Council after November 1, 1963; Minister of National Defense after November 4, 1963

Tri Quang, bonze, Buddhist opposition leader

Trueheart, William C., Minister-Counselor and Deputy Chief of Mission in Vietnam

Tung, see Le Quang Tung

Tuyen, see Tran Kim Tuyen

Unna, Warren, Washington Post correspondent

Vo Van Hai, Director of President Diem’s Personal Cabinet until November l, 1963

Vu Van Mau, Vietnamese Foreign Minister until August 22, 1963; Ambassador to the United Kingdom after December 24, 1963

Weede, Major General Richard G., USMC, Chief of Staff, Military Assistance Command, Vietnam

Wheeler, General Earle General, USA, Chief of Staff

Wood, Chalmers B., Director of the Vietnam Working Group, Bureau of Far Eastern Affairs, Department of State, until August 4, 1963

Vietnam, January-August 1963Vietnam, January-August 1963

Contents

I. Reassessment, January 1-March 14, 1963: Hilsman-Forrestal Report, Wheeler Mission, Mansfield Report, Comprehensive Plan, Thompson ReportI. Reassessment, January 1-March 14, 1963: Hilsman-Forrestal Report, Wheeler Mission, Mansfield Report, Comprehensive Plan, Thompson Report

1. Editorial Note

2. Memorandum for the Record by the Director of the Bureau of Intelligence and Research (Hilsman)

Saigon, January 2, 1963.

Source: Kennedy Library, Hilsman Papers, Country Series-Vietnam. Confidential. Hilsman and Forrestal visited Vietnam from December 31, 1962, to January 9, 1963, during a fact-finding trip which began on December 28 with a stop in Honolulu for consultations with Admiral Felt, and concluded with stops in Laos, Thailand, and Indonesia before returning to Washington on January 15. According to Hilsman, the trip was undertaken at President Kennedy’s request “to see if there was anything more that might be done” to improve the situation in Vietnam. (Hilsman, To Move a Nation, p. 453) This memorandum is excerpted in Hilsman’s memoirs.(Ibid., pp. 453-454) It is one of 17 memoranda dictated by Hilsman on tape during the trip and subsequently transcribed. A few of the memoranda are dated; some, such as the one printed here, can be dated from references in the text. All apparently were dictated during the visit to South Vietnam. Nine of the memoranda are not printed here but are in the same file in the Kennedy Library. After resuming to Washington, Hilsman and Forrestal prepared a report on South Vietnam which was submitted to President Kennedy on January 25; see Document 19.

3. Memorandum for the Record by the Director of the Bureau of Intelligence and Research (Hilsman)

Saigon, January 2, 1963.

Source: Kennedy Library, Hilsman Papers, Country Series—Vietnam. Confidential.

4. Memorandum for the Record by the Director of the Bureau of Intelligence and Research (Hilsman)

Saigon, January 2, 1963.

Source: Kennedy Library, Hilsman Papers, Country Series—Vietnam. Confidential. Hilsman quotes extensively from this conversation in his memoirs, and describes it as “the most disturbing analysis on the military side” which he received during his trip. (Hilsman, To Move a Nation, pp. 454-455)

5. Memorandum for the Record by the Director of the Bureau of Intelligence and Research (Hilsman)

Saigon, January 2, 1963.

Source: Kennedy Library, Hilsman Papers, Country Series-Vietnam. Confidential.

6. Memorandum for the Record by the Director of the Bureau of Intelligence and Research (Hilsman)

Saigon, January 1963.

Source: Kennedy Library, Hilsman Papers, Country Series-Vietnam.

7. Memorandum of a Conversation Between the Director of the Bureau of Intelligence and Research (Hilsman) and General Roland H. Anthis

Saigon, January 2, 1963

Source: Kennedy Library, Hilsman Papers, Country Series-Vietnam.

8. Memorandum for the Record by the Director of the Bureau of Intelligence and Research (Hilsman)

Saigon, January 1963.

Source: Kennedy Library, Hilsman Papers, Country Series-Vietnam.

9. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam

Washington, January 10, 1963, 4:21 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 751K.551/1-1063. Top Secret. Drafted by Howard Meyers in G/PM and Fred Greene in INR. Cleared by James M. Montgomery in SEA and by Charles Maechling Jr., Director for Internal Defense in G/PM. Also cleared with DOD/ISA, JCS, and CIA.

10. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, January 11, 1963, 7 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 751K.5/1-1163. Secret. Repeated to CINCPAC.

11. Current Intelligence Memorandum Prepared in the Office of Current Intelligence, Central Intelligence Agency

Washington, January 11, 1963.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Vietnam Country Series, 1/63. The source text is labeled “Sanitized Copy,” and the original classification has been obliterated. Ellipses throughout the document are in the source text.

12. Report to the Special Group for Counterinsurgency

Washington, January 15, 1963.

Source: Department of State, Special Group Counterinsurgency Files: Lot 68 D 451, Special Group (CI) 1/17/63-3/7/63. Confidential. Drafted in the Vietnam Working Group by Edmund H. Kelley. Circulated to the Special Group on January 15 under cover of a memorandum from Maechling, in anticipation of its January 17 meeting; see Dcoument 14.

13. Memorandum From the Director of the Vietnam Working Group (Wood) to the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Harriman)

Washington, January 16, 1963.

Source: Department of State, Vietnam Working Group Files: Lot 67 D 54, Def 19-3 Equip and Supplies. Secret. Sent to Harriman through Edward Rice. Copies were also sent to U. Alexis Johnson and Henry Koren.

14. Minutes of a Meeting of the Special Group for Counterinsurgency

Washington, January 17, 1963, 2 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Special Group Counterinsurgency Files: Lot 68 D 451, Special Group (CI). Secret. Drafted by James W. Dingeman who is not listed among the participants.

15. Memorandum From the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staffs Naval Aide (Bagley) to the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (Taylor)

Washington, January 17, 1963.

Source: National Defense University, Taylor Papers, T-240-69. Secret.

16. Letter From the Counselor of the Embassy in Vietnam (Manfull) to the Director of the Vietnam Working Group (Wood)

Saigon, January 23, 1963.

Source: Department of State, Vietnam Working Group Files: Lot 67 D 54, Def-19 Milit Assist-3rd country. Secret; Limit Distribution; Official-Informal.

17. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam

Washington, January 24, 1963, 1:31 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 951K.6211/1-2463. Confidential. Drafted on January 22 by Wood. Cleared by Frank P Lockhart, Harriman, Robert J. McCloskey, and in USIA by James N. Tull. Repeated to CINCPAC for POLAD.

18. Memorandum From the Commander in Chief, Pacific (Felt) to the Joint Chiefs of Staff

Honolulu, January 25, 1963.

Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OSD Files:FRC 69 A 3131, Vietnam 380 thru 381 1963. Secret.

19. Memorandum From the Director of the Bureau of Intelligence and Research (Hilsman) and Michael V. Forrestal of the National Security Council Staff to the President

Washington, January 25, 1963.

Source: Kennedy Library, Hilsman Papers, Country Series-Vietnam. Secret. This report and the attached annex are summarized in Hilsman, To Move a Nation, pp. 463-466. The report, without the annex, is also printed in Pentagon Papers: Gravel Edition, Vol. 11, pp. 717-725.

20. National Security Action Memorandum No. 217

Washington, January 25, 1963.

Source: Department of State, S/S-NSC Files: Lot 72 D 316,NSAMs. Sent to the Secretary of State, the Secretary of Defense, and the Administrator of AID.

21. Memorandum From Michael V. Forrestal of the National Security Council Staff to the President

Washington, January 28, 1963.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Vietnam Country Series. Secret.

22. Memorandum From the Deputy Director of the Vietnam Working Group (Heavner) to the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Harriman)

Washington, January 29, 1963.

Source: Department of State, Vietnam Working Group Files: Lot 67 D 54, Pol 13 Non-Party Blocs. Secret.

23. Memorandum From the Deputy Director of the United States Information Agency (Wilson) to the Director (Murrow)

Washington, January 30, 1963.

Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 306, USIA/TAP Files: FRC 68 A 1415, CI-Vietnam. Eyes Only.

24. Letter From the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Harriman) to the Ambassador in Vietnam (Nolting)

Washington, January 30, 1963.

Source: Department of State, Vietnam Working Group Files: Lot 67 D 54, PR-11 Press Relations. Secret. Drafted by Wood and Harriman.

25. Memorandum From the Director of the Vietnam Working Group (Wood) to the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Harriman)

Washington, January 31, 1963.

Source: Department of State, Vietnam Working Group Files: Lot 67 D 54, LEG-Mansfield Report. Secret. Initialed by Wood.

26. Report by an Investigative Team Headed by the Chief of Staff, United States Army (Wheeler), to the Joint Chiefs of Staff

Washington, January 1963.

Source: National Defense University, Taylor Papers, T-181-69. Top Secret.

27. Memorandum From Michael V. Forrestal of the National Security Council Staff to the President

Washington, February 1, 1963.

Source: Kennedy Library, President’s Office Files, Vietnam Country Series, Security 1963. Secret.

28. Memorandum From the Deputy Assistant Director, Pacific and Far East Division, United States Information Agency (Moore) to the Deputy Director (Wilson)

Washington, February 1, 1963.

Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 306, USIA/IOPIR Files: FRC 68 A 1415, Vietnam-General & Personnel. Confidential.

29. Memorandum From Michael V. Forrestal of the National Security Council Staff to the President

Washington, February 4, 1963.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Vietnam Country Series, 2/63-3/63. Secret.

30. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, February 5, 1963, 1 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, PPV 7 S VIET-US. Confidential. Repeated to CINCPAC. This document and all subsequent documents cited in the PPV file should be cited as PPB. A copy of this telegram was placed in the President’s weekend reading file, February 9-10. (Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Vietnam Country Series, 2/63-3/63)

31. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam

Washington, February 6, 1963, 1:10 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, DEF 19-3 US-S VIET Secret. Drafted by Heavner, cleared by Wood and Rice and in the Department of Defense in draft by Bundy. Repeated to CINCPAC for POLAD.

32. Minutes of a Meeting of the Special Group for Counterinsurgency

Washington, February 7, 1963, 2 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Special Group Counterinsurgency Files: Lot 68 D 451, Special Group (CI). Secret. Drafted by Dingeman who is not listed among the participants.

33. Memorandum From Michael V. Forrestal of the National Security Council Staff to the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Harriman)

Washington, February 8, 1963.

Source: Kennedy Library, Schlesinger Papers, South Vietnam. Secret. A copy was also sent to Hilsman.

34. Memorandum From Michael V. Forrestal of the National Security Council Staff to the Assistant Administrator, Bureau for Far East, Agency for International Development (Janow)

Washington, February 8, 1963.

Source: Kennedy Library, Hilsman Papers, Country Series-Vietnam. Secret. Copies were sent also to Byron Engle, Director of the Office of Public Safety in AID, and to Ogden Williams, Special Assistant on the staff of USOM Director Brent in the Embassy in Saigon.

35. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, February 8, 1963, 4 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, CSM 9-6 S VIET. Secret; Priority; Limit Distribution. Repeated to CINCPAC for POLAD.

36. Memorandum of Conversation Between the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Harriman) and the Chief of Staff, United States Army (Wheeler), Department of State

Washington, February 9, 1963, 11:30 a.m.

Source: Department of State, Vietnam Working Group Files: Lot 67 D 54, DEF 19-2 Advisory and Training Asst. Secret; Limit Distribution. Drafted by Harriman. Copies were sent to FE, SEA/VN, the Embassy in Saigon for Ambassador Nolting, the White House for Forrestal, and INR for Hilsman. A copy of this memorandum is also in Library of Congress, Harriman Papers.

37. Letter From the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Harriman) to the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (Taylor)

Washington, February 9, 1963.

Source: Library of Congress, Harriman Papers, TUVWXYZ. Personal and Confidential.

38. Letter From the Ambassador in Vietnam (Nolting) to the Vietnamese Secretary of State at the Presidency and Assistant Secretary of State for National Defense (Thuan)

Saigon, February 14, 1963.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, DEF 19-3 US-S VIET. Secret; Limit Distribution. Transmitted to Washington on February 18 as enclosure 2 to airgram A-435 from Saigon.

39. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam

Washington, February 15, 1963, 6:20 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, DEF 19 S VIET. Secret. Drafted by Heavner and cleared in FE by Wood, Abram E. Manell, and Harriman, and in P by Robert J. McCloskey. Admiral Heinz in DOD/ISA was informed about the contents of the telegram. Repeated to CINCPAC for POLAD.

40. Memorandum From the Joint Chiefs of Staff to the Secretary of Defense (McNamara)

Washington, February 16, 1963.

Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OSD Files: FRC 69 A 3131, Vietnam 380 thru 381 1963. Secret.

41. Letter From the Commander, Military Assistance Command, Vietnam (Harkins) to President Diem

Saigon, February 23, 1963.

Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 334, MAC/V Files:FRC 69 A 702, 204-58 Command Reporting Files (1963). Secret.

42. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam

Washington, February 25, 1963, 12:19 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 7 US/MANSFIELD. Official Use Only; Priority. Drafted by Wood and cleared in SEA by Deputy Director Norman B. Hannah. Repeated to CINCPAC for POLAD and pouched to Vientiane, Phnom Penh, Rangoon, Bangkok, Singapore, Kuala Lumpur, and Manila.

43. Editorial Note

44. Letter From the Director of the Vietnam Working Group (Wood) to the Minister-Counselor of the Embassy in Vietnam (Trueheart)

Washington, February 26, 1963.

Source: Department of State, Vietnam Working Group Files: Lot 67 D 54, PR-11 Press Relations. Confidential; Official-Informal. Drafted by Heavner and Wood.

45. Letter From the Ambassador in Vietnam (Nolting) to the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Harriman)

Saigon, February 27, 1963.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Vietnam Country Series, 2/63-3/63. Secret; Official-Informal.

46. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam

Washington, February 27, 1963, 5:24 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, DEF 19 S VIET Secret. Drafted by Heavuer and cleared by Wood, Rice, Harriman, and Forrestal. DOD/ISA was informed about the cable. Repeated to CINCPAC for POLAD.

47. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam

Washington, February 27, 1963, 8:37 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, AID(US) S VIET Confidential. Drafted by Walter G. Stoneman in FE/VN, AID. Cleared in draft in the Department of State by Wood and Maechling, and in Defense and AID.

48. Memorandum From the Director of the Vietnam Working Group (Wood) to the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Harriman)

Washington, February 28, 1963.

Source: Department of State, Vietnam Working Group Files: Lot 67 D 54, Pol 26-1 Counterinsurgency. Secret. Sent through Rice.

49. Memorandum From the Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs (Bundy) to the Secretary of Defense (McNamara)

Washington, March 5, 1963.

Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OSD Files: FRC 69 A 3131, Vietnam 091.4 thru 320.00 1963. Secret. Wood concurred in the memorandum for the Department of State.

50. Editorial Note

51. Memorandum From the Joint Chiefs of Staff to the Secretary of Defense (McNamara)

Washington, March 7, 1963.

Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OSD Files: FRC 69 A 3131, Vietnam 380 thru 381 1963. Secret.

52. Memorandum From the President’s Special Representative and Adviser on African, Asian, and Latin American Affairs (Bowles) to the President

Washington, March 7, 1963.

Source: Kennedy Library, President’s Office Files, Staff Memoranda-C. Bowles.

53. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, March 8, 1963, 6 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, AID(US) S VIET. Confidential. Repeated to CINCPAC.

54. Memorandum From Michael V. Forrestal of the National Security Council Staff to the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Harriman)

Washington, March 8, 1963.

Source: Library of Congress, Harriman Papers, Forrestal, Michael V. Top Secret; Eyes Only. Also addressed to McGeorge Bundy and Kaysen.

55. Telegram From the United States Information Agency to the Embassy in Vietnam

Washington, March 11, 1963, 8:25 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 S VIEI Secret. Drafted in USIA/IAF by Mecklin, who was in Washington because of a medical problem. Cleared in USIA by W. Kenneth Bunce, Deputy Assistant Director for the Far East; Thomas C. Sorensen, Deputy Director for Policy and Plans; and Murrow. Cleared in the Department of State by Harriman and James L. Greenfield, Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Public Affairs. Cleared in the Department of Defense by Sylvester and in the White House by Salinger.

56. Memorandum From the Joint Chiefs of Staff to the Secretary of Defense (McNamara)

Washington, March 11, 1963.

Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OSD Files: FRC 69 A 3131, Vietnam 380 thru 381 1963. Secret.

57. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam

Washington, March 12, 1963, 3:44 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, DEF 19 S VIET Secret; Priority. Drafted by Wood and cleared by Barnett, in AID by Stoneman, and in DOD/ISA by Colonel Kent. Repeated to CINCPAC for POLAD.

58. Memorandum From Michael V. Forrestal of the National Security Council Staff to the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Harriman)

Washington, March 13, 1963.

Source: Department of State, Vietnam Working Group Files: Lot 67 D 54, POL 27-10 Chemical Warfare. 1963. Secret.

59. Minutes of Meeting of the Special Group for Counterinsurgency

Washington, March 14, 1963, 2 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Special Group Counterinsurgency Files: Lot 68 D 451, Special Group (Cl). Secret. Drafted by Dingeman who is not listed among the participants.

1. Editorial Note 1. Editorial Note

On January 2, 1963, regular army and civil guard forces of the Republic of Vietnam engaged a Viet Cong battalion at the village of Ap Bac in Dinh Tuong province, 35 miles southwest of Saigon in the Mekong Delta. The South Vietnamese forces enjoyed a 4-1 numerical advantage in the battle, and, unlike the Viet Cong, were supported by artillery, armor, and helicopters. Despite the disparity of numbers and weapons, the Viet Cong battalion inflicted heavy casualties on the government forces and escaped with minor losses. Three American advisers were killed in the fighting and five helicopters were shot down.

The United States Army Command in the Pacific reported the battle to the Joint Chiefs of Staff as “one of the bloodiest and costliest battles of S. Vietnam war” and noted that the battle “will provide enemy with morale-building victory”. (Summary telegram 677 from ARPAC to JCS, January 4; Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Vietnam Country Series, 1/63) Lieutenant Colonel John P. Vann, senior United States adviser to the Seventh Division of the Army of the Republic of Vietnam, filed an after-action report on the Ap Bac operation which concluded that the operation was a failure. Vann attributed the failure to the poor state of training of the South Vietnamese units, a system of command which never placed a Vietnamese officer above the rank of captain on the battlefield, a reluctance to incur casualties, an inability to take effective advantage of air superiority, and a lack of discipline in battle. (After-Action Report by Senior Adviser 7th Infantry Division, January 9; JCS Files) Information obtained from a captured Viet Cong assessment of the battle indicated that the Viet Cong attributed their success at Ap Bac to preparation, motivation, and discipline in the execution of small-unit tactics. (SACSA Briefing, April 24; Department of State, Vietnam Working Group Files: Lot 67 D 54, ORG-3 WG/VN Mtgs with Other Agencies)

The battle of Ap Bac was reported in the press in the United States as “a major defeat” in which “communist guerrillas shot up a fleet of United States helicopters carrying Vietnamese troops into battle”. (The Washington Post, January 3, 1963; The New York Times, January 4, 1963) On January 7, The Washington Post printed a front-page assessment of the battle by Neil Sheehan in which he wrote that “angry United States military advisers charged today that Vietnamese infantrymen refused direct orders to advance during Wednesday’s battle at Ap Bac and that an American Army captain was killed while out front pleading with them to attack.” An assessment done in the Department of State on January 15 of press reaction across the country to the battle of Ap Bac noted that “since Ap Bac the complaint has been increasingly heard that the American public is not ‘getting the facts’ on the situation in Viet-nam, even at this time when American casualties are mounting.” (“Alert” on Viet-Nam: Current American Concern and Misunderstanding; National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Files of the Office of Public Opinion Studies, U.S. Policy on S. Vietnam, April-Dec. 1963)

The Department of State and the White House expressed concern over the reports printed in the press on the battle of Ap Bac. (Telegram 662 to Saigon, January 7; Department of State, Central Files, 951K.6211/1-763) On January 3, Deputy Secretary of Defense Roswell Gilpatric forwarded to the White House a memorandum prepared for the President by the Joint Staff of the Joint Chiefs of Staff which suggested that the press was painting the battle in misleading colors: “It appears that the initial press reports have distorted both the importance of the action and the damage suffered by the US/GVN forces. Although unexpectedly stiff resistance was apparently encountered, contact has been maintained and the operation is being continued.” (Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Vietnam Country Series, 1/63) On January 7, President Kennedy expressed concern about the Sheehan article published that day which indicated that the South Vietnamese troops involved in the battle lacked courage. (Telegram CAP 63037 from General C.V. Clifton at the White House to General Godfrey T. McHugh with the President at Palm Beach, January 7; ibid.) A copy of a report on the battle prepared on January 4 by General Paul D. Harkins, Commander of the U.S. Military Assistance Command in Vietnam, was forwarded to President Kennedy on January 7 in response to his concern. (Attached ibid.) General Harkins noted that the South Vietnamese forces at Ap Bac had made a number of errors, but he characterized them largely as errors of courage rather than cowardice. “It took a lot of guts”, he wrote, “on the part of those pilots and crews to go back into the area to try to rescue their pals.” “Like any engagements in war”, Harkins concluded, “there are days-and there are days. This day they got a bear by the tail and they didn’t let go of it. At least they got most of it.” Harkins’ assessment closely paralleled that of Admiral Harry D. Felt, Commander in Chief, Pacific, who sought to put the battle into perspective in telegram 100910Z to the Joint Chiefs of Staff on January 10. Felt noted that it was “important to realize that bad news about American casualties filed immediately by young reporters representing the wire services without careful checking of the facts.” He conceded that the South Vietnamese forces had made mistakes at Ap Bac based upon faulty intelligence and inexperience, but he added “along with the bad news of damage to helicopters and three Americans lost, there is good news which you may not read about in The Washington Post.” He pointed to a number of other military operations being undertaken successfully by South Vietnamese forces, and concluded: “It also hurts here when irresponsible newsmen spread the word to American public that GVN forces won’t fight and, on the other hand, do not adequately report GVN victories which are occurring more frequently.” (National Defense University, Taylor Papers, T-182-67)

On January 7, the Joint Chiefs of Staff authorized Army Chief of Staff General Earle G. Wheeler to lead a team of officers to Vietnam to investigate conflicting reports on military problems and report on future prospects for the war. For text of the Wheeler report, submitted to the Joint Chiefs at the end of January, see Document 26.

2. Memorandum for the Record by the Director of the Bureau of Intelligence and Research (Hilsman) 2. Memorandum for the Record by the Director of the Bureau of Intelligence and Research (Hilsman)1

Saigon, January 2, 1963.

At this point some thirty-six hours after having arrived in Saigon, I have the impression that things are going much much better than they were a year ago, but that they are not going nearly so well as the people here in Saigon both military and civilian think they are. They have a concept in the strategic hamlet program.2 They have aid and they have lots of people and this inevitably gives a sense of movement and progress. The trouble is, however, that the progress and the movement is highly uneven. One would wish that this is the fault of the Vietnamese, and it is to a considerable extent. But I am afraid that a great share of the responsibility belongs with the Americans. We have the impression that any one of these programs such as the strategic hamlet program or really any of the others requires precise and efficient coordination of the different activities of many different American agencies. And you also have the impression that this coordination is not really being accomplished. One example is the failure to provide a police program that even remotely is phased in with the provision of wire for the strategic hamlets and radios for the strategic hamlets. Thus you have strategic hamlets going up enclosing Communists inside their boundaries with no provisions for wrinkling [winkling?] out those Communists. Other things are similar. You have also the impression that the military is still too heavily oriented towards sweep-type operations. There is still the same emphasis on air power as there was before. Almost every operation so far as I can tell still begins with an air strike which inevitably kills innocent people and warns the Viet Cong that they should get moving for the troops will be coming soon. I think it justifies [signifies?] that the Americans are as much to blame for this as the Vietnamese. That MACV has requested an augmentation of the Farmgate group.3

I think Nolting and Trueheart are doing an excellent job of trying to coordinate the activities of all the U.S. agencies within the leverage that they have at their command. What I am afraid of is that it is not enough leverage. I can’t help thinking that the history of the establishment of MACV inhibits both the Ambassador and the DCM in their aggressiveness in providing leadership.

(I stress, however, that this is a first impression very much subject to revision as we learn more about what is going on here.)

1 Source: Kennedy Library, Hilsman Papers, Country Series-Vietnam. Confidential. Hilsman and Forrestal visited Vietnam from December 31, 1962, to January 9, 1963, during a fact-finding trip which began on December 28 with a stop in Honolulu for consultations with Admiral Felt, and concluded with stops in Laos, Thailand, and Indonesia before returning to Washington on January 15. According to Hilsman, the trip was undertaken at President Kennedy’s request “to see if there was anything more that might be done” to improve the situation in Vietnam. (Hilsman, To Move a Nation, p. 453) This memorandum is excerpted in Hilsman’s memoirs.(Ibid., pp. 453-454) It is one of 17 memoranda dictated by Hilsman on tape during the trip and subsequently transcribed. A few of the memoranda are dated; some, such as the one printed here, can be dated from references in the text. All apparently were dictated during the visit to South Vietnam. Nine of the memoranda are not printed here but are in the same file in the Kennedy Library. After resuming to Washington, Hilsman and Forrestal prepared a report on South Vietnam which was submitted to President Kennedy on January 25; see Document 19.

2 The Strategic Hamlet Program was established by President Diem on a nationwide basis on February 3, 1962, with the creation of an Interministerial Committee for Strategic Hamlets, headed by Ngo Dinh Nhu; see Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, vol. II, Document 46.

3 “Farmgate” was the code name of the U.S. Air Force Squadron introduced into South Vietnam in 1961 to train South Vietnamese pilots and to fly coordinated missions with Vietnamese personnel in support of Vietnamese ground forces. President Kennedy authorized the dispatch of the Farmgate squadron on October 11, 1961. Regarding this decision, see Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, vol. I, Document 156.) On December 21, 1962, Deputy Secretary of Defense Gilpatric proposed an augmentation of the Farmgate program, which was approved by President Kennedy; see ibid., vol. II, Document 333.

3. Memorandum for the Record by the Director of the Bureau of Intelligence and Research (Hilsman) 3. Memorandum for the Record by the Director of the Bureau of Intelligence and Research (Hilsman)1

Saigon, January 2, 1963.

Nolting and Trueheart are both very optimistic about the way the war is going in South Vietnam. They took exception, in fact, to several of the cautious, general statements in INR’s contribution to the forthcoming NIE2 which had just arrived the day before I did.

One of the reasons for their optimism is apparently the vigor with which the South Vietnamese government and especially Brother Nhu have pushed the strategic hamlet program. (R.G.K. Thompson also mentioned that without Nhu’s enthusiastic and vigorous backing, the strategic hamlet program would probably not have gotten off the ground. He went on to say, in fact, that he is wrong in his worry earlier this year that the Vietnamese would endanger the program by doing too much of it in too many places. He now feels that Nhu was not wrong in doing this because it attracted a great deal of attention to the program all over Vietnam and hence got an essential momentum.)

Beyond the above it is hard to see exactly what specific basis there is for the Embassy’s optimism. Partly it is a question of mood. The sense of activity is much stronger. The morale of the Vietnamese at least in Saigon is higher principally because something is being done and because so much American aid which is so visible has appeared. On a factual basis, they cite as reasons for optimism the increased activity of the ARVN—they are going out more often, attacking more often, and even occasionally engaging in night attacks. (However, see the Memcon of the Conversation with General Ed Rowny.)3

I mentioned to Trueheart the figures that CINCPAC gave me—that 18,000 Viet Cong had been killed this past year, but that the total Viet Cong regular strength nevertheless rose from 18,000 to about 22,000 to 24,000 with the sympathizers and supporters remaining about the same. Trueheart scoffed at this and said that the explanation was only that the statistics were more accurate, meaning that last year there were considerably more than 18,000. I still find this hard to believe completely, however, since that would have given a total of around 42,000 regulars in the VC last year and I am sure that though the intelligence was not very good, it was considerably better than that differential would indicate.

Trueheart is running a so-called Junior Country Team which is apparently the guiding direction of the American effort on the strategic hamlet program. He is reportedly doing an excellent job at this. However, I do think his optimism stems in part from identification with the local scene and that it is not entirely objective.

I told [queried?] both Nolting and Bill Trueheart on the question of whether the officials, both civilian and military, were frustrated by Diem’s failures to delegate since this could be a very serious morale problem while parliamentary elections are not. They both said that the officials that they and their staff contacted did not evidence any such frustration nor had they heard of any from other American representatives reporting on their contact. (This, of course, could be attributed to the morale improvement as a result of American aid and might not, therefore, be a permanent phenomenon—i.e., the frustration might manifest itself again if there is no substantial progress in the war itself as opposed to progress in the arrival of American aid.)

Part of our discussion concerned the Cambodian problem. Nolting is very strong in the view that he could persuade the South Vietnamese to be exceptionally forthcoming in a settlement with Cambodia of their outstanding problems if the United States were willing to back bilateral guarantees for Cambodia rather than an international conference which the South Vietnamese fear. He thinks the quid pro quo of the U.S. opposing a conference would be sufficient to make the Vietnamese forthcoming. It was agreed that he would draft a cable inviting instructions to explore the problem with the Vietnamese government.

Nolting and Trueheart are also pleased with the Montagnard program. Paradoxically, one of the things that pleases them is the way that the CIA has managed to take arms away from the Montagnards without alienating them so far as we can tell. Here the device the CIA used was to take the people who are giving up weapons out to the new villages so that they could see that their weapons were being given to other Montagnards who are in less secure areas. The reason that Nolting and Trueheart are pleased, of course, is that the Sough Vietnamese Government is nervous about the Montagnards and about their having too many arms and extremely anxious that the arms be taken away as the areas become more secure. (I am myself a little nervous that the weapons are being taken away prematurely. The Montagnard strategic hamlet program is essential if the infiltration routes are to be cut and I am surprised to find the areas are regarded as secure so soon.)

I questioned Nolting and Trueheart on the progress made in providing police for the strategic hamlets. Apparently an experimental program for one or two villages has been started, but nothing much more. (This to my mind is an enormous gap in the implementation of the strategic hamlet concept.)

1 Source: Kennedy Library, Hilsman Papers, Country Series—Vietnam. Confidential.

2 An apparent reference to NIE 53-63, Document 94.

3 Document 4.

4. Memorandum for the Record by the Director of the Bureau of Intelligence and Research (Hilsman) 4. Memorandum for the Record by the Director of the Bureau of Intelligence and Research (Hilsman)1

Saigon, January 2, 1963.

Conversation with Major General Edward L. Rowny

Ed Rowny is a Major General here on a special mission to provide new weapons and techniques for use in South Vietnam over and above the MAP program. This is a result of the fact that Rowny was the Executive Secretary of the Howze Board, which made a study of modern techniques of conventional war and mobility last year. He was scheduled to take command of a division in Korea as the youngest division Commander in the Army, but was switched to South Vietnam because of his unique background and experience.

I have known Rowny for some 15 years—first when he and I were graduate students together at Yale studying international politics. He is a most unusual Army officer in that he has had advance training in the political side of the equation and this training has taken root in a sophisticated and excellent mind. His judgments from the situation, therefore, are ones to which I would give great weight.

Rowny is optimistic, but with considerable reservations.

One of the greatest troubles he feels is CINCPAC. CINCPAC is still trying to run the war even in practical detail. Many of the plans and operations that are conceived out here in Saigon are still vetoed in CINCPAC. Many of the operations that they launch here are conceived of in CINCPAC. Operation Sunrise,2 of course, is a prize example of this.

CINCPAC screens the messages, according to Rowny, that Harkins sends and forwards to Washington only those that he and CINCPAC deem appropriate. Rowny says that on one occasion Felt called Harkins down for infoing the JCS without Felt’s advance permission.

Felt also exercises a very tight personal control over requests for equipment. For example, Rowny will recommend to Harkins the introduction from Department of Army sources rather than MAP, of some new weapon or technique or some such. If Harkins decides that it will contribute to the war in Vietnam, the Department of the Army will then honor the request. But CINCPAC must also concur and CINCPAC has not concurred on a very high percentage of the requests. Rowny feels that his operation is about fifteen percent effective, the rest of the time and energy going into attempting to persuade CINCPAC.

Rowny has been on some 20 operations. He describes the typical one as follows. The troops are scheduled to move at a certain hour in the morning. Usually there is a considerable delay waiting for a previous air strike. The air strike is then made on a village at which the Viet Cong is reported to be ensconced. The helicopters then move out, the troops are landed outside the village and they start forward. After a little while there is a flurry on the right and someone drags a peasant out of a rice paddy where he had been hiding. The peasant is bound and taken prisoner as a “suspected Viet Cong.” They then proceed up the road towards the village. Some time later another flurry appears on the left and a man runs towards the jungle. He is shot and killed and marked down as a Viet Cong since he ran.

They then proceed to the village which is deserted except for an old man or perhaps an addlepated girl—an Ophelia and [as?] Rowny describes her. Under interrogation the senile old man or addled girl points toward some spot in the jungle, or some cellar or something. The troops go there and drag out a man who is hiding who is then bound and captured as a “suspected VC.” The operation has now reached noon. Everyone sits down, cooks their rice and meal. Patrols are sent out and around finding nothing and then an hour or so later the helicopters come to pick the troops up and take them back to their regular billets.

We discussed why [there are] such elaborate operations, which are preceded by bombing, warning the VC and proceeding so slowly as to give the VC ample time to escape. Rowny puts it down to two things. One, reluctance on the part of the ARVN really to engage in a battle. As he says, they do not really want to tangle with the enemy, they want to be completely safe and not have any really serious fight. The second reason is Diem’s attitude towards “defeats.” Diem’s cold propaganda line, as we well know, is that there must never be a defeat even a small one, but only one long series of victories. (For example where the GVN was pleased with my speech given in Chicago,3 they did not want USIA which had distributed 2000 copies in English to translate it into Vietnamese because it admitted that there were some dark spots in the picture and that there was some reason to be cautious about one’s optimism.) Rowny told of the story where one of the much better commanders, more aggressive commanders, took a group out, killing three Viet Cong officers and 60 regular Viet Cong troops capturing their weapons in a stiff battle in which the ARVN lost one officer and several men. Diem was furious at this “defeat”; to lose an officer is a defeat in his eyes. This pressure for only victories and only total victories at that, leads to excessive caution on the part of the ARVN, in Rowny’s opinion.

The fact remains that the extended jungle patrolling extended in time and4 of being done. The reliance is on air power, on sweeps, on strikes, and so on.

The one encouraging note in the military picture is that some of these operations are of the “clear and hold variety.” That is the troops go out at least a site north of Viet Cong if they do not, or only rarely, seize them or surround them and the province chiefs and what civic action teams are available, then put in strategic villages providing the hold part of the clear and hold.5 The encouraging thing is that there are some of these operations among the sweep operations and, of course, this does extend the area of effective government control to the extent that the strategic villages built are themselves effective. Here again we will need to learn more about this .…6 eyes and equipment and in a more responsive MAP program responsive to Vietnamese true needs but he did not think that Harkins was a man who was going to exercise a great deal of initiative. Harkins apparently does not like a bureaucratic fight and wishes to avoid it if possible. For example, he makes no protest when Felt moves squads around on the map generally feeling that if it will make Felt happy, okay. He feels that Harkins is a good officer and competent, but not an imaginative and driving, highly motivated or creative officer.

Rowny is very high on Nolting and he feels that if CINCPAC were off his back and if he had the authority, that Nolting would be able to manage the war very well indeed, although Rowny added that he, of course, had no real basis for this kind of prediction since he had not seen Nolting in action, but was only giving this as his impression that Nolting would do a good job if given more opportunity and scope.

Rowny feels that what is really saving us out here is the high quality of the sergeants, lieutenants and captains. We discussed the failure on the civilian side to give as much impetus and vigor to what is going on out here as it should do and Rowny said that he had discussed this with Mecklin, the USIA chief, and with Rufus Phillips, the USOM fellow, who seems to be doing such a good job in the USOM part of the strategic hamlet program. Both Phillips and Mecklin pointed out that the civilian agencies simply cannot lay their hands on the high-quality, high-talented younger people that the military can just arbitrarily assign to Vietnam, that the civilian tasks can be better accomplished by the high-quality lieutenants and captains than they could be by the much lower quality civilians that would be the only ones available.

It is interesting that a number of these captains and majors are becoming strong advocates of fewer sweep operations and more civil and political action programs which tends to bear out Mecklin’s and Phillips’ judgments.

Another problem that Rowny discussed was the Air Force vs. Army-Air. The Air Force is very reluctant to provide escort aircraft for helicopter missions. They put “interdiction” on a higher priority than supporting or escorting helicopters and “retaining command of the air” at an even higher priority. There is, of course, no air opposition so it is hard to justify failure to support the helicopters on the grounds of maintaining air superiority. One wonders what they would interdict also, since any movement is by infiltration routes. Apparently what they mean by interdiction is precisely the air strikes on reported VC villages. The Army has gotten around this a little bit by using the Mohawk in an air-support role. The problem here, however, is that CINCPAC has put a restriction on what the Mohawk can carry limiting it only to machine guns rather than the rockets and other equipment that it could carry. To some extent this had had a beneficial effect in that the combination of using the Army Mohawk and its light armament has made the Air Force somewhat more forthcoming in providing some air support for the helicopter operations. The situation, however, seems to be far from satisfactory.

Judging from what Rowny said, Forrestal and I have begun to wonder whether it is wise to approve the requested augmentation in Farmgate.7 If for no other reason, a refusal to grant this permission might be good as a disciplinary measure.

Forrestal posed the question to Rowny as to whether it would be impossible to issue instructions to Harkins which in effect kept CINCPAC in the act for supplies,MAP and all of this, administration in other words, but cut CINCPAC out as regards operations, policy decisions, and so on. Rowny said that there was no reason at all that this could not be arranged without ruining the military’s chain of command. He thought it was easily possible and certainly desirable.

The following represents Forrestal’s remembrance of the Rowny conversation. Rowny made three separate points.

The first point was the relationship of CINCPAC to the South Vietnamese operation. Felt runs the South Vietnam operation like a ship. He interferes in details of tactical planning. He denies requests for equipment. Harkins cannot communicate directly with the Joint Chiefs of Staff. Felt actually directs some tactical operations from Hawaii.

The second major point is that the Air Force is not always providing adequate close aerial support. The Mohawk, for example, is an airplane which could carry a great deal more armaments and provide good close support, but the Air Force does not want tactical aircraft in Army hands. Rowny also feels that there is a tendency to use air power for interdiction rather than for close support.

The third major point that Rowny made was concerned with personnel. The best people are the majors, captains and lieutenants. The poorest people are at the staff level in all of the agencies. The top levels, meaning Harkins, Nolting, and Trueheart, and Mecklin are good. And also Rufus Phillips is excellent. The intermediates are not at all good and Nolting and Trueheart are effective by calling on the captains and majors and by-passing or detouring the top intermediate levels of the military. USOM is no good at all, except for Rufus Phillips. Rowny also feels that there are too many American generals in South Vietnam.

1 Source: Kennedy Library, Hilsman Papers, Country Series—Vietnam. Confidential. Hilsman quotes extensively from this conversation in his memoirs, and describes it as “the most disturbing analysis on the military side” which he received during his trip. (Hilsman, To Move a Nation, pp. 454-455)

2 For documentation on Operation Sunrise, see Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, vol. II, Documents 103ff.

3 For text of this speech, delivered on September 18, 1962, see American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1962, pp. 1109-1117.

4 A marginal notation on the text at this point reads: “(coughs)”, which suggests that the garbled text is due to an inaudible portion of the tape recording upon which this memorandum is based.

5 This confused sentence suggests that the tape recording was again difficult to understand at this point.

6 Ellipsis in the source text. The omission reflects a gap in the source text, which is explained by a note that indicates the memorandum “is being continued on the other side of the tape.”

7 See footnote 3, Document 2.

5. Memorandum for the Record by the Director of the Bureau of Intelligence and Research (Hilsman) 5. Memorandum for the Record by the Director of the Bureau of Intelligence and Research (Hilsman)1

Saigon, January 2, 1963.

SUBJECT

Country Team Meeting on Wednesday, January 2, 1963

Present were the heads of all the agencies there. The first item on the agenda was the planned operation beginning today which was a very large scale sweep operation directed against a headquarters in Tayninh Province. This is a very large scale affair and, of course, comes very close to the Cambodian Border which aroused Forrestal because of the implications of the Cambodian problems. The result was to impress those peasants with Washington’s concern about the relationships with Cambodia.

General Harkins raised the question of this desire to overfly Laos in order to get photographs of Tchepone and the buildup which he suspects is taking place there. He also wants permission to probe in Laos.

Another agenda item was the operation in the Ca Mau Peninsula in which two Marine battalions will be landed. This is a VC stronghold which the government has been unable to enter since 1945. Additional motives for the operation are the problem of charcoal for Saigon and also an attempt to cut off the export of fish from the Viet Cong territory to Singapore. The Embassy has doubts about this since they feel that it will tie down the two Marine battalions for many, many months. General Harkins’ response was to imply that the Marine battalions might not otherwise be used and that it was a clear and hold operation. Other of the Embassy doubts are that in the whole area of clear and hold only four strategic hamlets are planned and the Embassy feels that these four will be inhabited by women and children only and that they will require the resettlement of people and will be in effect concentration camps. It is recognized by everyone concerned that this operation is an exception to the general rule.

General Harkins described several clear and hold operations in VC strongholds, Phu Bon also in a VC stronghold, An Lac area also a VC stronghold. Others he mentioned as examples are Phu Yen Province, Vinh Binh Province, Quang Ngai Province, and the Ben Cat area.

The question of napalm came up for discussion with the Ambassador making the point that the South Vietnamese already had napalm and we could not control completely their use of it. And General

Harkins making the point that napalm really put the fear of God into the VC and was very effective. This led to a discussion of Farmgate and the requested augmentation. Apparently, air strikes have gone from one hundred a month to over a thousand a month partly as a result of the ARVN learning more about our air power and how to use it.

General Harkins also mentioned that following Tet he hoped for a nationwide intensification of ARVN offensives. This is his word now for the so-called explosion.

The Ambassador raised the point about the Cambodian bid for neutrality and his fear that this would be associated within South Vietnameses’ minds the desire [sic] for U.S. cutback in U.S. presence which might come early in ‘63. The Ambassador was very fearful that these two would make the South Vietnamese afraid that we were getting out and seeking a neutral solution for all of Southeast Asia. The Ambassador felt that this was to be handled very carefully and if it caused us a break with the French, he was willing to accept that cost.

I raised the question of Diem’s inability to delegate and asked whether this was leading to frustration on the part of technical and professional and bureaucratic elites. The Ambassador said that he thought that there was considerably less frustration both at the provincial and the national levels for three reasons. First, because of our aid and the momentum that has been generated these officials now have more to do than they ever did before. The second, they have a plan which they understand and are following and third, the mere fact of momentum lifts morale and dissipates doubts. I suggested that this morale might be shortlived and due mainly to our aid and participation only to emerge [submerge?] again if Diem’s habits about failing to delegate continued.

There was some discussion of this in which the Country Team generally sided with Diem and said that usually when he interfered he was right and the other people were wrong. My net reaction was that the case was not entirely persuasive.

1 Source: Kennedy Library, Hilsman Papers, Country Series-Vietnam. Confidential.

6. Memorandum for the Record by the Director of the Bureau of Intelligence and Research (Hilsman) 6. Memorandum for the Record by the Director of the Bureau of Intelligence and Research (Hilsman)1

Saigon, January 1963.

CONVERSATION WITH PRESIDENT DIEM

Forrestal and I spent four and a half hours with Diem. It is perfectly obvious that Diem regards these long conversations as a form of amusement. He schedules them when he has plenty of free time and it is a substitute for bridge, movies, music, or social evenings. He, of course, monopolizes the conversation, but what it does illustrate is his very profound knowledge of his own country. There is no facet of it that he does not know everything about. He spoke at great length about the Montagnards of which he knows a great deal. He concentrated upon the differences in the different tribes and their nature, and the way they behaved, and so on.

Diem also described in great detail the recent activities of the province chief in Tay Ninh and the operations there. There was a headquarters located in Tay Ninh province of the Viet Cong. By accommodation [a combination?] of airdrops and sweeps on the part of civil guard and ARVN forces large quantities of rice supplies, a radio, a Viet Cong colonel and so on and so forth were captured. In addition a great many Viet Cong were killed.

He also described in great detail the operations in Mackaday Zone D. This is adopting the long advocated but rarely done long-range patrols by ranger companies. At the time he was talking, these four or five day patrols had killed a total of 108 VC with very few losses to themselves. Diem’s general plans in this called for keeping the reserves outside of Mackaday but to parachute or helicopter them in if the long-range patrols ran into overwhelming resistance.

Diem also had some criticisms to make of the Plei Mrong operation and of our Special Forces there. His major criticism was that the defense perimeter was badly planned and organized. Unfortunately, I am afraid he is right.

1 Source: Kennedy Library, Hilsman Papers, Country Series-Vietnam.

7. Memorandum of a Conversation Between the Director of the Bureau of Intelligence and Research (Hilsman) and General Roland H. Anthis 7. Memorandum of a Conversation Between the Director of the Bureau of Intelligence and Research (Hilsman) and General Roland H. Anthis1

Saigon, January 2, 1963

The Farmgate now has eight B-26s, eight T-28s, four C-47s, and four U-10As. The complement is 43 officers and 104 airmen. The augmentation requested is for eleven B-26s, five T-28s, two C-47s, and 130 additional people. The Vietnamese Air Force on the other hand has two fighter squadrons; one squadron of T-28s consisting of 25 airplanes and one squadron of AD-6s consisting of 25 airplanes. We had a long discussion of the procedures by which targets are selected and fired. In brief, there are two ways in which targets are selected. The first is through the photographic interpretation route. If the American PIC sees a suspected area, it reports it to the Vietnamese PIC who on confirming this gives it to corps and corps to division. The other route is if it is requested by a division which then goes straight to the joint operations center and a strike is laid on.

Thus the key is the division. It is the division that really decides whether they will bomb a village or not. There is a US air liaison officer at the division level but he does not usually participate in target selection, but only in laying on a strike.

There are roughly two kinds of strikes. One is the close support, that is when a unit is actually in contact with the enemy and is fired upon. No, wait, there is a fallacy here. Close support is when the planes actually accompany the troops. One circumstance, of course, would be when the troops were fired upon and the planes were then bombed but under the rubric of close support would also fall air strikes done in preparation in softening up of a ground attack. (I will check on this today.)

The other kind of strike is the so-called interdiction. An interdiction strike is a bombing and/or strafing run on a suspected VC installation indicated by intelligence.

There are roughly 1,000 strikes a month. In November, 32 per cent of these were interdiction, 53 per cent were in direct support and 15 percent were other, i.e., reconnaissance and so on. Thus over 300 strikes per month are pure interdiction and it is unknown how many of the 15-53 percent are strikes based on intelligence rather than strikes on people who are actually shooting at the ground forces.

There are 63 so-called free areas which change constantly.

The request for augmentation is based really on three things. First, the ARVN is “learning more how to use air power and calling for it more.” The second is that there are nine active divisions and if you total up all the odd SCSDC and civil guard companies and so on, a total of 51 divisions equivalent all of whom are calling for air support. The third justification is in anticipation of General Harkins’ “national intensification” which he is planning to begin immediately following Tet. (This is what we understood as explosion in the states.)

The American Air Force here is, of course, terribly sensitive on this issue of “indiscriminate bombing” and really quite defensive in their conversations with us. The key to the issue is, of course, intelligence and this is something we will look into today.

1 Source: Kennedy Library, Hilsman Papers, Country Series-Vietnam.

8. Memorandum for the Record by the Director of the Bureau of Intelligence and Research (Hilsman) 8. Memorandum for the Record by the Director of the Bureau of Intelligence and Research (Hilsman)1

Saigon, January 1963.

The following are notes on the situation here.

1. Is there a plan? The answer is no. There are five or six plans many of which are competing. There is, consequently, great confusion.

2. How about implementation? Are the military and political action coordinated? The answer-Imperfectly at best. There are huge gaps in what people are doing. For example, the police program has not even begun to get off the ground, and this raises the possibility that the strategic villages will be built around Communists and will rot from within which could bring the whole thing down in shambles.

3. Is the U.S. effort coordinated? Is it guided by a clear conception which permits effective meshing of our various efforts? Answer—Individual agencies are doing a superb job (e.g., Rufus Phillips, Richardson of CIA and the Special Forces). But it cannot really be said that there is wide understanding of [or?] a clear conception though some individuals do have a clear conception.

1 Source: Kennedy Library, Hilsman Papers, Country Series-Vietnam.

9. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam 9. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam1

Washington, January 10, 1963, 4:21 p.m.

670. Joint State-Defense message. Re: Paramilitary Personnel: Interdepartmental committee charged with study feasibility increased use third-country personnel in paramilitary operations needs country team views ASAP in outline on: 1. Efficacy present use and desirability increasing numbers and roles any of third-country nationals already being used in South Vietnam [2 lines not declassified]. Comment on major contributions and problems encountered.

2. Uses personnel of other third-countries not now participating, which you consider desirable and feasible.

3. Auspices and organizational devices under which additional personnel could be used with USG, GVN and country of origin approval (e.g. Under unilateral third-country auspices, or US; possible non-attributable control; civilian contract, or overt military).

In formulating views, exclude third-country personnel engaged in essentially economic-social work; include those directly employed in other aspects counter-insurgency operations or supporting them, whether military or civilians.2

The source text does not have the usual stamped signature.

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 751K.551/1-1063. Top Secret. Drafted by Howard Meyers in G/PM and Fred Greene in INR. Cleared by James M. Montgomery in SEA and by Charles Maechling Jr., Director for Internal Defense in G/PM. Also cleared with DOD/ISA, JCS, and CIA.

2 In telegram 694 from Saigon, January 22, the Embassy responded that, in view of the sensitivity of the information involved, a coordinated mission reply was being sent through other channels. The reply would indicate that the mission favored increased third country military or paramilitary assistance to Vietnam. The mission expressed the hope that such assistance could be provided overtly under the participant’s own flag, and noted that it would be necessary to fit such assistance into existing military programs and operations. (Ibid., 751K.551/1-2263)

10. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 10. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, January 11, 1963, 7 p.m.

664. CINCPAC for POLAD. Dept pass USIS. Ref: Embtel 627,2 Tousi 138,3 and A–369.4 GVN apparently intends proceed surrender program at Tet.5 As reported ref messages first phase of program will apparently last until July 7 (anniversary Diem taking office) then continue in phase two until March 1964. Civic Action Minister Hieu in meeting with DGI Tao, Psywar Director Gen. Oai, and US reps Jan 9 said President would make pre-recorded radio proclamation (which would also be filmed) January 25 (Tet). GVN will attempt provide us with tape and film of proclamation (which reportedly to be submitted for President’s approval today) prior Jan 15.

Hieu described three aspects of program: philosophy, techniques, and organization. Asked us suggestions and help with last two but pointedly not with first. He stated program which will follow general outlines his proposal described ref messages, and will be called “Chieu Tap” (rassemblement), will receive “generous” support from Interministerial Strategic Hamlet Committee but will also require some US aid. Principal means of carrying out program will be civic action cadres who will receive indoctrination under DGI and Psywar Director beginning next week. All ARVN Psywar officers will also be brought to Saigon for special course. Three days of ten-day Strategic Hamlet school in Saigon now being devoted to surrender program. Additional points brought out in meeting: program will include national and provincial “welcome” centers and district “welcome” bureaus with latter merely serving to turn over surrenderers to province centers. National center for those considered “interesting enough”, presumably from intelligence standpoint, will be located in Gia Dinh in rehabilitated camp formerly used receive refugees from DRV. After interrogation those surrenderers not sent to national center will be returned to hamlets or used in GVN propaganda teams.

At meeting it tentatively agreed: 1. DGI will supply film and tape of President reading proclamation, USIS to make special newsreel and film leader on event, plus maximum use of all its publications including Kien Quoc.

2. On morning of Jan 26 air drop (possibly including US aircraft) will be made of one million leaflets in white areas and two million in red (to be printed by USIS, DGI and Psywar). Leaflets to have text proclamation, and on reverse side instructions to friendly population and military forces on reception surrenderers. Radio coverage to be handled by DGI. Use of theater programs and street banners also planned.

3. USIS will also print 400,000 posters with Diem picture in color and proclamation text. Planning to bring posters by air from Manila printing center.

Next joint meeting set for Jan 29, to be held monthly subsequently. Thompson Mission working closely with GVN and us on program. We will inform US military advisors and USOM rural reps general outlines plan and provide them with guidance on how to assist in its implementation. We will also impress on GVN need for adequately informing population and particularly military personnel of treatment to be afforded surrenderers.

Nolting

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 751K.5/1-1163. Secret. Repeated to CINCPAC.

2 In telegram 627 from Saigon, December 27, 1962, the Embassy reported on a number of indications of progress in the development of a Viet Cong surrender program by the Diem government. (Ibid., 751K.00/12-2762)

3 Not found.

4 Airgram A–369 from Saigon, January 11, enclosed a translated text of the proposed surrender plan which was approved in principle by the Interministerial Strategic Hamlet Committee of the Vietnamese Government on December 21. The airgram also enclosed a copy of a paper prepared for President Diem by R.G.K. Thomson, head of the British Advisory Mission, on the question of interrogation of Viet Cong who surrendered. (Department of State, Central Files, 751K.5/1-1163)

5 The “Chieu Hoi” policy anticipated in this telegram, which called on Viet Cong members to surrender, was formally established on April 17 with a proclamation issued by President Diem. See Document 92.

11. Current Intelligence Memorandum Prepared in the Office of Current Intelligence, Central Intelligence Agency 11. Current Intelligence Memorandum Prepared in the Office of Current Intelligence, Central Intelligence Agency1

Washington, January 11, 1963.

[document number not declassified]

SUBJECT

Current Status of the War in South Vietnam

1. Though the South Vietnamese government probably is holding its own against the Viet Cong and may be reducing the menace in some areas, the tide has not yet turned.

2. South Vietnam has made some military progress in its struggle with the Viet Cong due largely to extensive US support. The Viet Cong, however, continue to expand the size and effectiveness of their forces, and are increasingly bold in their attacks. Furthermore, Diem’s political improvements have not kept pace with purely military achievements.

3. Various statistics indicate government progress against the Viet Cong during 1962, but these can be misleading as a basis for a conclusion on who is winning. For instance, Viet Cong casualties during 1962 were reported at more than 30,000 including some 21,000 killed in action. Yet current Viet Cong strength is estimated at 22,000-24,000 regulars, as opposed to an estimated 17,600 last June. This suggests either that the casualty figures are exaggerated or that the Viet Cong have a remarkable replacement capability—or both.

4. The ratio of weapons captured to weapons lost has recently turned in favor of the government. For example, in October and November, the last two months for which complete statistics are available, the South Vietnamese lost a total of 736 weapons and captured 860. But many of the Communist weapons are old French equipment or crude homemade rifles and pistols, while government losses are generally modern US weapons.

5. The number of government strikes has certainly increased during the past year. But all too frequently the Viet Cong are gone when the strike force arrives. Hence, a pure count of government-mounted operations may indicate a more determined government policy but not necessarily a weakened enemy.

6. Nor is it completely safe to judge the condition of this enemy by the type of operation he mounts. Widespread small-unit attacks do not necessarily mean that the Viet Cong are on the defensive any more than a series of battalion-size operations necessarily heralds the advent of positional war. Each type of action is an integral part of the strategy known as “mobile warfare”-essentially a war of attrition.

7. The South Vietnamese, with extensive US assistance, have instituted military and political measures which have had some success in curbing the insurgency menace. Training has been intensified, counterguerrilla tactics have been improved, and force levels augmented. These, in conjunction with new US-provided or operated equipment and US tactical advice, have all resulted in a measure of increased effectiveness, mobility and aggressiveness on the part of government forces. A recent reorganization of the military command structure is designed to facilitate quicker and better responses to Viet Cong military moves.

8. In the political sphere, various counterinsurgency projects-of which the strategic hamlet program is the most important-have improved the local security situation in some areas and made some progress toward persuading the rural population to identify its fortunes with those of Saigon. Results of politico-military “clear and hold” operations-where an effort is made to follow up a military success with a political action program-have been encouraging. So too have been the results of work among the Montagnards and a heterogeneous variety of civilian paramilitary units known collectively as Citizens Irregular Defense Groups.

9. The overall effectiveness of the counterinsurgency effort, however, continues to be blunted by the government’s political modus operandi. Assorted control measures designed to guard against disloyalty in the military forces hobble their combat effectiveness. Recent military appointments have removed some competent officers from responsible positions and replaced them with others deemed more loyal. The political danger of acting without the protection of explicit orders is frequently responsible for unit commanders’ reluctance to exercise initiative. Provincial administration remains a major weakness; in some areas counterinsurgency programs have been carried out in such a way as to antagonize the peasantry further. Insensitivity to real or fancied popular grievances or to issues of popular interest such as corruption has done little to enhance the regime’s internal image.

10. The Viet Cong actively exploit the government’s domestic political shortcomings. The Viet Cong-controlled National Front for the Liberation of South Vietnam purports to combine all shades of political opinion and works vigorously to identify itself with the peasantry, as do the Viet Cong troops. On 1 December 1962, 793 of 2,530 South Vietnamese villages were either physically held by the Viet Cong or subject to their control. The government controlled 1,617 and the remaining 120 were not under the effective control of either side. This represents a gain of 27 villages for the Viet Cong since 1 October 1962 and 75 for the government. While the government does seem to be showing some progress in the contest to win control of the countryside, it is difficult to establish a really meaningful trend because the total number of villages in South Vietnam fluctuates with administrative reorganizations. In the areas dominated by the Viet Cong, the Communists exercise effective authority including taxation. Viet Cong sympathizers are also found in government-held areas. In fact, South Vietnam’s rural population constitutes the principal support of the Viet Cong military establishment.

11. … 2 the Communists anticipate a long struggle and have no fixed timetable for the development of their forces. Their strategy, however, requires a gradual progression toward conventional warfare. The Communists are a long way from that stage, but they are making a continuous and determined effort to improve the fighting effectiveness of the Viet Cong military establishment.

12. This development has been assisted by North Vietnamese army regulars who have infiltrated through Laos into South Vietnam. These regulars provide cadre for Viet Cong units as well as commanders and technicians. These infiltrators sometimes come down in sizeable groups-one unit of 400 entered South Vietnam in late September, for example. Other aspects of the Viet Cong military development include: … 3 special logistics, operations, and staff groups duplicating those found in the North Vietnamese army; the formation of regimental staffs to coordinate the operations of several independent battalions; and, since early spring, the improvement of firepower, in some instances with Chinese Communist weapons. The Viet Cong have improved their tactics against low-flying aircraft-from January through November 1962, 115 US aircraft were hit by Viet Cong groundfire and nine of these downed.

13. The Communists, however, face some very serious problems. Recent government operations have destroyed Viet Cong food stores and there are increasing reports of low morale as a result of hunger and the lack of medical facilities. This situation seems most acute among Viet Cong in the highland regions. Despite their improving ability to down helicopters, the Viet Cong are finding it difficult to concentrate and move troops in the face of greater South Vietnamese mobility. While it is difficult to assess the exact damage being done by air strikes, Viet Cong prisoners have expressed the fear these strikes instill in the individual guerrillas.

14. On balance, the war remains a slowly escalating stalemate. Both sides have problems, but both have improved their capabilities during recent months.

1 Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Vietnam Country Series, 1/63. The source text is labeled “Sanitized Copy,” and the original classification has been obliterated. Ellipses throughout the document are in the source text.

2 Approximately 1line of source text was excised here.

3 Approximately 2 lines of source text were excised here.

12. Report to the Special Group for Counterinsurgency 12. Report to the Special Group for Counterinsurgency1

Washington, January 15, 1963.

THIRD COUNTRY AID TO SOUTH VIET-NAM

Early in 1962 the U.S. undertook to canvass DAC members and certain other Free World nations on increased economic aid to Viet-Nam with emphasis on commercial import which could provide local currency for assisted projects. Preliminary soundings by Ambassador Riddleberger2 and Tuthill3 in Paris indicated that while most countries agreed on the political importance of Viet-Nam’s struggle, they were somewhat reluctant to come forward with increased aid; especially of the grant commercial import variety.

By mid-year a consensus had been reached that a proposed aid coordinating group for Viet-Nam should be handled outside DAC since at this stage of DAC’s evolution, a group on a hot point in the cold war could compromise DAC’s economic character. We then proposed the formation of an informal Saigon group outside DAC which would have no connection with the OECD body and would for the present receive no publicity.

It was agreed that a coordinating body should meet in Saigon which would serve two main functions. First of all it would serve as a vehicle for reviewing the aid contributions made by the various members and thus expose duplication or areas of neglect. Secondly it would give us a means to get across the financial facts of life to the other western nations that had a more peripheral interest in Viet-Nam. Thirdly, it would provide the necessary spadework for a later meeting of senior officials from capitals that could discuss the policy issue of commercial import aid for Viet-Nam. Australia, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, New Zealand, and the United Kingdom agreed to participate in the Saigon Group.

Beginning August 31 three meetings of the Saigon Group have been held.4 The first was primarily organizational, but included also a review of the U.S. commercial import program and a reiteration of the desirability of similar aid by others.

At the second meeting,5 the Australian and German Ambassadors agreed to draw the attention of their governments to the desirability of paying plaster costs of their project aid. The third meeting6 was more encouraging. The British predicted they would provide more paramilitary aid rather than expanded economic aid. The group unanimously adopted a report7 drawn up by financial experts from each country. This report, while not binding the countries to its conclusions, called for long term loans to cover the local currency costs of sponsored projects.

The meetings in Saigon have shown a certain amount of success within the limits set by the circumstances. One year ago most western countries were probably quite sceptical both of South Viet-Nam’s future and our commitment to it. By now they are probably reassured on both points. This does not mean that they feel an obligation to increase their aid significantly. Continuing efforts in Saigon, Washington, Paris, and the respective capitals are required to capitalize on these earlier soundings.

In October we directed our embassies to approach their host countries on the possibility of financing the local currency costs of projects they assist in. This was to be done without weakening our earlier stand on commercial import aid. So far there has been no reported reaction to this approach.

Viet-Nam was discussed briefly in December at a Far East Regional meeting of DAC in Paris. Germany indicated that it was considering grant commercial import financing. France claimed that Viet-Nam had not made use of previous general import credits (which are not grant in nature). Japan indicated that remaining reparation credits should be used before additional aid is made available.

Since then we have received indications that the Australians are seriously considering adopting a commercial aid program for Viet-Nam including agricultural and dairy products.

In summary there are encouraging signs that Australia, Germany, Japan could be moving toward a commercial import program. This possibility did not exist before our efforts began a year ago. The UK will provide slightly increased paramilitary aid, but is inclined to hold off on anything else because of the demand for Indian aid. Italy has had no experience in this area, but is showing limited interest.

During his recent visit to the Far East, Assistant Administrator Janow stressed in Saigon the need for prompt utilization of available French and Japanese credits. We propose to press forward in identifying specific projects and segments of the commercial aid program (such as spare parts) which are particularly suitable for financing by other countries.

THIRD COUNTRY AID—(FY 63)

Australia (Estimated $1,000,000 for FY 63)

—RR cars, Radio Station, jeeps, barbed wire, mills,

—corrugated iron, participants, etc.

Belgium —Five Year export credits

—Six scholarships

China, Republic of —Two geological engineers

—Technical advisers

Germany —Five additional Medical Professors for Hue

—Architectural Engineer

Japan —Steel Rolling Mill (under war reparations)

—Continuing work on Da Nhim Cam

New Zealand —Surgical team for Provincial Hospital

—Equipment for Hue Medical Faculty

—Participants

Canada —$300.000 worth of wheat flour

France (FY 63 effort about 4.8 million)

—Teachers

—Technicians

—Participants

—Commercial Credits

1 Source: Department of State, Special Group Counterinsurgency Files: Lot 68 D 451, Special Group (CI) 1/17/63-3/7/63. Confidential. Drafted in the Vietnam Working Group by Edmund H. Kelley. Circulated to the Special Group on January 15 under cover of a memorandum from Maechling, in anticipation of its January 17 meeting; see Dcoument 14.

2 James W. Riddleberger, Ambassador to Austria.

3 John W. Tuthill, Ambassador to the European Communities.

4 Records of this meeting and subsequent meetings of the coordinating committee are in the Washington National Records Center, RG 84, Saigon Post Files: FRC 67 A 667, 500 Economic Matters.

5 September 14,1962.

6 September 27,1962.

7 The report is entitled “Conclusions of the Experts of the Viet-Nam Aid Coordination Group”, undated. (Washington National Records Center, RG 84, Saigon Post Files: FRC 67 A 667, 500 Economic Matters)

13. Memorandum From the Director of the Vietnam Working Group (Wood) to the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Harriman) 13. Memorandum From the Director of the Vietnam Working Group (Wood) to the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Harriman)1

Washington, January 16, 1963.

SUBJECT

Jets for the Government of Viet-Nam

Background: Secretary Thuan has asked Ambassador Nolting if the U.S. would supply four T-33 jets. Nolting proposes to reply subject to the Department’s concurrence to the effect that jets are not warranted in Viet-Nam at this time.2 We have asked for DOD approval of a telegram concurring in Ambassador Nolting’s refusal.

However General Taylor has approved a recommendation that the Vietnamese be given four RT-33 (photo-reconnaissance) jets and two T-33 (training) jets.3 Bill Bundy will decide whether to approve this recommendation before sending it to Secretary McNamara. I have asked that Bundy call you for your views before making a decision. If Bundy and McNamara approve there will be a letter from Secretary McNamara to Secretary Rusk.

Pros and Cons:

Pros: 1. Jets for photo-reconnaissance are needed in Viet-Nam now. This need is being filled by U.S. planes and pilots. If the Vietnamese are given these planes they can then assume one of the responsibilities which they will have to undertake as we phase out. Most Vietnamese pilots have jet training and it is believed that they could take over fairly quickly.

2. DOD also points out that since the Cambodians have jets Vietnamese morale would be improved if they too had these planes.

3. The six jets which DOD would like to give the GVN have been suitably modified and are now ready for delivery.

Cons: 1. The Vietnamese don’t need jets now. This job is being done very well by the Americans. As you remember General Harkins told Secretary McNamara in October that he had everything he needed.

2. To give the Vietnamese jets would put both the United States and the GVN in flat violation of Article 17 of the Geneva Accords. We could be cited for a substantive violation by the ICC in Viet-Nam and to give the Vietnamese jets might have a bad effect on our attempts to get ICC Laos to function more effectively. It is true that we are flying jets over Viet-Nam and have been cited by the ICC for doing so. However, these jets are under our control and can be pulled out at any moment if the international situation makes it in our interest to do so.

3. If we give jets to the Vietnamese we increase the risks of border violations over Cambodia.

4. Jets under Vietnamese control would be a small but significant escalation in the terms of the war we are now fighting. It would give the Communist countries an excuse to introduce jets into North Viet-Nam.

5. It is true that at some point jets should be turned over to the Vietnamese as we phase out but this is far in the future.

Conclusion:

Giving jets to the Vietnamese now would not increase their military potential or shorten the war; it would significantly increase the risks of international incidents and repercussions. It would to a significant degree change the terms of the limited war which are now quite well understood on both sides in Viet-Nam.

Recommendation:

That we oppose giving jets to the Vietnamese at this time.4

1 Source: Department of State, Vietnam Working Group Files: Lot 67 D 54, Def 19-3 Equip and Supplies. Secret. Sent to Harriman through Edward Rice. Copies were also sent to U. Alexis Johnson and Henry Koren.

2 Nolting reversed this recommendation on January 19. In telegram 686 from Saigon, Nolting stated that, after meetings with Admiral Felt and General Harkins, he was prepared to “Recommend that Department concur in delivery these aircraft to GVN soon as possible. Critical point which has led me to this recommendation is desirability of VNAF beginning to develop own effective photo recce capability over long term. For us to assist GVN in acquiring this capability would be consistent with U.S. Govt’s long-range objective of making GVN self-sufficient in its ability cope with internal subversion.” (Ibid., Central Files, 751K.5/1-1963)

3 Taylor endorsed the JCS recommendation in a January 15 memorandum to McNamara. (Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OSD Files: FRC 69 A 3131, Vietnam 401 and above 1963)

4 Harriman indicated in a handwritten note on the source text that he approved the recommendation, and added, “what do we do”? On January 24, Wood sent another memorandum to Harriman in which he argued that the Department of State should make the decision on the issue, over Department of Defense objections if necessary, since it was a policy question affecting U.S. international relations. He noted that William Bundy, who was handling the question within the Defense Department, did not feel strongly about supplying the jets. He added that “this is really not a major issue since American reconnaissance jets are already doing the same job.” A handwritten note by Harriman on this memorandum indicates that he discussed the matter with William Bundy who agreed that the additional reconnaissance required in Vietnam could be provided by the United States directly without supplying jets to South Vietnam. (Department of State, Vietnam Working Group Files: Lot 67 D 54, Def 19-3, Equip and Supplies)

14. Minutes of a Meeting of the Special Group for Counterinsurgency 14. Minutes of a Meeting of the Special Group for Counterinsurgency1

Washington, January 17, 1963, 2 p.m.

PRESENT

Mr. Johnson, Mr. Bell, General Taylor, Mr. McCone, Mr. Dungan, Mr. Wilson vice Mr. Murrow, Mr. Bundy vice Mr. Gilpatric

Mr. Koren and Mr. Wood were present for the meeting

1. Southeast Asia Status Report

[Here follows discussion of Thailand.]

South Viet-Nam

Mr. Wood in discussing the situation in South Viet-Nam observed that the recent helicopter episode in which three Americans were lost was more serious from the political viewpoint than militarily.2 Mr. Dungan pointed out, however, that should such episodes be repeated, and coupled at the same time with public criticism from Vietnamese exiles in this country, it could result in difficulties with Congress.

The Group discussed at length the question of relating press coverage in South Viet-Nam to the positive side, as compared to the current predilection for articles critical of the Diem Government, and those which reflect the more adverse circumstances. Mr. Wilson will meet with the public relations officers of the several departments concerned, and try to develop ideas for improving the situation.3 In the meantime, General Wheeler will be notified that he should be prepared for a public appearance when he returns from his present trip, such as discussing the South Viet-Nam situation on “Meet the Press” or some similar television program. It was also agreed that it might be desirable to arrange background briefings for key members of Congress in the hope of heading off adverse reaction to the newspaper articles.

“I today informed the Secretary of our discussion in the Special Group (C.I.) yesterday of U.S. press coverage in Viet-Nam. In addition, the Secretary suggested that we have Saigon look into the possibility of ‘keeping a book’ on correspondents out there for a period of perhaps two weeks or so which perhaps in some way could demonstrate the present apparent bias of many of them toward reporting only defeats or alleged defeats and ignoring the successful operations. What the Secretary had in mind was Saigon keeping track of the offers made by ourselves or the Viet-Namese to the correspondents to cover successful operations and constructive accomplishments and the number of these accepted by the correspondents as compared with their acceptance when they sensed a less successful operation. Depending on the results of such a record, we could then decide what use could best be made of it.” (Department of State, Central Files, 951K.6211/1-1863)

The members, in general, agreed that there has been some improvement in the situation in South Viet-Nam during the last year. However, this has seemingly not affected the ability of the Viet Cong to maintain the size of their forces through local recruitment. It was also noted that it is extremely difficult to obtain significant information on the extent of infiltration of personnel or supplies.

2. Economic Assistance to South Viet-Nam from Third Countries

The Group agreed that progress is being made, but that much more remains to be done. Mr. Bell discussed this subject with Japanese officials during his recent trip, and also with the German Ambassador in South Viet-Nam. The latter suggested that it should be taken up with the German Government from the Washington level. Mr. Bell has asked the President to bring up the subject with the Italian Prime Minister during the latter’s visit. It was agreed that the field should develop specific types of assistance needed from third countries, and that Washington would then contact the respective capitals to seek cooperation. State will work with AID and the field on the details, and will then develop a coordinated circular telegram to Chiefs of Mission in the third countries concerned.

3. Emergency Medical Program for South Viet-Nam

The members agreed with an observation by Mr. Bell, that as the AID and DOD memoranda4 were uncoordinated, and thus did not present an overall picture, a joint briefing memorandum should in the future be prepared for the convenience of the members where two or more departments make reports on the same subject. Mr. Johnson said that his assistant will monitor this, and see that it is done.

“AID support of village and hamlet health stations, provincial hospitals, surgical teams, malaria control, mobile clinics, and nurses training. DOD complementing this program by sending out 29 teams of U.S. Army medical personnel in February, 1963 to assist and advise VN Armed Forces, Civil Guard, and Self-Defense Corps, in developing medical capabilities. USIS provides informational support and publicity.” (Washington National Records Center, RG 306, USIA/IAF Files: FRC 68 A 416, C.I. Special Group Meeting Notes)

4. Civic Action Teams in South Viet-Nam

General Taylor expressed his concern as to whether enough is being done by the South Vietnamese military in the field of civic action. However, it was agreed to hold off the development of a further report on this subject until General Wheeler returns.

[Here follows discussion of the final item, “Miscellaneous”.]

James W. Dingeman Executive Secretary

1 Source: Department of State, Special Group Counterinsurgency Files: Lot 68 D 451, Special Group (CI). Secret. Drafted by James W. Dingeman who is not listed among the participants.

2 See Document 1.

3 On January 18, Johnson sent a memorandum to Koren commenting on the discussion of press coverage in the Special Group:

4 Not found. Notes on the meeting prepared in USIA give the following summary of the discussion under item 3:

15. Memorandum From the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staffs Naval Aide (Bagley) to the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (Taylor) 15. Memorandum From the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staffs Naval Aide (Bagley) to the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (Taylor)1

Washington, January 17, 1963.

SUBJECT

South Vietnam

1. One thing it is to be hoped will emerge from the future recommendations of the JCS Military Mission to SVN is a critical appraisal of current restrictive political policies in SEA.2 There is sufficient evidence available to suggest that, in the situation which prevails, radical reinforcement and increased support will not gain decisive combat superiority. Other factors, on the strategic plane, will continue to exert a controlling influence.

The first of these factors is the question of satisfactory isolation of South Vietnam from external support. This is largely a political problem and is twofold: a. The ability of a neutral Laos government to prevent use of the Panhandle for infiltration from NVN into SVN.

b. The willingness of Sihanouk to deny use of northeast and east Cambodia to the Viet Cong.

Souvanna has not been able to exert any governmental control over, or even access into, the Panhandle. Despite assurances to Harrimanby Pushkin,3 the Soviets are making no visible effort to prevent DRV exploitation of this avenue of support to the Viet Cong in SVN. There have been recent reports that 1000 regular DRV troops infiltrated to the south. Our own capability to evaluate and meet the infiltration problem is hindered by political decision to halt air and ground reconnaissance and harassment in Laos. Thus our political willingness to remain passive to these breaches of faith in the name of supporting Souvanna is jeopardizing our military position in SVN.

The border control problem in Cambodia is essentially academic if the Laos question is not addressed. Freedom to move into Cambodia is a matter of convenience to the Viet Cong. If Laos is open, support can enter SVN-without use of Cambodian territory. If Laos borders are sealed, it should be easier politically to focus Sihanouk’s attention to the remaining and lesser problem.

3. The second factor is the matter of US willingness to take actions to discourage further DRV support for the Viet Cong. This issue also is related to strengthening Souvanna control in the RLG. If a truly neutral regime can be fostered in Laos, DRV support would lose its most effective route of support and the need for US pressures to dissuade DRV subversion in SVN would decrease. On the other hand, if the Laos situation continues in its present form, the DRV problem sharpens. We may be faced with a decision as to the relative advantages between chancing escalation of covert actions against NVN and pressing for strict observance of the Accords in Laos.4

4. The last major factor is the state of the political climate in SVN. No amount of military effort can succeed if the parallel political action program to include economic and social reform is not positive and enlightened. To measure this factor requires varied shades of information perhaps not available. It is clear that the economic and social side is getting unprecedented attention. If a responsible political evaluation were made and was adverse, the question of how to achieve corrective action that was not politically disruptive to the GVN would remain. On balance, this factor probably should remain secondary to the first two for the time being. This may not be possible, however, because this rather intangible issue that on the surface can be confronted without risk of war (while the alternatives cannot) is the first target of those who would question US policy in SVN.

5. The doubters continue to wait in the wings and there are some signs that they are becoming restless. Dispatch of the Wheeler Mission affords them sustenance because it implies some concern with the military situation. If the mission recommends more of the same equipment and support the US is now providing SVN, and the proposals are made in isolation from, or in acceptance of, these other factors, I would expect an uprising of despair. It is of vital importance that the mission address the questions of external support to the Viet Cong and the effectiveness of the GVN. The dual line of preaching patience in SVN and patience in Laos will not long be tenable for the two policies are in fact contradictory. The entire circle will be further aggravated by what will surely be the mission view that subversion in Thailand is on the rise, sustained from a Lao base.

6. It is interesting that analysis of the several factors which limit the effect of our efforts in SVN comes back to the matter of a neutral Laos. There is a legal base for stronger political action in the Accords. Evidence exists that our power position in SEA is influencing Communist moves there. What is needed is a review of the possibilities and risks of enforcing the Geneva Accords on Laos through strong diplomatic pressures to avoid a long war in SVN, escalation in NVN, and a new war in Thailand. The returning Wheeler Mission affords a reason to reopen this matter.

7. I recommend you make this reasoning an essential part of evaluating the Wheeler Report and press State on the entire Laos situation as it affects the US position in SVN and Thailand.

W.H.B.5

1 Source: National Defense University, Taylor Papers, T-240-69. Secret.

2 See Document 26.

3 Harriman reported these assurances in telegram 882 from Rome, September 13, 1961. (Department of State, Central Files, 751J.00/9-1361)

4 For text of the Declaration and Protocol on the Neutrality of Laos, signed at Geneva on July 23, 1962, by representatives of Burma, Cambodia, Canada, the People’s Republic of China, the Democratic Republic of Vietnam, France, India, Poland, the U.S.S.R, the United Kingdom, and the United States, see American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1962, pp. 1075-1083.

5 Printed from a copy that bears these typed initials.

16. Letter From the Counselor of the Embassy in Vietnam (Manfull) to the Director of the Vietnam Working Group (Wood) 16. Letter From the Counselor of the Embassy in Vietnam (Manfull) to the Director of the Vietnam Working Group (Wood)1

Saigon, January 23, 1963.

Dear Ben: During Admiral Felt’s recent visit, one of the subjects discussed at some length was the augmentation of Farmgate. Some time prior to Admiral Felt’s arrival, MACV, without clearing it with the Embassy, requested that Farmgate be augmented by 10 B-26’s, 5 T-28’s and 2 C-47’s. By the time we found out about it, the JCS had already approved it. During Admiral Felt’s visit the Ambassador pointed out this lack of coordination to General Harkins, who expressed surprise that the Embassy had not been consulted and said he would ask his staff to coordinate with the Embassy on such matters in the future. Because the Farmgate augmentation in question was of limited size, and therefore appeared to have no serious political implications, the Ambassador concurred in it ex post facto.

At the same time, we learned that MACV had informed CINCPAC that it was considering requesting a second, whopping Farmgate augmentation to meet the requirements of the “National Campaign.” MACV wanted to request: 1 sqn of B-26’s (25 aircraft)

1 sqn of T-28’s (25 aircraft)

2 sqns of C-123’s (16 aircraft each)

1 company of Caribous (25 aircraft)

3 sqns of L-19’s (22 aircraft each)

Admiral Felt pointed out to General Harkins that such a request would mean that the GVN in fact was unable to achieve victory over the VC without a significantly increased US commitment in Viet-Nam. The Admiral also informed MACV that, in endorsing the latter’s first Farmgate augmentation request, he had felt obliged to state to the JCS that there would be no additional similar requests. He asked MACV to study the matter further in light of his views, and to tailor its request accordingly. He agreed to receive the request but did not commit himself to it.

After the Admiral’s departure, MACV consulted the Embassy. The Ambassador said he could go along with a request for additional Farmgate transport capability (L-19’s, C-123’s and Caribous) if in General Harkins’ view the additional aircraft were necessary to meet the increased requirements of the “National Campaign.” (As you will note from a message2 through other channels, consideration is being given to meeting some of this airlift requirement from third country contributions.) However, the Ambassador took a firm stand against the additional strike aircraft (B-26’s and T-28’s), using the same arguments that Admiral Felt had used and, in addition, expressing concern that a request of such size for additional strike aircraft could raise political questions at home regarding the soundness of the Administration’s policy in Viet-Nam and the ground rules under which we are operating here. In light of the views of Admiral Felt and the Ambassador, MACV is looking into the problem further and will seek the Ambassador’s concurrence on any request going to CINCPAC.

On a related subject, you will have seen Embtel 686,3 on RT-33’s. The over-riding consideration in the Ambassador’s mind was the need and desirability for the GVN to develop its own effective photo reconnaissance capability.

We assume that WG/VN was better coordinated on this subject than we were here during the initial go-round. However, I would appreciate knowing to what extent the JCS or ISA consulted the Department on the proposed augmentations.4

“In answer to your question, we were informed by DOD when the request for 10

B-26s, 5 T-28s, and 2 C-47s came in to them. We assumed that it had been cleared with r the Ambassador and it was with this assumption in mind that we approved it at this end. I will certainly discuss the matter with DOD and the Ambassador should be assured that we will approve no increases which are requested of us by DOD until we have had the Embassy’s views.” (Department of State, Vietnam Working Group Files: Lot 67 D 54, Def-l9 Milit Assist-3rd Country)

With best regards,

Sincerely yours,

Melvin L. Manfull5 Counselor of Embassy for Political Affairs

1 Source: Department of State, Vietnam Working Group Files: Lot 67 D 54, Def-19 Milit Assist-3rd country. Secret; Limit Distribution; Official-Informal.

2 Not found.

3 See footnote 2, Document 13.

4 On January 31, Wood sent the following reply to Manfull, noting that he had discussed it with Deputy Under Secretary Johnson, “who agrees completely”:

5 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.

17. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam 17. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam1

Washington, January 24, 1963, 1:31 p.m.

729. Joint State/USIA. WG/VN for TF/Saigon. Request your frank, general, and confidential evaluation overall job being done by U.S. newsmen in reporting war in Viet-Nam to U.S. public. Context our concern as follows: 1. We are still getting adverse play in daily press; somewhat better coverage in weekly publications (e.g. Newsweek Jan 28, Life Jan 25). In general war in Viet-Nam going better than being reported to U.S. public.

2. Poor relations between U.S. press reps and GVN not likely be significantly improved.

3. Realize wire service correspondents have difficulty in leaving Saigon, where they in contact with home office, to go into country.

4. If correspondent has time, how difficult is it for him to get transportation a, to cover military operations, b) to go into countryside to cover strategic hamlets and other rural activities?

In general is it TF view that, given local obstacles and problems, U.S. correspondents are doing adequate or inadequate job of covering war?

Would appreciate your carefully weighed overall view this 1ong vexed question and would welcome any suggestions as to how we may assist or encourage them to do better job either here or in Saigon.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 951K.6211/1-2463. Confidential. Drafted on January 22 by Wood. Cleared by Frank P Lockhart, Harriman, Robert J. McCloskey, and in USIA by James N. Tull. Repeated to CINCPAC for POLAD.

18. Memorandum From the Commander in Chief, Pacific (Felt) to the Joint Chiefs of Staff 18. Memorandum From the Commander in Chief, Pacific (Felt) to the Joint Chiefs of Staff1

Honolulu, January 25, 1963.

CINCPAC 3010 Ser 0079

SUBJ

Comprehensive Plan for South Vietnam (CPSVN)

REF

(a) CINCPAC Record of Sixth Secretary of Defense Conference of 23 July 1962, dtd 26 July 1962 (Item No.2)2

(b) JCS Msg 5455, DTG 262318Z July 19623

(c) OSD Msg DEF 923923, DTG 222243Z January 19634

ENCL

(1) Comprehensive Plan for South Vietnam

1. Pursuant to directives in references (a) and (b), subject plan has been prepared to provide for bringing the counterinsurgency effort to a successful conclusion, withdrawing U.S. special military assistance, and developing within GVN a capability to defend against the continuing threat in Southeast Asia.

2. The primary limiting factor in developing this plan was the GVN capability to provide necessary trained personnel within a short period of time to efficiently assume those special functions now being executed by U.S. military personnel. Shortages of junior leaders, pilots and personnel with special skills will exist to some extent into FY 65. However, such shortages are not considered of sufficient magnitude to affect the feasibility of the plan.

3. Concurrent with the development of this plan, it was necessary to revise the FY 63 MAP to support the intensified counterinsurgency effort. As the plan developed it became apparent it could not be treated apart from MAP. Therefore, the period covered by the plan was extended through FY 68 to show the cost and phasing of forces in relationship with the FY 63-68 MAP. It is emphasized that the Comprehensive Plan has been developed using factors based on in-country experience to date and is subject to change. Order of magnitude dollar figures have been used in some cases, particularly with respect to construction. It does not represent a refined detailed program. This will be accomplished during the development of the FY 64-69 MAP.

4. The Civilian Irregular Defense Group (CIDG) program (Switchback) is an important counterinsurgency force, complementary to other programs in SVN and has been integrated into the Comprehensive Plan. However, experience on the ground has shown that this program is not susceptible to MAP procedures and should be treated as a separate but related program.

5. To defeat the insurgency by the end of 1965 and effect early withdrawal of U.S. special military assistance, it will be necessary to accelerate training, equipment deliveries, and combat operations. Comparing the DOD dollar guidelines provided in reference (c) with the Comprehensive Plan costs extended through FY 69, the net difference is about 66 million dollars. The preponderance of the increase is required in FY 64.

6. The plan has been developed by COMUSMACV, coordinated with the SVN Country Team and concurred in by the Ambassador.

7. It is recommended that: a. The Comprehensive Plan for South Vietnam be approved as the basis for the development of the FY 64-69 MAP for South Vietnam.5

b. Switchback be funded from sources outside of PACOM MAP.

c. Administration of Switchback funds be accomplished through DA channels, and authority be granted to dispense funds in an unvouchered manner and without compliance with a number of requirements that cannot be observed in an operation of this nature.

H.D. Felt

Memorandum From the Commander, Military Assistance Command, Vietnam (Harking) to the Commander in Chief, Pacific (Felt)6

Saigon, January 19, 1963.

SUBJECT

Comprehensive Plan for South Vietnam

1. References:

a. JCS Msg 5455, DTG 262318Z Jul 62.

b. CINCPAC Msg DTG 140428Z Aug 62.7

c. OSD Wash DC Msg DTG 082316Z Jan 63.8

d. CINCPAC Msg DT-G 100910Z Jan 63.9

2. In compliance with instructions contained references a. and b., an outline Comprehensive Plan for South Vietnam (CPSVN) covering the period FY 63-68 is hereby provided.

3. In view of the close relationship between this plan and the Military Assistance Plan, they should not continue to be treated as separate entities.

4. Consideration of the source and method of funding Switchback has been included in the plan, as well as the relationship of the CIDG Program to the GVN military and paramilitary forces.

5. It is recommended that: a. The Comprehensive Plan for South Vietnam (CPSVN) be approved as the basis for preparation of the FY 64-69 MAP for South Vietnam.

b. Funding of Switchback in FY 64 and future years not be funded by the Vietnam MA Program.

c. Funds to support Switchback be administered through DA channels.

6. The US Ambassador concurs.

Paul D. Harkins

COMPREHENSIVE PLAN FOR SOUTH VIETNAM

1. Requirement

During the Secretary of Defense Conference of 23 July 1962 in Hawaii, action was directed to develop a Comprehensive Plan for South Vietnam (CPSVN), looking ahead for three years and covering requirements in all categories of Government of Vietnam (GVN) military personnel, training and equipment. The plan was to be designed to meet the GVN military needs on an orderly basis so that, as US special military support assistance is withdrawn, the GVN would have developed the skills and the means to assume the total military responsibility.

2. Guidance

The CPSVN was developed by COMUSMACV based on the following CINCPAC guidance: a. Objective

Develop a capability within military and pare-military forces of the GVN by the end of CY 65 that will help the GVN to achieve the strength necessary to exercise permanent and continued sovereignty over that part of Vietnam which lies below the demarcation line without the need for continued US special military assistance.

b. Assumptions (1) The insurgency will be under control at the end of three years (end of CY 65).

(2) Extensive US support will continue to be required during the three year period, both to bring the insurgency under control and to prepare GVN forces for early take-over of US activities.

(3) Previous MAP funding ceilings for SVN are not applicable. Program those items essential to do the job.

3. Concept

a. General

To accomplish the objective of the CPSVN and bring the insurgency under control, several programs are developing along parallel lines and will become integrated and mutually supporting as the ultimate objective is achieved. Concurrent with the development of the CPSVN, the FY 63 MAP was revised to support the intensified counterinsurgency effort and has now become the FY 63 portion of the CPSVN. The FY 64-68 portion of the CPSVN constitutes an outline plan which will serve as the basis for the refinement and development of the FY 64-69 MAP.

b. National Campaign Plan (NCP)

The NCP establishes a concept for conducting an aggressive offensive campaign against the Viet Cong (VC) on a national basis. Tactical operations are being intensified with the view toward drawing the VC into areas where they can be destroyed. Areas within each province which are controlled by the GVN will be expanded through continuous operations, moving into uncontrolled areas immediately adjacent to controlled areas, consolidating, annexing, and expanding again. Those areas which are not controlled by the GVN will be subjected to continuous pressure by the military forces until they can be brought under martial law. Every effort will be made by all available forces in each province to maintain continuous pressure on the VC requiring them to keep moving until they are forced to stand and fight or surrender. The NCP stresses that operations will use every conceivable means to intensify offensive action. Close and rapid follow-up of military successes will be made by civic action teams. All programs will be integrated to support the NCP. The Republic of Vietnam Armed Forces (RVNAF), Civil Guard (CG), Self Defense Corps (SDC), Civilian Irregular Defense Groups (CIDG), and Strategic Hamlet Program will be brought into play in the consolidation effort to organize and secure rural communities and to restore normal GVN control with civil law and order throughout SVN. To have a better appreciation of the over-all concept it is necessary to examine the relationship of the Strategic Hamlet Program and the CIDG.

c. The Strategic Hamlet Program

Strategic Hamlet operations consist of the civil-military measures necessary to gain or maintain security of village and hamlet communities and establish presence of the government among the people. This program is conducted in those areas where GVN control and authority are reasonably well established and recognized by the people. The basic purpose is to isolate the people from the VC physically and ideologically. This is accomplished by providing the people the means for self protection from VC reprisals and denying the VC information, recruits, food and shelter. All agencies of the GVN must contribute to these operations. Plans provide for the civil consolidation of security gained initially by military action.

d. The Civilian Irregular Defense Group Program

Concurrently with the development of the Strategic Hamlet Program, the CIDG Program is being developed in those areas of SVN where GVN authority is not recognized by the people and the efforts by RVNAF to establish law and order would be actively resisted. This is not to imply that these people are necessarily sympathetic to the VC. They are ethnic tribes and minority groups who have not previously been under governmental controls. Thus, they are prime targets for the VC as a source of food, shelter, labor and intelligence. The CIDG program was initiated in 1961 for the purpose of clearing and holding specified VC controlled areas of SVN through the motivation, organization, training and arming of these non-GVN controlled groups. Responsibility for this program is currently being passed [less than 1 line not declassified] to COMUSMACV, under Switchback and is being executed by USA Special Forces. CIDG forces may reach a peak strength of 100,000 by July 1964, [1-1/2 lines not declassified]. The source of CIDG personnel and responsibilities for the program are portrayed at Enclosure (1).10

e. Transition and Disposition of SVN Forces

There will be a “phase down” of CIDG forces as the areas in which they operate come under GVN control. Concurrent with this “phase down” the SDC and/or CG will establish GVN control in these areas. The CIDG personnel will then either be absorbed into the National Police, SDC, CG, RVNAF or demobilized. Subsequent to the period of the insurgency, steps will be taken to revert from martial law and re-establish civil law and order as quickly as possible. At this time military and pare-military forces will revert to their peacetime role and the National Police Force will assume the task of maintaining civil law and order. The above concept is portrayed graphically at Enclosure (2).

4. Force objectives for South Vietnam

Force objectives for SVN should provide the capability to defeat the current insurgency with US special military assistance; defeat any new insurgency threat which may arise after phase down and withdrawal of US special military assistance; and provide an initial defense against overt invasion until outside forces can be introduced. Total SVN forces contemplated under the CPSVN increase to a possible peak strength of 575,000 in FY 64 as portrayed at Enclosure (3). However, it is emphasized that this peak strength will probably not be reached as the CIDG will be continually demobilized or absorbed by the CG and SDC as the GVN control expands. There is a rapid decrease commencing in FY 65 as the CIDG is replaced by GVN forces and the paramilitary forces are phased down. After withdrawal of US special military assistance no significant reductions in levels or in number and types of RVNAF units are contemplated in view of the threat of re-insurgency and overt aggression. This threat will probably continue for an extended period of time unless there occurs an unforeseen change in international attitudes resulting in a definite relaxing of tensions and cold war activities throughout Southeast Asia.

a. RVNAF

The RVNAF force structure shown at Enclosure (4) can be supported by the currently authorized (by JCS for MAP support) strength of 225,000, except during FY 64 and FY 65. During these years it will be necessary to provide a maximum of 6,000 additional spaces to accommodate an increased number of trainees, students, and patients (pipeline), additional logistical and administrative support units, and for minor changes in combat forces. Increases in pipeline personnel are necessary to support an intensified training program and provide for higher patient density during peak fighting period. After FY 65 the strength level can be reduced to 224,000, primarily as a result of a decrease in pipeline personnel. It should be noted that this strength is 6,000 less than that contained in the FY 63-68 MAP.

(1) The Army is being reorganized as a four corps force of nine divisions. By eliminating the restoration of the fourth rifle company previously planned for each infantry battalion, and making other adjustments, sufficient spaces can be generated during FY 63 and FY 64 to expand the training base, round out logistical and administrative support forces and provide minor augmentations for combat units. An additional 5,000 spaces above the original MAP figure of 204,000 in FY 64 will be required to provide adequate pipeline spaces to maintain unit operational effectiveness. A reduction to 202,000 by end FY 66 can be made in view of decreased requirements for pipeline personnel.

(2) Major changes in the Navy force structure are the deletion of a high speed transport (APD), the addition of a River Escort Group and five Coastal Surveillance Command Centers (CSCC), and increased personnel for the Junk Force. The River Escort Group will provide protection for essential cargo traffic in the delta area. The CSCC are required to control the Junk Fleet of 644 junks and coordinate the coastal surveillance effort.

(3) The Air Force structure has been revised to place increased emphasis on the counterinsurgency effort in the FY 63-65 time frame. A third fighter squadron is activated in FY 63 rather than FY 65. Augmentation of the liaison capability has been expanded from three squadrons (66 aircraft) to four squadrons (80 aircraft) in FY 64. The number of helicopter squadrons is increased from two to four in FY 65, rather than waiting until FY 68 to achieve an increased capability. The introduction of jet fighter aircraft has been slipped from FY 65 to FY 66 and the total number of squadrons has been increased from one to two by FY 67. The initial introduction of jet aircraft in FY 63 in the form of four RT-33s and two T-33s is dependent upon the lifting of the State Department suspension stemming from the Geneva Accords.

b. Paramilitary Forces

During FY 63-65 the paramilitary elements will be expanded as indicated in Enclosure (4) in accordance with the time phased requirements of clear and hold operations and the Strategic Hamlet Program. The CG and SDC will be increased to maximum strengths in FY 64 of 101,000 for the CG (current authorization 90,000) and 122,000 for the SDC (current authorization 80,000). Requirements for this phased build up include the need to formalize GVN control in areas in which the CIDG elements have achieved a reasonable degree of security. After FY 65 it is expected that the CG strength will be phased downward as it assumes the role of a provincial force to counter reinsurgency. The SDC will be reduced after FY 65 by transfer to the National Police Force and demobilization. A total of 4,600 junk sailors will be required to man the 644 junks.

c. Civilian Irregular Defense Group (CIDG)

Total planned US supported SVN forces include the CIDG as shown on Enclosure (4). The CIDG is an important counterinsurgency force which is complementary to RVNAF, SDC, and CG. With respect to the CIDG, the 18 months between end FY 64 and end CY 65 must be considered the maximum effort “phase down” months for the CIDG, during which time the strength of these forces is reduced from a ceiling of 116,000 to a theoretical zero.

d. Hamlet Militia

The strategic hamlet kits programmed for FY 63 and FY 64 will provide ordnance materiel support for approximately 201.6 thousand hamlet militia personnel. Subsequent to FY 65, this force will rapidly decline in strength, and weapons will be withdrawn as civil law and order is restored.

5. Personnel Training Feasibility

a. Training proposed in the CPSVN is adequate to provide the personnel required to execute the plan within the three-year period. Shortages of personnel in critical categories of pilots, junior leaders and special skills will exist to some extent during the three-year period, but they are not considered sufficient to affect the feasibility of the plan.

b. Specific requirements for critical categories of personnel are listed below: (1) Helicopter Pilots: Availability of helicopter pilots in FY 63 for two squadrons totaling 22 aircraft will be five short of the optimum requirement of 64. The 108 pilots required to permit increase of the total aircraft in the two squadrons to 40 in FY 64 will be available. The 228 pilots required to permit increase to four helicopter squadrons in FY 65 will be available.

(2) Pilots—All Other: This requirement will increase to a peak of 572 in FY 65. Sufficient pilots to meet this requirement will be available by mid-FY 65 (end CY 64). This category includes approximately 180 command control pilot positions.

(3) ARVN Officers and NCO’s: The peak requirement for ARVN officers is 15,837 in FY 64 and can be supported. The peak requirement for ARVN NCO’s is 35,743 in FY 64 and can be supported.

(4) CG Officers and NCO’s: The peak requirement for CG officers and NCO’s is 5,513 and 20,330 respectively in FY 64 and FY 65. Sufficient officers will be available by mid-FY 64. Shortage of NCO’s in mid-FY 64 will approximate 30%. This will be reduced to a 5% shortage by mid-FY 65 and thereafter planned availability will match requirements.

(5) SDC Platoon and Squad Leaders: The peak requirement for platoon leaders will increase to 5,080 by mid-FY 65, and for SDC squad leaders to 9,240 in mid-FY 65. Sufficient platoon leaders and squad leaders will be available to meet the requirement.

(6) VNN Officers and Petty Officers: The requirement for VNN officers is about 700 in FY 65 and thereafter. By FY 65, 90% of the required officers will be available, with the remainder becoming available in the first part of FY 66. The availability of petty officers matches requirements at 1,860 in FY 65 and the supply will meet the demand as it rises to a maximum of about 1900 in FY 68.

(7) VNMC Officers and NCO’s: The Marine Brigade will reach its required strength of 270 officers and 990 NCO’s in FY 63.

(8) ARVN Troposcatter Units: It is planned that the ARVN will take over operation of the US troposcatter system in FY 66. The requirement for troposcatter operators and related radio-relay operator-repairmen at that time is 600. A 19% shortage of ARVN troposcatter personnel will exist in FY 66. Off-shore schooling is the only source for the training and it is not feasible to plan on producing trained personnel at a faster rate. The shortage should be corrected by mid-FY 67.

(9) Medical Officers: (a) The requirement for medical officers is 890. At the end of FY 65 a 39% shortage will exist, with this shortage being reduced to 23% at the end of FY 68.

(b) The requirement has been developed using modified US standards. By these standards the situation appears critical throughout the planning years. However, the military forces have above average medical support when compared to in-country civilian standards.

(c) The sole source of medical officers is from the Saigon Medical School. At present ARVN takes approximately 50% of the 80 doctors trained annually. If more were taken by the military, it would be at the expense of the civilian population.

6. Planned Phase-Out of US Forces and Activities

a. Activation of RVNAF units listed below will permit relief of US units indicated:

Unit Year To Be Operational To Be Equipped by Transfer From US Units Permits Relief of US Unit

ARVN Troposcatter Radio Unit 1966 Yes, Incl Tropo system 1 Army Troposcatter Co

2 VNAF CH-34C Helo Sqdn 1965 No, 40 MAP a/c 2 Army H-21 Sqdns

Ln Sqdn (U/E increase and activation of 4th Sqdn) 1964 Yes, 3 L-20 (and 20 L-19 unless Cessna 185 is acceptable) Equivalent Army Element

b. As indicated in Enclosure (5), the phase-out of the US special military assistance is envisioned as generally occurring during the period July 1965-June 1966, with earlier phase-down (or phase-out where feasible) of US units and activities taking place concurrently as RVNAF becomes sufficiently proficient and qualified to assume their functions. The major commands of USMACV stationed in SVN primarily for the purpose of providing special military assistance which will not be required after the US objectives in SVN have been met are: (1) The US Marine Element which provides helicopter transportation support.

(2) The 2d Air Division which provides the USAF portion of the special military assistance support performed in SVN. This support includes such major contributions as operation “Farmgate” (Fighter), “Mule Train” (Transportation), and “Able Mable” (Reconnaissance). It also provides USAF administration and logistical support for USAF personnel and equipment engaged in special military assistance to

(3) US Army Support Group Vietnam (USASGV) which provides the US Army portion of the special military assistance support for SVN (except that performed by MAAG and Headquarters MACV) including helicopter and fixed wing air transportation, signal communications, and special forces. It also provides US administrative and logistical support for assigned and attached personnel and equipment engaged in the special military assistance.

(4) Headquarters Support Activity Saigon (HSAS) which provides administrative support to the US Headquarters and other US government sponsored agencies and activities located in Saigon.

c. No increase in MAAG Vietnam is proposed during the three-year period through FY 65 except for 127 civic action medical personnel. MAAG strength will be reduced by one-half after FY 65. The reduced strength contemplates the minimum essential personnel required to continue necessary advisory and military assistance functions, and to assume those functions in SVN currently executed by Headquarters USMACV and HSAS, which are assumed to be phased out at that time.

7. Cost Data

a. The FY 63 MAP was revised to provide support of the objectives of the CPSVN in accordance with the concept in paragraph 3 above. The revised FY 63 MAP, held within the OSD-approved fund ceiling of 187 million for FY 63 was forwarded to OSD on January 1963.11

b. Order of magnitude costs ($ millions) of the CPSVN in comparison with the original FY 63-68 MAP are as shown in Enclosure (6) and summarized below:

FY 63 FY 64 FY 65 FY 66 FY 67 FY 68 Total

CPSVN (a) 187 218 153 138 169 113 978

Original MAP (a) 187 130 114 119 127 133 810

Difference 0 +88 +39 +19 +42 -20 +168

CIDG (b) 8 24 32

(a) Packing, crating, handling and transportation (PCHT) costs excluded.

(b) Funded FY 63 by OSD MAP Contingency Reserve. Source FY 64 funds unresolved.

c. Matériel Costs (1) The following tabulation reflects the materiel cost comparison between the original MAP and CPSVN:

FY 63 FY 64 FY 65 FY 66 FY 67 FY 68 Total

CPSVN 139 174 132 129 152 106 832

Original MAP 139 113 98 109 117 124 700

Difference 0 +61 +34 +20 +35 -18 +132

(2) Increases in costs throughout the plan years are generally attributable to the earlier acquisition of major items of material, increased usage rates, and to the costs of intensified training programs. The additional material costs are particularly evident in the Air Force program as a result of the earlier acquisition of aircraft and the increased aircraft flying hour authorizations. Increased training ammunition requirements are due to the training program placing increased emphasis on completing required courses; increased availability of trainees; and, in the later plan years, an extensive replacement training program.

(3) Significant materiel changes contributing to net cost increases are as indicated below: (a) FY 64—Increases in operational ammunition required for intensified combat; acceleration of communication equipment from FY 68 to FY 64 to permit relief of the US troposcatter unit FY 66; material for 2053 strategic hamlet kits, early funding for 40 CH-34 helicopters. Significant decreases involved in the changed cost include the deletion of: F-86 aircraft, war reserve ammunition, previously planned addition of a fourth rifle company to each infantry battalion, and an additional airborne battalion.

(b) FY 65—Acquisition of 10 F5 A/B aircraft; and deletion of two F86F attrition aircraft with Follow-On Spares (FOS).

(c) FY 66—Acquisition of 19 F5 A/B aircraft, and deletion of two F86F attrition aircraft and FOS and cancellation of an APD activation.

(d) FY 67—Acquisition of 11 F5 A/B aircraft and 16 RF-5B aircraft; and the deletion of 20 CH-34 helicopters.

(e) FY 68—Deletion of 18 F-104G aircraft and advance funding FY 64 troposcatter equipment

d. Construction Costs. (1) The difference in the cost of the construction program is summarized in the following table

FY 63 FY 64 FY 65 FY 66 FY 67 FY 68 Total

CPSVN 29.3 26.0 4.6 1.0 9.7 .5 71.1

Original MAP 29.3 3.0 4.4 .5 .5 .5 38.2

Difference 0 +23.0 +.2 +.5 +9.2 +.0 +32.9

(2) The construction programs in the Revised FY 63 MAP and FY 63 CPSVN are the same, except for minor revisions to be made by deviation without increasing the total cost.

(3) As indicated in the above table, there is a significant increase in the construction program during the period FY 64-68. The major increases occur in FY 64 and FY 67. The increase in FY 64 is generated by the following requirements: (a) Construct facilities at three major Navy installations.

(b) Construct one airfield in the delta area and complete airfield construction at Da Nang.

(c) Improve two airfields in the delta area and two in Central SVN.

(d) Provide miscellaneous support facilities at seven airfields.

(4) The increased cost in FY 67 is to construct a jet-capable airfield in east Central SVN.

e. Training Costs. (1) A comparison of training costs is reflected in the following

FY 63 FY 64 FY 65 FY 66 FY 67 FY 68 Total

CPSVN 18.7 18.1 16.3 7.9 7.4 5.9 74.3

Original MAP 18.7 14.4 11.2 9.6 9.0 8.2 71.1

Difference 0 +3.7 +5.1 -1.7 -1.6 -2.3 +3.2

(2) For FY 63, except for deviations which may be necessary to meet operational considerations during the balance of the fiscal year, the requirements of the approved FY 63 MAP and the CPSVN are identical.

(3) The increase in FY 64 and FY 65 is attributable to accelerated training for officers, NCOs, specialists, and technicians with particular emphasis on junior leaders, pilots and communications personnel.

(4) The decreases in the FY 66-68 period are attributable to a phase-down of MAAG personnel and the training of pilots and communications personnel now planned for FY 64-65.

f. Support of CIDG

The CIDG is not susceptible to MAP support procedures. Selected groups receive support from other US sources and experience on the ground clearly indicates that the concept of irregular warfare must be designed to immediately exploit local politico-military successes in the battle for the people. The arming, training and support of irregulars must be carried out with the ultimate in flexibility of funding (to include necessary deviations) and administrative support. Current MAP lead times and administrative practices are unacceptable if the successes gained by the CIDG program to date are to be continued and exploited to the maximum degree.

g. Piaster Support

The proposed increase in force levels in FY 64 will cost an estimated additional 846 million plasters (an equivalent of $11.6 million at 73 to 1) and represents a 3% increase in the GVN national budget. The estimate was made using a straight line projection and costs per person derived from the CY 63 GVN budget applied to the FY 64 force levels. The estimate included the plaster cost of maintaining the RVNAF, CG, SDC and Junk Force; but excluded the cost of the strategic hamlet program since it is monitored by USOM. A major portion of the plaster cost of maintaining the RVNAF is borne by the counterpart fund and a significant, though minor, part of the cost is borne by the GVN. All of the plaster cost for the maintenance and support of the CG, SDC and the Junk Force is borne by the GVN and is a real part of the cost of the counterinsurgency effort. In view of the fact that generation of counterpart plasters from US AID Programs for the first few months of this fiscal year has lagged behind last year’s rate and that the CPSVN requires additional plasters in FY 64, the GVN will have to undertake an additional amount of deficit financing. Such financing may raise the inflationary pressure on the plaster and increase the possibility that further inflation will occur. This risk is small when compared to the over-all magnitude of the effort involved in SVN.

8. Summary

a. To prosecute the counterinsurgency effort to a successful conclusion and develop a GVN capability to defend against the continuing threat in Southeast Asia, it is necessary to temporarily increase the SVN force levels, provide essential equipment, and develop a GVN military posture similar to that contained in the CPSVN. The cost of such a program will be roughly the same as that contained in the CPSVN, but spread over a longer period of time. Therefore, to accomplish the ultimate objective of the CPSVN, early withdrawal of US special military assistance, the major costs of the program must be compressed into the FY 63-65 time frame. This is pointed out in the following table which compares the DOD dollar guideline with the CPSVN costs:

CPSVN-DOD Dollar Guidelines Cost Comparison

FY 63 FY 64 FY 65 FY 66 FY 67 FY 68 Total

CPSVN (a) 218 153 138 169 113 110(b) 901

DOD Guidelines 160 165 160 150 140 122(b) 897

Difference +58 -12 -22 +19 -27 -12 +4

PCHT Added +11 +11 +11 +11 +10 +8 +62

Difference +69 -1 -11 +30 -17 -4 +66

(a) Excludes PCHT

(b) Estimated by CINCPAC

b. It is emphasized that the Comprehensive Plan has been developed using factors based on in-country experience to date and is. subject to change. Order of magnitude dollar figures have been used in some cases, particularly with respect to construction. It does not represent a refined detailed program. This will be accomplished during the development of the FY 64-69 MAP.

[Here follow the enclosures: 1. “Chart, Non-MAP Supported Paramilitary Operations in SVN”, 2. “Chart, SVN Forces-Mix and Integration”, 3. “Graph, Total US Supported SVN Forces”, 4. “Table, Force Structure”, 5. “Table, Forecast of Phase-out of US Forces”, and 6. “Chart, Cost Comparison”.]

1 Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OSD Files:FRC 69 A 3131, Vietnam 380 thru 381 1963. Secret.

2 See vol. II, Document 546.

3 Not found.

4 In telegram DEF 923923, January 22, the Department of Defense transmitted to CINCPAC preliminary fiscal year 1965-1968 dollar guidelines for military assistance programs for countries in the East Asia area, including Vietnam. (Washington National Records Center, RG 319, U.S. Army Message Center Microfilm, Reel 11225)

5 On March 7, the Joint Chiefs of Staff recommended adoption of the Comprehensive Plan; see Document 51.

6 Confidential.

7 Not found.

8 In telegram 082316Z to CINCPAC, January 8, the Department of Defense asked for CINCPAC comment on proposed FY 63-FY 64 funding from MAP contingency reserves. (Washington National Records Center, RG 319, U.S. Army Message Center Microfilm, Reel 11208)

9 In telegram 100910Z, January 10,CINCPAC reported to JCS that preparations were being made for the scheduled visit to Vietnam by General Wheeler and a JCS team. CINCPAC also commented on the continuing impact of the Ap Bac battle, and pointed to contrasting successes on the part of the South Vietnamese army. (Washington National Records Center, RG 319, U.S. Army Message Center Microfilm, Reel 11254)

10 None of the enclosures is printed.

11 Not found.

19. Memorandum From the Director of the Bureau of Intelligence and Research (Hilsman) and Michael V. Forrestal of the National Security Council Staff to the President 19. Memorandum From the Director of the Bureau of Intelligence and Research (Hilsman) and Michael V. Forrestal of the National Security Council Staff to the President1

Washington, January 25, 1963.2

A REPORT ON SOUTH VIETNAM

The war in South Vietnam is clearly going better than it was a year ago. The government claims to have built more than 4,000 Strategic Hamlets, and although many of these are nothing more than a bamboo fence, a certain proportion have enough weapons to keep out at least small Viet Cong patrols and the rudiments of the kind of social and political program needed to enlist the villagers’ support.

The program to arm and train the Montagnards, which should go far toward choking off the infiltration routes, has also made progress. There are 29 U.S. Special Forces teams training Montagnards (as well as certain minority groups in the Delta), with eleven more teams on the way. By mid-autumn training camps had been set up in all the provinces bordering Laos, and a system of regular patrolling started that hopefully will one day cover the entire network of trails in the mountain regions. Under this program over 35,000 Montagnards have been trained, armed, and assisted in setting up their village defenses, the eventual goal being one hundred thousand.

In both the mountain regions and the heavily populated lowlands, the areas through which one can travel without escort have been enlarged. In contested areas, the government is beginning to probe out, gradually repairing the roads and bridges cut by the Viet Cong as they go. In some of the moderately populated areas fringing the Delta and the coastal plain, as for example Binh Duong province, isolated villages have been bodily moved to positions along the roads where they can be more easily defended.

As of December 1, the Vietnamese government controlled 951 villages containing about 51% of the rural population—a gain of 92 villages and 500,000 people in six months. The Viet Cong control 445 villages with 8% of the rural population-a loss of 9 villages and 231,000 people in six months.

The impact of previously authorized U.S. aid programs is also beginning to be felt. On the military side, U.S. advisors, helicopters, air support, and arms have given the Vietnamese military new confidence which they are showing by increased aggressiveness. For the first time since the war began in 1959, for example, the government forces began in September to capture more weapons than they lost. From January to August, government forces captured 2,728 weapons but lost 3,661. But in September and October, they captured 908 weapons and lost only 765.

On the Strategic Hamlet and civilian programs. U.S. aid is just coming in. Strategic Hamlet “kits” are now arriving, a U.S. military advisor has been stationed with each province chief, and twenty of the forty-one provinces will soon have a U.S. Rural Development advisor as well. Finally there is considerably more optimism among Vietnamese officials than there was a year ago, although it is probably based more on the visible flow of U.S. aid than on an objective analysis of actual progress.

The Viet Cong, in sum, are being hurt—they have somewhat less freedom of movement than they had a year ago, they apparently suffer acutely from lack of medicines, and in some very isolated areas they seem to be having trouble getting food.

Qualifications

Even so, the negative side of the ledger is still awesome. The Viet Cong continue to be aggressive and are extremely effective. In the last few weeks, for example, they fought stubbornly and with telling results at Ap Bac, near My Tho. They completely escaped an elaborate trap in Tay Ninh province. They fought their way inside the perimeter of a U.S. Special Forces training camp at Plei Mrong, killing 39 of the trainee defenders and capturing 114 weapons. And they completely overran a strategic hamlet in Phu Yen province that was defended by a civil guard company in addition to the village militia, killing 24 of the defenders and capturing 35 weapons.

Probably even more significant are the figures on Viet Cong strength. Intelligence estimates credit the Viet Cong with actually increasing their regular forces from 18,000 to 23,000 over this past year in spite of having suffered what the government claims were losses of 20,000 kil1ed in action and 4,000 wounded. Part of this increase may result from nothing more than better intelligence, but even so it is ominous that in the face of greatly increased government pressure and U.S. support the Viet Cong can still field 23,000 regular forces and 100,000 militia, supported by unknown thousands of sympathizers.

What these figures suggest is that the Viet Cong are still able to obtain an adequate supply of recruits and the large quantities of food and other supplies they need from the villagers of South Vietnam itself. Infiltration by sea has been effectively blocked since early in 1962. As for infiltration by land, captured documents, POW interrogation, evidence gathered by patrolling, and other intelligence indicates that 3,000 to 4,000 Viet Cong at the most have come over the so-called Ho Chi Minh trails since January, 1962. As to supplies, there seems to be no doubt that the trails have so far been used only for specialized equipment, such as radios; for medicines; and perhaps for a few automatic weapons, although no weapons have yet been captured which could be proved to have been brought in after 1954. Thus the conclusion seems inescapable that the Viet Cong could continue the war effort at the present level, or perhaps increase it, even if the infiltration routes were completely closed.

Villagers’ Attitudes

The question that this conclusion raises—and the basic question of the whole war—is again the attitude of the villagers. It is difficult, if not impossible, to assess how the villagers really feel and the only straws in the wind point in different directions. The village defenders in many of the strategic hamlets that have been attacked have resisted bravely. But in an unknown, but probably large number of strategic hamlets, the villagers have merely let the Viet Cong in or supplied what they wanted without reporting the incident to the authorities. There is apparently some resentment against the Viet Cong about the “taxes” they collect and suspicion based on the stories the villagers hear about what is going on in the North. But there may be just as much resentment and suspicion directed towards the government. No one really knows, for example, how many of the 20,000 “Viet Cong” killed last year were only innocent, or at least persuadable villagers, whether the Strategic Hamlet program is providing enough government services to counteract the sacrifices it requires, or how the mute mass of villagers react to the charges against Diem of dictatorship and nepotism. At the very least, the figures on Viet Cong strength imply a continuing flow of recruits and supplies from these same villages and indicate that a substantial proportion of the population is still cooperating with the enemy, although it is impossible to tell how much of this cooperation stems from fear and how much from conviction. Thus on the vital question of villagers’ attitudes, the net impression is one of some encouragement at the progress in building strategic hamlets and the number that resist when attacked, but encouragement overlaid by a shadow of uneasiness.

Conclusion

Our overall judgment, in sum, is that we are probably winning, but certainly more slowly than we had hoped. At the rate it is now going the war will last longer than we would like, cost more in terms of both lives and money than we anticipated, and prolong the period, in which a sudden and dramatic event would upset the gains already made.

The question is where improvements can be made-whether in our basic approach to fighting a guerrilla war, or in the implementation of that approach.

The Strategic Concept

We feel that the basic strategic concept developed last year is still valid. As mentioned above, the Viet Cong have gotten trained cadre and specialized equipment from the North, but the vast bulk of both recruits and supplies come from inside South Vietnam itself. Thus the strategic objectives of the war in South Vietnam, as in most guerrilla wars, are basically political—not simply to kill Viet Cong, but to win the people. Although the strategic concept has never been spelled out in any one document, the consensus seems to be that it consists of the following objectives: (1) to create the incentive for resistance in the basic population by providing for a flow upward of information on villagers’ needs and a flow downward of government services, and by knitting them into the fabric of community decision-making; (2) to provide the basic population with the means and training for resistance; and (3) to cut the guerrillas’ access to the villagers, their true line of communications, by essentially police-type measures for controlling the movement of goods and people. In this context, the military objectives are also threefold: (1) to protect installations vital to the economy and government; (2) to provide rapid reinforcement for villages under heavy attack; and (3) to keep the regular guerrilla units off balance and prevent them from concentrating by aggressive but highly discriminating and selective offensive military operations.

This combination of civilian and military measures is designed to reduce the guerrillas to their die-hard nucleus and isolate them in areas remote from the basic population. Only when this is done does the task finally become one of killing Viet Cong, of simple elimination.

As we say, this concept seems sound. For, even though it is difficult to assess the attitudes of the villager, two assumptions seem reasonable. The first is that the villagers will be prudently cooperative with the Viet Cong if they are not given physical security, both in the military sense of security from attacks on their village and in the police sense of security from the individual acts of terror and retaliation. The second is that if the villagers are in fact politically apathetic, as they seem to be, they are likely to remain so or even become pro-Communist if the government does not show concern for their welfare in the way it conducts the war and in the effort it makes to provide at least simple government services. It may be that these measures will not be enough to create popular support for the government and the incentive to resist, but it seems obvious that support could neither be created nor long maintained without them.

Implementing the Concept

Thus it is in the implementation of the strategic concept that there seems to be the greatest room for improvement. Success requires, first, full understanding of the strategy at all levels of the government and armed forces, and, second, the skills and organization for effective coordination of military activities with civilian activities. Some parts of the Vietnamese government do understand the strategy, but in other parts the understanding is imperfect at best. The same is true of the necessary skills and organization. Specific areas in particular need of improvement are listed in the paragraphs below, which discuss both programs and continuing issues and conclude with a proposal as to how the United States might increase its leverage on the Vietnamese government so as to bring the improvements about.

Lack of an Overall Plan

The most serious lack in South Vietnam is that of an overall plan, keyed to the strategic concept described above, through which priorities can be set and the coordination of military and civilian activities accomplished. In spite of U.S. urgings there is still no single countrywide plan worthy of the name but only a variety of regional and provincial plans, some good and some not so good. There are, for example, a number of special plans—the Delta Plan, Operation Sunrise, Operation Sea Swallow, Waves of Love—; several plans developed by the commanders of the Corps and Divisional areas; and an unknown number of plans developed by each of the forty-one province chiefs. Regional and provincial plans are, of course necessary, but they should be elements of a country-wide plan rather than a substitute for it. As it is, the impression is strong that many of these plans are both inconsistent and competitive.

Strategic Hamlets

One result of the lack of an overall plan is the proliferation of strategic hamlets that are inadequately equipped and defended, or that are built prematurely in exposed areas.

Gaps: The Police Program

The second result is that essential aspects of the strategy are neglected. The police program is an example. An effective police system is vital to guard against Communists remaining inside strategic hamlets, and to man the checkpoints and patrols that are essential in, controlling the movements of goods and people. The present police’ system is clearly inadequate, and although the Public Safety Division of U.S. AID has put forward a proposal for expansion, no action has yet been taken.

Multiple Armies

A third result is what appears to be an extremely uneconomic use of manpower. There is in South Vietnam a confusing multiplicity of separate armies. In addition to the regular forces (the ARVN), there are under arms the Civil Guard, the Self Defense Corps, the Civilian Irregular Defense Groups (CIDG), the Hamlet Militia, the Montagnard Commandoes, the Force Populaire, the Republican Youth, the Catholic Youth, several independent groups under parish priests, such as Father Hoa’s Sea Swallows, and even one small army trained, armed, and commanded by a private businessman to protect his properties in Cap St. Jacques. All these forces add up to almost half a million men under arms, a number which if so organized would come to the astounding total of 51 divisions.

This multiplicity of separate armies results not only in an uneconomic use of manpower, but also difficulties in coordination and confusion as to function. One also suspects that it is a misallocation of manpower as well, with too much emphasis on military activities and not enough on civilian such as government services to the villages and police work. So many armed men with different loyalties will also create problems in the transition to a peace-time economy if victory is in fact won, as well as the obvious danger that one or another chief will use the forces under his command for political purposes. South Vietnam does not need any more armed men, but it does need to reorganize what it has.

Coordination of Military and Civilian Activities

Still another result of the lack of an overall plan are the difficulties in coordinating military and civilian activities. One example is the proportion of “clear and hold” as opposed to “hit and withdraw” operations. There are no statistics available, but a number of American military advisors feel that the proportion of “clear and hold” operations, in which troops clear an area and then remain to protect the civic action teams and villagers while they build strategic hamlets, is too low in proportion to the “hit and withdraw” operations designed to destroy regular Viet Cong units. The latter type of operation is essential to keep the Viet Cong off balance and to prevent their concentrating for large-scale attacks, but it should be subordinate to the systematic expansion of secure areas.

Amnesty Program

A final result of the lack of an overall plan, or perhaps of imperfect understanding of an effective counter-guerrilla strategy, is the Vietnamese reluctance to embark on a meaningful amnesty program. After much U.S. urging, the Vietnamese have finally developed a plan, but it is far from satisfactory. The basic trouble is revealed by the Vietnamese insistence that what they want is not an “amnesty” policy but a “surrender” policy.

Civil Programs

The inadequacies in the police program, the tendency to build strategic hamlets in exposed places with inadequate arms and equipment, and the reluctance to develop a meaningful amnesty program have already been discussed. Other inadequacies in civilian programs are discussed below.

One continuing problem is the failure of the Vietnamese government to organize its economy on an emergency basis. A resistance to deficit spending and stricter controls has permitted too large a part of the country’s internal and external resources to go to nonessential purposes, especially in the Saigon area.

There should be more planning for what the Vietnamese economy will be like after the shooting has ended. There is almost none of this kind of planning now, and some of the things being done today might make sensible planning in the future very difficult. An obvious example is the rise of consumption levels, especially in non-essential imports which Vietnam could not buy without U.S. aid. At some point, and probably soon, the U.S. should undertake a long-range economic study of the country’s future development.

Military Operations with Political Aspects

The opinion of some American military advisors that the proportion of “clear and hold” offensive operations is too low in relation to “hit and withdraw” operations designed to keep the Viet Cong off balance has already been mentioned. Another aspect of military operations that may have political consequences is the tactics used in the offensive operations needed to keep the Viet Cong off balance. Some American military advisors feel that the Vietnamese have a bias toward elaborate, set-piece operations. These large-scale operations provide insurance against defeat, but they are expensive, cumbersome, and difficult to keep secret. From the political point of view they have the additional disadvantages for the Vietnamese of maximizing the chances of killing civilians and from the American point of view of requiring a very heavy use of helicopters.

An alternative, and apparently effective way of keeping the regular Viet Cong off balance is long-range patrolling by small units, such as Ranger companies. In this tactic, the patrols, resupplied by air, stay out in the field for extended periods of time, never sleeping two nights in the same place, ambushing, and in general using guerrilla tactics to fight the guerrilla. The remaining forces are kept in reserve for rapid reinforcement and sealing off an area when the patrol encounters resistance. Although American military advisors in South Vietnam have worked hard to overcome Vietnamese reluctance to operate for extended periods in the field and at night, which would permit greater use of this tactic, they have had only partial success. (Paradoxically, President Diem spent a substantial part of his four and a half hour lecture to us praising a province chief who has used the long-range patrol tactic to very good effect recently in Zone D).3

Use of Air Power

On use of air power, and the danger of adverse political effects, our impression is that the controls over air strikes and the procedures for checking intelligence against all possible sources are excellent. In spite of this, however, it is difficult to be sure that air power is being used in a way that minimizes the adverse political effects. U.S. Air Force advisors tell us that the demand for air strikes from the South Vietnamese has gone up enormously. There are now 1,000 strikes per month, and there would be considerably more if the air power were available. During November, thirty-two per cent of these 1,000 strikes were so-called “interdiction”—that is, attacks on installations located in air photos and identified as Viet Cong by intelligence. Fifty-three per cent of the air strikes during November were in direct support that is, bombing and strafing in advance of an attack on a location intelligence indicated as being occupied by Viet Cong or in response to a request by a ground unit in contact with the enemy. Fifteen per cent were other kinds of mission, such as reconnaissance. There is no doubt that the Viet Cong fear air attacks and that some interdiction is necessary and useful. On the other hand, it is impossible to assess how much resentment among persuadable villagers is engendered by the inevitable accidents. In general, the final judgment probably lies in the answer to the questions raised above about the relative emphasis on “clear and hold” and long-range patrolling versus “hit and withdraw” of the more elaborate type. If the proportion is correct between extending control and the necessary offensive operations to keep the Viet Cong off balance, then the killing of civilians is probably at an unavoidable minimum. If the proportion of “hit and withdraw” is too high in relation to “clear and hold”, on the other hand, then air power, too, is probably being overused in ways that have adverse political consequences.

Reinforcement of Strategic Hamlets

One final point on the political aspects of military operations concerns quicker reinforcement for strategic hamlets under attack. Some American military advisors feel that more attention should be paid to ways of providing quicker reinforcement for the hamlets, including air support, although in the case of air support there are formidable problems of communications and in providing airfields close enough to threatened villages.

Foreign Policy

In its complete concentration on the civil war and on the means and ideology for winning it, the government of South Vietnam has a naivete in foreign affairs which is dangerous for both Vietnam and for the U.S. There has been massive resistance to U.S. suggestions on policies for cooperation in other problems in the area, i.e. Laos and Cambodia. To some extent this is unavoidable in view of Diem’s rather simple view of the Communist threat, but U.S. interests are so heavily involved in the country that our voice should carry more weight.

Vietnamese Domestic Politics

The Diem government is frequently criticized for being a dictatorship. This is true, but we doubt that the lack of parliamentary democracy bothers the villagers of Vietnam or much affects their attitudes toward the war. The real question is whether the concentration of power in the hands of Diem and his family, especially Brother Nhu and his wife, and Diem’s reluctance to delegate is alienating the middle and higher level officials on whom the government must depend to carry out its policies. Our judgment is that the United States does not really have as much information on this subject as it should. All that can be said at the moment is that it is the feeling of Americans in contact with these officials that they are encouraged by U.S. aid and apparently getting on with the job. Both the American and British missions, for example, feel that Brother Nhu’s energetic support for the Strategic Hamlet program has given it an important push. The only evidence to contradict these judgments that we found was in a conversation with Buu, the head of the Vietnamese labor movement and, paradoxically, one of the co-founders with Diem and Nhu of Diem’s political party.

Diem’s Press Relations

The American press in South Vietnam now has good relations with the Embassy and MACV and generally are grateful for the help that they have received. But their attitude toward Diem and the government of South Vietnam is the complete opposite, and with much justice. Diem wants only adulation and is completely insensitive to the desires of the foreign press for factual information. He is equally insensitive to his own image, the political consequences of the activities of Madame Nhu and the other members of his family, and his own tendencies of arbitrariness, failure to delegate, and general pettiness. After much effort, Ambassador Nolting persuaded Diem to let the Defense Ministry give regular military briefings. True to form, however, the content of the briefings is deplorable. One of these briefings, for example, the transcript of which we examined, contained little more than a saccharine eulogy of President Diem.

It would be nice if we could say that Diem’s image in the foreign press was only his affair, but [it] seriously affects the U.S. and its ability to help South Vietnam. The American press representatives are bitter and will seize on anything that goes wrong and blow it up as much as possible. The My Tho operation, for example, contained some mistakes, but it was not nearly the botched up disaster that the press made it appear to be.

Action for the United States

By way of summary, then, we feel that the United States should push the Diem government harder on the need for an overall plan, on a reduction in the number of different military organizations, on foreign policy questions in which the United States has an interest, on an effective police program, for a greater emphasis on military operations in extending and securing government control as opposed to large-scale offensives and air interdiction, on a meaningful amnesty program, on planning for the post-war economy, and on a realistic effort to get a more favorable press.

On many of these issues, of course, the United States has already been pressing. Thus in one sense the question is how to increase our leverage in the face of Diem’s biases and general resistance to advice.

Actually, the United States is in a much better position to see that its advice is taken than it was a year ago. At that time Diem and officials at the national level were practically the only point of contact the U.S. had with either civil or military programs. Today, however, the U.S. has military advisors not only at the lower levels of the Army but with each province chief and steps are being taken to put U.S. AID advisors in at least 20 of the 41 provinces. It therefore is becoming possible to accomplish much of what we want at the local level without going through the vastly inefficient national bureaucracy. An example is the work of the special forces teams. They work at the village level, and at a number of places have done wonders not only in training and supervising the erection of village defenses but also in medical aid, school construction, and even in agriculture and marketing.

In general, it is our judgment that an effort should be made to increase this influence at the local level even more by putting additional U.S.AID people with province chiefs and, where it is indicated, even at selected places further down in the civilian hierarchy.

In addition, having gotten past the first year of increased U.S. support and demonstrated our sincerity, the time has probably come when we can press our views on Diem more vigorously and occasionally even publicly.

One final recommendation for U.S. action concerns our dealings with the press here in Washington. In our judgment a systematic campaign to get more of the facts into the press and T.V. should be mounted. Although our report, for example, is not rosily optimistic, it certainly contains the factual basis (e.g., the first few paragraphs) for a much more hopeful view than the pessimistic (and factually inaccurate) picture conveyed in the press.

Eyes Only4 Annex: Performance of U.S. Mission

Many of the individuals and agencies in the U.S. Mission are doing an outstanding job. But some of the criticisms of the Vietnamese also apply to the Americans, the following in particular: 1. There is no overall planning effort that effectively ties together the civilian and military efforts.

2. There is little or no long-range thinking about the kind of country that should come out of victory and about what we do now to contribute to this longer-range goal.

3. Among both civilians and military there is still some confusion over the way to conduct a counter-guerrilla war. Many of the lower-ranking people out in the field in actual contact with the problems seem fully conscious of the importance of the civil and political aspects, but in the middle and higher levels understanding is far from perfect. The American military mission must share some of the blame for the excessive emphasis on large-scale operations and air interdiction which have the bad political and useless military effects described in our report.

4. In general, we don’t use all the leverage we have to persuade Diem to adopt policies which we espouse. On foreign policy matters the U.S. mission has failed to press U.S. interests sufficiently hard, possibly because it is easier to concentrate on in-country operations. In domestic politics, we have virtually no contact with meaningful opposition elements and we have made no attempt to maintain a U.S. position independent of Diem. There should be a more outspoken U.S. attitude on public policies we disapprove of, more U.S. support of people like Buu, the head of the major labor organization, and less of Madame Nhu. We should push harder for a gradual liberalization of the authoritarian political structure and for the other programs discussed in the body of our report.

The real trouble, however, is that the rather large U.S. effort in South Vietnam is managed by a multitude of independent U.S. agencies and people with little or no overall direction. No one man is in charge. What coordination there is results mainly from the sort of treaty arrangements that are arrived at in the Country Team meetings and from an inter-agency committee chaired by the Deputy Chief of Mission, which limits itself to provincial rehabilitation. The result is that the U.S. effort, although massive, is fragmented and duplicative. An example is the chronic shortage of weapons for strategic hamlet defenders. There are more than enough weapons in the country, but they get lost in Vietnamese government depots. The full effort of the American community is rarely concentrated on breaking such bottlenecks.

What is needed, ideally, is to give authority to a single, strong executive, a man perhaps with a military background but who understands that this war is essentially a struggle to build a nation out of the chaos of revolution. One possibility would be to appoint the right kind of general as Ambassador. An alternative would be to appoint as Ambassador a civilian public figure whose character and reputation would permit him to dominate the representatives of all other departments and agencies.

There are, of course, some formidable political and bureaucratic problems in taking either of these steps. What is more, we cannot say that the matter is urgent or that disaster will inevitably or immediately follow if things remain as they are. Progress toward winning the war is being made under the present setup-although, as we have said, it will take longer than expected, cost more, and prolong the period in which a dramatic event could wipe out the gains already made. On balance, our recommendation would be not to make any sudden and dramatic change, but to keep the problem in mind when changes are made in the normal course.

Certain specific problems concerning the U.S. Mission are dealt with in the numbered paragraphs below.

(1) A continuing problem is air support of ground operations and of reinforcement for strategic hamlets and other static defense forces under attack. There is an inter-service argument over who should do this sort of thing, whether the Army controlled HU1B armed helicopters and Mohawks, or the Air Force controlled Farm Gate fighters and bombers. The result is an insufficient effort in certain circumstances.

(2) There are also insufficient liaison type aircraft for support of U.S.AID and Special Forces especially. Here again there is an inter-service argument over who should do this sort of thing, resulting in an insufficient effort.

(3) Concerning air support and the outstanding request for another increase in “Farm Gate” (the U.S. flown bombers and fighters), we would suggest delaying approval until we could be sure that progress had been made on the problems of emphasis between “clear and hold” operations on the one hand and “hit and withdraw” and “interdiction” operations on the other. Any such request should also be reviewed from the standpoint of whether adequate close support and liaison air capability is being provided.

(4) The U.S. military has still not solved the communications problem in South Vietnam, especially ground-to-air communications, but including ground-to-ground communications. When the Special Forces at Plei Mrong were attacked, it was several hours before air support could be brought to bear. Despite the program to equip strategic hamlets with radios, of which over 2,000 have already been distributed, the strategic hamlets still have trouble obtaining reinforcements, and especially air support. Partly this is a problem of peculiar electromagnetic conditions in South Vietnam, which should yield to research and development efforts. In the main, however, it results from inadequate procedures for calling in air power and directing it by local people who know the terrain and targets.

(5) In U.S. AID, the effort seems to be divided between the Deputy in charge of Rural Development, Rufus Phillips, and the more conventional AID activities. Phillips is coming close to running a practical program, but so far is operating meaningfully in only half the provinces. This rural development program, which is essentially the civic side of the strategic hamlet program, is the cutting edge of the U.S. effort at the village level. It needs to be expanded and given more flexibility and quicker support than the AID agency normally can give under present circumstances. The remainder of the AID activities seem confined to administering the commodity import program and the vestiges of earlier projects. What is most lacking here is an economic program for Vietnam designed both to support the present war effort and lay the basis for future development of the country when peace is restored.

(6) A decision has been reached to transfer from CIA to the Army the training of certain paramilitary groups including the Montagnards. This is known as “Operation Switchback”. The Agency is making a sincere effort to carry out this decision, but serious difficulties are arising from the Army’s rather inflexible budgetary and personnel procedures. These programs require unconventional disbursements of local currency, rapid air delivery of specialized equipment and rapid construction of storage facilities. The Army may eventually work these problems out; but in the meantime the program should not be allowed to slacken at this critical point. “Operation Switchback” should be extended, if necessary.

Michael V. Forrestal
Roger Hilsman5

1 Source: Kennedy Library, Hilsman Papers, Country Series-Vietnam. Secret. This report and the attached annex are summarized in Hilsman, To Move a Nation, pp. 463-466. The report, without the annex, is also printed in Pentagon Papers: Gravel Edition, Vol. 11, pp. 717-725.

2 The memorandum, as prepared for submission to the President, was undated. The date given here was handwritten on the source text.

3 For a summary of this conversation, see Document 6.

4 According to Hilsman’s memoirs, Eyes Only in this instance meant Eyes Only for the President. (Hilsman, To Move a Nation, p. 465)

5 Printed from a copy that bears these typed signatures.

20. National Security Action Memorandum No. 217 20. National Security Action Memorandum No. 2171

Washington, January 25, 1963.

SUBJECT

Official Visits to South Vietnam

The President has asked that official visits by high ranking military and civilian personnel to South Vietnam be coordinated with Governor Harriman. Accordingly, such proposed visits should be cleared with his office.2

McGeorge Bundy

1 Source: Department of State, S/S-NSC Files: Lot 72 D 316,NSAMs. Sent to the Secretary of State, the Secretary of Defense, and the Administrator of AID.

2 According to Hilsman, this directive grew out of President Kennedy’s frustration over press reports of unscheduled visits by senior U.S. officials to Vietnam. Hilsman recalls that the President telephoned him to express his concern over these visits, which, he felt, appeared to increase the U.S. commitment in Vietnam. Hilsman added that Kennedy said: “That is exactly what I don’t want to do.” (Ibid., Office of the Historian, Vietnam Interviews, Roger Hilsman, May 15, 1984)

21. Memorandum From Michael V. Forrestal of the National Security Council Staff to the President 21. Memorandum From Michael V. Forrestal of the National Security Council Staff to the President1

Washington, January 28, 1963.

SOUTH VIETNAM

You asked for a list of actions which you might take to follow up on Roger Hilsman’s and my report on South Vietnam.2

General Wheeler is returning to Washington on Wednesday.3 I suggest you meet with him, Secretary McNamara, Governor Harriman, Director McCone and General Taylor on Friday to hear his report.4 At that meeting you might keep the following points in mind for discussion and action: 1. Start looking for a successor to Fritz Nolting, whose tour comes to an end in April unless he is reappointed. More vigor is needed in getting Diem to do what we want.

2. Review of the command relationship between CinCPac and Harkins. Ideally Harkins should report to the JCS directly. If you don’t want to go this far right away, you might ask General Taylor to discuss with CinCPac the strategy of the war in South Vietnam and perhaps suggest less interference in the tactical aspects of General Harkins’ job.

3. The press problem needs attention. You might ask Governor Harriman and the press people to review our own policies. I think we have not been candid enough with them and consequently have generated suspicion and disbelief. The USIA chief in SVN, John Mecklin, has recommended that the U.S. begin giving our newsmen briefings, including a limited amount of classified information whether the GVN likes it or not. He further suggests that our people in the field be instructed to ignore any efforts by the GVN to prevent them from cooperating with U.S. newsmen.

4. You might also ask General Wheeler whether he is satisfied that enough emphasis is being placed upon clear and hold operations’ as distinguished from large scale hit and run strikes involving a possible over-use of U.S. helicopters.

5. You might ask John McCone to see if his people think “Operation Switchback” (the shift of responsibility for paramilitary training from CIA to the Army) should be delayed at least until the Army can assure its continuity.

Before your meeting on Friday I will supply you with a check list to remind you of these and other questions you may want to raise.

A National Security Action Memorandum5 has gone out to the Departments concerned directing them to clear all VIP trips to South Vietnam with Governor Harriman.

MVForrestal6

1 Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Vietnam Country Series. Secret.

2 Document 19.

3 January 30.

4 General Wheeler’s report is printed as Document 26. There is no record of the February 1 meeting, but see Documents 27 and 29.

5 Document 20.

6 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.

22. Memorandum From the Deputy Director of the Vietnam Working Group (Heavner) to the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Harriman) 22. Memorandum From the Deputy Director of the Vietnam Working Group (Heavner) to the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Harriman)1

Washington, January 29, 1963.

SUBJECT

Contacts with Vietnamese Opposition Parties

During your discussions with Mr. Forrestal and Mr. Hilsman following their return from Viet-Nam, the question of adequate contact with Vietnamese oppositionists was raised. As I recall, Mr. Forrestal indicated his feeling that we are not sufficiently aware of opposition activities. I said that State Department personnel are not permitted to maintain contacts with known oppositionists, [2 lines not declassified].

[1 paragraph (4 lines) not declassified]

I am not sure that the policy of no contact with lower level State Department officers is necessarily the right policy. However, this has been the policy for the last five years to my knowledge. A change now would almost certainly be interpreted by Diem as an effort to undermine his regime.

1 Source: Department of State, Vietnam Working Group Files: Lot 67 D 54, Pol 13 Non-Party Blocs. Secret.

23. Memorandum From the Deputy Director of the United States Information Agency (Wilson) to the Director (Murrow) 23. Memorandum From the Deputy Director of the United States Information Agency (Wilson) to the Director (Murrow)1

Washington, January 30, 1963.

At the January 17 CI meeting2 there was a long discussion about U.S. press coverage of Viet-Nam. The feeling of the group was that, although our policies were correct in Viet-Nam you would never know it from the press coverage of Viet-Nam in this country. I was charged by the CI group to ask Pierre to hold a meeting on the problem and see what solutions might be devised. A meeting was held on January 21 with Bob Manning, Secretary Sylvester, Ralph Dungan and myself in Salinger’s office.

We agreed that there are two layers to the problem: 1. Past U.S. policy of laying back and letting the Vietnamese take the lead in dealing with the press must be reviewed. John Mecklin’s memorandum3 was read and discussed at some length. It was the opinion of all of us that Mecklin’s memorandum goes in the right direction. Salinger said that he would give the memorandum to the President and send it back to us with the President’s reactions. Unfortunately, the President still has the memorandum and he has not reacted, although I have jogged Pierre a couple of times. Apparently there isn’t much Pierre can do about it, since he knows the President has the memorandum and has asked him about it at least once since the meeting.

2. Devise means whereby favorable accounts of the situation in Viet-Nam can be given to the right press men under the right circumstances. Under this approach, two things have happened: a. Admiral Felt will hold an on-the-record press conference this week.

b. General Wheeler will issue a statement next Tuesday, upon his return, and then hold an on-the-record press conference. It is also hoped that he can be teed up for a subsequent National Press Club luncheon but early optimism on this has faded somewhat.

Meanwhile, Governor Harriman reacted so favorably to the Mecklin memorandum that he sent a letter4 to Ambassador Nolting in which he suggested three areas of improvement which Nolting should explore: 1) The handling of foreign journalists by the Vietnamese Government-leaving it to the Ambassador to decide whether we ourselves should simply take the initiative to increase our briefings and contacts or should try to explain the facts of life to the Vietnamese. However, the governor feels that the American public has a right to the best possible information even if this offends Vietnamese sensibilities.

2) Critical statements by the military advisers in the heat of battle—and here Governor Harriman notes that the new PIO will be able to help considerably. The Governor is also urging an indoctrination of U.S. personnel on the importance of not criticizing the Vietnamese publicly.

3) Finally, Ambassador Nolting, General Harkins and other responsible members of the Country Team are urged to increase their official and informal contacts with the American press, making sure that the press promptly gets the facts and the perspective involved. But the Country Team has also been cautioned against optimistic statements to the press and public officials.

Donald M. Wilson

1 Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 306, USIA/TAP Files: FRC 68 A 1415, CI-Vietnam. Eyes Only.

2 See Document 14.

3 For text of Mecklin’s November 27,1962, memorandum, see Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, vol. II, Document 322.

4 Document 24.

24. Letter From the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Harriman) to the Ambassador in Vietnam (Nolting) 24. Letter From the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Harriman) to the Ambassador in Vietnam (Nolting)1

Washington, January 30, 1963.

Dear Fritz: I can imagine that the flood of unfavorable news stories about the helicopter operation of January 2-32 has given you as much pain as me, particularly those stories alleging that American military spokesmen made such statements as, “It was a miserable damn performance.” I know that press relations is one of your biggest headaches.

The purpose of this letter is to explore with you what further steps can be taken in Saigon & Washington to improve the situation. I realize that a great deal has been done by you and your able PAO, John Mecklin, but more objective reporting in the U.S. press is of great importance. I know I don’t have to emphasize to you the need for support and understanding at home for the expensive, continuing and sometimes dangerous programs which we are carrying out in Viet-Nam.

I suggest we take a look at the problem under three heads: the handling of foreign journalists by the Vietnamese Government; critical statements made by American advisers in the heat of battle; and the amount of news that American officials themselves should make available to U.S. journalists in Viet-Nam.

As to Vietnamese briefings of the press and restrictions on the press, there does not seem to be much chance of an adequate improvement. You have done a great deal to encourage the Vietnamese to tell their story of their war and should continue to do so. However, since this is also a war which involves very important American policies, commitments and risk to American personnel, the American public has a right to the best possible American information even if this does offend Vietnamese sensitivities. It is for you to decide whether this should be explained to the Vietnamese or whether we should simply take the initiative to increase our briefings and contacts.

As to the U.S. military policy towards the press, I have noted the excellent guidance which General Harkins gave to American military advisers on press relations (Airgram 327, December 193 ).1 think the ground rules which he set forth should certainly help the American advisers in their contacts with the press. In order to further clarify this situation I would suggest that all American correspondents while on operations with United States forces might well be clearly identified by a name tag or by other means. I think the most damaging aspect of our press problem is alleged quotes of American military advisers criticizing their Vietnamese comrades in arms. Nothing could be more destructive of the cooperation we must have with the Vietnamese or more helpful to the Communist propagandists. I know this is difficult to lick. However, I was glad to learn that the new PIO, Colonel Bazil L. Baker, who will be coming to Saigon as Colonel Smith’s tour comes to an end, is highly regarded. I would recommend that more assistant PIO’s be sent to Saigon so that journalists may be given better service and coverage in their contacts with our military personnel in the field. Also, I would like to know what is done to explain to U.S. personnel the importance of not insulting the Vietnamese publicly. We are guests in their house and we have come to help them. I believe this simple point might be reiterated frequently to our official personnel in Viet-Nam.

Finally, I want to encourage you, General Harkins, and such other responsible members of your staff as you think appropriate, to increase your official and informal contacts with the American press. I know that you do this kind of thing very well and even if there is no hard news to give, regular contacts with you will enable the correspondents to vent some of their frustrations, which in itself will be helpful. If the official Americans can take the initiative in providing the press promptly with the facts and with sufficient perspective, we are likely to get a good result in the long run. However, I would caution against over-optimistic statements to the press and to public officials. This will be a long struggle, with many frustrations. (Senator Mansfield’s report4 will probably mention U.S. officials who believe we can win in a year or two, whereas it was originally announced as a long pull.)

In Washington I understand that action is being taken to see that returning officials, such as General Wheeler, are given the opportunity to tell the press and public how things are going in Viet-Nam. Obviously, one problem is that, although this is a Vietnamese war, the stories the U.S. press are interested in are largely about Americans. The success stories of Vietnamese operations have little U.S. news value, whereas the setbacks involving planes shot down with U.S. casualties, are headline material. Attempts will be made here to encourage experienced reporters to go to Viet-Nam and write stories about their overall observations. Through these feature articles, perhaps a better and more accurate understanding of the war can be obtained.

We have a mutual problem and I ask for your views and suggestions. We want to try to do all we can to help you from this end.5

Sincerely,

W. Averell Harriman6

1 Source: Department of State, Vietnam Working Group Files: Lot 67 D 54, PR-11 Press Relations. Secret. Drafted by Wood and Harriman.

2 See Document 1.

3 Not printed. (Department of State, Central Files, 751K.5/12-1962)

4 Senators Mike Mansfield, J. Caleb Boggs, Claiborne Pell, and Benjamin A. Smith visited Vietnam December 1-3, 1962, as part of a fact-finding trip undertaken at the request of President Kennedy. On December 18, Senator Mansfield submitted a report outlining his assessment of prospects for U.S. policy in Vietnam. For text of that report, see Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, vol. II, Document 330. The term Mansfield report was popularly applied, however, to the composite report on Southeast Asia which was transmitted by the four Senators involved in the trip to the Senate Foreign Relations Committee on February 25, 1963. Part 2 of that report dealt with Vietnam and differed somewhat in emphasis from the report submitted to the President in December. For text of the report to the Foreign Relations Committee, see Viet-Nam and Southeast Asia: Report of Senator Mike Mansfield, Senator J. Caleb Boggs, Senator Claiborne Pell, and Senator Benjamin A. Smith (Committee print, Senate Committee on Foreign Relations, 88th Cong., 1st sees.) For a summary of the report, see Document 42.

5 Nolting responded with a letter to Harriman on February 4 in which he stated that he shared the concern over the problem of adverse press coverage in Vietnam, and he proposed that he should be called back to the United States for several weeks of consultation, which he would devote largely to public relations work concerning Vietnam. (Department of State, Vietnam Working Group Files: Lot 67 D 54, PR-11 Press Relations)

6 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.

25. Memorandum From the Director of the Vietnam Working Group (Wood) to the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Harriman) 25. Memorandum From the Director of the Vietnam Working Group (Wood) to the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Harriman)1

Washington, January 31, 1963.

SUBJECT

Comments on Senator Mansfield Report2

The following comments are keyed to the pagination of the report:

Page 1: Our aid programs were “ill conceived and badly administered.”

Comment: Our old military aid program was ill-conceived since it was designed to repel overt invasion. This concept was changed in late 1959. Our old economic aid program was well-conceived but badly administered.

Page 2: American and Vietnamese officials speak of success in a year or two.

Comment: Only General Harkins says this and we have repeatedly suggested to the military that he be dissuaded from voicing such an estimate. The guerrilla wars in Greece, Malaya and the Philippines each lasted the better part of a decade. If we can win in five years we will be doing twice as well as was done in the others. The British knew they would win in Malaya in 1951 but did not achieve preponderant control for four years. We will be doing well if by the end of 1963 there are enough indications for us to say we can win.

Page 3: The growth of Viet Cong strength during 1962.

Comment: Our own strength also grew during 1962. The ratio of Vietnamese military and paramilitary to Viet Cong military and paramilitary (i.e., all forces of both sides) was 2-1/2 to 1 in our favor at the end of 1961. It has now grown to 3-1/2 to 1 in our favor, still a narrow margin in terms of the 10 to 1 or 20 to 1 cited as being necessary in the textbooks. However, our side has tremendous strength in men and equipment.

Page 3: Road travel and rice as indicators of improvement.

Comment: The change from a near panic shortage of rice to large exportable stocks during 1962 was more than an indicator. Perhaps the most important indicator was that the VC were unable to escalate the size and number of their attacks during 1962. If guerrilla forces are unable to steadily increase the size and number of their attacks they lose momentum. When a force which is inferior in size such as the VC once loses momentum it is extraordinarily difficult for it to regain momentum.

Page 4: The Viet Cong tactics can change.

Comment: Viet Cong tactics and our own change constantly. As guerrillas the Viet Cong strategy of living off the peasants while attempting to gain their support cannot change. They have no other major source of supply which is easily available and if their revolution is to succeed they must have peasant support. Strategic hamlets are designed to make the sea of Vietnamese peasants an inhospitable element for the VC fish.

Do the peasants support the Viet Cong merely out of fear or indifference?

Comment: No one really knows what the Vietnamese peasants think. However we believe it wise to assume that they will align themselves with whichever side appears stronger and more capable of benefiting them. This provides a reasonable basis for our programs.

Page 6: Can we win with Diem?

Comment: For a year we have increasingly shifted the emphasis of our programs to the province level.

There are really many wars in Viet-Nam, and we are fighting them at the local level as much as possible.

Comment: While Saigon does cause difficulties, Nhu’s emphasis on the strategic hamlet program has on balance been useful.

Page 7: The problem can be licked provided there is plenty of Vietnamese and American vigor and self-dedication (particularly Vietnamese).

Comment: Agreed.

Page 8: If present remedies are inadequate it is not recommended that we go to war ourselves.

Comment: Agree, but we should keep the Communists guessing on this one.

Page 9: Change in the situation caused by increased infiltration.

Comment: We have asked DOD and Saigon repeatedly for a contingency program to meet increased infiltration. General Wheeler should have comments.3

Page 9: A major increase in Chicom support.

Comment: This would be a major escalation which I doubt that the Chinese would risk. It would very seriously damage our prestige if we were to withdraw in the face of such an escalation

Is it in our interest to maintain a “quasi-permanent position of power on the Asian mainland?”

Comment: It is rather in our interest to prevent the Chicoms from achieving a quasi-permanent position of power in southeast Asia.

If a U.S. position of power in Asia is not essential, any improvement in Viet-Nam should be viewed as “strengthening our diplomatic hand.”

Comment: Success in the Malayan, Greek and Philippine wars was not achieved by diplomatic conferences. It was achieved rather when the Communist guerrillas decided that the power was against them, that they should lie low. Our objective in Viet-Nam should be similar, i.e., to help the Vietnamese Government to obtain a position where it is recognized as being predominantly sovereign over its own national territory (south of the 1 7th parallel).

Viet-Nam would be unlikely to survive another Geneva conference.

The same comment applies to the last paragraph on page 16. Our diplomacy cannot be “vigorous” unless based on a real position of strength.

1 Source: Department of State, Vietnam Working Group Files: Lot 67 D 54, LEG-Mansfield Report. Secret. Initialed by Wood.

2 Reference is to the December 18, 1962, report to the President; see footnote 4, Document 24.

3 See Document 26.

26. Report by an Investigative Team Headed by the Chief of Staff, United States Army (Wheeler), to the Joint Chiefs of Staff 26. Report by an Investigative Team Headed by the Chief of Staff, United States Army (Wheeler), to the Joint Chiefs of Staff1

Washington, January 1963.2

JCS TEAM REPORT ON SOUTH VIETNAM JANUARY 1963

I. General

1. At their meeting on 7 January 1963, the Joint Chiefs of Staff agreed that General Earle G. Wheeler, who had twice postponed a scheduled visit to Southeast Asia, should lead a team of senior Service and Joint Staff representatives to South Vietnam. The team was asked to provide the Joint Chiefs of Staff and the Secretary of Defense with an up-to-date assessment of the situation in South Vietnam. It was composed as follows:

Joint Chiefs of Staff Representative: General Earle G. Wheeler, USA Team Chief

Joint Staff Representative: Major General Victor H. Krulak,USMC

U.S. Army Representatives: Lieutenant General Theodore W. Parker
Lieutenant Colonel Bill G. Smith

U.S. Navy Representative: Rear Admiral Andrew McB. Jackson

U.S. Air Force Representatives: Lieutenant General David A. Burchinal
Major General William W. Momyer
Colonel Robert M. Levy
Lieutenant Colonel Harry M. Chapman

U.S. Marine Corps Representative: Brigadier General Norman J. Anderson

Assistants to the Chief of Staff: Colonel George I. Forsythe
Major Louie W. Odom
Sergeant Major George E. Loikow

2. The team’s mission was to obtain information for use by the Joint Chiefs of Staff in making an assessment of the counter-insurgency program in South Vietnam. The team was asked to form a military judgment as to the prospects for a successful conclusion of the conflict in a reasonable period of time. Specific appraisals were requested on the effectiveness of the present military program to meet United States objectives in South Vietnam, to include: the command and control arrangements of the United States and indigenous military forces in Southeast Asia; effectiveness of employment of United States and indigenous aviation; the quality and validity of military intelligence; and the readiness of plans to meet contingencies in the area. The team was to submit recommendations for modifications to our program which appeared to be desirable. Because the current counterinsurgency program in South Vietnam is largely the result of an appraisal made by General Maxwell D. Taylor in November 1961, the team used his report3 as a point of reference in reaching its conclusions.

3. Subsequent sections of this report cover the current situation in South Vietnam in terms of military, political, and economic factors, specific conclusions as to the current state of affairs, prospects for the future, and finally, recommended measures to improve the mutual efforts of the United States and the Government of Vietnam.

4. The map and table4 at the frontispiece detail the localities and activities visited by the team during its eight-day stay in South Vietnam. The team visited CINCPAC headquarters on both its outbound and inbound trips and stopped briefly in Okinawa to inquire into the capabilities of the United States Army, Ryukyus, to support our operations in South Vietnam.

II. The Situation

1. General Factors

The team approached its visit with the knowledge that the Vietnam war has been in progress for fifteen years, during which the insurgents have not allowed the young country the opportunity to pursue its nation-building program. Despite this, the government has managed to survive. The team’s assessment of progress achieved, and programs required, was made in light of the strong nationalistic convictions of the Government of Vietnam. These convictions limit the role of the United States to one of advice and persuasion, supplemented only by the metering effect of our material assistance. Finally, the team was mindful of the fact that, in a counterinsurgency campaign, there are few major judgments that are wholly military. Decisions, particularly in the campaign in Vietnam, usually embrace political, economic, and ideological factors as well. The team’s study and conclusions were influenced by this fact.

2. Military Factors

a. The Growth of U.S. Advisory Strength. In 1962, the number of U.S. advisors with the Vietnamese military was tripled, rising from 900 to over 3,000. At the beginning of the year, there were no advisors where the bulk of the fighting takes place, at the battalion level. At year’s end, there were over 400 serving with every battalion and comparable unit in the Vietnamese armed forces. Likewise, the number of U.S. advisors with province chiefs grew from two in January 1962, to over 100 in December 1962, while the system of intelligence advisors expanded nearly tenfold from 25, at the beginning of the year, to 220 in December. This across-the-board increase in numbers has begun to have a noticeable effect on the quality, uniformity, and coordination of military operations. Also, the high quality of U.S. advisory personnel was particularly noticeable. The “first team” is in the game in Vietnam.

b. Filling the Gaps. Responsive to another deficiency portrayed in the Taylor report, in 1962 the U.S. has moved supporting military formations to Vietnam to provide capabilities which the Vietnamese, themselves, could not quickly develop. Nearly three hundred aircraft in United States military units have been deployed. They include 148 transport helicopters, 11 armed helicopters, 81 fixed-wing transport aircraft, 13 fighter bombers, 9 light bombers, 4 reconnaissance fighters, and 37 liaison aircraft. Additionally, we provided, and are now operating, an urgently needed backbone communications system which has drawn together the geographic extremes of the country. To assist the Vietnamese in doing something far beyond their own capabilities, we installed an effective electronic detection system that is now capable of locating and following the movements of a large number of the more active Viet Cong radio transmitters. We have created an effective but austere logistic base to support all of these United States gap-filling efforts and to avoid burdening the overloaded logistic system of the Vietnamese armed forces.

c. Growth of the Vietnamese Military Capability. (1) A comparison of the current strength of the Vietnamese armed forces with that of a year ago is:

Army Navy AF Marines Civil Guard Self Defense Corps

31 Dec 1961 167,971 4,426 5,441 3,123 67,163 56,426

15 Dec 1962 196,357 6,595 5,817 5,281 75,909 95,828

(2) More important than these strength increases is the improved state of training of the Government of Vietnam armed forces. Direct United States training efforts have been felt in all of the regular armed forces. Additionally, United States’ operated training centers have given individual training to over 90,000 members of the Civil Guard and the Self Defense Corps. Training, much of it technical in nature, has had to take place concurrently with the absorption of large quantities of equipment, including, for example, 55 aircraft, 27 naval craft, 474 personnel carriers, 1,100 tactical radios, and 38,000 assorted infantry weapons. Additionally, the process of expansion and training was conducted in a combat environment, where the demands of war often took priority over training requirements. In assessing the over-all strength of the Vietnamese armed forces, it is the team’s opinion that current personnel strengths, modified only by minor increases which have been recommended by the Assistance Command, are adequate to meet the current level of Viet Cong effort. Our aim for the future should be focused on improving the quality of existing forces.

(3) Very recently, a Joint Operations Center (JOC) was established under the Joint General Staff. The JOC consists of staff officers from the Vietnamese Army, Navy, and Air Force. In addition, U.S. Army and Air Force officer advisors are assigned to the JOC to provide advice and assistance on the planning and on the employment of air, ground, and naval forces. The JOC provided a composite display of military activities in progress throughout South Vietnam, and when completed, will provide a focal point for top level coordination of all military planning and operations at any given time.

(4) The Army. Built around nine light divisions and several separate battalions, the Army tended in the early months of 1962 to employ conventional tactics involving large area sweeps by division-size units. These operations were often inadequately planned, awkwardly executed and usually unproductive. 1962 showed progress in overcoming this basic weakness. Planning is now far better coordinated. Commanders now consult their United States advisors and give greater consideration to the influence of supporting air operations. The great proportion of operations now take place at the lower levels, some 26% of which were of company size and 58% of platoon size during the year. By the same token, progress has been made during the past year in freeing the regular units to take the field to attack and pursue the Viet Cong. Army units have been replaced with Self Defense Corps and Civil Guard personnel in many static tasks. In the average division, six or seven of the nine battalions are usually free to conduct some 400 platoon and company-size offensive operations monthly. United States advisors to Vietnamese Army units, at every level, encourage their counterparts to be relentless in this effort.

(5) The Air Force. (a) The small Vietnamese Air Force is enthusiastic and is becoming increasingly competent, although still immature and limited by a pilot shortage. Comprising two fighter squadrons, one transport squadron, two helicopter and three liaison squadrons, it provides escort, visual reconnaissance, strike, and close air support of ground operations in a satisfactory manner. Bombing and strafing approach the accuracy and effect of highly-trained United States units. However, without the currently planned augmentation of United States tactical aviation units, it would not be possible for the Vietnamese Air Force to meet the daily sortie demands required by the current and contemplated tempo of operations. It will be October 1964 before the pilot training program will match the demands of operational requirements.

(b) To facilitate the control and employment of all Vietnamese Air Force and U.S. Air Force air operations in South Vietnam, a Joint Air Operations Center QAOC) has been established. The center provides the means by which the air commanders can allocate and control the available tactical air effort to maximum advantage. Subordinate facilities are established and planned to facilitate air and ground coordination at lower echelons.

(6) The Navy and Marines. Comprised of about 6,000 men, the Navy is divided into a Sea Force, a River Force, and a Junk Force. It has grown rapidly in efficiency in recent months. It is capable of limited amphibious operations, coastal and river patrols, and provision of some logistic support of ground forces. The Marine Corps, numbering 5,000 men, and organized as a brigade of four battalions, has now completed basic training in both helicopter and landing craft amphibious operations. In early January, a landing of two battalions of Marines in the Ca Mau Peninsula was skillfully executed, and shows a capability for greatly expanded amphibious activity in the Delta area.

(7) The Civil Guard and the Self Defense Corps. These two paramilitary forces, designed respectively to provide regional security at the province and district levels, matured greatly in 1962. The Civil Guard increased in size from 65,000 to 76,000 during the year, while the Self Defense Corps grew from 49,000 to 80,000 men. Far more important than their growth has been the magnitude and quality of their training by United States advisors. Over 30,000 Civil Guardsmen have undergone a three-month training course, while 43,000 members of the Self Defense Corps have had six weeks of United States supervised training. Their growing role in the security of the land testifies to the value of the program. However, the team noted with sympathy General Harkins’ generally unsuccessful efforts to persuade the Vietnamese government to abandon their concept of holding many of the Self Defense Corps in small static posts. This inheritance from the French provides tempting, lucrative targets for the Viet Cong. When overrun, they represent a source of weapons, ammunition, and food.

(8) Leadership. One area in which training of the Vietnamese armed forces is particularly important is leadership. They have only about 60% of their required noncommissioned officers, and they are also short junior officers. There are some senior officers, serving at division and higher echelons, whose false pride and unwillingness to acknowledge ignorance have impaired their effectiveness. All of these factors manifest themselves on the battlefield, and their elimination is a prime objective of the United States military advisory and training effort.

(9) Intelligence. (a) In all of the fields of endeavor in South Vietnam, development of an effective intelligence system stands near the top in terms of progress achieved during 1962. Starting from an initial zero, the United States intelligence advisory program has, in a single year, grown into a reasonably effective mechanism. Its counterpart Vietnamese military intelligence program has moved decisively, although not nearly so far, in the direction of an efficient, organized system. In 1962, United States intelligence advisors have been accepted at each level of Vietnamese military command, from the Joint General Staff down to the division. In addition, United States intelligence advisors are serving at regiment and battalion level. These personnel, provided with their own communication system, are developing the capability to procure information and transmit it rapidly. In addition to providing timely information, the United States effort has the ancillary effect of energizing the Vietnamese intelligence system to a higher level of performance. In the past year, the Vietnamese have also developed a basically sound military intelligence organization which suffers only from technical inexperience. A former problem preventing the easy flow of information up through the civil and military channels has been largely solved by making the sector (military) and province (civil) leaders one and the same man in all but three of the forty-one provinces.

(b) Deficiencies in the Vietnamese intelligence operation include slowness in transmission of information, weaknesses in interrogation of prisoners, and the lack of skill among personnel at the lowest levels. On the United States side, the weakness lies mainly in linguistic proficiency. These are defects which time should correct.

(c) There can be no more profound index to the progress of the battle in Vietnam than the measure of changes in the level and quality of information coming to the Vietnamese forces. On the basis of this very respectable measurement, the Government of Vietnam is making steady and favorable progress. Every Vietnamese corps commander, and many United States advisors, attest to a growth in confidence in the government which the common people are now demonstrating by providing useful intelligence. Successful operations in each corps tactical area have recently been accomplished. Many were based upon information supplied by the inhabitants, who probably did so only because of a conviction that the government is going to triumph.

This favorable trend is self-regenerative. The more good intelligence that is forthcoming, the greater the number of successful operations that can be undertaken. These successes, in turn, provide for more tranquillity and confidence in the countryside, with the result that there is still greater willingness on the part of the people to support the government cause with information. A case in point is Plei Mrong, a Montagnard training camp in the highlands near the Cambodian border. It is located in an area which has been dominated by the Viet Cong for fifteen years. Here, an unsuccessful effort on the part of the Viet Cong to destroy the training camp resulted immediately in a change in attitude on the part of the local residents, many of whom began to volunteer useful information on Viet Cong sanctuaries and personalities. This information, in turn, has resulted in the capture of more Viet Cong, and this has had a further impact on the people, who have responded with still more information.

This favorable note is being sounded with growing resonance across the country, by Vietnamese military commanders, provincial administrators, and, most objectively, by United States advisors at every high level. The intelligence tide has begun to run toward the government.

(d) As the volume of information has grown, there have developed several basic intelligence indications which are now serving to influence the strategic and tactical thinking of the Vietnamese and their United States advisors. By no means are all of these indications favorable. Among the adverse indications, the principal ones are the continuity of Viet Cong strength, the growth in quantity of Chinese Communist weapons appearing in enemy hands, and the increased size and sophistication of the Viet Cong communications system. Taking the indications in order, the first, and perhaps most disquieting, is the apparent ability of the Viet Cong to maintain their strength, or even increase it slightly, in the face of growing pressure by the government. It cannot be ignored that the Vietnamese intelligence system, having improved greatly, is doubtless uncovering Viet Cong elements which have been in the country all the time. Giving generous discount to this fact, there still is basis for concluding that the conscription base for Viet Cong rank and file is still substantial, particularly in the Delta, and that the infusion of cadres of leaders and technicians, from outside the country, continues at a significant rate.

The same factor of improved intelligence resources applies to the growth in quantities of Communist Chinese material in the battle area. This cannot be permitted to obscure the fact that heavy Chinese infantry weapons, such as 57 millimeter recoilless rifles and associated ammunition, have recently been captured as far south as the Delta area.

Our improved communication detection system now reveals the existence of some 224 active communist radios in South Vietnam, where a year ago only 60 had been located. While there may not be as many more radios as the improved detection facilities indicate, there is no question but that the communist systems have improved, and we know that their cryptographic arrangements have grown more sophisticated.

These indications show that the communists are engaged in a slow, though perceptible, increase in effort. This suggests that the headquarters in Hanoi is not yet persuaded that the Americans are any different from the French; and that if they will but respond to our efforts with a determined reaction from outside the official battle areas, we will ultimately lose our confidence and our resolution.

(e) There are intelligence indicators which fall on the favorable side. The most significant relate to deteriorations in the physical and moral condition of the Viet Cong. Reports, in growing numbers, reflect shortages of food, and an increased repugnance of the Vietnamese people to Viet Cong depredations upon their food stocks, and extortion of their property and money. These are accounted as one of the causes for the migration of some 145,000 Montagnards away from the Viet Cong into safer areas. Likewise, reports emphasize the shortage of medical supplies, and Viet Cong attacks on Vietnamese outposts are frequently launched for the express purpose of acquiring medicines. Hunger, sickness, and lack of munitions have had a visible effect in terms of Viet Cong defections, which have grown steadily during the year from about 75 per month in January to a peak of 215 in December. The level of Viet Cong offensive activity has diminished in a degree consistent with the foregoing impediments. From a peak of almost 1,900 incidents in March 1962, the intensity of the insurgent effort has dropped to 1,340 incidents in December 1962. In spite of this, Viet Cong personnel losses grew steadily through 1962, from an initial level of 1,900 per month to 2,750 in the month of December.

(f) On balance, the team concluded that the intelligence picture is much better than it was a year ago. A stronger intelligence organization; more, better and more timely information; a growth in the popular intelligence base; and a series of interlocking intelligence indicators portray an upward trend in the conduct of the war. A sobering counterpoise is the strong evidence of effective external support for the insurgency, with its consequent implications in terms of protraction of the conflict.

(10) The Military-Economic-Political Relationship. Although President Diem is fully aware of the interlocking nature of these elements, many of his subordinates are not. Therefore, all programs often do not advance abreast. Here, too, United States military and civilian advice has shown results during the past year. In clear-and-hold operations, efforts are now made to have seed and fertilizer readily at hand to permit the farmers to exploit their liberated fields. Strategic hamlets are encouraged to elect their own hamlet chief, thus to remove a common Viet Cong propaganda target. Schools are now being run for civil administrators, to help raise the standards of province, district, village, and hamlet government. A village and hamlet radio system has been installed for intelligence, administrative and emergency warning purposes. These developments mark a small beginning in weaving the military solution into the nap of the politico-economic situation. The team sees this as the longest-term task of all. It is a task which gives rise to the greatest apprehension, since the liberated farmer is still encumbered with countless restrictions. Until he is freed from these, the Viet Cong will continue to have volunteers from a disgruntled fringe of the society.

3. Political and Economic Factors

a. Political Factors. (1) The team was impressed with the United States Country Team in South Vietnam. Under the leadership of Ambassador Nolting, the work of the member agencies of the country team has been carefully integrated to optimize the United States effort. The JCS team believes that the military measures being taken in South Vietnam must continue to be considered as necessary, principally to establish conditions favorable for political and economic growth. The basic problem now is to restore law and order, particularly in the rural areas, so that measures for the development of political and economic strength can take hold. Historically, the central government in Vietnam has not reached down and made itself felt to the peasant. Likewise, the peasant has not truly identified himself, his activities, or his future with his government, nor has he thought in terms of national political issues, as we know them. The team found that this situation is slowly beginning to change. Now the government is beginning to reach the people, and the people are beginning to reach for the government.

(2) The strategic hamlet program is perhaps the greatest single case for this encouraging development. It is a program aimed directly at the people that not only provides them with an elementary system of defense against, and isolation from, the Viet Cong, but also is the vehicle by which the Government of Vietnam can carry forward a political, economic, and social revolution. More than 4,000 strategic hamlets have been completed and another 2,000 of the 8,000 programmed will soon be completed. In 1962, this program was instrumental in bringing an additional 500,000 people under the control of the government.

(3) To date, elections have been held in more than a thousand hamlets. While the government attempts to insure that candidates for office are not Viet Cong members or sympathizers, the elections appear to be conducted in a democratic manner. Following the election of a hamlet chief and a hamlet council, the new officials, themselves, decide on projects for the improvement of the well-being and living conditions of the people. It is through this “rice roots” program that the framework for a democratic political process is being developed. It is the intention of the government to extend this process from the hamlets and villages up through the districts and provinces, whose officials are now appointed by the central government. The United States advisory effort, both military and civilian, is being extended to the province level to assist in the development of civic action and economic development programs. Although this is a slow process, the team believes that democracy cannot be legislated in South Vietnam, and that the current political development program will move forward in direct ratio to the results achieved in improving the living conditions and satisfying the basic aspirations of the people.

(4) Another noteworthy development is the government’s progress toward winning over the Montagnards. Long ignored, and often exploited by the central government, a campaign has been undertaken to protect these primitive hill people from Viet Cong exploitation. Over 145,000 of these people have willingly left their natural habitat to seek training by, and support of, the government. They represent an important plus for the Government of Vietnam, both politically and militarily. They are tough and cunning fighters who are completely at home in the rugged mountain terrain through which the principal Viet Cong infiltration routes pass.

b. Economic Factors. (1) The increased economic activity throughout the country, particularly on the lower levels, provides an indicator of growing confidence in the government and in the eventual outcome of the struggle with the Viet Cong. The number of applications for licenses to start new businesses is increasing; goods and food are moving-although with some difficulty-by road and water; and trade with the Montagnards is increasing. Six hundred million piasters were loaned to farmers and fishermen for fertilizer and for purchasing fishing boats and equipment. These loans are to be repaid on the installment plan and the capital is to be reinvested.

(2) Education in rural areas has been expanded greatly. Several new United States-financed technical and teacher training schools have been opened. Training sessions were completed for 120 provincial education chiefs, school inspectors and school principals. During 1963, nearly 8,000 new teachers will be trained, and classrooms, textbooks, and supplies for 150,000 primary school students will be provided. This will add to the nearly threefold growth in primary school population already experienced since 1955. Expansion of intermediate and university student population has been fivefold since 1955 and is programmed to continue in 1963. In addition, over 7,000 students are being taught the English language by the military members of the Military Assistance Advisory Group.

(3) The team believes that the current educational and economic aid efforts will have a far-reaching impact on the economic development of South Vietnam. However, the team believes the achievement of a viable economy is still remote.

III. The National Campaign Plan

1. As a result of the extensive United States and South Vietnam effort of the past year, described in preceding paragraphs, the South Vietnam armed forces are now attaining a position of strength, capability, and disposition which should enable them to assume a greater initiative than they have in the past.

2. The broad outline of this action is known as the “National Campaign Plan,” sometimes erroneously referred to as “Operation Explosion.” The National Campaign Plan is a concept of coordinated political, economic, and military operations to be undertaken at an accelerated pace by each corps, division, and sector commander in his own area. In fact, the operations have already begun.

3. There are four basic strategies involved in the National Campaign Plan:5 a. To seek out and destroy Viet Cong strongholds.

b. To clear and hold areas heretofore dominated by the Viet Cong.

c. To build strategic hamlets in these areas and protect them from Viet Cong attack.

d. to gain and hold the plateau and mountain areas and effect a degree of border control with the tribesmen (chiefly Montagnards).

4. Operations under the National Campaign Plan are expected to result in an ever-increasing measure of control by the Government of Vietnam over its people and its territory. Since the basic concept is one of many small operations, with decentralized control, activity has been increasing in those areas where trained units have been available and where the initiative of local commanders has been most pronounced. The tempo of small scale operations has now reached 450 per month. This tempo should increase substantially in the months ahead, as the strength of South Vietnam, developed over the past year, makes itself felt. However, the successful completion of the strategies listed will take considerable time and will demand much in resolution and perseverance. There appears to be no quick or easy solution.

4. [sic] Commander, United States Military Assistance Command, Vietnam, has developed a comprehensive plan6 designed to prepare the armed forces of South Vietnam to exercise control of their territory, without our help, by the end of calendar year 1965. It involves a concurrent phase-out of United States support personnel, leaving a Military Assistance Advisory Group of a strength of about 1,600 personnel. This comprehensive plan has been reviewed by the Commander in Chief, Pacific, and was submitted on 25 January 1963 to the Joint Chiefs of Staff for their consideration. As it finally evolves, this plan will provide general guidance for United States force requirements, Military Assistance Program support (which has been developed in coordination with the five-year Military Assistance Program), and Military Assistance Advisory Group personnel requirements over the next three years.

IV. Areas Where Improvement Can Be Made

1. Command Control of the United States Effort in South Vietnam

a. A difficult problem, at Saigon level, for over-all control and correlation of the United States military effort stems from the separate organization and operation of the Military Assistance Advisory Group, which uses many of the same military personnel in the field as are used in combat planning and operations monitored by the Military Assistance Command Vietnam staff. The team considers that improvement may be realized by more closely interrelating the military assistance functions with the appropriate Military Advisory Command Vietnam staff functions. This could be achieved without prejudice to the planned phase-out of Military Assistance Command Vietnam and the planned retention of the Military Assistance Advisory Group.

b. It may be both possible and desirable, within available resources, to establish Army and Navy components of Military Assistance Command Vietnam, deriving benefit from the clear channels of command such an organization would afford. The Commander, 2d United States Air Division, functions as the air component commander of Military Assistance Command Vietnam. As such, the Air Force is the only Service with an organization and commander under Military Assistance Command Vietnam that actually functions as a component command. In this context, Military Assistance Command Vietnam would become in actuality a subordinate unified command of Commander in Chief Pacific rather than a specially tailored organization with a number of subordinate service activities reporting directly to the headquarters. In any event, composition of the Military Assistance Command Vietnam staff should be reviewed in the light of increasing air and naval activity and in recognition of the growing importance of and requirement for air and sea logistics lift.

c. The potential of the Joint Air Operations Center (JAOC) should be more fully exploited. It is important that the JAOC be cognizant of all air activities planned or in progress in South Vietnam. Significant United States air elements of the Army, Marines and the Air Force are making up for a current deficit in the Vietnamese Air Force capability. In the interests of efficient use of these air resources, they should be responsive to shifting between and among the corps areas to meet peak combat and other air support requirements, and to take maximum advantage of good weather areas. The JAOC is an excellent means for Commander United States Military Assistance Command Vietnam, through his Air Component Commander, to exert maximum influence on tactical air planning and in the appropriate allocation of tactical air assets to the growing air combat and tactical air support tasks. Similarly, the JAOC has the potential to assist in the task of bringing logistic airlift resources in South Vietnam to bear on the air logistics problem, which is assuming increasing proportions and importance. The team agrees that the use of the JAOC for these purposes does not imply centralized control of all aviation assets in South Vietnam, certain of which will continue to be more appropriately controlled at lower organizational levels of the army and air structures.

d. The transfer of responsibility for the numerous civilian irregular groups [less than 1 line not declassified] to the U.S. military is proceeding. The team noted, however, that considerable numbers of irregulars are now being exempted from this transfer, in terms which appear to contravene the basic concept of establishing the entire project under the military, except for elements wholly involved in secret intelligence.

2. Command and Control Problems within the Vietnamese Armed Forces

Though generally recognized, these problems persist: a. A tendency to hold planning very closely within the armed forces, ostensibly for security purposes, inhibits adequate and concurrent air support planning. This practice also precludes realizing such pre-operations advantages from the air elements as photo, weather and visual reconnaissance and observation.

b. Some Vietnamese Army battalions are still immobilized by allocation to local security tasks rather than to mobile employment against the enemy. This is a constantly improving situation, but requires continuing emphasis.

c. The Joint Operations Center and the Joint Air Operations Center are in their early formative states. Constant emphasis and daily work with the Vietnamese armed forces, particularly the Army and the Air force, are required in order that these agencies develop and mature as quickly and soundly as possible.

d. The rank and grade structures of the Vietnam Air Force and Vietnam Navy are significantly lower than in the Vietnam Army. Although much smaller, these services have an important role to play and they must be accorded a greater part in military planning and decisions.

3. Nature of the Relationship between United States and Government of Vietnam Authorities

a. An important and interesting aspect of relationships between the American military and the leadership of the Vietnamese Government became apparent in the course of calls made by General Wheeler. Accompanied by General Harkins, he called on Minister of Defense Thuan and President Diem. The attitude of Minister Thuan toward General Harkins is completely open, frank and friendly. The two confer on matters of organization, operations and assignment of personnel in the most free and easy fashion. General Harkins has no hesitancy in pointing out mistakes in military operations to Minister Thuan, and he in turn receives these comments with equanimity and assurances that he will look into, and correct, mistakes. General Harkins told General Wheeler privately that Minister Thuan had proved that he keeps his promises. General Harkins has a great influence upon the assignments of senior Vietnamese officers. While this influence is not advertised (and General Harkins would prefer that it not be known), nevertheless, it is known, and adds to the prestige and influence of American officers in their advisory role.

b. The conference with President Diem made it apparent that he, also, likes and trusts General Harkins. Moreover, General Harkins, as with Minister Thuan, has no hesitancy in pressing the President to carry out programs which he considers to be important to the military effort. All-in-all, this attitude at the very top of the government represents a vast change from the aloofness and suspicion with which American advisors were received by senior Vietnam officials a year ago.

c. United States officials, military and civilian, are not in a position to command, control or direct Government of Vietnam military, economic or political activities, nor do they desire such added responsibility. They must, therefore, be in a strong position to influence Government of Vietnam activity along the desired lines and thus achieve the desired objectives. Fortunately, excellent relations exist between United States and Government of Vietnam authorities in all major fields of joint endeavor and United States advice is generally, though not always, accepted. The team feels these relationships will continue to strengthen and United States advice will be increasingly followed as Government of Vietnam confidence in themselves and their advisors continues to grow.

4. Airlift and Air Logistics

a. There is a significant airlift currently available in South Vietnam. Thus far it has readily met all requirements levied against it. Expanded operations visualized in the National Campaign Plan and the number and extent of “special situations” requiring air logistic support will generate a wide variety of additional airlift requirements. Until road and rail nets can be secured and improved, major reliance for logistic support and transport of personnel will continue to be placed in the airlift forces. The number and types of fixed and rotary wing aircraft available, and the magnitude of the air logistic effort currently forecast, merit special attention.

b. The team has asked General Harkins for his views on the desirability of augmenting his headquarters with a small group of officer’s,-experts in air logistics and air transportation, to assist him in coping with the anticipated air movement problem.

5. Rules of Engagement

a. An Army aviation unit was deployed to South Vietnam by the Joint Chiefs of Staff to test the applicability and effectiveness of the armed helicopter, in an escort role, under combat conditions as they exist in South Vietnam. The principal armament of this unit consists of two fixed, forward-firing, machine guns and two 2.75 rocket pods. The Joint Chiefs of Staff-established rules of engagement state that the aircraft carry United States markings; be flown by United States crews; have a Government of Vietnam observer or crew member aboard on all flights; and that fire delivered be considered defensive in nature.

b. The team learned that Commander in Chief Pacific and Commander United States Military Assistance Command Vietnam have placed additional restrictions upon rules of engagement for the armed helicopters. They require that the aircraft must be fired upon before they may engage a target, even when an enemy target is clearly identified.

c. Under these rules, helicopter pilots are placed in the position of being unable to attack clearly identified Viet Cong targets of opportunity, in a combat situation, unless first fired upon. To some degree, this places United States lives and equipment at risk unnecessarily and gives the enemy an advantageous option. The United States Air Force “Farmgate” units in South Vietnam are not faced with these specific restrictions. They can attack identified Viet Cong targets provided that: a Vietnam Air Force observer is aboard; the Vietnam Air Force does not have the capability to engage the target, the aircraft carry Vietnam Air Force markings and the targets are designated by the Vietnamese.

d. The team believes that Commander in Chief Pacific should reconsider the present restrictions on the rules of engagement pertaining to armed helicopters in South Vietnam to allow these aircraft to engage clearly identified Viet Cong targets which may emerge as targets of opportunity during combat operations.

7. Press Relations

a. The mutual distrust and dislike between the Diem government and the foreign press, particularly United States press representatives, has created serious public relations problems which impact directly on the war effort both in the United States and in Vietnam. Press representatives charge the Government of Vietnam with repressing the freedom of the press (two American newsmen were expelled from Vietnam), being unduly secretive, issuing deliberately erroneous news bulletins, and attempting to use the press as involuntary propaganda tools. The press attitude is summed up this way: “The Western press refuses to submit to such treatment.”

b. The Government of Vietnam regards the foreign press as untrustworthy, prone to publish secret and false information derived from private sources and biased to the extent that the press writes up only the bad and not the good aspects of events in South Vietnam. A revealing nuance of the Government of Vietnam press feud was communicated to General Wheeler by a first-hand source. Madame Nhu, wife of the brother and principal advisor to President Diem, and an important figure in her own right, deeply resents the press stories of the bombing of the President’s palace during which she and her children were in grave danger of death. She states that the stories revealed an “ill-concealed regret” that the bombing failed in its objective.

c. While the truth of these countercharges probably lies, as usual, somewhere between the extremes of the allegations of the two parties, the fact remains that the situation is serious, because the continuing bad press has colored public attitudes both in the United States and Vietnam. The unfortunate aftermath of reports of the fight at Ap Bac on 2 January 19637 is a prime instance of the harm being done to the war effort. Press members admit that they were appalled at the flood of editorial punditry and cries of doom elicited by the first incomplete accounts of the clash. They insist defensively, and contrary to the facts, that the battle was a defeat and that the stories were derived from United States sources. The latter is true, but only to the extent that the stories were based on ill-considered statements made at a time of high excitement and frustration by a few American officers.

d. Nevertheless, great harm has been done. Public and Congressional opinion in the United States has been influenced toward thinking that the war effort in Vietnam is misguided, lacking in drive, and flouts the counsel of United States advisors. Doubts have been raised as to the courage, the training, the determination and dedication of the Vietnamese armed forces. In Vietnam the backlash of these reports, both in governmental and military circles, is apparent. The Vietnamese resent statements in the American press of such a derogatory nature to their personal characteristics and military habits and objectives. Moreover, relations between the United States diplomatic and military representatives, on the one hand, and the press representatives on the other, is somewhat strained.

e. Officials at the United States Embassy and within the United States Advisory Group have long been aware of this unfortunate atmosphere and have attempted to overcome it by press briefings given by the Public Information Officer of United States Military Assistance Command Vietnam. General Harkins himself is readily available to the press at almost any time. However, it is considered that further efforts must be made, both in Vietnam and the United States, if the current course of events is to be reversed.

8.Infiltration

a. Almost every judgement reached by the team had to be accompanied by the reservation that it had validity only under the current level of Viet Cong effort. The enemy, however, has both resources and a latitude of choice, and could materially increase the level of his effort if he chose.

b. External influence on the situation is considerable. Facts in the hands of the Advisory Command characterize this infiltration as substantial, at least in terms of quality. Entrance is gained through four general routes. Cadre personnel (estimated as an average of 500 per month for the past few months) enter from North Vietnam or Laos near the 17th parallel, and move southward in stages through the Annamite Chain of mountains, utilizing a well developed underground railway. Alternatively, some personnel, as well as equipment, move down the Ho Chi Minh trail through Laos, some entering South Vietnam at the waist of the country, and some moving farther south to enter via Cambodia. Some supplies enter by sea, either across the Gulf of Siam from Cambodia, or by coastwise junk from North Vietnam. In terms of magnitude it is noted that some 3000 junks were inspected by the Vietnamese Navy during the past year, of which number 160 were proved to harbor Viet Cong. Finally, it is accepted by the Advisory Command that there is a movement across the border of selected commercial items, in undetermined quantity, purchased on the open market in Cambodia.

c. Without the sophisticated infusions of weapons, code books, medicines, fuzes, leaders and technicians, it is certain that the lot of the Viet Cong would be much harder. But to cauterize the 900 miles of border and 1500 miles of coastline presents a problem which even the most dynamic of efforts on the part of the Vietnamese will not greatly diminish. It is plain that, apart from the task of gaining the respect of the people, this matter of external assistance for the Viet Cong is the greatest problem facing the Vietnamese, and it must be solved by methods more practicable than surveillance of the country’s borders.

V. Conclusions

1. a. The situation in South Vietnam has been reoriented, in the space of a year and a half, from a circumstance of near desperation to a condition where victory is now a hopeful prospect. There are numerous options of support and involvement available to the United States. They range from complete disengagement to overt commitment of United States forces with a concomitant demand on our part for full command authority over the Vietnamese. The first extreme is unacceptable. It sacrifices all that has been gained, and is tantamount to relinquishment of our position in Asia. The second is impracticable in terms of what the Vietnamese would accept, and it is undesirable from our viewpoint in that it would tend to make us responsible for every misadventure in the conflict. Intermediate to these extremes is the course of augmenting, greatly, our aid and advice to the Vietnamese; a program which could only be justified if there were major benefits clearly promised. This is not the case; there are no areas of assistance which are deficient in a quantum degree. This leads to the conclusion that the current support program in Vietnam is adequate, and should be retained with only minor alterations as may be recommended by the Advisory Command. This view derives from the conviction that we are winning slowly in the present thrust, and that there is no compelling reason to change.

b. At the same time, it is not realistic to ignore the fact that we have not given Ho Chi Minh any evidence that we are prepared to call him to account for helping to keep the insurgency in South Vietnam alive, and that we should do something to make the North Vietnamese bleed. Here again, the opportunities cover the full spectrum, from overt, pre-emptive attack by United States forces of targets in North Vietnam, to being content with the minor intelligence and sabotage forays [1 line not declassified]. The former is a grave step, embodying a far-reaching national decision which might have serious implications elsewhere. The latter offers essentially no promise of influencing the progress of the war. This leaves the more reasonable course of authorizing the Assistance Command to build up a much stronger unconventional warfare capability in the Vietnamese military, and then directing it in a coordinated program of sabotage, destruction, propaganda, and subversive missions against North Vietnam. To do this has the virtue of putting organized pressure on the North Vietnamese on a basis which keeps the United States wholly in the background while at the same time conducting the anti-North Vietnam campaign as a powerful military endeavor rather than as an ancillary [1 line not declassified].

2. Turning to the specific areas which the Joint Chiefs of Staff directed be addressed, the team reached the following conclusions: a. The National Campaign Plan is a logical outgrowth of the marshalling process which has taken place in response to the Taylor report. It should not create requirements for great increases in United States support and offers reasonable prospects for improving greatly the military situation. As such, it deserves to be supported.

b. Command and control, within the United States structure, embodies few problems, none of which is fundamental and all of which can be solved locally. The team would prefer to see the Military Assistance Advisory Group absorbed into the Assistance Command and sees some virtue in the formal designation of the Assistance Command as a formalized subordinate Unified Command. The team learned, however, that General Harkins and Admiral Felt are opposed to one or the other of these moves. The team considers that their views in both areas should prevail.

c. The employment of air assets absorbed much of the team’s time. Its conclusion, and that of Generals Harkins and Anthis is that the basic relationships are satisfactory, but that there are weaknesses in the joint planning for supporting air operations, reporting on helicopter movements, and in logistic airlift operations. A team of four experts has been offered to General Harkins to assist in solving the problem of logistic airlift operations. The problems of planning and reporting are being solved locally.

d. Intelligence. A continuous improvement in the areas of intelligence reporting, communications, interrogation, and basic reliability of contacts with the civilian society was noted. The team concluded that no change is indicated in the thrust of intelligence operations.

e. Contingency planning, conducted both by CINCPAC and the Assistance Command, gave evidence of adequacy and responsiveness to the contingencies which might arise.

3. The team reached other conclusions, in areas not specifically delineated by the Joint Chiefs of Staff, as follows: a. Political restrictions add to the complexity of achieving the desired military objectives in South Vietnam. The privileged sanctuary in Laos and Cambodia for Viet Cong concentration and infiltration, and restrictions on overflights of Laos and North Vietnam, tend to restrict the freedom of military action of the Government of Vietnam and ourselves. These restrictions make victory more remote.

b. South Vietnam is, in large measure, a special situation. Generalizations affecting United States doctrine, concepts, equipage and training must be viewed conservatively and without predisposition or preconception. There needs to be a full awareness that the special environment may respond better to new techniques and different applications, or to old techniques and applications carefully and consciously adapted to the problem rather than to the textbook solution.

c. Vietnam is at the end of a long logistics pipeline. The United States military structure there should be held to its operational essentials and not become encumbered with marginally productive special interest activities. With respect specifically to research, development, test and evaluation, the team concludes that there may be too many organizations, equipment, and projects in Vietnam now. All of these activities require overhead and supporting structures and are competing for resources that should be directed to producing combat power. All such activities should be brought completely under the authority of the Assistance Command, who should appraise them under the objective criterion of whether or not they contribute directly and significantly to the conflict. This appraisal should not be prejudiced by the origin of the project or function.

d. The schism between the United States press and the Government of Vietnam is more than a simple lack of communications. To span the gap requires great effort and, on our side, much patience. An objective, on the-spot appraisal of the war by mature, responsible newsmen is gravely needed as a counter to the sometimes frustrated reporting of the resident correspondents.

e. Finally, the performance of United States military personnel in South Vietnam, whatever their task, is of a uniformly high quality. The United States image is being steadily enhanced by their actions, and the experience they are receiving is of great value.

VI. Recommendations

1. The team recommends that we: a. Maintain the current general level of military support for the Government of south Vietnam.

b. Accept the Advisory Command’s Comprehensive Three Year Plan for South Vietnam (19 January 1963) as a generally sound basis for planning the phase-out of United States support. In this connection, the Advisory Command’s requests for additional support should be considered in a favorable light, on a case-by-case basis.

c. Re-evaluate the situation in South Vietnam semi-annually and make alterations in the Comprehensive Plan as indicated by the reassessment.

d. Request the Advisory Command to present its view on an optimum command arrangement, designed to bring under most effective control all of the United States military elements functioning in South Vietnam.

e. Direct that all research, development, test, and evaluation be brought directly under the Advisory Command and that it review every United States endeavor in South Vietnam in terms of its usefulness to the prosecution of the war, recommending the termination of projects or the return to the United States of personnel where they do not meet this criterion.

f. Procure authority for air and ground reconnaissance missions in Laos.

g. Undertake a press orientation program embodying a series of sponsored visits to Vietnam by mature and responsible news correspondents and executives.

h. Intensify the unconventional warfare training of the Vietnamese military forces and encourage their execution of raids and sabotage missions in North Vietnam, coordinated with other military operations. The purpose of this effort is to consume communist resources and prevent the North Vietnamese from giving unimpeded attention and support to the insurgency in South Vietnam. [1 sentence (2-1/2 lines) not declassified]

2. Finally, the team wishes particularly to emphasize that, in sum, the preparations of 1962 have led to the development of the human and material infrastructure necessary for the successful prosecution of the war within South Vietnam. The team believes that unless the Viet Cong chooses to escalate the conflict, the principal ingredients for eventual success have been assembled in South Vietnam. Now, perseverance in the field, and at home, will be required in great measure to achieve that success.

1 Source: National Defense University, Taylor Papers, T-181-69. Top Secret.

2 The source text does not provide a more specific date. According to telegram MACJ00 433 from General Wheeler at MAC/V headquarters to the Chairman of the JCS, January 21, the Wheeler team did not return from Southeast Asia to CINCPAC headquarters in Hawaii until the last week in January. Wheeler expected to work on the report in Hawaii and submit it to the JCS after the team’s anticipated return to Washington on January 30. (Ibid., T-184-69) In 1964, Wheeler recalled that when he returned to Washington, he reported first to the Joint Chiefs of Staff and the Secretary of Defense, and then to President Kennedy. He reported to the President that things were going well in Vietnam militarily, but that “Ho Chi Minh was fighting the war for peanuts and if we ever expected to win that affair out there, we had to make him bleed a little bit.” The President, Wheeler recalled, “was quite interested in this.” (Kennedy Library, Oral History Program, Earle G. Wheeler interview, July 11, 1964)

3 For text, see Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, vol. I, Document 210.

4 Neither printed.

5  On February 2, Lieutenant Commander Worth H. Bagley, Naval Aide to General Taylor, sent a memorandum to Taylor assessing the Wheeler Report, in which he discussed the evolution of the four strategies outlined in the report: ”The Wheeler Report discusses the National Campaign Plan in detail (pages 14-15). The four basic strategies stated as involved in that plan are in essence an incorporation of the original Thompson concept of Province Rehabilitation (Clear and Hold); the Nhu concept which splintered off from Thompson of establishing Strategic Hamlets separately from, as well as with, Province Rehabilitation operations; [2 lines not declassified]; and the Thompson concept that as Province Rehabilitation progressed the regular RVNAF forces would seek out and destroy the Viet Cong at their bases. It is a restatement of original strategy. The discussion of this complete strategy in the Three Year Plan, also under the heading of the National Campaign Plan, says the same thing in more general terms, but confuses the situation by listing the Strategic Hamlet program as a separate entity as Nhu has made it. General Wheeler’s expression of the National Campaign Plan brings the Strategic Hamlet program back into the orderly and sound concept of Province Rehabilitation. This is the appropriate strategy and the one we should follow. Forrestal and Hilsman noted this difference in approach in their Report and recommended we get back on track with Province Rehabilitation (Clear and Hold).” (National Defense University, Taylor Papers, T-240-69)

6 See the enclosure to Document 18.

7 See Document 1.

27. Memorandum From Michael V. Forrestal of the National Security Council Staff to the President 27. Memorandum From Michael V. Forrestal of the National Security Council Staff to the President1

Washington, February 1, 1963.

SOUTH VIETNAM

You are meeting this afternoon at 4:30 p.m. with Secretary Rusk, Secretary McNamara, Mr. Gilpatric, General Taylor, General Wheeler, Governor Harriman, Director McCone, Mr. David Bell and Mr. William Bundy. The announced purpose of the meeting is to give you an opportunity to hear General Wheeler’s report2 on his trip to South Vietnam.

As a means of stimulating action, you may wish to put some of the following questions: 1. Should General Harkins report directly to the JCS instead of CinCPac?

2. In view of Ambassador Nolting’s completion of his two-year extension in South Vietnam in mid-April, should we consider a new appointment?

3. Have we been as firm as we should with the GVN in putting our views across on our military, domestic and foreign policy?

4. Is U.S. air power (“Farm Gate”) being used effectively to support our guerrilla war strategy, i.e.: (a) Is enough emphasis being: placed on close air support and liaison capabilities as against air strikes and interdiction?

(b) Has it been resolved whether the Army or the Air Force will provide liaison and quick response to calls for help from our Special Forces people in exposed and isolated training camps?

(c) Are we paying enough attention to the problem of quick reinforcement of strategic hamlets by ground and air when they are attacked?

5. Why do we have such a bad press from South Vietnam? Should we be more forthcoming with the U.S. press in Saigon despite GVN objections?

6. Does Director McCone feel that “Operation Switchback” (the transfer of paramilitary training [less then 1 1ine not declassified] to Army Special Forces) is progressing smoothly, or should it be stretched out to allow the Army more time to work out its funding procedures?

7. Have we thought about the danger of creating too many separate and disorganized paramilitary organizations? Is this an efficient use of manpower? Has any thought been given to providing a police force to control the movement of peoples and goods in areas which have been cleared by government forces?

MF

1 Source: Kennedy Library, President’s Office Files, Vietnam Country Series, Security 1963. Secret.

2 Document 26.

28. Memorandum From the Deputy Assistant Director, Pacific and Far East Division, United States Information Agency (Moore) to the Deputy Director (Wilson) 28. Memorandum From the Deputy Assistant Director, Pacific and Far East Division, United States Information Agency (Moore) to the Deputy Director (Wilson)1

Washington, February 1, 1963.

SUBJECT

Press Relations in Viet-Nam

Governor Harriman said in his staff meeting this morning that General Wheeler would make a very strong report on the sad condition of GVN relations with the press. Governor Harriman has urged the Secretary to make a public statement deploring GVN treatment of press. (At his press conference this morning the Secretary said: “But let me say quite frankly that we have not been satisfied with the opportunities given to the press in Viet-Nam for full and candid coverage of this situation there, and we are discussing this matter from time to time and most urgently with the Government of Viet-Nam.”2 The Governor continued in substance that we must start calling some of the tunes and Diem must take our advice. This issue good one for test of wills.

Comment:

Although a public statement here could make John Mecklin’s idea of unattributed U.S. press briefings a matter of direct confrontation with GVN; depending on how it played in Saigon, such a statement could serve only to strengthen Embassy’s hand and put GVN on notice to acquiesce quietly to our projected press program.

The Governor stressed that statement necessary for U.S. consumption.

1 Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 306, USIA/IOPIR Files: FRC 68 A 1415, Vietnam-General & Personnel. Confidential.

2 For text of the Secretary’s statement concerning the situation in Vietnam, see Department of State Bulletin, February 18, 1963, p. 238.

29. Memorandum From Michael V. Forrestal of the National Security Council Staff to the President 29. Memorandum From Michael V. Forrestal of the National Security Council Staff to the President1

Washington, February 4, 1963.

SOUTH VIETNAM

The meeting with General Wheeler on Friday2 was a complete waste of your time for which I apologize. It was intended to provide you an opportunity to initiate action on some of the problems in South Vietnam described in the Eyes Only Annex to Hilsman’s and my report.3 The rosy euphoria generated by General Wheeler’s report4 made this device unworkable.

The problems remain, however, and I would suggest another technique to solve them. If you approve, Governor Harriman and I will start a quiet campaign in the appropriate departments for the following objectives: 1. to get General Harkins a direct line of communication to the JCS, or, alternatively and less desirably, to persuade CinCPac to delegate more responsibility to Saigon;

2. to look for a replacement for Fritz Nolting when his 2-year term is up in April;

3. to encourage our civilian and military people in Saigon to put across more forcefully to the GVN U.S. views on fighting the war and on foreign policy;

4. to develop gradually a more independent posture for the U.S. in South Vietnam and very carefully to dissociate ourselves from those policies and practices of the GVN of which we disapprove with good reason;

5. to stimulate Defense to examine more carefully whether our Special Forces camps and the strategic hamlets are getting effective close air support when they are attacked;

6. to make a rapid and vigorous effort to improve press relations in Saigon, even at some cost to our relationship with the Diem Government;

7. to determine, before any slack occurs, whether the transfer of paramilitary training [less than 1 1ine not declassified] to the Army should be stretched out:

8. to get the field to consider whether we are supporting too many paramilitary organizations and overlooking some of the specific needs, such as a police force for movement control.

I don’t think we should start on such a campaign of persuasion without your knowledge and approval. You may prefer simply to tell me to go ahead, or perhaps you would prefer to speak with Averell on these subjects.

MV Forrestal5

1 Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Vietnam Country Series, 2/63-3/63. Secret.

2 An apparent reference to the meeting discussed in Document 27.

3 Document 19.

4 Document 26.

5 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.

30. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 30. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, February 5, 1963, 1 p.m.

726. CINCPAC for POLAD. Task Force message. Deptels 729,2 731.3 Quality of reporting by US newsmen here is probably as good as average reporting of stateside story like earthquake or Hollywood divorce. Difference between Vietnam and that kind of story is not only that accurate information more difficult to come by (and accuracy far more important), but also that balanced judgment on extraordinarily complex and mixed situation in this country is inherently difficult to reach. Latter is in fact perhaps too much to hope for from young reporters with limited facilities for coverage and research.

We do not think, either, that newsmen here now are deliberately trying to undermine US effort (though their work can certainly have that result).

There was no malice for example in early Agency report that Captain Good was killed at Ap Bac while trying futilely to get Vietnamese to fight. Newsmen got this version from American advisors who believed it true themselves at time and were understandably bitter. Impact on US public opinion apparently was incendiary, with damage irrevocably done when correct version was available next day. Withholding an angle like this to major highly competitive story to take time for difficult double-checking requires very high degree reportorial restraint and judgment-which it not realistic to expect from average Agency reporter-rests in fact that major US news organizations like UPI,AP and NY Times use men (average age 27) with approximately same experience to cover Vietnam as they do routine stateside police beat. These three, furthermore, are only US organizations that consider story important enough to station full-time staff correspondent in Saigon. Other outfits use part-time stringers and sporadic visits by staffers stationed elsewhere, usually Hong Kong or Tokyo.

Explanation contains implicit comment on state of American press as institution and perhaps goes even deeper. Older, more experienced correspondents are not stationed here because editors apparently cannot persuade such men to live in Saigon, and in fact often have difficulty finding anyone at all who will agree to come, for essentially same reasons that US agencies in Saigon have chronic recruiting problems. Legendary American dream of frontier, seeing world, adventures in far off lands seems no longer to have pull it once did among newspapermen.

Perhaps equally significant, there are only three staff correspondents stationed Saigon because this has never been consistently what editors (and/or readers) rate as big story. Despite dramatic increase in American involvement, visiting editors and reporters repeatedly advise us that stateside public simply hasn’t been stirred by Vietnam, perhaps because remoteness, perhaps obscured by more pressing understandable crises like Cuba, perhaps, as they claim, by routine optimistic statements from American visitors here. This has meant that so called “positive” stories got relatively little play, if they make papers at all, while bad news often hits page one. Same time correspondents deliberately searched for “angles” to dress up story and one of best of these inevitably was peculiarities of Ngo Dinh family.

On top of all this, reporting from Saigon has been immeasurably complicated—as Mission has reported frequently in past—by built-in incompatibility in personalities of GVN and American newsmen. Like most new, inexperienced regimes in less-developed countries, GVN has poor press facilities, often tries to conceal shortcomings by deceit, tends to confuse US press with US Government, and pridefully resents hostile criticism. Same time, GVN also has rather recklessly adopted policy of harassment of foreign press and reprisals against specific newsmen whom it considered insulting and/or unacceptably hostile to GVN cause.

This is not unparalleled in other new countries. Older, more experienced correspondents who come here usually accept harassments with all other characteristics of this war and are able to take the larger view of what’s at stake here and logic of US policy under circumstances. Younger men, experiencing situation like this for first time and often finding news sources among equally young American advisors-tend to be shocked, angry, indignant because they think US is being “suckered”, though most of them also accept basic US policy intellectually when considered in calmer moments.

Such young reporters, and young advisors, have yet to learn that the mark of a great nation is tolerance and understanding of such tortured people as Vietnamese and their petty, often rather pathetic, maneuvers to save face. And they forget that the face of the government has vital bearing on support of its people in conduct of war.4

This is further complicated by reality that these particular American newsmen and this particular regime dislike each other to degree that verges on neurotic. Besides their public dispatches, newsmen have reported at length by mail and private cable to editors back home on indignities of working Vietnam. Chances are when Ap Bac story broke,GVN had hardly friend in any editorial room in United States. What happened looks from here like savagely emotional delayed reaction to ousters of Sully and Robinson, Mme. Nhu’s charge that whole American press is “communist” and every other harassment over past six months.5 Ap Bac was reported as major GVN failure at cost of American lives, and it appears from here that American editorial writers, commentators, columnists licked chops with delight and reached for simplest adjectives they could muster.

About reftel comment war going better than reported to US public, this is collective judgment of US Country Team, and of most senior American and foreign officials here. But this judgment is still not unanimous among informed observers in Saigon. There is still debate about outcome this struggle, newsmen report this, always at risk of over-emphasizing minority viewpoint. Mission has been reporting for some time that GVN performance, decisively proving its capacity to win, will be ultimate and in fact only solution to foreign press problem. To date performance is not yet that convincing, at least to man who must give his major effort to reporting front-page material.

On what to do, Mission sees no panacea. GVN daily press briefings continue, but Americans seldom bother to attend because news is so old. Freshest information available is passed privately to GVN by MACV/PIO but is sometimes cut by GVN despite US advice. US Mission continues operate on principle it can release news only on military events involving American personnel-or risk GVN irritation and possibly even cutoff of reports to MACV. There are no formal MACV briefings for same reason,6 but in practice, MACV is able provide news on almost all events except some VC-initiated actions like attacks on strategic hamlets, and Mission has found that adequate news even of these can usually be passed discreetly to newsmen. Senior members of Mission, including Nolting and Harkins, are regularly available to US and other journalists, and spend much time on this.

Plentiful US air transportation is available to correspondents to go anywhere they want in country pretty much at will.7 Newsmen are generally satisfied with facilities available. Their main complaints are GVN news blackouts on specific military actions or deceit and absence of reliable GVN news sources.

Mission has been trying to pass word discreetly to GVN that Ap Bac press eruption was result its ill-considered policy toward newsmen. This apparently has had some success. Except for relatively mild attacks in Saigon press, there have been no new harassments in wake of Ap Bac, and Nhu assures us none is planned. It’s even conceivable eruption will have healthy long-term effect.

Reftel’s invitation for Mission’s ideas on ways to alleviate situation at Washington end is much appreciated. Again we can see little that will really change situation other than long held GVN performance. [sic] As one-shot move, however, it might be useful to consider sending planeload of relatively senior newsmen to Vietnam for tour of country which Mission would be happy to arrange. Generally our feeling is that Ap Bac explosion was as much fault of US editors and pundits as that of reporting from Saigon. If not already being done, perhaps Department would consider series of off-record briefings for top editors to clarify true considerations in US policy here vis-a-vis undeniable problems of application. Conceivably, this could lead to sending of more seasoned correspondents for full-time duty Vietnam.

Mission is attempting to generate more news about GVN social and economic progress. USIS-Saigon plans soon to assign officer full-time to USOM to act in effect as press attache to encourage such stories in foreign press (where possible with minimum emphasis on American role), and to generate news on such subjects for dissemination through USIS facilities.

While this should help shift press attention toward real progress being made socially and economically, it must be recognized that this sort of thing is secondary news compared to death of single American serviceman from enemy action. Unhappily it must also be noted that if correspondent is set on spotting GVN shortcomings, he can find them just as easily in civil activities as military operations. To repeat, there are occasional one-shot opportunities to counter unfavorable reporting (e.g., making available captured VC document showing internal difficulties), but in general there can be no lasting solution until it is clear to even relatively casual observer that GVN is winning.

Nolting

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, PPV 7 S VIET-US. Confidential. Repeated to CINCPAC. This document and all subsequent documents cited in the PPV file should be cited as PPB. A copy of this telegram was placed in the President’s weekend reading file, February 9-10. (Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Vietnam Country Series, 2/63-3/63)

2 Document 17.

3 In telegram 731 to Saigon, January 24, the Department of State and USIA inquired if U.S. officials in Vietnam were giving daily military press briefings. (Department of State, Central Files, 951K.6211/1-2163)

4 A marginal notation in Wood’s hand at this point reads: “Not alone in forgetting this.”

5 See Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, vol. II, Documents 133, 310, and 322.

6 On February 10, Admiral Felt, after consultations on the press problem in Washington, cabled General Harkins that the Departments of Defense and State and the White House Press Secretary had agreed that Harkins should conduct briefings for the American press on the military situation in Vietnam. Felt added: “It is recognized that the GVN might not be happy about this at first, but we believe they will get used to it. The important thing is that we must improve press relations despite possible GVN sensitivities.” (CINCPAC telegram 01014Z to COMUSMACV, February 10; Washington National Records Center, RG 84, Saigon Embassy Files: FRC 67 A 677, 350 GVN)

7 In telegram 749 from Saigon, February 13, the Embassy reported that recent press accounts emphasizing U.S. combat air activities in Vietnam grew out of the practice of allowing journalists to accompany interdiction missions. Ambassador Nolting indicated that he and General Harkins would continue to respond to questions from the press relating to the Farmgate operation by referring to its operational training role, but he added: “With GVN and US joint air effort now reaching over 1,000 sorties per month, and with U.S. casualties from Farmgate operations coming into print, there is more and more chance that reporters will feature Farmgate role.” (Department of State, Central Files, DEF 19 US-S VIET)

31. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam 31. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam1

Washington, February 6, 1963, 1:10 p.m.

771. Embtels 644,2 686.3 After weighing all factors concerned and taking into account your views and those DOD, it is Department’s view that we should not commit ourselves at this time to turn over jets (RT-33 and T-33) to GVN.

Recognize need for increased reconnaissance capability and desirability of having GVN embark on this task as part of overall long-term policy giving GVN increasing responsibility for its own defense. However, due to overriding political considerations, involving escalation from US-controlled to GVN-controlled jets as this might affect NVN, Laos situation and Cambodia, we cannot afford take unnecessary international risks now.

You should, therefore, inform Thuan in terms you think appropriate that we are not prepared to turn over jets at this time. FYI. We are prepared to review this question periodically and propose to do so next in March. End FYI.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, DEF 19-3 US-S VIET Secret. Drafted by Heavner, cleared by Wood and Rice and in the Department of Defense in draft by Bundy. Repeated to CINCPAC for POLAD.

2 Not printed.

3 See footnote 2, Document 13.

32. Minutes of a Meeting of the Special Group for Counterinsurgency 32. Minutes of a Meeting of the Special Group for Counterinsurgency1

Washington, February 7, 1963, 2 p.m.

PRESENT

Mr. Johnson, The Attorney General, Mr. Bell, Mr. Murrow, Mr. Forrestal, Mr. Bundy vice Mr. Gilpatric, General Krulak vice General Taylor, Mr. Colby vice Mr. McCone

Mr. Wood was present for Items 1 and 2

1. Report by General Krulak2 on the Situation in South Viet-Nam

General Krulak prefixed [prefaced?] his remarks with the comment that he believes real progress has been made in the struggle against the Viet Cong since the occasion of his last visit during the summer of 1962. There has been a continuous improvement in intelligence activities and apparent modest gains in the economic area. Vietnamese military operations are moving in the right direction, although more urging is required by U.S. advisors to maintain this momentum.

On the negative side, General Krulak stated that the MAAG and the Assistance Command could be drawn closer together. Coordination of air operations should be improved. Reaction time for air support must be reduced, greater rapport must be established with the Vietnamese in order to obtain advance information on planned operations. Rules of engagement should be modified to permit U.S. armed helicopters to fire upon the Viet Cong without having to wait to be fired upon.

Relative to these rules, the Attorney General suggested that an early decision should be sought as to whether or not this would be desirable. General Krulak will follow through on this. General Krulak continued by stating that Vietnamese morale is good, and suggested that Viet Cong morale is deteriorating. The latter judgment was based on increased defections, the difficulty in retaining personnel, and their demonstrated need to capture supplies, especially medicines.

General Krulak emphasized the need to relieve our logistical system from supporting any effort not essential to the struggle. As an example, he pointed out that in the field of research and development a number of test projects are being carried out which could be conducted elsewhere. JCS will take action to resolve this problem. Infiltration of personnel and equipment by the Viet Cong continues both by land and sea. Captured Chinese weapons are tangible evidence of the infiltration of supplies from outside South Viet-Nam. The members agreed with an observation by the Chairman that it is especially important to develop some hard evidence of this infiltration of personnel and supplies in order that it may be presented to Moscow with another version for release to the press. Mr. William Jorden of the Department of State is scheduled to depart for South Viet-Nam for the express purpose of developing such a substantiated report.

2. Paramilitary Training in South Viet-Nam

The members expressed their desire that in the transfer of responsibility for certain Montagnard training programs to DOD we do not lose the long-term assets [less than 1 line not declassified]. In particular, the members expressed concern at the prospect of Special Forces personnel handling these projects with only a six-months tour in South Viet-Nam. The members agree that while it might not be necessary for personnel conducting normal instruction to stay longer than this period, certain key personnel should be assigned for longer periods.

Mr. Bundy explained the current funding problem for DOD is how to handle the Montagnard training program, as well as other paramilitary programs within normal military accounting procedures. However, arrangements are currently being worked out [less than 1 line not declassified] within Defense to resolve this problem. It was noted that it might be necessary to revise NSAM 57,3 which is the basis for this transfer of responsibility to DOD.

Mr. Colby explained that the difficulty of presenting a clear organizational chart for the diverse paramilitary groups in South Viet-Nam resulted from the fact that these groups were developed wherever a potential existed rather than based on a preconceived plan. However, understanding of missions and coordination of operations does exist at the district and provincial level.

The members expressed concern over the prospect of the creation. Of approximately a 50,000 man police program for South Viet-Nam prior to the development of adequate coordination mechanisms for existing paramilitary forces.

Miscellaneous

A. The Chairman called the attention of the members to Embassy Saigon Telegram No. 726,4 which provides an analysis of the press problem.

[Here follows a reference to a scheduled visit of the Interdepartmental Team to Africa.]

James W. Dingeman
Executive Secretary

1 Source: Department of State, Special Group Counterinsurgency Files: Lot 68 D 451, Special Group (CI). Secret. Drafted by Dingeman who is not listed among the participants.

2 General Krulak was a member of the investigative mission headed by General Wheeler sent to Vietnam by the JCS in January. For the report of that mission, see Document 26.

3 Not printed.

4 Document 30.

33. Memorandum From Michael V. Forrestal of the National Security Council Staff to the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Harriman) 33. Memorandum From Michael V. Forrestal of the National Security Council Staff to the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Harriman)1

Washington, February 8, 1963.

SUBJECT

Contacts with Vietnamese Opposition

In our report2 Roger and I did suggest that consideration be given to expanding the contacts between U.S. personnel in Saigon and noncommunist elements of the Vietnamese opposition.

There are, I think, two major reasons for doing this. First, it would be part of a carefully designed program to establish a somewhat more independent U.S. position in SVN. Second, it should eventually increase our alternatives in the event of an accident which results in a shift in the government.

I agree with Fritz Nolting that there are dangers in raising old suspicions in the mind of President Diem and his family about U.S. intentions. But I think that the risks in remaining too closely tied to Diem’s government will increase rather than decrease as time goes on.

If the field agrees with the suggestion, I should imagine they would want to move with great caution, and I would agree. If I were Fritz, I would simply encourage our people in Saigon to be available to non-governmental personalities and to listen to their problems. I would avoid at the outset any involvement in officially disapproved activities, but I would not discourage reporting. [1 sentence (1-1/2 lines) not declassified] I have in mind one such area which could be reexamined and that is the trade union movement. As I understand it, the government is starting to take repressive measures against Mr. Brui’s [Buu’s]union which is the only legitimate labor organization in the country. I would think we might attempt to counter some of these measures by discreet support of this labor organization, if we believe it is soundly based.

At some point, of course, Diem will become aware of shift in our present policy of total public and private support of his person and family. We should face this likelihood squarely and without guilt feelings. It may be necessary to re-state to him as smoothly but as firmly as possible, that the interests of the United States require that we maintain a friendly attitude towards all his people, that we must inform ourselves of all opinion in Vietnamese society, and that, occasionally, we must speak out as frankly as he does on matters on which we have honest differences of opinion.

All this is rather vague and I am quite aware that neither casual visitors to Saigon nor the Department itself can give specific advice on such a matter to our people in the field. The most we can do is to raise questions for consideration and indicate support for broad political principle.

Michael V. Forrestal3

1 Source: Kennedy Library, Schlesinger Papers, South Vietnam. Secret. A copy was also sent to Hilsman.

2 Document 19.

3 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.

34. Memorandum From Michael V. Forrestal of the National Security Council Staff to the Assistant Administrator, Bureau for Far East, Agency for International Development (Janow) 34. Memorandum From Michael V. Forrestal of the National Security Council Staff to the Assistant Administrator, Bureau for Far East, Agency for International Development (Janow)1

Washington, February 8, 1963.

SUBJECT

South Vietnam Manpower Problems

I have read Mr. Williams’s memorandum to you of February 4th on the police problem of South Vietnam.2 I think he raises a legitimate point when he emphasizes the care that must be taken to avoid the adverse political consequences of our support of a repressive police force.

I still believe, however, that the overall problem of efficient use of U.S. supported paramilitary organizations in South Vietnam should be reviewed. My understanding of the historical background is that in the early part of last year we were so desperate to get arms into the hands of anyone who would fight the VC, that CAS, AID and MAAG were inclined to provide arms and training to almost any organization in South Vietnam which asked for them. This was a perfectly understandable policy at the time; but the numbers of men and organizations are now reaching a very large total, and I am not convinced that we have a clear idea of the political and military function they will serve.

The police problem is really subsidiary to this manpower problem. R.G.K. Thompson makes a convincing argument that some form of civilian organization is required to relieve the army of normal security functions after an area has been pacified. His major point is that there are no professionally trained people to man mobile check points and other installations to ensure control of the movement of people and property. It is going to take some time to find and train such people, which is why I feel that we should get started before the need becomes country-wide.

From a political point of view, I feel that it is equally important to get population control functions out of the hands of the army and into the hands of carefully trained civilian police types as rapidly as possible. Williams’s point is well taken, but this is precisely the reason why our public safety people, who are particularly sensitive about the political problems of the police activities, should be brought in at this early stage.

Only the field, of course, can make sensible judgements about these matters; I would think that a carefully drafted suggestion to them to do some thinking, perhaps in consultation with Thompson, would be useful.

Michael V. Forrestal3

1 Source: Kennedy Library, Hilsman Papers, Country Series-Vietnam. Secret. Copies were sent also to Byron Engle, Director of the Office of Public Safety in AID, and to Ogden Williams, Special Assistant on the staff of USOM Director Brent in the Embassy in Saigon.

2 The Williams cited here is apparently Ogden Williams. The memorandum has not been found.

3 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.

35. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 35. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, February 8, 1963, 4 p.m.

734. Deptels 618 and 740.2 All elements TF/Saigon have been intensively examining infiltration problem and have reached following initial conclusions:

I. Possible Communist Moves

A. We believe for immediate future it likely Communists will retain present ideological-military framework (i.e., keeping GVN under as much pressure as possible but stopping short of conventional warfare of movement) hoping for favorable break such as coup or onset of war weariness on part of US or GVN to give Viet Cong opportunity propose political settlement on their terms—international conference and/or establishment of neutral or left-leaning government.

B. If war increasingly goes against them (as we expect during this year), highly probable Communists will increase infiltration. We would expect Communists couple this with political offensive for conference and neutral solution for SVN. If pressure on VC becomes unbearable, we believe Communists would probably choose to go underground rather than resort to steps which would amount to open intervention. Having gone underground, they might work through front groups to attempt to effect change in government and would probably pull cadres back across border into Laos or DRV or into inaccessible areas and continue training against time when armed action might again prove feasible and desirable.

C. Our reading of both Soviet and Chinese policy for this part of world leads us to believe major escalation unlikely. They probably feel that long-range prospects in SEA are on whole favorable and would be reluctant to make move which might provoke direct US intervention. While some indications point to an increase in VC military and political activities in year ahead, these do not imply significant change in character of war. We see at this time no indication from north of preparations for overt intervention.

D. Likewise we discount possibility that Communists would attempt to seize specific area of SVN to serve as seat of “liberation government” which would then appeal for international recognition. Even with greatly stepped up infiltration from Communist side, strength of RVNAF would be too great to permit VC to exert full military and political control over an identifiable area for any length of time. We recognize that geographic base in SVN is not “sine-qua-non” for “liberation government”. Would be questionable Communist asset.

II. Communist Capabilities for Infiltration Into SVN

Available documentary evidence on Communist infiltration into SVN (vast majority relating to period prior mid-1962) indicates that primary objective is to provide Viet Cong movement with vitally needed matériel and with human skills which it cannot obtain locally, viz, certain types of arms and munitions, medical supplies, trained cadres and military specialists. VC still relying on local recruitment to fill ordinary manpower needs.

Rate of infiltration has varied from low of 100-200 per month Jan-April 1962 to high of 1,200 during June 1962. Monthly average June-December 1961 was 500-1,000. Difficult judge present rate, but on basis numerous low level and villager sightings and reports we believe infiltration continuing. Intelligence lag is several months because hard evidence needed to substantiate infiltration and establish rate does not normally become available until infiltrators begin to be killed or fall into GVN hands, or documents captured.

Current infiltration operations appear to have dual purpose of improving political and military efficiency of insurgency and providing trained manpower to cadre new units. We believe Communists banking on this type operation to sustain insurgency at current pace or even somewhat higher tempo. We do not know what maximum rate of infiltration (chiefly through Laos, Cambodia and DMZ) Communists could maintain, but note that rate as high as that registered in June did not necessitate fundamental change in nature of infiltration operation. Since that time, however, regroupment of Montagnard population and development of capability of Montagnards to defend themselves and harass VC have certainly increased difficulties VC hard core forces to maintain themselves. Added to this are problems imposed by increasing ARVN forays into VC base areas.

We believe, nevertheless, that they could introduce units up to battalion size and concentrate several if necessary to support critical operations. (Statements of two recent defectors indicate infiltration of battalion-sized group in July and another in August.) We assume DRV units in southern Laos are there to support operations in SVN and could be introduced any time situation dictated. However, unless Communist strategy changed, they would attempt to keep this intervention on a relatively small and clandestine basis.

In sum, as long as infiltration operation [garble—is?] conducted in a clandestine manner, it could vary in intensity from a few hundred crossings a month for purpose of supplying the VC with critically needed equipment and human skills up through introduction of modest number of organized units not exceeding battalion strength. If the Communists decided to up the scale of infiltration to organized units of regimental or division strength, logistic problems involved would probably exceed capabilities of present system and support effort required would destroy clandestine nature of operation.

III. Actions To Forestall Increased Infiltration

Forestalling increased infiltration through diplomatic and political actions will be difficult because: (1) such an increase will likely remain short of overt intervention; (2) US is hampered by lack of direct leverage on countries from which infiltration comes, i.e., DRV, Laos (PL-controlled section) and Cambodia.

In the event of a serious increase in infiltration, there are a number of political and quasi-military courses which might be followed. These could be used by stages, but their effect would probably only be significant if they were part of a package. They might include:

1. Maintaining firm stance, with Western allies, that US would not consider participation in international conference on SVN.

2. Demanding ICC action in Laos and Viet Nam.

3. Warning Russians of danger of escalation. Protesting to them in their role as Geneva Co-Chairman if we can document charge of infiltration through Laos.

4. Invoking SEATO, with the expectation that Council meeting, political pressures and warnings would, if necessary, lead to individual supporting actions by SEATO members rather than to a SEATO operation per se.

5. Active, supporting military countermeasures such as: A. Aerial reconnaissance of logistic routes in Laos,

B. Anti-infiltration operations outside South Vietnam,

C. Increased harassing and sabotage operations in the DRV.

6. Appeal to UN seeking at least its moral support for counteractions.

We have also continued larger scale actions directed toward hitting Communists where it hurts such as aerial interdiction of Laos supply routes, strikes against selected NVN targets, introduction of US combat units into SVN to oppose infiltration and naval blockade of DRV. The likely consequences of these actions would, of course, have to be considered in light of overall national policy since they involve serious risk of escalation. At this point we would recommend against such measures except in unlikely event of overt intervention. We do believe, however, that their efficacy and feasibility as a response to large-scale infiltration should be investigated.

IV. Updating Jorden Report3

Whatever actions we might undertake, a well-documented case supporting our infiltration charge would appear absolutely essential. Job would be a big one requiring placing [piecing] together numerous bits of information. Other than two previously mentioned defector reports on infiltration in July and August, little or no documentary evidence now available to substantiate infiltration since mid-1962. Experience to date has shown that hard information lags 5-6 months in reaching MACV. With extra effort now being mounted to collect this type info we would hope to begin receiving useful material within next month or two. We would welcome assignment of Jorden to undertake this task on full-time basis as soon as sufficient documentation available so as to have report ready at earliest possible date.

V. [garble] and GVN Capabilities for Detecting Infiltration

With expanding programs along Laos frontier (CIDG, Mountain Scouts, etc.), GVN capability improving rapidly and should be increasingly able, if properly coordinated at central level, to cover area inside SVN’s borders. Main problem lies on Laos side. More intensive intelligence collection across border will be necessary to acquire precise info on Communist movements. With present capabilities we could probably detect movement large units into SVN. However, without air surveillance over Laos and covert reconnaissance on the Laos side of the border warning time would be inadequate to insure positive detection.

VI. Sustaining GVN Effort in Face of Increased Infiltration

Question of sustaining GVN effort in face of increased infiltration largely matter of continuing to press forward with counterinsurgency programs already initiated and particularly putting our weight behind National Campaign Plan. It is our judgment that likely scale of increase will not result in any great change in character of war.4 If, contrary to this expectation, DRV decided to undertake massive intervention, then whole nature of conflict would have changed and we and our allies would be confronted with new decisions. Current US unilateral and SEATO plans address this eventuality.

Nolting

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, CSM 9-6 S VIET. Secret; Priority; Limit Distribution. Repeated to CINCPAC for POLAD.

2 In telegram 618 to Saigon, December 21, 1962, the Department of State instructed the Task Force in Saigon to prepare an assessment of the infiltration problem in South Vietnam. The assessment was to focus on three aspects of the problem: possible Communist moves, U.S. and South Vietnamese preventive or reactive moves, and U.S. and South Vietnamese intelligence capability to detect Communist moves. The Task Force was also instructed to consider what measures might be taken to complement military action in order to sustain the South Vietnamese effort in the face of increased infiltration, to forestall increased infiltration through diplomatic and political actions, and to obtain improved intelligence on infiltration. (Ibid., 751K.001/12-2162) Telegram 740 to Saigon, January 26, instructed the Task Force to submit a response to the questions posed in telegram 618, on an interim basis if necessary. (Ibid., 751K.001/1-2663)

3 Published as “A Threat to the Peace: North Viet-Nam’s Effort To Conquer South Viet-Nam” (Department of State Publication 7308, December 1961).

4 A marginal notation on the source text, in an unknown hand, reads: “Wishing will make it so.”

36. Memorandum of Conversation Between the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Harriman) and the Chief of Staff, United States Army (Wheeler), Department of State 36. Memorandum of Conversation Between the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Harriman) and the Chief of Staff, United States Army (Wheeler), Department of State1

Washington, February 9, 1963, 11:30 a.m.

During his call on me on Saturday, February 9, General Wheeler spoke of General Harkins’ difficulties with Diem, and said: 1. General Harkins has been urging Diem to end the small self-defense units which are in static posts. He believes self-defense units should be in larger units, with active patrols laying ambush for Viet Cong.

2. General Harkins feels Diem has been overly cautious in offensive actions in engagement with the Viet-Cong. Diem doesn’t want losses. Officers involved in action should be told not to be afraid of blame on account of losses. At the present time, they are afraid if they attack they will be criticized for losses that are sustained.

General Wheeler said that our civilian staff is not restrained in where it travels.

General Wheeler considers the strategic hamlet program good. He spoke well of Rufus Phillips. He indicated that the program was being expanded to take care of additional requirements. He said that none of the radios in strategic hamlets had been lost. Reinforcements are readily available when called for. They were on the alert at the airfields at each of the four Corps areas.

General Wheeler described the U.S. press situation as “terrible.” He pointed out that there was a good article by Beech in the morning Washington Post. He suggested that there should be a special press tour from U.S. run by Defense. When I questioned him about this, he accepted my suggestion that perhaps it would be better to try to get the press to send especially experienced men out, individually.

It has been arranged that each of the four Corps should have a U.S. press officer to handle the American press when they came there, and also to see that information got out.

Briefings by U.S. military were being conducted to “cut the press in” on information available to U.S., at least to some degree. He reported excellent relations between Nolting and Harkins. He spoke highly of each.

I suggested that he might wish to develop in more detail his proposal made in the conference with the President, that the South Vietnamese army develop commando capabilities against North Viet-Nam.2

1 Source: Department of State, Vietnam Working Group Files: Lot 67 D 54, DEF 19-2 Advisory and Training Asst. Secret; Limit Distribution. Drafted by Harriman. Copies were sent to FE, SEA/VN, the Embassy in Saigon for Ambassador Nolting, the White House for Forrestal, and INR for Hilsman. A copy of this memorandum is also in Library of Congress, Harriman Papers.

2 In another memorandum of this conversation, Harriman noted that he and Wheeler also discussed “the command problem”: “I urged General Harkins should report to the Joint Chiefs, and not CINCPAC, for well-known reasons. He said the Joint Chiefs were considering the matter. He said that confidentially, if left to him, he would take the action we recommend.” (Library of Congress, Harriman Papers, Memoranda of Conversation-Governor Harriman 1963)

37. Letter From the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Harriman) to the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (Taylor) 37. Letter From the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Harriman) to the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (Taylor)1

Washington, February 9, 1963.

Dear Max: I had a good talk this morning with General Wheeler about his trip,2 and touched on the question of whether General Harkins should report direct to the Joint Chiefs, rather than CINCPAC. This was raised by the President and the Secretary of State in our meeting last week.

To cite detailed complaints would obscure the main issue which is that if we are to win in Viet-Nam, our people there must have the fullest possible authority with clear lines of responsibility. This is a war of constant, small incidents and innumerable daily problems of every kind. We must leave these decisions to those in the field and permit them to act as quickly as necessary.

What bothers us is that the basic command concept, namely, that there be the closest cooperation and coordination between our military and civilian activities, is not being carried out fully. It does exist in Viet-Nam and in Washington. CINCPAC, however, is off on the side without contact on the political and economic aspects. This is the basic weakness. We are satisfied that it both slows up decisions and leads to military decisions that have not been concerted with the political and economic considerations.

We feel strongly that there would be a substantial benefit if General Harkins as MACV would report directly to the Chiefs of Staff, obtaining, however, logistic support from CINCPAC. We have too much at stake to permit the sensitivity of command procedures to interfere with the most direct and effective channels.3

Sincerely,

W. Averell Harriman4

1 Source: Library of Congress, Harriman Papers, TUVWXYZ. Personal and Confidential.

2 See Document 36.

3 In a letter of February 14, Taylor informed Harriman that he had “initiated a directive to the Joint Staff to review this command organization. In making it, we will give close attention to the views contained in your letter.” (Library of Congress, Harriman Papers, TUVWXYZ)

4 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.

38. Letter From the Ambassador in Vietnam (Nolting) to the Vietnamese Secretary of State at the Presidency and Assistant Secretary of State for National Defense (Thuan) 38. Letter From the Ambassador in Vietnam (Nolting) to the Vietnamese Secretary of State at the Presidency and Assistant Secretary of State for National Defense (Thuan)1

Saigon, February 14, 1963.

Dear Mr. Secretary: My Government has carefully considered the request for four T-33 jet aircraft contained in your letter to me of December, 10, 1962.2 We appreciate your Government’s desire to be come better equipped to counter any threat to South Viet-Nam posed by unauthorized incursions into Vietnamese air space. We understand, however, that there has been no actual confirmation of such incursions and that there is insufficient evidence to concluded that a threat of this kind exists at the present time.

My Government’s position in this matter rests essentially on the following considerations. The delivery of jet aircraft to your Government could open our two Governments to charges of violating the specific prohibition against jet engines contained in Article 17 of the Geneva Accords. It could also lead to the acquisition of jet aircraft by the North Vietnamese regime, thereby enhancing the threat which that regime poses to South Viet-Nam.

As you know, for some time our Military Assistance Program for Viet-Nam has included four RT-33 jet aircraft. However, because of the considerations referred to above, the delivery of these aircraft has not been authorized. In our view, these considerations continue to outweigh the advantages which a jet reconnaissance aircraft capability would have for our joint efforts to restore internal security in South Viet-Nam. Additionally, the requirement for a jet aircraft reconnaissance capability, as you are aware, is at present being met by other means.

I wish to assure you that we have this matter under continuous study. Should any new information be brought to our attention which would materially change our assessment of the situation, we would be prepared to review our present position.

Accept, Mr. Secretary, the renewed assurances of my highest consideration.

Frederick E. Nolting, Jr.3

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, DEF 19-3 US-S VIET. Secret; Limit Distribution. Transmitted to Washington on February 18 as enclosure 2 to airgram A-435 from Saigon.

2 Not found.

3 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.

39. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam 39. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam1

Washington, February 15, 1963, 6:20 p.m.

807. Embtel 749.2 Agree that reporters cannot be prevented from observing Farmgate operations but Embassy and MACV should insure that Farmgate cover maintained to extent that there are no stories or publicity on Farmgate given out by US sources. We concerned by news reports US air combat role because (1) this is clear violation Geneva Accords; (2) we have stated repeatedly in public that no US combat forces as such in Viet Nam and these stories give lie to all high officials who have made statement; (3) these stories also give substance to Commie charge this is US war on VN people; (4) combat role US forces may raise demand for Congressional action, since we have repeatedly stated their role limited to advisory logistic.

We also concerned by stories on US jets doing photo reconnaissance work. We note Feb 7 AP story quotes General Anthis directly on this subject. Policy on jets remains that we will not accuse ourselves of violating Geneva Accords nor give Commies any excuse for overt escalation by admitting that we have introduced jets into Viet Nam.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, DEF 19 S VIET. Secret. Drafted by Heavner and cleared in FE by Wood, Abram E. Manell, and Harriman, and in P by Robert J. McCloskey. Admiral Heinz in DOD/ISA was informed about the contents of the telegram. Repeated to CINCPAC for POLAD.

2 See footnote 7, Document 30.

40. Memorandum From the Joint Chiefs of Staff to the Secretary of Defense (McNamara) 40. Memorandum From the Joint Chiefs of Staff to the Secretary of Defense (McNamara)1

Washington, February 16, 1963.

JCSM-137-63

SUBJECT

Rules of Engagement for US Helicopters in Vietnam

It came to the attention of General Wheeler’s team during his visit to Vietnam, that under local interpretation of JCS instructions, all US aircraft other than Farmgate are precluded from using their weapons until they are actually fired upon even in the case of clearly identified enemy personnel discovered during the progress of combat. This prohibition is more restrictive than the Joint Chiefs of Staff had intended and seriously limits effective self-defense. Accordingly, CINCPAC has been authorized to permit all helicopters to fire on clearly identified Viet Cong elements which are considered to be a threat to the safety of the helicopters and their passengers.2

For the Joint Chiefs of Staff:

Maxwell D. Taylor
Chairman
Joint Chiefs of Staff

1 Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OSD Files: FRC 69 A 3131, Vietnam 380 thru 381 1963. Secret.

2 On February 25, Chalmers Wood sent a memorandum to Harriman which indicated that the decision to change the rules of engagement for U.S. helicopters in Vietnam had been cleared with the President but not with the Department of State, and had become an embarrassment because of a news leak: “Today’s Washington Daily News runs the headline ‘New Order to American Troops in Viet Nam … “SHOOT FIRST” ‘ “.“On reading this headline I called JCS and asked them to send a message to Saigon within 24 hours inquiring under what authority the Secret order changing the rules of engagement for helicopters had been released by informed military sources’ to the UPI. I learned that CINCPAC has sent such a message.

“I also asked why JCS had not cleared the order changing the rules of engagement with State. They replied that the Attorney General had wished the matter taken to the President for decision quickly. While this is true, they would not have been delayed if, for example, Bill Bundy had called you on the matter before it went to the White House. DOD has, once again, promised to clear such matters with us in the future.” (Department of State, Vietnam Working Group Files: Lot 67 D 54, PR-11 Press Relations)

John Mecklin described this as a “spectacular leak”, which “leaked so rapidly that stories appeared in the press before the new rules had even taken effect.” According to Mecklin, the leak should have been anticipated: “The order had to be circulated among something like a thousand persons, most of them young, embittered helicopter crewmen who had lost buddies to V.C. fire, and many of whom were close personal friends of newsmen.” (Mecklin, Mission in Torment, p. 119)

41. Letter From the Commander, Military Assistance Command, Vietnam (Harkins) to President Diem 41. Letter From the Commander, Military Assistance Command, Vietnam (Harkins) to President Diem1

Saigon, February 23, 1963.

Dear Mr. President: This is a report on progress as I see it in our common drive to put down the Communist Insurgency in the Republic of Vietnam. I feel that this report is particularly timely as we implement the National Campaign Plan.

I am convinced that we have taken the military, psychological, economic and political initiative from the enemy. We have kept steadily mounting pressure on him in all phases of the war to return the loyalty and control of the people to the Government of Vietnam. The next four to eight weeks will tell us all whether or not my conviction is true.

As you know, the Communists’ capabilities confronting the Government and people of the Republic of South Vietnam remain very formidable indeed. Capturing the initiative and winning a decisive victory are two very different objectives. Victory is not attainable, if we do not exploit our hard-won initiative. Victory can be delayed indefinitely or never won if we do not act decisively, while applying ever increasing pressure on the enemy in all areas of the conflict.

The VC are still everywhere. They still have much of their relatively secure strategic base structure. If the pressure which we have gradually developed everywhere is allowed to level off or decrease, we will lose the initiative. We have the means to increase this pressure on all fronts beginning now.

I believe we seized the initiative in September or October, though we may not have realized it at that time. Analysis of progress, militarily, politically, economically and psychologically leaves no doubt in my mind. Here are some indicators as we see them—results achieved by not only the RVNAF, but all elements of your government. Results achieved since October 1962 are compared with those during the prior 18 months for which records are available to me.

Prior to October there were 3,089 Strategic Hamlets, protecting 4,096,391 people in varying degrees. On 14 February 1963 6,988,826 people were living in 5049 Strategic Hamlets. If we count the citizens of Vietnam living in the metropolitan areas of Saigon, Dalat, Qui Nhon, Quang Ngai, Danang and Hue, who are not in strategic wards, an additional 823,827 people are living and working in secure conditions. The number of people enjoying the security of Strategic Hamlets will steadily increase as each day passes.

Prior to October, there were many different ideas in the RVNAF and the Provinces on how the VC threat should be defeated. Through your leadership, these differences in methods and strategy have been dramatically reduced. Our advisors report for the first six weeks of 1963 that 80% of the RVNAF effort has been applied to Clear and Hold operations, directly supporting and protecting the Province Rehabilitation and Strategic Hamlet programs.

Militarily, the average number of VC initiated incidents per week prior to October 1962 was 347. Since October it has been 271 with the trend continuing downward.

Prior to October, the VC initiated 98 armed attacks per week, now the average is 80, again the trend downward. Part of the explanation is that the VC has had to increase the size of attacking forces if they hope to be successful. This is good because the VC cannot now be in as many places simultaneously. Militarily, this is good because the VC is exposed to more decisive defeats by the RVNAF.

Another reliable military index is weapons captured. Prior to October the monthly averages were 474 GVN weapons lost and 304 VC weapons captured. Since October the ratio is increasingly in favor of the GVN, 401 GVN weapons lost each month to 506 VC weapons captured.

Rapidly improving communications permit reporting of many smaller scale incidents and engagements which never have come to the attention of Saigon authorities before. I believe the figures we now have are the most reliable possible.

Several primary reasons have made these gains possible. There is ever increasingly effective intelligence on the enemy, military and political. The population is seeing physical evidence of its government’s interest and ability to protect and assist them. The VC more and more must rely on force and brutality to supply themselves and recruit personnel at the cost of both the political and psychological support of increasing numbers of the people.

These vital improvements in the RVN position could not have occurred without a steadily improving military situation. The 9th Division has been trained and equipped; their record in full field operations is one of which we all should be proud. The 25th Division will complete its training and be fully equipped for field operations in April. The M-113 units are equipped, trained and operating. The state of training and equipment of the other elements of the RVNAF, combined with steadily improving leadership, have made our gains possible.

There remain several important elements of the RVNAF which are not being used to full advantage. Some of the artillery is not being effectively used. I have directed a study which will develop solid recommendations for improvement. The ARVN reorganization has not proceeded the way we would hope, especially the organization and functions of the ARVN headquarters, as they pertain to logistical operational functions. Control of these functions has been retained at JGS level, whereas in original joint planning it was agreed that they could best be accomplished by ARVN headquarters by delegation of authority and appropriate transfer of personnel. Division TOC’s are not yet capable of giving Division Commanders the ability to monitor and control operations that they must have if they are to be effective. The JOC already provides the JGS with much current information. However, operational control must be decentralized to the Corps and Division Commanders who have the responsibility, the means and the tactical knowledge to do the best job possible. As we gain more experience in the new organization of the ARVN, I am confident that these conditions will be corrected.

As you know, the strategic hamlet program—the real core of our effort here in the Republic of Vietnam—is proceeding at a rapid pace. The military clear and hold operations, the construction of defenses and the training and arming of defenders are moving along in a well-planned and coordinated effort. However, I am sure that you will agree with me that the military effort is just half the battle. Along with the military programs there must be other governmental programs such as public health, education, agricultural assistance, psychological warfare, etc., etc., etc. All these are necessary to win the hearts and minds of the people, to inform them of what the government is trying to do, and to assure them that the government is doing everything in its power to suppress the common enemy and restore peace and freedom in the Republic of Vietnam. Therefore I would suggest that all agencies of the government be urged to intensify their efforts within their particular fields so that the National Campaign Plan will not be solely a military effort, but in fact a true national effort. I am not sure at this time that all agencies are completely familiar with the details and objectives of the National Campaign Plan.

What of the enemy? The VC know they have an adversary who, for the first time, is capable of defeating him. They have become the hunted instead of the hunter. Captured documents and personnel, plus other intelligence, reveal VC dismay and concern. However, he is a long way from defeat. He may have more military capability today than he did a year ago. But, he is being driven from the base of his support, the people.

The ever-increasing rate of VC defectors, including hard core people, attest to the enemy’s concern. However, the VC can recapture the initiative if the GVN pressure on him is lessened or allowed to level off. In certain areas, notably the Camau peninsula, he is as strong or stronger than ever. In the northern provinces he has the people, organization and forces to turn the tide in his favor if we should allow him to do so.

What of time? Time is on our side if we use the ever-increasing RVN capabilities to steadily increase the pressure on the VC in every way, militarily, politically, economically and psychologically. Time is on the VC’s side if this pressure is relaxed, or we rest on our laurels.

Time and weather are either for us or against us. In the high plateau, and in southern Vietnam, half of the dry season has already passed. When the wet season arrives, we will no longer be able to apply all the mobility and firepower we have developed. Between now and then, the VC must not be allowed to regroup or rest. We must attack and destroy them. We must hurt them so badly, that they will be forced to apply all their remaining resources merely to survive. If we don’t, the VC may neutralize much of the gain we have won at great cost and effort. In the meantime, we must apply ever increasing pressure on the VC in the north and central coastal areas to make new gains, protect and consolidate those we have won, and prepare for increased operations with the coming of good weather.

Time is on our side, if we use it properly. All plans must guarantee that the VC get no relief from the steadily increasing pressure of our efforts to win the population and put down the Communist insurgency.

The National Campaign Plan which you have recently approved places high priority on eliminating the enemy ability to infiltrate into the Republic of Vietnam and to move about the country. We must succeed in this task.

I conclude that the Republic of Vietnam is defeating the VC. I conclude that to relent now, in optimism over the favorable results and achievements of the past few months could be ruinous or fatal to the RVN counterinsurgency. Your senior military and political leaders in the field sense that victory for the first time is in their grasp. Your armed forces rank and file are as fine soldiers as exist in the world today. They are young and ready to carry on with the fight. Their leaders, tired as they are of a generation of fighting for their country and very existence, have the skill and determination to lead them to victory. The means and morale needed for RVN victory over the insurgents are evident everywhere.

As for me and my advisors, I now see the way clear to achieve decisive military results in the next six months which will permit the ultimate complete defeat of the Communists in the Republic of Vietnam. There will be bitter fighting for much longer but the military result should not be in doubt. The tremendous task of transforming a colonial empire into a prosperous, proud and democratic Republic, a model for all of Asia, will take even longer. The means of military victory are now in hand. The foundations of liberty and prosperity are in process. Time is the key to our success or failure. I urge that we use time to our advantage-give the enemy no rest. Attack on all fronts until the Communist insurgency is put down and they are driven from the country, physically and spiritually.2

Paul D. Harkins3
General, United States Army

1 Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 334, MAC/V Files:FRC 69 A 702, 204-58 Command Reporting Files (1963). Secret.

2 In telegram 132315Z from CINCPAC to DIA, Admiral Felt quoted extensively from this letter, and noted that he concurred “wholeheartedly” in it. (Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Vietnam Country Series, 2/63-3/63)

3 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.

42. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam 42. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam1

Washington, February 25, 1963, 12:19 p.m.

822. Ref Saigon’s 771.2 Herewith principal points re Viet-Nam in Senate Foreign Relations Report “Viet-Nam and Southeast Asia”:3

I. Letter of transmittal (Mansfield to Fulbright).

(1) Focus report is Viet-Nam.

(2) Mansfield expresses “great admiration” for Diem, but voices deep concern over trend in VN in seven years since last Mansfield visit. “Viet-Nam now appears to be, as it was then, only at the beginning of a beginning in coping with its grave inner problems.”

II Body of report.

(1) During lull in struggle (1955-1959) considerable constructive work undertaken, but in past three years these achievements overshadowed by resumption guerrilla war.

(2) By 1961 total collapse in VN dangerously close. A joint US-VN re-evaluation undertaken. Vietnamese themselves devised new strategic theories to meet situation.

(3) Strategy three-fold: to win Montagnards in order to render hazardous VC supply lines, to enable ARVN seize initiative, and to regroup rural population into strategic hamlets.

(4) Responsible Americans and Vietnamese directing operations predict “success in a year or two”. Success defined as “reduction of guerrillas to point where they no longer serious threat to stability GVN”.

(5) In best circumstances very substantial outside aid will be necessary for many years and will not suffice “without a great mobilization of selfless Vietnamese leadership in all parts of the country and at all levels.” GVN is in many respects authoritarian. Very difficult situation which GVN inherited when it took power, VC pressures and some political and social progress are recognized. However, “present political practices in Viet-Nam” do not appear to be mobilizing potential capacities for able and self-sacrificing leadership on a substantial scale. Such mobilization necessary for success.

(6) Primary responsibility success lies with GVN and VN people, “…4 there is no interest of the United States in Viet-Nam which would justify, in present circumstances, the conversion of the war in that country primarily into an American war, to be fought primarily with American lives.”

In final conclusion dealing with all SEA report makes several recommendations of which following concern Viet-Nam:5 (3) Induce more equitable contribution from other free nations to costs aiding freedom in SEA.

(4) Encourage vigorously … throughout region relations of mutual advantage.

(6) Help bring internal peace to VN, but maintain scrupulously our advisory capacity, recognizing primary responsibility in all areas is Vietnamese.

(7) Emphasize social, economic and political aspects our policy.

Comment follows in septel.6

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 7 US/MANSFIELD. Official Use Only; Priority. Drafted by Wood and cleared in SEA by Deputy Director Norman B. Hannah. Repeated to CINCPAC for POLAD and pouched to Vientiane, Phnom Penh, Rangoon, Bangkok, Singapore, Kuala Lumpur, and Manila.

2 In telegram 771 from Saigon, February 25, the Embassy requested the text of those portions of the Mansfield report that dealt with Vietnam. (Ibid.)

3 The report, Viet-Nam and Southeast Asia: Report of Senator Mike Mansfield, Senator J. Caleb Boggs, Senator Claiborne Pell, and Senator Benjamin A. Smith, was released as a Senate Foreign Relations Committee print on February 25. For background on the preparation of the report, see footnote 4, Document 24. The report was generally known as the Mansfield report.

4  All ellipses in this document are the source text.

5 The numbered paragraphs correspond to numbered paragraphs in the report.

6 See Document 43.

43. Editorial Note 43. Editorial Note

In telegram 823 to Saigon, February 25, 1963, the Department of State provided the Embassy with the following guidelines for discussion of the Mansfield report with the South Vietnamese Government: “Report should only be discussed with GVN if they bring it up. If queried Embassy may wish note emphasis which report paces on importance Vietnamese winning their own war and, if occasion arises, report’s clear implication that GVN political practices need improvement to-obtain fuller mobilization of people.” (Department of State, Central Files, POL 7 US/MANSFIELD)

The report prompted a stronger reaction in South Vietnam than in the United States. On March 1, Consul John J. Helble reported from Hue that President Diem, who was in Hue, was “quite upset” by the report. (Letter from Helble to Trueheart, March 1; Washington National Records Center,RG 84, Saigon Embassy Files: FRC 67 A 677, 360.01 Hue) In telegram 798 from Saigon, March 8, the Embassy reported that important Vietnamese officials, including Vice President Tho, feared that the report was based upon the premise that “the less US involvement in SEA, the better for US interests.” (Department of State, Central Files,POL 7 US/MANSFIELD) On March 24, the majority “Personalist Bloc” in the Vietnamese National Assembly issued to the press a comment on the Mansfield report which took issue with a number of the statements in the report, and attempted to rebut “doubts expressed as to Viet-Nam’s political stability.” (Telegram 848 from Saigon, March 27; ibid.) On April 3, Assistant Secretary of State-designate Hilsman sent a memorandum to Frederick G. Dutton, Assistant Secretary of State for Congressional Affairs, in which he assessed the overall impact of the Mansfield report on relations with South Vietnam: “The reaction within the GVN, particularly at the higher levels, has been sharp. We are informed by Saigon that the GVN, and in particular Counselor Ngo Dinh Nhu, sees the report as a possible prelude to American withdrawal. Uncertainty about our intentions has become an obstacle in current negotiations of importance.” (Ibid., Vietnam Working Group Files: Lot 67 D 54, Leg-Mansfield Report)

For John Mecklin’s assessment of the impact of the Mansfield report on relations between the United States and South Vietnam, see Document 60.

44. Letter From the Director of the Vietnam Working Group (Wood) to the Minister-Counselor of the Embassy in Vietnam (Trueheart) 44. Letter From the Director of the Vietnam Working Group (Wood) to the Minister-Counselor of the Embassy in Vietnam (Trueheart)1

Washington, February 26, 1963.

Dear Bill: It would help my relations with the Governor if you could give me information on the following points concerning Task Force Saigon’s relations with U.S. press. The Embassy’s previous telegrams have been very useful.

I know that with about 12,000 military men in Viet-Nam, it is hopeless to expect that they will all see the overall picture and phrase their remarks accordingly when they talk to newsmen. Nonetheless, the impression persists here that the lack of perspective which has been characteristic of news reports from Viet Nam springs at least in part from inadequately informed American military sources. Could you give me a brief rundown on what is being done to insure that official Americans in Viet-Nam understand why we are in Viet-Nam, what our role there is, and how, in general, the war is going? How are they briefed? Is it possible to give MAAG advisers in the field a regular news picture of how the war is going (beyond their own bailiwick)? Any chance of increasing the coverage of the Armed Forces radio? We have survived guerrilla war between the GVN and the reporters, but public criticism between U.S. and ARVN brothers in arms can be more serious.

You will recall that in a recent letter to the Ambassador,2 the Governor suggested that since the Vietnamese appear unable or unwilling to give the newsmen adequate, accurate, and timely information on the war, we must do at least part of the job ourselves, perhaps on an unattributed basis. I believe that in fact you have been doing this discreetly for some time (e.g. Embtel 7583),3 but I don’t know how far you have gone. Are you still avoiding giving out news which does not have some connection with American personnel?

I believe the consensus here on this problem is that we should give the newsmen as complete a picture as possible without regard to the source of our information or the degree of US involvement. If the GVN complains, we can simply say that we have to be candid with our press in order to maintain our present Viet-Nam policy. I don’t think we have your full views on this idea or know exactly what you are now doing.

In the suggestion box we have a couple of ideas on the press problem which I pass along to you for whatever they may be worth. We are somewhat concerned that the plan originally called “explosion” which matured into the national offensive will be picked up by the newsmen and played as the last big push. To prevent this, perhaps we could make it clear in discussions with newsmen that the national offensive now getting under way is really only a gradual increase in activity rather than a sudden or climactic acceleration of the war effort.

Also, to improve the American image of the Vietnamese fighting man—which unhappily is not good at the moment because of unfavorable press reports of the Ap Bac affair—I wonder if we could not find ways of bringing individual acts of heroism and valor to the attention of the newsmen. Probably the best way to do this is through our advisers in the field who are most familiar with such stories and who see newsmen from time to time.

I will see John Mecklin here. So sorry he had to come back on a medical.

All best wishes,

Sincerely,

Chalmers B. Wood4

1 Source: Department of State, Vietnam Working Group Files: Lot 67 D 54, PR-11 Press Relations. Confidential; Official-Informal. Drafted by Heavner and Wood.

2 Document 24.

3 Dated February 16, telegram 758 reported that the Task Force planned expanded efforts to promote news about South Vietnamese social and economic progress. (Department of State, Central Files, PPV 7 S VIET-US)

4 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.

45. Letter From the Ambassador in Vietnam (Nolting) to the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Harriman) 45. Letter From the Ambassador in Vietnam (Nolting) to the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Harriman)1

Saigon, February 27, 1963.

Dear Governor: This is in response to your letter of February 182 outlining Mike Forrestal’s thoughts about more contacts between American personnel in Viet-Nam and non-Communist members of the Vietnamese opposition.

I am sorry that Mike didn’t voice these thoughts while he was here. We could then have filled him in on what is done in this regard on a regular basis and with the knowledge of the GVN. In fact, I should have been glad to introduce him to dozens of non-commie members of the Vietnamese opposition at our home. These might have included a wide assortment of Vietnamese friends—bankers, businessmen, labor leaders, landowners, layers, doctors, university professors-who would doubtless have had a field day criticizing the government in varying degrees and from various angles. But what good this would have done—outside of demonstrating a point and possibly stimulating a coup—I don’t know!

I must confess to being somewhat astonished by the implication that we are living in cocoons here, dealing only with GVN officials and deliberately cutting ourselves off from other Vietnamese elements. This has never been the case since I have been here. One of the first things I did upon arrival was to tell President Diem personally that I intended to see and talk with members of the opposition; that I wanted him to know this and trusted that he would not consider it as plotting or as throwing doubt on US support of South Viet-Nam through its duly elected government. He accepted this in good spirit and we have been doing it ever since. All members of my staff know that they are free to do the same. I have heard some false reports to the contrary. These I attribute to the proclivity of certain oppositionists (and to certain former members of our Mission) to charge a freeze-out when, after hours of conversation, they fail to change one’s opinion.

There is, of course, a great difference between being accessible to oppositionists and giving them encouragement. Many of them tend towards radical solutions and we give them no encouragement. If we are not crystal clear on this, we would stimulate revolution. We have, however, frequently passed on to members of the government what seemed to be reasonable suggestions from oppositionists, and some of these have resulted in government actions. I think, for example, of suggestions about “the complaints department”, the Council of Economic Advisors, and the Provincial Advisory Councils; also such specific complaints as local officials’ overcharging for identity cards in certain Saigon districts.

In brief, I think we have been doing all along what Mike suggests, if I interpret the suggestion correctly. If, however, the idea is to try to build up an alternative to the present government, I believe you already know that I am opposed, for reasons: (1) that I see no viable or better alternative; (2) that any such attempt would ruin the carefully built base of our advisory and supporting role here, which must rest on persuasion and on confidence in our integrity.

I should add that, after the unequivocal public pronouncements of Vice President Johnson two years ago, and more recently the Attorney General and other high US officials, which I myself thought right and proper, I would not find it possible to be the agent in a change of. US policy away from forthright support of the legitimate government, which happens also, in my opinion, to be the best available at the present time.

Sincerely yours,

Frederick E. Nolting, Jr.3

P.S. I am enclosing a memo4 from Barney Taylor on what we’re doing vis-a-vis the CVTC.

1 Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Vietnam Country Series, 2/63-3/63. Secret; Official-Informal.

2 Not found.

3 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.

4 This memorandum, prepared by the Labor Attache in the Embassy, has not been found.

46. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam 46. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam1

Washington, February 27, 1963, 5:24 p.m.

828. Deptel 8072 and Embtel 749.3 News accounts of American combat role continue. Recent stories quote informed American military sources in Viet-Nam as stating US personnel now authorized to “shoot first”,4 state that most combat missions are flown by Americans. We wish reiterate our concern over such stories and reasons for concern as stated Deptel 807. These news reports very damaging both here and abroad and we must do everything possible prevent them in future.

Our policy remains that American role Viet-Nam strictly limited to advisory, logistic, training functions. Any activities such as Farmgate which may be construed as American combat role are not to be discussed with newsmen. This policy set at highest level at time of initiation increased aid to Viet-Nam. It has not changed.

Request all official Americans be instructed above policy still in force and they expected observe it rigorously.

This message approved by White House.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, DEF 19 S VIET Secret. Drafted by Heavuer and cleared by Wood, Rice, Harriman, and Forrestal. DOD/ISA was informed about the cable. Repeated to CINCPAC for POLAD.

2 Document 39.

3 See footnote 7, Document 30.

4 See footnote 2, Document 40.

47. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam 47. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam1

Washington, February 27, 1963, 8:37 p.m.

Aidto 1658. Joint State/AID/Defense message. Subject: Counter Insurgency Measures.

Measures to deny VC sources of supply have received considerable Washington attention recently. Realize CT has considered subject, and that with respect to proposals for control of movement of goods and people, a public safety pilot project being undertaken Phu Yen and that a PROHAB committee established to study subject.

Also realize this is complex subject related to total anti-commie effort on which fully integrated CT judgment must be brought to bear. Recognize this subject also element of recently submitted Comprehensive Plan and plans for intensified national effort this year. We anxious be kept informed your plans and developments in this regard and without attempting second-guess CT, would appreciate your views on following: 1. Desirability of not augmenting planned number of men under arms for above supply denial function, but rather drawing needed personnel from already existing paramilitary organizations.

2. Desirability of establishing clear responsibility for movement control as primary mission of force charged therewith.

3. Importance of assigning local personnel to movement control functions as to give appearance of indigenous control effort rather than of imposing outside control.

4. Need to adapt control system to province chief command structure while developing centralized data collection and professional guidance systems.

5. Need to develop program in way which would complement and support, and not impair key political aspect of developing grassroots political strength for struggle against VC.

6. Need to develop clear lines of responsibility as between civilian police authorities and military/paramilitary forces depending upon actual conditions in area concerned.

7. Need to avoid identification U.S. personnel with actual movement control operations.

8. What new U.S. costs may be involved and can they be offset by concomitant savings to U.S. programs by reason of utilization of personnel or equipment already available.

Would appreciate early reply on interim basis if necessary.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, AID(US) S VIET Confidential. Drafted by Walter G. Stoneman in FE/VN, AID. Cleared in draft in the Department of State by Wood and Maechling, and in Defense and AID.

48. Memorandum From the Director of the Vietnam Working Group (Wood) to the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Harriman) 48. Memorandum From the Director of the Vietnam Working Group (Wood) to the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Harriman)1

Washington, February 28, 1963.

SUBJECT

Status of Strategic Hamlets

1. 5,000 strategic hamlets, with a population of 7 million (58% of the rural population) have now been built. Of these 5,000 the VC attacked 9 and gained entry into 5 during the week of February 13-20.

2. There are three basic problems connected with the hamlets: (a) Their defense. DOD is finding out urgently about what is being done to train village militia.

(b) Their administration. Far too few existing strategic hamlets have trained officials. AID is sending out a very capable man, Gus Herz, who with 5 assistants, will work full time to speed training of those Vietnamese who will in turn train hamlet chiefs and their subordinates. Herz has just returned from a 30-day survey in Viet-Nam. He reports that the Vietnamese Government recognizes the serious need for training hamlet officials and is most willing to cooperate with Herz and his people in speeding up and improving these training programs.

(c) Their cost. The 10 million dollars with which we bought piasters to finance the strategic hamlet program will soon be expended. We believe that the Vietnamese can assume this burden from their own funds, but time is growing short. We are preparing a draft telegram which will contain a suggested letter from you to Secretary Thuan on this subject. It will also review the whole problem of financing the strategic hamlets. Our thought is to ask Fritz in the telegram whether such a letter from you to Thuan would give him the support he needs in the difficult negotiations which will be required to persuade the Vietnamese to increase their own expenditures.

3. Risks of Interdiction Bombing of Populated Places. I have talked with Mike about this yesterday and he agrees that we should try to stop, or at least severely curb, this practice which will probably cost us more in good will than it is likely to achieve in destroying VC installations. We recently bombed a strategic hamlet by mistake. I will try next week to get Bill Bundy’s support and will keep you informed.

1 Source: Department of State, Vietnam Working Group Files: Lot 67 D 54, Pol 26-1 Counterinsurgency. Secret. Sent through Rice.

49. Memorandum From the Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs (Bundy) to the Secretary of Defense (McNamara) 49. Memorandum From the Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs (Bundy) to the Secretary of Defense (McNamara)1

Washington, March 5, 1963.

I-21382/63

Problem: To act on a JCS recommendation for increase of the GVN paramilitary force levels that are authorized MAP support.2

Discussion: The GVN paramilitary force levels now authorized for MAP support are compared below with those proposed 21 Feb 63 by the JCS:

Current Proposed

Civil Guard 81,000 86,000

Self Defense Corps 80,000 104,100

Junk Force None (some materiel support) 4,100

The increases recommended by the JCS will support the planned intensified national effort, meet the time-phased requirements of “clear and hold” operations, and support the strategic hamlet program in South Vietnam. The main objective in increasing the paramilitary strength to the proposed levels is to ensure permanent control in areas secured as the national campaign progresses. The proposed levels were developed by applying a formula that allows, for example, two squads of SDC for each secure village, one platoon for each village not under government control, one platoon for each group of three villages, and one platoon for each training center. Requirements developed in this manner were 2500 platoons and 1600 squads. Civil Guard requirements were estimated by province in a parallel manner. It is anticipated that the Junk Force will be a continuing paramilitary operation that should be regularized to a status comparable with the SDC. CINCPAC foresees the future and continuing requirement to be 4,600 junk sailors to man 644 junks. The actual strengths on 15 Jan 63 were Civil Guard—77755 and SDC—99797.

A related consideration is the Comprehensive Plan for South Vietnam (CPSVN) that has been proposed by CINCPAC to provide for bringing the counterinsurgency effort to a successful conclusion, withdrawing U.S. special military assistance, and developing within the GVN a capability to defend against the continuing threat in Southeast Asia. The JCS are currently preparing recommendations as to the CPSVN, and the ensuing force levels for FY 64 and subsequent years. The FY 63 force levels that would be approved if the attached memorandum is signed are compatible with the force levels proposed by CINCPAC in the CPSVN.

The proposed increases for FY 63 can, according to the JCS and CINCPAC, be accommodated within the currently approved FY 63 MAP funding ceiling.

Recommendation: That you sign the attached memorandum.3

1 Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OSD Files: FRC 69 A 3131, Vietnam 091.4 thru 320.00 1963. Secret. Wood concurred in the memorandum for the Department of State.

2 In memorandum JCSM-152-63 to the Secretary of Defense, February 21, the Joint Chiefs of Staff recommended that fiscal year 1963 MAP support be authorized for the increase in South Vietnamese paramilitary force levels noted in this memorandum. (Ibid.)

3 On March 8, McNamara signed the attached memorandum to the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, that reads as follows: “MAP support is authorized for FY 63 GVN paramilitary force levels of 86,000 Civil Guard, 104,100 Self Defense Corps, and 4,100 Junk Force personnel.”

50. Editorial Note 50. Editorial Note

On March 7, 1963, Forrestal sent a copy of Nolting’s letter, Document 45, to Deputy Assistant to the President Carl Kaysen with a covering note that reads: “Everything is just dandy in Saigon!” (Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Vietnam Country Series, 2/63-3/63) Also on March 7, Forrestal sent a letter to Harriman expressing appreciation for receiving a copy of Nolting’s letter. Forrestal added: “It’s about what I expected, since this is more a question of attitude than of making a case one way or the other.

“The last two paragraphs are significant because I think they suggest that Fritz tends to be more concerned about preserving the legitimate government than keeping in touch with the opposition.

“I might also add that his statement, ‘All members of my staff know that they are free … ‘ to see and talk with members of the opposition was not entirely borne out in conversations that Roger and I had with some members of his staff. I don’t think it does any good to tell Fritz this, because I am sure he is sincere in what he says.

“Your letter has obviously done some good in reminding Fritz of our concern with the issue.” (Library of Congress, Harriman Papers, Forrestal, Michael V. The ellipsis is in the text of the letter.)

Special Assistant to the President Arthur Schlesinger, Jr. sent a memorandum to Forrestal on March 9 in which he reacted to Nolting’s letter and suggested that a new Ambassador should be sent to Vietnam: “The letter from Nolting is one of the most dismal documents I have ever encountered. If Ed Gullion is leaving the Congo, how about sending him back to Saigon.” (Ibid.)

Forrestal sent a copy of Schlesinger’s memorandum to Harriman on March 11 and asked what Harriman thought of the Gullion suggestion. (Ibid.) Harriman’s response to this suggestion has not been found.

51. Memorandum From the Joint Chiefs of Staff to the Secretary of Defense (McNamara) 51. Memorandum From the Joint Chiefs of Staff to the Secretary of Defense (McNamara)1

Washington, March 7, 1963.

JCSM-180-63

SUBJECT

Comprehensive Plan, South Vietnam

1. The Joint Chiefs of Staff have reviewed the attached Comprehensive Plan for South Vietnam (CPSVN), submitted 25 January 1963 by CINCPAC2 for approval in response to your directive set forth during the 23 July 1962 Honolulu Conference.

2. This comprehensive plan provides the special military assistance and equipment the Government of Vietnam will require to carry on an adequate and effective counterinsurgency program with essentially no help from US personnel after Calendar Year 1965.

3. To attain its objectives, the CPSVN is dependent upon the success of the parallel development of many mutually supporting national plans and programs such as the National Campaign Plan, the Strategic Hamlet Program, and the Civilian Irregular Defense Group (CIDG) Program. For example, the Strategic Hamlet Program, which normally is conducted in areas controlled by the Government, is perhaps the greatest single factor in the all-important effort of the Government to reach the people. In close support is the CIDG program which will provide security initially in those areas where the inhabitants do not identify themselves with the Government. It is intended that the successful prosecution of these two mutually supporting national programs will result in 90 per cent of the population pledging allegiance to the Government of Vietnam. The attainment of such a goal is inseparable from the success of the CPSVN.

4. The CPSVN plans a peak armed strength of 575,000 in FY 64-65. This total includes a CIDG with a strength of 116,000 [less than 1 1ine not declassified]which will be phased out as the Government approaches its goal of control of 90 per cent of the population. In this connection, the plan considers the 18 months between FY 64 and end CY 65 as the maximum effort “phase down” period for the CIDG, during which time the strength of these forces is to be reduced from a ceiling of 116,000 to a theoretical zero. The plan also provides a balanced residual national military strength approximating 368,000. Maintenance of the Republic of Vietnam Armed Forces at the levels proposed in the CPSVN, while providing an essential part of the desired military balance within Southeast Asia, will result in an economic imbalance in South Vietnam. Continued US assistance will be required to maintain these forces. This assistance must be subject to continued assessment to reflect requirements resulting from situation changes both in Vietnam and Southeast Asia. By separate action the Joint Chiefs of Staff are establishing procedures for semi-annual formal review of the over-all situation in the Republic of Vietnam (RVN). In this review the size of the proposed residual force will be considered to insure that it is planned to be maintained at a level consistent with the degree of control of the insurgency attained. Conceivably, should the insurgency be reduced to a state of subversion as currently exists in Thailand, some reduction in residual forces could be attained provided the United States guarantees protection against external aggression and renewed insurgency. Long-range AID programs are expected to provide for assumption of internal security responsibilities by a national police force permitting a planned reduction in Government of Vietnam forces.

5. The CPSVN cannot be considered apart from military assistance planning, and to be in consonance, the period of the CPSVN has been extended through FY 69. Based upon current in-country experience factors, a comparison of the estimated costs of the CPSVN with the new dollar guidelines3 indicates an over-all requirement in military assistance planning for an additional $66 million, exclusive of the CIDG program. The preponderance of this additional requirement will be needed in FY 64 when the major portion of the costs of increased training programs, new equipment, and construction occur.

6. Because the greatest increase occurs in FY 64 military assistance planning, an early decision on the CPSVN is required.

7. Related political, economic, and sociological problems, which are under the purview of US Government agencies other than the Armed Services, and which are capable of influencing the success of the CPSVN, will have to be resolved separately. Not the least of these problems is consideration of the effects of the CPSVN on the outflow of gold, the ability of the RVN to undertake additional deficit spending, and the impact of planned residual force structures on the RVN economy. Others include the development by the Country Team of a national police plan for the eventual return to a situation of law and order under normal police controls, and the probable requirements thereafter for continuing US assistance. In addition, the communications-electronics portions of the plan, as it relates to utilization of the tropospheric scatter systems, poses the problem of the replacement of the US military system by the proposed AID microwave system manned by Vietnamese. The problem is presently being reviewed by the Joint Chiefs of Staff along with the impact that redistribution of PACOM communication resources would have on current contingency plans for Southeast Asia. US personnel and materiel will have to be further augmented in view of the increased force levels, compression of training, and accelerated introduction of equipment, for RVN forces, called for in the CPSVN. The Commander in Chief, Pacific, has been requested to furnish an estimate of the peak US military personnel required.4 With regard to materiel, some other transport aircraft, such as C-47 or C-119 aircraft, will have to be substituted for the RVN C-123 aircraft requirement in the plan, since no C-123 aircraft will be available for MAP in the foreseeable future. Nevertheless, the Joint Chiefs of Staff agree that the CPSVN provides an adequate basis for defining the five-year MAP and a realistic framework for integrating the efforts already being expended in related and mutually supporting nation-wide programs and plans such as the National Campaign, the Strategic Hamlet, and the CIDG programs.

8. The CPSVN has been coordinated with the RVN Country Team and concurred in by the Ambassador for MAP planning purposes. It now requires careful coordination and integration of effort by all involved governmental agencies at the Washington level. CINCPAC and Commander, US Military Assistance Command, Vietnam, have recommended that the CIDG program (Switchback) be funded from outside of PACOM MAP. Funding of Switchback for the period FY 64-66 has not been resolved and requires early action to insure a capability for supporting CPSVN as well as other programs covered by NSAM 57.5

9. The Joint Chiefs of Staff recommend that the CPSVN submitted by CINCPAC be approved as the basis for the refinement of the FY 64 MAP and development of the FY 65-69 Military Assistance Plan.

For the Joint Chiefs of Staff:

Maxwell D. Taylor
Chairman
Joint Chiefs of Staff

1 Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OSD Files: FRC 69 A 3131, Vietnam 380 thru 381 1963. Secret.

2 Printed as Document 18.

3 Defense Message DEF 923923, DTG 222243Z Jan 63. [Footnote in the source text. For a summary of this message, see footnote 4, Document 18.]

4 In a March 26 memorandum to the Secretary of Defense, the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff reported that Admiral Felt had estimated that peak U.S. military strength in Vietnam should not exceed 15,640 personnel. (Washington National Records Center RG 330, OSD Files:FRC 69 A 3131, Vietnam 380 thru 381 1963)

5 Not printed.

52. Memorandum From the President’s Special Representative and Adviser on African, Asian, and Latin American Affairs (Bowles) to the President 52. Memorandum From the President’s Special Representative and Adviser on African, Asian, and Latin American Affairs (Bowles) to the President1

Washington, March 7, 1963.

Secret.

SUBJECT

Recommendations for a Fresh Approach to the Vietnam Impasse

I hesitate to play the role of Cassandra again in regard to Vietnam and Southeast Asia. However, I remain deeply concerned about the outlook there, and having talked to Mike Mansfield about his Report and the rather fragile nature of our present position, I feel that I should frankly express my misgivings to you.

I see nothing in the present course of events to dispel my conviction, expressed to you and the Secretary on several occasions, that this situation may ultimately prove to be as troublesome as Cuba in its effects on the Administration’s position at home and abroad.

Although the general outlook here in Washington and in Saigon now seems to be cautiously optimistic, it may be worthwhile to remind ourselves of the confident assumptions of the Eisenhower Administration in a somewhat similar situation during the winter of 1954.

Thus on February 19, 1954, Congressman Walter Judd told the New York Times that Admiral Radford, in testimony to the House Foreign Affairs Committee, reported “the development by the French and Vietnamese commanders in Indo-China, supported by United States financial and military assistance, of a broad strategic concept which within a very few months should insure a favorable turn in the course of the war …2 Communist prospects of achieving any decisive immediate successes are slight while their prospects for ultimate victory are non-existent.”

One month later, on March 22nd, following a White House conference with President Eisenhower, General Ely, and Defense Secretary Charles Wilson, Admiral Radford was again reported in the New York Times as saying that he planned to take up with General Ely the question of U.S. participation in training the Vietnamese army.3 “The French are going to win,” the Admiral was quoted as saying. “It is a fight that is going to be finished with our help.”

Six weeks later, on May 8, 1954, came the surrender of the French garrison at Dien Bien Phu, and the collapse of the entire French position in Southeast Asia.

Nine years have passed, and now it is we who appear to be striving, in defiance of powerful indigenous political and military forces, to insure the survival of an unpopular Vietnamese regime with inadequate roots among the people. And now, as in 1954, many able U.S. military authorities are convinced that the situation is moving in our favor and that victory can be foreseen within two to three years.

I wonder if these assurances are not based on a dangerously false premise, i.e., that the Communists will not embarrass us by upping the military ante.

What we are now holding in check is the Communist “Fourth Team,” most of which, as General Harkins pointed out in a recent interview in Saigon, is made up of local forces armed with old weapons. A much more effective Third Team could be produced by introducing a few thousand of General Giap’s well-armed North Vietnamese troops as “volunteers,” either as cadre infiltrators or as organized units. A still more formidable Second Team could emerge through the addition of Chinese “volunteers” with modern equipment. The First Team (an admittedly unlikely entry since it would create an all-out war) would comprise the Chinese and Vietnamese armies themselves.

Is it not a serious mistake for us to assume that the Communists will limit their efforts in South Vietnam to actions that we can conveniently contain through our present “advisory” operations? On the contrary, it seems to me very likely that Communist counter-pressures will grow in direct proportion to the effectiveness of our own efforts.

If this assumption is borne out by events, it is more than possible that we may soon be faced with increasing Communist opposition, growing U.S. casualties, and rising public resentment here in the United States, followed, as in the days of Korea, by politically inspired demands that we either “admit our error” and withdraw, or go after “the real enemy, which is China.”

I am not unaware of the enormous amount of time, energy and dedication that our people in Washington and Saigon are giving to the problems we face in Vietnam. Nor do I profess to have a handy formula that will enable us quickly to move to firmer ground in our Vietnam operations. I am nonetheless convinced that the ground on which we now stand is likely to become steadily more treacherous unless we attempt a new approach to these problems.

Recommendations:

In the light of this situation, I believe that some basic changes in the policy and personnel aspects of our South Vietnam operations are required as quickly as may be feasible.

These changes should be designed (1) to strengthen our political and military position in Vietnam vis-a-vis the Viet Cong; (2) to lay the groundwork for an acceptable negotiated political settlement in Southeast Asia as a whole at a time when we still retain some strong cards; and (3) to head off serious political pressures here at home well in advance of the 1964 open political season.

Specifically, I suggest action along the following lines: 1. A directive by you, requesting an immediate review in depth of our present Vietnam position within the framework of Southeast Asia as a whole. Such a request might pose the following questions: (a) What are our basic long-range interests in Southeast Asia and, specifically, in South Vietnam?

(b) What kind of South Vietnam will best serve to secure these interests and to assure the continued existence of a viable state free of Communist control: a U.S. military bastion (like Taiwan or South Korea), or a buffer-state area that can be reasonably neutralized (like Malaya or even Burma)?

(c) What sort of military operations are best designed to achieve our minimum political objectives in Vietnam? Our maximum objectives?

(d) What are the political tactics, vis-a-vis the Diem Government and the South Vietnamese people, best calculated to put us in an effective negotiating position?

What we need is not merely a policy to “win the war,” but a definition of what constitutes “winning the war,” and how our military operations relate to realistic political objectives.

I suggest that with all the information now at hand such a policy review could be completed within thirty days.

2. A directive by you to AID and Defense to commence at once a Long-range Assistance Strategy (LAS) study of Vietnam to be used as a contribution to this basic policy review of our interests in Vietnam and Southeast Asia as a whole.

3. On the basis of this overall review, I suggest that the draft speech on U.S. interests and policy in Southeast Asia which I prepared for you last June4 be updated for early delivery on TV or elsewhere by you, the Secretary, Averell Harriman, or some major Administration spokesman.

By laying down a clear and realistic set of objectives now, we could begin to neutralize present and potential domestic critics of our position, bring pressures on the Diem Government, and strengthen our influence among the people of Southeast Asia.

4. Simultaneously, a series of moves should be prepared to narrow the gaps between Diem and the anti-Communist-left and between Saigon and the villager.

Such measures should include: increased pressure on Diem for the broadening of the government’s urban political base and for the wider delegation of political and military authority; new proposals for increased peasant welfare (perhaps along the lines of the Taiwan JCRR); and plans for a gradual lessening of conspicuous one-family rule.

5. At the earliest appropriate moment, a responsible representative (Averell Harriman would appear to be best fitted for the assignment) should be sent to Saigon to make clear to Diem that our continued assistance to his regime is dependent on his acceptance of the fresh political, economic and military approach that these moves embody.

Should Diem refuse to accede to this request, we should be prepared to convey our disapproval of his actions and our openness to alternative leadership through increased Embassy cultivation of Diem’s chief political and military critics.

I do not underestimate the risks of such a course; I simply suggest that they are far less than those we now run, tied as we appear to be to Diem’s coattails.

6. In order to symbolize our shift in policy (and not in any sense to impugn his efforts), I recommend that we recall Ambassador Nolting. Ambassador Edmund Gullion, who knows the area intimately and whose courage, persuasiveness and toughness have been thoroughly tested, would be my first choice as Nolting’s successor.

Gullion’s appointment would indicate to everyone concerned a new U.S. resolve to achieve a more favorable balance among military, political and economic factors in Vietnam.

Although this is admittedly an inopportune time to transfer Gullion from the Congo, he is so ideally qualified for the difficult task in Saigon that I believe the sacrifice to be justifiable.

7. Through personnel changes or otherwise, we should see that the Administration’s new approach is clearly understood and fully supported by U.S. military officers at the highest level in the Pacific Command.

8. Simultaneously, we should seek ways to widen our present set of political choices in dealing with the area as a whole and with Vietnam in particular.

I believe that the time may be ripe, for instance, for a discreet, noncommittal, and confidential approach to the USSR in which the potential dangers to both Moscow and Washington that the Vietnam impasse contains may be underscored.

Indeed, there is already some evidence of an increasing concern about the two Vietnams on the part of the USSR, a concern that we might profitably explore.

Against the background of my previous talks on Cuba and Communist China with Ambassador Dobrynin, there may be something to gain—and certainly nothing to lose—in my quietly raising the Vietnam dilemma with him in an informal way.

The eight-point program which I have proposed is admittedly strong medicine. But, in my opinion, our present course of action within a rigid political and military framework dominated by Diem is very likely to fail, and for this failure we may eventually be called upon to pay a heavy price, both in Asia and here at home.

Again forgive me the Cassandra role, but I am deeply alarmed about the present situation, and I feel that more promising policy choices are available to us.

1 Source: Kennedy Library, President’s Office Files, Staff Memoranda-C. Bowles.

2 Ellipsis in the source text.

3 For documentation on discussions concerning Vietnam with General Paul Ely, Chairman of the French Chiefs of Staff, in Washington in March 1954, see Foreign Relations, 1952-1954, vol. XIII, Part 2, pp. 1133-1173.

4 A copy of this speech is attached to a June 13, 1962, memorandum from Bowles to Kennedy. (Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Meetings and Memos, Staff Memos, Chester Bowles) For the text of the memorandum, see Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, vol. II, Document 214.

53. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 53. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, March 8, 1963, 6 p.m.

800. CINCPAC for POLAD. Dept pass Defense and AID. Aidto 1658.2 Control of movement of goods and people is indeed complex subject which enters into every phase of counterinsurgency. Necessary reemphasize this because tendency exists consider it separate field of action. PROHAB Committee studying means supplement the principal measures for control of movement and denial of support to VC, which are Strategic Hamlet program and military action against VC. Recognizing this, and the necessity to ensure that additional measures are worth the cost in terms of financial and personnel resources and in possible adverse popular reaction, committee is still engaged in seeking to evaluate possible additions to, or possible expansion or improvement of activities currently in progress.

To this end, committee has instituted province-by-province survey to determine (a) what controls are presently in existence; (b) who is carrying them out; (c) how effective are they; (d) present critical VC commodities; (e) present VC source supply (f) present VC methods of movement of commodities. In addition two pilot projects (in Binh Duong and Quang Ngai) using existing military and paramilitary forces especially trained this work by National Police and USOM PSD are expected provide essential practical experience.

At this point, committee’s views on specific points raised reftel are as follows: 1. Agree.

2. Point is ambiguous. Committee does not favor establishment of new force with primary mission control of movement goods and people. Nor does it believe that latter should be primary mission any existing force, civil or military. Movement control should be a complementary effort and one of the tasks accomplished by forces already engaged in security missions. In any given area, however, responsibility for this (and other) functions should of course be clearly defined.

3. Concur in use local personnel for majority control functions except insofar as carried out by ARVN. Also must be recognized that activities of a specialized nature (administration, communication, and investigation) may require use of other than local personnel.

4. Agree.

5. This is essential.

6. Agree.

7. This is true of all U.S. military and civilian effort in RVN. U.S. personnel expected to act in normal advisory role in movement control operations. Though U.S. not identified with operation it must not be onerous or will conflict with essential objective cited para 5.

8. We have little or no basis for cost estimate at this time. if program conducted along lines cited paras 1-7 above, any additional U.S. cost should be modest.

Above replies based on situation which now exists in RVN. National Police organization functions as the primary security force in major urban areas while military forces have this role in rural areas. Military forces, as part of their mission to secure rural areas, engage in movement and population control measures; as areas are cleared of insurgents and the military begins to relinquish control, civil law and order must be established. At this time National Police should be phased into rural area control function, and plans must be developed to accomplish this. It is visualized that members of paramilitary units being demobilized would provide a recruiting base for local police. It is also recognized that necessity for movement and population controls will be greatly reduced when civil law and order replace military controls. In this regard the final disposition or status of the Civil Guard must be determined.

Nolting

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, AID(US) S VIET. Confidential. Repeated to CINCPAC.

2 Document 47.

54. Memorandum From Michael V. Forrestal of the National Security Council Staff to the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Harriman) 54. Memorandum From Michael V. Forrestal of the National Security Council Staff to the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Harriman)1

Washington, March 8, 1963.

SUBJECT

Conversation with Ambassador Tran van Chuong of Vietnam

I had lunch today with Ambassador Tran van Chnong. After lunch the Ambassador said he had something very important and private to tell me.

He began by saying that he had great difficulty in assessing the political importance of the Mansfield report. He said that his own estimate of public opinion in the United States was that it was 99% against the Diem Government, and that sooner or later the political effect of this report would be felt on U.S. efforts in South Vietnam. The Mansfield report, he believed, was just another manifestation of this feeling, and it would no doubt be followed by worse reports.

He then said that he had been in this country for eight years and. under normal circumstances would have resigned as Ambassador a long time ago. The reason he didn’t was that he did not see how he could return home as a private citizen and live in any security. He said he did not dare even to write to his brother, who is still living in Vietnam.

As a Vietnamese patriot, he said he strongly disapproved of the Diem regime, which was not only a dictatorship, but worse-an inefficient one. He said he realized the United States had brought all sorts of pressures on Diem to liberalize the regime but that such pressures were doomed to failure, since running a totalitarian regime was like riding a tiger—you could not get off its back.

The Ambassador said he knew Mr. Nhu very well, since he was his son-in-law. Nhu was the intellectual force behind Diem and would never give up his political power willingly. Indeed it was largely because of Nhu that the Vietnamese Government was deprived of the services of its most able people. There has been a deliberate policy of forcing any person of competence out of his job and into exile. As a result, no matter how much American aid is poured into the country, it will not be managed properly. He estimated that within six months it would become obvious that the Diem regime could not possibly win the war against the Viet Cong. The Ambassador fervently maintained that the United States could not and should not withdraw from his country. To do so, he said, would condemn all Southeast Asia to Communist control. On the other hand, we could not win with Diem. Therefore there was only one course open to us and that was to bring about a change in government, which could probably only be done with violence.

The conversation was almost entirely one-sided, and I was sufficiently non-plussed that I contributed very little to it myself. I protested some of the Ambassador’s statements in the early part of the conversation, but this only served to make him more emotional. Although it occurred to me that the Ambassador might be provoking a reaction, I am inclined to think that he believed what he was saying. He asked that our conversation not be reported.2

“I regime and his son-in-law, Mr. Nhu. I received an hour’s run-down from General Joe Collins, formerly Chief of Staff of the Army, who has known the Ambassador well during his Saigon days. I passed this on to the boys working on Viet Nam and they told me that they had been thoroughly familiar for some time with the Ambassador’s feelings. He has evidently talked this way to a number of people and to each one has asked that the conversation ‘not be reported’.” (Ibid.) have been thoroughly alive to the emotional views of the Ambassador, both about the Diem

MVF

1 Source: Library of Congress, Harriman Papers, Forrestal, Michael V. Top Secret; Eyes Only. Also addressed to McGeorge Bundy and Kaysen.

2 In a March 13 memorandum to Forrestal, Harriman indicated that he was familiar with the views of Ambassador Chuong:

55. Telegram From the United States Information Agency to the Embassy in Vietnam 55. Telegram From the United States Information Agency to the Embassy in Vietnam1

Washington, March 11, 1963, 8:25 p.m.

Usito 235. Joint State/USIA/Defense message. Embtel 497, Deptel 516.2 As Saigon undoubtedly aware, Communist bloc propaganda on “poison gas” in Vietnam apparently is to be massive effort comparable with Korean germ warfare campaign. If Mission concurs, we feel situation calls for action vis-à-vis free world press considerably beyond limits set by reftels. Our thinking is that news dispatches with Saigon datelines telling whole story [of] exactly what is happening would be helpful.

Suggest accordingly, if Mission has not already done so, that newsmen there, including all available third country correspondents, be called in and told in complete detail everything about both crop destruction and defoliation operations. This preferably should be done by GVN but if this not feasible, Mission itself should conduct briefing on non-attribution basis.

Briefing should particularly accent extreme precautions being taken to spray only crops which are established beyond doubt as part of Communist food supply. It should include details on provisions for compensation of damage done unintentionally to innocent peasants, and copious anecdotal background on such advance preparations among population as sacrificial animals for Montagnards. Note that these chemicals widely used in US.

Point should be clearly made that operations are being conducted exclusively by Vietnamese planes and personnel with US only supplying chemicals. If Mission finds it feasible, perhaps plane could be provided to fly newsmen over sprayed areas.

Principle applicable here, in our opinion, is fact that extraordinary precautions have indeed been taken to limit spraying to unquestionably legitimate military requirements, that denial of food and ambush sites is wholly normal procedure in counter-insurgency warfare, and that neither US nor GVN has anything to hide about this. It is essential to achieve necessary credibility, especially in uncommitted third countries, that every possible detail (short of compromising future operations) be given to newsmen on scene. Harriman, Sylvester, Mecklin concur.

Advise action taken.3

Murrow

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 S VIEI Secret. Drafted in USIA/IAF by Mecklin, who was in Washington because of a medical problem. Cleared in USIA by W. Kenneth Bunce, Deputy Assistant Director for the Far East; Thomas C. Sorensen, Deputy Director for Policy and Plans; and Murrow. Cleared in the Department of State by Harriman and James L. Greenfield, Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Public Affairs. Cleared in the Department of Defense by Sylvester and in the White House by Salinger.

2 In telegram 497 from Saigon, November 9, 1962, the Embassy asked for press guidance in connection with the South Vietnamese crop destruction operation in Phuoc Lon Province. The Embassy suggested that, if questioned regarding U.S. involvement, Embassy officials should reply that the United States had provided chemicals and advice, at the request of the South Vietnamese Government. (Ibid., 751K.00/11-962) The Department of State responded, in telegram 516 to Saigon, November 14, that the Embassy’s suggestion was sound, but any such explanation should be prefaced by remarks emphasizing that this crop destruction program was inspired and operated by the South Vietnamese. (Ibid.)

3 According to a memorandum of a telephone conversation, Murrow discussed the telegram with Harriman on March 11, and Harriman agreed to the necessity for such a message. Harriman also suggested that it might be useful to obtain information concerning the type of weed killers used by the Soviet Union. (Harriman Papers, McMNO) In telegram 858 to Saigon, March 12, the Embassy was instructed to consider whether it “might be worthwhile add that these chemicals similar to and no more toxic than weed killers used in USSR and commercially available to farmers throughout most of world.” (Department of State, Central Files, POL 27-10 S VIET)

56. Memorandum From the Joint Chiefs of Staff to the Secretary of Defense (McNamara) 56. Memorandum From the Joint Chiefs of Staff to the Secretary of Defense (McNamara)1

Washington, March 11, 1963.

JCSM-190-63

SUBJECT

Air Augmentation

1. The Joint Chiefs of Staff have reviewed two requests from CINCPAC, both of which recommend that the US air commitment in the Republic of Vietnam (RVN) be augmented. The expanded air effort would be temporary in nature, required until the success of the forthcoming national effort is assured. In addition to recommending that the pilots and maintenance personnel strength of Farmgate be doubled, a requirement for 111 aircraft and about 1,200 personnel was established, consisting of: 2 squadrons L-28 (or equivalent) aircraft (44 a/c)

2 photo reconnaissance aircraft, RF-101

1 squadron C-123 aircraft (16 a/c) with a second squadron to follow if need is confirmed by CINCPAC

1 company CV-2B (Caribou) aircraft (16 a/c)

1 platoon U-1A (Otter) aircraft (8 a/c)

15 0-1 aircraft (L-19)

10 UH-1B helicopters

2. The additional liaison and photo reconnaissance units requested by CINCPAC are required to provide an improved forward air control and an increased air reconnaissance capability. This increased capability is essential to the success of the accelerated counterinsurgency operations in South Vietnam as a part of the national campaign. There are now four L-28 aircraft in Farmgate which are available for visual surveillance and tactical air control. Although programs such as the one for RT-28 pilot training are underway to increase the VNAF capability, effects will not be felt until the second quarter of FY 1964. Therefore, the additional air photo reconnaissance capability at this time must be provided by the US Air Force from resources not currently available in RVN. These commitments would be separate and apart from Farmgate.

3. Further, the RVN National Campaign requires an increase in air transport. With the effectiveness of the national rail and highway systems limited by the security problem, seaport redistribution centers at Danang, Qui Nhon, Nha Trang, and Can Tho are planned to facilitate the sea movement of supplies from Saigon to these coastal points for inland movement, predominantly by airlift. The total monthly air transport requirement is estimated to be 4,375,700 ton miles. Compared with the present air transport capability of 2,190,500 ton miles, a lift deficit of 2,185,200 ton miles is indicated. There are two C-123 squadrons and one CV-2B company in South Vietnam now. The proposed addition of one US Air Force C-123 squadron and one US Army CV-2B company would overcome the anticipated air transport deficit.

4. The U-1A (Otter) aircraft would provide light cargo capability for the Civil Irregular Defense Group (CIDG) program and direct support for US Army advisers. Additional day to day support for the advisers and the CIDG program would be furnished by the 15 0-1 aircraft. Three 0-1 aircraft would be located with each of the five CH21 companies and would provide an estimated 302 sorties per month in support of small unit movement of supplies and personnel, movements of staff, detachment, and control personnel, mail and courier service, and light cargo emergency resupply.

5. The ten UH-IB helicopters will provide the 52nd Aviation Battalion, authorized for deployment in March 1963, with a capability similar to that of the 45th Army Aviation Battalion now in RVN. This has been proved to be most effective in support of Vietnam Army commanders and corps advisers during tactical operations for medical evacuation, inspection visits, sector lift requirements, and other administrative functions. The U H-1B aircraft will also furnish support of US Special Forces in areas where limited or no fixed wing facilities exist, and can respond to tactical lift requirements within the adjacent CIDG protect areas.

6. In addition to augmenting air resources in South Vietnam by the means outlined above, CINCPAC indicates that a 30-35 per cent increased sortie rate for Farmgate would result from doubling pilot and maintenance resources, with appropriate adjustment made to the flying hour program. The present combined monthly sortie rate for Farmgate and the Vietnam Air Force is 1,462. Compared with the estimated monthly sortie rate of 2,642 to support the national effort, a deficit of 1,180 sorties per month will exist. Present strength of Farmgate, including the recent augmentation, totals 42 aircraft and 277 personnel. Increasing the Farmgate sortie rate by the assignment of additional personnel would reduce the estimated sortie deficit established by the increased national effort.

7. During the Joint Chiefs of Staff consideration of the requests by CINCPAC for air augmentation in Vietnam, agreement was reached regarding the additional air units and personnel augmentation as listed in paragraph 1, above. Agreement was not reached, however, on the US source of the two squadrons of L-28 (or equivalent) aircraft.

8. In consonance with the foregoing, the Joint Chiefs of Staff are of the opinion that the requests for air augmentation are necessary and timely, and therefore recommend that you authorize the deployment to RVN of the US Army and US Air Force units requested by CINCPAC. In addition, it is requested that the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, the Chief of Staff, US Army, and the Chief of Staff, US Air Force, meet with you at an early date to discuss the divergence mentioned in paragraph 7, above.

For the Joint Chiefs of Staff:

Maxwell D. Taylor
Chairman
Joint Chiefs of Staff

1 Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OSD Files: FRC 69 A 3131, Vietnam 380 thru 381 1963. Secret.

57. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam 57. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam1

Washington, March 12, 1963, 3:44 p.m.

856. Joint State/DOD/AID. References: 1) Embassy Airgram A-417;2 ) Embtel 800.3 The Joint Chiefs of Staff have recommended that the Comprehensive Plan for South Viet-Nam (CPSVN) be approved as the basis for refinement of the FY 64 MAP and development of the FY 65-69 Military Assistance Plan for Viet-Nam.4 Require ASAP specific Country Team recommendations concerning the CPSVN in view of following factors: (1) Imminence presentation FY 64 MAP to Congress (estimated April). If State/DOD/AID decide accept CPSVN, presentation may be affected.

(2) Fact that most significant cost increase under CPSVN (approximately $75 million) over dollar guidelines occurs in FY 64.

(3) Fact that detailed review of 64 Program is scheduled at CINCPAC in April.

(4) Stated urgency some of the requirements for activations under the increased FY 64 force levels proposed in CPSVN.

(5) Likelihood that to attain objectives of the CPSVN requires parallel development of other mutually supporting national plans and programs. To enable State/DOD/AID expedite decision whether accept CPSVN for planning, request Country Team views or estimates concerning following: 1. GVN willingness make the required additional financial contribution. Realize that CT may judge that direct approaches to GVN now proposing additional GVN deficit or other fiscal measures might adversely affect current negotiations re GVN contribution counterinsurgency funds. If this is case, request CT judgment (without GVN consultation) what portion of additional required piaster financing GVN would accept. If this is less than total 846 million piasters, request general outline of the modification of the CPSVN that would be necessary and revision of total dollar costs for FY 64 that would result.

2. Para 3e of the CPSVN indicates CIDG personnel may be absorbed into National Police during “phase down”. Can we assume plans that must be developed as described Embtel 800 so provide?

3. Requirements for dollar purchase of piasters for construction indicated in CPSVN for FY 64 and subsequent years and feasibility construction with local currency not affecting gold outflow?

4. Is there provision in the CPSVN for a MAP/AID “maintenance” cost for villages and hamlets secured under CIDG program after they pass to the strategic hamlet program?

5. What revisions current political economic programs would be required if CPSVN approved?

6. What would be economic consequences if additional 846 million piasters provided through GVN deficit financing?5

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, DEF 19 S VIET Secret; Priority. Drafted by Wood and cleared by Barnett, in AID by Stoneman, and in DOD/ISA by Colonel Kent. Repeated to CINCPAC for POLAD.

2 Airgram A-417 from Saigon, February 8, enclosed three copies of the Comprehensive Plan for South Vietnam, and indicated that “the Ambassador has concurred in the Plan as a basis for MAP planning.” (Ibid.)

3 Document 53.

4 See Document 51.

5 In telegram 857 to Saigon, March 12, the Embassy was asked for additional comment on the Comprehensive Plan: “State requests frank TF/Saigon view on whether plan should be changed to extend phase out U.S. forces by one year (FY 65 through 68 rather than FY 65 through 67).

“In requesting this view we have in mind that such stretch out would

“a) require smaller increase in FY 64 training costs to U.S. and GVN;

“b) lessen risk inability GVN take over in FY 67;

“c) reduce political risk that GVN become unduly concerned that U.S. planning pull out.” (Department of State, Central Files, DEF 19 S VIET)

58. Memorandum From Michael V. Forrestal of the National Security Council Staff to the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Harriman) 58. Memorandum From Michael V. Forrestal of the National Security Council Staff to the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Harriman)1

Washington, March 13, 1963.

SUBJECT

Defoliation and Crop Destruction in South Vietnam

The President would like an up-to-date report on the results of defoliation and crop destruction carried out by the ARVN.

The report might contain brief statements on the following: 1. Defoliation Activities. Number of miles of lines of communication cleared. Estimate of military effectiveness of the operations. Proposed plans for future operations.

2. Crop Destruction. Location and number of acres of crops destroyed. Estimate of amount of food denied to Viet Cong. Evidence of significant military results. Future plans.

3. Political Effects inside and outside South Vietnam. Reaction of local populace to defoliation and crop destruction operations. Estimate of success of psywar measures by ARVN. Description of international Communist propaganda and estimate of its effect on the United States posture before international opinion. Effectiveness of measures taken by the United States to counter adverse propaganda.

4. Recommendations. Should the defoliation operations or crop destruction operations or both be suspended? Should any changes in the operations be made in the field either to improve their effectiveness or to minimize adverse political reaction? If it is desirable to continue or expand these operations, are there any additional propaganda measures which the United States should take to minimize adverse international reaction?

I would suggest, if you agree, that Ben Wood should try to coordinate the views of the JCS and Ed Murrow’s shop into a single paper for the President.2

Mike

1 Source: Department of State, Vietnam Working Group Files: Lot 67 D 54, POL 27-10 Chemical Warfare. 1963. Secret.

2 Telegram 872 to Saigon, March 15, requested the Embassy to contribute a full report on defoliation and crop destruction programs to date for the draft response being prepared for the President. (Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Vietnam Country Series, 2/63-3/63)

59. Minutes of Meeting of the Special Group for Counterinsurgency 59. Minutes of Meeting of the Special Group for Counterinsurgency1

Washington, March 14, 1963, 2 p.m.

PRESENT

Mr. Johnson, the Attorney General, Mr. Gilpatric, Mr. Murrow, Mr. Forrestal, Mr. Janow and Mr. Wolf vice Mr. Bell, General Krulak vice General Taylor, Mr. Karamessines vice Mr. McCone

Mr. Koren was present for Items 1 and 2

[Here follows discussion of Thailand under item 1, “Southeast Asia Status Report”.]

South Viet-Nam

General Krulak observed that Viet-Cong activities during the last six months have been at a level 50% less than last year. It is not known whether this means they are regrouping for a greater effort, or if their capability has been reduced.

Mr. Murrow stated that our press relations in Saigon suggest to him the need for a single U.S. spokesman, to represent both civilian and military officials, under close direction from Washington. Mr. Murrow was asked to develop this idea and to again bring it up for. discussion.

The members agreed to re-examine the military justification for continued use of defoliants.

[Here follows discussion of items 2, “Progress Report on the Internal Defense Plan for Cambodia”; 3, “Review of Counterinsurgency Programs in Venezuela”; and 4, “Military Mobile Training Teams”, and “Miscellaneous Items” which do not relate to Vietnam.]

James W. Dingeman
Executive Secretary

1 Source: Department of State, Special Group Counterinsurgency Files: Lot 68 D 451, Special Group (Cl). Secret. Drafted by Dingeman who is not listed among the participants.

II. Increasing Tensions Between the United States and South Vietnam, March 15-May 8, 1963: Reaction to the Mansfield Report, the “Press Problem,” the Number and Role of U.S. Advisers in Vietnam, Differences Over the Joint Counterinsurgency FundII. Increasing Tensions Between the United States and South Vietnam, March 15-May 8, 1963:
Reaction to the Mansfield Report, the “Press Problem,” the Number and Role of U.S. Advisers in Vietnam, Differences Over the Joint Counterinsurgency Fund

60. Memorandum From the Counselor and Public Affairs Officer of the Embassy in Vietnam (Mecklin) to the Public Affairs Adviser in the Bureau of Far Eastern Affairs (Manell)

Washington, March 15, 1963.

Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 306, USIA/IOP/R Files: FRC 68 A 1415, Vietnam-General and Personnel. Secret. Also sent to Manning and Bunce in USIA.

61. Letter From the Ambassador in Vietnam (Nolting) to Secretary of State at the Presidency and Assistant Secretary of State for National Defense Thuan

Saigon, March 18, 1963.

Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 84, Saigon Embassy Files: FRC 67 A 677, 350 GVN Task Force (Econ). Confidential. Drafted by Solomon Silver of USOM. Transmitted to Washington in Toaid A-2874.

62. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, March 18, 1963, 7 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, AID(US) S VIET. Confidential; Limit Distribution.

63. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, March 20, 1963, 11 a.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27-10 S VIET. Secret; Limit Distribution. Repeated to CINCPAC for POLAD.

64. Memorandum From the Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs’ Special Assistant (Jorden) to the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Harriman)

Washington, March 20, 1963.

Source: Department of State, Vietnam Working Group Files: Lot 67 D 54, POL 27-11 Infiltration. Secret.

65. Memorandum From the Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs’ Special Assistant (Jorden) to the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Harriman)

Washington, March 21, 1963.

Source: Department of State, Vietnam Working Group Files: Lot 67 D 54, PR-II Press Relations (Moss Comm). Confidential; Eyes Only. Harriman indicated on the source text that he was sending copies of this memorandum to Hilsman, Rice, and Wood, and intended to brief Rusk on it verbally. He wrote: “I accept these comments & recommend they be adopted as guides.” In circulating the memorandum for this purpose, however, Harriman indicated that numbered paragraph 8 of the Recommendations section should be omitted.

66. Airgram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam

Washington, March 22, 1963, 5:13 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 26-1 S VIET Top Secret; Priority. Drafted by Heavner and Wood, cleared by Harriman and Hilsman. Repeated to CINCPAC for POLAD. JCS and DOD/ISA were informed of the contents of the message.

67. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, March 26, 1963, 7 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, DEF 19 S VIET. Secret. Repeated to CINCPAC.

68. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, March 28, 1963, 8 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, AID(US) S VIET. Secret; Limit Distribution. Repeated to CINCPAC.

69. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam

Washington, March 29, 1963, 1:04 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, AID(US) S VIET Secret; Limit Distribution; Operational Immediate. Drafted by Heavner and cleared by Koren, Rice, and Hilsman. Repeated to CINCPAC for POLAD.

70. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, March 30, 1963, noon.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, AID(US) S VIET. Secret; Limit Distribution. Repeated to CINCPAC.

71. Telegram From the Commander, Military Assistance Command, Vietnam (Harkins) to the Commander in Chief, Pacific (Felt)

Saigon, March 30, 1963, 2:05 p.m.

Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 84, Saigon Embassy Files: FRC 68 A 5159, Interdiction, SGN (63)19 GVN. Top Secret; Priority. Sent to CNO exclusive for Admiral Felt who was in Washington and for General Barnes. A copy was sent by courier to Ambassador Nolting.

72. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Hilsman) to the Secretary of State

Washington, April 1963.

Source: Kennedy Library, Hilsman Papers, Vietnam Country Series, Hilsman Trip 12/62-1/63, Related Documents. Secret. Also sent to McNamara, McCone, Harriman, McGeorge Bundy, William Bundy, and Forrestal.

73. Memorandum of a Conversation, Department of State

Washington, April 1, 1963, noon.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL S VIET Secret. Drafted by Wood on April 5 and approved in M on April 15. Thompson spent 2 weeks in Washington at the end of March and the first week in April. During the period April 1-4, Thompson met with a number of officials concerned with developments in Vietnam including Hilsman, Harriman, Rusk, Murrow, McNamara, and Kennedy. No records of Thompson’s conversations with Hilsman, Rusk, Murrow and McNamara have been found. Regarding Thompson’s conversation with President Kennedy, see Document 77.

74. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam

Washington, April 1, 1963, 5:40 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, AID(US) S VIET Secret; Operational Immediate; Limit Distribution. Drafted by Heavner and Stoneman and cleared by Wood, Rice, and Hilsman, and in DOD/ISA in substance by Heinz. Repeated to CINCPAC for POLAD.

75. Memorandum for the Record by the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (Taylor)

Washington, April 2, 1963.

Source: National Defense University, Taylor Papers, T-646-71. Secret.

76. Memorandum From the Director of the Vietnam Working Group (Wood) to the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Hilsman)

Washington, April 3, 1963.

Source: Department of State, Vietnam Working Group Files: Lot 67 D 54, DEF 19-3, Equip and Supplies. Secret. Drafted by Heavner. A copy was also sent to Rice.

77. Memorandum of Conversation, White House

Washington, April 4, 1963, 10 a.m.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Vietnam Country Series, 4/63-5/63. Secret. Drafted by Wood on April 5. Approved by the White House on April 9.

78. Minutes of Meeting of the Special Group for Counterinsurgency

Washington, April 4, 1963, 2 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Special Group Counterinsurgency Files: Lot 68 D 451, Special Group (CI). Secret. Drafted by Dingeman who is not listed among the participants.

79. Letter From the Director of the Vietnam Working Group (Wood) to the Ambassador in Vietnam (Nolting)

Washington, April 4, 1963.

Source: Department of State, Vietnam Working Group Files: Lot 67 D 54, ORG-1 Gen Pol (Off & Inf Lets). Secret.

80. Memorandum From the Joint Chiefs of Staff to the Secretary of Defense (McNamara)

Washington, April 4, 1963.

Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OSD Files: FRC 66 A 3542, 370.64 2 Feb. Vietnam 1963. Secret.

81. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, April 5, 1963, 7 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 26-1 S VIET Secret; Priority; Limit Distribution. Repeated to CINCPAC.

82. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, April 7, 1963, 1 a.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 26-1 S VIEI Secret; Priority; Limit Distribution. Repeated to CINCPAC. Also published in Declassified Documents, 1978, 433B.

83. Editorial Note

84. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam

Washington, April 8, 1963, 8:06 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, AID (US) S VIET. Secret; Operational Immediate. Drafted and cleared by Wood. Repeated to CINCPAC for POLAD and to Paris for the U.S. Delegation at the SEATO Council meeting.

85. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, April 9, 1963, 7 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 26-1 S VIET Secret; Operational Immediate; Limit Distribution. Repeated to CINCPAC and Paris. A note on a copy of this telegram in the Kennedy Library indicates that it was included in the briefing book prepared for the President for the NSC meeting on April 10. (Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Vietnam Country Series, /4/63-5/63)

86. Telegram From the Delegation at the SEATO Council Meeting to the Department of State

Paris, April 10, 1963, 2 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POLS VIET. Confidential; Priority. Repeated to Saigon.

87. Editorial Note

88. Memorandum for the Record of a Conversation With the Presidential Counselor (Ngo Dinh Nhu)

Saigon, April 12, 1963.

Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 334, MAC/V Files:FRC 69 A 702, 501-03 (63). Secret. Drafted on April 15. The name of Nhu’s interlocutor, who drafted the memorandum, was not declassified.

89. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, April 13, 1963, 1 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 15-1 S VIET. Confidential; Limit Distribution.

90. Telegram From Michael V. Forrestal of the National Security Council Staff to the President, at Palm Beach, Florida

Washington, April 16, 1963, 3:42 p.m.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Vietnam Country Series, /4/63-5/63. Secret; Operational Immediate. Transmission was authorized by Bromley Smith. Sent to the President’s naval aide, Captain Tazewell T Shepard, for the President. A handwritten note on the source text indicates that the President read the telegram.

91. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, April 17, 1963, 3 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, AID (US) S VIET. Secret; Limit Distribution. Repeated to CINCPAC.

92. Editorial Note

93. Memorandum From the Joint Chiefs of Staff to the Secretary of Defense (McNamara)

Washington, April 17, 1963.

Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OSD Files: FRC 66 A 3542, Vietnam 1962 370.64 2 Feb. Secret.

94. National Intelligence Estimate

Washington, April 17, 1963.

Source: Department of State, INR-NIE Files. Secret; Controlled Dissem. According to a note on the cover sheet: “The following intelligence organizations participated in the preparation of this estimate: The Central Intelligence Agency and the intelligence organizations of the Departments of State, Defense, the Army, the Navy, the Air Force, and NSA.” All members of the U.S. Intelligence Board concurred in this estimate on April 17, except the Atomic Energy Commission Representative and the Assistant Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation, who abstained on the grounds that the subject was outside their jurisdiction. The statement of the problem and the conclusions are also printed in United States-Vietnam Relations, 1945-1967, Book 12, pp. 522-524.

95. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam

Washington, April 18, 1963, 6 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, AID (US) S VIET. Secret. Drafted by Wood and cleared by Rice and Hilsman, in AID by Stoneman and R. Poats, and in DOD by Colonel Kent. Repeated to CINCPAC for POLAD.

96. Memorandum Prepared in the Department of State

Washington, April 18, 1963.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Vietnam Country Series, 4/63-5/63. Secret. Attached to a covering memorandum dated April 18 from William H. Brubeck, Executive Secretary of the Department of State, to McGeorge Bundy, which indicates that it was prepared in response to Document 58. Information on a draft of this paper found in Department of State files indicates that the paper was prepared in the Vietnam Working Group on April 17 by Heavner. (Department of State, Vietnam Working Group Files: Lot 67 D 54, Pol 27-10 Chemical Warfare, 1963) On April 17, Hilsman sent a copy of the paper to USIA Director Murrow for comment, with a covering memorandum that indicated the paper had been prepared in FE with the assistance of the USIA Vietnam desk. (Washington National Records Center, RG 306, USIA/TOP Files: FRC 67 A 222, IAF Defoliation-1963) Murrow responded on April 19 with a memorandum to Harriman in which he indicated that, while USIA felt that herbicide operations in South Vietnam were contributing to a potentially damaging propaganda campaign being orchestrated from Hanoi, “we concur—if reluctantly—in the recommendation that herbicide operations be continued.” (Ibid.)

97. Memorandum From the Director of the Vietnam Working Group (Wood) to the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Hilsman)

Washington, April 18, 1963.

Source: Department of State, Vietnam Working Group Files: Lot 67 D 54, Def 19/2 Advisory and Training Assist. Secret. Sent to Hilsman through Rice.

98. Memorandum From Michael V. Forrestal of the National Security Council Staff to the President

Washington, April 22, 1963.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Vietnam Country Series, 4/63-5/63. Secret. Also sent to McGeorge Bundy.

99. Central Intelligence Agency Information Report

Washington, April 22, 1963.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Vietnam Country Series, 4/63-5/63. Secret; No Foreign Dissem; No Dissem Abroad; Background Use Only. Also published in Declassified Documents, 1977, 93B.

100. Airgram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, April 25, 1963.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 26-1 S VIET Top Secret. Drafted by R. H. Miller and cleared by Manfull and General Harkins. Repeated to CINCPAC for POLAD.

101. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, April 26, 1963, 5 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, AID (US) S VIET Secret; Priority; Limit Distribution. Repeated to CINCPAC.

102. Memorandum From the Assistant Director for Rural Affairs, United States Operations Mission in Vietnam (Phillips), to the Director of the Mission (Brent)

Saigon, May 1, 1963.

Source: Hoover Institution Archives, Lansdale Papers, Chron File C. Secret. A note on the source text indicates that copies were also sent to the Ambassador, the Deputy Chief of Mission, J-5 MAC/V, J-3 MAC/V, Chief of MAAG, Chief of OSA, and the Director of the Office of Vietnam Affairs, AID/Washington.

103. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam

Washington, May 1, 1963, 4:29 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, AID (US) S VIET. Secret; Priority; Limit Distribution. Drafted by Montgomery and Poats and cleared by Wood, Donald L. Woolf in SEA, Robert W. Barnett and Hilsman in FE, Fowler in AID, and Kent in DOD/ISA. Repeated to CINCPAC for POLAD.

104. Letter From the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Hilsman) to the Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs (Bundy)

Washington, May 1, 1963.

Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OASD/ISA Files: FRC 67 A 4564, Vietnam 1963 333 Jan. Secret. The copy of this letter in Department of State files indicates that it was drafted on April 18 by Wood and cleared by Harriman, Johnson (G), and Rice. (Department of State, Central Files, DEF 19-3 US-S Viet)

105. Memorandum From the Deputy Director of the Vietnam Working Group (Heavner) to the Director (Wood)

Washington, May 2, 1963.

Source: Department of State, Vietnam Working Group Files: Lot 67 D 54, Pol 15 Govt. Secret; Limit Distribution.

106. Memorandum for the Ambassador in Vietnam (Nolting) and the Commander, Military Assistance Command, Vietnam (Harkins)

Washington, May 3, 1963.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Vietnam Country Series, 4/63-5/63. Secret; Limit Distribution. A note on the source text indicates that the memorandum was to be hand-delivered by Arthur Sylvester, Assistant Secretary of Defense for Public Affairs. A covering memorandum from White House Press Secretary Pierre Salinger to Sylvester, also dated May 3, notes that the memorandum “has been signed off here.” Salinger added that Sylvester should obtain the necessary clearances in the Departments of Defense and State. There is no indication on the source text of such clearances.According to Salinger’s memoirs, he drafted the memorandum on instructions from President Kennedy after the President had met with John Mecklin at the White House on April 29. Salinger arranged the meeting for Mecklin, who was in Washington recuperating from surgery, after Mecklin convinced him that the President should be informed of the “mounting difficulties in Saigon” regarding press coverage of the war. (Salinger, With Kennedy, p. 400) Mecklin wrote of this meeting that Kennedy was “skeptical but willing to try” his advice that the administration make an effort to take newsmen into their confidence. (Mecklin, Mission in Torment, pp. 149-151) After the meeting, Salinger recorded that “the President told me he had been deeply impressed with Mecklin’s recital-but at the same time he did not feel that any new press policy in Vietnam would, in the long run, be successful because of the highly conflicting interests of the government and the press there.” Nevertheless, after a discussion, in which McGeorge Bundy participated, Kennedy authorized Salinger to draft a new press guideline to be delivered to Harkins and Nolting by Sylvester at one of the periodic review meetings in Honolulu. (Salinger, With Kennedy, p. 401) The policy outlined in the memorandum was formally implemented in the press policy guidance sent to Saigon on May 21 in Document 130.

107. Memorandum for the Record of the Secretary of Defense Conference

Honolulu, May 6, 1963.

Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OASD/ISA Files: FRC 69 A 6214, Sec Def Conference (HQ CINCPAC). Secret. Drafted in Washington on May 8.The participants in the conference, which was held at CINCPAC headquarters, included Secretary of Defense McNamara, General Harkins, General Krulak, Admiral Felt, Assistant Secretary of State Hilsman, Ambassador Nolting, and USOM Director Brent.

108. Letter From the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Hilsman) to the Director of the United States Information Agency (Murrow)

Washington, May 6, 1963.

Source: Department of State, Vietnam Working Group Files: Lot 67 D 54, INF Information Activities (Gen). Secret. Drafted on April 15 by Wood and cleared by Rice. Also sent to Jorden.

109. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, May 6, 1963, 7 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27-14 S VIET Secret. Repeated to CINCPAC, London, New Delhi, and Ottawa.

110. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam

Washington, May 7, 1963, 7:57 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27-10 S VIET Secret; Priority; Limit Distribution. Drafted by Montgomery and cleared by Heavner, Hilsman, Harriman, Heinz, Murrow, and Forrestal. Repeated to CINCPAC for POLAD. On May 15 Forrestal sent a copy of the telegram to McGeorge Bundy with a covering memorandum which reads, in part: “The arrangements described in the cable are satisfactory to me, but let me know if you have any other thoughts.” Bundy initialed the memorandum and indicated in the margin that the arrangements described were “OK”. (Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Vietnam Country Series, 4/63-5/63.)

111. Memorandum From the Secretary of Defense (McNamara) to the Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs (Nitze)

Washington, May 8, 1963.

Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OASD/ISA Vietnam Task Force Files: FRC 75-163, Chronological File-Vietnam-1963. Secret.

60. Memorandum From the Counselor and Public Affairs Officer of the Embassy in Vietnam (Mecklin) to the Public Affairs Adviser in the Bureau of Far Eastern Affairs (Manell) 60. Memorandum From the Counselor and Public Affairs Officer of the Embassy in Vietnam (Mecklin) to the Public Affairs Adviser in the Bureau of Far Eastern Affairs (Manell)1

Washington, March 15, 1963.

SUBJECT

Saigon Reaction to Mansfield

Further to Governor Harriman’s request, here are my recollections of the reaction in Saigon to Senator Mansfield’s recent report on his visit to Southeast Asia.2 I assume you will pass them on to the Governor if appropriate.

As you know, there was a considerable difference between the tone and content of the initial U.S. news agency stories and of the report itself. As is, unhappily, so often the case, the news stories accented its negative comment on the Diem regime.

Reactions thus came in two parts: dismay initially, a degree of reassurance when the full text of the report arrived. As far as I know, neither the U.S. Mission nor the GVN was given an advance copy of the report. If this had been done, some of the damage inflicted by incomplete press dispatches could have been averted. It would be useful to distribute advance copies to the parties concerned in future release of papers of this sort.

There was no coverage at all of the report in the Vietnamese press, and thus no editorial comment. This in itself is significant, in my opinion, of a rather chastened mood (however privately bitter) inside the GVN as a result of such recent reminders of sensitive U.S. public opinion as the press uproar over Ap Bac and Secretary Rusk’s public criticism of the lack of adequate facilities for newsmen in Viet-Nam. In previous cases of this sort, the GVN often has printed severe foreign criticism in its controlled press, in order later to counter-attack. There was a CAS report3 that one group inside the GVN wanted to use this technique on Mansfield, but was overruled by the palace.

Similarly, the Mission feared that Mme. Nhu would be stirred to attack the U.S. in her speech on Truong Sisters Day (the national women’s festival) which happened to come a few days after the Mansfield paper was released. Ambassador Nolting strongly advised the GVN against permitting her to do this, and in fact warned that he would walk out of the ceremony if she persisted, thus precipitating an ugly, open issue. The speech contained some unpleasant comment on foreign critics, but there were no names and in general it was moderate by comparison with some of her past explosions.

As of my departure from Saigon on March 5, there had been no further GVN public comment that could be related to Mansfield. This clearly seemed to be a hard policy decision since GVN sources had also refrained even from private, anonymous comment to foreign newsmen.

To a lesser degree, this was also true of official GVN comment to the U.S. Mission (as of March 5). I happened to have applied for a meeting with Ngo Dinh Nhu a fortnight earlier to discuss plans for the projected Chieu Hoi (call to return) program to encourage Communist defections. On the morning after the Mansfield report was released, Nhu called me to the palace to talk Chieu Hoi. It was quickly evident that what he really wanted to discuss was Mansfield—but he was relatively guarded, again I think reflecting a GVN decision not to engage in polemics with the U.S. at this point.

Nhu’s main point was that the Mansfield report would hurt the Chieu Hoi effort because it suggested flagging U.S. support and thus would influence possible VC defectors to postpone action (which seemed a bit incongruous in view of his repeated previous statements that the U.S. presence should be downplayed). At one point he called the report “treachery” and he remarked rather enigmatically that “it changes everything,” declining my invitation to elaborate. He listened somewhat absently and wearily as I remarked that the report was not U.S. Government policy (which I think he doubted, on the assumption that it could not have been released without the President’s approval) and that nothing should be permitted to weaken the existing close U.S. working relations with the GVN in Viet-Nam. Altogether Nhu gave an impression of weary frustration with what he considers U.S. vagaries-or worse. He definitely was not as angry as on some previous occasions, but there seemed little doubt that the report would add to U.S. difficulties in working with him. (Nhu commented similarly to CAS, including, I believe, an unhappy reference to Mansfield’s praise for Sihanouk, whom Nhu detests.)

A few days later, President Diem called me to the palace to express regrets about my departure for Washington. He talked for 2-1/2 hours, mostly about military operations, and mentioned the Mansfield report only once. This was a parenthetical remark that such foreign talk as this encourages the Communists to make a greater effort. He said it possibly would lead to new Communist infiltration to try to exploit the report’s “demoralizing” impact in South Viet-Nam. He did not pursue the subject further and plainly wanted no comment from me. He was otherwise friendly and apparently unperturbed.

I can’t recall that my lower-level GVN friends volunteered any reaction at all to the report. When I asked Phan Van Tao, Director General of Information, what he thought, the reply was a grimace and shrug, again tending to confirm my theory of a policy directive to clam up. But there was no doubt that the GVN was shaken by the initial press treatment of the report, coming as it did on top of a wave of other criticisms. On the basis of my personal knowledge of the notable personality complexities of the Ngo Dinh family, it may be speculated that this kind of suppressed bitterness could turn out to be more consequential to our relations with the GVN than a public explosion.

The full text of the Mansfield report had just arrived when I left Saigon. The immediate result was relaxation, as it was seen that Mansfield urged continuation of the U.S. effort at its present level. The longer term impact remains to be seen, but it may be useful to register some personal speculation.

It is close to axiomatic that the Ngo Dinhs are seldom “persuaded” in the Western sense, by logical U.S. arguments. Nhu, for example, has said repeatedly that Americans don’t “understand” Asians, Communism, or much of anything else on the intellectual level. Where the GVN has acceded to U.S. wishes, as it frequently does, and often gracefully, I think the main reason has been a realistic acceptance of the political imperative to get along with the U.S., not because our arguments were compelling-however much the results may have subsequently confirmed them. This, I think, is why very few of our agreements with the GVN had materialized except when the U.S. brought direct, specific pressure. It is characteristic of the Ngo Dinhs [less than 1 line not declassified] that they usually come to claim as their own successful actions that were initially urged by foreign advisers, e.g. the strategic hamlet program which grew in large measure from the Thompson Mission.

Thus, I don’t think the Mansfield paper will have much effect, in itself, on GVN performance, i.e., its suggestions for specific actions will not be persuasive. On the contrary, I think Diem and the Nhus will resent the outrageous claim of a foreigner to the right to discuss internal Vietnamese affairs, and this in turn will exacerbate their existing emotional attitudes toward the U.S. These, however, were already richly developed.

But politically I think it may turn out that Mansfield’s report will be beneficial to the U.S. interest at the Saigon operating level. We have lately been approaching a showdown in our dealings with the GVN in some areas, e.g., the recent prolonged dispute about a GVN piaster appropriation for the strategic hamlets. Within limits, the Mission has almost literally been doing what our press critics have so long urged: “getting tough with Diem.” This, I think, has combined with the recent stateside public splashes on Viet-Nam to create the psychological state of suppressed bitterness mentioned above. In effect, what’s happening is that the Ngo Dinhs’ (especially Nhu’s) dislike and suspicions of the U.S. are hardening, and presumably will make trouble for us at some future date as the Communist threat declines. But at the same time the GVN seems to have decided realistically, on the political level, to go along with us at the pressure points, as indicated by its eventual surrender on the piaster issue.

It is certainly debatable whether this is a desirable state of affairs in relations with an ally, but experience indicates that in the case of the GVN it may be the only way to get urgently essential things done. If this is to continue, incidentally, it is important that this changing relationship not be leaked to the press, or hinted in any way in official U.S. public statements. News stories with gloating headlines, e.g., “Diem at last heeding U.S. advice,” would so anger the Vietnamese that emotion might once again prevail over the GVN’s political judgments. (Which in itself is a glimpse of our dilemma in dealing with the U.S. press, since, of course, stories of this sort would strengthen support for U.S. policy in Viet-Nam.)

Within this framework, I think the Mansfield report will be helpful to the Mission in Saigon, at least indirectly, in reinforcing our repeated appeals for better cooperation on grounds of the sensitivity of U.S. public opinion. The GVN has long been particularly alert to Mansfield, first because of his early support for Diem, and later because of the disillusion he revealed in his speech at Michigan State in the summer of 1962.4 It would be surprising indeed if the Vietnamese Embassy in Washington is not reporting that such doubts by a man in Mansfield’s key political position indicate a real possibility of a change in U.S. policy. In other words, paradoxically, we may have arrived at the point where negative criticism of the GVN is almost as useful in the present circumstances in Saigon as it is damaging to the Administration’s defense of its policy at home.

It follows, however, that if this is the case, we are in a perilous situation. We certainly can’t live on paradoxes indefinitely. Altogether I think the Mansfield report’s political and psychological impact, both here and in Saigon, tends to confirm its main point: that it is essential for the U.S. and the GVN to strive more vigorously than ever to turn the struggle decisively against the Communists, as quickly as possible-before the Western political deterioration that Ho Chi Minh has predicted begins indeed to set in.

John M. Mecklin5

1 Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 306, USIA/IOP/R Files: FRC 68 A 1415, Vietnam-General and Personnel. Secret. Also sent to Manning and Bunce in USIA.

2 See Documents 42 and 43.

3 Not found.

4 See Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, vol. II, Document 214.

5 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.

61. Letter From the Ambassador in Vietnam (Nolting) to Secretary of State at the Presidency and Assistant Secretary of State for National Defense Thuan 61. Letter From the Ambassador in Vietnam (Nolting) to Secretary of State at the Presidency and Assistant Secretary of State for National Defense Thuan1

Saigon, March 18, 1963.

Dear Mr. Secretary: I refer to Mr. Brent’s letter of January 14, 1963,2 and to our subsequent conversations on the subject of a piaster fund to finance the local currency component of the jointly agreed priority economic program. The high priority accorded the strategic hamlet program and the total counterinsurgency effort by both our governments, in addition to the recognized need for adopting procedures of implementing such programs in an extraordinary and expeditious manner compatible with the extraordinary demands of counterinsurgency, are the factors prompting the proposal to establish a new fund.

Mr. Brent’s letter communicated to you a proposal worked out at the staff level in broad terms. These proposals are elaborated below in more specific terms which I hope you will find acceptable on behalf of the Government of Viet-Nam. The proposal consists briefly of the following points:

I. Total Requirements

At the staff level, a total piaster requirement for the economic program has been agreed to on the order of 2.3 billion piasters. The Directorate General of Budget and Foreign Aid and USOM have been: working on the details of this program, and while they have not reached agreement on all details, the differences are small enough that it has become, I am sure, a relatively minor problem. The breakdown of this requirement, prepared by the USOM, is attached for your convenience.

II. Sources of Financing

Sources of financing for the Fund in 1963 would be (a) the unexpended balance of “purchased” piasters (approximately 635 million as of January 1, 1963); (b) the unobligated balance of 1962 counterpart (approximately 200 million piasters as of January 1, 1963); (c) all newly generated counterpart not committed by agreement to the military budget; (d) other GVN piasters, including VN$300 million “earmarked” in the National Budget for counterinsurgency, VN$100 million from the Lottery, and additional amounts as required to make up the deficiency between the total agreed program, on the one hand, and the total of (a), (b), and (c) on the other.

III. The Fund

It is proposed that a piaster Fund for the agreed program be established (a special “compte hors budget”), upon signature of a Fund Agreement. The Fund Agreement would provide principally for the following: (a) The deposit in the Fund of the unexpended balance of the $10 million “piaster purchase.” From the moment of such deposit the piasters would be subject to the procedures applicable to all releases from the Fund.

(b) The deposit in the Fund of all counterpart piasters not already obligated and not otherwise committed by joint agreement to the military budget.

(c) The deposit into the Fund of the Government of Viet-Nam’s contributions including, but not limited to, the 300 million piasters earmarked in the 1963 budget for strategic hamlets and 100 million piasters from Lottery receipts.

(d) In the case of U.S. purchased piasters and unencumbered counterpart piasters, the deposits would be made initially upon establishment of the Fund. In the case of additional GVN contributions, deposits would be made in such a manner as to insure adequate financial resources to cover obligations contained in Action Plan Piaster Agreements or Project Agreements. In order to facilitate expeditious preparation of such agreements, the total of deposits to the tuna from all sources would not be less than 1.5 billion piasters by June 30, 1963 and 2.0 billion piasters by September 30, 1963.

(e) The Fund would be managed by the Director General of Budget and Foreign Aid, and obligations against it would be accomplished by Action Plan Piaster Agreements and Project Agreements signed by him on behalf of the Government of Viet-Nam and by the Director of USOM on behalf of the United States Government

IV. Implementing Agreements

(a) With respect to Action Plan Piaster Agreements in which responsibility for administration rests primarily with the province chief (with the assistance of the province committee), the development of specific requirements and budgets would continue to arise from hamlet, village, district and province requests, which would be screened, as is now the case, by the Interministerial Committee on Province Rehabilitation, on the one hand, and by the U.S. Interagency Committee or USOM, on the other hand. It would then be signed by, in addition to the two signatories noted in III (e) above, the province chief concerned, and by the head of the Secretariat of the Interministerial Committee.

(b) With respect to agreements for which the primary responsibility for direction and administration resides with a GVN national agency or any other agreements to be financed from the Fund, such agreements would be signed by the head of the appropriate agency, as well as by the Director General of Budget and Foreign Aid and the Director of USOM.

V. Expenditures

As there are at this time two distinct types of operation-expenditures made at the province level and those made by national agencies or departments—I propose the following procedures appropriate to each: (a) For expenditures made at the province level, the procedures now in use for U.S. “piaster purchase’ release agreements would be used. This procedure involves the establishing of a fund at the province level which is initially funded for only a relatively small portion of the total agreed expenditures, and is then replenished as required by expenditures under the approved plan.

(b) For plans administered by national agencies, procedures similar to those now used for such expenditures would be employed. It has been agreed by our staffs that some improvements in these procedures might be effected on the occasion of the establishment of this Fund.

In conclusion, it should be pointed out that we recognize that the extent of the liability of the GVN for this fund is not a fixed one. We cannot predict precisely the amount of counterpart that will become available for this purpose. There is no way this can be determined in advance very definitely, since commercial import program licensing rates and military budget requirements are factors in the equation.

It is proposed, however, that in view of the high priority accorded by both our governments to the counterinsurgency effort, that the Government of Viet-Nam agree to provide from its own resources whatever funds are necessary to augment previously identified contributions to the fund to the extent necessary to fully fund an agreed 1963 expenditure program of approximately 2.3 billion piasters. And it is noted that the GVN’s contribution to the Fund from non-aid generated sources would not exceed as a maximum, 1.4 billion piasters (including the 300 million and 100 million piasters referred to in II (d) above) even in the event that newly generated counterpart piasters available to the Fund in 1963 were zero. This assumes the contribution in excess of 200 million unencumbered 1962 counterpart piasters and 635 million purchased piasters. The actual GVN contribution might, of course, be less.

If this proposal is agreeable to your government, I would appreciate your concurrence. This would then permit our respective staffs to undertake the establishment of the fund and implementation of the program.3

Accept, Excellency, the renewed assurances of my highest consideration.4

Attachment

PROPOSED 1963 PRIORITY PIASTER PROGRAM5

Note: Figures shown were developed by USOM in December, 1963 [1962] during DCBFA/USOM staff talks. A number of modifications will be necessary when final agreement on the program is worked out, following establishment of the Fund.

Total Program (piasters millions) 2,325

A. Activities Directly Affecting Strategic Hamlets 1,330

1. Province Administered 1,200

S.H. Construction, Civic Action Teams

Hamlet Militia

Resettlement

Training Hamlet Councils

Self-Help

Hamlet Schools

Village/District Works

Fishboat Motors, Facilities

Windmills

VC Rehabilitation, Resettlement

Emergency Relief

Miscellaneous and Contingency

Montagnards Plans

2. Administered by National Agencies 130

Well Digging

Rural Info. Media

Plant Protection

Village/Hamlet Radios

Identification (Teenage Photographs)

Village Health

B. Activities Supporting the Above (Administered by National Agencies) 330

Farm Improvement

Credit and Coops

Land Development

Irrigation

Rural Trade Schools

Public Health (Province Level)

Malaria Eradication

Operations Support

C. Support of Infrastructure for War Economy 390

Highways

Municipal Water Supply

Electric Power

Inland Waterways

Air Traffic Control

National Information Programs

National Radio Network

National Instructional Materials

Nursing Services

National Public Safety Services

D. Long Range Economic Development 85

Vocational Education

Teacher, Public, Higher Education

Medical Education

Participant Costs

Labor Institutions

Public Administration

Agriculture (Support)

Saigon Fish Facilities

E. Program Administration 190

1 Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 84, Saigon Embassy Files: FRC 67 A 677, 350 GVN Task Force (Econ). Confidential. Drafted by Solomon Silver of USOM. Transmitted to Washington in Toaid A-2874.

2 Not found.

3 In telegram 821 from Saigon, March 19, Ambassador Nolting reported that he gave this letter to Thuan on March 18: “Thuan promised prompt response and said that he did not anticipate any difficulties”. (Department of State, Central Files, AID(US) S VIET) The source text is a copy of the letter sent to Thuan and contains no indication of his response.

4 The source text bears no signature.

5 Confidential. Prepared in the Embassy in Saigon.

62. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 62. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, March 18, 1963, 7 p.m.

820. For Harriman. Deptel 871.2 I have not yet had opportunity to read subject GAO report, although I understand a draft of it has reached USOM. I would like, however, to make a preliminary comment based on contents reftel.

For many months this Mission has been reporting steady and encouraging progress in the slow and difficult counterinsurgency and pacification effort here. At the same time, we have pointed out that the general situation, though improving, is still fragile and subject to dangerous deterioration, physical and psychological. We are not out of the woods yet; the favorable trend is not irreversible. Any sign of weakening could well result in another attempt to overthrow the government. The predictable result of such an attempt—whether successful or not—would be, in my judgment, a bonanza for Hanoi. As it now stands, continued foreign press criticism of the GVN and US policy here, followed by the Mansfield report and signs of reluctance and disillusionment on the part of certain segments of US opinion, have without doubt encouraged coup plotting, have made the govt here tighten up rather than liberalize, and have encouraged the enemy. I do not think in these circumstances we can afford a public chastisement of the GVN (and/or our own policy) by a US agency. This is not said in an attempt to stifle criticism. It would, however, be totally incredible to the Vietnamese people (government and non-government, friendly and hostile) that the US could sustain a position with one hand and publicly slap it down with the other. They would certainly interpret this as foreshadowing change of US Govt policy here. In this connection, it seems to me pertinent to recall the first commandment of our task force instructions issued two years ago.3 To build confidence in US intentions to support this country through its duly-elected government, and to use that confidence to improve and underpin the entire situation. These basic instructions have not been changed to my knowledge. We have made, and continue to make, measurable progress under them. I have a strong feeling that publication of the GAO report as summarized and as suggested in reftel would gravely undermine this progress. I do not believe that its publication in any form would provide us leverage in negotiations with GVN.

It is, therefore, my strong recommendation that US Government consult with Congressional leaders with view to deferring publication of GAO report indefinitely. Executive branch should of course, undertake investigate and correct any specific deficiencies USOM operation brought out by report.

Nolting

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, AID(US) S VIET. Confidential; Limit Distribution.

2 Telegram 871, a joint State/AID message to Saigon, March 15, informed the Embassy that a draft GAO report on Vietnam had been prepared, covering roughly 1958 to mid-1962, which was “severely critical of several AID operations,GVN shortcomings in mobilizing resources, and GVN personalities.” The report also “discloses course of several negotiations with GVN and impugns its good faith.”GAO reports were customarily printed in unclassified form, but the State Department indicated that it would attempt to have the criticisms of the South Vietnamese Government which were contained in the report classified. (Ibid.)

3 An apparent reference to the instructions transmitted to the Embassy on May 20, 1961. For text, see Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, vol. I, Document 56.

63. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 63. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, March 20, 1963, 11 a.m.

824. Reference: Deptel 872.2 Emb A-480 and A-5 193 gave evaluations respectively of Phuoc Long crop destruction and Ca Mau defoliation operations. Evaluation of defoliation operation Rt 1, Phu Yen and Binh Dinh provinces being pouched. Interim evaluation Thua Thien crop destruction operation will follow shortly. In brief, latter operation, carried out with hand-sprayers on ground, proved difficult from point of view logistics and security. Terrain, isolation of area, and VC response made it difficult for chemicals to be transported to target sites and to be applied to crops. Out of 120 hectares planned to be sprayed, only 12 were attacked with herbicides, additional 20 destroyed by hand. Also, psywar effort reportedly not wholly satisfactory. TF/Saigon currently attempting obtain further details on which base evaluation this operation.

As will be seen from airgrams referred to above, it extremely difficult obtain precise, statistical results defoliation and crop destruction operations, particularly in terms specific military impact and reactions local people. We must rely on judgments and to some extent our conclusions have had to be based more on absence adverse evidence rather than on positive evidence. Similarly, we have drawn conclusion about military effects which are general but which, on basis available evidence, we consider valid.

Regarding plans for future operations, General Harkins and I recently approved GVN request, supported by USOM recommendation, for applying herbicides to railroad right-of-way primarily for proper railway maintenance and only secondarily for security purpose. Project will be carried out on ground by railroad maintenance employees and herbicides will be provided by USOM from U.S. commercial sources. Same criteria as for military defoliation projects being applied: avoidance of crops, proper stage of growth, psywar effort. We also anticipate that GVN will in near future submit rather extensive proposals for defoliation and crop destruction in anticipation next growing season. In fact, it has recently submitted several targets which now being studied. We consider it important to determine future basis for herbicide operations and to inform GVN soon so that its planning may be developed accordingly.

On basis evaluation results so far, General Harkins and I recommend that chemical defoliation and crop destruction be continued (latter as integral part of more general GVN food denial program) but on new footing: instead of considering chemical defoliation and crop destruction as separate program under which appropriate targets can be selected, herbicides should be considered as an effective tool to be employed in specific situations and areas where we can determine that their employment will hurt VC military or supply operations. This shift in emphasis would still mean limiting crop destruction operations to crops definitely identified as being grown by or for VC, such as those near or in definitely established VC secret bases (e.g., Zone D or Duong-Minh-Chau Zone) and where denial those crops would magnify VC supply problems greatly and directly. Similarly, for defoliation new basis would still mean limiting operations to targets where we see definite and justifiable military utility. In both defoliation and crop destruction, however, new emphasis should mean greater dependence on views and recommendations local commanders and advisers rather than on those of GVN/JGS in Saigon. This should permit operations to be more directly related to local military situation, thereby ensuring greater military impact.

Procedurally, General Harkins and I recommend that we be given authority approve crop destruction targets now, as well as authority approve other defoliation targets in addition to lines of communication and related areas. We would continue report operations fully to Washington with our evaluations as information becomes available. Regarding selection targets, we would envisage continuing same careful selection process used to date, judging selections on basis existing criteria.

Regarding propaganda and political effects, implications and effects present bloc campaign against “poison gas” and “noxious chemicals” difficult foresee at present. However, we have no information suggesting that operations carried out to date have had any measurably adverse effects on local population vis-à-vis GVN or U.S. Moreover, from our vantage point, we can see no signs that bloc propaganda has tended undermine international support for U.S. effort in SVN or for Diem government, or that it has raised questions regarding U.S. moral standing or adherence to international agreements. Accordingly, we recommend that use of herbicides be continued on basis described above, recognizing that bloc propaganda efforts will continue and likely increase as VC are hurt. We also recommend that, in order help combat bloc propaganda with truth, results of herbicide operations be included in daily GVN and U.S. military press briefings and that reporters be given opportunity observe defoliation or crop destruction missions.

Regarding Department’s paper, our records indicate trial defoliation operations began August 1961 (Rt 13, Chon Thanh), and that thirteen specific areas have been hit. Regarding crop destruction, as noted above only about 12 hectares sprayed with herbicides in Thua Thien, bringing total chemical crop destruction efforts to 312 hectares. As for military effectiveness defoliation, would prefer see it described as appearing have general impact on security situation although no statistical results can be isolated. Again, with crop destruction, evidence of military effectiveness may never be conclusive in wholly measurable terms but believe Phuoc Long operation validates general conclusion that VC in Zone D hurting for food and that whatever done to deny them food will add to their problems.

Nolting

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27-10 S VIET. Secret; Limit Distribution. Repeated to CINCPAC for POLAD.

2 See footnote 2, Document 58.

3 Neither found.

64. Memorandum From the Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs’ Special Assistant (Jorden) to the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Harriman) 64. Memorandum From the Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs’ Special Assistant (Jorden) to the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Harriman)1

Washington, March 20, 1963.

SUBJECT

Infiltration in Viet Nam

(This memorandum is based on a study of the above subject conducted during a visit to Viet Nam from February 21 to March 14.)

Problem. To demonstrate the continued use of Laos as a channel for introduction of Viet Cong personnel and war material into South Viet Nam, particularly since October 7 by which date all foreign military personnel were to have been withdrawn from Laos under the Geneva Agreement.

Procedure. Before departing Washington, I read all available information on this subject. In Saigon, I reviewed more recent data with the Embassy and CAS. The subject was discussed in detail with the G-2 section of MAC/V. The latter has just completed a study of infiltration and has submitted it to the JCS.

Then, working through contacts in the Vietnamese Government I was able to look over the evidence in the hands of ARVN/G-2 and other intelligence agencies. This evidence consisted of captured weapons and supplies, interrogation reports of VC prisoners and defectors, captured diaries and documents. Finally, I visited a number of posts near the border and talked with Vietnamese and American officers who are concerned with border control and the infiltration problem.

Findings. Infiltration from North Viet Nam into South Viet Nam occurred through the first eight months of 1962. It is possible to demonstrate that the territory of Laos and Cambodia was used for this purpose. In addition, external support for the Viet Cong effort can be demonstrated in the increasing quantity of arms and equipment captured in South Viet Nam which originated from bloc sources. These include weapons and ammunition, particularly of Chinese origin, and medical supplies from Communist China, North Viet Nam, Hungary and East Germany.

It is not possible, however, to prove any significant movement of personnel through Laos and into South Viet Nam since September, 1962. As of the date of my departure from Saigon, no VC prisoner or defector had come into GVN hands who admitted entering South Viet Nam after October 7. Informants in the Highlands and other areas have reported Viet Cong moving over trails and through or near villages from the direction of Laos in recent months. But hard evidence is lacking.

Conclusions. We cannot now prove a clear violation of the Laos Agreement by demonstrating that foreign military personnel crossed into South Viet Nam from Laos since October 7, 1962. Nor, in fact, is there hard evidence that the elaborate program of infiltration from North Viet Nam into the South continued during the past five months on any significant scale.

I question, therefore, the utility at this point of producing a follow-up report on this subject along the lines of the Department’s earlier white paper, “A Threat to the Peace.”2 Nor do we have in hand the kind of material that would make possible an effective protest to the Soviets in their role as co-chairman of the Laos settlement.

It appears virtually certain, however, that the kind of evidence we seek will become available within a reasonable time. Officials in Saigon, both Vietnamese and American, are alert to the problem and can be expected to report promptly any significant new evidence that becomes available.

Some Observations on Infiltration.

Problems of control—the people.

Control of Viet Cong infiltration into South Viet Nam depends on control of the Highlands. This, in turn, means winning the confidence and cooperation of significant numbers of the Highland tribes who inhabit most of the area. A start has been made by the handful of able and talented Special Forces teams now operating in the area. More, much more, must be done if this problem is to be met even half-way.

A major disadvantage in this effort is the contempt in which most Vietnamese hold the tribal peoples. This sentiment is reciprocated by the Montagnard. Moreover, the Viet Cong have devoted considerable effort to winning Montagnard support by both promises and threats. Some Vietnamese understand the problem perfectly well and are working to overcome the residue of distrust and dislike that has prevailed. But it is going to take a major effort to convince the average Vietnamese soldier, officer and government official of the necessity for treating the tribesmen as something more than sub-human.

The territory.

The most misleading thing we can do is to look at a political map of Viet Nam and think in terms of “sealing off” the border. A topographical map helps. Better still, one should fly over the vast trackless area that is the Viet Nam-Laos border region. Mile after mile of mountains and steep valleys unfold below you. The whole area is covered by impenetrable forest growth. Now and then you see a hut, or a cluster of three of four, in the middle of nowhere. The monotony is broken occasionally by a open plot burned into a hillside for planting.

I visited one post where part of a Vietnamese battalion (181 men) and one lonely American sergeant were stationed. Their sector was an area of more than 250 square miles. Their assignment-to patrol their area and to keep a 20 mile stretch of highway open and safe. A regiment might have been able to do it.

At another post, a 12-man American Special Forces team had trained a 200-man strike force of Montagnard and a patrol group of 150. Their area was 1,800 square miles.

An American officer noted: “They could put the Fourth Route Army through here and we wouldn’t know it until they hit somewhere.”

No one is quite certain just where the Laos border is. Three maps of different scale each show it differently with variations up to ten miles.

These are some of the things we must consider when we talk of border control and infiltration in Viet Nam.

Need for better surveillance.

If infiltration from the North and through Laos is to be controlled or even restricted, it is clear that greater efforts will have to go into tighter border surveillance. This calls for an accelerated effort with the mountain tribesmen. One promising program in this regard is the proposal to form small (five-man) patrol units to move into the large unpoliced area east of the Laos border. Their job would not be to engage the Viet Cong, though they would carry light arms to defend themselves. Rather they would try to spot infiltration groups, report their size and direction, discover the most used trails for later ambush, locate feeding and rest stations, and the like. For both political and practical reasons, we should seek to engage the Vietnamese in this program as actively as possible.

Deep surveillance.

From the testimony of Viet Cong infiltrators and other evidence, it seems certain that much of the effort depends on VC establishments in such places as Tchepone, Saravana and Atopeu. Officers on the scene think that surveillance of these areas by small patrols would produce invaluable information on the Viet Cong infiltration and supply effort. Such a program of deep surveillance involves sensitive political questions which must be weighed carefully. However, we should consider that we are dealing with an enemy that treats such niceties with contempt. If there has been no recent review of this problem, this might be an appropriate time for reconsideration.

Aerial surveillance.

I understand that the program of aerial reconnaissance over suspected VC base areas in Laos and along the border area was halted some time ago. U.S. officers in Viet Nam believe that this amounts to tying one arm behind our back in the anti-infiltration effort. Should not this matter be reconsidered?

VC aerial flights.

I heard several reports in the border areas of mysterious night flights from the direction of Laos flying due East into the heart of the Highlands and then returning in the direction of Laos some time later. People on the scene assumed they were VC flights and that they were either delivering key personnel or high priority equipment to a VC base in the area.

Officials in Saigon appeared not to have heard of these reports. The matter should be checked carefully. If there seems to be any basis in fact for the belief that some kind of air drop effort is underway from Laos to the VC, appropriate steps to intercept should be undertaken.

A downed plane from Laos carrying VC supplies or personnel would provide us with dramatic evidence of infiltration to say nothing of a clear violation of the Laos Agreement.

Nature of infiltration.

The most recent information from VC prisoners and defectors includes some disquieting data. An increasing number of infiltrees during 1962 were specialists—in antiaircraft, armor and transport. This suggests a move toward much more sophisticated activity than the VC have engaged in heretofore. The number of recoilless rifles in VC hands has increased and there have been several reports that they have 50 cal. machineguns, effective against aircraft.

Our intelligence people in Saigon are fully aware of these developments. We should consider them here in assessing VC plans and determination to counter the heightened use of air and armor by the GVN.

1 Source: Department of State, Vietnam Working Group Files: Lot 67 D 54, POL 27-11 Infiltration. Secret.

2 See footnote 3, Document 35.

65. Memorandum From the Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs’ Special Assistant (Jorden) to the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Harriman) 65. Memorandum From the Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs’ Special Assistant (Jorden) to the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Harriman)1

Washington, March 21, 1963.

SUBJECT

Press Reporting from Viet Nam

Problem

There is, I think, a serious misunderstanding of what has come to be called the “press problem in Viet Nam.” The impression has gained currency in official circles that “the real story” is not being told. The press has been described as negative, biased, naive, or worse. Some officials believe that American reporters in Viet Nam concentrate on criticism and pay slight attention to some of the promising and encouraging developments.

Periodically, a story appears from or about Viet Nam which causes official embarrassment. Often our reaction is to try to discover the source and plug the “leak,” to order our people not to talk about the subject concerned, and to think in terms of how we can “balance” the account.

Blame is variously ascribed—to the GVN’s lack of capability and skill in handling information problems, to the GVN’s official policy of regarding anything critical of itself as treasonable or pro-Communist, to the immaturity or irresponsibility of the American press, to the alleged proclivity of the press toward the sensational, the negative, and the critical.

Some Observations

1. The Viet Nam story is one of great complexity and with infinite shadings and nuances. There is considerably more gray than there is black or white. In any situation as complicated as this, we have to expect reporting—whether official or in the press—that is good and bad, fair and unfair, balanced or one-sided, accurate or in error. We are getting far more of the former of each of these pairs than of the latter.

2. To ignore the many negative features of the situation in Viet Nam is to dangerously delude ourselves. There is a vast multitude of problems and only by recognizing them can we hope to do something about them. A reporter who exposes such a problem may well be opening the door to its solution.

3. The quality of reporting by American newsmen from Viet Nam is, in my opinion, exceedingly good. They are young, it is true. And they are still learning their trade. But they are doing so with energy and seriousness of purpose. They spend a considerable amount of time in the provinces and the villages and with the military forces in the field. They have both better information and a better feel for the situation than many military officers and officials in Saigon.

They do not rush into print with everything they hear or know. Each one of them has on occasion not written stories he could have because he felt it would jeopardize military security or some larger interest.

They have made mistakes. None of them probably would write each of his stories precisely as he did if he were doing it over. But the same is true of any good reporter. No one in whatever profession can be very active without an occasional mistake. In general, I think that errors of fact or judgement have been no greater in reporting from Viet Nam than on any major story of this kind.

The relative youth of the reporters in Saigon is sometimes given as an explanation for alleged deficiencies in their reporting. Yet some of the most “critical” and “negative” reporting from Viet Nam in the past year or so has come from such reporters as Homer Bigart, Keyes Beech, Robert Martin, and Bob Trumbull—each of them mature, seasoned, and experienced reporters.

3. [sic] We can understand the problems of the reporters in Saigon only by realizing some of the difficulties under which they operate. I refer here to the negative attitude of the Diem Government toward the foreign press. With their own press under total control, they find it difficult to understand why the U.S. press is permitted to travel freely and write freely. The highest officials in Saigon regard the foreign reporters as a kind of fifth column in their midst. The police keep careful check on where the reporters go and with whom they talk. The threat of expulsion hangs over them constantly.

4. The editorials of many American newspapers have been far more intemperate and one-sided than any of the reporting from Saigon. A phrase or a sentence in a story from Viet Nam—probably accurate in the context in which it was used—is sometimes pulled out and used as the basis for the most sweeping generalizations about the country, its government or the military situation. There is a tendency to confuse reporting from and about Viet Nam with editorials and other comment and to bracket them all under the term “press coverage.”

5. It is charged that the reporters have stressed excessively the role of American forces and personnel in Viet Nam and downgraded the Vietnamese effort. We must recognize a fact of life: any time we have 12,000 Americans in a country, particularly if they are under combat or otherwise hazardous conditions, there is going to be more interest here in how they are faring and what they are doing than in almost any other development. Also, a story from Viet Nam that mentions one or some Americans is much more likely to appear on the front pages here than a story that includes no such mention.

Many stories are written from Viet Nam that do not mention Americans directly or indirectly. It is not the reporters’ fault that they often end up as four or five paragraphs on Page 15.

6. It also is unfortunately true that “bad news” is likely to get more space and prominent display than stories of progress and hope. A defeat is likely to win more attention than a victory. The determination of space and display is made in the home office, not by the reporter on the spot.

7. We cannot hope to get 12,000 Americans scattered widely over the Vietnamese countryside to stop talking to reporters. It is sometimes possible, particularly in the Saigon area, to limit discussion of a single matter for a limited time period. Control is also possible on matters to which a very limited number of people have access. But efforts to get all Americans to avoid discussing this or that subject are likely to prove ineffective.

On the whole, we are likely to have more success in keeping sensitive matters out of print if we give reporters the details on an “off the record” basis accompanied by an explanation of why publication would adversely affect our interests. This is not foolproof, of course, but it is likely to be more effective than efforts at mass muzzling. This approach should not be used to conceal bad news but to protect information in which very real security interests may be involved.

Some Recommendations

1. We should encourage the GVN by every available means to improve its information policy and techniques and to avoid excited and vocal reactions to every story it considers critical of itself. This is not an easy task. The present and former Public Affairs Officers in Saigon have worked hard and with some success on this matter. The effort should be continued. As much as possible we should encourage the GVN to do the kind of job it did this week on the “germ warfare” charges.

2. The desirability of getting the best possible Public Information personnel into MAC/V cannot be exaggerated. It is essential that the PIO’s, particularly the chief PIO, be competent, imaginative and forceful and that they have the confidence of both their superiors and of the press.

3. There should be the closest possible working relationship between the PIO and the press attache in USIS. They should share information and ideas and consult daily. Sensitive matters or policy questions should be referred to the Public Affairs Officer and, as he deems necessary, by the PAO to the Ambassador. All concerned should try to promote as fast and as free a flow of information as possible.

4. The Embassy should give its full support to the PAO, the press attache and the cause of freer and fuller information. I suggested in Saigon that the Embassy consider setting up a weekly meeting between the resident American correspondents and a responsible Embassy officer. These sessions should be a two-way street-an opportunity for the Embassy to provide background and perspective but also to get information and to discover and respond positively to the correspondents’ problems or complaints. An occasional session with the Ambassador serves the good cause of promoting better mutual understanding, but the reporters understand he is a busy man.

5. In Saigon and in Washington, news stories from Viet Nam should be read more as a source of information than of possible embarrassment. Time and energy devoted to correcting weaknesses or mistakes would be better spent than that devoted to stopping leaks or criticizing the reporters.

There will be times when we will want to comment on a news story with a statement aimed at providing balance and perspective. But we should avoid rushing into print with public disclaimers or denials. These have at times been just as wrong or misleading as the reports they sought to balance.

6. It would be useful if high officials here would take appropriate opportunities to clarify U.S. policy in Viet Nam and to put the total situation in focus. It would be helpful to give Viet Nam particular attention in the useful series of regional background sessions which the Public Affairs Bureau has developed. Any presentation of the situation should, of course, include a realistic balance of positive and negative aspects.

7. Here and in Saigon, we should view with considerably more equanimity, the occasional appearance of stories that appear to be “negative” or “embarrassing.” This situation can never be eliminated. We can and should do those things within our power. especially in Saigon, to introduce balance and perspective. But this can only be done on a basis of mutual trust and confidence between reporters and officials.

We can hope to deal with a problem as difficult as that of Viet Nam only with the fullest possible information. In my opinion, the American reporters in Viet Nam are making a valuable contribution in providing us and the American people with many of the facts we need.

8. To anyone interested in the press situation in Viet Nam, I would commend highly the very thoughtful report2 prepared for Ambassador Nolting last November by Mr. John Mecklin, the PAO in Saigon.

Finally, I would say that the U.S. Government is fortunate in having in Saigon men with the intelligence, drive and understanding of press problems of Mr. Mecklin and the new press attache, Mr. Paul Garvey. Hopefully the new PIO in the military command will have similar qualities. If their advice is sought and followed, we should be well on the way toward handling a problem that can never really be solved.

1 Source: Department of State, Vietnam Working Group Files: Lot 67 D 54, PR-II Press Relations (Moss Comm). Confidential; Eyes Only. Harriman indicated on the source text that he was sending copies of this memorandum to Hilsman, Rice, and Wood, and intended to brief Rusk on it verbally. He wrote: “I accept these comments & recommend they be adopted as guides.” In circulating the memorandum for this purpose, however, Harriman indicated that numbered paragraph 8 of the Recommendations section should be omitted.

2 Dated November 27, 1962; for text, see Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, vol. II, Document 322.

66. Airgram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam 66. Airgram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam1

Washington, March 22, 1963, 5:13 p.m.

CA-10362

Subject: Interdiction. For Nolting from Harriman. The use of air power in counterinsurgency operations in Viet-Nam has been subject to continuing study and refinement. The Country Team, and particularly the military members of the Country Team, are to be commended for their constant efforts to increase the effectiveness of our air advantage in Viet Nam.

However, we must never forget that this is a political war and since more than a year has now passed since we began our expanded assistance to Viet-Nam, we feel that we must now undertake a careful evaluation of the future use of both American and Vietnamese air power against the Viet Cong.

There appears to be no doubt of the great value of the increased mobility which transport planes and helicopters have conferred on the RVNAF. Relief by air power of units, posts, and hamlets under attack has proved very important. Reconnaissance by air is also most valuable. In the case of close air support for Government-initiated offensive operations, the picture is not so clear, however, and further study seems in order. But we are particularly struck by the difficulties of assessment with regard to interdiction missions.

In an effort to clarify the value of air interdiction missions and place them in proper perspective, we have drawn up the following balance sheet. We are aware that our information is incomplete. The great difficulty here is that, basically, any evaluation of the usefulness of air interdiction tends to become an evaluation of the temper of the Vietnamese people. The difficulties of assessment do not make it any less important, however. We therefore request that the Country Team consider the following statement of the problem, give us their comments, and wherever possible, provide us with more complete information.

Problem

We understand that U.S. piloted combat fixed-wing aircraft now fly about 1,000 sorties monthly. Of these, about 530 are in direct support of ground actions. Over 300 of the remainder are interdiction missions. These, as we understand it, are independent air strikes against ground targets believed to be Viet Cong positions or bases.

Targets for interdiction missions are often inhabited. Given the Viet Cong dependence upon the people, it is believed likely that many Viet Cong bases and installations include numbers of persons who are not hard core Communists, who are less than wholehearted supporters of the Viet Cong, or who may even be basically anti-Viet Cong.

Joint US-Vietnamese procedures for checking targets and controlling aircraft to insure that they hit the right target have been very carefully worked out and refined. They are believed to be basically sound. The intelligence on which targeting is based, however, comes from Vietnamese sources which are often difficult to evaluate. To the degree that this intelligence is faulty or imprecise, the likelihood of injuring or killing civilians is increased.

We have in fact received scattered reports of civilians being injured and killed by interdiction missions. Considering the difficulty in separating out Viet Cong personnel from the general population, plus the sources of our intelligence, this is probably to be expected. The problem, then, revolves around the reactions of the Vietnamese population to these injuries and deaths. We must seek to weigh popular Vietnamese reactions to the civilian casualties which are inflicted by air power against the value of Viet Cong casualties so inflicted.

Another, somewhat separate, but equally important factor in the problem is the American presence. We have been at great pains to put strict limits on our role in this war, not only for domestic reasons, but also because the mere appearance of either American control or direct participation in the war gives substance to the main theme of Communist propaganda, i.e. that Diem is an American puppet, that this is a neo-colonial war, and that all patriotic Vietnamese must fight for their independence against the United States.

In examining this problem the following specific factors must be considered, they are set forth as arguments, of varying degrees of validity, pro and con.

Pros

1. Interdiction missions appear to have contributed substantially to the progress already registered against the Viet Cong. Intelligence reports and POWs indicate that one of the most serious problems which the Viet Cong confront is how to react to air power. Air attacks are credited with inflicting heavy casualties on the VC. They no longer feel safe in their base areas and are under constant psychological pressure as a result. Their growing logistic problems stem at least in part from the destruction of supplies by air raids.

2. Evidence of popular resentment resulting from interdiction missions is slim. We do not know that injuries or deaths of civilians have generated any substantial degree of hatred or resentment against either the GVN or the United States.

3. We do not know how many innocents have been injured or killed. Given the care with which proposed targets are examined, the number could be quite small.

4. Targeting procedures have been continually refined and intelligence is improving. Fewer and fewer civilians should therefore be involved in interdiction strikes. The Strategic Hamlet program also helps. As that program progresses, the Viet Cong should be progressively separated from the people, thus reducing the chances of air strikes resulting in civilian casualties.

5. In this war we work under a number of limitations, most notably, presumed enemy safe havens and secure bases across international boundaries. We should not deny ourselves the full use of those advantages which we enjoy. A principal advantage is our monopoly of air power.

6. While there has been rising concern in the United States about the American combat role in Viet-Nam, both in terms of interdiction missions and close air support, international opinion seems to have been affected very little. Aside from the Communist bloc, our efforts to help the Vietnamese defend themselves appear to have been accepted without much difficulty. Within Viet-Nam, there is little or no evidence that the American role in the use of air power against the Viet Cong is resented or that it has helped advance the Communist propaganda line.

7. The Vietnamese are not yet capable of conducting the war from the air without our help. Our air efforts in Viet-Nam, including interdiction missions, are an important part of training the Vietnamese to defend themselves and to take over the war effort.

Cons

1. The U.S. objective in Viet-Nam is to assist the Government to reestablish predominant control over its national territory. To do this the GVN must win the support of its citizens. While destroying Viet Cong targets makes life immediately more difficult for the VC, the lasting result may be to create resentment among people who are living in the target areas or who have friends and relatives there. We cannot assume that the people in the target areas have chosen to be governed by the VC. There are probably very few in Viet-Nam who are such hardened and committed Communists that they cannot be won back to support of the Government.

This is a political war. To regard any territory as enemy or any villages as VC is a dangerous oversimplification.

2. We do not know with any certainty the reactions of the Vietnamese rural population to interdiction missions. It is known, however, that the VC are able to recruit with little or no difficulty in many areas. The growth in VC strength in spite of very heavy casualties in the course of the past year is dramatic evidence of this. It is not unreasonable to suspect that an important factor in the ease of VC recruitment is popular resentment generated by interdiction strikes.

It could be argued that each time an inhabited VC target is hit, serious political antagonism is created in the vicinity, and that these antagonisms would be deepened in localities subjected to repeated air strikes. The French experience suggests that both propositions are true. Since these targets can rarely be reached on foot, it would be quite difficult to assuage resentments so generated by sending in civic action teams to help with reconstruction. It seems unlikely that GVN broadcasts, or even rural programs such as agricultural credit, will readily win over persons whose friends or relatives have been killed or injured by aerial attacks. These people are more likely to volunteer for the VC.

3. Interdiction strikes are most effective where enemy forces, supply lines, and logistics are highly organized, well defined, and hence vulnerable to air attack. This is not the case in Viet-Nam. Air interdiction is basically a conventional war concept, and to be valid, interdiction strikes require clearly defined enemy territory. We are not prepared to admit that parts of Viet-Nam are enemy territory.

The French experience suggests, in fact, that air interdiction is not a useful concept in this kind of warfare. There is no question that air power is useful against the VC and that they are afraid of it. But the best use of air power may be strictly limited to relief of units, posts, and hamlets under attack, the great mobility which air power provides, and carefully controlled close air support of government operations.

4. While targeting has certainly been improved, it is probably not susceptible to adequate refinement. This is because many Vietnamese officials frankly do not recognize the basically political nature of this war. The province and district chiefs, who are the primary sources for much of the intelligence on which interdiction strikes are based, are inadequately trained and often do regard certain areas as enemy territory simply because they are known to harbor VC.

In this connection, we note (Embtel 1553, June 4, 1962)2 that in June of last year we undertook a very large attack involving B-26s, AD-6s and T-28s against “confirmed command post installations, facilities and activities” in I Corps. The coordinates reported for the strike zone covered an area of about 230 square miles.

5. The prestige of the U.S. in Asia can be seriously damaged if it becomes widely known that American aviators are killing Vietnamese peasants. The Communist nations have already started to make this a serious part of their propaganda campaign. We may be able to explain that defoliants are weed killers, but we cannot expect to explain why American pilots are using bombs, napalm, and machine guns against Vietnamese peasants in a war where our role has been publicly defined as limited to training, equipping, and supplying the Vietnamese in the prosecution of their own defensive war. For ourselves and for the Vietnamese the most important rule governing our actions is to avoid steps which will create the general belief that this is our war. We are already getting too close to such a position.

6. Our actions in undertaking a direct combat role in Viet-Nam are in violation of the Geneva Accords.

7. It appears that the U.S. role in interdiction-strikes badly stretches, if it does not actually break, the mandate under which American air power was first engaged in the Viet-Nam conflict.

NSAM 111 of November 22, 1961,3 authorized U.S. uniformed personnel “for air reconnaissance, photography, instruction in and execution of air-ground support techniques, and for special intelligence.” Present interdiction missions appear to go beyond “air-ground support techniques”.

Conclusion

The arguments set forth above indicate there is not a demonstrably clear case either for or against interdiction missions, and this in itself is a convincing argument for undertaking a review. While some of the issues involved transcend the situation in Viet-Nam itself, such a review requires an on-the-ground evaluation of the validity of arguments advanced above, pro and con, and some indication of the respective weights to be assigned them. In such an evaluation, we think the intimate interaction of political and military factors must be taken into account. A measure, for instance, which gave short-run military advantages might in the long run be militarily disadvantageous if it affected popular attitudes in such a way as to increase Viet Cong ability to build larger forces and the organization required for their effective support. What we would hope to determine is the net worth, positive or negative, of (a) U.S.-piloted interdiction and (b) interdiction missions piloted only by Vietnamese.

On receipt of your comments and information, we intend to review the problem thoroughly and come to a decision.4

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 26-1 S VIET Top Secret; Priority. Drafted by Heavner and Wood, cleared by Harriman and Hilsman. Repeated to CINCPAC for POLAD. JCS and DOD/ISA were informed of the contents of the message.

2 Telegram 1553 from Saigon conveyed a summary of an intelligence briefing conducted in Saigon on June 1. (Ibid., 751K.00/6-462)

3 For text, see Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, vol. I, Document 272.

4 In telegram 917 from Saigon, April 16, Nolting responded that the Embassy was “coordinating with MACV an extensive review all aspects air interdiction. Because of vital importance this subject to effort here in Vietnam, believe thoroughness preferable to speed. I hope be able respond definitively within very near future.” (Department of State, Central Files, POL 26-1 S VIET)

67. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 67. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, March 26, 1963, 7 p.m.

844. CINCPAC also for POLAD. Reference: Department telegrams 856,2 857.3 Country Team message.

1. Recommend State/DOD/AID accept CPSVN as basis for MAP planning CPSVN developed by MACV/MAAG in response specific directive by SecDef last July to develop military plan which looked ahead three years and covered requirements to meet GVN military needs on orderly basis so that, by end three-year period, GVN could take over increasingly greater share of internal security responsibility and US special assistance could begin be phased out. Basic assumptions to this exercise were that VC insurgency would be under control by end three-year period and that extensive US support would be required during period to do this. In process its development, plan realistically related to MAP planning and requirements National Campaign.4 Within this context, plan represents best military judgment on how to bring insurgency under control and meet SecDef’s objective. Accordingly, I gave my concurrence to CPSVN as basis for MAP planning, subject review annually as normally occurs with MAP. It of course impossible guarantee that CPSVN will bring US out of woods by end three-year period, or that its major assumption that VC will be brought under control by then will be borne out. Present progress is encouraging and holds prospect of continuing in same vein, but nonmilitary aspects this war can not easily be quantified or put into time period. Thus, there are risks in tying ourselves to time limit for bringing insurgency under control and defining phase-out special US military assistance to GVN. However, as stated para 4 of Plan, CPSVN represents best estimate military requirement to permit GVN to defeat current insurgency by end CY 65, defeat any new insurgency threat that may arise after withdrawal special US military assistance and put up initial defense against overt invasion.

2. Care was taken in development CPSVN to relate it to revised FY 63 MAP. Refined FY 64 MA program and FY 65-69 plan now being developed under assumption that CPSVN will be received favorably in Washington. In fact, revised FY 63 MAP now approved by DOD was developed concurrently with CPSVN to support intensified counterinsurgency effort during 1964 in line with National Campaign Plan (NCP). As reflected in para 8,CPSVN, $160 million DOD guideline for FY 64 entirely inadequate by estimated $369 million to permit implementation CPSVN. In this connection, believe it important keep in mind that over FY 64-69 time span CPSVN envisages total cost of only $4 million more than DOD dollar guidelines ($901 million vs. $897 million). Adding PCH&T increases total costs by $62 million over same period, since DOD guidelines now require country allocation to bear cost PCH&T. Major compression involved in CPSVN occurs in FY 64 in order provide means to accomplish job in three year period.

3. The detailed review of the refined FY 64 program and FY 65-69 MA Plan for RVN now scheduled in CINCPAC 13-17 May 63, following submission of 1 May 63.To meet this tight schedule, CPSVN is being used as planning basis.

4. Envision little problem in accomplishing activations or increased strengths under the FY 64 force levels proposed in CPSVN. Soft spots in training of some categories of technical personnel are discussed in CPSVN but they are not considered sufficient to affect the feasibility of the plan.

5. Parallel development of other mutually supporting national plans and programs such as National Police, etc., should and are being accomplished to attain the objectives cited in the CPSVN.

6. In light above, following are Country Team’s answers to questions posed Deptel 856: A. We do not anticipate economic consequences to be overriding factor in GVN’s willingness to accept additional piaster contribution. We cannot foresee GVN’s reaction with any precision. We now trying persuade GVN agree contribute in major way to joint counterinsurgency fund and undoubtedly later in year we will be trying to get GVN agree finance an increased proportion its military budget for CY 1964 (in past 3 years GVN proportion has increased from 11 percent to 29 percent). However, GVN budgeted in CY 1963 force levels paralleling those in CPSVN which FY 63 paramilitary increase just recently approved by OSD. Re-examination of CY 64 additional cost stated in CPSVN for planned FY 1964 force levels reflects that the increase will be about 492 million rather than 846 million piasters. Difference between 492 and 846 is a result of GVN budgeting in CY 1963 for force levels larger for paramilitary forces than we had projected based on previous MAP planning figures, resulting in lower average cost per man. General Harkins furnished Secretary Thuan 5 March, without commitment, detailed proposed see [sic] structure for CY 1964 for GVN budget planning guidance (which are based on CPSVN FY64 and FY 65 planned strengths) with no adverse reaction to date or expected.

In fact pattern has been the reverse, with MAAG and MACV receiving repeated requests for MAP support of increased forces. Since GVN knows forces proposed (which represent the increased piaster contribution required), we recommend that requirement continue to be described to GVN in terms requirements of National Campaign and not of three-year plan objective of which was US phase down to normal MAAG. If GVN does not agree to absorb additional piaster costs of CPSVN, latter would have to be stretched out accordingly. Amount of stretch out and corresponding effect on CPSVN cannot be determined in vacuum.

Additional financial contribution required of GVN to implement CPSVN would comprise only about 4 percent and 10 percent respectively of deficits which we estimate would be in order of five billion piasters in CY 1963 and 5.5 billion in CY 1964. We do not envision supplementing or increasing of GVN CY 63 budget for support of CPSVN. Believe CY 63 shortfall amounting to about 200 million piasters can be absorbed by program slippages. While anticipated aggregate deficit of 10 to 11 billion piasters in CY 1963 and 1964 is staggering burden, and we doubt GVN’s ability, administratively and politically, to implement harsh and unpopular measures necessary to hold inflation in check, contribution to CPSVN is only a minor fraction of estimated deficit. Since we anticipate deficits of this order of magnitude with or without CPSVN, economic risks, whatever their potential danger must simply be borne and measures taken to minimize their ill effects.

Accordingly, we think standby authority to inject goods and services into Vietnam will be necessary if deficits of this order develop. Such authority will not only help assuage GVN fears, but will also enable US to intercede swiftly and effectively should inflation threaten to nullify economic and social gains already achieved.

B. Anticipate two stage turnover present CIDG areas: 1) as these areas come under initial GVN control, CIDG will be absorbed into RVNAF, CG, SDC or discharged; 2) as these areas are further secured permitting turnover to civil authorities, paramilitary will be demobilized and used as recruitment base for local police per Embtel 800.5 To extent stages (1) and (2) overlap, there could be direct absorption of CIDG into police.

C. Dollar costs of construction in CPSVN peak at $26 million in FY 1964 decreasing to annual average of less than $4 million in succeeding years. In view comments in answer pare A. regarding dangers inherent in anticipated budget deficits, definitely recommend against additional shifts out of MAP which would further exacerbate these deficits. Large and complex construction projects in MAP exceed capability SVN construction industry and availability GVN or counterpart piasters. In addition to MAP funded construction program, there is annual counterpart-funded construction program as part of GVN budget which represents maximum counterpart fund availability for that purpose.

D. MAP includes maintenance of weapons, arms and other ordnance items required to support villages and hamlets, including those taken over from CIDG. Anticipate CIDG secured hamlets will normally not require other hamlet kit items. These hamlets will be ready for socio-economic projects through USOM’s action plans and are included in projects given pare E. below.

E. USOM now has study underway to develop three-year projections for action plans related counterinsurgency. However, these projections based not only on CPSVN (which contemplates construction 7,500 strategic hamlets by end FY 1963 and completion total 11,000 by July 1964), but also on experience already gained as new CI activities progress and evolve. Projections cited below would require revision if CPSVN not approved but some increases would still be required.

Preliminary estimates for province administered-strategic hamlet plans (activity no. 430-AA-99-5) Montagnard relief (activity no. 430-AA-99-AB-5) and CI operational support (activity no. 430-AA-99-A1-5) indicate total FY 63 and FY 64 dollar costs these activities $3.4 million and $6.3 million respectively as compared CAP totals $3.020 and $3.4 million. Wish emphasize these new estimates do not necessarily require increase by these amounts in FY 1963 and 1964 total dollar requirements; final estimates may vary considerably up or down after completion review balance of program. Do not recommend change in FY 1963 and FY 1964 dollar totals for Congressional presentation for AID. However, some increase in total FY 1964 requirements stated CAP is definite future possibility for which AID/W may wish to reserve funds.

CY 1963 and CY 1964 piaster requirements for above three activities may require increases over CAP estimates on order of VN$ 265 million and VN$ 284 million respectively. As in case of dollars, these not net increases and only in part attributable to CPSVN.

7. Regarding Deptel 857, differences in economic consequences of stretching CPSVN from three to four years should not prove consequential. We face serious economic problems in any case. In our view, CPSVN should be put into effect, but no hard decisions need be taken on timing US phase-out. Latter will undoubtedly occur gradually and in any event should not begin until internal security situation permits and until GVN can realistically take over. This process may begin before end CY 1965 or it may begin later.

Accordingly, recommend that no decision re extending phase-out of US special military assistance be taken at this time for the following reasons: a. The target date for phase-out of the US special military assistance was generally established in the SecDef requirement for the development of the CPSVN. The date was further defined by the CINCPAC guidance and assumption that this insurgency will be under control at the end of 3 years (end of CY 65). The plan was developed to accomplish the desired objective within the assumptions and timeframe established.

b. The CPSVN was developed concurrently with the revised FY 63 MAP. The refined FY 64 MAP as well as the PY 65-69 MA plan are now being developed for submission to CINCPAC 1 May 63 under the assumption that the CPSVN will be favorably received in Washington.

c. A stretch-out would require a smaller increase in the FY 64 training costs to US and GVN. However, when considered in the context of the overall FY 64 costs and the training costs which would be MAP supported if the CPSVN were not implemented, the increase of $3.7 million under the CPSVN is very minor. The savings realized in later years will offset a portion of this increased cost. Many of the individuals trained early under MAP will undoubtedly be qualified for subsequent duty as instructors. This gives RVNAF the capability of developing more qualified technicians, specialists and leaders, sooner than would occur otherwise. The overall increased training costs for the period FY 63-68 over that contained in the original MAP is only$3.2 million of a total $74.3 million.

d. The training proposed in the CPSVN is adequate to provide their personnel required to execute the plan within the 3-year period. Shortages of personnel in critical categories are discussed in the CPSVN but they are not considered sufficient to affect the feasibility of the plan. Should GVN be unable take over US tasks when the appropriate time arrives, it would be for relatively short extension of a few specific US units or personnel. This residue would not justify continued existence of the US special military assistance but could probably be handled by MAAG.

e. There may be some political risk that GVN would become unduly concerned that US planning pull out prematurely, if they were informed now of 3-year plan. For this reason believe it preferable present additional requirements to GVN in terms National Campaign rather than CPSVN.

Nolting

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, DEF 19 S VIET. Secret. Repeated to CINCPAC.

2 Document 57.

3 See footnote 5, Document 57.

4 Regarding the National Campaign Plan, see Document 26.

5 Document 53.

68. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 68. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, March 28, 1963, 8 p.m.

852. CINCPAC for POLAD. Deptel 869,2 Embtel 790.3 Went to day to prod Thuan on counter-insurgency fund. Ran into what has proved to be serious trouble. Thuan first raised certain questions and objections of relatively minor nature which he said had been raised by Director of Budget and Department of Interior. Discussing these, I suggested that we get our experts together in next day or two to iron out any remaining differences so that proposed letter could be signed and matter concluded.

Thuan then said (asking me not to report) that agreement in principle that he had previously gotten from Ngo Dinh Nhu had been withdrawn. I asked him whether President Diem had also reneged, and he said no, that Nhu was the trouble. I asked him why, and he said in effect that Nhu had been frightened off from close collaboration envisaged in this counter-insurgency proposal by the “atmosphere” now prevailing in US-GVN relations. In discussing this, Thuan repeatedly referred to the doubts and misgivings engendered by the Mansfield report, by editorial and press pressures against the GVN in America, by what appeared to Nhu to be indications of US uncertainty in continued support of GVN. In this connection he referred to Washington Post story about Nguyen Ton Hoan and upcoming visit of Warren Unna, whom he characterized as incurably prejudiced against GVN. In short, he said that Nhu particularly was disturbed about entering into a commitment of this sort (both procedural and financial) at a time when he thought he saw signs of a possible shift in US policy.

In a long discussion I attempted to disabuse him of these doubts, citing recent statements by Secretaries Rusk and Harriman and giving him my own convictions. Thuan commented that it was ironic that these tremors should be disturbing basis of our joint endeavors at very time when our team work is excellent and when real progress is being made. With this comment I heartily agreed.

I suggested that, even if Nhu had grounds for feeling as he does, the best way to get over this period is to demonstrate confidence which would in turn engender confidence; the worst way would be to give USG and Congress grounds for feeling GVN was holding back in committing themselves to an essential part of the counter-insurgency struggle. I said I would like to talk to Nhu about this. Thuan said he would see him again this afternoon and try to overcome his objections, and let me know if he needed my assistance.

Comment: We have been feeling that this kind of reaction was brewing. We can get over it but it may take awhile. I would like again to stress my conviction, particularly in connection with the GAO report,4 that the sine qua non of what we can get done here under present policies is mutual confidence. I hope Nhu’s suspicions can be overcome and that they will not rub off on President Diem and other members of the government.

Nolting

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, AID(US) S VIET. Secret; Limit Distribution. Repeated to CINCPAC.

2 In telegram 869 to Saigon, March 15, the Department of State asked for a status report on efforts to settle the details of CI financing. (Ibid.)

3 In telegram 790 from Saigon, March 6, Nolting reported that Thuan had advised him that President Diem had accepted “in principle” the U.S. proposal for a joint counterinsurgency fund for 1963, “although he still needed to be filled in on details.” (Ibid.)

4 See footnote 2, Document 62.

69. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam 69. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam1

Washington, March 29, 1963, 1:04 p.m.

911. Embtel 852.2 We most concerned by report GVN apparently drawing back from commitment to continue successful rural CI social economic programs which we view as heart of effort to win support of VN people and isolate VC. If our figures correct, funds remaining for these programs will be exhausted in about one month. Firm GVN commitment therefore appears most urgent matter. In negotiating with Nhu and Diem you therefore authorized at your discretion stress great importance we attach to these programs and state Washington also views their continuation as test of mutual confidence. If GVN unwilling trust us to extent of continuing successful and vital CI programs under proven machinery, difficulties of working together for common goals will be greatly increased.

You are also authorized tell Nhu and Diem that you instructed assure them US policy remains full support of Diem’s government in its efforts defend VN against VC attack and bring better life to VN people. Mansfield report does not mean change in US policy of support for GVN against Communist threat. This connection you may wish quote President Kennedy’s March 6 press conference remarks on Mansfield report.3

“I don’t see how we are going to be able, unless we are going to pull out of Southeast Asia and turn it over to the Communists, how we are going to be able to reduce very much our economic programs and military programs in South Viet-Nam in Cambodia, in Thailand.

“I think that unless you want to withdraw from the field and decide that it is in the national interest to permit that area to collapse, I would think that it would be impossible to substantially change it particularly, as we are in a very intensive struggle in those areas.” (Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: John F. Kennedy, 1963, pp. 243-244)

With regard Warren Unna visit you may wish tell Nhu that Thompson had long talk with Unna last night and Unna appeared impressed by Thompson’s positive views VN situation.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, AID(US) S VIET Secret; Limit Distribution; Operational Immediate. Drafted by Heavner and cleared by Koren, Rice, and Hilsman. Repeated to CINCPAC for POLAD.

2 Document 68.

3 During his press conference on March 6, President Kennedy was asked to comment on the recommendation by the Mansfield committee for “a thorough security reassessment in the Far East and a clamp down, if not a reduction in our aid to that part of the world.” Kennedy replied:

70. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 70. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, March 30, 1963, noon.

860. CINCPAC for POLAD. Deptel 9112 greatly appreciated. If Thuan has been unable to overcome main objection to counterinsurgency fund described Embtel 8523 on basis arguments already advanced, warnings and assurances contained reftel should be most useful in my next meeting with him, Nhu or Diem. To make point even more emphatic, plan tell them also that further procurement and shipment of hamlet kit materials (barbed wire, etc.),PL 480 and AID dollar procurement items for hamlets would not seem justified unless there is adequate piaster fund to go with them, and agreed procedures for their effective use.

Harkin and Brent concur.

Nolting

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, AID(US) S VIET. Secret; Limit Distribution. Repeated to CINCPAC.

2 Document 69.

3 Document 68.

71. Telegram From the Commander, Military Assistance Command, Vietnam (Harkins) to the Commander in Chief, Pacific (Felt) 71. Telegram From the Commander, Military Assistance Command, Vietnam (Harkins) to the Commander in Chief, Pacific (Felt)1

Saigon, March 30, 1963, 2:05 p.m.

MACJ00 1870. 1. My comments on State to Saigon 22 March2 follow. Before making specific comments I want to set the stage first. There are no hard facts here to support general theme that aerial interdiction is an indiscriminate killer. Second, recognize fully that the war in Vietnam is political as well as military. In fact, this point was one of the essential elements in the National Campaign Plan. How ever at this stage of the game the 30,000 VC casualties on the one hand and 13,000 RVN on the other for 1962 would indicate it has a distinct military flavor. Third, political attacks by the VC are possible only because of the active participation of their military forces. For this reason, destruction of the VC political organization, which is essential to GVN efforts to regain control and support of the people, requires application of force against the VC military capability which enables it to flourish. In many cases air delivered munitions are the only type of force which can presently reach some of the VC strongholds. Fourth, to consider the VC as merely a political adversary in spite of the vicious manner and means that he employs to subvert the populace is inviting disaster and accepting a degree of procrastination which puts time on his side.

2. Specific comments in the area of statement of the problem follow: a. U.S. supported offensive sorties though increasing have not reached the tempo cited. Actual statistics for U.S. fixed wing aircraft for the past 6 months reveal a total of 2450 offensive sorties for an average of 480 per month of which an average of 100 were interdiction. 183 (Farmgate) interdiction missions have been flown thus far in March 1963 which is indicative of the increase in this area.

b. The first paragraph should state that these air strikes are based upon confirmed intelligence. Additionally, Vietnamese military personnel are on board U.S. aircraft when ordnance delivery missions are flown.

c. In regard to the 2nd paragraph, VC bases and installations identified by intelligence have existed for a considerable period-if not hard core, the population in these areas are considered active sympathizers in the enemy camp. We realize that 2 or 3 hard core VC can make a village VC using their terrorist methods. We are particularly mindful of this and never put strikes on such villages if we feel this the case.

d. Third paragraph is basically sound although the quality and quantity of intelligence are improving. Unfortunately shooting wars have always produced civilian casualties. A most regrettable fact. This must be weighed in light of the malicious killing done by the VC purposeful terrorization.

e. The concern expressed in paragraph 4 of the problem is shared here. The RVN accepts the probability of occasional incidents philosophically. The most probable adverse effect has been VC exploitation and exaggeration for propaganda purposes. It must be pointed out that air is only one of many means to achieve interdiction; however, it attracts more attention though not necessarily inflicting more innocent casualties in RVN than artillery, surface action, etc. Further, there is no basis to assume relaxation of thorough planning and forewarning measures to avoid civil casualties even at the expense of reduced results.

f. The approach expressed in paragraph 5 of the problem has been unavoidably compromised numerous times. The presence of U.S. press representatives free to report anything other than classified information makes secretiveness in this area more difficult. It is quite possible that a reevaluation of the U.S. role is in order as pertains to open acknowledgment of our disdain for international Communism.

3. Following comment pertains to the Pros of the problem: a. Although this may be called a political war it is an established fact that the VC have maintained and operated four war zones for as long as 17 years. Support by the population concentrically surrounding these zones varies inversely with the distance from the heart of each war zone area; from passive support, such as providing rice, to active participation in guerrilla actions. These war zones are the safe havens inside the country from which the direction of the VC effort comes.

b. The former successes in recruiting have not been continued as evidenced by increased tempo of kidnapping and impressing of males to support the VC cause. The “dramatic growth” in VC strength is more attributable to our own improved intelligence reporting, which has confirmed that the VC hard core was already there.

c. Parts of RVN are enemy held as stated in paragraph 2 (War Zones). The aircraft presently used in SVN are adapted to the type of interdiction missions that the enemy disposition and the nature of the terrain dictate. The optimum roles of air operations in this type of conflict are the support roles. However, this does not obviate offensive operations as a major contribution to the C.I. effort.

d. Target lists are approved by JGS after intensive screening. In the present organization of the districts and provinces either the chief or his deputy is a military man. The conditions that existed in June of last year no longer apply to the tempo and method of current operations.

e. Propaganda is not restricted to the Communist bloc. Our role in RVN should be placed before the world by our own agencies to allow both sides to be analyzed. The current propaganda is an excellent barometer of the effectiveness of our air operations. It does not appear that we have suffered a loss of prestige in any friendly nation in S.E. Asia.

f. U.S. forces are presently in South Vietnam at the request of the RVN in an advisory role. RVN is not a signatory of the Geneva Accords.

g. RVNAF pilots unaccompanied by U.S. advisors fly the majority of interdiction missions. No interdiction missions are executed by USAF pilots exclusively.

4. Conclusions: a. It is essential in a counter-insurgency effort that all types of means and method of delivery of munitions be employed. Increasing intelligence capabilities, proper selection of targets, better accuracy on control of delivery, all of which we are working daily to improve, should do much to eliminate the political opposition to interdiction.

b. As long as the U.S. supports the RVN in this effort propaganda wise it appears to make little difference as to whether interdiction is made by U.S. or VN piloted aircraft. If air attacks were not hurting the VC the propaganda effort would not be directed at this capability. The VC is directing a strong propaganda and terrorist campaign against the strategic hamlet too and we know this program is hurting them badly.

c. Aerial interdiction cannot be related to recruiting ability of VC, as long as the VC have access to people they will get recruits. As the VNAF improves in capability direct U.S. participation (Farmgate) will be reduced accordingly.

5. This responds to ADMINO CINCPAC 242350Z3 which requested my personal comments. My response has been prepared in order to reach you while you are still in Washington. Country Team position this regard has not been determined, however Amb Nolting has seen this message.4

1 Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 84, Saigon Embassy Files: FRC 68 A 5159, Interdiction, SGN (63)19 GVN. Top Secret; Priority. Sent to CNO exclusive for Admiral Felt who was in Washington and for General Barnes. A copy was sent by courier to Ambassador Nolting.

2 Document 66.

3 Not found.

4 Numbered paragraph 5 was handwritten. On March 30, General Anthis, U.S. Air Force Commander in Vietnam, sent a memorandum to General Harkins commenting on airgram CA-10362, Document 66, along lines similar to those outlined in Harkins’ telegram: “In summary, I can think of no greater advantage to be gained by the VC than to have the role of air curtailed at this time. If we wish to serve the interests of the Communists, this is the step to take. The last attack from Hanoi was on defoliation. Apparently the latest is interdiction. If interdiction is curtailed or stopped then I would say we are well on our way to a ‘gut-less’ war in SVN.” (Washington National Records Center, RG 84, Saigon Embassy Files: FRC 68 A 5159, Interdiction, SGN (63)19 GVN)

72. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Hilsman) to the Secretary of State 72. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Hilsman) to the Secretary of State1

Washington, April 1963.2

SUBJECT

South Viet-Nam

In my judgment, the strategic concept that was developed for South Viet-Nam remains basically sound. If we can ever manage to have it implemented fully and with vigor, the result will be victory.

The concept is based on the assumption that villagers in Southeast Asia are turned inward on themselves and have little or no sense of identification with either the national government or Communist ideology—that the villagers are isolated physically, politically and psychologically. In such circumstances, it is not at all difficult to develop a guerrilla movement. In Burma during World War II, about 150 Americans created a guerrilla force of 30,000 and did it with white faces. It is hardly surprising that the Viet Cong could do equally well or better in South Viet-Nam.

A corollary to this assumption is that the villager’s greatest desire is security and that, if the villagers are given security, some simple progress towards a better life, and—most important of all—a sense that the government cares about them and their future, they will respond with loyalty.

The recent USIA survey of Long An3 gives some evidence of the validity of this assumption. 1,250 families were interviewed in Long An, which is among the worst of the Delta provinces. The results were as follows: In insecure villages, 75 percent of the people expressed an attitude towards the Viet Cong and the government that was essentially “a plague on both their houses”, and 25 percent of the people were silent. In relatively secure villages—those which could be penetrated by large Viet Cong groups but not by small patrols—50 percent of the people took a “plague on both their houses” point of view, and 50 percent were mildly pro-government. In very secure villages, which had also received some benefits, such as a school or a well, the people were 100 percent pro-government and expressed a determination to fight the Viet Cong.

On the basis of such an apparently valid assumption, the strategic concept calls for primary emphasis on giving security to the villages. The tactics are the so-called oil-blot approach, starting with a secure areas and extending it slowly, making sure no Viet Cong pockets are left behind, and using police units to winkle out the Viet Cong agents in each particular village.

This calls for the use of military forces in a different way from that of orthodox, conventional war. Rather than chasing Viet Cong, the military must put primary emphasis on clear-and-hold operations and on rapid reinforcement of villages under attack. It is also important, of course, to keep the Viet Cong regular units off balance by conventional offensive operations, but these should be secondary to the major task of extending security.

All this requires careful coordination of military operations, police efforts and rural development towards the primary objectives: the extension of security over the heavily-populated regions of the Delta, the cutting off of Viet Cong sources of supplies and especially recruits, and their dispersion into the jungles and mountains where they can be worn down by attrition, starvation and more conventional military means.

At the heart of the strategic concept are two basic principles:

The first is that of the oil blot. In the past, the GVN sought to blanket the whole country with so-called strategic hamlets which in many cases involved nothing more than wire-enclosed villages doused with political propaganda, with the Viet Cong agents left in place. The result was to blanket the Delta with little Dienbienphus—indefensible, inadequately armed hamlets far from reinforcements, that lacked both government benefits and police facilities to winkle out Communist sympathizers, with Viet Cong pockets left behind. In effect these were storage places of arms for the Viet Cong which could be seized at any time. After November 1st, the military began to demobilize some of these vulnerable villages and outposts, and a race developed between the government and the Viet Cong. The race may have ended in a tie, but the result is that the Viet Cong now have much better weapons and greater stocks of ammunition than they ever had before.

The second basic principle is that the way to fight a guerrilla is to adopt the tactics of the guerrilla—night ambushes, small patrols, and so on. In spite of all our pressures, this has never been done in Viet-Nam. Instead, the emphasis has been on large operations, artillery and air bombardments, and the use of cumbersome battalion-sized units which telegraph their movements to the Viet Cong.

As to the question of operations against North Viet-Nam, I would suggest that such operations may at a certain stage be a useful supplement to an effective counterinsurgency program, but they would not be an effective substitute for such a program.

My own preference would be to continue the covert, or at least deniable, operations along the general lines we have been following for some months with the objective, since these are only pinpricks, not of forcing North Viet-Nam to its knees but of keeping the threat of eventual destruction alive in Hanoi’s mind. Then, after we had made sufficient progress in the Delta so that all concerned began to realize that the Viet Cong were losing the support of the population, and that their ability to continue the war depended solely on North Vietnamese support, I think we should indicate as much privately to the North Vietnamese and follow this by selected attacks on their infiltration bases and training camps.

In my judgment, significant action against North Viet-Nam that is taken before we have demonstrated success in our counter-insurgency program will be interpreted by the Communists as an act of desperation, and will, therefore, not be effective in persuading the North Vietnamese to cease and desist. What is worse, I think that premature action will so alarm our friends and allies and a significant segment of domestic opinion that the pressures for neutralization will become formidable.

In sum, I believe that we can win in Viet-Nam with a number of provisos.

The first proviso is that we do not over-militarize the war-that we concentrate not on killing Viet Cong and other conventional means of warfare, but on an effective program for extending the areas of security gradually, systematically, and thoroughly. This will require better teamwork in Saigon than we have had in the past and considerably more emphasis on clear-and-hold operations and on police work than we ourselves have given to the Vietnamese.

The problem of getting effective teamwork is troublesome. Ideally, what we need is what the British had in Malaya-a Gerald Templar who has absolute authority to hire and fire anyone in any agency or department and through whom all reporting and all orders are transmitted.

My second proviso is that there be political stability in Saigon. The talk of neutralization is clearly very dangerous. It tends to be in the nature of a self-fulfilling prophecy-talk about neutralization disheartens those who must fully and vigorously implement the strategic concept and encourages those who are plotting for a neutralist coup.

I think we can counter such dangers most effectively by the proposals in my letter to you of March 144 dealing with the whole of Southeast Asia; if necessary, however, we might also station a Marine battalion in Saigon. Publicly, we could explain this as a move to protect American dependents; privately, we could pass the word in Viet-Nam that we wanted no more coupe.

To reiterate, I think that we have made the necessary and fundamental policy decision on the over-all strategic concept. What remains is to implement this concept vigorously and with effective coordination.

1 Source: Kennedy Library, Hilsman Papers, Vietnam Country Series, Hilsman Trip 12/62-1/63, Related Documents. Secret. Also sent to McNamara, McCone, Harriman, McGeorge Bundy, William Bundy, and Forrestal.

2 The source text is undated, but it appears to have been drafted shortly after Hilsman assumed the duties of Assistant Secretary for Far Eastern Affairs in April.

3 Not found.

4 Not found.

73. Memorandum of a Conversation, Department of State 73. Memorandum of a Conversation, Department of State1

Washington, April 1, 1963, noon.

SUBJECT

Situation in Viet-Nam

PARTICIPANTS

Governor W. Averell Harriman

Mr. R.G K Thompson, Head, British Advisory Mission to Viet-Nam

Mr. Michael V. Forrestal,NSC Member

Mr. William H. Sullivan, Asst. to Undersecretary for Political Affairs

Mr. Chalmers B. Wood, Director, Working Group/Viet-Nam

There follow the chief topics in the conversation between Governor Harriman and Mr. Thompson: 1. Confidence. Thompson emphasized the necessity of building confidence on the part of the GVN and in Washington. This was a matter of making it clear that we were determined to see this through. The Governor asked whether it was possible to build Vietnamese confidence in Diem. Thompson replied that where you needed confidence most was in the villages and that it was increasing there. An index of this confidence was the fact that so much rice was getting through from the villages to Saigon. The GVN might be able to export 300,000 tons during 1963. The Mansfield Report had a depressing effect, particularly because it complimented Sihanouk. The Governor wondered whether Senator Mansfield knew this.

2. Press Relations. The Governor felt that the chief responsibility for improving press relations rests with the GVN President Diem and that everything possible had been done in Washington. Thompson said that he had strongly emphasized the importance of this matter to President Diem and to Thuan.

3. U.S. Forces Level. Thompson said that Secretary McNamara has asked him about the advisability of reducing U.S. forces. He had replied that if progress during 1963 continued good, and if it were possible to have a white area during the summer, it might be wise to reduce U.S. strength by a significant amount, say 1,000 men. This would take the steam out of Viet Cong propaganda and it would reaffirm the honesty of American intentions.

4. Population Control. Thompson believed this program should have priority in order to regain control of the hamlets. Many villagers were pleased that the Government cared enough to give them I.D. cards. The program so far has been a thorough and useful census. The Governor felt that the name was unfortunate and should be changed.

5. Surrender Program. Thompson emphasized that the top level of the GVN now understood that persons who surrender must be well treated. Nhu attached great importance to this.

6. Strategic Hamlets. In general it is no longer possible for the Viet Cong to run in and out of these hamlets at will. Before the U.S. took a decisive hand the hamlet program had been shallow and inadequate. Since September, 1962, it has been much better.

7. Size of Viet Cong Forces. The Governor noted that the number of Viet Cong continued to increase. Thompson said that this was done mainly by recruitment, pointing out that the Viet Cong control large enough areas to recruit the numbers they need.

8. Montagnards. Thompson was pleased with the Montagnards but cautioned that they were less dependable than the Vietnamese villagers, more easily influenced by unfounded rumors, and therefore prone to switching sides.

9. Republican Youth Movement and Women’s Solidarity Movement. Thompson said he was chary of these organizations. He did not know much about the Women’s Solidarity Movement. These organizations were very much Vietnamese affairs. However, if it was necessary to give training to people who were already Republican Youth in order to improve hamlet defense, we should not hesitate to do so.

10. GVN Foreign Relations. The Governor felt that Diem could obtain better control of his frontiers by changing his attitude toward Sihanouk. Thompson was dubious.

11. Authority of Local Officials. The Governor felt that the GVN should give more authority to its local officials and pick better people for these jobs. Thompson emphasized the greatly improved caliber of the province chiefs.

12. Corps Headquarters. Thompson felt that the creation of headquarters for the four Corps in Viet-Nam added one more layer to the chain-of-command, that they were obstructive, and used up too many officers.

13. Recruiting for Civilian Jobs. This was difficult as the Army has had the cream for eight years. The middle ranks of the Civil Service must, in the future, come from the Army. Parenthetically, there is no longer any difficulty in recruiting for the Civil Guard. This is an important indication, said Thompson, of improved rural morale.

14. Diem and the Chain-of-Command. Thompson felt that President Diem should delegate more authority.

15. Tactical Air. Thompson was strongly opposed to bombing populated areas which were not under Viet Cong attack.

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL S VIET Secret. Drafted by Wood on April 5 and approved in M on April 15. Thompson spent 2 weeks in Washington at the end of March and the first week in April. During the period April 1-4, Thompson met with a number of officials concerned with developments in Vietnam including Hilsman, Harriman, Rusk, Murrow, McNamara, and Kennedy. No records of Thompson’s conversations with Hilsman, Rusk, Murrow and McNamara have been found. Regarding Thompson’s conversation with President Kennedy, see Document 77.

74. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam 74. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam1

Washington, April 1, 1963, 5:40 p.m.

910. State/AID/Defense message. Embtel 860.2 Concur with your plan tell Nhu and Diem further procurement and shipment hamlet kit materials, PL-480 and AID dollar procurement items for hamlets not justified unless there adequate piaster fund and agreed procedures for piaster use.

You may further wish indicate that new approvals are currently pending in AID/W for additional funds for direct counter-insurgency procurement and for additional Title II PL-480 commodities. We may hold up these approvals pending resolution piaster issue. FYI, we will continue processing papers assuming satisfactory outcome your negotiations End FYI.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, AID(US) S VIET Secret; Operational Immediate; Limit Distribution. Drafted by Heavner and Stoneman and cleared by Wood, Rice, and Hilsman, and in DOD/ISA in substance by Heinz. Repeated to CINCPAC for POLAD.

2 Document 70.

75. Memorandum for the Record by the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (Taylor) 75. Memorandum for the Record by the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (Taylor)1

Washington, April 2, 1963.

SUBJECT

Meeting with Under Secretary Harriman with regard to Command Relationships between CINCPAC and COMUSMACV

1. I introduced the discussion by describing the review of command relationships made by the JCS which culminated in the recent discussion with Admiral Felt. I showed him General Harkins’ “Eyes Only” to the Chairman (MAC 566)2 in which General Harkins recommends no change in the present command setup. I also called Mr. Harriman’s attention to General Harkins’ directive,3 in particular to paragraph 2a which gives Harkins broad responsibilities in the fields of US military policy, operation, advice and assistance to South Vietnam.

2. I explained to Mr. Harriman that the Chiefs had gone over this paragraph 2a with Admiral Felt and all were in agreement that this language gave Harkins adequate authority to deal with local incidents, and to conduct the campaign as he saw fit without further specific authority from higher headquarters.

3. With regard to establishing a direct channel of communication between the JCS and General Harkins, I explained the practical difficulties of such a change and the disadvantages from the point of view of the JCS.

4. Mr. Harriman appeared reasonably well satisfied with my explanation but reserved the right to reopen the matter if the present arrangement, in his judgment, does not work well.4 I asked him to take a look at the POLAD situation in Honolulu as the State representation there should keep CINCPAC abreast of political and economic issues. Mr. Harriman indicated that he would talk to Minister Martin, the present CINCPAC POLAD, and would consider what changes, if any, might be made.

5. In the course of the conversation, Mr. Harriman indicated that Admiral Jerauld Wright would succeed Admiral Kirk as Ambassador to Taipei and that Nolting had requested relief from Saigon effective this coming May. Thus far, no successor has been designated.

MDT

1 Source: National Defense University, Taylor Papers, T-646-71. Secret.

2 Not found.

3 See Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, vol. II, Document 53.

4 Harriman called U. Alexis Johnson later in the day to discuss his conversation with Taylor: “They agreed to recommend to the Secy that they continue the present setup re Gen Harkins, but reserve the right to reopen the question in the future.” (Memorandum of telephone conversation, April 2; Library of Congress, Harriman Papers, Telecons—March-April-May 1963)

76. Memorandum From the Director of the Vietnam Working Group (Wood) to the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Hilsman) 76. Memorandum From the Director of the Vietnam Working Group (Wood) to the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Hilsman)1

Washington, April 3, 1963.

SUBJECT

Jets for Government of Viet-Nam

I thought it might be useful for you to have in writing our reasons for opposing the proposal to supply the GVN with four RT-33 and two T-33 jets at this time: (1) Giving the Vietnamese jets would be a small but significant escalation of the war in Viet-Nam. We would lose the ability to remove jets from Viet-Nam at any time that the international situation might make it in our interest to do so. The fact that these are unarmed jets will be overlooked by Bloc propagandists. Such a move would give the Bloc an excuse for escalation. If the GVN is doing as well against the VC as many of us believe, the DRV and the Bloc may well be looking for such an excuse.

(2) The fact that Cambodia will receive MIGs from the Russians should not be a reason for giving jets to Viet-Nam.

(3) There appears to be no need to give jets to the Vietnamese in order to get the job done. In fact, the job would admittedly be done better if we continued to use only American piloted aircraft. The reason for this is that the T-33 is not as good for reconnaissance as the F-101 which American pilots are now using.

(4) Giving the Vietnamese jets would be a flat and obvious violation of the Geneva Accords, which specifically prohibit the introduction of jet engines into SVN. It is true that we have already been cited for introducing jets and other war material into Viet-Nam. We continue to receive citations from the ICC each time a new violation is detected. Our policy has been to minimize the number of these citations as much as possible. This is because the ICC still has an important effect on world opinion and because there are still things the ICC can do for us. The June 2, 1962 report of the ICC charging the DRV with carrying out a campaign aimed at the violent overthrow of the GVN continues to be very useful.2 At the moment we want to keep Hanoi’s “noxious chemicals” charge either out of the ICC altogether, or perhaps get the ICC to debunk this propaganda by investigating and reporting that the charges are unfounded. This means we still need ICC, or rather Indian, cooperation.

(5) It is true that giving jets to the Vietnamese would permit them to undertake one of the jobs now being done by Americans. It is also true that the Vietnamese should have some reconnaissance jets of their own before we pull out of Viet-Nam. However, the number of personnel involved is small and the date of our pullout distance.

Conclusion

Giving jets to the Vietnamese now would not shorten the war. It would increase the risks of international incidents and repercussions.

Recommendation

That jets not be given to Viet-Nam now and that the question be reviewed every six months.

1 Source: Department of State, Vietnam Working Group Files: Lot 67 D 54, DEF 19-3, Equip and Supplies. Secret. Drafted by Heavner. A copy was also sent to Rice.

2 See Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, vol. II, Document 208.

77. Memorandum of Conversation, White House 77. Memorandum of Conversation, White House1

Washington, April 4, 1963, 10 a.m.

SUBJECT

Situation in Viet-Nam

PARTICIPANTS

The President

The Honorable David Ormsby Gore, British Ambassador

Mr. R.G.K. Thompson, Head, British Advisory Mission to Viet-Nam

Mr. Chalmers B. Wood, Director, Working Group, Viet-Nam

The following are the principal points touched on between the President and Mr. R.G.K. Thompson: 1. Diem. Thompson emphasized that Diem had much support in the country where it counted and that he had written off the Saigon intelligentsia. In reply to a question from the President, he said that the quality of the political opposition was very poor. He said that if Diem disappeared there would be a risk of losing the war within six months since there was no other leader of his caliber available. (After the meeting with the President, he qualified this remark by saying that as a result of the war effort there was a continuing increase in the number of competent and experienced Vietnamese officials.)

2. How the War is going. Thompson said that on the military side statistics showed that things were moving in our favor. He cited particularly the increased number of defectors (from an average of 15-20 a week in early 1962 to 148 for the week ending March 25, 1963). He cautioned that the pattern of the war would not change much, that there would be no major victories on our side, and that we had to expect as a part of the fortunes of war occasional reverses, such as the one at Ap Bac.

3. Infiltration. The numbers were not large but the quality of the cadres infiltrated was high. The Viet Cong did not possess the food and equipment necessary to absorb a large quantity of infiltrators and they wished to keep North Viet-Nam’s role in the war at least semi-covert.

4. The President asked why the Viet Minh were able to defeat the French. Thompson replied the French never had any hope of getting the people on their side and that the strategic hamlet program, which had gone much better than anyone had expected, provided a degree of security in the countryside which the French had never been able to achieve.

5. American Military Personnel. Thompson said that the American military personnel that he had observed, particularly the MAAG Advisers in the provinces, were very good. He was also impressed by the good behavior of the American military in Saigon.

6. Favorable contrast between the Government of Viet-Nam and Viet Cong controlled territories. Thompson said that things had now progressed to a point where an observer in a plane could distinguish, on the one hand, GVN-controlled territories where roads and bridges were repaired and strategic hamlets built, and, on the other hand, VC territory where the bridges were generally down and the roads cut.

7. Defoliants. Thompson doubted that the effort involved in defoliation was worthwhile on the grounds that even when the foliage was dead, sufficient branches and twigs remained to provide hiding places for the Viet Cong. He also cited the automatic aversion of the Asians to the use of unknown chemicals. As to crop destruction, he believed this should only be carried out in a situation where it was clear that the Viet Cong had no sources of supplies other than the areas to be destroyed. The President asked that the defoliation and crop destruction programs be reviewed again.

8. Vietnamese Morale. Thompson said that the morale not only of the top leaders but also of most Vietnamese civilian and military authorities, particularly province chiefs, was up.

9. Helicopters. These were useful instruments for preventing Viet Cong concentrations and surprising the Viet Cong, but they would not lead to large scale victories. The war would “be won by brains and feet”.

10. Terrorism. Terrorism is not bad at present but as it becomes clear that the Viet Cong are losing, an increase in terrorism, particularly hand grenades in Saigon, should be expected. Such terrorism would be an admission of defeat. It would require steady nerves to endure it, particularly given the unfavorable publicity which would probably be generated in the foreign press.

The Viet Cong were not using much terrorism against officials. They did not kill popular officials but sought to make them unpopular before bumping them off.

11. North Viet-Nam. Not much has been accomplished by the GVN agents who are amateurs when they come up against the professional defense, security, and intelligence measures of the DRV on its home grounds.

12. Tactical Air. This is a key factor, Thompson said, in preventing Viet Cong concentrations, in rescues, and in assisting villages which are attacked. Thompson was dead against strafing and bombing of occupied villages as this would leave an indissoluble legacy of bitterness. He believed that present controls were sufficient to prevent attacks against villages occupied by the Viet Cong.

13. Surrender Policy. Thompson believed that the surrender policy as now elaborated was good. He thought we should give it public support when it was announced (it is now due for announcement on April 17).

14. U.S. Presence. If the GVN continued to progress at the present rate, if it were possible to declare one or two provinces white areas by summer 1963 (no announcement about white areas should be made unless it were certain that the areas were indeed freed of the Viet Cong), and finally, if confidence of success continued to grow until the end of the year, an announcement out of the blue by the United States that it was reducing the American military in Viet-Nam by say 1,000 men would have three good effects: a) It would show that we were winning;

b) It would take the steam out of the Communists’ best propaganda line, i.e., that this was an American war and the Vietnamese were our satellite; and

c) It would reaffirm the honesty of American intentions.

1 Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Vietnam Country Series, 4/63-5/63. Secret. Drafted by Wood on April 5. Approved by the White House on April 9.

78. Minutes of Meeting of the Special Group for Counterinsurgency 78. Minutes of Meeting of the Special Group for Counterinsurgency1

Washington, April 4, 1963, 2 p.m.

PRESENT

Governor Harriman, The Attorney General, Mr. Gilpatric, Mr. McCone, Mr. Forrestal, Mr. Coffin vice Mr. Bell, Mr. Wilson vice Mr. Murrow, General Johnson vice General Taylor

Mr. Thompson and Mr. Wood were present for Item 1

Mr. Jorden and Mr. Cooper were present for Items 1 and 2

Mr. Maechling, Mr. Koren, Mr. Janow and Mr. Wolf were present for the meeting

1. Discussion with Mr. Thompson on the Situation in Viet-Nam

Mr. Robert Thompson, head of the British Advisory Mission to Viet-Nam, discussed with the members his observations on the situation in Viet-Nam. He characterized the situation as one of requiring patience and exhibiting confidence. Relative to the latter, he believes that the Vietnamese have confidence in the ultimate success of the war against the Viet Cong. He cautioned, however, that there is the danger that we may be over-extending ourselves in the strategic hamlet program, leaving pockets of Viet Cong control behind to subvert and harass the peasants. He stressed the importance of consolidating areas prior to pushing forward into insecure areas.

Mr. Thompson observed that the infiltration is not a decisive factor in Viet Cong recruitment, and that only a relatively small amount of equipment comes into the country by this means. It is his opinion that the solution to the infiltration problem is to gain solid control at the village level with military forces screening in the border areas. Once solid control in the villages is gained, it will be possible to detect infiltrators as they attempt to enter these secure areas.

Mr. Thompson stated that it was his belief that U.S. forces in Viet-Nam are adequate for the task, but by the end of the year it could be possible to withdraw some of these forces. This move should be made as an indication that we are winning and tied into the achievement of a white area, free from Viet Cong attack. He also brought out that good relations exist between the U.S. and Vietnamese. However, he believes that reporting in the U.S. papers on the overall effort in Viet-Nam could be improved.

He acknowledged that a weakness of the Vietnamese is that they have been unable to cope with Communist penetration efforts in the Government, labor, and student organizations. However, steps are being taken to build up an internal security service to improve their capabilities in this area.

In commenting on air strikes, Mr. Thompson stated that their utilization is essential, as the threat prevents the Viet Cong from concentrating to carry out operations. He agreed that large scale “clear and hold” operations, although they may have some value, have not obtained significant results to date. He emphasized that the most effective method of operations against the Viet Cong are extended operations of ranger or similar type units in areas under Viet Cong control.

Mr. Thompson remarked that President Diem is stronger in the provinces than in Saigon. However, the Government is very dependent on him, and if he were to fall, the whole Government would collapse. To counter this possibility, we must encourage the establishment of a stable administrative system operating from the Ministries down to the village level, which would eventually lead to a viable government when the insurgency situation abates. In conjunction with this effort, planning should be initiated for demobilization, as well as increased attention to programs to assist in the agricultural sector.

Mr. Thompson commented that the only valid bench mark to assess the effectiveness of our effort in Viet-Nam is “when we reach the level of having sufficient control of the population to deny their accessibility to actions by the Viet Cong.” He believes we might reach this point by the middle of next year. In conclusion, Mr. Thompson stated that the key to success in Viet-Nam is the population and the existence of a strong government, which functions for the benefit of the people. He believes that this trend is now slowly developing.

2. Discussion with Mr. Jorden Concerning his Recent Trip to Viet-Nam2

Mr. Jorden, Special Assistant to the Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs, presented a summary of his findings based on his recent trip to Viet-Nam. Mr. Jorden pointed out that he was unable to document and develop any hard evidence of infiltration from Laos into Viet-Nam after October 1, 1962. Mr. Cooper, who has just returned from Viet-Nam, stated that it was difficult to assess the extent of infiltration from Laos; however, he did observe that the Viet Cong are now infiltrating from the southern delta area into the northern provinces. In response to a question from the Chairman, Mr. Jorden stated it would be extremely difficult to interdict infiltration from Laos, but that reconnaissance and surveillance operations over the border should help in determining intelligence on the source of any infiltration.

Mr. Jorden mentioned that he believes that present press reporting out of Viet-Nam is about the best that could be expected under the present circumstances. However, he pointed out that efforts should be made to provide more background briefings for the press in Saigon.

Mr. Jorden stated that despite progress and increased U.S. efforts in Viet-Nam, he did not detect on his recent trip any significant signs of enthusiasm on the part of the Vietnamese that the situation was getting better.

[Here follows discussion of agenda items 3. “Report on Feeder Roads” in Thailand, 4. “Assessment of Communist Subversive Efforts in Thailand—Bangkok 1477, dated March 29, 1963”, and “Miscellaneous.”]

James W. Dingeman
Executive Secretary

1 Source: Department of State, Special Group Counterinsurgency Files: Lot 68 D 451, Special Group (CI). Secret. Drafted by Dingeman who is not listed among the participants.

2 See Documents 64 and 65.

79. Letter From the Director of the Vietnam Working Group (Wood) to the Ambassador in Vietnam (Nolting) 79. Letter From the Director of the Vietnam Working Group (Wood) to the Ambassador in Vietnam (Nolting)1

Washington, April 4, 1963.

Dear Fritz: Thank you for your letter of March 252 on Dave Nuttle’s proposals. The letter has just arrived. Your comments seem wise and practical. After I have given myself the pleasure of studying them more carefully I will pass them on to those directly concerned. I think Dave Nuttle’s paper and your comments taken together could be very usefully synthesized for use in, say, similar minority problems in other underdeveloped countries.

Under the same general head, the British Embassy here tells me, as you probably already know, that their team on aborigines is being formed and that some of the members have, I understand, already arrived in Saigon.

On another British front the Embassy tells me that their plans and funds for a medical team are in hand and that the present problem is the completion of recruiting six properly qualified people.

The most helpful British development has been Bob Thompson’s visit, just completed. Before dictating the necessary memoranda of conversations, I thought I would give you the highlights. He saw the President this morning and when queried about Diem, he said the question was not whether we could win with Diem but that without Diem we would very probably lose within six months. He emphasized that the quality of the opposition was very poor. As to the war, he underlined the military statistics which are moving in our favor (especially defections-up to 148 for the week ending March 25). He played down the importance of infiltration. When asked why the French had not been able to win he replied that they had had no hope of getting the population on their side, but that more importantly the strategic hamlet program had gone very much better than we had expected. He praised the quality of the American military observers and advisers. As to defoliants, he felt that even when the foliage was dead it was still possible for the Viet Cong to hide under the branches. He also cited as a negative factor the automatic Asian aversion to unknown chemicals. He was not opposed to crop destruction, provided it was carefully planned so that it really hurt the Viet Cong. He emphasized the improving morale of Vietnamese military and civilian officials, particularly the province chiefs.

Queried on helicopters he said they were fine to prevent large scale concentrations and to surprise the Viet Cong, but that we must expect no large scale victories from them. The war, he emphasized, would be won slowly by brains and feet. He warned that as things turned more definitely against the Viet Cong they must be expected to use more terror, particularly in the form of hand grenades in Saigon.

He felt that tactical air was a key factor in preventing Viet Cong concentrations and in helping villagers and armed forces engaged on the ground. He was dead against strafing and bombing occupied villages since this left an irremediable legacy of bitterness. He thought that the present restrictions reduced the dangers of such activities. Tactical air, he said was carefully controlled and the pilots understood that when in doubt about bombing and strafing, they should not do it.

Throughout, he made it clear that we are winning, that we are on the right track and that we should not be drawn off or man the panic station if there are further incidents like Ap Bac or if press reports continue to be unsavory.

He believed it possible that a real white area could be achieved between June and August, and that if we continue to gain the upper hand it would be wise for the United States to decide unilaterally and without prior announcement to reduce the MAAG by a substantial amount, say 1,000, at the end of calendar 1963. This, he emphasized, would show our confidence that we are winning, would take the steam out of the main Viet Cong propaganda line (that the Vietnamese are a satellite of the Americans), and would reaffirm the honesty of American intentions.

The President warmly congratulated Bob on his presentation and on his very fine work in Viet-Nam.

I enclose a very incomplete agenda3 showing some of the other persons he met during his visit here.

I might comment that his meeting with the Governor was extremely cordial, lasting an hour and 15 minutes-during which time the Governor kept his hearing aid in with the volume up. This is, I believe, a record for undivided gubernatorial attention. To the Governor, Thompson stressed the need for patience and confidence.

Speaking of the attitude of the Vietnamese peasants, the Secretary supposed that the average Vietnamese peasant did not arise and beat his breast and inquire what he could do for Ngo Dinh Diem that day. He recalled that as a boy on a farm in Georgia they had a phone which was connected to about 30 others in the neighborhood, that three rings on the phone signaled everyone to pick up the instrument, and that such a signal could only mean fire, mad dog, or Federal Revenue Agent.

Thompson also made his point to Mr. McNamara about reducing the size of MAAG at the end of the year if things continue to go well.

He made a speech at Fort Bragg.

He was also the dinner guest of the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs Hilsman, where he had a long conversation with Warren Unna. In fact, he did so much for us these last ten days in Washington that he would deserve two months home leave even if he had not spent the previous ten months in Viet-Nam.

During all of these conversations the question of the U.S. press was, of course, a recurring topic. I forgot to mention that he gave a brief backgrounder at the British Embassy and under strictly British auspices which was attended by approximately 15-20 correspondents. The British felt it had gone very well. Roger Hilsman was pleased with the talk that Bob had with Warren Unna. I was happy to receive your letter of March 264 saying that you have asked Lyall Breckon to travel to the delta with Warren if he would like to do it.

I had a fine skiing vacation.

[1 paragraph (1-1/2 lines) not declassified]

I hope to see you soon and I hope that you will let me know if there is anything that we can possibly do for you for your family before your arrival.

With all best wishes.

Yours very sincerely,

Chalmers B. Wood5

1 Source: Department of State, Vietnam Working Group Files: Lot 67 D 54, ORG-1 Gen Pol (Off & Inf Lets). Secret.

2 In his letter to Wood, Nolting assessed a proposal forwarded from the State Department, which called for the establishment of three-man ethnic specialist teams to prepare long-term field studies of tribal minority areas in Vietnam. Nolting praised the idea, but suggested that the techniques proposed should be considered for application in other countries “which are vulnerable to Communist blandishments but which have not yet been swept up in a Viet-Nam style liberation war.” In Vietnam, Nolting felt that “programs relating to the Montagnards have now gone far beyond the point where such teams would be of much help.” (Ibid.)

3 Not found attached.

4 Not printed. (Department of State, Vietnam Working Group Files: Lot 67 D 54, Pol 7 Visits and Mtgs)

5 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.

80. Memorandum From the Joint Chiefs of Staff to the Secretary of Defense (McNamara) 80. Memorandum From the Joint Chiefs of Staff to the Secretary of Defense (McNamara)1

Washington, April 4, 1963.

JCSM-275-63

SUBJECT

Defoliation—Operational Evaluation

1. Reference is made to JCSM-738-62, dated 28 September 1962,2 Subject: “Review and Operational Evaluation of Defoliation Program in South Vietnam.” In this memorandum, the Joint Chiefs of Staff concurred in a conclusion forwarded by CINCPAC which stated essentially: Potential effectiveness of defoliation was overestimated, particularly in those areas of mixed vegetation, but it was effective in mangrove areas.

2. On the basis of the more recent information contained in the Appendix3 hereto, evaluation of additional evidence indicates the desirability of revision of the initial conclusions. Whereas the initial test defoliation operations against mangrove forests in January-March 1962 gave satisfactory results, excellent results were obtained in the defoliation operations against mangrove forests in September-October 1962, by using increased quantities of herbicide per acre and a larger droplet size. Additionally, subsequent operations indicate that the results of using herbicides in test defoliation operations conducted prior to March 1962 in the Republic of Vietnam against evergreen and scrub forest were not conclusive because: a. The tests were conducted during the dormant season for the above types of vegetation.

b. An insufficient quantity of herbicide per acre was used.

c. The droplet size was too small.

Based on the technical evaluation of the results attained in the January-March 1962 tests against evergreen and scrub forests and the increase in effectiveness obtained against mangrove areas, as stated above, there is now a good reason to conclude that herbicides, if used during the growing season in the proper quantity per acre and in a correct droplet size, would be effective against evergreen and scrub forests.

3. The letter4 from the Commander, United States Military Assistance Command, Vietnam, in the Appendix hereto should be of interest to the Advanced Research Projects Agency.

For the Joint Chiefs of Staff:

A. H. Manhart5
Major General, USA
Deputy Director, Joint Staff

1 Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OSD Files: FRC 66 A 3542, 370.64 2 Feb. Vietnam 1963. Secret.

2 Not printed. (Ibid.)

3 Not found attached.

4 Not found.

5 Printed from a copy that bears this stamped signature.

81. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 81. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, April 5, 1963, 7 p.m.

882. CINCPAC for POLAD. Embtels 852,2 790; Deptel 869.3 Herewith a report of failure to persuade or move Diem on counterinsurgency fund issue. In the past, he has been known to change his mind after digesting some hard facts. He may do so this time, but I rather doubt it. Certainly he gave no indication of so doing in course of three and one-half hour discussion Thursday evening.4 In writing this, I am gravely concerned and perplexed. I believe I used all the ammunition and personal persuasion I had, without apparent result. He seemed stoically prepared to accept all consequences of his decision, was relatively relaxed and rather philosophical throughout, and gave the impression of one who would rather be right, according to his lights, than President. He was evidently braced for this session, well prepared on details, courteous but immovable.

Several previous talks with Thuan had revealed increasingly stubborn objections by Diem, stimulated by Nhu, to our long-standing proposal which had, according to Thuan, previously received Diem’s approval in principle. I insisted on carrying matter to President after Thuan finally reported his failure to convince him and after discussion of issue and my instructions with Harkins and Brent.

I shall try to give essence of long discussion with Diem as accurately as possible, since I believe situation now confronting us represents another perplexing turn in GVN policy with far reaching implications for American policy. I have considered possibility of his having misunderstood either proposal itself or consequences of his refusal, and I do not believe he is under any misapprehension or misunderstanding. He is apparently sincerely convinced (though erroneously in my judgment) that Americans, particularly at lower levels and in all branches of GVN activity, are, by their very number and zeal, creating within the governmental structure of the GVN and among the population the impression of assuming an American “protectorate” over SVN. He recognized repeatedly that this is neither our aim nor our desire and expressed great gratitude for American generosity and intentions, but stuck to his conviction that having so many Americans here is creating the impression of a U.S. protectorate. Relating this to our present proposal for counter-insurgency fund, he insisted that our proposal would perpetuate too close a relationship in financial and procedural matters, particularly on the civil side, would undermine the authority of his government and its ability to make unimpeded decisions, and thus play into the hands of the Communists.

I told Diem that I could not accept his argument. I felt he must have been misinformed by persons who, for some ulterior motive, were trying to break the close working relationship between the GVN and us which had produced (and he admitted it) such measurable and encouraging results over the past months. I pointed out to him that it was he who had asked for, and received, American assistance in the very forms requested, without intention or act on our part to infringe his government’s sovereignty. I asked him to consider carefully and give me his answer. Did he want to eliminate American help and advice at this critical time? His reply was “not eliminate but reduce” (referring, I am sure, to the advice, not the material aid). He insisted that the “men at the top” of our mission understood the psychological and political problems, but that many junior officers among such a large and increasing American contingent did not, and were prone to insist upon their own ideas when they did not have sufficient experience of the country, its people, its traditions, and its way of doing things. He said that the resulting frustration on the part of some Americans was the root cause of a great deal of unfavorable publicity, and of much uncoordinated reporting to Washington. So many Americans were confusing and disrupting the functions of the GVN, he said, particularly at the provincial and district level. He elaborated on the well-known problems of government here. He said that he had two kinds of officials in the provinces: those with a “colonial mentality” and a new generation of nationally-minded officials. He claimed that U.S. advisors (particularly certain U.S. AID rural affairs [garble] intelligence advisors, psychological and propaganda advisors, and military sector advisors) cause difficulties in the case of the colonial-minded officials by assuming their responsibilities with their concurrence, and in the case of the nationally-minded officials by insisting too much upon their own views and causing delay and confusion. He claimed that the Minister of Interior, and he personally, had received many complaints on this score from provincial officials.

I challenged him to document this, and he went into many alleged cases, ranging from disputes as to where small canals, roads, bridges, etc., should be placed, to conflicting ideas on strategic hamlet construction, to the unwitting stimulation of corruption of Vietnamese local officials when American money was passed out. On the subject of corruption, I told him of one instance known to me where an American advisor had caught a province chief red-handed in overpricing material for a strategic hamlet, and that it was my impression that the presence of Americans had resulted in considerably less chiseling than would otherwise have been the case. He admitted this, and said, as he has done frequently in the past, that we should report to the Minister of Interior any case of corruption and he promised that it would be investigated and dealt with.

In the course of the discussion, I told him that my government and this mission had tried to get the very best people we could for all branches of our mission. They were hand-picked, experienced people, with dedication and good judgment; if these people were creating difficulties of the kind he described, I could not have any hope that a different set of Americans would do any better. I told him I thought that he had been deliberately misled and misinformed. The first serious criticisms I had heard along this line-and these only recently had come, I said, from his brother, Ngo Dinh Nhu. I asked him whether he had carefully checked the sources of his information and warned him that there were many Vietnamese, both Communist and non-Communist, government and non-government, who might wish to mislead him into this vital mistake. He replied calmly that he relied a great deal on his brother, that he could not do all the work himself, and that he trusted his brother’s judgment and integrity. He was convinced that what he had said, as ungrateful as it sounded, ought to be said for the sake of the country. He took full responsibility for the decision.

I told him he must realize he was striking at the root of our joint cooperative effort, at what had been freely agreed between him and President Kennedy after long and hard consideration; that it would be impossible, particularly given the trend of U.S. Congressional and public opinion on the subject of Vietnam, for us to hand out the money and equipment without genuine cooperation and team-work, including advice but not ultimate control, in its effective use. This, I said, applied not only to funds and equipment for economic and social purposes in the rural areas (and I reviewed for him these amounts and sources) but also to other American aid, including military. I read to him relevant portions of reftels, and he understood I told him this was a real test of confidence and that I would not recommend, nor would Washington approve, a one-way street on confidence.

This led to a rather philosophical discussion by him of the problems of American aid policy, during which he said inter alia he thought it was the most generously motivated thing in history but that somehow we had not yet found the key for its most effective use, particularly in highly sensitive, ex-colonial, underdeveloped countries. He did not go so far as Nhu has sometimes gone in telling us how we should spend our money, but he did stress the point of giving the recipient country more elbow room to run its own affairs and develop its own institutions according to its own background and traditions. I told him bluntly that this attitude would only arouse suspicions at home, as it did in my own mind, about the political motivations of his government. Was he really working for the benefit of the people or, as his critics charged, to perpetuate his own regime? He responded quite calmly, “look at the record of what I have done and tried to do for the Vietnamese people during the past eight years”, and went into a long history of land development centers, agricultural credits, (both of which he claimed were opposed in one way or another by American advisors at the time), and other social and economic programs. I referred at this point to a trip I had made the day before to An Giang Province, mentioning the large number of refugees who had come over to the government side and the measures being implemented to feed, house, and rehabilitate them. I said these joint GVN-US efforts seemed to me to be working smoothly and effectively there as elsewhere; that security in that area as in many others had been greatly improved and morale lifted. I remarked that I had noticed especially how the children gave the Americans a friendly signal and grin and certainly, even in that VC influenced area, showed no hostility. Diem said rather sadly, “yes, that is often the case. That is what I meant by the colonial mentality of the Vietnamese people. I have complaints from my own officials in those areas to the effect that the people believe that the Americans are now the government and disregard the authority of my local officials.”

I tried to bring him back to the specific subject of the proposed counter-insurgency fund. I suggested that we could do something about specific cases where the advisory effort proved to be undercutting the authority of Vietnamese officials. It was clearly necessary, however, to establish an adequate and agreed piaster fund and procedures to carry on the strategic hamlet and related programs if the gains to date were to be consolidated and this struggle eventually won. This, I said, was a must from my government’s viewpoint. I reviewed with him the pathfinding procedures developed last year, President Kennedy’s hard decision (contrary to our balance of payments policy) to buy 10 million dollars worth of piasters, the successful experience to date with this fund and procedures. I reviewed with him the concept and origin of provincial rehabilitation plans; how they were developed by his own officials, screened and approved by Ngo Dinh Nhu’s Ministerial Committee on Strategic Hamlets, passed to the U.S. Committee on Province Rehabilitation with a request for support. I showed him that these plans were generally accepted by the U.S. committee without appreciable change, and that there were absolutely no grounds for the contention that the US was usurping planning and executive functions of the GVN at any echelon. He admitted this, but insisted that some of our people in the field, particularly on the civilian side but also some sector advisors, were undoing the good work done by the committees, creating interference and playing to the colonial-minded Vietnamese and hence into the hands of the VC. Upon my insistence upon specifics, he finally said he felt the real trouble was that we had too many people here, advising in too much detail on too many matters, and that the remedy was to gradually cut back the number of people, thus “restoring control at the top”. I told him that I could not accept the implication that our people were freewheeling and out of control nor that there was uncoordinated reporting. I did not think it was true. We certainly had no desire to flood his country with Americans, and there might be some possibility of reducing the number; but certainly, considering our investment here, we had to have eyes and ears, as well as an advisory voice. Our support in its present dimensions would not be possible otherwise. With respect to the subject fund, we were asking two things: A commitment by the GVN to fill a limited gap for agreed counter-insurgency work, and procedures along the lines already proven to be effective. I asked whether his objections to this were financial, political or what. He said they are not financial; that the GVN was prepared to provide from its own resources or borrowings whatever seemed to it to be necessary to continue vigorously the strategic hamlet and rural development programs.

It could not, however, accept an American voice or control over the GVN’s own resources. This, he said, would be interpreted throughout his government and by all Vietnamese as Vietnam’s becoming a “protectorate”. I pointed out that we were in fact under this proposal asking for a voice with respect to about 1.3 billion piasters of Vietnamese origin, whereas the GVN had been exercising for years a voice-and a predominant one-in the expenditure of U.S. funds now running at the rate of some 36 billion piasters per year. I found it impossible to accept his reasoning. He said simply that this was one of the problems involved in giving aid. I asked him what he intended to do. Did he wish to abolish the present procedures for approving projects and dispensing funds in the provinces? He said that he did not wish to abolish those procedures insofar as U.S. funds were concerned, but he could not see his way clear to extending them over GVN’s own funds. I said this was the nub of the problem, and that we were not prepared to go ahead on the present effort unless it could be overcome. He said again that the GVN would supply adequate funds for counter-insurgency but had to have control of them itself. We could verify their expenditures had been made; GVN books would be open.5

Before leaving, I told the President, as a friend and a supporter of his, I was bound to say that his decision, in my opinion, would result in a downward spiral of Vietnam-American confidence, would result in curtailment of U.S. aid, and really threaten to wash out the gains made over the last year and a half. I asked him to reconsider. He said that he had thought hard about this matter, that he knew our policy was well motivated, but he could not accept this proposal. His reasons were in a nutshell that it would be considered by the Vietnamese people, both in form and execution, as proof of the establishment of a U.S. “protectorate”. I repeated that I could not accept his reasons and that, in my opinion, he was by this decision forcing a change in the policy of the U.S. Government towards Vietnam.

Comments follow.6

Nolting

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 26-1 S VIET Secret; Priority; Limit Distribution. Repeated to CINCPAC.

2 Document 68.

3 Telegrams 869 to Saigon and 790 from Saigon are summarized in footnotes 2 and 3, Document 68.

4 April 4.

5 A marginal notation at this point, in Wood’s hand, reads: “If we bought more piasters would it be all right?”

6 Document 82.

82. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 82. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, April 7, 1963, 1 a.m.

888. CINCPAC for POLAD. Embtel 882.2 In assessing Diem’s rejection of our proposal for counter-insurgency fund, most significant point is that grounds advanced for rejection approach repudiation of concept of expanded and deepened U.S. advisory effort, civil and military. This concept was fundamental element our agreement with GVN in December 1961 on greatly stepped up U.S. assistance effort. Progress made since that date would not have occurred, in our view, without massive advisory effort, nor do we believe it can be maintained if drastic reduction made at this stage in number of advisors, particularly in provinces and with smaller military formations-which are precisely areas where Diem seems to find most difficulty. We would not deny that some advisors may, on occasion, have acted in way to cause complaint or that their number and zeal have reached point where, to those who want to see it that way, there are similarities with a “protectorate” situation. Point is we don’t think GVN can win without U.S. advisors in roughly present density for the next year at least.

We also gravely doubt that momentum of strategic hamlet program can be maintained and, especially, gains already made consolidated without piastre fund of roughly size we have proposed and procedures for its use as effective as those we have had for purchased piastres. Although Diem says GVN will make necessary funds available, he is probably thinking of much smaller sum than we are (very likely the 400 million piastres already earmarked by GVN vs 1300 million in our proposal) and it is clear that he is not thinking of procedures which would give us satisfactory voice in use of GVNfunds. (He probably wants to revert to former unsatisfactory GVN procedures.) In short, we conclude that unless we can get something comparable to what we have proposed, there is grave risk that strategic hamlet program will founder. Without successful strategic hamlet program, it will take longer to get insurgency under control.

If this is correct evaluation of significance of Diem’s position, we see no viable alternative to taking action (or possibly series of actions) designed to convince Diem that we mean business—notwithstanding grave risk that such action (a) will not move Diem but on contrary lead to retaliatory action and descending spiral our relations and (b) might light coup fuse. (We continue have no grounds to believe that coup would bring to power a government more likely to win the war than Diem. On contrary, we think a coup, either accomplished or abortive, would weaken chances of preserving independence of SVN.)

Unless tactical move prescribed at end this message bears fruit, first action we would recommend is to inform GVN that we are revising counterpart support to GVN military budget downward by, say, 1.3 billion piastres (from 7.5 billion) and are tentatively earmarking this sum for support to strategic hamlet program. This would be very r serious matter for GVN but action not irreversible if Diem comes around and would not involve dislocations inherent in cancelling orders for hamlet materials, for example. Moreover, it is in any case going to be necessary to reduce counterpart allocation to military budget (if joint fund is not approved), simply in order to provide funds to carry on minimum existing economic projects and for USOM operating expenses.

In informing Diem of above, we would at same time offer (a) to review advisor situation with view to seeing what reduction can be made and (b) to replace any advisor who abuses his position or undermines GVN authority. Finally, as earnest our firm intention to phase out special military assistance, would give him detailed briefing on 3year comprehensive plan (request authority to do this).

Before taking step of informing Diem of reduced support for military budget, believe it advisable for tactical reasons to ask him to give me written response our proposal for counter-insurgency fund, to include reasons for rejection. This move would provide time for him to reflect on consequences his decision and for members his government to work on him if they are disposed to do so. I might also use this period for further talks with Diem and others in course of which I might draw on arguments in immediately preceding paragraph. Meanwhile, we would quietly hold up approval of military budget support level and any new allocations of funds.

Harkins and Brent concur.

Nolting

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 26-1 S VIEI Secret; Priority; Limit Distribution. Repeated to CINCPAC. Also published in Declassified Documents, 1978, 433B.

2 Document 81.

83. Editorial Note 83. Editorial Note

The eighth Ministerial meeting of the Council of the Southeast Asia Treaty Organization (SEATO) was held in Paris, April 8-10, under the chairmanship of French Foreign Minister Maurice Couve de Murville. Secretary of State Dean Rusk led the United States delegation to the meeting. Rusk addressed the Council on April 8 and gave a guardedly optimistic assessment of developments in Vietnam: “In Viet-Nam, although the struggle has intensified since our 1961 meeting, the Viet Cong drive has been blunted, and there are some grounds for further encouragement. We believe that Viet-Nam has now found the right strategy for meeting the Viet Cong terrorism and is applying it with increasing vigor.”

The communique issued by the Council at the conclusion of the meeting on April 10 was similarly optimistic. The Council noted reports of considerable progress in the fight against subversion in Vietnam, and expressed the hope that “Viet-Nam, with the support given to it, would be in a position to maintain its advance towards internal stability and international security.” For texts of Rusk’s statement to the Council and the final communique, see American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1963, pages 729-733.

84. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam 84. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam1

Washington, April 8, 1963, 8:06 p.m.

943. Paris SEATO for Hilsman and Felt. Embtels 882 and 888.2 Your recommendations receiving full review here. Meanwhile suggest you hold off requesting explanatory letter from Diem and from reducing counterpart support to GVN military budget.

1. What is your judgment as to probable GVN actions if support to GVN military budget were revised downward as suggested reftel?

2. If these revisions made what likelihood that GVN would agree use these funds for CI Program?

3. Why do you believe that GVN will not make 1.3 billion piasters available for CI?

4. Do you expect GVN could be persuaded to make their piasters available under acceptable procedures?

5. Would GVN likely agree to provincial advisers continuance and joint CI fund if funded (a) with U.S. owned Sec 104 (c) PL-4803 piaster proceeds; (b) with more purchased piasters?

6. What is your estimate amount needed carry on non-CI economic projects and fund USOM operating expenses for remainder CY 63?

7. What is possibility at this time or in near future of altering the proposed counterinsurgency joint fund to give GVN greater voice in planning and control of operations, and at same time continue an effective CI effort?

Request reply Tuesday COB Washington time.4

Ball

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, AID (US) S VIET. Secret; Operational Immediate. Drafted and cleared by Wood. Repeated to CINCPAC for POLAD and to Paris for the U.S. Delegation at the SEATO Council meeting.

2 Documents 81 and 82.

3 Section 104 (c) of P.L. 480, as adopted on July 10, 1954, stipulates that the President may enter into agreements with friendly nations to use the foreign currency which accrues under P.L. 480 for the following purpose: “To procure military equipment, materials, facilities, and services for the common defense.” (68 Stat. 454)

4 See Document 85.

85. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 85. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, April 9, 1963, 7 p.m.

893. Paris for SEATO for Secretary Hilsman and Felt. CINCPAC for POLAD. Deptel 943, Embtels 882 and 888.2 GVN seems to be giving ground on this issue. On Monday, I sent personal letter to President Diem3 requesting written reply to my letter to Thuan of March 184 on counter-insurgency fund. Today, Thuan asked me to see him and what he had to say after talks with Diem and Nhu encourages our hope for reasonable and effective compromise. We went very thoroughly into matter. Thuan, while unable to guarantee Diem’s position, made following points and proposals which he thought, on basis conversation with President after our talk, could be made acceptable to GVN:

Thuan’s first point was that GVN did not want to alter fundamentally relationship with U.S. He said this meant that GVN does not desire a reduction of U.S. advisory-support effort. I asked, what about reduction of U.S. advisors? Thuan replied he thought Diem did not want a reduction in number of U.S. advisors, but only more “political sensitivity” on the part of certain advisors especially in rural areas.

Thuan specifically stated that Diem had agreed that relationship and working arrangements between GVN Inter-Ministerial Committee on Strategic Hamlets and U.S. Province Rehabilitation Committee should remain as is.

(There is an ambiguity here which will require further detailed discussion.)

On the question of financing the rural counter-insurgency program, Thuan stated that the GVN is prepared to contribute piasters from its own resources, on the basis of the list of projects attached to my letter of March 18 (Toaid A-2874) up to 2.3 billion piasters. Questioned closely on this, he said that Diem had not specifically agreed to the amount, but he felt that he could persuade him to state this in terms. I asked, under what procedure would GVN’s contribution be expended. Thuan replied, under special fund set up for this purpose, not subject to bureaucratic red tape, for allotment to province chiefs in manner similar to that employed in Phu Yen Province prior to establishment of U.S. special fund. (We believe this can be made to work, but will require further negotiation and effective understanding.)

In general diagnosis of Diem’s position last week and reasons therefor, Thuan said that President was emotionally worked up by a number of reports (some true, some partly true, and some false) concerning Americans’ activities coming to him at the same time. He listed a number of these, and I agreed, of course, to look into each one. He agreed with me (and said Diem now does, too) that these relatively minor matters do not justify “pouring out the baby with the bath”, the one point on which Thuan said he had no hope of persuading Diem was to continue the procedure of approving expenditures and dispensing funds of GVN origin through the existing province committee of three (generally the Province Chief, the MAAG sector advisor, and the USOM provincial representative). I said I could see no reason to dispense with this provenly effective mechanism. I saw considerable danger in falling again into the time-consuming procedures of prior years, and there was not time for this. I further stated that a good province chief would find, in my opinion, no difficulty in such an arrangement, since he would have the initiative and should exercise it. I also said, that without such an arrangement, I could not see how proper coordination could be achieved between the arrival of U.S. goods (both MAP and AID) and the parallel requirements for piaster expenditures. I said that fundamentally the difference between us seemed to be this: that the GVN, under Ngo Dinh Nhu’s theory, seemed to expect the Vietnamese peasants to pull themselves up by their own bootstraps when they have no shoes; we, to contrary, felt that they must be given, either in money or in kind, some inducement to work for the government’s cause. This did not have to be lavish, but it had to be something. Thuan admitted the difference in philosophy, but stuck to his point that he could not persuade Diem to continue the three-party arrangement in the provinces using GVN funds.

I told him that, while he was not sure of being able to persuade his government on the basis of the above, I was less sure of being able to persuade mine. Nevertheless, hoped with him to be able to work out a satisfactory arrangement to continue the joint effort, and I was encouraged by what he had told me of the relaxation in President Diem’s attitude. Thuan, who was in process of drafting at Diem’s request a reply to my letter of March 18, said he would make this as “good” as he could and hoped to get it signed promptly. I said I felt we could work out the ad hoc and ad hominem problems as they arose, but the main thing was to be sure that we understood each other and had confidence each in the intentions of the other. Without this, no compromise would work. He reiterated that Diem had no intention of suggesting a change in basic relations at this time, although he realized that he had conveyed that idea. Thuan said “the trouble is that we have a lot of people with a lot of views, not a coordinated government”.

Deptel 943 was received after this conversation. Answers to numbered questions therein, in light of above conversation, follow: 1 and 2. Purpose of informing GVN of reduction counterpart support to military budget would be to impress on them seriousness with which we regard their rejection of CI fund proposal and to do this in such a way as to create minimum dislocations if tactic has intended effect. That is, if GVN in face of our action comes around on CI fund or shows interest in satisfactory compromise, we could revert to status quo ante on military budget. If, on other hand, GVN does not come around, we think it is improbable that they would cooperate on use of transferred counterpart funds in accordance our desires. On contrary, they might also retaliate, for example by additional restrictions on advisers. In other words, as we sought to indicate in our 888, this is exceedingly risky step and chances success we think about fifty-fifty provided there are no leaks. In light indication from Thuan of real movement on GVN side, hope this step will not be necessary.

3. Primarily because of known view of GVN, particularly Nhu, that province rehabilitation operations should be funded locally to maximum extent and statements of Diem that provincial operations supported by purchased piastres have in past been too “lavish”, we had thought it most unlikely GVN would come up with fund of size we consider necessary. There is also fact that GVN budgeted total of 100 million piastres for Strategic Hamlet Program in CY 1962 and for CY 1963 has budgeted 300 million plus earmarking 100 million from lottery receipts. It would appear from Thuan’s statements that we were too pessimistic.

4. Conversation with Thuan gives hope that they can be.

5a. See 1 and 2 above. These funds are already part of projected contributor to military budget.

5b. Probably.

6. Depends on how “non-CI projects” are defined. (See attachment to Toaid A-2874.)

7. Under our proposal all planning and expenditures would require joint U.S.-GVN agreement. (See Toaid A-2874 and earlier agreement on purchased piastres.) There may be ways in which this can be improved, at least optically [sic], from GVN standpoint. There are also probably ways in which U.S. advice in this process can be made less obtrusive and possibly some reduction in number of advisors can be effected.

Nolting

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 26-1 S VIET Secret; Operational Immediate; Limit Distribution. Repeated to CINCPAC and Paris. A note on a copy of this telegram in the Kennedy Library indicates that it was included in the briefing book prepared for the President for the NSC meeting on April 10. (Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Vietnam Country Series, /4/63-5/63)

2 Documents 84, 81, and 82, respectively.

3 No copy of this letter has been found.

4 Document 61.

86. Telegram From the Delegation at the SEATO Council Meeting to the Department of State 86. Telegram From the Delegation at the SEATO Council Meeting to the Department of State1

Paris, April 10, 1963, 2 p.m.

Secto 19. GVN FonMin Mau at his request called on Secretary April 10.2 At latter’s request Mau described situation his country, referring to evidences of success in military and economic fields and pointing to prospect in few months of assembly and local elections. Secretary expressed pleasure at progress, but warned of need to maintain momentum and to guard against our common efforts being sapped by inevitable frustrations.

Mau then launched into review his government’s viewpoint on problems confronting it. After alluding to difficulties posed by Viet Minh infiltration through Cambodia and Laos, Mau warned against danger of bloc efforts to divide the free world. For instance, the idea of neutralization for SVN originates with the Communists but is supported by “certain organs of French Government”, which hope see both bloc and US depart leaving a French presence in SVN. Example of difficulties facing Souvanna, a “creature of French,” is particularly instructive. Mau stated, however, he wished to concentrate on more delicate question of three problems cropping up between US and GVN which derive from principle of freedom: 1) Press: US press often does not understand nature of situation in SVN, seeks sensational aspect, and has deleterious effect on US public opinion. Furthermore unrestricted freedom of press can jeopardize security of military operations.

2) Vietnamese oppositionists: 75 to 80 percent of those claiming be opposition political elements have proved be “creatures of French” and undesirable elements, such as Tran Van Huu, tend to gather in Paris where they do not observe non-political role appropriate for political refugees (such as Bidault). GVN can’t understand why USG permits such persons, who obtain French travel documents, to come to US. Such visits give unfortunate impression of US support.

3) General policy: GVN, which is locked in struggle with VC, cannot accept 100 percent democracy.

Secretary spoke briefly to these three points, assuring Mau first of US concern that balanced press picture emanate from SVN but stressing need for prerequisite of mutual confidence between press and GVN. He stated that US press reacts badly to feeling GVN attempting control our public opinion. If, however, American public believes it getting full picture, it will support our efforts in SVN. Secretary mentioned to Mau in confidence he had talks with number of press leaders in effort promote balanced reporting. Re oppositionists, Secretary stated denial entry into US would only turn undesirable public attention on them. Finally, Secretary stated that while hesitating prescribe form of political changes desirable for SVN he wished emphasize importance GVN be in position enlist energies and loyalties of the people.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL S VIET. Confidential; Priority. Repeated to Saigon.

2 Secretary Rusk was still in Paris for the SEATO Council meeting.

87. Editorial Note 87. Editorial Note

On April 10, 1963, the National Security Council met to consider problems in Laos and South Vietnam. At the request of McGeorge Bundy,-the Department of State prepared and circulated to the National Security Council a briefing paper which outlined the problems to be considered by the Council. (Memorandum of telephone conversation, April 8; Library of Congress, Harriman Papers, Telcons — March-April-May-1963) The problem at issue in Vietnam was identified in the paper as “an apparently critical situation” which had developed concerning the Counter-Insurgency Piaster Fund established in 1962. The paper traced the dispute over the question of joint supervision of the fund, and concluded: “It now seems probable that a reasonable and effective compromise can be worked out in the field which will provide for appropriate Vietnamese funding contributions and adequate U.S. advisory representation in the Counter-Insurgency Program.” (Memorandum for consideration by the National Security Council on April 10; Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Vietnam Country Series, /4/63-5/63)

The National Security Council limited its discussion on April 10, however, to the implications of developments in Laos. According to a summary record of the meeting prepared by Bromley Smith, “Mr Harriman recommended that the discussion of Vietnam be omitted in view of recent developments which indicated that the problem discussed in the State paper was not as urgent as had appeared earlier.” (Ibid., Meetings and Memoranda Series)

Harriman wrote to General Taylor after the meeting that the National Security Council had deferred consideration of Vietnam in light of the assurance received from Saigon in telegram 893 (Document 85) that a compromise on the issue of the counterinsurgency fund seemed likely. Harriman added, “it was decided that the Ambassador and the Country Team should be given an opportunity to work out the ‘reasonable and effective compromise’ which is predicated in that message.” Therefore, Harriman concluded, “it would be appropriate for the Special Group (CI) to be guided by this decision and to defer consideration of the subject until and unless it appears that our Ambassador and his Country Team are unable to accomplish the results which they anticipate.” (Memorandum from Harriman to Taylor, April 10; Department of State, Central Files,POL 26-1 S VIET)

88. Memorandum for the Record of a Conversation With the Presidential Counselor (Ngo Dinh Nhu) 88. Memorandum for the Record of a Conversation With the Presidential Counselor (Ngo Dinh Nhu)1

Saigon, April 12, 1963.

1. Ngo Dinh Nhu began [less than 1 line not declassified] by stating that an important current of “revisionism” thought was moving with increasing strength throughout various departments of the Government of Vietnam, within the armed forces, and in such semi-private organizations as the Republican Youth. It was not clear as to what Nhu meant by “revisionism”. He seemed to imply that a general reexamination of the processes and performance of government in its broadest sense was taking place-a self-criticism and self-examination. [1 sentence (1-1/2 lines) not declassified] Nhu said that part of this process represented an effort to grapple with the problem of “control”. He said that in developed societies with a tradition of democratic control, absorbed by the citizenry during early youth, such institutions as a free press, free association and assembly, democratic political institutions, and free universities contribute to democratic control of the society. However, in the underdeveloped state of war-time South Vietnam, other forms of control are necessary. Nhu did not define these other forms of control but gave the impression of making an exploratory effort toward locating and applying control measures. He repeated several times that the objective was to achieve “liberty, fraternity, and justice.”

2. Nhu said that one area of revisionist thought and of the control problem lay in the problem of relationship between the province chief and the central government, especially the ministries. Nhu feels that province chiefs have acquired too much power, usurping “illegal power” to a degree which results in local abuses and lack of a sufficiently coordinated and disciplined governmental process. Province chiefs are not sufficiently responsive to the various ministries of the central government. He cited relationships between the Ministry of Finance and the province chiefs and said that the Ministry of Finance had inadequate control of the discharge of fiscal responsibilities by a province chief in his province. Province chiefs were also insufficiently responsive to the Ministry of Interior.

3. Another sector of revisionist thinking is in the field of education. Nhu thinks that the Vietnamese educational system, including the universities, is not geared to the needs of a developing new country in terms of modern statehood. The Vietnamese educational system does not produce civic-minded graduates imbued with a sense of patriotism or of service to the nation. He said that, in contrast to the American system, civics is not even taught anywhere in the Vietnamese educational process.

4. Nhu claimed that revisionist soul-searching was taking place in the Cabinet ministries with respect to the organization, personnel, and performance of these ministries. And he claimed that similar self-examination is taking place within the armed forces. He mentioned his growing interest in psychological warfare as conducted by the armed forces and said that psychological and political warfare consciousness and practice within the armed forces cannot be achieved as long as this sector is left primarily to a handful of trained specialists within the armed forces. Trained specialists tend to be ignored by their commanding officers and consequently fail to achieve the objectives sought. Nhu’s thesis is that psychological and political warfare consciousness within the armed forces must be obtained by training the commanding officers themselves from general staff officers and corps commanders on down to the various echelons of command. This program has already been started and Nhu referred to the 133 officers who had just been graduated at the Psychological Warfare Cadres Training Center in Saigon. Nhu spoke at the graduation ceremonies and an article on the subject is carried in the Times of Vietnam, 13 April 1963, Page 2. General Tran Van Don headed up this course of instruction.

5. Nhu touched only briefly on the American economic aid problem and said that he thought some economic aid should be augmented, other aid should be programmed for elimination in the long run, some forms of aid should be programmed for elimination in the short run, and some aid could be eliminated almost immediately.

6. On American presence in South Vietnam, Nhu repeated his view that it would be useful to reduce the numbers of Americans by anywhere from 500 to 3,000 or 4,000. He said that when the Americans first arrived, the Vietnamese had a particular respect for them because the Americans were very hard-working, disciplined, and without “rancor” among themselves or toward other persons. However, Nhu feels that the process of discipline has broken down with the passing of time and the numerical increase of the American presence in South Vietnam. He repeated that the influx of Americans and their stationing in the provinces had been welcomed with the thought that Americans located in the provinces would come to understand the difficulties confronted by the Vietnamese and would interpret Vietnamese problems sympathetically and with more knowledge of the situation. This had not proved sufficiently to be the case.

7. Nhu said that for us to understand President Diem we should recall that Diem had spent a great part of his life in reaction against and resistance to French domination. He would be extremely sensitive to any situation which seemed even to imply the shadow of a protectorate status or of, as Nhu put it, “condominium”. [2 sentences (3 lines) not declassified]Nhu said that he wanted to avoid “institutionalizing” certain substantive relationships and procedures jointly engaged in by the Vietnamese and by American personnel. These relationships and procedures should not become “juridical”. Aside from these problems of the institutional and juridical, Nhu said that, for his part, he was disposed to consult with and inform American personnel as fully as before on problems and programs of joint interest.

8. According to Nhu, President Diem has received a considerable flow of complaints and statements of irritation from his military and civilian chiefs about problems of relationships with American counterparts. He cited General Dinh as being among these officials and claims that General Dinh had commented to the effect that there were too many Americans in South Vietnam. Complaints had come in from the Joint General Staff. Nhu volunteered his recognition that one advantage of the American presence at all echelons was to help keep Vietnamese officials honest and stimulate them into better performance as Vietnamese officials did not want to look bad in the eyes of a foreign officer. The Vietnamese officials were at a disadvantage with respect to their American opposite numbers as the Americans controlled the “means”, that is, the funds and goods. This contributed to the sense of inadequacy and inferiority felt by Vietnamese officials. In this connection and in passing, Nhu cited as an example the allegation that U.S. Special Forces were directly distributing funds and goods instead of doing so though Vietnamese authorities.

9. [1 sentence (1-1/2 lines) not declassified] He said that Colonel Le Quang Tung had made some criticisms and Nhu had replied to the effect that anyone can avoid making mistakes by just sitting back in his chair and “smoking his pipe”. President Diem had recently called down both Tung and Nhu because of inadequacies in the Vietnamese Special Forces performance and Nhu, himself, implied that Tung was not sufficiently experienced, qualified, or senior for the responsibility he now holds. Nevertheless, he gave [less than 1 line not declassified] no real impression that Tung was slated to be changed from his present assignment.

10. Nhu then referred to problems relating to the construction of the long earthen wall, “the Maginot Line”, as a defensive measure in the province of Vinh Long. This had been an initiative on the part of the province chief and had not been cleared with the Interministerial Committee on Strategic Hamlets. When Nhu called the province chief in for an explanation, the province chief justified the project and said that American opposition was based on personal antagonism to him. Nhu described the province chief as having made an effort to put the problem on a “nationalist” basis. He allowed the province chief to make his presentation in defense of the project before the Interministerial Committee and then asked the Regional Delegue for his view, which turned out to be in support of the province chief. After examination, Nhu ruled against the project on the basis of effectiveness alone and then succeeded in reversing President Diem’s judgment since Diem had previously heard the province chief’s defense and had approved the project. Nhu expressed appreciation for American representations against this project which had been made on a private and constructive basis to Vietnamese authorities.

[1 page of source text not declassified]

1 Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 334, MAC/V Files:FRC 69 A 702, 501-03 (63). Secret. Drafted on April 15. The name of Nhu’s interlocutor, who drafted the memorandum, was not declassified.

89. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 89. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, April 13, 1963, 1 p.m.

909. For Hilsman. For your information Harkins, Brent and I have declined on grounds press of work previously accepted invitation from Madame Ngo Dinh Nhu to spend several days next week at GVN villa in Dalat. Real reasons for this action, which I shall pass to President Diem orally at first opportunity, stem from recent directive from Madame Nhu to Women’s Solidarity Movement urging members not to show gratitude for foreign (i.e. American) aid (UPI has filed story on directive this week and Time correspondent has cabled translation much of text). Directive seriously impugns motives of givers of aid, charging that some of latter believe their position gives them right to destroy “our customs and habits and healthy laws” and that they are using their position “to make lackeys of Vietnamese and to seduce Vietnamese women into decadent paths”. Notwithstanding likelihood adverse but unpredictable reaction from Madame Nhu, do not believe that we can afford to let this directive go unnoticed. Nor do I and my colleagues feel that senior members of mission should be in position of publicly accepting rather lavish hospitality from Madame Nhu immediately following this outburst.

I hope that leaks on this matter do not occur but, if they do, felt you should know background.

Nolting

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 15-1 S VIET. Confidential; Limit Distribution.

90. Telegram From Michael V. Forrestal of the National Security Council Staff to the President, at Palm Beach, Florida 90. Telegram From Michael V. Forrestal of the National Security Council Staff to the President, at Palm Beach, Florida1

Washington, April 16, 1963, 3:42 p.m.

The telegram was sent in response to telegram PBWH07 from Captain Shepard to McGeorge Bundy, sent from Palm Beach at 2 p.m. April 16, which reads: “The President asked for a report on the use of the chemicals in RVN. What good did they do? Stop any further use until there has been an analysis.” (Ibid.)

CAP 63195. Only chemicals which have been used in Vietnam are ordinary weed killers similar to those in common use in the United States. Report on their effectiveness both as defoliants and to destroy crops has been in preparation by Defense and State for the past three weeks and will be available by week end. Since last December no further crop destruction has been authorized and none may be authorized without your approval. Except for clearing of railroad right of way no defoliation is planned within the next few weeks. Suggest you review matter after seeing report on your return.

1 Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Vietnam Country Series, /4/63-5/63. Secret; Operational Immediate. Transmission was authorized by Bromley Smith. Sent to the President’s naval aide, Captain Tazewell T Shepard, for the President. A handwritten note on the source text indicates that the President read the telegram.

91. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 91. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, April 17, 1963, 3 p.m.

920. CINCPAC for POLAD. Deptel 952;2 Embtel 909.3 Saw President Diem at my request yesterday morning for a 2-hour session. Believe our talk eased situation further and perhaps paved way for satisfactory resolution of problem of counter-insurgency fund, although this remains to be seen.

Told him first of Department’s instructions received Sunday4 re my home leave and return.

Then repeated reasons for our continued concern to settle promptly question of adequate Counter-Insurgency Fund and procedures to go with it, so that other important financial segments of U.S. support could move forward without interruption. Diem said letter we had requested was being prepared by Thuan and said he would act on it promptly. I told him thing which concerns us most were reasons that he had given for turning down our proposal. These seemed to amount to desire substantially to reduce American advisory effort in Vietnam. I hoped that upon reflection he would agree that time was not yet ripe for curtailment of advisory effort in any sector. I said we understood his problems, had already looked into some of complaints he had made, and would look into them all on case-by-case basis. I had certain procedures to suggest for remedying these matters. What we could not agree to was a wholesale reduction of advisory effort at this juncture while continuing large [scale] physical and financial aid, although nothing would please us more than to arrive at a stage as soon as possible when reductions of U.S. advisors would be possible without loss of momentum. Diem has evidently backed off considerably from his original position and, after some conversation, made it clear that he now does not insist upon withdrawals of U.S. personnel, but rather upon a concerted effort to make advisory system work better. He went into several new types of complaints from GVN officials, concerning both military and civilian matters, which I will not detail here. I suggested that we should work out with Thuan, for submission to him, possible remedial measures: A small group to look into such complaints on a case-by-case basis; frequent or regular meetings between himself and me or General Harkins (or both) to take up matters before they reached a crisis stage; perhaps a directive to all of our advisors in the field and to all their counterparts in Government of Vietnam detailing certain responsibilities and other matters to clarify relationships and functions. He thought these suggestions were good, and we will proceed to work them out with Thuan. My guess is that we can continue to take the heat out of this matter. We will, of course, have to see to what extent he will in fact drop his previous demands and work out satisfactory compromise on counter-insurgency funding and procedures.

I then requested to speak frankly on delicate question of public (or semi-public) statements, principally by Madame Ngo Dinh Nhu, which had caused misunderstanding and resentment among Americans here and had become cause of real morale problem on our side. I related this to need for “more goodwill and understanding” which he had mentioned in connection with the U.S. advisory effort. I cited Madame Nhu’s recent communique to Women’s Solidarity Movement,5 and read certain passages which were invidious to Americans. I told him that none of our principal officers wished to be in position of seeming to agree with or condone such statements, and for that reason General and Mrs. Harkins, Mr. Brent and my family and I had reluctantly declined our previously planned visit to Dalat at the invitation of Madame Nhu. I said we had declined ostensibly on grounds of business here, but I wanted him to know privately that a major factor was the communique referred to. He seemed to understand this position, and after some discussion said he would do what he could to prevent a repetition. In course of this discussion, in which he at first defended Madame Nhu while admitting she was prone to overstate, I had opportunity to stress point that such statements were not only damaging in America, but in Vietnam as well. They encourage the very form of criticism by Americans which he had complained against and could in fact bring about a dangerous situation in which the “volatile Vietnamese” (to use his phrase) might get out of hand. This, I thought, might take one of two directions-either against Americans or against those who were apparently driving wedges between Americans and their Vietnamese friends.

Comment: It is too early, I think, to know how this rather sensitive matter will turn out. At any rate, I felt compelled to insist that he exercise his responsibility in this matter and President Diem, initially at least, received it in the spirit intended.

Our further conversation concerned various matters of some importance to progress of events here. I found Diem optimistic and apparently thinking in terms of moving in right directions on political side. He spoke of reviewing dossiers of political prisoners for public trials in near future, of organizing village elections and subsequently Provincial Council elections. I urged him to press on with these matters, which would give new demonstration of direction of his policy. He said he would do so. He closed conversation by proposing several trips with General Harkins and me.

Nolting

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, AID (US) S VIET. Secret; Limit Distribution. Repeated to CINCPAC.

2 Telegram 952 to Saigon, April 12, asked Ambassador Nolting if it would be “tactically useful” to hold regular weekly meetings with Diem in order to ease tension. (Ibid.)

3 Document 89.

4 April 14. The instructions have not been found.

5 See Document 89.

92. Editorial Note 92. Editorial Note

On April 17, 1963, President Diem issued in Saigon what became known as the “Chieu Hoi proclamation.” (Chieu Hoi translates into English as “Open Arms.”) The proclamation reads, in part, as follows: “Based on the ideal of Personalism and the spirit of Brotherhood and Justice, the policy of Chieu Hoi sets forth the measures and methods to be applied to these elements who have been tricked, terrorized, exploited by the communist bandits, and who, becoming enlightened, (seek of their own volition to) come back to present themselves (to the authorities) to serve the National Government.”

The proclamation established a “Chieu Hoi Sub-Committee,” directly responsible to the Interministerial Committee for Strategic Hamlets, with the duty of carrying out the policy “by reaching from the hamlets, to the districts, to the provinces, to the towns, to the Capital.”

President Diem concluded the proclamation by calling on all persons who had been “flattered and deceived and exploited by the communists to come back soon to the just cause, in order to join with the people in struggling to build a new society, a new civilization, in which each citizen is free to develop himself in all fields.”

President Diem broadcast a message from the Presidential Palace in conjunction with the issuance of this proclamation. For texts of both the proclamation and the broadcast, see American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1963, pages 848-849.

USIA mounted an extensive information program in Vietnam to support the Diem government’s efforts to achieve “maximum nationwide and external exploitation of Chieu Hoi proclamation.” (Washington National Records Center, RG 306, USIA/IAF Files: FRC 68 A 1415, Vietnam-Outgoing, 1963)

93. Memorandum From the Joint Chiefs of Staff to the Secretary of Defense (McNamara) 93. Memorandum From the Joint Chiefs of Staff to the Secretary of Defense (McNamara)1

Washington, April 17, 1963.

JCSM-302-63

SUBJECT

Defoliation and Crop Destruction in South Vietnam

1. Reference is made to a memorandum by Mr. Michael Forrestal of the White House Staff for the Honorable W. Averell Harriman, dated 13 March 1963,2 which stated that the President would like an up-to-date report on the results of defoliation and crop destruction carried out by the Armed Forces, Republic of Vietnam. He suggested that the views of the Joint Chiefs of Staff on this subject be coordinated into a single State/Defense/US Information Agency paper for the President. Certain guidelines were furnished which have been followed in this memorandum.

2. Two separate herbicide programs have been in progress during the past year and a half in the Republic of Vietnam. In order to increase visibility and deter Viet Cong ambush, a total of 87 miles of roads, canals and areas bordering military installations were sprayed with defoliants. Trial crop destruction operations were conducted against Viet Cong crops in two areas, 750 acres of Phuoc Long Province and 29 acres in Thua Thien Province.

3. As in other weapons systems, a precise statistical determination of the military effectiveness of defoliant operations in terms of enemy losses or as a deterrent to his operations is difficult. Technical reports received from the field thus far, however, provide ample evidence that they do give us a degree of military advantage. Specifically, defoliation facilitates clearing of rights of way along rail lines, retards jungle growth, and thereby makes enemy concealment more difficult while improving our reconnaissance and ability to see the enemy. The Joint Chiefs of Staff conclude that defoliation contributes to the improvement of the security situation and that it is one tool of many in the counter-insurgency kit.

4. Crop destruction operation in Phuoc Long Province adjacent to Viet Cong War Zone D is estimated to have resulted in the destruction of over 700,000 pounds of rice or roughly enough to feed 1,000 Viet Cong for one year. Militarily and technically, the results were excellent. The actual operation was conducted entirely by Vietnamese. This operation was a military success in that it increased the Viet Cong food problems in the area and concurrently added to over-all logistic difficulties in the Viet Cong Zone D area.

5. In Thua Thien Province, only 29 out of 296 target acres have been attacked with herbicides. This was a hand-sprayed operation carried out on an experimental basis which in part accounts for the low percentage of total area sprayed. Consequently, a full evaluation of this operation is not yet available. However, initial reports citing the destruction of 56,000 pounds of food give every evidence that the success achieved in Phuoc Long will be repeated.

6. In connection with proposed plans for future operations, the Country Team has recently approved a Government of Vietnam (GVN) request to apply herbicides to railroad rights of way primarily for proper railway maintenance and only secondarily for security. The project would be carried out on the ground by railroad maintenance employees with herbicides being provided by the US Overseas Mission from US commercial sources. In addition, COMUSMACV is now studying 12,000 acres as possible defoliant targets and the Republic of Vietnam Armed Forces are actively selecting and evaluating additional targets for operations during the forthcoming growing season. Plans include communication and area targets with the major portion being in Central Vietnam. The total acreage is unknown now. A list of crop destruction targets in Binh Dinh, Thua Thien, Phuoc Thanh, and Quang Tin Provinces totaling approximately 4,000 acres has been submitted to COMUSMACV.3 Evaluation of first priority targets based on current selection criteria is now in process by COMUSMACV. To gain optimum effect, these crop destruction targets should be sprayed in April and May.

7. There is no indication from the field that herbicide operations have had an adverse propaganda effect upon the local population. Neither is there any indication of condemnation of GVN and US efforts from other than Bloc propaganda sources. Any propaganda effort on the part of the Bloc can be countered by timely and frequent press briefings and by permitting press members to observe defoliation and crop destruction missions. Efforts have been initiated in Saigon in this matter. In any event, stepped-up Bloc propaganda efforts should be regarded primarily as a barometric reading of the degree of success being achieved rather than as a reason for terminating or decreasing the defoliation and crop destruction effort.

8. The Joint Chiefs of Staff agree with the Country Team, Vietnam, that defoliation and crop destruction operations should be continued. Herbicides should be considered as an effective tool to be employed in specific situations and areas where its employment will hurt Viet Cong military or supply operations. This policy would reflect greater dependence on the views and recommendations of the local commanders and advisers. As Ambassador Nolting noted in his message to State on 10 March 1963,4 this should permit operations to be more directly related to the local military situation, thus ensuring a greater military value.

9. The Joint Chiefs of Staff recommend that: a. Herbicide operations be prosecuted in Vietnam on a continuing basis.

b. The Country Team, Vietnam, be authorized to approve crop destruction as well as other defoliation targets based on existing target selection criteria. Resultant reports and evaluations would continue to be made.

c. A memorandum be forwarded to the Secretary of State substantially as indicated in the Appendix hereto.5

For the Joint Chiefs of Staff:

Maxwell D. Taylor
Chairman
Joint Chiefs of Staff

1 Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OSD Files: FRC 66 A 3542, Vietnam 1962 370.64 2 Feb. Secret.

2 Document 58.

3 Not found.

4 Not found.

5 Not printed. The draft memorandum prepared for Secretary McNamara’s signature was sent from William Bundy to Harriman on April 19. The memorandum reflected the views and recommendations of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, as outlined in the JCS memorandum printed here. (Department of State, Vietnam Working Group Files: Lot 67 D 54, Pol-Polit Affairs & Rel, Pol 27-10 Chemical Warfare 1963)

94. National Intelligence Estimate 94. National Intelligence Estimate1

Washington, April 17, 1963.

NIE 53-63

PROSPECTS IN SOUTH VIETNAM

The Problem

To assess the situation and prospects in South Vietnam, with special emphasis upon the military and political factors most likely to affect the counterinsurgency effort.

Conclusions

A. We believe that Communist progress has been blunted and that the situation is improving. Strengthened South Vietnamese capabilities and effectiveness, and particularly US involvement, are causing the Viet Cong increased difficulty, although there are as yet no persuasive indications that the Communists have been grievously hurt. (Paras. 27-28)

B. We believe the Communists will continue to wage a war of attrition, hoping for some break in the situation which will lead to victory. They evidently hope that a combination of military pressure and political deterioration will in time create favorable circumstances either for delivering a coup de grace or for a political settlement which will enable them to continue the struggle on more favorable terms. We believe it unlikely, especially in view of the open US commitment, that the North Vietnamese regime will either resort to overt military attack or introduce acknowledged North Vietnamese military units into the south in an effort to win a quick victory. (Paras. 29-31)

C. Assuming no great increase in external support to the Viet Cong, changes and improvements which have occurred during the past year now indicate that the Viet Cong can be contained militarily and that further progress can be made in expanding the area of government control and in creating greater security in the countryside. However, we do not believe that it is possible at this time to project the future course of the war with any confidence. Decisive campaigns have yet to be fought and no quick and easy end to the war is in sight. Despite South Vietnamese progress, the situation remains fragile. (Para. 32)

D. Developments during the last year or two also show some promise of resolving the political weaknesses, particularly that of insecurity in the countryside, upon which the insurgency has fed. However, the government’s capacity to embark upon the broader measures required to translate military success into lasting political stability is questionable. (Paras. 33-35)

[Here follow 11 pages of discussion of the conclusions outlined above.]

32. The Outlook. Whether the Communists are correct in their appraisal will, of course, depend in some measure upon the extent and nature of US involvement, but primarily upon the South Vietnamese response to the developing situation. We do not believe that it is possible at this time to project the future course of the war with any confidence. Despite GVN progress, the situation remains fragile. A series of major Viet Cong successes, should they occur, might have a shattering psychological effect. Nevertheless, the heavy US involvement and close working relationships between US and Vietnamese personnel have fundamentally altered the outlook. Changes and improvements have occurred during the past year which for the first time indicate that the Viet Cong can be contained militarily and that further progress can be made in expanding the area of government control and in creating security in the countryside. However, some areas of Viet Cong control, such as the Mekong delta, will be very difficult to pacify, decisive campaigns have yet to be fought, and no quick and easy end to the war is in sight.

33. Developments in the last year or two have also gone some distance in establishing a basis for winning over the peasantry and in improving the efficiency of the military establishment and the civilian bureaucracy. It can, of course, be argued that only a highly centralized regime, single-mindedly dedicated to independence, and placing a heavy emphasis on personal loyalty can cope with the problems of guerrilla warfare. However, we believe that a greater willingness on the part of the regime to enlist the active support of those who have become disaffected or discouraged in the face of Diem’s techniques of government would considerably speed the reduction of the Viet Cong insurgency.

34. Substantial reduction of Viet Cong military power, however, would probably intensify rather than reduce the need for changes in the philosophy and practice of the Diem regime, if revived insurgency were to be precluded and military victory translated into political consolidation. The achievement of physical security in the countryside would in itself satisfy a major political requirement in convincing the peasants of the government’s ability to protect them. But the government must be both willing and able to expand its efforts to bring social, political, and economic improvements to the countryside if the peasant is to recognize a stake in the survival of the government and to be fortified against Communist blandishments. Effective action in this and other fields, particularly with the removal of a substantial US presence at all levels of the government, would almost certainly require a wider participation in the development and implementation of policy and a considerable reduction in the tight, personal control of the bureaucracy.

35. On the basis of its past performance, the ability of the Diem regime to move willingly and effectively in these directions is questionable, and may become even more so should military victory come within sight. With the removal of the inhibiting effects of an immediate and overwhelming military danger, political stability would be greatly threatened if disappointment with the regime’s performance mounted among important sectors of the population and the conviction deepened that legal avenues to change remained blocked.

[Here follows a map of South Vietnam highlighting principal. areas of insurgency and counterinsurgency activity.]

1 Source: Department of State, INR-NIE Files. Secret; Controlled Dissem. According to a note on the cover sheet: “The following intelligence organizations participated in the preparation of this estimate: The Central Intelligence Agency and the intelligence organizations of the Departments of State, Defense, the Army, the Navy, the Air Force, and NSA.” All members of the U.S. Intelligence Board concurred in this estimate on April 17, except the Atomic Energy Commission Representative and the Assistant Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation, who abstained on the grounds that the subject was outside their jurisdiction. The statement of the problem and the conclusions are also printed in United States-Vietnam Relations, 1945-1967, Book 12, pp. 522-524.

95. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam 95. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam1

Washington, April 18, 1963, 6 p.m.

970. Joint State/AID/Defense. Embtel 920.2 Gratified atmosphere continues improve. You have done excellent job making Diem face funding issue without upsetting joint effort. Concur your view expressed to Thuan (Embtel 893)3 that heart of matter may revolve around whether or not peasants should be given boots so they can have straps to pull on. Certainly this has been one of your longstanding problems. Given success of US-GVN cooperation during past 15 months we would hope avoid crisis our relations with GVN, but continue dialogue thru frequent letters and meetings. Following offered for your consideration in attempting maintain reasonable degree flexibility in negotiating subjects which GVN has put on table.

A. U.S. Military and Civilian Advisers

1. Completely concur with your suggestion to Diem that specific cases raised by GVN could be discussed as suggested reftel. We prepared fully support you in seeking recall and personnel whose presence, in your judgment, may jeopardize US-GVN cooperation.

2. Suggest you and TF/Saigon consider whether we should offer substantially reduce number U.S. military advisers in any province within say 90 days after it declared “white”?

3. DOD actively studying Comprehensive Plan which will be discussed at Honolulu. Meanwhile it should not be discussed with GVN.

B. C.I. Joint Piaster Fund

We would have no objection to minor modification role provincial representatives, e.g. re veto power these reps over GVN funds. However use streamlined budget procedures appears essential.

Because attribution of source of piasters has become such an issue, we wish to make sure Saigon understands distinction between US-owned PL 480 piasters and GVN-owned counterpart, both of which involved in U.S. support of GVN military budget. Use of US-owned Section 104(c) PL 480 piasters may offer a practical psychological advantage over use counterpart which continues to be mentioned in Saigon messages when referring to diversions from military budget. There is a legal problem of definition here, and the tentative interpretation is that 104(c) currencies can be used for C.I. activities which are basically defensive in nature, but not those of primarily an economic and social development nature.

View this limitation, if US-owned PL 480 funds appear helpful in present situation, you may wish consider proposing amendment Sales Agreement to provide for piaster use under Section 104(e)4 rather than 104(c) as at present, and seeking Presidential waiver grant the 104(e) funds for C.I.

We also observe that it would not appear essential to extend C.I. joint piaster fund procedures to cover USAID support and economic development costs, and perhaps not to war infrastructure costs. If a substantial negotiating advantage could be achieved, it would seem to be possible to reduce size of joint fund to costs of direct counterinsurgency purposes only.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, AID (US) S VIET. Secret. Drafted by Wood and cleared by Rice and Hilsman, in AID by Stoneman and R. Poats, and in DOD by Colonel Kent. Repeated to CINCPAC for POLAD.

2 Document 91.

3 Document 85.

4 Section 104 (e) of P.L. 480 stipulates that the President may enter into agreements with friendly nations to use the foreign currency which accrues under P.L. 480 for the following purposes: “For promoting balanced economic development and trade among nations.” (68 Stat. 4541)

96. Memorandum Prepared in the Department of State 96. Memorandum Prepared in the Department of State1

Washington, April 18, 1963.

SUBJECT

Chemical Defoliation and Crop Destruction in South Viet-Nam

1. Defoliation Activities

Defoliation trials have been carried out in thirteen localities, beginning in August of 1961 (see attached map2 ). About 87 miles of communication lines have been cleared plus a number of areas around military installations. The purpose of these operations is to increase visibility, thus providing better fields of fire and reducing the possibility of ambushes.

The military effectiveness of defoliation is difficult to assess. Some statistics suggest curtailed Viet Cong activity as a result of defoliation operations, but the evidence is inconclusive. Saigon reports that these trials appear to have a general impact in the security situation, but no statistical results can be isolated. While visibility is without question improved by defoliation, R.G.K. Thompson and some of our own military say the remaining tree trunks, limbs and twigs often provide quite adequate cover.

It is our understanding that ambushes generally make use of terrain features rather than foliage for cover in any event. Moreover, hand cutting would seem simpler, more effective, and probably less expensive in those areas where it is important to clear fields of fire. Thus defoliation appears to be a useful tactic only in those instances where very special terrain features justify it, and we anticipate that such situations are and will be rare.

Proposed plans for future defoliant operations include the clearing of the railroad right of way—according to our Embassy primarily for proper maintenance and only secondarily for security. In addition, COMUSMACV is now studying defoliant targets totaling 12,000 acres. The Vietnamese armed forces are also selecting and evaluating additional targets for the coming growing season, the major portion being in Central Viet-Nam.

2. Crop Destruction

To date two chemical crop destruction operations have been carried out in Viet-Nam, one by air in Phuoc Long Province in November of 1962 and one by hand in Thua Thien Province in February of this year (see attached map). In the Phuoc Long operation 300 hectares, primarily rice, were sprayed with the probable loss to the Viet Cong of 356,000 pounds of food or enough to support 1,000 men for six months.

In Thua Thien, because of difficult terrain and Viet Cong response, only 12 of the planned 120 hectares were actually sprayed, with an additional 20 hectares being destroyed by hand. Initial reports indicate about 56,000 pounds of food, primarily manioc, were destroyed by herbicides in the Thua Thien operation.

Total for both the Phuoc Long and Thua Thien operations was 312 hectares or about 412,000 pounds of food—enough to support 1,000 men for seven months.

As in the case of defoliation, the military effectiveness of crop destruction is difficult to measure. There is good evidence that the Viet Cong are short of food in many areas, however, and these trial operations almost certainly increased their food problem. These operations were carried out in food deficit areas where the Viet Cong have no ready alternative food sources. In such areas, notably in the central plateau and mountain regions, food denial tactics are clearly in order. In areas where food is plentiful, crop destruction is probably not useful and may be counterproductive.

In the case of the Phuoc Long operation, Saigon reports that U.S. advisory personnel believe the general area in which the operation was carried out is a major rice producing area for Zone D. At the present time, Zone D personnel are extremely short of rice; they reportedly require 300 tons per month and are only getting some 150 tons per month. According to information obtained from a recent VC prisoner captured in Zone D, the authorities in Zone D have instructed each man to grow enough rice to feed three people. The Vietnamese Central Intelligence Organization reported last December that twothirds of the Viet Cong in Zone D were to be used for crop protection; this information was derived from captured VC documents. It is the considered opinion of U.S. advisory personnel that the VC located in Zone D are absorbed almost full-time with the problem of survival. As evidence of this, our advisory personnel cite the fact that the defection rate in the area is increasing and that prisoners and defectors are almost invariably hungry and miserable.

Future crop destruction operations now under study include about 4,000 acres in Binh Dinh, Thua Thien, Phnoc Thanh, and Quang Tin provinces. For best results, these targets should be sprayed in April and May.

3. Political Effects

Inside Viet-Nam there is little evidence that either defoliation or crop destruction has generated any significant political reaction against the United States or the GVN. Hanoi propaganda likewise appears to have had little or no effect in South Viet-Nam. It is, of course, possible that the local populace in GVN-controlled areas would consider it unsafe and hence unwise to express adverse reactions to this program of the government.

Viet Cong propaganda efforts are known to have produced popular demonstrations in one provincial capital. On February 8 and 10 Viet Cong were able to stage, in front of the Kien Hoa province headquarters, a demonstration against artillery, air strikes, and the use of chemicals to destroy their food. Since no herbicides have been used in Kien Hoa province, the demonstration was purely the result of Viet Cong propaganda. Saigon comments that the Kien Hoa demonstrations indicate that the Viet Cong can do exploit locally the use of chemicals to at least the temporary detriment of the GVN and the United States.

The demonstrations in Kien Hoa appear to be unique, however, and Saigon reports that they have no information suggesting that operations carried out to date have had any measurably adverse effects on the local population. It is perhaps significant that the only area in which Viet Cong propaganda has had any apparent effect is one where the population has had no first-hand experience of defoliant chemicals.

(a) PsyWar Efforts and Compensation Machinery in Support of Herbicide Operations

ARVN PsyWar activities in support of herbicide operations appear adequate. Ground and air leaflet distribution was employed, using persuasive themes. In most cases, loud speaker planes were also used to explain the program prior to using defoliants in the area. “Sprayed ARVN soldiers” were displayed to show that chemicals do not harm humans or animals. Sacrificial animals were donated by the government to Montagnard tribesmen to placate any spirits which might have been offended by herbicide operations.

The GVN has set up a mechanism for compensating peasants whose crops are inadvertently destroyed. We do not have much information on the results of the compensation program, but there are indications that it was not adequately carried out, in part because of security difficulties.

(b)Bloc Propaganda

Radio Hanoi has carried propaganda about the defoliant and crop destruction programs for more than a year, billing them as chemical warfare by the United States against the people of Viet-Nam. The Hanoi charges include the use of poison gas as well as noxious chemicals and allege the deaths of many people and animals as a result.

Hanoi output on this theme was stepped up sharply in mid-February and has increased steadily since. By mid-March roughly one quarter of the total DRV output was devoted to the subject. DRV propaganda recently featured a protest to the International Control Commission, reported a mass protest rally in Hanoi on April 7, and claimed that the NFLSVN has evidence of poison sprayings including “objects, photos, and witnesses.” Moscow, Peking and Havana have picked up the theme, but it still occupies a very small percentage of their total output.

Non-Communist playback has been negligible to date. On April 1, the New York Times printed a letter from British philosopher Bertrand Russell charging that the U.S. is using chemical warfare to destroy crops and livestock and starve the population. The Times editorial set the record straight in the same issue, however, strongly refuting Russell’s charges and pointing out that only common weed killers have been used. The Cambodian press has carried a few items, and Hanoi recently cited a statement by 11 African nationalist organizations condemning the U.S. However, the African statement in fact contained no specific reference to poison.

There is no evidence to date that the Bloc propaganda campaign has tended to undermine international support for our Viet-Nam policy or that it has damaged the image of the United States abroad.

(c)Countering Communist Propaganda

To counter Bloc propaganda, Saigon was instructed on March 11 to surface the entire crop destruction and defoliation programs, giving full details to the press.3 Accordingly, our Saigon mission persuaded the GVN to undertake a press conference on the subject which was held March 20. The presentation was very well done and followed closely an Embassy-prepared guidelines paper.4

About 80 newsmen attended and all seemed pleased by the briefing. Only two stories were filed, however, and neither story was to our knowledge carried in any U.S. newspaper. Nevertheless, the press conference probably served to place Communist charges in perspective for the Western press in Saigon, and by giving them the true facts, it should tend to prevent their being taken in by future Communist propaganda against the program.

All U.S. posts and missions abroad have been informed of the facts of the program. They are under instructions to report significant reactions to Communist propaganda and to counter such propaganda with the facts as appropriate.

VOA played the March 20 press conference plus an exclusive interview with President Diem on the subject. USIA has also prepared additional material which will be used as required.

4. Conclusions

The Embassy has recommended that both defoliation and crop destruction be continued. They further recommend that they be given authority to approve all herbicide operations, including crop destruction; that crop destruction and defoliation be regarded as a single program, and that the recommendations of local commanders and advisers should henceforth carry more weight in the use of herbicides in order to relate herbicide operations more directly to the local military situation.

Reports from the field do not permit precise, statistical evaluation of the reactions of the people or the military effectiveness of these programs. In part this is due to the limited scale on which herbicides have so far been employed. It is also due, in larger part, to the inherent difficulties of measuring popular sentiment in Viet Nam and to the continuing problem of defining progress in guerrilla conflict.

Some factors are clear if not measurable. One such factor is the value of food denial tactics. The Viet Cong are short of food in some areas and food denial, by whatever means, increases their difficulties. If herbicides are not available, other means have been and will be used by the GVN to destroy VC crops. These alternate means may be more difficult, as hand destruction in remote areas, or more destructive of the soil and human life, as napalm.

Mr. R.G.K. Thompson, head of the British Advisory Mission in Saigon, believes that crop destruction should be used only in situations where it is clear that the Viet Cong have no alternate sources of supply. It is his view that crop destruction is a useful weapon only when the people and the Viet Cong are effectively separated. This appears to be a correct evaluation, and our use of defoliant chemicals may have been premature. However, since the programs have been initiated and have proved effective against Viet Cong crops in remote areas, and since there are distinct disadvantages to halting the program at this time, we believe they should be continued on at least a limited basis.

A prime consideration in this evaluation is that the Communist propaganda will almost certainly be continued regardless of whether or not the herbicide programs are continued. This propaganda has not so far had any significant and measurable effect either inside or outside Viet-Nam. There are signs, however, that the Bloc intends to redouble its efforts, and it is not impossible or even unlikely that this propaganda will become more effective in the future.

Regardless of the degree of effectiveness of future Bloc propaganda, halting herbicide operations now would tend to confirm Bloc charges and invite further such campaigns because of their proven effectiveness against us. (It is worth noting in this connection that the only place in Viet-Nam where the Communists have succeeded in generating a demonstration against herbicides is in an area where the people have had no first hand experience of either defoliation or crop destruction.)

We recognize as Thompson has pointed out, that feet and brains, not gimmicks, will win the war. We also recognize the dangers of herbicide operations. On balance, however, the following considerations appear ruling: a) Defoliation is at best only partially effective militarily. Ambushes normally make use of terrain features rather than foliage for cover. In those cases where it is important to clear fields of fire, it would appear that hand cutting would normally be at least as easy and inexpensive as defoliation.

b) Although crop destruction might better have been postponed until a later stage in the war, it has proved to have an important potential for hurting the Viet Cong in food deficit areas. While a massive program should not be undertaken at this time, crop destruction should be continued in areas where the inhabitants are known to be solidly Viet Cong and where food denial tactics are certain to bring effective pressures on them.

c) Halting herbicide operations under Communist propaganda fire would not halt propaganda attacks. On the contrary, if we yield and halt operations, it would likely encourage further propaganda attacks.

5. Recommendations

We therefore recommend that herbicide operations be continued and that authority to approve all such operations be delegated to the Ambassador and COMUSMACV, provided: (1) that all herbicide operations continue to be most closely controlled by the Ambassador and COMUSMACV;

(2) that crop destruction be undertaken only in areas where it is clear that the inhabitants are Viet Cong and have no ready alternative food sources;

(3) that defoliation operations be limited to those situations, which we assume will be rare, where special terrain features are such as to fully justify the use of chemical clearing;

(4) that all herbicide operations be undertaken only when it is clear that both PsyWar preparations and compensation and relief machinery are adequate; and

(5) that the Embassy provide by late summer a complete report and evaluation of all herbicide operations carried out during the 1963 growing season.

1 Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Vietnam Country Series, 4/63-5/63. Secret. Attached to a covering memorandum dated April 18 from William H. Brubeck, Executive Secretary of the Department of State, to McGeorge Bundy, which indicates that it was prepared in response to Document 58. Information on a draft of this paper found in Department of State files indicates that the paper was prepared in the Vietnam Working Group on April 17 by Heavner. (Department of State, Vietnam Working Group Files: Lot 67 D 54, Pol 27-10 Chemical Warfare, 1963) On April 17, Hilsman sent a copy of the paper to USIA Director Murrow for comment, with a covering memorandum that indicated the paper had been prepared in FE with the assistance of the USIA Vietnam desk. (Washington National Records Center, RG 306, USIA/TOP Files: FRC 67 A 222, IAF Defoliation-1963) Murrow responded on April 19 with a memorandum to Harriman in which he indicated that, while USIA felt that herbicide operations in South Vietnam were contributing to a potentially damaging propaganda campaign being orchestrated from Hanoi, “we concur—if reluctantly—in the recommendation that herbicide operations be continued.” (Ibid.)

2 Not found attached.

3 See Document 55.

4 Not found.

97. Memorandum From the Director of the Vietnam Working Group (Wood) to the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Hilsman) 97. Memorandum From the Director of the Vietnam Working Group (Wood) to the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Hilsman)1

Washington, April 18, 1963.

SUBJECT

American Military Personnel in Viet-Nam

At the July meeting in Honolulu, Secretary McNamara requested a plan to reduce the American military in Viet-Nam to about 1500 by FY68. MACV made several plans which were rejected as being too expensive and finally submitted a Comprehensive Plan for SVN which was endorsed by Embassy Airgram A-417 and in later messages (enclosed).2 The objective was to “assure the capability of the GVN to exercise permanent and continued sovereignty over SVN at the end of CY 65 without the need for continued US special military assistance”. Reductions in military personnel would not start until FY 65. The cost of the Plan, which involved additional training for the Vietnamese forces so that they could take over more quickly, was estimated at $168 million above already planned expenditures for the period through FY 68. The additional cost for FY 64 alone was planned at $88 million. The plan also required additional expenditures by the Vietnamese of about 800 million piasters (the equivalent of $10.9 million at 73 to 1). This would require deficit financing by the GVN in addition to the deficit financing needed to pick up the costs of the strategic hamlet and counterinsurgency programs. All above figures subject to change without notice.

As you know Bob Thompson suggested while in Washington that if one or two provinces became genuinely “white” by July or August this year, and if the GVN continued to make good progress, the US should seriously consider pulling out a significant number of men, say 1,000, by the end of calendar 1963.

The Comprehensive Plan described above, which has been approved by Admiral Felt and JCS as well as by the Embassy, has been under study in Defense since early February. Quite clearly DOD will not be able to make the funds required by this plan available.

Politically, I recommend that a substantial number of American military should be pulled out of Viet-Nam by the end of this year, provided we make the progress suggested by Thompson. Diem’s discussions with the Ambassador show that this is a touchy subject with the Vietnamese. However, the Vietnamese would like these men taken out of the provinces. It is more likely that they will be taken out of Saigon where you report that 50% of the American military are now stationed. It is for our military to decide which jobs they can best eliminate. I understand very confidentially that McNamara will tell them to cut their forces by 1,000 at the end of this year and will also make it clear that large additional funds will not be available.

I believe the difficulty DOD has faced has been to try and meet McNamara’s July request that the cut be completed by FY 68, and secondly to assume that the rate of increasing GVN strength through FY 68 which had already been planned should be maintained in the face of a very substantial cut in our military. It would be more realistic to make a substantial cut now provided progress continues, and to then plan to reduce the rate at which the American military are cut back in the following years. Should the war go better than we expect in ‘66 and ‘67 we can always pull out still more men. This would be safer than pulling out too many men too soon.

You have asked that we first seek to reach agreement with the military on a ceiling and that we then ask them to cut by 1,000 at the end of the year provided good progress continues. When the Comprehensive Plan was made there were 12,200 U.S. military in Viet-Nam. The number is now over 13,000 and before your request was made State approved further increases which could bring the total to 15,600. Since DOD will have to ask State clearance for any further increases and since McNamara will almost certainly order them to make a cut of about 1,000 by the end of CY 63, the question of a ceiling has become somewhat academic. It adds one more emotional element to an already tight situation.

If we insist on it, and if the war should suddenly take a turn for the worse, we would then have to approve a break in the ceiling and DOD would have to rush in additional men.

Recommendation

That we see what happens at Honolulu. DOD is very conscious of our views and I think our relations would be less strained if we do not insist on them at this time. We should veto any further requests for increases which in effect would place a ceiling of 15,600 on our military and quietly support McNamara’s intention to achieve a significant reduction by the end of the year, provided things go well. Personally, I think 1,000 military could be pulled out of Saigon tomorrow and things would go better. During 1964 we should press for a further reduction of 1500 to 2000. You should also keep in mind that of the present 13,000 in Viet-Nam about 3,000 are advisers and 10,000 are troops. I would not want to see us cut 1,000 advisers at the end of this year, but the military could well cut some of their headquarters and backup troops.

1 Source: Department of State, Vietnam Working Group Files: Lot 67 D 54, Def 19/2 Advisory and Training Assist. Secret. Sent to Hilsman through Rice.

2 Not found enclosed. A note on the source text indicates that the enclosures included the airgram cited, telegrams 856 and 857 to Saigon, and portions of telegram 844 from Saigon. Telegrams 844 from Saigon and 856 to Saigon are Documents 67 and 57. Regarding airgram A-417 to Saigon and telegram 857 to Saigon, see footnotes 2 and 5. Document 57.

98. Memorandum From Michael V. Forrestal of the National Security Council Staff to the President 98. Memorandum From Michael V. Forrestal of the National Security Council Staff to the President1

Washington, April 22, 1963.

CHEMICAL DEFOLIATION AND CROP DESTRUCTION

I attach a memorandum prepared by the Department of State and a paper prepared by the Joint Chiefs of Staff2 on the subject of chemical defoliation and crop destruction in South Vietnam. Both papers come essentially to the same conclusions and recommendations, which are best summarized on page 8 of the attached State paper. If you accept these recommendations, you will, in effect, be continuing present policy with one important exception: both State and the JCS wish to give blanket authority to Saigon to decide when and where crop destruction operations will be carried out. At present such blanket authority has only been given for defoliation (weed killing operations). Permission to destroy crops by chemical means still must come from Washington.

It seems to me that, having started on this type of operation, we have already reaped the propaganda whirlwind. If we stop now the propaganda will probably continue, and we would be denying ourselves whatever military effect the use of herbicides have. Both Roger Hilsman and I felt, when we were in South Vietnam, that under certain special conditions which will occur more and more frequently as the Viet Cong are driven into more remote base areas, the use of chemicals to destroy crops from the air has a definite military value in denying food for the fighting cadres of the Viet Cong. Under these circumstances it would seem to me unwise to cancel this program at this time; but I do think you should not grant blanket authorization to Saigon for crop destruction activity. It is hard to conceive of a situation where there would not be time to explain a project to Washington and obtain authorization from here.

1 Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Vietnam Country Series, 4/63-5/63. Secret. Also sent to McGeorge Bundy.

2 Documents 96 and 93, respectively.

99. Central Intelligence Agency Information Report 99. Central Intelligence Agency Information Report1

Washington, April 22, 1963.

TDCSDB-3/654,285

SUBJECT

Indications of Government of Vietnam Plan To Request Reduction of American Personnel in Vietnam

By mid-April 1963 a considerable amount of tension had developed between the Government of Vietnam and the U.S. Government over operations in South Vietnam. Both Diem and Ngo Dinh Nhu were concerned over recent “infringements” of Vietnamese sovereignty. MAAG was cited as a violator in this connection, but the U.S. Special Forces were singled out as the main irritant. Diem is allowing additional time for further blunders and, after building up a strong case, he plans to confront Ambassador Nolting and USMACV Chief General Harkins with irrefutable evidence of U.S. responsibility, demanding a reduction in the number of U.S. personnel in South Vietnam on the basis that the force is too large and unmanageable.

2. Some Vietnamese involved in close working relationships with Americans were being questioned in detail by Presidency Staff members as to U.S. activities. Some of the individuals questioned had indicated to the Presidency that the U.S. military, and particularly the U.S. Special Forces, although generally well motivated, did not seem to understand the necessity for coordinating their activities with appropriate Vietnamese authorities.

3. Field Dissem. State (Ambassador Nolting), USMACV (General. Harkins), MAAG (General Timmes), CINCPAC PACFLT ARPAC PACAF.

1 Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Vietnam Country Series, 4/63-5/63. Secret; No Foreign Dissem; No Dissem Abroad; Background Use Only. Also published in Declassified Documents, 1977, 93B.

100. Airgram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 100. Airgram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, April 25, 1963.

A–661

SUBJECT

Interdiction

REF

CA-103622

For Harriman and Hilsman from Nolting. In response to the reference instruction, my staff and I, with the close cooperation of MACV and 2nd Air Division, have conducted a thorough review and evaluation of the subject of interdiction air strikes. The results of this study are presented below.

General Description of the Problem.

During the past six months about 7,000 combat support sorties, or a little more than 1,000 per month, have been flown in SVN. About 2,500 of these, or 35%, have been flown by Farmgate (combined US/VNAF crews). Of these 7,000 combat support sorties, VNAF has flown about 1,900 interdiction missions, while Farmgate aircraft have flown about 600 such missions. Thus, Farmgate has flown about 415 combat support sorties per month over the past six months, of which about 100 per month have been interdiction missions. Accordingly, Farmgate combat support sorties have amounted to about 35% of the total such sorties flown in SVN over the past six months, while Farmgate interdiction sorties have counted for less than 10% of that total.

There are three general types of interdiction targets involved in the war against the VC: a) Structures abandoned by people relocated into strategic hamlets. The purpose of pre-planned interdiction missions against such structures is to deny the VC their use as dwellings, food storage, training centers, arms factories, ordnance storage, etc.

b) Structures abandoned by the VC during ARVN operations against them. Immediately following the operation, and after GVN forces have withdrawn from the area, ARVN often requests an air strike to destroy the remaining structures.

c) Targets of known VC concentrations, headquarters, storage areas, communications and control centers, arms manufacturing facilities, etc. These targets are normally located in remote areas where the air interdiction mission is the only feasible method of destroying them.

Of these three types of targets, only the third kind is likely to be inhabited at the time of an interdiction mission against it. Because of the remote areas in which targets are normally located, however, interdiction strikes against them are unlikely to affect many people who might be classed as “innocent bystanders.” To be sure, these target areas could harbor some people who were not wholehearted V(: supporters or who might even be basically anti-VC. It is highly doubtful, though, that the numbers of such persons are great enough in proportion to the total numbers of people in SVN affected by all GVN and VC military operations to have any important effect on the GVN’s efforts to gain control over and support of the mass of the population.

The basic source of intelligence for interdiction target selection is GVN knowledge of those areas under VC control or in which VC influence is predominant. This knowledge is gained from secret agents in GVN employ at different levels; interrogation of VC prisoners and defectors; captured VC documents; patrolling and scouting by ARVN, Rangers, Special Forces and paramilitary units; after-action surveillance of withdrawing VC to obtain information on escape and dispersal routes; VC ground fire; and photo reconnaissance. Sometimes, intelligence gathered from one or more of these sources has such a high reliability that a valid target can be established immediately. When, however, intelligence is fragmentary or has a lower evaluation rating, additional confirmatory evidence is sought by employing one or more of the sources mentioned above, as well as by photo reconnaissance flown specifically for target location and evaluation. Any time lag ensuing from this process requires revalidation of the target.

In many cases, the information provided by local civil GVN authorities establishes the basic requirements for an interdiction mission. This information is passed by civilians through the village and district chiefs to the Province Chief, who passes it to the GVN military authorities. Interdiction target requests originating with the local civilian authorities must be passed at least to Corps level for approval; target requests originating at the Corps level or higher must be passed to the local authorities to confirm the validity of the target. While the mechanism for approving interdiction targets varies slightly from Corps Hqs. to Corps Hqs., all such targets must be approved at the Corps level.

Additional requirements for target identification and attack are effective target marking, two-way radio communications, and trained Vietnamese forward air controllers, all of which must without exception be employed before Farmgate aircraft are authorized to attack an interdiction target. Final discretion for carrying out interdiction missions rests with the pilot. There are many cases on record of both Farmgate and VNAF pilots refraining from attacking targets because of inadequate target visibility, communications failure, inadequate target markings, and apparent discrepancies between the target as seen by the pilot and as described in the target folder. Pilots returning to base having refrained from delivering ordnance for these reasons are not charged with failure to carry out their missions. They are debriefed and the results of their observations are fed back into intelligence channels for verification and necessary correction of targets.

No one would claim that the sources of intelligence on which target selection is based are faultless. Nevertheless, as described above, raw intelligence is subjected to such painstaking scrutiny and confirmation at all levels before a target is approved and actually attacked that the risks arising from Vietnamese carelessness or insensitivity are considered to be minimal. Parenthetically, the stringent requirements and controls imposed on Farmgate interdiction missions have been adopted by the GVN and greatly improved VNAF operations and procedures.

It is admittedly difficult to obtain accurate and complete information on the casualties caused by interdiction strikes. Nevertheless, positive official evidence is available in only one case to confirm that innocent people have been killed or injured in interdiction strikes. It should be noted that this case was attributable to serious pilot error rather than to faulty intelligence or improper target selection. Reports of other such incidents are occasionally received; they are investigated but have not been confirmed. There is certainly no evidence to suggest that the relatively small number of Vietnamese affected by interdiction missions react more adversely to the GVN than do the many more affected by all types of GVN and VC military operations. It also seems highly questionable to conclude that individuals affected by Farmgate or VNAF interdiction strikes, even if these individuals are basically anti-VC or at least less than wholehearted VC supporters, are going to become sympathetic to the VC. Just as good an argument to the contrary might be made: individuals who are half-hearted supporters of the VC or who are forced by circumstances to work for the VC could regret the circumstances which exposed them to the strikes, and blame the VC for these circumstances; they could fear those strikes more than they resent the perpetrators of the strikes. Indeed, there is more evidence to support this argument than the contrary one. One of the generally accepted major reasons for the large-scale Montagnard flight into GVN-controlled areas over the past year has been their fear of being caught between VC and GVN military operations, including air strikes. Their reaction generally was not to go deeper into VC territory but to flee VC-controlled areas in search of GVN protection. Similarly, in a more recent case, it appears that the 1,300 or more refugees of Khmer-origin who recently fled an area long controlled by the VC in the Tri Ton District of An Giang Province to receive GVN protection did so because the area near where they had been living had just prior to their flight been subjected to heavy and sustained air strikes against the VC. These people who have sought GVN protection have undoubtedly made no conscious political choice between the VC and the GVN; rather they have sought safety and decided that safety lay with the GVN rather than with the VC.

As indicated above, less than 10% of the combat support sorties flown in SVN in the past six months have been interdiction missions flown by Farmgate aircraft. These aircraft, of course, have VNAF markings. As was originally stipulated in the rules of employment of Farmgate aircraft, they are employed in combat support missions only when the VNAF capability is exceeded. Despite frequent press reports on the role of USAF personnel in combat support missions, there is no more emphasis on that role than on the role of the US Army advisers attached to ARVN combat units. There is thus no foundation for believing that US participation in interdiction missions could intensify the Communist charges of US control over the war in SVN or of the GVN’s “neo-colonial” subservience to the US.

Pros and Cons

The analysis above is intended to place the subject of interdiction air strikes in proportion within the overall context of the GVN’s war against the VC and of the GVN’s efforts to win the support of the population. It obviously attaches more weight generally to the pro arguments in the reference instruction than to the con arguments, largely because the latter are reduced in importance when applied to the subject of interdiction in its proper context as we see it. Nevertheless, it is believed useful to make some specific comments on the Department’s pro and con arguments.

Pros

Regarding the first pro argument, intelligence reports confirm that the interdiction effort restricts VC movements, the consolidation and storage of VC arms, equipment, food and other supplies. Interdiction; strikes also restrict the manufacture of VC war goods, keep the VC forces off balance, disrupt training centers, render medical attention more difficult and lower morale. In short, the destruction of interdiction targets restricts the flow of war materiel to VC forces, which in turn reduces their capability to fight.

A key pro argument has been omitted from the reference instruction. Farmgate interdiction missions constitute about one-fourth of the interdiction missions in SVN. To reduce Farmgate participation in such missions before VNAF has the capability to fulfill the requirements and at a time when operations against the VC are being intensified in accordance with the National Campaign would deprive the GVN of an important military advantage. Undoubtedly, the plan of ground operations under the National Campaign would have to be restudied and reduced in scope, resulting in a prolongation of the war. Similarly, the political impact of a Farmgate curtailment at this time on US-GVN relations is likely to be considerable.

Cons

1. As the above statement of the problem would suggest, con arguments 1, 2, 5 and 6 are so general that they might be applied across the board to all types of GVN military operations. To use them against a specific aspect such as interdiction gives those arguments much more importance than they should have in relation to the pro arguments. One might ask, for example, that if Farmgate interdiction missions were ruled out, would the GVN be better able to win the support of the population? Would the VC be able to recruit with much less ease? In our judgment, the answer to both of these questions is no.

In this connection, it may be a dangerous oversimplification, as con argument 1 asserts, to regard any SVN territory as enemy or any village as VC. However, it is an equally dangerous oversimplification to consider that there are no hard and fast VC targets, base areas, training and supply centers, etc., which can be destroyed by air interdiction without endangering the lives of innocent people. Such areas are frequently revealed by GVN military sweeps and patrols, and increasingly, through intelligence provided by defectors and POW’s. Post-strike inspections on the ground have frequently verified the accuracy of the intelligence and the effectiveness of the strikes.

2. It is the considered military judgment here that con argument 3 is not valid, since the extent or magnitude of the target, or its relationship to a battle line, does not matter. In the judgment of MACV, with which I agree, once a target is verified, it is just as legitimate in counterinsurgency warfare as in a limited or general conventional war. We are therefore unaware of any reason why interdiction missions are more applicable to conventional warfare then to counterinsurgency warfare, although we are fully conscious of the greater difficulty of fixing targets in this type of situation.

3. Regarding con argument 4, it is granted that targeting techniques cannot be refined to as great a degree as would be ideal. It may also be admitted that certain Vietnamese officials are not as sensitive to the basically political nature of the war, and therefore are not wholly trustworthy as sources of information for interdiction target selection (province officials and ARVN military officers vary widely in this regard). However, in absolute terms, target selection techniques currently employed in SVN are applied with great care and with many safety devices. Moreover, it must be recognized that, largely because of the USAF advisory effort and Farmgate operation, VNAF techniques of target selection, marking and operational control have been tightened up and improved considerably.

In this connection, there appears to be a misconception as to what an interdiction target is. It is not an area, but a pinpointed facility or troop concentration. Thus, even if a province or district chief considers an area as enemy territory simply because it harbors VC, the interdiction strike is conducted, not against an area but against a specific verified target—a target which is usually in a remote area. The 230mile area referred to in the reference instruction was not the target but the target area. In that area there were 19 pinpoint targets of which 12 were hit and 7 were not hit because of weather. The incident referred to was caused by pilot error.

4. Regarding con argument 7, Farmgate aircraft are today operating under the same ground rules that were established when they arrived in Viet-Nam. There has been no change in those rules. Two changes have occurred, however, since Farmgate first arrived in SVN: 1) the number of Farmgate aircraft has increased to meet increased requirements and the tempo of air activity has increased; and 2) the press has gradually devoted more attention to the role of air power in Viet-Nam’s war.

Conclusion

US-piloted interdiction missions, at the present stage of the war in SVN, are a necessary supplement to VNAF’s interdiction capability, which is growing but is still insufficient to fulfill the intensified requirements of the National Campaign. Total Farmgate and VNAF capabilities are still at times exceeded by these requirements. Intelligence reports confirm that the present combined interdiction effort of Farmgate and VNAF is restricting VC capabilities through the destruction of VC troops, arms, equipment and supplies.

The continued refinement of target selection, marking and operational control techniques has reduced insofar as possible the likelihood that interdiction missions will cause casualties among innocent civilians or among people who are not wholehearted VC supporters, although there is no way to ensure that interdiction missions will avoid such casualties altogether. There is, on the other hand, considerable evidence that those threatened by air strikes and other combat operations have found that the way to escape danger is to seek GVN protection. The GVN has not thereby won their loyalty, but it has won control over them and the opportunity to win their loyalty, and it has denied them, their resources and their energies to the VC. Against this, there is very little concrete evidence available to give weight to the argument that interdiction missions, more than other kinds of combat operation, will render more difficult if not impossible the GVN’s task of winning the loyalty of the people. To curtail or withdraw Farmgate interdiction operations on the basis of very little negative evidence when the positive evidence of their effectiveness is much greater would, in my judgment, be a mistake. It would render more difficult and lengthy the task of restoring internal security to SVN, give the VC an advantage it does not now have, and raise questions in the GVN as to US support.

The fundamental questions raised in the reference instruction have been on our minds here for a long time. It is certainly useful to have made another mission-wide assessment of this particular problem. I have myself been on the look-out for many months, and have had many discussions to try to evaluate the net effects of many types of military operations, not alone air operations. The yardstick used is winning the people. The best evidence, I think, is found in captured VC documents and in POW and defector testimony. Among these, I have seen nothing to indicate or suggest that the VC think that air strikes are helping to win the struggle for them. On the contrary, all the evidence from VC sources is in the opposite sense.

F.E. Nolting, Jr.

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 26-1 S VIET Top Secret. Drafted by R. H. Miller and cleared by Manfull and General Harkins. Repeated to CINCPAC for POLAD.

2 Document 66.

101. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 101. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, April 26, 1963, 5 p.m.

959. CINCPAC for POLAD. Embtel 920.2 Have now received (April 23) Diem’s written reply3 re Counterinsurgency Fund. It is brief, reiterates GVN unwillingness to apply purchased-piastre procedures to GVN funds on grounds derogation of sovereignty, but states flatly that “GVN intends obtain necessary resources to finance all jointly developed projects listed in annex to your letter of March 18, 1963 (Toaid A-2874),4 even if total cost of these projects should go as high as 2 billion 300 million piastres”. Letter also states desire maintain existing relationship between, and apparently functions of, GVN Interministerial Committee on Strategic Hamlets (ICSH) and U.S. Committee on Province Rehabilitation (COPROR) and to continue coordinate U.S. and GVN activities in rural area.

Letter is of course entirely too vague on question of procedures, and Trueheart, Brent and I met with Thuan April 24 to pin down these elements of problem. To set stage, I first proposed to Thuan that—since Diem’s only explicit objection to continuing present purchased piastre procedures was that it would be derogation to sovereignty to apply them to GVN funds—the problem would be solved by transferring required piastres from counterpart tentatively earmarked for military budget to Counterinsurgency Fund, with GVN applying its own funds to former. As expected, Thuan threw up his hands at this, and we then proceeded to talk about procedures for using GVN funds. Upshot appears to be that we can get following, confirmed by exchange of letters with Thuan: 1. Piastres to cover province administered projects (Section A1 of attachment to March 18 letter) would be paid as required into special Treasury account from which they would be disbursed directly to province chiefs to carry out approved programs.

2. Province programs would be approved as in the past by ICSH and COPROR.

3. Disbursement would be made by province chief without need to have concurrence U.S. provincial representatives. (This is nominally only difference between this procedure and that used for purchased piastres.) However, province chief would consult with U.S. representatives re his plans and proposed actions, so that related GVN and U.S. rural programs can be properly developed and executed, and his expenditures would be made known to U.S. provincial representatives.

4. With regard to nationally administered programs (remainder of items in annex to March 18 letter), GVN funds would not be deposited in special account. These programs would be administered in same manner as counterpart-funded programs, i.e., on basis of appropriate understanding or agreement between Directorate General of Budget and Foreign Aid and USOM.

5. GVN agrees to provide piastres to support essential USOM operations (“program administration” in annex to March 18 letter). Thuan did not agree, however, to support any specific level of expenditures under this heading, pending detailed GVN review of USOM estimate. On other hand, I made it clear that we will insist after this review on definitive GVN commitment. (This is essential if we are to insure against being forced later to make piastre purchase simply to keep USOM going, and I so explained matter to Thuan.)

On paper the above goes far to meet our requirements. Only significant change from past procedures is that involving U.S. provincial representatives concurring in province chiefs’ expenditures. This is not something we would insist on—we are not interested in vetoing expenditures, quite the contrary—and procedure was initially introduced at GVN request as check on local GVN officials.

Procedurally, then, we have what we want, and we have a formal GVN commitment to speed up to our target of 2.3 billion piastres. We, therefore, recommend that this solution be accepted as best compromise obtainable in present circumstances.

In recommending acceptance, however, we wish Washington to understand that we have doubts as to how this scheme will work in practice.5 These doubts stem from fact that, though we shall be using old and tested procedures, we shall be dealing with GVN money. It may be that GVN will be as ready to spend for counterinsurgency programs as we are, and formal statement of readiness to find 2.3 billion piastres6 for types of projects we favor certainly suggests that they will be. Nevertheless, past experience with parsimonious approach of GVN dictates caution at least.

There is, however, no present alternative to trying to make this work. To try to force use of counterpart piastres for counterinsurgency would not in practice give us much more leverage in funding projects which we want-possibly less in view of bitterness which insistence on this would arouse. Moreover, important programs which would be affected by shift would then be subject aforementioned parsimonious GVN approach.

As for using PL 480 US-owned piastres, this seems to us nonstarter because it presupposes GVN willingness to amend existing sales agreement, and we fail to see any incentive for them to do so.

Only other alternative is further piastre purchase. We have made it very clear from outset that this is ruled out, and that we would not recommend it. We have also discussed fully with Thuan our misgivings concerning GVN’s willingness in fact to spend sums which seem to be required. Thuan is aware that our leverage on this consists in the “matching” goods and services from U.S. sources which we could withhold, if important differences arise concerning the amount of pump-priming that has to be done.

In summary, this outcome is not as fool-proof as we would like, but on balance we believe we should move ahead on this basis. Recommend Dept authorize us ASAP to exchange memoranda of understanding with GVN on this basis.

Nolting

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, AID (US) S VIET Secret; Priority; Limit Distribution. Repeated to CINCPAC.

2 Document 91.

3 Not found.

4 The letter and attachment are printed as Document 61.

5 These doubts were expressed in a memorandum for the record prepared on April 30 by Rufus Phillips, who, as Assistant Director for Rural Affairs of the U.S. Operations Mission, had immediate responsibility for the strategic hamlet program. As Phillips saw it: ”We are now asked to give up essential ingredients of what has proven to be a winning formula. We are asked to give up direct US funding, and to give up effective US participation in the province administered counter-insurgency operations directed at winning the people. Yet, it is precisely this participation, and the funding system which has supported and made it possible, which are essential to the success of the program.” (Hoover Institution Archives, Lansdale Papers, Chron File C)

6 A marginal notation at this point, in Wood’s hand, reads: “‘if’ it is needed”.

102. Memorandum From the Assistant Director for Rural Affairs, United States Operations Mission in Vietnam (Phillips), to the Director of the Mission (Brent) 102. Memorandum From the Assistant Director for Rural Affairs, United States Operations Mission in Vietnam (Phillips), to the Director of the Mission (Brent)1

Saigon, May 1, 1963.

SUBJECT

An Evaluation of Progress in the Strategic Hamlet-Provincial Rehabilitation Program

1. I have asked our Regional Representatives, Ralph Harwood (IV Corps - ), George Melvin (III Corps - ), John Perry (II Corps - ) and Len Maynard (I Corps +) to assess the progress of the Strategic Hamlet-Provincial Rehabilitation Program, in their regions. Their reports, attached to this memorandum,2 provide a brief, analytical and realistic province by province review of progress made in this effort to date.

2. This evaluation seems particularly useful at this time, since a major change in the provincial support method is under consideration.3 It should provide useful documentation for discussions of the program at the upcoming Secretary of Defense Conference in Hawaii.

3. In general, highly significant progress has been made in the Strategic Hamlet-Provincial Rehabilitation program in many provinces. Progress is measured in terms of the establishment, in steadily increasing number, of viable hamlets with inhabitants who have the will and the means to resist the Vietcong. There is a sharp difference between the number of such hamlets, and the total number of strategic hamlets officially listed as complete by the Vietnamese Government. That the distinction is both necessary and realistic has been confirmed to us by Colonel Lac and his staff who reviewed these evaluations in draft.

4. After six months field experience with this program, it has become inescapably clear that, although the concept itself is excellent, execution of the program is seriously handicapped by a lack of understanding of the concept and the lack of sufficient will to put it into effect. This is especially true of provincial and other local participating officials, but is by no means confined to them. There is, almost across the board, great difficulty in grasping the idea that “the strategic hamlet is a state of mind.” Conditioned by years of experience with the French, and having no prior experience in the practice of democratic methods of leadership, many feel unable to carry out the program without using methods sure to alienate the population whose support is its real objective. Significant progress has been made in improving the basic attitudes of officialdom but this progress has stemmed more from our on-the-spot insistence that the welfare of the population be considered than from Central Government direction.

Even when Mr. Nhu touched upon this vital area in his recent speech at Lo-O, his references were oblique and not easily translatable into practical actions. Specific guidance from the Interministerial Committee against such practices as the collection of money for hamlet construction from the population has been honored as much in the breach as in the observance (one province chief recently received a reminder on this score and complained bitterly that this would force him to stop his entire program).

5. More important than what the Central Government says, however, are its actions in rewarding some province chiefs and punishing others for their progress in establishing hamlets. Here the stress has been almost entirely on quantity, not quality, which has reinforced the natural inclination of most provincial officials to create strategic hamlets “by command.” I have accompanied the Minister of Interior, for instance, on visits to hamlets where he praised the Province Chief for having moved the population without expense to the Government, but where I found out later the Province Chief was obliged, because of popular discontent, to use two companies of Civil Guard to keep the people in the hamlets. This continues up to the present to be the main approach of the Central Government. This must be changed, for insistence by the Central Government on unrealistic requirements tends to force province chiefs into actions surely destructive to the program.

6. This situation is changing for the better, but still too slowly to produce the type and number of viable hamlets needed to win the war. Fortunately, encouraged by readily available support and by our guidance and backing at the provincial level, more and more province chiefs are learning for themselves that the program must be carried out the hard way, i.e., by persuading the population and winning their support—rather than by herding them into hamlets. It is precisely this change at provincial level which is most encouraging and which holds the most promise of ultimate success if we can keep the present support pattern in being.

7. These are problems which must be understood and which must be solved if the strategic hamlets are to be viable and effective in achieving their purpose. The evaluations which are attached highlight some of the problem areas, particularly in the Delta where they are most acute and where, except in a few provinces, the apparent progress is largely illusory.

8. In conclusion, it should be added that the above comments must not be construed as reflecting undue pessimism or a negative outlook. To the contrary, the strategic hamlet program has so well proven itself in those areas where it has been well executed that there is every reason for optimism and confidence. At the same time, however, if success is to become widespread, some of the obstacles and problems involved must be realistically faced and solved. These can be solved if we have the perseverance and the intelligence to continue to seek their solution in a manner which fits the task, for the heart of this task is a psychological revolution in the way the Vietnamese Government and its officials operate.

1 Source: Hoover Institution Archives, Lansdale Papers, Chron File C. Secret. A note on the source text indicates that copies were also sent to the Ambassador, the Deputy Chief of Mission, J-5 MAC/V, J-3 MAC/V, Chief of MAAG, Chief of OSA, and the Director of the Office of Vietnam Affairs, AID/Washington.

2 Not found attached.

3 For the reaction of Phillips and his staff to the agreement reached with the Diem government on the question of control over the financing of the counterinsurgency program, see footnote 5, Document 101.

103. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam 103. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam1

Washington, May 1, 1963, 4:29 p.m.

1024. Joint State/AID. Embtel 959,2 If Thuan’s conversation can be translated into agreement believe this best available resolution difficult situation. You authorized seek memorandum of understanding along lines procedures contained reftel.

Depending on your judgment of current atmosphere you should decide whether or not seek add to memo understanding statement that funds adequate to cover local costs of all provincial plans approved by Interministerial Committee and COPROR will be deposited in specified increments in advance of requirements.

If helpful to your efforts you may inform Thuan that you have been instructed achieve broadest possible list of activities eligible for special Treasury fund financing to include if possible all activities under province administered plans regardless whether included in section A1 attachment March 18 letter3 or subsequently added on grounds this necessary insure most efficient flow our dollar commodities. Alternatively it may be preferable simply submit list to include all activities in province administered programs whether or not in March 18 letter.

May we assume Province Chiefs will be able to draw upon special Treasury fund against approved plans without need for clearance from other GVN agencies? Would appreciate whatever clarifications you may obtain re special Treasury fund.

While we have no objection to joint review of USOM administrative costs, memorandum should not derogate from U.S. rights under Section 1, para 3 of Annex to Bilateral of September 7, 1957, requiring GVN to finance administrative costs from counterpart account. Notification under para 3 of Annex to Bilateral could provide for nature and mechanics of review to be made this instance.

Ball

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, AID (US) S VIET. Secret; Priority; Limit Distribution. Drafted by Montgomery and Poats and cleared by Wood, Donald L. Woolf in SEA, Robert W. Barnett and Hilsman in FE, Fowler in AID, and Kent in DOD/ISA. Repeated to CINCPAC for POLAD.

2 Document 101.

3 Document 61.

104. Letter From the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Hilsman) to the Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs (Bundy) 104. Letter From the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Hilsman) to the Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs (Bundy)1

Washington, May 1, 1963.

Dear Bill: I was glad to discuss with you the problem of jets for Viet-Nam. Having thought it over, I believe on balance that it is best not to provide the Vietnamese Air Force with jets at this time. Certainly we should consider whether they should have jets before our extraordinary assistance is withdrawn, but this is some years off. Unless some new and important factors arise, I suggest we let the matter rest for the time being.

Certainly American pilots in F-101’s can do a better job of photo reconnaissance than Vietnamese pilots in T-33’s. It would not lead to a significant reduction in U.S. personnel. There thus doesn’t seem to be a compelling reason for changing now. As you say, we have violated the Geneva Accords in the past. We have been cited for these violations. However, in each case our actions resulted in an important increase in Viet-Nam’s ability to defend itself (e.g. helicopters and M-113’s). The reason our violations have not caused greater repercussions is because we made it clear to the ICC that we were helping Viet-Nam defend itself. Tacit Indian recognition of this point was shown by the helpful ICC report of June 2, 1962,2 which came close to charging North Viet-Nam with aggression. We are still trying to get a legal report out of the ICC which could give us more useful ammunition. Thus, we don’t want to rock the tippy ICC boat more than we have to. Jets are an emotional subject with them which we should not take on without compelling reasons. Herbicides in Viet-Nam and the whole situation in Laos are already giving us enough to do with the ICC.

Finally, so long as the jets are ours we can pull them out any time it is in our interest to do so. To give them to the Vietnamese could be considered an escalation. The war seems to be going our way under the terms in which it is now being fought. We shouldn’t give the other side a pretext to change the terms unless we thereby obtained a decided advantage.

In short, giving the Vietnamese jets at this time will not shorten the war or materially reduce the American commitment. It would risk international repercussions which we are anxious to avoid.

In saying the above, I do not mean of course to close the door on this issue. I think it should be reviewed whenever the situation has so changed as to warrant reconsideration.3

Sincerely yours,

Roger Hilsman

1 Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OASD/ISA Files: FRC 67 A 4564, Vietnam 1963 333 Jan. Secret. The copy of this letter in Department of State files indicates that it was drafted on April 18 by Wood and cleared by Harriman, Johnson (G), and Rice. (Department of State, Central Files, DEF 19-3 US-S Viet)

2 For excerpts of the Special Report issued in Saigon on June 2, 1962, by the International Commission for Supervision and Control, see American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1962, pp. 1103-1106.

3 On May 17, Secretary of Defense McNamara sent a memorandum to the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff which noted the continuing reservations of the Department of State on the question of the delivery of jet aircraft to the Republic of Vietnam. In light of those reservations, McNamara directed that the 4 RT-33 and 2 T-33 aircraft earmarked for Vietnam in the fiscal year 1962 Military Assistance Program be reallocated to meet other requirements. In addition, McNamara wrote: “As I mentioned at the Honolulu Conference on 6 May, we should take a hard look at the plans for delivering jet aircraft under future year programs for Vietnam. I feel that the plans presented at Honolulu were unrealistic in this regard. Aside from the political aspects, I have reservations as to the advisability, on cost effectiveness grounds, of providing jets for Vietnam before the insurgency is under control. Request that you give special attention to this matter in your review of the CINCPAC Military Assistance Plan for Vietnam.” (Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OSD Files: FRC 69 A 3131, Vietnam 452) Regarding the Honolulu conference, see Document 107.

105. Memorandum From the Deputy Director of the Vietnam Working Group (Heavner) to the Director (Wood) 105. Memorandum From the Deputy Director of the Vietnam Working Group (Heavner) to the Director (Wood)1

Washington, May 2, 1963.

SUBECT

Forrestal Meeting on Contingencies

(1) Forrestal indicated that shortly after your return2 he will want a checklist of things which we have asked or which in the future we might ask Diem to do. He seems to be thinking of a large paper which would include various means of pressuring Diem as well as requesting him to do various things. He specifically asked that we include in the paper alternative means of applying economic and fiscal pressures. (I briefly mentioned some of the alternatives we have debated here, and at his request, gave him a rundown on the current status of the CI fund negotiations.) I have asked Jim3 to draft up the various alternatives which we have for pressuring Diem on the economic side, giving both pros and cons and likely GVN responses.4

(2) As you know, he also wants a new paper on what to do if Diem passes from the scene.5 He was not aware of the existence of the 1961 contingency plan,6 which I took with me as you suggested.

CIA has been wamping up some drafts on this. They appear to regard brother Nhu as the most likely if not the most appealing prospect for a successor. This disturbs me personally, because I think Nhu is a sure loser. He is so cordially hated by all and sundry that I think he could not possibly lead the Vietnamese to victory against the VC. Moreover, his anti-American bias seems much stronger than that of Diem; I doubt that we could work with him even as well as we do with the old boy. Finally, I don’t think this intellectual acrobat has the grip or the stamina or the practicality required to take and hold power.

I think you might want to discuss this both in Honolulu and Saigon. Our present plan which calls for constitutional succession backed or followed by a military leader is still valid. Saigon has not suggested any alteration, but I gather their thinking is moving away from that solution and in the direction of supporting brother Nhu.

(3) Most of the meeting7 was taken up with a discussion of how best to get political intelligence on the military establishment, particularly at the middle levels of Major and Colonel. A plan tentatively agreed upon is to designate whether [sic] MAAG advisers as political reporters in addition to their regular duties. Their job would be to evaluate the political tendencies and loyalties of the military establishment, or that part of it within their ken, and if it ever became necessary, to use their influence as directed by the Ambassador.

It was pointed out, repointed out, and repeatedly emphasized that the great danger in this plan would be GVN discovery of the effort. The reporting channel, as I understand it, would be through General Harkins to the station chief and the Ambassador, rather than plugging CIA into the machine at any other lower or lateral level.

General Krulak was present at the meeting, and he will discuss the matter at Honolulu. I recommend that you talk to him about it.

1 Source: Department of State, Vietnam Working Group Files: Lot 67 D 54, Pol 15 Govt. Secret; Limit Distribution.

2 On May 4, Wood traveled to Honolulu for the Secretary of Defense Conference on Vietnam at CINCPAC headquarters on May 6. After the conference, he went on to Vietnam for the remainder of the month for discussions with the Vietnam Country Team.

3 James M. Montgomery of the Vietnam Working Group.

4 On May 20, Heavner sent an 18-page memorandum to Hilsman listing the reforms which the United States had urged Diem to implement since 1960, as well as “actions which we might consider pressing Diem to take”. Projected reforms listed by Heavner included recognition of a legal opposition, delegation of presidential authority, acceptance of additional U.S. direction of the economic and social aspects of the strategic hamlet program, land reform, and measures to increase income for Vietnamese farmers. With the exception of some possible flexibility on the question of allowing the price of rice to rise, Heavner noted that Diem was unlikely to respond favorably to any of the proposed reforms. (Department of State, Vietnam Working Group Files: Lot 67 D 54, Pol 15 Govt)

5 Enclosure to Document 133.

6 For text, see Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, vol. I, Document 181.

7 No further record of this meeting has been found.

106. Memorandum for the Ambassador in Vietnam (Nolting) and the Commander, Military Assistance Command, Vietnam (Harkins) 106. Memorandum for the Ambassador in Vietnam (Nolting) and the Commander, Military Assistance Command, Vietnam (Harkins)1

Washington, May 3, 1963.

1) Extensive discussions have been held over this past weeks on press situation in Viet Nam which had shown substantial improvement in the past few months. In our view however, the press situation in South Viet Nam at present still holds unfortunate potential which rigid continuation of present press policies might aggravate. After conversations including State, Defense, the White House (including the President) and USIA, it is thought desirable to keep present favorable momentum by granting more leeway to field in making day to-day news policy as it affects on-the-spot situations. This would include wherever possible taking American reporters in Saigon further into our confidence, particularly on matters which they are almost certain to learn about anyway. Washington will exercise patience with efforts in implementation of this guide in order to give it chance for success.

2) Public statements by high officials of the United States Government either visiting South Viet Nam or discussing our policies in Soutl1 Viet Nam should continue on the note of caution manifested by the President in his December 12th press conference,2 cited here for your information: ”Q: Mr. President, it was just a year ago that you ordered stepped-up aid to Viet Nam. There seems to be a good deal of discouragement about the progress. Can you give us your assessment?

”The President: Well, we are putting in a major effort in Viet Nam. As you know, we have about 10 or 11 times as many men there as we had a year ago. We have had a number of casualties. We put in an awful lot of equipment. We are going ahead with the strategic hamlet proposal. In some phases, the military program has been quite successful. There is great difficulty, however, in fighting a guerrilla war. You need ten to one, or eleven to one, especially in terrain as difficult as South Viet Nam.

”So we don’t see the end of the tunnel, but I must say I don’t think it is darker than it was a year ago, and in some ways lighter.”

Neither undue optimism nor pessimism are called for.

3) Nothing in this memorandum should be interpreted as any change in your present policy of discouraging public and private comments by United States personnel of a derogatory nature about Vietnamese military efforts.

1 Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Vietnam Country Series, 4/63-5/63. Secret; Limit Distribution. A note on the source text indicates that the memorandum was to be hand-delivered by Arthur Sylvester, Assistant Secretary of Defense for Public Affairs. A covering memorandum from White House Press Secretary Pierre Salinger to Sylvester, also dated May 3, notes that the memorandum “has been signed off here.” Salinger added that Sylvester should obtain the necessary clearances in the Departments of Defense and State. There is no indication on the source text of such clearances.According to Salinger’s memoirs, he drafted the memorandum on instructions from President Kennedy after the President had met with John Mecklin at the White House on April 29. Salinger arranged the meeting for Mecklin, who was in Washington recuperating from surgery, after Mecklin convinced him that the President should be informed of the “mounting difficulties in Saigon” regarding press coverage of the war. (Salinger, With Kennedy, p. 400) Mecklin wrote of this meeting that Kennedy was “skeptical but willing to try” his advice that the administration make an effort to take newsmen into their confidence. (Mecklin, Mission in Torment, pp. 149-151) After the meeting, Salinger recorded that “the President told me he had been deeply impressed with Mecklin’s recital-but at the same time he did not feel that any new press policy in Vietnam would, in the long run, be successful because of the highly conflicting interests of the government and the press there.” Nevertheless, after a discussion, in which McGeorge Bundy participated, Kennedy authorized Salinger to draft a new press guideline to be delivered to Harkins and Nolting by Sylvester at one of the periodic review meetings in Honolulu. (Salinger, With Kennedy, p. 401) The policy outlined in the memorandum was formally implemented in the press policy guidance sent to Saigon on May 21 in Document 130.

2 For full text of these remarks, see Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: John F. Kennedy, 1962, p. 870.

107. Memorandum for the Record of the Secretary of Defense Conference 107. Memorandum for the Record of the Secretary of Defense Conference1

Honolulu, May 6, 1963.

SUBJECT

Notes and Necessary Actions Resulting from SecDef Honolulu Conference on Vietnam, 6 May 1963

Item 1. Evaluation of the Situation in RVN

a. General Harkins discussed the over-all progress that had been made since the last meeting2 and conveyed the feeling of optimism that all elements of the Country Team now have. General Harkins did not attempt to predict a date when the insurgency would be broken, but did feel that we are certainly on the right track and that we are winning the war in Vietnam, although the struggle will still be a protracted one.

In response to a question from the Secretary, General Harkins stated that M-113’s have proven to be excellent combat vehicles and have produced a very high number of VC casualties. In regard to M-114’s, he stated that they had not been in use long enough to prove their merit, but that he expected them to also be of great value.

(1) Action: The Secretary directed that we should examine the Thai MA Program to see if we should put additional M-113/M-114’s in the Thai Program. we should also consider these vehicles for India. In this regard, CINCPAC stated that the most recent submission for Thailand does have APC in the program.

b. General Harkins reported that the M-79 grenade launcher is one of the best weapons they have in Vietnam. It is useful for the troops, paramilitary forces, and for hamlet defense.

(2) Action: The Secretary stated that we should also look into this weapon for Thailand. He wished to know if we have the proper number scheduled. We should also look into the possibility of sending this weapon to South America.

c. General Harkins mentioned that in regard to US helicopter support, in June the Army will begin to shift from H-21’s to HU-1B’s.

d. In regard to the Navy, Capt. Drachnik reported that scheduled junks are now all operational. The Gulf of Siam patrol has shown good results, where the junks are backed up by PGM as available. He said that additional PGM will be assigned to the area when they are received. Capt. Drachnik stated that one item of concern is the shallow draft swimmer-support boats. They have worked out well but maintenance is difficult. The bow is subject to heavy damage and they have a repair problem, the main trouble at present being getting sufficient epoxy resin. A shipment was due on 1 April but has not yet arrived.

(3) Action: The Secretary directed that we look into this problem and speed up delivery of the epoxy.

e. General Harkins reported that the medical program is going well. We presently have a team of 127 US medical personnel there. They treat about 150,000 people a week. They are training VN personnel, both VNAF and strategic hamlet medics. In regard to the latter, there is a problem with the GVN Department of Health which is slowing up the training program.

(4) Action: The Secretary stated that he thought the major purpose of the 127-man medical team was to train Vietnamese and that it appears they are putting more emphasis on treatment rather than training when the opposite should be true. He directed that COMUSMACV develop and send in a plan for medical training of Vietnamese.

f. General Harkins discussed the training and equipment of the paramilitary forces. In response to a question, he stated that hamlet militia do get weapons, but that the issue of weapons is subject to GVN regulations. The Secretary mentioned that at the previous conference the subject of AR-15 rifles had arisen. He asked how many were in-country and what was the appraisal of this rifle. General Harkins reported that it is a very good weapon and well-liked, but that the weapons in-country can do the job. The Secretary remarked that possibly we should not send in any new rifles unless they are AR-15’s. It was pointed out that our rifle program is now about completed and that all programming is for replacement or attrition, and that for FY 64 substituting AR-15 for other weapons would cost about an additional $1 million.

(5) Action: The Secretary stated he would review the reports presently in Defense regarding the AR-15 prior to making any further decisions regarding this weapon.

g. General Harkins reported that the VC defection rate was increasing. The GVN Chieu Hoi Program has been instituted and looks good. However, there is a shortage of loudspeaker planes to use in connection with this program. It was pointed out that there is a restriction on use of US planes and crews for loudspeaker operations. The VNAF has enough C-47’s, but needs additional loud-speaker equipment.

(6) Action: The Secretary stated that we should look into the restrictions on use of US planes and crews and make them commonsense restrictions, that we should minimize the participation of US personnel and that we should expand as rapidly as possible the GVN capability for loudspeaker operations. He directed that COMUSMACV send in a list of equipment needed to install in GVN planes and that DOD will see that it is delivered.

h. General Harkins reported on progress of the National Campaign Plan noting that Phase I is essentially completed, and Phase II should formally start in July. However, there will be no dramatic entry into Phase II, since many activities are already underway with increased operations throughout SVN.

i. On the Strategic Hamlet Program, Mr. Trueheart reported that generally speaking it is going very well in the first three Corps areas, but not very well in the IV Corps. He stated that in the II Corps we have an excellent plan which is well co-ordinated and which is going well. In the Delta area, the strategic hamlet problem is more difficult. Here the people are spread out more, with hamlets one house wide and five miles long along the canal. In the area there are more VC, the people are generally more hostile to the Government, and strategic hamlets defenses are more difficult.

j. On border problems, General Harkins stated that as long as we have Laos and Cambodia there will be border problems. In regard to infiltration, he stated that Phu Quoc is a transshipping point. Where the junk patrols are backed up by PGM (as in the Phu Quoc area), they are more effective.

k. In giving his outlook for the future, General Harkins gave his opinion that some of our recent setbacks had been due to people dropping their guard. He said that this is a natural reaction when things are going well, and it is something we have to watch. Also, this is the wrong time for us to mention any cutback to the GVN. We should not have them think that now that we have gotten them this far, we are going to decrease our support.

Item 2. Comprehensive Plan South Vietnam

a. CINCPAC presented the proposed '64-'69 RVNAF force structure and the proposed phasing in of equipment to the RVNAF. The Secretary questioned some of the figures, in that they showed larger forces in ‘68 than in ‘64, whereas we are operating on the assumption that the back of the insurgency would be broken by FY'65.

(7) Action: The Secretary stated it his impression that the projections were too light on helos and transport aircraft and too heavy on fighters. He specifically questioned the introduction of F-5A and F-5B aircraft.

He further stated that insofar as the MAP is concerned, once the insurgency is broken, the MAP for GVN should be about $50 million per year. He suggested that it would be wise to work out two alternative plans-one that the GVN could carry on with about $50-$100 million US assistance annually (including supporting assistance) and the other which showed what would be required from a military standpoint.

b. CINCPAC then presented the detailed ‘64 requirements, which showed a total of $163 million for maintenance of current forces and $59 million for force improvements. It was pointed out that the $163 million operating requirements exceeds the present FY ‘64 Vietnam MAP ceiling of $159.1 million. A detailed list of each project for force improvement was then presented.

(8) Action: The Secretary stated that he did not see how it would be possible to meet the proposed total $222 million for FY 64. He then proposed that the figure of $65 million for ammunition be reduced to about $30 million. He would guarantee that if MACV ran into trouble, DOD would see that requirements were filled immediately from US stocks. The Secretary expressed his views that US equipment now in; country which is to be turned over to the GVN should be turned over at no cost to MAP. This would cover such items as helicopters, C-123, AC&W and Tropo-scatter equipment.

(9) Action: The Secretary also stated that the phase out of US personnel as planned is too slow and that we should try to get US numbers down to a minimum level earlier than FY'66.

Item 3. Role of Attack Aircraft

a. General Anthis presented a briefing of all air operations in Vietnam. In each category (i.e. transport, liaison, combat sorties) there has been a great increase in air activity over the past year.

(10) Action: The Secretary requested that in the future the statistics for combat sorties be broken down to show the types of combat sorties (i.e. interdiction, convoy escort, helo escort, etc.)

b. General Anthis stated there has been an increase in photo recce over the past year. He stated that over 70% of targeting for interdiction purposes comes from photo recce. Currently, we have a problem of quickly getting film from the airfield to processing centers. MACV has requested additional aircraft (U-3B or T-37) for this purpose.

(11) Action: The Secretary asked that we look into getting the U-3B aircraft to Vietnam.

(12) Action: The Secretary remarked while the VN Air Force is increasing its activities, the job to be done has also increased. The VNAF is not doing a greater proportion of the job than they were doing last year; in air lift the VNAF is doing proportionally less than they were a year ago. He stated that it is his desire that we expedite training of the Air Force so that they can take over an increasingly greater share of air tasks, thus relieving US personnel. He directed that COMUSMACV look into the training of VNAF personnel with a view toward accomplishing this purpose.

c. General Anthis mentioned that the number of flare missions has increased greatly over the past year and that the supply of flares was getting short.

(13) Action: The Secretary directed that we get an additional supply of flares out there as soon as possible. It was reported by CINCPAC that 5,000 are now en route. The Secretary asked that we see that the flare supply is adequate.

d. General Anthis gave a detailed briefing of air interdiction operations, covering the types of targets, the targeting process, and the control of air interdiction operations. The controls are all pointed toward hitting verified VC targets and avoiding hitting any friendly personnel. General Anthis mentioned that in the past year there have been 1350 combat sorties. During this period there have been reported only 14 alleged reports of air strikes hitting friendly personnel. Of these 14, only in two cases did investigation show the aircraft hitting the wrong target.

(14) Action: The Secretary stated he is satisfied that we are doing well in the air interdiction effort, but that we should make sure that all possible errors are reported and that we keep track of any errors shown up in targeting in the air strikes.

Item 4. US-GVN Relations

a. Ambassador Nolting stated that the atmosphere of US-GVN relations is somewhat less cordial than it was six months ago. There remains a sense of touchiness in the GVN resulting from the CI fund discussions. He also attributed this situation to an increasing sense of nationalism and from misgiving on US policy in SEA due to: (1) Mansfield Report

(2) The situation in Laos

(3) The touchiness of the GVN regarding US advisors (both military and civilian) whenever advisory efforts touch upon the political field.

In regard to advisors, he stated that he feels no specific measures are called for to remove any blocks of advisors. The GVN concern re US advisors is not with any advisors who are in the strictly military field, but rather with the group of advisors, civilian and military, now in each province and concerned with advising and assisting the Province Chiefs. While these advisors are the ones that cause GVN concern, at the same time it is these advisors who are most valuable in the over-all CI effort.

(15) Action: The Secretary stated that we should have a plan for phasing out US personnel; as the situation improves we should phase down our effort. This will be required if we are to get continued US support for our effort in Vietnam. The Secretary also stated that the last category of personnel he would take out would be advisors. He still desires that we lay down a plan to have the RVNAF take over some functions this year so that we can take out 1,000 or so personnel late this year if the situation allows. The Secretary repeated that we should lay down a plan to expedite training to get VN personnel to take over tasks being performed by US personnel. For instance, he asked why should we have US personnel flying Cessna 185’s?

b. Mr. Brent, USOM Director, presented the GVN budgetary projections, showing that there is a projected shortage of piasters for future operations. The alternatives we have for solving this piaster shortage are all undesirable; these include budget deficits, US piaster purchase, and relaxation of US imposed import controls. The piaster problem was discussed further without reaching any recommended solution.

(16) Action: The Secretary requested that in view of the impending piaster shortage and the GVN deficit, the Ambassador let State and Defense know if the GVN should do any cutting back on its piaster support of CI operations.

c. There was a brief discussion of press relations. It was pointed out that we have a problem either if US personnel talk too much or refuse to talk to the press at all. Better indoctrination is the only way we can improve this situation.

(17) Action: The Secretary requested that General Wheeler look into putting more emphasis on training our people before they leave the US. This is the best place to indoctrinate them in regard to press relations.

Item 5. GVN Operations in the DRV

(Being reported separately by Gen. Krulak.)3

L.C. Heinz4
Rear Admiral, USN
Director, Far East Region

1 Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OASD/ISA Files: FRC 69 A 6214, Sec Def Conference (HQ CINCPAC). Secret. Drafted in Washington on May 8.The participants in the conference, which was held at CINCPAC headquarters, included Secretary of Defense McNamara, General Harkins, General Krulak, Admiral Felt, Assistant Secretary of State Hilsman, Ambassador Nolting, and USOM Director Brent.

2 The previous conference convened by the Secretary of Defense to consider progress in Vietnam was held on October 2, 1962. See Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, vol. II, Document 298.

3 No such report has been found.

4 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.

108. Letter From the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Hilsman) to the Director of the United States Information Agency (Murrow) 108. Letter From the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Hilsman) to the Director of the United States Information Agency (Murrow)1

Washington, May 6, 1963.

Dear Ed: I would like to suggest a steady, low-key, and continuing propaganda campaign, particularly through Vietnamese media, to the effect that North Viet-Nam is falling increasingly under Communist Chinese influence.

Ho Chi Minh poses as the father of Vietnamese independence and it would be galling for him and his government since the Chinese have been the ancestral enemies for more than 2,000 years, having invaded Viet-Nam many times and, indeed, controlled the country for about 1,000 years. Ho chi Minh has always tried to straddle between Russia and Communist China and to play the role of the elder statesman patching up differences between the two. His posture is clearly becoming increasingly uncomfortable and I thus think it would be timely to turn his discomfort to our advantage.

Perhaps more importantly we do not want North Viet-Nam to become a satellite of Communist China. This would be regarded widely in Southeast Asia as one more inevitable step in the takeover of Asia. It would also render that much more difficult any possible political solution to the Vietnamese problem and reduce the viability of the Vietnamese hope that some day their country may be reunited. While this hope may not seem very viable to us even now, it must be a part of the long range political program of any government in South Viet-Nam. We cannot, within our present policy, control the balance of North Viet-Nam’s alignment between Russia and Communist China, but I think we have the capability of influencing it. If Ho chi Minh and his government are labelled as becoming increasing subservient to Communist China it is at least likely that he will increase his efforts to demonstrate his continuing strong connections with the Russians.

Ho’s problems in this respect are highlighted by an Airgram from Paris (A-1693, January 16, 1963)2 citing French sources to the effect that the number of Russian technicians in North Viet-Nam declined from 60% to 15% of all technicians in North Viet-Nam during 1960 and 1961 whereas the percent of ChiCom technicians allegedly increased from 28% to 80% of all technicians. Ho’s problem is also brought out in an AP despatch of April 5 indicating that since he will not achieve a quick victory he will need a lot of logistic support for a long war and reflecting his concern that if he accepts such support from Communist China his country would become “virtually a vassal of neighboring China.”

I suggest such a campaign could be carried on by highlighting every visit or program between North Viet-Nam and Communist China and by frequently citing the innumerable instances in Vietnamese history when the Chinese have sought to or have actually gained control of Viet-Nam. I believe the program should not be high-keyed and short lived. It should be a slow, steady repetition of the theme. We should avoid the untruth of stating that Ho chi Minh is the satellite of the Communist Chinese, but rather suggest that he is falling increasingly under their influence.

In this connection I wonder if someone on your staff could give us the present status of our capacity and of the South Vietnamese capacity to broadcast into North Viet-Nam.

I would be glad to have your views on this question and provide any further information which you might need.

Sincerely,

Roger Hilsman3

1 Source: Department of State, Vietnam Working Group Files: Lot 67 D 54, INF Information Activities (Gen). Secret. Drafted on April 15 by Wood and cleared by Rice. Also sent to Jorden.

2 Not printed. (Ibid., Central Files, 851H.0060/1-1663)

3 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.

109. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 109. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, May 6, 1963, 7 p.m.

987. CINCPAC for POLAD and Ambassador Nolting. Deptel 951, Emb A-651.2 GVN replied May 4 to ICC concerning DRV charges on “noxious chemicals” (copies being pouched). Reply asserts charges completely without foundation, explains purpose defoliation operations in RVN; claims no chemical product other than 2,4-D 2,4,5-T has “ever” been used, particularly arsenites and others alleged by Hanoi. Letter says DRV charges constitute inadmissible interference in internal affairs of RVN; notes Communist propaganda effort aims at diverting international attention from VC aggressive acts (it mentions particularly VC arsonists in Saigon) in face realization that VN people: turning away from Communist propaganda (Strategic Hamlet and Chieu Hoi programs are cited). GVN letter also encloses text President Diem’s VOA interview (Emb A-552)3 and Professor Buu Hoi’s April 15 press conference this subject (Emb A-628).4 Finally, letter says in event “some” members ICC wish to form “personal opinion” GVN mission will arrange with local authorities for them to go to provinces where VC propaganda alleges defoliation caused damage or claimed victims.

We consider letter generally good (although claim that no other chemicals than 2,4-D and 2,4,5-T used is not true and no mention made of crop destruction) but final reference to visit more forthcoming than we would have preferred. Colonel An, Chief GVN Mission to ICC, explained to Embassy officer wording of this paragraph had been changed from “invitation” to offer to “arrange if requested” in light Embassy’s views; draft had then been discussed with Foreign Minister Mau and President Diem who “instructed” An leave offer in. An requested our assistance in obtaining British and Canadian support for position outlined in letter.

[1 paragraph (5 lines) not declassified]

It continues our strong conviction (with which Colonel An [less than 1 line not declassified] agree) ICC investigation would be counterproductive and latest offer to arrange visit should not be permitted provide opening wedge such investigation. Would be helpful if New Delhi, Ottawa, London, and Department would continue use appropriate opportunities emphasize this position. We plan continue taking this position here with Canadians, British and GVN.

Concerning New Delhi’s 41235 to Department, Embassy fully agrees first pare Deptel 1000.6 On question legal committee report,7 believe its release would have considerable exploitable value to us even though information old and we should seek avoid quid pro quo between non-publication of report and ICC decision not to investigate chemicals charges. In view immediate necessity preventing ICC investigation, however, and fact our views on legal report recently conveyed Indians, believe we should concentrate on “noxious chemicals” charges and not add to potential linkup those charges with legal report by pressing for latter at this time.

Manfull

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27-14 S VIET Secret. Repeated to CINCPAC, London, New Delhi, and Ottawa.

2 In telegram 951 to Saigon, April 12, the Department concurred in the Embassy’s proposal to encourage the Government of Vietnam to limit the response to the North Vietnamese charges to a denial. (Ibid.,POL 27-10 S VIET) Airgram A-651 from Saigon, April 23, transmitted a copy of the April 8 letter from the ICC to the Government of Vietnam requesting a response to North Vietnamese charges that noxious chemicals had been used to carry out “collective reprisals” against the people of South Vietnam. (Ibid., POL 27 S VIET)

3 In the interview, which was conducted by the Voice of America on March 17, Diem characterized the North Vietnamese charges as “a pure fabrication”. (Airgram A-552 from Saigon, March 26; Ibid., POL 27-10 S VIET)

4 On April 15, Professor Buu Hoi, Director of the Vietnamese Atomic Energy Office, held a press conference in Saigon to explain that defoliants and herbicides were not harmful to humans or animals and could have beneficial effects. (Airgram A-628 from Saigon, April 18; Ibid.)

5 In telegram 4123 from New Delhi, April 23, the Embassy noted that Indian officials inclined to the view that it might be better if the ICC investigated the North Vietnamese charges and refuted them rather than dismiss them and leave the question open for further exploitation by the North Vietnamese. (Ibid.)

6 The first paragraph of telegram 1000 to Saigon, April 25, outlined the Department of State’s conviction that given Polish membership, the ICC was unlikely to clear the Government of Vietnam rapidly of the noxious chemical charges. Rather, the investigation would probably be prolonged with continued propaganda exploitation by the North Vietnamese. (Ibid.)

7 Not further identified.

110. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam 110. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam1

Washington, May 7, 1963, 7:57 p.m.

1055. Joint State/Defense message. Embtel 824.2 Herbicides. Program has been reviewed by highest levels:

Defoliation: 1. Authority to initiate defoliation operations is delegated to Ambassador and COMUSMACV. 2. Guidelines: Defoliation operations should be few in number, undertaken only in following circumstances: a) where terrain and vegetation peculiarly [particularly?]favor use of herbicides; b) in areas remote from population; and c) when hand cutting and burning are impracticable. A few high priority projects can be undertaken in populated areas where military advantage very clear and hand cutting and burning not feasible.

Crop Destruction: 1. All crop destruction operations must be approved in advance by Assistant Secretary FE and DOD. 2. Guidelines re Crop Destruction: a) Crop destruction must be confined to remote areas known to be occupied by VC. It should not be carried on in areas where VC are intermingled with native inhabitants and latter cannot escape. Also should be limited to areas where VC either do not have nearby alternative sources food or areas in which there is overall food deficit e.g. High Plateau and Zone D.

General Comments (applicable to both defoliation and crop destruction): a. All herbicide operations to be undertaken only after it is clear both PsyWar preparations and compensation and relief machinery are adequate. Would appear GVN should increase compensation efforts.

b. Suggest further increase reliance on hand operations where feasible which less awesome than spraying by air.

c. Continue efforts counteract international effect Commie propaganda through demonstrations, visits by newsmen, etc.

d. Request by first week July a full report and evaluation of all 1963 herbicide operations to serve as basis decision here whether continue defoliation and crop destruction.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27-10 S VIET Secret; Priority; Limit Distribution. Drafted by Montgomery and cleared by Heavner, Hilsman, Harriman, Heinz, Murrow, and Forrestal. Repeated to CINCPAC for POLAD. On May 15 Forrestal sent a copy of the telegram to McGeorge Bundy with a covering memorandum which reads, in part: “The arrangements described in the cable are satisfactory to me, but let me know if you have any other thoughts.” Bundy initialed the memorandum and indicated in the margin that the arrangements described were “OK”. (Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Vietnam Country Series, 4/63-5/63.)

2 Document 63.

111. Memorandum From the Secretary of Defense (McNamara) to the Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs (Nitze) 111. Memorandum From the Secretary of Defense (McNamara) to the Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs (Nitze)1

Washington, May 8, 1963.

The tentative Military Assistance Program recommended by CINCPAC2 for South Vietnam for the years Fiscal 1965 through Fiscal 1968 totals approximately $575 million. In my opinion, this is at least $270 million higher than an acceptable program.3

CINCPAC’s recommendations assume an unrealistically high level for the South Vietnamese forces and assign to them equipment which is both complicated to operate and costly to procure and maintain. I believe the plan needs to be completely reworked.4

Before the first of September, please submit to me your recommendations for the Military Assistance Program for South Vietnam for the years Fiscal 1965 through Fiscal 1969. For each of the years I should like to see the following information: the personnel strength of each of the South Vietnamese forces; the weapons inventory of the South Vietnamese forces in a form similar to that attached;5 the defense budget to be funded by South Vietnam; the Supplementary Assistance to be furnished by the U.S.; the Military Assistance Program, both in dollars and in terms of the weapons listed in the attached schedule; the U.S. forces assigned to South Vietnam broken down by function.

Robert S. McNamara6

1 Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OASD/ISA Vietnam Task Force Files: FRC 75-163, Chronological File-Vietnam-1963. Secret.

2 On an attached interoffice control sheet, Colonel J.R. Kent noted that Admiral Felt had presented a proposed military assistance plan for Vietnam at the May 6 conference in Honolulu. Kent added, however, that the specific CINCPAC recommendations to which McNamara referred in this memorandum apparently were those in the Comprehensive Plan of January 25, Document 18.

3 On May 17, William Bundy sent a memorandum to McNamara in which he proposed a military assistance program for Vietnam for fiscal years 1965-1969 not to exceed $450 million. Bundy noted that if the figures given in McNamara’s May 8 memorandum to Nitze were taken as governing, the military assistance program for 1965-1969 could not exceed $390 million. Bundy argued that a $390 million program would be too limiting, and would require an abrupt drop in Vietnamese force levels in fiscal year 1966 to the pre-build-up force levels of 1959. (Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OASD/ISA Vietnam Task Force Files: FRC 75-163, Chronological File-Vietnam-1963)

4 An instruction to rework the plan in accordance with McNamara’s objections was sent to Admiral Felt by the JCS on May 9. (Telegram JCS 9820 to CINCPAC, May 9; Ibid., OSD Files: FRC 69 A 3131, VN 091.3 MAP 1963) This telegram also instructed CINCPAC to prepare, “as a matter of urgency”, a plan for the withdrawal of 1,000 U.S. troops from Vietnam before the end of the year. CINCPAC was instructed to bear in mind that Secretary McNamara felt that “the phase-out program presented during 6 May conference appeared too slow.” CINCPAC was to develop a revised plan to achieve a more rapid phase-out of U.S. forces, with emphasis on the development of training plans to accelerate the replacement of U.S. by South Vietnamese units.

5 Not printed.

6 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.

III. Beginning of the Buddhist Crisis, May 9-June 16, 1963: Incident in Hue, the Five Buddhist Demands, Use of Tear Gas in Hue, Self Immolation of Quang Duc, Negotiations in Saigon To Resolve the Crisis, Agreement on the Five DemandsIII. Beginning of the Buddhist Crisis, May 9-June 16, 1963:
Incident in Hue, the Five Buddhist Demands, Use of Tear Gas in Hue, Self Immolation of Quang Duc, Negotiations in Saigon To Resolve the Crisis, Agreement on the Five Demands

112. Telegram From the Consulate at Hue to the Department of State

Hue, May 9, 1963, 3 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 25 S VIET. Secret; Operational Immediate. Received at 8:33 a.m.

113. Minutes of a Meeting of the Special Group for Counterinsurgency

Washington, May 9, 1963, 2 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Special Group Counterinsurgency Files: Lot 68 D 451, Special Group (CI). Secret. Drafted by Dingeman who is not listed among the participants.

114. Memorandum From the Deputy Director of the Vietnam Working Group (Heavner) to the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Hilsman)

Washington, May 9, 1963.

Source: Department of State, Vietnam Working Group Files: Lot 67 D 54, AID-7, CIR Secret. Drafted by Heavner and Montgomery and sent to Hilsman through Robert W. Barnett.

115. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam

Washington, May 9, 1963, 3:24 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, SOC 14-1 S VIET. Secret; Operational Immediate. Drafted by Heavner and cleared by Rice. Repeated to CINCPAC for POLAD.

116. Telegram From the Consulate at Hue to the Department of State

Hue, May 10, 1963, 2 a.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, SOC 14-1 S VIET. Secret; Operational Immediate. Also sent to Saigon.

117. Telegram From the Consulate at Hue to Department of State

Hue, May 10, 1963, 3 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, SOC 14-1 S VIET. Secret; Operational Immediate. Also sent to Saigon.

118. Manifesto of Vietnamese Buddhist Clergy and Faithful

Hue, May 10, 1963.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 13-6 S VIET. Unclassified; Translation. Transmitted as attachment A to airgram A-781 from Saigon, June 10. A slightly variant translation of this manifesto was transmitted as enclosure 5 to airgram A-20 from Hue, June 3. (Ibid., SOC 14-1 S VIET) The manifesto was issued at a mass meeting of Buddhist clergy and faithful at Tu Dam Pagoda in Hue on May 10. The five demands put forward in this declaration are those which have been described in some of the memoir accounts dealing with the Buddhist crisis as having been addressed to the Diem government on May 13. (Hilsman, To Move a Nation, p. 469; Mecklin, Mission in Torment, p. 154)

119. Letter From the Ambassador in Vietnam (Nolting) to Secretary of State at the Presidency and Assistant Secretary of State for National Defense Thuan

Saigon, May 10, 1963.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 26-1 S VIET. Confidential. Drafted by Nolting and Trueheart and transmitted as enclosure 2 to airgram A-718 from Saigon, May 16.

120. Memorandum From Michael V. Forrestal of the National Security Council Staff to the President

Washington, May 10, 1963.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Vietnam Country Series, 4/63-5/63. Secret.

121. Memorandum From the Commander in Chief, Pacific (Felt) to the Joint Chiefs of Staff

Honolulu, May 11, 1963.

Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OSD Files:FRC 69 A 3131, Vietnam 091.3 MAR. Secret. A marginal note on the source text indicates that a copy was sent to Secretary McNamara and he saw it.

122. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam

Washington, May 13, 1963, 6:36 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, DEF 6 US. Secret; Priority. Drafted by Heavner and cleared by Hilsman, Rice, Koren and in DOD/ISA by Heinz. Repeated to CINCPAC for POLAD.

123. Letter From the Commander, Military Assistance Command, Vietnam (Harkins) to President Diem

Saigon, May 15, 1963.

Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 334, MAC/V Files:FRC 69 A 702, 204-58 Command Reporting (1963). Secret.

124. Letter From the Assistant Administrator for the Far East, Agency for International Development (Janow), to the Assistant Director for Rural Affairs, United States Operations Mission in Vietnam (Phillips)

Washington, May 15, 1963.

Source: Department of State, Vietnam Working Group Files: Lot 67 D 54, AID-7 CIF. Secret.

125. Memorandum from the Deputy Director of the Vietnam Working Group (Heavner) to the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Hilsman)

Washington, May 15, 1963.

Source: Department of State, Vietnam Working Group Files: Lot 67 D 54, POL-1 (Gen. Pol. Secret; Limit Distribution.

126. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, May 17, 1963, 4 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL S VIET-US. Secret. Repeated to Bangkok, Phnom Penh, Vientiane, Paris, London, and CINCPAC. On May 18, Michael Forrestal sent a copy to President Kennedy with a covering memorandum that reads:

127. Editorial Note

128. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam

Washington, May 17, 1963, 8:51 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, DEF 6 US. Secret; Operational Immediate; Limit Distribution. Drafted by Hilsman, cleared by Heavner and in draft in FE/P by Abram E. Manell. Repeated to CINCPAC for POLAD.

129. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, May 18, 1963, 4 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, SOC 14-1 S VIET Confidential; Priority. Repeated to CINCPAC.

130. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam

Washington, May 21, 1963, 10:48 a.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, PR 11 Saigon. Confidential; Routine. Drafted by Heavner and cleared by Manell, Hilsman, Manning, and with Defense and USIA. Repeated to CINCPAC for POLAD.

131. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, May 22, 1963, 2 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, SOC 14-1 S VIET. Secret; Priority. Repeated to CINCPAC.

132. Minutes of a Meeting of the Special Group for Counterinsurgency

Washington, May 23, 1963, 2 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Special Group Counterinsurgency Files: Lot 68 D 451. Secret. Drafted by Dingeman who is not listed among the participants.

133. Letter From the Ambassador in Vietnam (Nolting) to the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Hilsman)

Saigon, May 23, 1963.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 1-1 S VIET-US. Top Secret; Official-Informal. A note on the source text indicates that the contingency plan was “approved by White House” on June 6.

134. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, May 23, 1963, 2 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 15-S VIET Secret; Limited Distribution. Repeated to Bangkok, Vientiane, Phnom Penh, and CINCPAC.

135. Letter From the Charge in Vietnam (Trueheart) to the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Hilsman)

Saigon, May 25, 1963.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 S VIET Top Secret; Official-Informal.

136. Memorandum From the Commander in Chief, Pacific (Felt) to the Commander, Military Assistance Command, Vietnam (Harkins)

Honolulu, May 27, 1963.

Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 334, MAC/V Files: FRC 69 A 702, 201-42.1 (63). Secret. Copies were also sent to COMUSARPAC, CINCPACFLT, CINCPACAF, JCS, CSA, CNO, CSAF, and DODPRO.

137. Telegram From the Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs (Nitze) to the Commander in Chief, Pacific (Felt)

Washington, May 29, 1963, 1:52 p.m.

Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OSD Files: FRC 69 A 3131, Viet 091.3 MAR Secret; Priority. Drafted on May 27 by Woods in the Planning Division of OASD/ISA/ODMA and cleared by Milton H. Thick, Director of the Division, and several Defense Department officials, including William Bundy, Krulak, and Kent. Repeated to COMUSMACV.

138. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam

Washington, May 29, 1963, 7:07 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, SOC 14-1 S VIEI Secret. Drafted by Wood. Repeated to CINCPAC for POLAD.

139. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, May 30, 1963, 4 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, SOC 14-1 S VIET. Confidential. Repeated to CINCPAC.

140. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, May 31, 1963, 7 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, SOC 14-1 S VIET. Confidential; Priority. Repeated to CINCPAC.

141. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, June 1, 1963, 1 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, SOC 14-1 S VIET. Confidential; Priority. Repeated to CINCPAC.

142. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, June 1, 1963, 1 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, SOC 14-1 S VIET Confidential; Priority. Repeated to CINCPAC.

143. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam

Washington, June 1, 1963, 1:59 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, SOC 14-1 S VIET Confidential; Priority. Drafted by Wood and cleared by Rice and Hilsman. Repeated to Bangkok and to CINCPAC for POLAD.

144. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, June 3, 1963, 6 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, SOC 14-1 S VIET. Confidential; Operational Immediate. Repeated to CINCPAC.

145. Current Intelligence Memorandum Prepared in the Office of Current Intelligence, Central Intelligence Agency

Washington, June 3, 1963.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Vietnam Country Series, 6/63. Confidential; No Foreign Dissem.

146. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, June 4, 1963, 4 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, SOC 14-1 S VIET. Secret; Operational Immediate. Repeated to CINCPAC.

147. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam

Washington, June 3, 1963, 5:30 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, SOC 14-1 S VIET Secret; Operational Immediate. Drafted by Heavner and cleared by Wood and Hilsman. Repeated to CINCPAC for POLAD.

148. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam

Washington, June 3, 1963, 6:46 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27-10 S VIET. Secret; Operational Immediate; Limit Distribution. Drafted by Heavner and cleared by Wood and Hilsman. Repeated to CINCPAC for POLAD.

149. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, June 4, 1963, 2 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, SOC 14-1 S VIET. Secret; Operational Immediate; Limit Distribution. Repeated to CINCPAC. Passed to the White House, OSD, Army, Navy, Air Force, and CIA.

150. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, June 4, 1963, 5 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, SOC 14-1 S VIET. Secret; Limit Distribution. Repeated to CINCPAC.

151. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, June 4, 1963, 7 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, SOC 14-1 S VIET Secret; Operational Immediate; Limit Distribution. Repeated to CINCPAC. A note on another copy of this telegram indicates that the President was briefed on its contents. (Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Vietnam Country Series, 6/63)

152. Letter From the Director of the United States Information Agency (Murrow) to the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Hilsman)

Washington, June 4, 1963.

Source: Department of State, Vietnam Working Group Files: Lot 67 D 54, INF-Information Activities (Gen). Secret.

153. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, June 5, 1963, 1 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 26 S VIET. Top Secret; Priority; Limit Distribution.

154. Editorial Note

155. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, June 6, 1963, 1 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, SOC 14-1 S VIET. Top Secret; Operational Immediate; Limit Distribution.

156. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, June 7, 1963, 9 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, DEF 19 US-S VIET. Secret; Operational Immediate; Limit Distribution. Repeated to CINCPAC.

157. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, June 8, 1963, 6 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, SOC 14-1 S VIET. Secret; Operational Immediate; Limited Distribution. Repeated to CINCPAC. Received at 7:20 a.m.

158. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam

Washington, June 8, 1963, 12:55 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, SOC 14-1 S VIET Secret; Operational Immediate; Limit Distribution. Drafted by Wood and cleared by Hilsman. Repeated to CINCPAC for POLAD.

159. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam

Washington, June 8, 1963, 5:37 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, SOC 14-1 S VIET. Secret; Priority. Drafted by Heavner and Wood and cleared by Hilsman. Repeated to CINCPAC for POLAD.

160. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, June 9, 1963, 1 a.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, SOC 14-1 S VIET. Secret; Operational Immediate; Limit Distribution. Repeated to CINCPAC. Received at 2:47 p.m., June 8.

161. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, June 9, 1963, 8 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, SOC 14-1 S VIET. Secret; Operational Immediate; Limited Distribution. Repeated to CINCPAC. Received at 9:16 a.m.

162. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, June 10, 1963, 6 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, SOC 14-1 S VIET. Secret; Operational Immediate; Limit Distribution: Repeated to CINCPAC.

163. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, June 11, 1963.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, SOC 14-1 S VIET. Unclassified; Operational Immediate. Repeated to CINCPAC. The time of transmission is not given on the source text. The telegram was received at 12:08 a.m.

164. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, June 11, 1963, noon.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, SOC 14-1 S VIET. Confidential; Operational Immediate. Repeated to CINCPAC. Received at 2:21 a.m.

165. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, June 11, 1963, 5 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, SOC 14-1 S VIET. Secret; Operational Immediate; Limit Distribution. Repeated to CINCPAC. Received at 7:37 a.m.

166. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, June 11, 1963, 7 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, SOC 14-1 S VIET. Secret; Priority. Repeated to CINCPAC.

167. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam

Washington, June 11, 1963, 11:03 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, SOC 14-1 S VIET. Secret; Operational Immediate; Limit Distribution. Drafted by Wood and Hilsman and cleared in draft by Harriman. Repeated to CINCPAC for POLAD.

168. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, June 12, 1963, 2 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, SOC 14-1 S VIET Confidential; Operational Immediate; Limit Distribution. Repeated to CINCPAC.

169. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, June 12, 1963, 8 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, SOC 14-1 S VIET. Secret; Operational Immediate; Limit Distribution.

170. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, June 13, 1963, 7 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, SOC 14-1 S VIET Secret; Operational Immediate; Limit Distribution.

171. Minutes of a Meeting of the Special Group for Counterinsurgency

Washington, June 13, 1963, 2 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Special Group Counterinsurgency Files: Lot 68 D 451, Special Group (CI). Secret. Drafted by Dingeman who is not listed among the participants.

172. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, June 14, 1963, 4 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, SOC 14-1 S VIET Secret; Operational Immediate; Limit Distribution. Repeated to CINCPAC.

173. Telegram From Prince Sihanouk to President Kennedy

Phnom Penh, June 14, 1963.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, SOC 14-1 S VIET. A copy of the original French text is Ibid. A notation on the French text indicates that the telegram was sent by MacKay Radio. In telegram 964 from Phnom Penh, June 14, the Embassy reported that Agence Khmere Presse in Phnom Penh had published in that day’s issue the text of Prince Sihanouk’s message to President Kennedy, along with the texts of similar telegrams sent by Sihanouk to U.N. Secretary-General U Thant, British Prime Minister Macmillan, French President De Gaulle, and Indian President Radhakrishnan. Ambassador Sprouse reported that the Foreign Ministry also told him the Cambodian Government had given a diplomatic note to the South Vietnamese Charge in Phnom Penh expressing concern over events in Vietnam following the deaths in May of Buddhists in Hue. (Ibid.) On June 18, Ceylonese Prime Minister Bandaranaike also sent a letter to President Kennedy expressing concern over developments in South Vietnam, and requesting that the United States use its good offices to enable the Buddhist majority in South Vietnam to enjoy the right to practice their religion. (Ibid.) And on June 28, the Representatives at the United Nations of Cambodia, Ceylon, and Nepal called on the U.S. Delegation at the United Nations to express mounting concern over religious difficulties in South Vietnam. (Telegram 4686 from USUN, June 28; Ibid.)

174. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam

Washington, June 14, 1963, 4:43 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, SOC 14-1 S VIET. Secret; Operational Immediate. Drafted by Wood and cleared by Rice and Forrestal. Repeated to CINCPAC for POLAD.

175. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam

Washington, June 14, 1963, 11 p.m.

Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 84, Saigon Embassy Files: FRC 68 A 5159, SGN (63) 19 GVN. Top Secret; Eyes Only. Drafted by Wood and cleared by Hilsman and Harriman.

176. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, June 15, 1963, 2 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, SOC 14-1 S VIET. Secret; Emergency. Repeated to CINCPAC. A note on another copy of this telegram indicates that the President read it. (Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Vietnam Country Series, 6/63)

177. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, June 16, 1963, 4 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, SOC 14-1 S VIET. Limited Official Use; Operational Immediate. Repeated to CINCPAC.

178. Editorial Note

179. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, June 16, 1963, 5 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, SOC 14-1 S VIET Top Secret; Priority; Eyes Only.

112. Telegram From the Consulate at Hue to the Department of State 112. Telegram From the Consulate at Hue to the Department of State1

Hue, May 9, 1963, 3 p.m.

4. Buddha Birthday Celebration Hue May 8 erupted into large-scale demonstration at Hue Radio Station between 2000 hours local and 2330 hours. At 2245 hours estimated 3,000 crowd assembled and guarded by 8 armored cars, one Company CG, one Company minus ARVN, police armored cars and some carbines fired into air to disperse mob which apparently not unruly but perhaps deemed menacing by authorities. Grenade explosion on radio station porch killed four children, one woman. Other incidents, possibly some resulting from panic, claimed two more children plus one person age unknown killed. Total casualties for evening 8 killed, 4 wounded.2

Background this incident started May 7 when police attempted enforce law that no flags other than Viet-Namese to be flown.3 Police apparently encountered popular resistance to enforcement of law as thousands Buddhist flags publicly displayed. At police request evening May 7 Province Chief Dang reportedly rescinded order. Morning May 8 demonstration at large Tu Dam Pagoda resulted in speech by Chief Bonze in presence Buddhist Dang criticizing GVN suppression freedom religion, favoritism of Catholics. Parade banners during day anti-GVN orientated. Translations of same will be forwarded when available.

Evening May 8 crowd gathered at radio station where Head Bonze scheduled broadcast speech. Permission refused at last minute by GVN. Bonzes on scene urged people remain peaceful. GVN fire hoses and exhortations of Province Chief unsuccessful in dispersing crowd. Troops arrived and ordered dispersal.

Bonzes said stand still, do not fight, GVN claims some threw rocks at radio station, although indications are this not true. Firing then broke out.

1100 hours May 9, Province Chief addressed estimated 800 youth, demonstrators, explained crowd actions spurred by oppositionist agitators had necessitated troop action to maintain order. Head Bonze requested crowd disperse peacefully and turn in flags. Some of crowd heard chanting “down with Catholicism”.

At moment Hue quiet. Population controls and unusual troop deployment not observed. However, situation very fluid and reports of Buddhist demonstration to occur afternoon May 9 flowing in. Buddhists very upset. American community on Emergency Phase II Alert but no threat to Americans apparent at present.

Helble

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 25 S VIET. Secret; Operational Immediate. Received at 8:33 a.m.

2 At 7 p.m. the Embassy in Saigon sent a second report of the incident to Washington, listing seven dead and seven injured. The Embassy noted that Vietnamese Government troops may have fired into the crowd, but most of the casualties resulted, the Embassy reported, from a bomb, a concussion grenade, or “from general melee”. The Embassy observed that although there had been no indication of Viet Cong activity in connection with the incident, the Viet Cong could be expected to exploit future demonstrations. (Telegram 1005 from Saigon, May 9; Ibid., SOC 14-1 S VIET) Subsequent accounts of the May 8 incident in Hue have generally listed the casualties as nine killed and fourteen wounded. (United States-Vietnam Relations, 1945-1967, Book 3, p. 5; Hilsman, To Move a Nation, p. 468; Mecklin, Mission in Torment, p. 153) In a detailed assessment of the Buddhist demonstrations in Hue May 8-10, Consul Helble reported that seven people died on the evening of May 8, and one of those injured subsequently died. He noted that approximately 15 additional demonstrators were injured, but added that exact figures were difficult to determine. Two of those killed, both children, died from being crushed by armored vehicles. (Airgram A-20 from Hue, June 3; Department of State, Central Files, SOC 14-1 S VIET)

3 The law limiting the use of religious flags was established by Decree 189/BNV/NA/P 5, which became effective on May 12, 1958. According to the law, religious sect flags could be flown only on religious holidays at places of worship or private homes with the permission of the local authorities. In airgram A-20, cited in footnote 2 above, Helble noted that the law was “never observed” until the attempt to enforce it, apparently on orders from President Diem, at Hue on the most important Buddhist holiday of the year. (The text of the regulations outlined in Decree 189 is contained in a communique issued by the Mayor of Danang on April 8, 1963, which was transmitted to Washington as enclosure 6 to airgram A-20)

113. Minutes of a Meeting of the Special Group for Counterinsurgency 113. Minutes of a Meeting of the Special Group for Counterinsurgency1

Washington, May 9, 1963, 2 p.m.

PRESENT

Governor Harriman, Mr. Gilpatric, Mr. Bell, General Taylor, Mr. Forrestal, Mr. Wilson vice Mr. Murrow, Mr. Helms vice Mr. McCone, Mr. Nolan vice The Attorney General

Mr. Koren, General Krulak, Mr. Colby and Mr. Jantzen were present for Item No. 1

Mr. Willman was present for Item No. 2

Mr. Maechling was present for the meeting

Item 1. Southeast Asia

[Here follows discussion of part a, “Southeast Asia Status Report,” which included a brief discussion of the proposed agreement with the Diem government on the joint counterinsurgency fund. Koren noted that the agreement in significantly reduce U.S. control over the funds, and Bell observed that AID personnel in the field were concerned that the Vietnamese would not push counterinsurgency programs with sufficient vigor.]

b. Report on the Honolulu Conference

General Krulak presented a summary review of the Secretary of Defense’s recent Honolulu Conference bringing out the following points: General Harkins cited indicators that identify favorable trends in the situation in Viet-Nam. Ambassador Nolting stated that the Vietnamese confidence in the U.S. is not as good as it was some months ago, but recent speeches by senior Government officials have somewhat restored lost ground.

Other items mentioned by General Krulak included: The USOM effort is now geared to counterinsurgency; revised rules for border operations should assist in actions against the Viet-Cong; border patrol operations are moving forward but will not seal off the border; planning is going forward on a contingency basis for future MAP and force structure adjustments; air interdiction is being applied under stringent rules and is achieving good results.

At the request of the Chairman, Mr. Colby agreed to look into recent developments in the Laos/South Viet-Nam border area.

The Group discussed the problem of reconciling differences of opinion on the situation in Viet-Nam as between officials on the scene and the U.S. press. Mr. Wilson commented that our military in Viet-Nam should take the press more into their confidence. Mr. Bell suggested that we should explore sending opinion leaders other than the press out to Viet-Nam.

The Group agreed that Mr. Bell should make a recommendation as to when it would be advisable to have General Harkins return for appearances before various Congressional committees. General Taylor indicated that he sees no problem in having General Harkins return for this purpose.

[Here follow part c, “Man-Pack Jungle Radio;” item 2, “Venezuela;” and a general discussion of developments in the Middle East.]

James W. Dingeman
Executive Secretary

1 Source: Department of State, Special Group Counterinsurgency Files: Lot 68 D 451, Special Group (CI). Secret. Drafted by Dingeman who is not listed among the participants.

114. Memorandum From the Deputy Director of the Vietnam Working Group (Heavner) to the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Hilsman) 114. Memorandum From the Deputy Director of the Vietnam Working Group (Heavner) to the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Hilsman)1

Washington, May 9, 1963.

SUBJECT

Related Problems of Counterinsurgency Funding and Commercial Import Program

1. CI Funding

We are pressing the GVN to pick up the piaster costs of the CI program and other AID projects which until now have been financed by our $10 million piaster purchase of last year and by counterpart funds. It is our best estimate that the GVN can undertake the amount of deficit spending required without incurring dangerous inflationary pressures. In the past the GVN has resisted deficit financing, clinging to very conservative fiscal policies.

GVN resistance to deficit spending for the CI programs has not up until now however been couched in fiscal terms. Their objection to our proposed joint counterinsurgency fund was political. Diem and Nhu apparently feel that to share control of a fund predominantly made up of “their” monies would be an unacceptable infringement on Vietnamese sovereignty and their control of the levers of power.

We have taken a very firm line on this issue. We have insisted that economic and social CI projects undertaken in support of the strategic hamlet program are essential to winning the war. We have further insisted that the GVN is obligated to finance them after our piaster purchase funds are exhausted. These funds will run out about the end of September.

The outcome of these negotiations will not be known for quite a while. The GVN has agreed to finance all of these projects up to the total amount of 2.3 billion piasters which we requested. However, these projects will be subject to GVN control and in most cases will have to be negotiated, project by project, with the USOM. A slowdown and curtailment of the whole AID effort is therefore likely.

We will have to evaluate the effect of this possible slowdown and curtailment on the overall program and on the total war effort as the program continues under the new ground rules. We will need to keep up a steady pressure on the GVN to maintain the necessary momentum. And if after we have given this arrangement a fair trial, it appears that the GVN effort is inadequate, we may be compelled to make some very hard decisions.

2. The Commercial Import Program (CIP)

As we approach the end of the fiscal year, Saigon states that orderly licensing and procurement under the Commercial Import Program will be seriously disrupted if more money is not made available. Saigon estimates that they need additional new obligational authority (NOA) of $15 million for FY 63.

The amount of aid extended under the Commercial Import Program has varied from year to year. The import targets have in the past been set, for psychological reasons, higher than we really expected the Vietnamese importers to realize. This was done both to ensure an orderly flow of commodities and to reassure the GVN that the largest possible amount of counterpart funds would be available for essential war programs. This year’s import demand, however, apparently exceeds our estimates.

A. Economic Considerations

The economic justification for an increase in new obligational authority for the CIP is questionable. It would probably be possible for the GVN to maintain the present level of imports by drawing down its own foreign exchange reserves, which are quite substantial. It may also be—although this is not at all clear—that inventories in Viet-Nam are now so large that a curtailment of commercial import licensing would not seriously affect the situation. Imports could perhaps be halted, and the resulting cut in counterpart piaster resources made up by deficit spending, without any disastrous economic results.

It is also possible that an increase in CIP funds would result in a rise in GVN foreign exchange reserves or in an increase in luxury imports. It appears, moreover, that the GVN may be deliberately pumping up present import demand. The GVN has pursued an easy credit policy, and last month business borrowing reached an all-time high. Much of this borrowed money is apparently being used to purchase CIP goods.

Finally, general U.S. policy toward CIP’s worldwide is that they must be based on balance of payments considerations rather than serving as budgetary support. We should recognize that this requested increase leans toward the budgetary support approach.

B. Political Considerations

The political justification for an increase is as strong as the economic justification is weak. In the vital area of piaster resources for the war effort, it is clear that GVN willingness and ability to finance the CI programs depends to a large degree on counterpart piasters generated by the commercial import program. For us to disrupt licensing under the commercial import program at this time would make it doubly difficult, if not impossible, for us to persuade the GVN to carry out those CI economic and social projects which we deem so essential in winning the war.

The war is entering a critical stage. Economic programs have been launched which support the military effort and which we believe are essential to any permanent restoration of security. To keep up this momentum we must have GVN confidence and cooperation, and we must retain maximum influence in the direction of the war effort.

The funds involved are not large by comparison with our total effort, but failure to provide them might well reopen the whole “crisis of confidence” problem so recently skirted.

3. Recommendations

I am told that the only source which we could tap to make up the commercial import shortfall is the President’s contingency fund. I recognize the difficulties of tapping this fund, but given the importance of the Viet-Nam situation, I recommend the following: A. We should continue to press the GVN to pick up the piaster costs of CI projects, undertaking whatever degree of deficit spending is required to accomplish this.

B. To support this effort we should take every step to avoid disrupting commercial import licensing.

C. We should request that funds be made available from the President’s contingency fund to cover the necessary imports.

D. Attached for your approval is a Memorandum to Assistant Administrator Janow2 recommending on political grounds that we maintain orderly CIP licensing by using contingency funds if necessary.3 “I agree with Roger Hilsman that the application of strict economic criteria is not feasible at this fume. Our Government should make every reasonable effort to sustain the current momentum of the GVN’s military drive.” (Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OASD/ISA Vietnam Task Force Files: FRC 75-163, Chron FilesVietnam-1963)

1 Source: Department of State, Vietnam Working Group Files: Lot 67 D 54, AID-7, CIR Secret. Drafted by Heavner and Montgomery and sent to Hilsman through Robert W. Barnett.

2 Not printed. The draft memorandum from Hilsman to Janow is not initialed and may have been revised before being sent. No copy of the final version has been found, but a May 15 letter from William Bundy to Janow indicates that Hilsman did send a memorandum to Janow on May 9 dealing with the Vietnam Commercial Import Program. The thrust of Hilsman’s memorandum to Janow apparently accorded with the conclusions outlined in Heavner’s memorandum in light of Bundy’s supporting remarks in his letter to Janow:

3 Further documentation on a proposed increase in the Commercial Import Program for fiscal year 1963 is in Department of State, Central Files, AID (US) S VIET

115. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam 115. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam1

Washington, May 9, 1963, 3:24 p.m.

1066. Hue 4 to Dept.2 At your discretion suggest you urge GVN take no repressive measures against Buddhists, offer sympathy and funeral expenses to families of demonstration victims, make any other appropriate gestures toward restoration of order and amity between religious groups.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, SOC 14-1 S VIET. Secret; Operational Immediate. Drafted by Heavner and cleared by Rice. Repeated to CINCPAC for POLAD.

2 Document 112.

116. Telegram From the Consulate at Hue to the Department of State 116. Telegram From the Consulate at Hue to the Department of State1

Hue, May 10, 1963, 2 a.m.

5. Early AM May 10 Hue quiet. 9 PM curfew now in effect. May 9 crowd of 3,000 gathered radio station 1700 hours local. Chief Bonze Central Vietnam Tri Quang called on people disperse quietly. He promised call meeting later date. His request obeyed. Quang has now demonstrated on at least three occasions his ability handle his followers. He apparently respected as independent, non-GVN Bonze. GVN mobile loudspeakers roamed streets evening May 9 calling on population stay calm, avoid public assemblies, respect curfew.

NRM sponsored public meeting at 1500 hours May 9 for purpose condemnation “Viet Cong terrorist act evening May 8” drew no audience whatsoever and speeches never came off. Large group mostly youths, reported to have marched around old citadel part of Hue several hours early 9th until 0400 hours chanting down with Diem government.

Theme Buddhist banners May 8 reported earlier called for equality of religion. Protested order take religious flags down, urged no refusal sacrifice for Buddhist cause. USIS BPAO forwarding photographs same.

Bonze Quang has reportedly called upon all Buddhist followers in Central Vietnam who can come to Hue May 10 do so for mass funeral victims evening May 8. Reportedly he also has ordered meetings of Buddhists in all provinces. At noon May 8, prior killings, he reportedly sent telegrams to President Diem and Buddhist organization Rangoon protesting order take down flags. This order here known as Decree Number 102 issued by Minister Interior Saigon last year.

Nung battalion paratroops arrived Hue May 9. All evidence indicates ARVN present incident evening 8th refused take action against population, CG under Deputy Province Chief Major Sy unit which fired. Little question now that one of these threw grenade. Province Chief Dang apparently has gained stature during developments, Sy being considered villain. Brother of President, Ngo Dinh Can, reportedly informed of all developments, but not clear as to his feelings re situation.

Mass funeral May 10 probably will be peaceful, although VC have had sufficient time to react and may attempt touch off something following funerals which likely be attended by thousands. Government offices in Hue ordered now by government delegate CVN lowlands to have all personnel remain in office 24 hours a day to “prevent VC infiltration” and have available all possible weapons. May aggravate situation.

Population must be judged as tense. Duration and intensity of crisis unusual in view generally passive nature Vietnamese in terms public demonstrations. People seem to have taken seriously Bonze speech morning 8th “now is time to fight”. While word fight perhaps overemphatic, desire of people seems to be to have some sort of showdown following years of frustration for Buddhists. Student banner morning 9th “please kill us”. Man on street expressing great desire for world to know of killings on 8th. While GVN line is VC responsible, no credibility this among population.

Helble

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, SOC 14-1 S VIET. Secret; Operational Immediate. Also sent to Saigon.

2 The correct reference is to Decree 189; see footnote 3, Document 112. Decree 10, which became a central issue in the Buddhist crisis, was issued by Emperor Bao Dai at Vichy, France on August 6, 1950. It established regulations governing the creation and functioning of associations in Vietnam. As interpreted by the Diem government, the law governed the functioning of the Buddhist religion, as well as political parties, trade unions, and sports associations. The law provided, however, that “a special status shall be prescribed later for Catholic and Protestant missions and for Chinese congregations”. (For text, see Journal officiel de la Republique du Viet-Nam, No. 34, August 26, 1950, pp. 434-437; the English language text, as amended by Ordinance No. 6 of April 3, 1954, is printed as Annex XV to U.N. doe. A/5630, December 7, 1963.)

117. Telegram From the Consulate at Hue to Department of State 117. Telegram From the Consulate at Hue to Department of State1

Hue, May 10, 1963, 3 p.m.

6. May 10 meeting 10:30 hours local at Tu Dam Pagoda attended by estimated five or six thousand Buddhists. Crowd orderly. ARVN troops and police in area. Province Chief Dang present. Numerous banners displayed “kill us, ready sacrifice blood, Buddhists and Catholics equal. Cancel Decree Number 10, request stop of arrests and kidnapping; a Buddhist flag will never go down”. Ex-chief Bonze Tri Quang urged all be peaceful. Carry no weapons, be prepared die. Be alert to VC efforts agitate people, follow Gandhi policies. Quang asked people agree to follow him and crowd roared assent.

Buddhist leader [less than 1 line not declassified] told crowd this regime is a good govt. Bonze Quang told people fly flags and he would take responsibility. Letter addressed to GVN2 given to Province Chief related peaceful history Buddhists, even despite many arrests and kidnappings recent years. Some bad men in govt responsible for this. Themes of banners embodied in letter which signed by Quang and other high Buddhists and organizations. Chairman GVN Buddhist Association Mat Nguyen called on GVN pay families of May 8th victims. Nguyen told crowd all Buddhist temples in Vietnam will always remember incident on Buddha’s birthday. Nguyen called on GVN punish man who ordered open fire evening May 8th.

Province Chief thanked Buddhists for opportunity address meeting, expressed sorrow for those dead, stated GVN ready help families of victims and guarantees payments to families. Crowd cheered him enthusiastically.3

Final of hour long session was official placing of blame for Decree Number 10 re no flags on former Emperor Bao Dai who allegedly issued original order. Meeting ended peacefully.

Believe crisis nearing end. Although mass funeral which may be held although not now confirmed could still cause difficulties. Population seems quiet, but long term hard feelings will clearly persist. Pacifist direction of Buddhist leadership has avoided additional bloodshed and crystallization of conflict. Catholics here appear almost unanimously sympathetic to Buddhists’ situation.

Arriving aspects whole incident: 1) Relatively bold natural language in banners and addresses May 8 of Bonze; 2) Duration of tension highlighted by 5 major demonstrations [of] over 50 [in] one hour; 3) Total failure NRM scheduled meeting May 9 which was to have blamed deaths on VC; 4) Inability or unwillingness GVN to quell overt large scale protest albeit peaceful at early stages; 5) Willingness of people to congregate and demonstrate in face of police and military; 6) Evident grounds will rock roots popularity of cause which not frequently witnessed in Vietnam.

Believe Embassy Saigon and Dept should anticipate some international reaction to incident, particularly in view Bonze Quang telegram to Rangoon. Would seem Communists almost certain to give incident big propaganda play as example GVN suppression freedom of religion and slaughter of innocent people.

Helble

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, SOC 14-1 S VIET. Secret; Operational Immediate. Also sent to Saigon.

2 An apparent reference to Document 118.

3 A marginal comment in an unknown hand reads, at this point, “Great”.

118. Manifesto of Vietnamese Buddhist Clergy and Faithful 118. Manifesto of Vietnamese Buddhist Clergy and Faithful1

Hue, May 10, 1963.

For many thousands of years the Buddhist clergy and faithful throughout the world as well as within the country have been loyal to the principles of benevolence, altruism and honesty espoused by Buddha. Because of this, Buddhism has gradually evolved an atmosphere of tranquillity. History has clearly proven this point. Thus, for many years Buddhists have been terrorized and repressed everywhere. Because of our conscience, we are still resigned, although not cowardly so, in the face of the suffering and mourning of our present national circumstances. But our sorrow has been taken advantage of by the authorities to cause untold mourning among the Buddhist clergy and faithful in the country. Buddhism has been condemned in a manner unjust to a religion which has existed in the country for thousands of years. From these actions we can perceive the bad intention of the authorities. They even have smashed the most sacred symbol of the Buddhists by taking down the International Buddhist flag. This decision is contrary to the Constitution and brazenly violates the freedom of religious worship. In the face of these unjust actions, the monks and faithful throughout our country must rise up and struggle for their ideals.

The incident which occurred three days ago really affected morale. Blood flowed and human lives were once again sacrificed, so we are now determined to place our hopes before the government and to request the following points: 1. To request that the Government of the Republic of Vietnam permanently retract the official cable repressing the Buddhist religious flag.

2. To request that Buddhists be allowed to enjoy a special regime such as that allowed to Catholics according to Decree 10.2

3. To request the government to stop arrests and terrorization of Buddhist followers.

4. To request that Buddhist bonzes and faithful be allowed freedom to preach and observe their religion.

5. To request that the government make worthwhile compensation for those innocent persons who were killed, and mete out proper punishment to the instigators of the murders.

The points mentioned above express the most ardent hopes of Buddhist bonzes and followers in the entire country. We are prepared to make sacrifices until such time as the reasonable aspirations mentioned above are realized.3

Buddhist Year 2307

Hue, 10 May 1963

Bonze Tuong Van
President, Vietnam General Association of Buddhists
Bonze Mat Nguyen
Board of Directors of the Central Vietnam Bonze Association
Bonze Mat Hien
Board of Directors of the Thua Thien Bonze Association
Bonze Tri Quang
Board of Directors of the Central Vietnam Buddhist Association
Bonze Thien Sieu
Board of Directors of the Thua Thien Bonze Association

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 13-6 S VIET. Unclassified; Translation. Transmitted as attachment A to airgram A-781 from Saigon, June 10. A slightly variant translation of this manifesto was transmitted as enclosure 5 to airgram A-20 from Hue, June 3. (Ibid., SOC 14-1 S VIET) The manifesto was issued at a mass meeting of Buddhist clergy and faithful at Tu Dam Pagoda in Hue on May 10. The five demands put forward in this declaration are those which have been described in some of the memoir accounts dealing with the Buddhist crisis as having been addressed to the Diem government on May 13. (Hilsman, To Move a Nation, p. 469; Mecklin, Mission in Torment, p. 154)

2 See footnote 2, Document 116.

3 On May 13 a representative of the Diem government met in Hue with a delegation of Buddhist leaders to consider the demands outlined in the May 10 declaration. The government official suggested that most of the Buddhist concerns were groundless, but indicated that the government would consider them. He added, however, that the Buddhist declaration was extreme in language and appeared to be an ultimatum. Such an approach, he indicated, was a mistake. A memorandum of the discussion between an unnamed Vietnamese Government official and the Buddhist delegation was transmitted as enclosure 1 to airgram A-20 from Hue. On May 15 a delegation of Buddhist leaders took up the Buddhist demands with President Diem in a meeting with him at the Presidential Palace in Saigon. For a report of that meeting, see Document 129.

119. Letter From the Ambassador in Vietnam (Nolting) to Secretary of State at the Presidency and Assistant Secretary of State for National Defense Thuan 119. Letter From the Ambassador in Vietnam (Nolting) to Secretary of State at the Presidency and Assistant Secretary of State for National Defense Thuan1

Saigon, May 10, 1963.

Dear Mr. Secretary: I refer to President Ngo Dinh Diem’s letter to me of April 232 regarding the funding of counterinsurgency activities and to our discussion the following day concerning the procedures to be followed in the administration of these funds.

As I understand the position, during the calendar year 1963 the Government of Viet-Nam is prepared to supplement the U.S.-owned and counterpart piastre contributions with its own funds up to a limit of 2.3 billion piastres, to carry forward the mutually agreed projects described in broad terms in the attachment to my letter to you of March 18, 1963.3 (As of January 1, 1963 it was predicted that the U.S. owned and counterpart piastres would amount to VN $900,000,000, which would leave a remainder of VN $1,4000,000,000 to be provided by the Government of Viet-Nam.) I understand that the Government of Viet-Nam is not prepared, however, to have its own funds administered under the procedures followed for the “purchased piastres”. Your government nevertheless wishes to maintain the functions of and the existing relationship between the Vietnamese Interministerial Committee for Strategic Hamlets and the U.S. Committee on Province Rehabilitation. It is also the desire of your government that the activities of the Vietnamese authorities in the rural areas continue to be coordinated with those of the American agencies.

To give effect to these principles, it is my understanding that your government proposes that funds to be administered by the provinces (generally funds for those projects enumerated in Section A1 of the attachment to my letter of March 18) shall continue to be paid into a central account at the Treasury, as required, and disbursed from this account directly to the province chief as needed to carry out approved programs.

It is also my understanding that these provincial programs will, as in the past, be reviewed and approved by the Interministerial Committee and by the Committee on Province Rehabilitation. At the province level, however, the power to disburse Government of Viet-Nam funds within the approved programs will rest with the province chief. In view of the U.S. contributions to these programs, the province chief shall nevertheless consult with the U.S. representatives concerning his plans and proposed actions so that related U.S. and Vietnamese programs can be properly developed and executed. The province chief and the U.S. advisors will keep each other informed of all aspects of their respective activities in the execution of the approved programs.

With regard to those programs administered by national agencies (generally those projects enumerated in Sections A2, B, C, and D of the attachment to my letter of March 18) no special fund will be involved. The funds will in general be administered in accordance with customary procedures for the use of counterpart funds, i.e., on the basis of appropriate understandings between the Director General of Budget and Foreign Aid and the U.S. Operations Mission.

Finally, it is my understanding that your government undertakes, as in the past, to provide piastre support for necessary operations of the U.S. Operations Mission. It is estimated that such support will amount to VN $173,000,000 during 1963.

I believe that the undertaking of your government with respect to funding of counterinsurgency activities and the procedures described above will provide a reasonable basis for carrying forward the strategic hamlet program, a program which has already contributed so much to the security and well-being of the rural population and which holds out the promise of final liquidation of the Communist insurgency and of revitalization of rural society in Viet-Nam. I should be obliged if you would confirm that this letter correctly states the position of your government.4

Accept, Mr. Secretary, the renewed assurances of my highest consideration.

Frederick E. Nolting, Jr.
Concur: Nguyen Dinh Thuan5

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 26-1 S VIET. Confidential. Drafted by Nolting and Trueheart and transmitted as enclosure 2 to airgram A-718 from Saigon, May 16.

2 A copy of the April 23 letter was transmitted as enclosure 1 to airgram A-718. The letter is summarized in Document 101.

3 Document 61.

4 The joint communique issued on May 17 announced agreement of funding for counterinsurgency; see Document 127.

5 Printed from a copy that bears these typed signatures.

120. Memorandum From Michael V. Forrestal of the National Security Council Staff to the President 120. Memorandum From Michael V. Forrestal of the National Security Council Staff to the President1

Washington, May 10, 1963.

SOUTH VIETNAM

Roger Hilsman asked me to show you the attached memorandum2 from him to me. I also attach an airgram3 from Fritz Nolting also on the subject of interdiction of air strikes against the Viet Cong. The issue resolves to whether or not the United States and Vietnamese military are effectively carrying out our policy of treating the war in South Vietnam as essentially a political battle.

Hilsman also asked about the effect of the bombing campaign on the loyalty of the people of South Vietnam. The major expressed “considerable skepticism” about the findings of a recent study which indicated that the use of air power in Vietnam was under tight control.

I don’t think that the problem raised by Roger’s memorandum can be effectively handled from Washington. What we need is fresh leadership in the field. In this connection, State has still not come up with a replacement for Fritz Nolting who is returning on home leave late this month, although several candidates have been suggested.

Mike

1 Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Vietnam Country Series, 4/63-5/63. Secret.

2 In the attached May 4 memorandum, Hilsman indicated that the officer whom Forrestal had sent to see him, who is identified as a major recently returned from 10 months service in Vietnam, had made a number of points which Hilsman felt merited consideration:

“1. That simply killing Viet Cong was not the way to win in South Viet-Nam,

“2. That the only way to win was by getting the support of the people, and

“3. That the strategic hamlet program was the means to accomplish this.

“He said that not all the Vietnamese—Americans—understood this, but that more and more were coming to.”

3 Document 100.

121. Memorandum From the Commander in Chief, Pacific (Felt) to the Joint Chiefs of Staff 121. Memorandum From the Commander in Chief, Pacific (Felt) to the Joint Chiefs of Staff1

Honolulu, May 11, 1963.

CINCPAC 3010. Ser. 00447-63

SUBJ

Revised Plan for Republic of Vietnam

REF

(a) JCS msg 9820 DTG 091805Z May 19632

(b) CINCPAC msg DTG 102246Z May 19633

(c) USAF AFSMSB 60437 DTB 091639Z May 1963 NOTAL4

(d) CINCPAC msg DTG 110017Z May 19635

ENCL

(1) Outline Revised Plan for Republic of Vietnam

1. Pursuant to directives by the Secretary of Defense during the conference held in Honolulu on 6 May 1963 and guidance in reference (a), an outline revised plan has been prepared. The details of the plan will be developed within the guidelines of a force structure that the RVN budget can support with minimum U.S.MAP assistance, acceleration of RVNAF training for earlier takeover of U.S. equipment and functions, a realistic demobilization program to prevent economic chaos, and minimum forces necessary to cope with reinsurgency and permit timely introduction of U.S. forces in the event of overt aggression.

2. Assumptions: a. The insurgency can be controlled by the end of CY 1965 (mid-FY 66). Note: In my view, it is overly optimistic to assume that insurgency can be controlled as early as FY 65 as hopefully expressed in reference (a).

b. The necessary training aircraft (9 additional UH-19’s and 25 Cessna 185’s) and supporting U.S. training personnel will be available in RVN no later than 1 July 1963 to improve the in-country training capability.

c. The USAF and/or USN will provide 44 spaces during FY 63 for training T-28 pilots rather than slipping this program to FY 64 as proposed in reference (c). Reference (d) requested that USAF take necessary action in this regard.

d. Equipment required by RVNAF, such as AC&W, troposcatter, USMC helicopters, C-123 aircraft, and liaison aircraft, including spare parts and supporting equipment for operation of these items, will be turned over in place without cost to MAP as U.S. forces withdraw.

e. The Secretary of Defense will ensure that sufficient ammunition is provided on a timely basis from other than MAP resources as necessary to cover reductions which have been made in ammunition funding requests in compliance with SecDef directive. This situation applies also to other categories of supply such as expendables/consumables.

f. Operational support of the troposcatter system (funded, installed and currently operated by the U.S. military services) will be assumed by AID in FY 66.

g. The Civil Guard and Self Defense Corps will revert to the Minister of Interior once the insurgency is under control.

h. A bilateral defense agreement will be made between the U.S. and the RVN to permit the reduction of RVN forces on the scale outlined in enclosure (1).

3. The primary limiting factor affecting early withdrawal of U.S. special military assistance is the capability of RVN to provide sufficient personnel during FY 64-65 with required aptitudes for training as pilots, and technicians to operate and maintain equipment turned over to RVNAF.

4. Plans for development and support of a National Police Force should be formulated now by AID for utilization of Civil Guard and Self Defense Corps assets to assure an orderly transition from martial to civil law. Paragraph 2g. is valid only if this is accomplished on a timely basis.

5. The FY 64-69 force structure and priority list for FY 64 were developed in consultation with COMUSMACV and CHMAAG Vietnam. The costing data was developed by representatives of CHMAAG Vietnam in coordination with my staff.

6. It is recommended that the Outline Revised Plan for Republic of Vietnam be approved as the basis for the refinement of the FY 64-69 MAP.

[Here follows an 18-page enclosure giving statistical projections dealing with fiscal year 1964 operating costs, a priority investment list for fiscal year 1964, South Vietnamese force structure objectives through fiscal year 1969, and the cost of the military assistance program for South Vietnam for fiscal years 1965 through 1969.]

H. D. Felt6

1 Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OSD Files:FRC 69 A 3131, Vietnam 091.3 MAR. Secret. A marginal note on the source text indicates that a copy was sent to Secretary McNamara and he saw it.

2 See footnote 4, Document 111.

3 In CINCPAC telegram 102246Z to RUEAHQ/HQ USAF, May 10, CINCPAC surveyed programs designed to build up the capabilities of South Vietnamese forces to permit the early release of U.S. units from Vietnam. These programs included helicopter training and liaison pilot training. (Washington National Records Center, RG 319, U.S. Army Message Center Microfilm, Reel 11331)

4 Not found.

5  In CINCPAC telegram 110017Z to RUEAHQ/HQ USAF, May 11, CINCPAC instructed the Air Force command to prevent an anticipated “slippage” in the training program for South Vietnamese pilots. (Washington National Records Center, RG 319, U.S. Army Message Center Microfilm, Reel 11331)

6 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.

122. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam 122. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam1

Washington, May 13, 1963, 6:36 p.m.

1084. Believe public reopening of issue American presence and mutual confidence by Ngo Dinh Nhu in interview with Warren Unna2 cannot be ignored. Unless you perceive objection, request you seek interview with Diem to protest Nhu action and clarify GVN intentions. You may state you speaking under instructions.

You may draw on following at your discretion: 1. We are aware of propaganda Communists generate as result US military presence SVN. We also very much aware of US casualties and dollar costs resulting from assistance we supplying GVN at GVN request. It is in our interest to reduce our military commitment in SVN as fast as VC threat effectively reduced and this has always been our policy.

2. We do not believe that time has yet arrived when Viet Cong threat so reduced and GVN military capabilities so improved that we can safely undertake large reduction US military presence. It is our understanding that this view shared by GVN. (This connection we note Nhu considers even amnesty program premature.) We hope that a cut of perhaps 1,000 men may be possible later this year but that would depend on progress made and would come only after private discussion with GVN.

3. When time does arrive to reduce US forces, best procedure is obviously joint announcement by both governments that in light progress made against VC, cuts in order. We would hope to work it out in that fashion.

4. Public call for cut in US forces by high official like Nhu likely generate new and reinforce already existing US domestic pressures for complete withdrawal from SVN.

5. Statement that some American casualties incurred because our advisors are daredevils and expose themselves needlessly likely to have very bad effect on morale US forces. To be effective, advisors must often be at or near scene of battle. We believe, as President Kennedy said in his State of Union message,3 that our casualties suffered in Viet-Nam were incurred in defense of Free World. It will not be well taken by US public or by US forces in Viet-Nam to be told our casualties were needless.

6. As GVN well aware, Americans were not behind attempted 1960 coup and our actions at that time were correct and in accordance with international practice. To suggest we were behind coup can only serve Communist cause.

7. If GVN has any evidence of US plotting as alleged in Unna interview we would like to see it. Our policy has been full support for Diem government in fight against Viet Cong and efforts provide better life for Vietnamese people.

If Diem indicates he agrees our forces should not be subject large cut at this time, you should suggest a public statement to this effect. You may say it will be difficult for us to justify to Congress greater U.S. forces than GVN apparently wishes and that public statement GVN position therefore important.4

If on contrary Diem agrees with Nhu that large cut in order or in general associates himself with Nhu position as reported by Unna, you should seek at your discretion to clarify exact GVN position and intentions on these issues. If it seems useful to you, you may state until further progress against VC achieved, we believe war can be won only by maintaining something like present level US forces SVN. If it appears useful tactic, you may also request list of activities which GVN believes could be cut.

Believe above points should also be made to Nhu in manner you deem appropriate.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, DEF 6 US. Secret; Priority. Drafted by Heavner and cleared by Hilsman, Rice, Koren and in DOD/ISA by Heinz. Repeated to CINCPAC for POLAD.

2 On Sunday, May 12, the front page of The Washington Post featured an interview by Warren Unna with Ngo Dinh Nhu, in which Unna quoted Nhu as saying that “South Viet Nam would like to see half of the 12,000 to 13,000 American military stationed here leave the country”. Unna described Nhu as the power behind the throne and wrote that Nhu told U.S. authorities 5 months earlier that it was possible to withdraw one half of the American forces, and that the presence of unnecessary American forces lent credence to Communist propaganda. Unna reported that Nhu and Diem distrusted Americans working at local levels in Vietnam and that Nhu felt that many American advisers were only intelligence gatherers. Referring to American impatience, Nhu said that the time was not ripe for a general counter-offensive. He added, according to Unna, that “many of our American friends who died here are cases of soldiers who exposed themselves too readily”.

3 For text of President Kennedy’s State of the Union message, January 14, 1963, see Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: John F. Kennedy, 1963, pp. 11-19.

4 Heinz and Hilsman faced sharp questioning from the House Foreign Affairs Committee on May 14 as a result of the Nhu interview, and Hilsman cabled Nolting on May 16 to reemphasize the need to persuade Diem to restrain Nhu in his public remarks: “Reactions to Nhu interview very strong on Capitol Hill. Foresee considerable domestic criticism and opposition our Viet-Nam policy as direct result. My own feeling is that Nhu’s action incomprehensible and I wonder whether he will not repeat performance if not brought up sharply and immediately. If you have not already seen Diem, you should be sure to couch your protest in strongest possible language.” (Telegram 1098 to Saigon, May 16; Department of State. Central Files. DEF 6 US)

123. Letter From the Commander, Military Assistance Command, Vietnam (Harkins) to President Diem 123. Letter From the Commander, Military Assistance Command, Vietnam (Harkins) to President Diem1

Saigon, May 15, 1963.

Dear Mr. President: As you well know, for over a year the Government of the United States has been backing an intensified program for aid and assistance to the Government of the Republic of Vietnam. You are conversant with our many and varied programs, particularly those in the military, economic, social, and psychological fields. Last week Ambassador Nolting and I, with selected personnel from our staffs, met in Hawaii with Secretary of Defense McNamara and representatives of other Washington offices to review the status of these U.S. programs. In my short conversations with you during the past few days, I have mentioned certain aspects of this meeting and the various U.S. programs. However, I think it timely to present for your consideration a review of the progress made in certain areas to date, therefore this letter. In this review I will confine my remarks only to the military programs.

Our combined, intensified effort really began in late 1961 and early 1962 and has continued to the present, at which time I can report practically all military programs have been completed or are well on the way to completion.

What has been accomplished? The results are indicated below:

Intelligence: A significant effort to improve the intelligence advisory capabilities was initiated in January 1962. The new U.S. Intelligence advisors were all in place by May 1962. These advisors working side-by-side with their Vietnamese counterparts have made a commendable improvement in reporting and editing intelligence data. The improvement has been apparent in the success of the Vietnamese actions in the field. On the U.S. side, and because of the one-year assignment of most personnel, practically all of the original advisors now have been replaced. The new group have been hand-picked, given special schooling in both intelligence matters and language training and, all-in-all, should further improve our joint intelligence efforts.

Communications: A year ago a reliable military communications system did not exist. Since September 1962, there has been a tremendous improvement in communications throughout the country and within the tactical units of the Vietnamese Armed Forces. The tropospheric scatter system, recently completed in the northern part of the RVN, is now being extended into the Delta region. All divisions and major units are now connected by telephone switchboards and other improvements are being made daily.

Mobility: There are now seven U.S. Army helicopter companies and one U.S. Marine helicopter squadron in the country to provide troop transport and escort capability for ARVN. These units plus the two VNAF squadrons provide a formidable mobile force for rapid reaction against the Viet Cong.

With improved intelligence, widespread and rapid communications, and a constantly available mobile force, actions of the RVNAF have improved tremendously and should improve even more in the future. While I believe that these are the primary improvements, much more has been accomplished.

New Divisions: The Ninth and Twenty-Fifth Divisions have been added to the “Front Line” combat troops in the past year. Both have given outstanding accounts of themselves in recent actions.

Paratroops: The training of the Parachute Brigade has been completed and the ARVN now has six battalions, all combat tested and proven in battle. They are very fine soldiers and create a fine impression wherever they go.

Marines: The four Marine battalions, like the paratroopers, are outstanding soldiers. They, too, have been combat tested and also give an outstanding performance when they confront the enemy.

Rangers: 86 Ranger Companies have been processed through the training schools. Many have seen combat and are used in small-scale operations constantly. I think greater and more effective use should be gained from them in the future.

Civil Guards: As you know, last year over 375 Civil Guard companies were trained. The Civil Guard Program continues to increase in strength, and this year’s program calls for training and equipping new companies while retraining some of the old companies where necessary.

Self-Defense Corps: Last year over 1,700 SDC platoons were trained in some 35 camps. Like the Civil Guard, the Self-Defense Corps is being increased, equipped, trained, and retrained in 1963. I am sure you know as well as I that the Civil Guard and the Self-Defense Corps share a tremendous burden in the complex war against the Viet Cong.

Civilian Irregular Defense Groups: U.S. and RVN Special Forces have trained approximately 40,000 members of the Civilian Irregular Defense Group. These are the mountain scouts, the commandos, the strike force, and the village militias. The program continues and becomes even more important as RVN control moves into those areas where the Viet Cong have controlled the population for many years in the past,

M-113’s: One-hundred forty-seven of the M-113 Armored Personnel Carriers are now used extensively in combat. These have proven invaluable and have operated faithfully under extremely difficult conditions in the war against the Viet Cong. I think these vehicles will be used to greater advantage as the unit commanders and soldiers gain experience in the use and capabilities of these very fine fighting machines.

M-114: This is a new armored vehicle, not yet fully tested in combat. However, the four companies organized with the 95 vehicles now in the country are trained and should be in action before the end of this month.

Caribou, C-123’s, Otters: There is one Caribou company in the country partially serving the most remote of the outlying bases, and also two C-123 squadrons which carry the brunt of the load in the air transportation of men and supplies. There is also one Otter company, a small passenger vehicle with limited military cargo capability, operating in the corps and division forward areas. The performance of these aircraft has been outstanding.

Air Force: The sortie rate for the Air Force rose from 150 sorties a month in January 1962, to over 1,500 in April 1963. The pilots are becoming more experienced, and many of the night operations are now performed by the VNAF. The Air Force is being dispersed in small tactical units throughout the country so that their reaction time will be even more rapid than it is today. This should greatly increase the damage it can do to the Viet Cong.

Navy: The Junk Fleet of 644 junks now has 28 divisions patrolling the coast. The Sea Force has taken over patrol along the 17th Parallel and in the Gulf of Siam, while the River Force is supporting operations in the Delta area.

Strategic Hamlet Program: As you are aware, there are over 6,000 strategic hamlets now completed in the country, with practically 8,000,000 people securely tucked away behind their fences. I believe this program, more than any other, has served to isolate the Viet Cong from the people. As it nears its completion in the coming months, it should prove one of the turning points in the war. Many of the combat units are involved in “clearing and holding” operations in support of the strategic hamlets. While I think this is vital, I believe that at the same time we must continue to have other operations which search and clear the Viet Cong bases that can be located.

With all of these accomplishments, the major prospective courses should be to: organize, train, and develop the new units-re-organize, refine, and retrain the old units. Besides continuing to carry the war to the enemy, training in all branches of the service and all its various aspects continues to be one of the most vital features of any future program.

The RVNAF operations continue to increase and improve in scope and effectiveness; however, there are still areas for refinement. I feel many military plans are too grandiose, employing too many large units. Although these are necessary in some instances such as the operation in the Do Xa area, I think they should be the exception. A review of the records will show that the smaller operations, of battalion-size or less, contributed more than 70% in the Viet Cong casualties. Small unit actions must be continually stressed. I am also concerned that too often once contact with the enemy has been established it is lost too quickly, the enemy fades away, and the operation is called to a halt. Nothing will hurt the Viet Cong more than relentless pursuit. The units must stay out longer, and once contact is gained, continue to retain it until the Viet Cong are eliminated.

Although I have said the intelligence has improved, there is still room for further improvement. Too many operations are still based on faulty or incomplete intelligence and end with no real contact being established—as though we were fighting ghosts.

The Viet Cong are still with us, but for the most part are not so bothersome. His logistics support (principally food and medicine) has been severely disrupted by the RVNAF operations, and his own operations have been cut in half. However, he is still a wily enemy and apparently is dedicated to his cause because he continues to put up a very stiff fight under pressure. As the RVNAF presses him harder, I am sure we will continue to find him an even more stubborn enemy because he is gradually getting to be like a rat caught in a trap with no place to go and being constantly annoyed. He is becoming a “foreign legion” in a foreign country without support from the local population.

All in all, the past year has been one of remarkable effort and remarkable progress. All the programs listed above have been carried to a successful conclusion on the one hand while fighting the war continues on the other. Few people realize this, but to me it makes the accomplishment of the Armed Forces of the Republic of Vietnam even more impressive. The Army, Air Force, and Navy of the Republic of Vietnam have come into their own by carrying the fight to the enemy. Daily they gain more and more confidence, and many units have won their spurs. We might call 1962 the year of the “building the base”. I am confident that 1963 shall be called the year of victory. From the military point of view I know that this can be true if we continue to maintain constant pressure on the enemy, even more so than we have in the past six months. The equipment is on hand, the units are trained, the morale is high, and from all I can ascertain, the determination and the will are present.

Though I note your brother, Counselor Nhu, in a recent interview with the press2 said we are not ready to go on the offensive, I disagree. The RVNAF is ready-over two-thirds of the people are in strategic hamlets. I say the time for an all-out offensive is at hand, before the armed forces get stale.

I will close by saying that at the staff conference last week in Hawaii, Secretary McNamara reiterated the U.S. policy of support for your country, and that we would leave no stone unturned to achieve victory in Vietnam. My staff and I, and further, all of the U.S. advisory and support agencies in Vietnam are ready and willing to do their part in continuing the pressure against the Viet Cong to see that victory is within our grasp in 1963.

Very respectfully yours,

Paul D. Harkins3
General, United States Army

1 Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 334, MAC/V Files:FRC 69 A 702, 204-58 Command Reporting (1963). Secret.

2 See footnote 2, Document 122.

3 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.

124. Letter From the Assistant Administrator for the Far East, Agency for International Development (Janow), to the Assistant Director for Rural Affairs, United States Operations Mission in Vietnam (Phillips) 124. Letter From the Assistant Administrator for the Far East, Agency for International Development (Janow), to the Assistant Director for Rural Affairs, United States Operations Mission in Vietnam (Phillips)1

Washington, May 15, 1963.

Dear Rufe: Your letter to me and your memorandum to Joe Brent of May 12 on the question of financing of the counter-insurgency effort have been very much on my mind. I hope you will understand that since I returned to Washington we have been overwhelmed by preparations for our Congressional Presentations. There were two this week. On Monday I was before the Senate Appropriations Committee on our personnel/management and I have just returned today from our hearings before the House Foreign Affairs Committee on the whole of our program.

Today was not a very comfortable environment for the hearings as we had an editorial in The Washington Post3 following up Warren Unna’s story on Nhu’s suggestion for a 50 percent reduction in the number of GI’s in Vietnam that gave some members of the Committee difficult questions to ask concerning our policies in Vietnam. What I am about to say to you is not influenced by this experience of today nor by the news statements.

At the Honolulu Conference I talked with Ambassador Nolting, with Joe Brent, and also raised, on the floor of the conference, the problems of our counter-insurgency operations under the changed financing plan. I asked General Harkins in the general meeting whether he had heard from his MAAG sector advisors that the change in financing would impede the programs establishing the strategic hamlets and the movement of supplies to them. He said he had not heard from them and did not know whether there would be great difficulties.

Both Nolting and Brent agreed that the system had to be changed and that a compromise method of operation, using the Government of Vietnam funds in the manner acceptable to the Government of Vietnam, would have to be tried. When I said on the floor of the conference that our Assistant Director had reported he expected difficulties in operation and any change in the methods that had been followed would be an impediment to the program, Secretary McNamara said he did not think that we could very well insist on perpetuating a system where the GVN had such strong objections. Secretary McNamara did not, however, appear to have been briefed on this subject. Because MAAG had not prepared their position and thereby there is only the Ambassador’s and Brent’s views here that a compromise method should be tried, it would not be good for you to visit Washington now.

I discussed this at some length with Dave Bell. He and I agreed that your views had to be heard and respected as you are the man on the spot charged with the responsibility of that which is central to our whole program in Vietnam. We agreed, however, that because the Ambassador feels that even if we purchased plasters with dollars the Vietnamese might not permit us to use them as we had in the past, we had no alternative but to attempt to make the alternate system work. On the other hand, both Dave Bell and I feel if it does not work, if the goods are delayed in delivery, if there are impediments to the program that the question should be promptly reopened.

I am sure that you will find that Joe Brent, the Ambassador and General Harkins will all feel this way. We urge you to take this attitude and not to prejudge the alternate system. If it does not work, if there is a documented case of delays, inefficiencies and waste, I assure you that you will have plenty of support in changing the system.

The question of your resigning and other members of your staff resigning would not achieve, at this time, a change in policy and will damage not advance our hamlet program in Vietnam. The problem cannot be dealt with that way. We cannot afford to lose your services; we have no replacement for you and will not look for one. I have not met anyone whom I would trust to have the same understanding, the same energy and the same passion for this program. The achievements of the strategic hamlet and your achievements are at the core of the aid program in Vietnam, and it is not a program which can spare you nor, in my opinion, is it one you can walk away from. Our assignment is to finish this program. We suggest that you do this: operate in such a way as to respect to the greatest degrees possible the Vietnamese sensitivities about not losing control of their government to us and yet we must not sacrifice a critical amount of efficiency. All the materials we supply are still in our hands, the food, fertilizer, barbed wire and guns we still control. Only the plaster fund control has changed. If you find impediments to the flow of materials to the strategic hamlets, because of the Vietnamese management of funds, these should be documented not just by you but jointly with the MAAG sector advisors. It will greatly simplify our programs if we represent what we find in this area as a joint AID/MAAG report. As I understand President Diem’s and Nhu’s objections to American intervention at the province level, it is primarily directed against the MAAG people and not towards A.I.D. In any event, the strategic hamlet efforts are in a joint program and involve the flow of MAAG materials as they do ours. Joint reporting seems to me essential if we are to watch the “compromise” plan.

I would like to say that I read with pleasure and with substantial benefit your report on Quang Ngai4 and found it very heartening indeed. I assure you that I share your concern about any change that may spoil or impede the very promising hamlet program. I want you to feel free to ask that any of the reports you make to Joe Brent should be sent in copy to me. I have, of course, sent a copy of this letter to Joe.

It would be most welcome if something good came out of this in the way of increased Vietnamese efficiency and greater provincial authority and initiative. I have passed your letters around, and many of us here are worrying with you.

With best regards.

Cordially,

Seymour J. Janow5

1 Source: Department of State, Vietnam Working Group Files: Lot 67 D 54, AID-7 CIF. Secret.

2 The May 1 memorandum is printed as Document 102. The letter from Phillips to Janow has not been found.

3 On May 14, The Washington Post made Warren Unna’s May 12 interview with Ngo Dinh Nhu (see footnote 2, Document 122) the subject of an editorial. The Washington Post noted that the interview raised basic questions concerning U.S. involvement with the Diem government.

4 Not found.

5 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.

125. Memorandum from the Deputy Director of the Vietnam Working Group (Heavner) to the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Hilsman) 125. Memorandum from the Deputy Director of the Vietnam Working Group (Heavner) to the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Hilsman)1

Washington, May 15, 1963.

SUBJECT

Possible Responses to Nhu Call for Cut in U.S. Forces

You requested a list of actions we might take which would hurt Diem but not the war effort. The list, plus estimates of likely results, follows:

A. Possible Actions

1. Aid Cuts. This could take a variety of forms on both the civilian and military side. I would suggest—and this is subject to further study—the following possibilities: (a) POL. Petroleum products for civilian use are financed by our commercial import program; they run around $17 million per year. To cut this flow, we could inform the GVN that licensing under existing purchase authorizations is suspended and no further authorizations will be issued. This would force the GVN to use its own foreign exchange reserves to buy POL-and Diem is very sensitive about keeping up the level of GVN foreign exchange reserves. He probably sees his rather large foreign exchange reserves as a hedge against American withdrawal, aid cuts, or pressures like this.

(b) Sugar and Wheat Flour. We finance, under our CIP and PL-480, about $25 million per year of these commodities. Cutting them would have the same effect on GVN foreign exchange reserves as cutting

(c) [less than 1 1ine not declassified] Support for National Youth Center. This is quite a small item [1-1/2 lines not declassified]. But as a gesture, it might prick Nhu directly because he is the Grand Mogul of r the Republican Youth.

(d) Military Construction. We are planning to fund under MAP a number of construction projects. The problem, of course, is that cutting them will interfere with the war effort rather directly. In this category are items such as rehabilitation of the air field at Danang ($3.5 million) and construction of a quad wall at Saigon ($1.6 million).

2. Stopping Herbicide Operations. This has been a pet project for Diem. We have had our doubts and misgivings about it, but dropping crop destruction would, in my opinion, also hurt the war effort to some degree.

3. Cutting Farmgate. The military view would be, I am sure, that any cut in Farmgate would be very bad for the war effort. Perhaps they could eliminate interdiction type missions, however, and carry out all their other missions in spite of a healthy cut. There is a lot to be said for this idea, in terms of U.S. and world opinion, because Farmgate is our only real combat involvement. On the other hand, Diem would be nettled, but not deeply hurt. Nhu could present it as a personal triumph, i.e. we were forced out.

4. Public Statements. It might help domestically to respond directly to Nhu, and it would certainly strike a sensitive Diem nerve if we were to rebuke Nhu, however mildly, in a public statement. It would also play directly into the Communist propaganda line, give aid and comfort to all our critics, possibly force us to go much further in facing down Diem than we may wish to go, and even conceivably spark a coup attempt.

B. Results and Objectives

1. Strictly speaking, none of the above actions would be completely without negative effect on the war effort. Even in the case of POL or sugar and wheat cuts, for example, counterpart plaster re sources would be directly reduced by the proposed cuts; as you know, we are chronically short of plaster resources and are even now engaged in delicate negotiations aimed at getting the GVN to deficit finance CI projects formerly paid for by our $10 million plaster purchase. The GVN response to POL or sugar and wheat cuts would likely be to reduce their plaster support for CI projects which we, but not they, deem essential to a successful war effort. (There could also be a troublesome Vietnamese public reaction to cuts in POL or wheat and sugar. Shortages could be used to direct public anger against the U.S.)

2. There is also the broader question of what we mean to accomplish. I doubt that any of the above actions would result in chastening or disciplining Nhu and Diem. We would have to tell them pretty directly that we were undertaking the action as a punitive response to Nhu’s outrageous remarks or risk the interpretation that the action was a prelude to an American pull-out. Given Ngo psychology, most likely the result would be not more but less GVN cooperation, less trust certainly, and quite possibly, more outrageous public statements.

If pressure is brought on Diem and Nhu, it should serve our major objective—defending Viet-Nam. Thus, if we cut or threaten to cut aid, it should be in support of an objective such as full plaster support of CI projects and a continuing American voice in administering them.

In the immediate instance, we could use such actions or threats to back up a demand for a public GVN statement to the effect that American assistance and personnel were requested by the GVN and are needed, at the present level, until the VC threat is further reduced. If such a statement is judged essential to maintaining domestic support for our Viet-Nam program, the actions would be justified. But we should recognize that Diem might well refuse to yield and could even use our demand against us publicly. We should also recognize that such a statement, coming on the heels of the Nhu remarks, would lend support to the main Communist propaganda line, i.e. Diem is an American puppet.

Most important, if we use punitive actions or the threat of such actions, we have to recognize that the mutual confidence on which the joint war effort must rest will be further eroded. This means the likelihood of an all-out confrontation, now or later, is increased measurably. And of course, there is a very real chance that Diem will not bend, and that once started down the road we will be unable to stop short of anything except a change in government. We don’t want to blunder into that.

All of the foregoing is subject to reconsideration after we get the results of Ambassador Nolting’s demarche plus the benefit of his suggestions.

1 Source: Department of State, Vietnam Working Group Files: Lot 67 D 54, POL-1 (Gen. Pol. Secret; Limit Distribution.

126. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 126. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, May 17, 1963, 4 p.m.

“The attached cable from Fritz Nolting (which you may already have seen) gives a cheerful picture of progress in South Vietnam.

“I believe it should be read with a grain of salt, although the fact that Diem has gotten out into the country is in itself hopeful.” (Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Vietnam Country Series, 4/63-5/63)

1036. CINCPAC for POLAD. During past week several members of our mission and I have accompanied President Diem on trips to various provinces, mainly to areas recently brought under Government control through clear and hold operations, road and canal building, strategic and combat hamlet establishment, and related measures. On trips last Sunday and Tuesday2 in seven provinces, it was the consensus of all of us, including several other foreign ambassadors, that important improvements were unmistakable. First was the evident enthusiasm among peasants and officials alike in progress to date towards permanent security and follow-up benefits to the people. In one recently cleared area the farmers, expressing their thoughts freely, had only one request-that a hundred families living to the West of their zone be also “liberated” promptly. Second was the evident goodwill and cooperation existing between U.S. advisors, both military and civil, and their GVN opposite numbers. (I talked personally with more than a dozen on both sides and I found no indications of friction or frustration-on the contrary, the prevailing mood was one of encouragement in accomplishments, goodwill, and confidence in the future.) Third was the obvious purpose of President Diem to show Americans, as well as other foreigners and Vietnamese, his appreciation of American help, including advisors, and his satisfaction with results achieved to date. Fourth, and perhaps most striking, was Diem’s touch with the people. He spent two long hot dusty days talking with, and seeking the reactions of farmers and their families and elders to the measures the Government is taking, probing their sentiments and listening to their ideas. The rapport between him and the people was evident and the exchange of questions and answers remarkably free. This applied as well to groups of recent VC “ralliers” and their families, who were grouped among other village people, and to groups of Buddhist bonzes. Realizing that these trips did not cover the entire country and cannot by their very nature be completely revealing, I was nevertheless again impressed, as I believe my colleagues were, by the vast difference between what is actually happening in this country and the reflection of it in the outside world. In my view, what is actually happening is a vindication of American and GVN policy, a steady forcing of the Communists to the defensive and a breaking of their classical pattern of subversion. There is a fierce concentration on the internal problems here and a consequent neglect of, or insufficient attention to, the factors forming international opinion, which are way beyond the grasp or control of this Government. It goes without saying that, even on internal matters, there continue to be “snafus”, but the general average of internal performance is improving constantly, I am convinced.

Nolting

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL S VIET-US. Secret. Repeated to Bangkok, Phnom Penh, Vientiane, Paris, London, and CINCPAC. On May 18, Michael Forrestal sent a copy to President Kennedy with a covering memorandum that reads:

2 May 12 and May 14.

127. Editorial Note 127. Editorial Note

On May 17, 1963, President Diem and Ambassador Nolting issued a joint communique to announce United State-Vietnamese agreement on counterinsurgency funding. The text of the communique reads: “The Government of Vietnam and the American Embassy announced on May 17 that agreement has been reached regarding funding for counter-insurgency and other economic development projects, particularly those supporting the Strategic Hamlet Program, during 1963. The agreement provides inter alia for the continuation of counter-insurgency projects supported under the piastre-purchase agreement announced in August, 1962. As explained at that time, the latter was an extraordinary arrangement necessitated by the fact that full provision for the counter-insurgency operations in question was not made either in the Vietnamese budget for 1962 or in the United States AID Program. It was planned that the continuation of these operations would be budgeted and programmed in a manner calculated to be responsive to the requirements of the present situation.

“Under the agreement just announced, the Government of Vietnam has undertaken to supplement U.S.-owned funds and counterpart, so as to make available up to $2.3 billion piastres during calendar year 1963. The United States is also providing some $55 million in the form of agricultural products, barbed wire, weapons for hamlet militia, cement, fertilizer and other commodities for the program.

“Counter-insurgency projects will continue to be initiated and developed by the Vietnamese authorities, and all of them will be fully coordinated between the Vietnamese and American central committees, as in the past. The execution of projects will also continue to be closely coordinated between the Vietnamese authorities and American experts in the provinces.

“During the course of the discussions, it was also reaffirmed that the scale of the U.S. advisory and support effort in Vietnam is directly related to security requirements and to the need to bring about throughout the country the economic and social improvements envisaged in the strategic hamlet program. Although at this time the present level of the advisory and support effort is still necessary, as the security situation improves and as the strategic hamlet programme progresses, it is expected that the need for foreign assistance, both in terms of material and personnel, will be progressively lightened.” (American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1963, pages 854-855)

128. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam 128. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam1

Washington, May 17, 1963, 8:51 p.m.

1104. For Nolting from Hilsman. Gratified you able persuade Diem issue statement to effect present level our personnel SVN necessary to meet VC threat. Communique on CI funding agreement2 excellent device permit Diem disavow Nhu remarks indirectly and without loss of face.

As you know, this reaffirmation need for our assistance may not get extensive press play because it seems buried in communique on funding, and in any case slate would not really be wiped clean here. I hope you able find additional opportunities continue impress on Diem and Nhu fact that we having rough going defending our Viet-Nam program at best and this incident likely leave lasting bad impression in spite of communique. You may say we hope future statements will be more helpful to joint effort defeat VC.

Nhu rejoinder to Unna,3 which we have not yet seen, also may create further difficulties. Unna has reputation on Hill and elsewhere in government as accurate reporter no matter what his policy view. An insulting accusation against him could provoke even stronger resentments.

Doubt that there is anything you can do to change immediate situation, but repeat both my own fear that Nhu likely to repeat performance if not brought up sharply and above hope that you able find opportunity continue to impress consequences on both Diem and Nhu.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, DEF 6 US. Secret; Operational Immediate; Limit Distribution. Drafted by Hilsman, cleared by Heavner and in draft in FE/P by Abram E. Manell. Repeated to CINCPAC for POLAD.

2 See Document 127.

3 In telegram 1043 from Saigon, May 20, Ambassador Nolting reported that Nhu claimed that he had been badly misquoted and generally misrepresented by Unna. Nolting added that he was convinced that the joint communique issued on May 17 was as far as Diem would go in the direction of a public repudiation of his brother Nhu’s remarks. Nolting concluded that much of the unfortunate impact of the incident was due to The Washington Post’s handling of the interview. (Department of State, Central Files, PPV 7 S VIET-US)

129. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 129. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, May 18, 1963, 4 p.m.

1038. CINCPAC for POLAD. References: Embtel 1005, Deptel 1066, Hue tels 5 and 62 May 15, following preliminary discussions with Vice President Tho (Buddhist), delegation Buddhist leaders met with President Diem to present series of demands. Secretary Interior Luong and Secretary Civic Action Hieu also were present. Semi-official Vietnam Presse and local press May 17 gave lengthy report of press conference by Buddhist leaders giving their version of meeting with President. According Vietnam Presse, Buddhists demanded following: a. Rescission of order prohibiting flying of Buddhist flags. Diem replied both Catholics and Buddhists guilty “disorderly use” of religious flags, which should be confined to temple grounds and subordinated to national flag. (Same issue VN Presse reports communique from Saigon Archbishop that Vatican flag to be flown only inside churches and noting that violations of rule have recently been seen.)

b. Give Buddhists rights with Catholics. Buddhists pointed out GVN Ordinance Number 10 does not cover Catholic organizations, which still enjoy privileges originally granted by French. Buddhist organizations on other hand considered foreign by Property Registration Office so that presidential permit required to allow them to buy property. Diem stated inconsistencies resulted from administrative errors and that he would have matter investigated.

c. Stop arbitrary arrests of and halt pressures on Buddhists in Hue. Diem replied that suspending practice of arrests could be taken advantage of by subversive elements. Discussion of facts which had transpired at Hue apparently did not bring agreement.

d. Grant Buddhists right to worship and propagate creed. Diem stated this right guaranteed by Constitution. Delegation referred to pressures and intimidation on Buddhists and Diem said these should be reported to authorities. Buddhists referred to case of Japanese film “Sakya” which deplored by Buddhists as distortion of Buddha’s life; despite Buddhist protest, import license issued. President replied that import license not same as permission to exhibit. (Vietname Presse has reported separately that informed GVN sources say GVN will refuse film’s admission to country.)

e. Pay compensation to Buddhist demonstrators killed at Hue. Diem promised financial aid to families, noting that Catholics and other non-Buddhists also among victims.

Two additional requests reportedly made: (1) Protection for delegation to visit families of deceased in Hue. Diem asked Luong and Hieu to look into matter. (2) Memorial for victims to be held in all pagodas throughout VN. Diem agreed if ceremonies inside pagodas and with small groups. Hieu suggested postponement till another holiday in four months time.

Buddhists indicated to Presse they had not yet decided what further action they should take in light meeting with President. Other reported Buddhist actions taken include widespread circulation of protest literature, including bulletins to newspapers (which have not of course published this material) and hunger strikes which started in Hue about May 12 and were perhaps intended secure release of arrested demonstrators. CAS also reports that Cao Dai and Hoa Hao leaders have come to Saigon to discuss concerted action with Buddhists. Under consideration in Buddhist circles are such steps as preparation of a white paper on GVN oppression to present International Buddhist Association, dissemination of films taken during the Hue demonstrations, setting of a national day of mourning for victims of Hue violence, as well as more active measures such as mass meetings and demonstrations. According to Lt. Col. Thuong, National Police Chief for Central VN Plains, a Buddhist plan exists to hold parades and demonstrations in every city and town in central VN on May 21. Such public gatherings would of course contain danger of possible violence. Thuong said police plan to attempt confine demonstrations to various pagoda grounds. Also recurrent rumors that Buddhist demonstration in Saigon planned for May 19 (now postponed to May 21, according to Minister of Interior).

Within Buddhist ranks it appears that religious leaders are tending to counsel moderation based on religious traditions of non-violence (consistent chief bonze Quang Tri’s actions in controlling followers in Hue). On other hand certain lay leaders reportedly urging more activist line involving demonstrations etc. Also appears quite possible that individuals without genuine religious convictions may attempt exploit issue as means unify anti-regime elements.

For its part, GVN has moved quite slowly to placate Buddhist sentiment. Initial GVN reaction was to blame incident on VC agitation. This line has been adhered to perhaps for reasons of face, perhaps because of fear that GVN acceptance of responsibility for deaths would have even more damaging repercussions, or perhaps because GVN wished avoid publicity to extent possible. However, since allegation is widely disbelieved main result has been to damage GVN credibility and to further irritate Buddhists. Vietnam Presse account of Buddhist press conference suggests Buddhists themselves uncertain regarding their future course of action.

May 15 interview with President Diem may now indicate some willingness accommodate Buddhists. In discussion with Ambassador May 16 Secretary Thuan said Diem was contemplating issuing public declaration, an idea which Ambassador encouraged. Ambassador has also spoken to leading Catholic leaders (Papal Delegate and Rector University at Hue) urging a public statement. Thuan also said meeting with Buddhists went well but that President could not agree to demand that GVN accept responsibility for incident. There are other indications GVN trying to find ways to appease sentiment: reportedly Dang (concurrently Chief of Thua Thien Province and Mayor of Hue) to be fixed with responsibility for Hue riot and replaced along with other officials (although culprit in popular mind is Deputy Province Chief Sy). However, it not clear that if taken, these measures will placate Buddhists at this late date. Some high-level GVN officials take view GVN should have acknowledged fault immediately, dropped pressure on Buddhists, offered compensation to families of killed and injured, and tried officials responsible for violence.

At same time, GVN has acted hesitantly, apparently also unsure how to proceed. Buddhist meeting with Diem reported banning of film in response Buddhist demands, etc. suggest GVN understands need for placating Buddhists and erasing image religious discrimination. On other hand, GVN action to date does not yet appear satisfy Buddhists.

Comment: Apparent that original riot in Hue evolved from series of errors of omission and commission on both sides. Since then, GVN has been slow to make amends and accept responsibility for actions its own officials even where these actions clearly more extreme than situation demanded. GVN reluctance to date assume such responsibility and publicly address basic issue religious discrimination probably explained by difficulty in pinning down facts concerning causes and developments at Hue and assessing extent and seriousness religious cleavage and its future ramifications. GVN well aware seriousness of continued disaffection of any substantial part SVN’s large Buddhist population and of necessity meeting their legitimate concerns. However, to date general GVN efforts appear directed toward damping down situation; positive actions have tended to be piecemeal and played in low key.

What appears needed at this point is a prompt clear-cut statement by GVN along following lines: 1) Affirming constitutional guarantees of religious equality, anti-discrimination; 2) Accepting GVN responsibility for actions its authorities during Hue riot; 3) Confirming GVN willingness to compensate families of Hue victims; and 4) Urging moderation on all sides while discussions continue.3 This is substantially what Buddhists have demanded and President has thus far refused to grant. As alternative he might be willing appoint investigative commission headed by prominent Buddhist, and I plan to suggest this to him. While it obviously would have been better if some such action had been taken immediately following events in Hue, a forthright statement now would go far to redress the situation. Even given this, events of past week will leave substantial scar tissue among members of Buddhist faith. Without it there will be strong possibility of violence in connection planned demonstrations May 21.

Nolting

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, SOC 14-1 S VIET Confidential; Priority. Repeated to CINCPAC.

2 Telegrams 5 and 6 from Hue are printed as Documents 116 and 117. Regarding telegrams 1005 from Saigon, see footnote 2, Document 112. Telegram 1066 is Document 115.

3 In telegram 1117 to Saigon, May 21, the Department of State responded: “Concur in your estimate of what GVN should do to dampen down crisis with Buddhist community. Believe you should strongly recommend to Diem various actions contained last para reftel ASAP. You may convey these points as view USG.” (Department of State, Central Files, SOC 14-1 S VIET)

130. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam 130. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam1

Washington, May 21, 1963, 10:48 a.m.

1111. Re press policy. Primary purpose this message is to recapitulate our basic approach and policy on press relations Viet-Nam.

In line with policy laid down at outset increase US assistance effort, first principle press relations Viet-Nam must continue be to provide fullest possible cooperation to press in order make available to newsmen complete picture complicated Viet-Nam situation and US role. US public must have accurate story our Viet-Nam program if we are to justify our large human and material investment there. Assistance to press thus commands very high priority.

We aware mission has made extraordinary efforts assist press and encourage GVN adopt liberal and generally helpful press policy. Believe however that wherever possible we should take reporters further into our confidence in order to be certain their background understanding of situation is more complete.

We also have in mind more frequent pre-operations briefings. While considerations of military security must naturally come first, believe it might be possible to do more such briefings without endangering war effort.

You should also continue your efforts persuade GVN cooperate more fully with US press. Primary responsibility for access to news is theirs and hence primary effort get Viet-Nam story fully told should be Vietnamese also.

We understand difficulties your situation and fully appreciate your efforts. Department also confident press accounts Viet-Nam situation are bound to reflect overall improvement situation as progress against VC becomes more evident. Foregoing intended only to reiterate standing policy and suggest what may be done to further implement that policy.

Ball

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, PR 11 Saigon. Confidential; Routine. Drafted by Heavner and cleared by Manell, Hilsman, Manning, and with Defense and USIA. Repeated to CINCPAC for POLAD.

131. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 131. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, May 22, 1963, 2 p.m.

1050. CINCPAC for POLAD. Deptel 1117.2 During meeting with Diem May 18, he devoted about two hours to Buddhist questions. I sought to impress on him need for further GVN action and specifically suggested public declaration by him and/or appointment commission along lines Embtel 1038.3 Diem was non-committal re commission and took position that declaration should be deferred until people had had time to reflect on various statements which have been made, particularly at press conference held by Buddhist leaders following meeting with him.

From Diem’s extensive remarks to me, it was quite clear that he is convinced that (a) Hue incident was provoked by Buddhist leaders, (b) deaths were caused by grenade or grenades thrown by VC or other dissidents and not by GVN, and (c) certain Buddhist leaders are seeking to use Hue affair as means of enhancing their own positions within Buddhist movement. Finally, Diem appears to feel that whole affair is far less serious matter than we do. I said I hoped he had not underestimated seriousness of situation; that our information re facts and attitude of people was considerably different from his.

With regard to Buu Hoi’s suggestion,4 there might be merit in creation of Cabinet-level post for religious affairs. I do not feel, however, that this is propitious moment to propose it, and I frankly think that at any time, proposal would have far better chance of acceptance if made by Vietnamese rather than American. We will work toward this at suitable opportunity.

Nolting

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, SOC 14-1 S VIET. Secret; Priority. Repeated to CINCPAC.

2 See footnote 3, Document 129.

3 Document 129.

4 In telegram 1117 to Saigon, the Department of State also noted that, during his current visit to Washington, Ambassador Buu Hoi had expressed the idea that the Diem government should appoint a cabinet level official responsible for religious affairs. Buu Hoi suggested that Ambassador Nolting might take up the idea with Diem.

132. Minutes of a Meeting of the Special Group for Counterinsurgency 132. Minutes of a Meeting of the Special Group for Counterinsurgency1

Washington, May 23, 1963, 2 p.m.

PRESENT

Governor Harriman, The Attorney General, Mr. McCone, Mr. Forrestal, Mr. Coffin vice Mr. Bell, Mr. Wilson vice Mr. Murrow, Mr. Bundy vice Mr. Gilpatric, General Krulak vice General

Taylor Mr. Engle and Mr. Poats were present for Item No. 2 Mr. Martin, Mr. Koren and Mr. Heavner were present for Item 3 Mr. Maechling was present for the meeting

[Here follow items 1, “Special Report-Mr. Forrestal,” and 2, “Follow-up Report on Indonesia from May 16 Meeting.”]

3. Discussion with Colonel Serong on the Situation in Viet-Nam

Colonel Serong, Head of the Australian Training Mission to South Viet-Nam, stated that he believes we are winning the war in VietNam, current statistical indicators reflect favorable trends, and the most significant development is the increase in volume of spontaneous intelligence provided by the people. This is because the Government is now providing them with security from the Viet Cong.

He pointed out that there are problems with the press in Viet-Nam but they are reporting what they see or are being told. He believes this situation can be improved by working more closely with them in the field. Our U.S. military advisors are reflecting in their comments to the press their frustrations to get the Vietnamese to accept their advice. The big success story in Viet-Nam is the strategic hamlet program and this story has not yet been fully told. He stated that out of a total population in Viet-Nam of about 16 million some 8 million have been moved into the strategic hamlets, resulting in one of the biggest population moves in history.

Colonel Serong presented an oral and graphic description of the concept of the strategic hamlet program in the southern portion of Viet-Nam, stating that its objective is to establish strategic hamlets on a radial basis along communications routes with subsequent development of hamlets laterally to fill the gaps. The purpose is to separate the people from the insurgents.

The radial development of the hamlets is progressing well but the lateral program is falling behind. He observed that we may be overextending ourselves in the strategic hamlet program leaving a number of Viet Cong behind enabling them to penetrate areas already cleared. The strength of Vietnamese armed forces is being sapped to counter the threats of the Viet Cong in these pockets of resistance. He believes that unless we clear out these Viet Cong pockets we may provide the Viet Cong with an opportunity to concentrate against the over-extended Vietnamese armed forces.

Colonel Serong commented that the concept for the strategic hamlet program in the high plateau area envisions groups of mutually supporting areas cleared of the Viet Cong. The strategic hamlets in this area are designed to restrict and inhibit Viet Cong movement while those in the south are designed to destroy the Viet Cong.

Colonel Serong stated that he had discussed this problem with Diem and Diem recognizes the threat of the left-behind pockets of Viet Cong but he desires to extend the presence of his Government into outlying areas. Diem believes that to pursue this program effectively he may require additional resources from the U.S.

General Harkins, in discussing this matter with Colonel Serong, stated that he believed the Vietnamese units deployed to counter these left-behind Viet Cong are effectively utilized as they have been able to flush out and destroy the Viet Cong.

Colonel Serong concluded by stating that our goal should be to get a higher percentage of the population into areas free from Viet Cong attack, concentrate on economic programs in this area, and then extend these “white areas” throughout the country.

[Here follows item 4, “Progress Report on the Internal Defense Plan for Colombia.”]

James W. Dingeman
Executive Secretary

1 Source: Department of State, Special Group Counterinsurgency Files: Lot 68 D 451. Secret. Drafted by Dingeman who is not listed among the participants.

133. Letter From the Ambassador in Vietnam (Nolting) to the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Hilsman) 133. Letter From the Ambassador in Vietnam (Nolting) to the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Hilsman)1

Saigon, May 23, 1963.

Dear Roger: I enclose a contingency plan drafted by Ben Wood for the U.S. role in the event of a change of government in Viet-Nam. I think it is about as good and sound guidance as one can develop on this subject, and I have concurred in it. We will keep it for reference and will update it at least annually. I hope you will clear it and suggest that it be submitted for White House approval. In the event of an emergency it would be invaluable for the Ambassador or the Charge to know that this plan had top level approval and could be used as the basis for action here.

Sincerely,

Fritz

Contingency Plan Prepared by the Director of the Vietnam Working Group (Wood)2

Saigon, undated.

SUBJECT

Eventual Change of Government in Viet-Nam

I. Dissemination of this Memorandum

Knowledge of the existence of this memorandum which replaces earlier memoranda on the same subject3 is to be limited to the smallest possible number of people. Dissemination in Washington will be the sole responsibility of the Assistant Secretary for FE; in Saigon it will be the sole responsibility of the Ambassador.

II. Purposes of Memorandum

—To plan in advance the U.S. role when there is a change in the Government of Viet-Nam. Since this is inevitable, plans should be made and reviewed with the same care that a prudent man devotes to his will.

—To recognize, in the basic American tradition of supporting free governments, that the Vietnamese should, if possible, exercise their own choice without U.S. or any other outside intervention; that any U.S. interference runs a serious risk of branding a successor government as U.S. dominated. The U.S. role should, if possible, be limited to indicating discreetly, but clearly the conditions under which the U.S. would recognize and support a new government. Should further steps be required to prevent, for example, a dangerous interregnum, they must be exercised with sound knowledge, great firmness, good timing and the awareness that there will probably be only one chance to intervene effectively.

—Recognizing that the unexpected will occur, to avoid plans which are binding or too complicated.

—To insure that those directly responsible in Saigon and Washington understand and agree on such planning. These plans are designed for reference by the Ambassador, but are not binding on him.

—To insure that all official Americans in Saigon will keep the Ambassador fully informed in time of crisis, but will take no action to influence Vietnamese citizens unless specifically authorized by the Ambassador (see last paragraph Section III below).

—To authorize the Ambassador to act for the United States on his sole responsibility if in his judgment the situation requires him to do so. In a situation which is likely to be chaotic and dangerous prompt decisions and actions by the Ambassador must not be inhibited. He will be expected to seek instructions from Washington if, in his judgment, time permits. Instructions from Washington should lay down principles of policy which are considered necessary and useful for the Ambassador in dealing with the Vietnamese; they should not be detailed. While the Ambassador will be expected to keep Washington informed as fully and promptly as practicable, his responsibilities for deciding and acting have priority over his responsibility for reporting.

III. Continuing Embassy Responsibility

While Diem is in effective control, official U.S. personnel should under no circumstances discuss with any Vietnamese the position which the U.S. might take in the event of a government crisis.

The Embassy should keep current in the Ambassador’s office a carefully selected compilation of biographic sketches of persons likely to play important roles in a change in government. In addition to relevant information on each person, it should attempt to keep current his relations with and attitudes towards Diem, Nhu and other important people. If possible there might be several pages showing groupings by family connections, place of origin (North, Center or South) and profession. Groupings by party are usually not permanent and are not worth listing.

Responsible persons in all agencies in Viet-Nam should be discreetly encouraged to submit such biographic information and evaluations of their Vietnamese colleagues as they may obtain without asking leading questions on the grounds that this is routine and important in all embassies. Many persons might find that they could spare an hour a month to write down informally their impressions of a Vietnamese friend. Officials should be encouraged to submit reports at the end of their tours. The powerful role of Vietnamese wives should not be ignored. It should be emphasized that information for these reports should not be obtained by asking too many leading questions likely to arouse suspicion.

The question of whether, how and by whom contacts should be maintained with persons opposed to or not supporting the Government deserves regular review. Questions to be considered would include: How much contact is necessary to provide essential intelligence in a crisis and mutual understanding after a new government is formed? How can such contacts be maintained without jeopardizing the person contacted; overtly, covertly or indirectly? As a minimum the Embassy Political Section should overtly maintain enough contacts so that it will be known that we exercise the right to see persons outside the circle of the GVN anointed.

The Embassy may wish to consider whether additional personnel are needed to collate this material and whether some background research can be done in Washington. Old reports should be reread to fill out the biographic sketches to be kept in the Ambassador’s office (referred to at the beginning of this section).

On the basis of the findings thus collected this memorandum should be reviewed, revised and pouched to Washington for State Department clearance annually.

The Embassy may also wish to consider drafting an unclassified order which could be held in readiness for distribution to all official American personnel in the event of a government crisis. Such an order could emphasize the importance of avoiding any commitment which might possibly be construed as involving American prestige or support and recall that the Ambassador is the only person authorized to set forth American policy.

Consideration might also be given to setting forth procedures so that key American personnel could confidentially and quickly forward useful intelligence to their superiors in Saigon.

IV. Crisis Indicators

The Embassy may wish to decide on what symptoms should be particularly watched as most likely to indicate trouble for the Vietnamese body politic, e.g.: an abnormal increase in reliable coup rumors, particularly if they involve a rapprochement of leaders and forces opposed to the GVN; multiple VC victories or serious economic stagnation.

When such symptoms multiply, the question of how a change might occur should be watched almost continuously. With knowledge, care and luck, the U.S. might then be able to exert discreet and timely pressure in order to avoid violence and chaos. For example, if the GVN felt itself threatened, it might be persuaded to undertake reforms necessary to forestall a crisis. Likewise U.S. military and civilian advisers outside Saigon might be instructed to use all their influence to persuade Corps Commanders, Province Chiefs and others to remain at their jobs, holding off the V.C. and damping down local unrest. Extra efforts should be made to maintain the movement of necessary equipment to the provinces.

Instructions for American personnel suggested in Section III above and E and E plans should also be reviewed.

V. Types of Change

Foreseeable situations in which there might be a change in government. are listed in ascending order of likelihood that U.S. interests would be adversely affected. A possible U.S. role is suggested for each situation.

A. Diem retires before the end of his term and names Vice President as his constitutional successor.

(Unlikely but would be entirely acceptable. Presumably we would back Vice President Tho strongly, attempt to line up military support under officers sympathetic to Tho, e.g., his friend General Duong Van Minh, and encourage orderly elections.)

B. Diem announces his intention of retiring and urges the election of his brother Nhu as his successor.

Given Diem’s prestige, Nhu would probably be elected. (The U.S. would have to accept this with good grace despite a chorus of hostile comments from Congress, the press and third countries. Nhu’s nationalistic xenophobia would require careful handling, but his anti-Communist record and his commitment to the strategic hamlet program would limit his freedom to maneuver too far out of line.)

C. Diem announces he will retire, but to preserve his own position while in office, does not name a successor.

(This would allow time for U.S. to work out its position. Presumably we would have to decide whether to support (a) a constitutional solution, the election of a non-family candidate with military backing or (b) a dynastic solution, the election of Nhu, on the grounds that his political machine was too strong to oppose unless it was clear that doing so would risk an interregnum favorable to the Communists.)

In the three situations outlined above there would be the question of Diem’s presence after he left office. Probably in the long run it would be easier if he stayed in Viet-Nam where he could be consulted by the government. While this would cramp the new president’s style, it might be less risky than if he left the country. In the latter situation he might subsequently decide that he was being forgotten and decide to try for a comeback.

D. Diem Killed by VC.

Diem’s death at the hands of the VC would impede VC attempts to play a role in the formation of a new government and give more time for the formation of a government not under Communist influence. (Nhu would try to take power. This could be done without violating the constitution if Vice President Tho were “persuaded” to resign. President of the National Assembly Le could then take office to organize elections within two months-Article 34, Constitution of Viet-Nam.. Nhu would have very little popular support and if the military felt well enough organized to oppose Nhu’s political machine, they would probably do so. The Ambassador would have to decide quickly whether to stand aside while Nhu makes his bid or whether to try and persuade Vice President Tho to carry on as constitutional successor and to persuade the military, possibly through Tho’s friend General Duong Van Minh, to support him. Tho is not inspiring and has for some time been reluctant to play an active political role. However, he is one of the few Vietnamese politicians who can obtain sympathetic popular support, particularly in the important Delta area where he comes from. He is experienced. Both he and General Minh would have the advantage of having not been closely associated with Diem and Nhu. Tho, as Diem’s constitutional successor, would be in the position to retain the services of most of the top men now in the government. He might also broaden the Cabinet by bringing in a few carefully picked new men. General Minh is respected by some of the more competent generals. He or another general might be able to persuade them to support Tho for the sake of constitutional continuity and in order to avoid upheavals favorable to the Communists. Nhu and his wife would be a threat to such moves unless the Vietnamese military acted promptly to remove them from the scene. In the interests of public order in Central Viet-Nam, it might be well if Ngo dinh Can would remain at least temporarily in charge at Hue. Since the U.S. within the next few years may well have to face the question of whether or not to support Nhu as a successor to Diem, it is important to evaluate whether Nhu’s political apparatus would, in the event of Diem’s death, hold together out of self-interest and support Nhu in a push for power. While Nhu is unpopular, he has built up an apparatus of people who owe their positions to him; but in Viet-Nam political loyalties are mercurial. The Embassy should continue to explore the question of whether Nhu’s machine would hold together in Diem’s absence.)

E. Diem dies naturally.

(This would present the same situation as described above, except that Diem would not have died a martyr to Communist violence. Thus it would be somewhat easier for the Communists to play a role. Conversely Nhu’s chances would be somewhat reduced since he could not play on the theme that he was the best suited to carry on the crusade of his martyred brother. There would be less polarization and a somewhat greater danger of slack and drift into interregnum. The chances for a constitutional succession by the Vice President would be slightly increased, particularly if quietly and firmly supported by the U.S.)

F. Diem killed by non-VC opposition.

If the opposition were tightly organized and ruthlessly determined, and if other members of the family were also removed from the scene, the transfer of power might be so quick as to bridge a crisis. Certainly the failure of the attempted coup of November, 1960 showed prospective coup leaders the importance of determination.

However, based on past performance it is more likely that even if coup leaders went so far as to kill Diem, there would be dissension and confusion. The situation might hang fire dangerously while competing leaders sought U.S. support. This would be a situation where the American Ambassador might need to act rapidly without awaiting precise instructions from Washington. Here, too, it would be particularly important that the best possible dossier of biographic information be available to the Ambassador (Section III supra).

G. Diem’s position weakened by physical incapacity or by an attempted coup, but he has not clearly relinquished power.

This would be analogous to the situation which existed during the attempted coup of November, 1960’ or to President Wilson’s last days. It would be very dangerous particularly if it dragged on and it became well known that neither Diem nor anyone else were effectively running the country. Diem would hang on as long as possible and would bitterly resent any U.S. moves which might be interpreted as favoring a successor. The U.S. would have to support him fully for a reasonable time if there appeared to be a reasonable chance that he could reestablish himself. If the Ambassador concluded that Diem was incapable of exercising power, he would then have to decide whether or not to discuss the question with Diem and if so whether to urge him to relinquish power to another group. Whether or not Diem were consulted, a decision to support another group would have to be quick, determined and irreversible.

VI. Possible Contenders and U.S. Interests and Roles

The main contenders would be dynastic (the President’s family) and military (the best trained and organized group in Viet-Nam). A constitutional successor (Vice President Tho or an elected candidate) could only succeed with military support.

Minor contenders would be opposition politicians outside Viet-Nam (who have little support in Viet-Nam) and the shadowy and disorganized oppositionists who still exist in Viet-Nam.

Given the strength of the Communist threat to South Viet-Nam, it would be in the U.S. interest to support a government of persons who were quickly available (i.e., in Viet-Nam) and who were sufficiently experienced in the operation of the GVN to carry on without faltering dangerously (this would probably rule out oppositionists in Viet-Nam).

The dangers of a change of government in an underdeveloped country at war are tremendous. However, these dangers are somewhat mitigated by the fact that Vietnamese in positions of responsibility are committed to opposing the Communist takeover of Viet-Nam. This would be a unifying force.

Two other factors may be serving to gradually reduce the dangers: 1. The war in Viet-Nam is building a group of competent men (some ministers, generals and province chiefs) who are not afraid of responsibility.

2. Vietnamese leaders understand and agree on the general program which their country should follow in fighting the war and rallying the peasants.

Given these factors the most realistic choice would probably be between Nhu and Vice President Tho with military backing.

A dynastic succession to power by Nhu would be very unpopular in the United States and in third countries (it would be wise to assume that our support of Viet-Nam would be drastically weakened). Yet Nhu could only be removed by use of force. The United States should play no part in such a move as it would almost certainly become known to the grave detriment of our relations with any succeeding government. We would probably be wise to reserve our public position until it became clear whether Nhu’s political machine was strong enough to put him in power despite his unpopularity. If he succeeded, we would have to recognize his government as exercising effective sovereignty. In the United States we would have to emphasize the continued importance of supporting the Vietnamese people in their struggle and seek to minimize any official comments for or against Nhu. This would be the most serious situation which could follow Diem’s death.

Alternatively, if on Diem’s death Nhu were removed even temporarily from the scene, the United States should then, and only then, move promptly to support the constitutional succession of the Vice President with backing of the armed forces. Unfortunately no preliminary contacts should be made (prior to Diem’s death or withdrawal) since the persons involved would surely be compromised.

Further study should be given to persons who could widen and strengthen the existing and future governments. Particular attention should be focused on younger men (such as Tran Van Dinh) and labor leaders.

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 1-1 S VIET-US. Top Secret; Official-Informal. A note on the source text indicates that the contingency plan was “approved by White House” on June 6.

2 Top Secret.

3 See Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, vol. I, Document 181.

134. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 134. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, May 23, 1963, 2 p.m.

1056. CINCPAC for POLAD. Before departure on home leave,2 would like to summarize briefly recent conversations with GVN officials, in addition to those with President Diem reported separately.3

1. Counselor Ngo Dinh Nhu. Nhu was most forthcoming in his observations and assessment of situation here, with particular emphasis on role of U.S. advisors. He appreciates and regrets problems caused by recent published interview. In long discussion, I found nothing inconsistent with U.S. objectives in what he had to say. This was, in brief, that South Viet-Nam must continually strive for self-sufficiency in all fields if it is to endure as free nation. It cannot be expected that foreign assistance will continue in present dimensions for prolonged period, and it is up to Vietnamese people to make this unnecessary. While much remains to be done, a great deal has been accomplished under difficult circumstances, thanks in large part to American material assistance and advice. Said he hoped I realized that he is neither anti-American nor xenophobic. Said he realized that he is unpopular among many Vietnamese, because he is trying to get GVN to promote a genuine revolution among the people and this annoyed the stand-patters. Nhu gave many examples of what he called his “lectures” to Vietnamese officials, high and low, civilian and military.

These lectures, he insisted, were not aimed against American assistance or advice. On contrary, he said they were aimed at making Viet-Nam self-sufficient as rapidly as possible so as to ease the burden on her friends. Citing examples, he said when ARVN general recently complained about too much U.S. advice, he asked him how often he had visited ARVN training centers. When told never, he said that Generals Harkins and Timmes are in the field every week visiting training centers and other installations and when Vietnamese officers can do the same there will no longer be the need for American officers to fill the gaps. In another instance, he said he asked ARVN battalion commander how many times he had been visited by ARVN general during operations. When told never, Nhu asked about U.S. general officers and commander said latter had visited battalion several times during operations. Nhu said he then told ARVN general present that when Vietnamese generals could do the same they would be in better position to talk about no need for U.S. assistance. Talking about U.S. civil advisors, he said he had found their reports and advice to be direct, well-motivated and generally correct. On this score, he had one request to make, i.e., that our people be diagnosticians rather than physicians, meaning that they should size up a difficulty and report it to higher authority in Saigon rather than trying to fix it by end-running the Province Chief, which caused difficulties. He was explicit in promising prompt investigations through Ministerial Committee to remedy insofar as possible such situations. He agreed time not yet ripe for lessening U.S. advisor-support role, but said he would continue to work toward that end as desirable for both countries. Said he deplored being misunderstood, but had gotten used to it. I said that his views as expressed to me were entirely consistent with U.S. views and objectives, and I was reassured to have them. At same time, I hoped he would not ignore serious problems created for us by reports, such as the recent one, which was 180 degrees different from what he had just told me.

(Comment: Nhu was as usual somewhat subtle and difficult to understand, but apparently sincere and cordial throughout. He is, however, capable of reacting emotionally and I dare say he did so when confronted by Unna’s questions.)

2. Vice President Tho. In an hour’s discussion with Vice President Tho, I found him more bullish on situation here than I had ever seen him. This was tempered by worry about handling of Buddhist situation, by developments in Laos, and by present poor prospects of developing any regional ties. But he thought things were going well internally in struggle against VC, emphasizing particularly economic improvements especially in rural area. He was most outspoken in appreciation of U.S. support. As regards regionalism, I asked him whether he was interested in the Mekong River development plans, remarked that this seemed to me offer long range prospects of collaboration among SEA countries. He said he was interested in this planning, and felt that best way to make progress was to continue technical studies and planning, leaving political aspects aside until more propitious time. With regard to U.S. advisors, Tho said that it is true that the presence of U.S. advisors, especially civilian, in remote country areas caused the Vietnamese people to wonder who was running the government. While he entirely agreed that the benefits of U.S. advice should be continued until victory is assured, he suggested as a device an inspection system from several central locations rather than having Americans living constantly and conspicuously in small rural villages.

3. Foreign Minister Maul. In a briefer courtesy call, we discussed mainly the need to work more effectively on improvement of the image of the GVN to the outside world. Mau said what struck him as most ironic was the picture of President Diem as aloof from the people when in fact his main strength lies in the liking and respect of the peasantry. He said he (Mau) had many friends among the intellectuals in Saigon, but since most of these had been in one way or another deprived of some of their privileges and possessions by the government in its attempt to benefit the people, he thought they would be the very last to be won over. On the public image topic, I suggested two things: that the staff of the GVN Embassy in Washington be beefed up by several young officers who could help tell the story of Viet-Nam to American groups (he said he thought this was a good idea and would see what he could do about it); second, that resident U.S. and other foreign journalists be taken by Diem on some of his trips to the provinces, so that they could see and report on his touch with the people. Mau said he agreed and would do what he could, but added that Diem had “disappointments” in trying to do this in the past.

Re relations with Laos, Mau remarked that they were “improving” and business was being conducted almost normally, albeit with some ambiguity. He remarked that he had attended the Laotian National Day and offered a toast to the King as usual. I asked about the invitation to the Laotian King to visit Saigon. He repeated that Diem preferred to have this next year in view of the situation here, but was willing to have the visit this year if the King preferred, and the GVN representative in Vientiane had been so instructed. He said he was waiting to hear the King’s preference before issuing a formal invitation.

On Cambodia, he said he saw no prospect of improvement so long as Sihanouk continued to “insult” Diem.

Re Thailand, Mau remarked that, despite the fact that Thailand had sent back to North Viet-Nam about 10,000 to 15,000 Vietnamese residents of Thailand. the number of those still remained about the same, 38,000. This he attributed to the fact that they were sent back to Thailand as a fifth column after indoctrination in North Viet-Nam. He went on to say that personally he would expect the pressure of Communist subversion to be stepped up in Thailand when, as he anticipated, the going for the VC becomes too hard and costly in SVN.

Nolting

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 15-S VIET Secret; Limited Distribution. Repeated to Bangkok, Vientiane, Phnom Penh, and CINCPAC.

2 Ambassador Nolting left Vietnam on May 24. He returned to Vietnam on July 11, after a holiday and consultations in Washington.

3 An apparent reference to Document 131.

135. Letter From the Charge in Vietnam (Trueheart) to the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Hilsman) 135. Letter From the Charge in Vietnam (Trueheart) to the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Hilsman)1

Saigon, May 25, 1963.

Dear Roger: Yesterday afternoon Mr. Ngo Dinh Nhu asked General Harkins, General Weede, John Richardson and me to call on him for a discussion of a highly sensitive matter. Thuan and General Khiem, Chief of the Joint General Staff, were also present.

Nhu stated that he wished to recount to us an intelligence report which he had just received, to reach a joint evaluation of the report, and to consider together what should be done about it. The report concerned a meeting held on May 19 (Ho Chi Minh’s birthday) at the Mimot plantation in Cambodia, at which all the principal VC political and military leaders in South Viet-Nam had been present, as well as representatives from Hanoi. Nhu’s informant had been one of the participants. (This is not the first time that Nhu has claimed to be in touch with a top VC leader. So far as I know, previous information from this or these informants has not turned out to be particularly significant. Richardson confirms this impression and suggests that Bill Colby may be able to provide further comment. In this case, at any rate, we have no confirmation whatsoever.)

Nhu said that at this meeting the VC leaders had been informed that the Communists had now assigned top priority to liquidating the Laotian problem. South Viet-Nam would for the time being have secondary priority. In accordance with this decision, a directive was issued at the meeting, with effect from May 20, that all VC “special forces” in South Viet-Nam should be withdrawn to southern Laos. (Neither we nor Nhu had ever heard of VC “special forces”. He explained that, according to his informant, these were elite units, about six battalions in all, divided between the southern and central areas of SVN, a sort of hard hard-core authorized to operate throughout South Viet-Nam without prior permission from higher authority. The ordinary VC regular units had to get permission to operate outside of their assigned area.) In addition, it had been directed that the VC regular units in SVN should retire into their “maquis” (or Cambodia) and cease operations, dispersing if necessary to avoid contact with GVN forces. In short, the effect of the alleged directive would be to leave all the fighting in SVN to the regional or territorial VC forces.

Nhu said that the report, if true, indicated that it might be advisable to advance the date of the GVN general offensive (national campaign), to sweep up the regional VC, and to attempt to prevent the “special forces” from re-entering Viet-Nam. This conclusion was applauded by all present, with General Harkins in the lead.

The above is the guts of the report, but there were a number of intriguing details. For example, the head of the “special forces” is a General de Division by the name of Nghe who has a special flag, green with a golden eagle. Nghe will accompany his troops to southern Laos where he will be military adviser to a General de Brigade (sic) named Tran Son, who is in overall command of an international force in southern Laos. (Tran Son’s standard is white with a gold star. He is not fully trusted by Hanoi and Nghe, a 200% communist, is supposed to keep him in line.) The international force led by Tran Son consists of contingents from North (two regiments) and South Viet-Nam, plus Cambodia, Thailand, Malaya, Burma, and Laos. Nhu’s informant said the Cambodian contingent was of battalion strength, but he was unsure about the size of the other non-Vietnamese groups. At any rate, they were or are supposed to be in southern Laos right now.

Nhu was asked a number of questions about the report—among them why the DRV would pull six battalions out of South Viet-Nam and expose their territorial troops when presumably it would be far easier to supply an equivalent, or larger, number of elite forces from North Viet-Nam. Nhu agreed that this was a good question and said he could only speculate that the Communists might feel that international repercussions in the event of a Communist takeover of Laos would be less if, for example, prisoners of war said they came from South Viet-Nam rather than North Viet-Nam. Nhu, incidentally, said he was convinced that the Communists were on the point of a drive to take over Laos in toto. He repeated this several times. He also said that the Hanoi representatives at the aforementioned meeting had estimated that the GVN planned to inject a force—25,000 men—into southern Laos.

I don’t know what to make of all this. Nhu never said that he accepted the report and frequently used such expressions as “if it is true”. On the other hand, he obviously gave it some credence. (None of us here do, and General Harkins suggested at the meeting that the report could be a Communist ruse.) I am inclined to think, however, that the real object of the meeting was to convey to us, particularly to General Harkins, Nhu’s readiness to see the National Campaign Plan go forward and even to advance the kick-off date. About a week ago, General Harkins sent President Diem a longish letter2 in which he detailed the steps which had been taken to bring the Vietnamese military and para-military forces to a state of readiness to push the National Campaign. He expressed confidence that the time had come to intensify operations further. He also mentioned, having in mind the Unna and Halberstam articles,3 that he understood that Nhu thought the time was not right and that he, Harkins, disagreed. President Diem was somewhat perturbed by the latter remark and, undoubtedly, Nhu heard of it. If my conjecture is right, yesterday’s meeting was Nhu’s Oriental way of setting the record straight.

As for the conclusions of the group in Nhu’s office, they were that, whether or not the report is true, the correct course of action is to continue to intensify operations against the VC. It was also concluded, at Nhu’s suggestion, that there should be no special publicity to the effect that some new and grandiose campaign had been started. Finally, there was some discussion of the possibility of verifying the report, and Richardson suggested in this connection that it would be helpful if President Diem would authorize deeper cross-border intelligence operations, proposals for which are now before him.

One other point is worth mentioning. Nhu said that he regarded our meeting as sort of a test case. He had not previously informed the President (or anyone else) of this intelligence report. The normal practice would have been to tell the President and seek his instructions as to what to do. In this case, we were consulting together first with a view to making recommendations to the President at the same time the information was conveyed to him. Nhu said that if-the procedure worked well in this case, he thought it would be well to continue it. This seems to be a healthy sign, and we will encourage Nhu to continue this scheme. We have the impression that another object of the meeting, in Nhu’s mind, was to show his willingness to work with us.

Finally, Nhu asked that we not report this matter, at least until he had a chance to inform the President. Hence the classification of this letter. General Harkins and John Richardson have seen it and have agreed to let this be the only report of the meeting. Would you, therefore, please pass the enclosed copies to Defense (DIA), JCS, and CIA. I am also sending a copy to Ed Martin for Admiral Felt. Perhaps you would also show it to Fritz when he eventually reaches Washington.

Best personal regards.

Sincerely yours

Bill

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 S VIET Top Secret; Official-Informal.

2 Document 123.

3 Regarding the Unna article, see footnote 2, Document 122. The Halberstam article is apparently the one printed in The New York Times on May 14, which David Halberstam began with the statement: “President Ngo Dinh Diem and his brother and political adviser, Ngo Dinh Nhu, have outlined a military philosophy that observers believe conflicts with the one espoused by American officials.”

136. Memorandum From the Commander in Chief, Pacific (Felt) to the Commander, Military Assistance Command, Vietnam (Harkins) 136. Memorandum From the Commander in Chief, Pacific (Felt) to the Commander, Military Assistance Command, Vietnam (Harkins)1

Honolulu, May 27, 1963.

CINCPAC 3010. Ser. 00523

SUBJ

Civilian Irregular Defense Group Program in the Republic of Vietnam

1. Purpose. The purpose of this letter is to confirm agreements previously reached by providing a mission, tasks, and coordinating instructions for execution of U.S. Military responsibilities concerning the Civilian Irregular Defense Group (CIDG) Program and certain CAS activities in the Republic of Vietnam (RVN).

2. Background. On 23 July 1962, SecDef announced that the DOD would assume responsibility for certain activities in the RVN which had been developed under CAS auspices with U.S. military support. The JCS accordingly directed that training, operational assistance and logistical support responsibility for the essentially overt military and paramilitary elements, which had been developed in the RVN under CAS sponsorship, be taken over by COMUSMACV. This directive has been complied with. COMUSMACV has assumed responsibility for the CIDG program in RVN (nicknamed Operation Switchback).

3. Policy. a. The CIDG Program will be supported by the U.S. Armed Forces with due regard for certain sensitive matters involved including the basic CAS requirement to obtain covert intelligence. In handling political aspects, care will be taken to preserve the well-established U.S. relationships with GVN officials in Saigon and the provinces.

b. Upon agreement between CAS Saigon and COMUSMACV, additional elements of CAS activities in the RVN may be transferred to COMUSMACV with CINCPAC and Washington-level approval.

c. The CIDG Program will be undertaken in a spirit of mutual CAS-Defense cooperation and support. DOD funds, including special authorization to meet unusual requirements, will be made available for the CIDG Program upon submission of firm requirements. Whenever possible these requirements should be determined by COMUSMACV in coordination with the U.S. Ambassador, CAS Saigon, and the Government of Vietnam. Every effort should be made to integrate this program with existing programs supported by the joint efforts of all U.S. resources and those of the RVN. However the CIDG Program will be funded outside the Military Assistance Program in order that there will be no problem concerning transfer or withdrawal of any items required for it from the GVN and to assure flexibility of operations.

d. CIDG activities should be conducted and supported in such a manner that they are completely acceptable to the U.S. Ambassador and the GVN. In so doing, it should be made plain that although such activities have some hazard with respect to the loyalty of the nationals involved, this integration of all military and paramilitary activities into one coordinated effort should reduce the loyalty hazard, while increasing overall future effectiveness of the total RVN military capability and helping to integrate minority groups into the RVN.

4. Mission. The U.S. Armed Forces will assist RVN by providing training, advice, operational assistance, and logistical support to the CIDG and training assistance to certain CAS assets.

5. Concept. The basic U.S. objective in supporting the CIDG Program is to assist the RVN in developing a closely knit paramilitary capability by obtaining the support of certain ethnic groups whose loyalty is contested by the Viet Cong. The CIDG Program is an offensive against the Viet Cong designed to expand and recover both people and territory from VC domination, develop a sense of national loyalty among the participating ethnic groups, improve their morale and well being and by so doing counter communist insurgency. The CIDG personnel are recruited from, but not limited to, primitive tribes and minority groups in remote areas where there is little if any government presence or control and the sovereignty of the RVN is not fully recognized. They complement the operations of other RVN military and paramilitary forces under the National Campaign Plan by clearing, holding, and expanding specified area-development centers. U.S. personnel achieve the desired results in cooperation with GVN personnel by employing paramilitary, medical, economic, and psychological techniques in the process of motivating, arming, training, advising, supporting, and assisting these groups. When the GVN is able to assume full responsibility for the CIDG and success is assured, the U.S. personnel will be withdrawn. As the National Campaign progresses the CIDG are demobilized or absorbed into other paramilitary or military forces.

6. Tasks. a. COMUSMACV will: (1) Provide training, advisory, and logistical support to the RVN for the conduct of the CIDG Program.

(2) Provide training assistance to certain CAS-supported forces.

(3) Assist the GVN in psychological operations and civic action in support of the CIDG.

(4) Assist CAS to develop assets for execution of U.S. and SEATO war and contingency plans when so requested.

(5) Assist the GVN to provide for security of bases, supplies, and activities for the CIDG.

(6) Control initial issue and eventual recovery of weapons, munitions, and equipment from CIDG personnel as they are phased out and absorbed in other activities or demobilized in accordance with the National Campaign Plan.

(7) Pass responsibility for CIDG guidance and support to appropriate RVN commanders when GVN is capable of assuming effective control.

(8) Provide a monthly status report to CINCPAC and other appropriate commands to include organization, equipment, training, operations, and requirements of the CIDG Program.

b. CINCUSARPAC. CINCPACFLT. and CINCPACAF will:

Support COMUSMACV as directed and required for these operations.

c. Coordinating Instructions. (1) The U.S. Armed Forces involved in the program will remain under U.S. military control but will be responsive to GVN and CAS requirements as directed by COMUSMACV.

(2) Phasing of the CIDG Program will be in accordance with the Comprehensive Plan South Vietnam (CPSVN).

(3) COMUSMACV will coordinate with the CAS Saigon on requirements for mutual support. CAS representation with GVN officials may be used.

(4) COMUSMACV is authorized to communicate directly with the GVN and CINCPAC Component Commanders with information copy to CINCPAC on matters concerning the CIDG Program.

7. Administration and Logistics. a. The CIDG Program will be administered outside of the MAP, with special procedures as authorized by the Secretary of Defense through the Department of the Army.

b. CAS will continue to provide fiscal assistance to the Department of the Army during FY 63. Thereafter this assistance will continue until the DC) D has secured authority for special disbursements.

c. COMUSMACV will submit detailed budget estimates for FY 64 and subsequent years to CINCUSARPAC for processing through DA channels with two copies to CINCPAC. CINCUSARPAC will obtain CINCPAC approval prior to submission to DA.

d. CINCUSARPAC is responsible for providing personnel, units, funds, and logistical support for the CIDG Program.

e. COMUSMACV will refer to CINCPAC for approval GVN and CAS requests for support which have not had prior overall policy approve.

8. Report Symbol. CINCPAC Reports Control Symbol 3300ÿ095 is assigned to the reports required by this letter.

H. D. Felt

1 Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 334, MAC/V Files: FRC 69 A 702, 201-42.1 (63). Secret. Copies were also sent to COMUSARPAC, CINCPACFLT, CINCPACAF, JCS, CSA, CNO, CSAF, and DODPRO.

137. Telegram From the Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs (Nitze) to the Commander in Chief, Pacific (Felt) 137. Telegram From the Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs (Nitze) to the Commander in Chief, Pacific (Felt)1

Washington, May 29, 1963, 1:52 p.m.

DEF 928638. Reference: (a) JCS 9820 DTG 091805Z May;2 (b) DEF 928115 DTG 160026Z May.3

Part I

1. Following guidance for preparation FY 64-69 MA Programs for Vietnam has been obtained from SecDef. It supplements and amplifies instructions in Part III of ref a.

FY 64

a. The MAP dollar guideline including supply operations will be $180 million.

b. Of this amount approximately $35 million may be programmed for ammo. However, whatever ammo is required for successful prosecution of the counterinsurgency campaign will be provided. The source of funding for any ammo requirements over the program level of approximately $35 million will be determined as requirements are filled.

FY 65-69

a. Three alternative plans will be developed and compared in the detail described in para b, Part III, ref a. These three plans will be based on the following dollar levels: 1. $585 million (derived from CINCPAC 11 May submission).4

2. $450 million.

3. $365 million.

These dollar levels include supply operations costs.

2. The materiel of U.S. units in Vietnam that will be replaced by equivalent Vietnamese units will be made available to the Vietnamese through the MAP. Items will be delivered where is, as is. Thus, the pricing of such items will be at the minimum allowable as authorized by law and based upon the year in which turned over to the Vietnamese.

Part II

1. The following additional planning guidance is provided by the Director of Military Assistance: a. In comparing Plans, indicate projects or items which would have to be deleted (and any substitute items added) to arrive at lower plan levels. Projects or items should be listed by year by priority.

b. Following FY 65-69 funding guidelines for these three plans are provided:

Plan ($ Mill) FY 65 FY 66 FY 67 FY 68 FY 69

$585 150 130 120 100 85

$450 150 120 70 60 50

$365 125 90 50 50 50

2. Secretary of Defense requirements for data on “supplementary assistance” must be derived from USAID/Vietnam.

3. Washington review will address many points on which estimates and opinions of USAID and Embassy will be of great interest and these agencies should be given maximum opportunity to participate in development of plans and to provide full comment on all aspects of same.

4. U.S. materiel being turned over in place to equivalent Vietnamese units must be charged to MAP. However, do not count MAP costs against country MAP program guidelines stated Part II, para 1-b above. Rather, submit as additional and separate requirement, including lists of subject equipment (all major items), and year in which turn-over will occur. ODMA will then establish MAP price in accordance with para I-2 above, and seek approval of additional MAP funding if required.

4. [sic] The revised FY 64 program in program data card detail together with abbreviated MAP Element Description (descriptive title and machine data less asset data) will be submitted to ODMA on 30 June 63.

6. Alternative $585-$450-$365 Plans for FY 65-69 will be submitted to ODMA no later than 1 Aug 63.

1 Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OSD Files: FRC 69 A 3131, Viet 091.3 MAR Secret; Priority. Drafted on May 27 by Woods in the Planning Division of OASD/ISA/ODMA and cleared by Milton H. Thick, Director of the Division, and several Defense Department officials, including William Bundy, Krulak, and Kent. Repeated to COMUSMACV.

2 See footnote 4, Document 111.

3 Telegram DEF 928115 to CINCPAC, May 16, indicated that the programming level and source of funding for fiscal year 1964 for ammunition for the Republic of Vietnam would be included in a forthcoming general guidance. (Washington National Records Center, RG 319, U.S. Army Message Center Microfilm, Reel 11328)

4 Document 121.

138. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam 138. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam1

Washington, May 29, 1963, 7:07 p.m.

1159. Embtels 1038 and 1050; Deptel 11172 New York Times today reports Buddhists still very upset by Hue incident and failure GVN take meaningful steps toward religious equality. Story states Buddhists planning hunger strikes and four weeks of memorial services.3

We have noted your recommendations and Diem’s essentially negative response as contained reftels. In face continuing Buddhist agitation, however, believe Diem may after further reflection be willing shift his ground. Urge Embassy make continuing effort move him on this problem which could either become very serious for GVN or be susceptible considerable easing by greater show GVN good will.

You may wish again raise problem with Diem, in whatever terms you think best in order persuade him take further actions meet Buddhist demands. You might wish consider suggesting public reassurance by Diem that Constitutional provision (Article 17) for religious freedom will be enforced, especially with understanding Buddhists will have equal rights with Catholics to hold processions, display flags, etc, promise full investigation of Hue incident by special commission, release of any Buddhists held by Hue authorities, and offer continue discussions with Buddhist leaders. Doubt GVN can be persuaded now to admit responsibility for Hue incident, but investigation headed by prominent Buddhist could cover this problem.

Since drafting above have received Reuters ticker May 29 on GVN communique urging “Absolute Respect” for all religious groups. What is background?4

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, SOC 14-1 S VIEI Secret. Drafted by Wood. Repeated to CINCPAC for POLAD.

2 Telegrams 1038 and 1050 from Saigon are printed as Documents 129 and 131. Telegram 1117 to Saigon is summarized in footnote 3 to telegram 1038.

3 The article was written by David Halberstam, who quoted a Vietnamese Government source as saying that President Diem had told Buddhist leaders on May 15 that they were “damn fools” to ask for religious freedom when it was guaranteed by Vietnam’s Constitution. (The New York Times, May 29, 1963, p. 5)

4 See Document 139.

139. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 139. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, May 30, 1963, 4 p.m.

1076. CINCPAC for POLAD. On May 29 semi-official Vietnam Presse published text of GVN communique2 affirming freedom of religion in VN and reiterating that national flag must be given supremacy. Communique explains that regulations for display of national flag intended to emphasize it as symbol of national unity and not intended to be discriminatory toward any religion. Communique also asks that “international groups not having extended any support to our cause” not interfere in VN internal affairs. All GVN cadre instructed to conform to policy set forth.

Text of communique being pouched.

Comment: Communique may be public declaration suggested to President Diem by Ambassador Nolting (Embassy telegram 1050)3 issuance of which Diem had stated should be deferred until people had had time to reflect on various statements previously made.

Trueheart

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, SOC 14-1 S VIET. Confidential. Repeated to CINCPAC.

2 For text of this communique, see American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1963, pp. 855-856.

3 Document 131.

140. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 140. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, May 31, 1963, 7 p.m.

1083. CINCPAC for POLAD. Deptel 1159;2 1162.3 No further Buddhist demonstrations last evening or today. Bonzes continuing their fast in pagodas until 1400 tomorrow. Reports from Hue, Danang and My Tho indicate those cities quiet with no Buddhist manifestations.

In assessing general situation it quite clear that feeling continues run deep among Buddhists. Equally clear that problem facing GVN goes well beyond issues religious freedom and discrimination. These issues-though real enough-are now also being used as label and facade behind which other groups seek express opposition to Diem government and exploit situation for various aims. This greatly complicates problem of GVN—and our advice to them—since they must act on assumption they are dealing with political opposition. Problem is further compounded by fact that Buddhists have no recognized hierarchy with which government can deal and which can take position on behalf of movement. (Thus Thuan complained to me May 29 that Diem had spent some hours with group of Buddhist leaders only to be confronted later by other groups demanding to be heard and complaining first group not the “real” leaders.)

Given history of events it seems unlikely to us that GVN can back off its stand on responsibility for Hue incident. Psychological moment to do so has long passed in any event. Unhappily, it appears that it may also be too late for GVN concessions of other sorts to halt Buddhist agitation. For example, May 29 GVN communique which clearly reaffirmed religious freedom under Article 17 of Constitution and gave firm assurance against discrimination, appears to have had no effect on militants. Moreover, those seeking to use Buddhist agitation for their own purposes can be counted on to keep pot boiling if possible.

While both sides displaying restraint to date, prolongation of GVN-Buddhist confrontation contains real dangers: a. For first time many civil servants faced with religious issue and forced to take a stand, which cannot help but affect their morale.

b. Military predominantly Buddhist and sharp cleavage in their ranks would of course be most serious for prosecution CI effort, and otherwise.

c. Actions to date by both sides during demonstrations have been restrained and orderly. However, if Buddhists become more militant in their demands and demonstrations continue over extended period, possibility of clashes with police, whether provoked or inadvertent, are distinct possibility. For example, it is quite unlikely that GVN yesterday would have permitted 500 bonzes to squat indefinitely in central Saigon, had they not decided to move out on their own. Although VC have not overtly exploited situation to date, they undoubtedly have contingency plans and capability to exploit any situation which gets out of hand.

I have sought appointment with Thuan today with view to getting GVN assessment of situation and sounding him out on future plans. I will also raise again possibility of President’s naming commission to study Buddhist grievances. At this point, I believe it would be best—from standpoint GVN acceptance as well as effectiveness with Buddhists—if commission’s mandate were quite broad and not linked specifically to Hue incident. What is needed, I think, is to get all aspects of problem off the streets and into the conference hall.

I also prefer if possible to work through Thuan on this one, rather than Diem. Latter became quite agitated during Ambassador’s and my conversation with him May 18, and I sense this is a subject on which he is predisposed not to take U.S. advice. Thuan, on other hand, claims to be completely objective and asserts he is neither Catholic nor Buddhist. but Confucianist.

As for Papal Nuncio, both Ambassador and I have previously sought his good offices. He was not responsive but I will try again at first opportunity. Ambassador also spoke with Diem’s confessor, who promised to do what he could. Difficulty with this approach is that, as explained above, we are no longer dealing with purely religious issue.

Trueheart

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, SOC 14-1 S VIET. Confidential; Priority. Repeated to CINCPAC.

2 Document 138.

3 In telegram 1162 to Saigon, May 30, the Department suggested that the Embassy should consider approaching the Papal Nuncio in Saigon to ask if he would discuss the Buddhist problem with Diem. (Department of State, Central Files, SOC 14-1 S VIET)

141. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 141. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, June 1, 1963, 1 p.m.

1084. CINCPAC for POLAD. Reference: Embassy’s telegram, 1083.2 Saw Thuan this morning re Buddhist problem. His assessment of situation is generally same as reftel. He says GVN is convinced NFLSV and VC are exploiting situation. President’s position is therefore very difficult. If he now makes concessions under pressure, it could simply whet appetites. Next demands, Thuan felt, could be of a sort designed to interfere with war effort, for example, a plea in name of peace that GVN treat with NFLSV.

On other hand, Thuan is fully aware of dangers of inaction. Problem is to find a solution acceptable to President and to Buddhists. Thuan pointed out again that lack of Buddhist hierarchy and authoritative spokesman compounded problem.

Thuan said he did not know Diem’s latest thinking but expected see him later today. I suggested possibility of high level commission, along lines reftel, and said that Vice President Tho might be good person to head it. Thuan was rather skeptical; he did not understand why a commission was any more likely to come up with a solution than the government. I said the idea was not so much to come up with an immediate solution as to establish a respectable forum in which Buddhists, whatever their standing, and others could be heard. Once tempers had cooled, the “solution” might be relatively simple. Thuan remained non-committal but I imagine that he will at least mention the idea to Diem. With regard to Tho, Thuan informed me that shortly after Hue incident Vice President had been asked by Ngo Trong Hieu to discuss problem with one of principal Saigon Buddhist leaders but latter had refused to call on him.

Thuan said Diem’s immediate problem was whether to receive delegation of four Buddhist leaders from Hue. While he did not know what decision would be, he thought tentatively that it might be a good idea for Diem to offer to meet again with Buddhists if latter would first agree among themselves as to who would be empowered to speak for them. I said Buddhists might have some difficulty in meeting this condition, but I saw no harm in trying. President’s expression of willingness to continue talking would, in any case, be good move.

I was mildly encouraged by this conversation, primarily because of indication that GVN is not apparently thinking of standing pat. Thuan promised let me know results his talk with President.

Separate report3 follows on demonstrations now in progress Hue and Danang.

Saigon quiet.

Trueheart

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, SOC 14-1 S VIET. Confidential; Priority. Repeated to CINCPAC.

2 Document 140.

3 Document 142.

142. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 142. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, June 1, 1963, 1 p.m.

1085. CINCPAC for POLAD. Reference: Embassy telegram 1083.2 Consul Helble reports from Hue (1030 AM) that large crowds Buddhists gathering various places throughout city. One crowd converging on offices Province Chief and provincial delegate, where former has promised convey to Buddhists GVN reaction to Buddhist demands. Another crowd expected total about ten thousand beginning gather Tu Dam Pagoda. Hunger strike of bonzes scheduled end at 14003 with no clear indication Buddhist plans for later today if dissatisfied with GVN response. Crowds very orderly up till now; however many unverified rumors that Buddhists will not remain passive throughout day.

Large number of police positioned in city and augmented by paratroopers and M-113 vehicles from Quang Tri. Total number police and troops in excess number involved May 8 incident.

Situation considered tense and could erupt in violence if sparked by either side. Chief bonze Tri Quang, among staunchest of militants, has reportedly stated earlier this week, that situation in his view beyond compromise and, in direct confrontation with GVN, Buddhists should seek help from any source, including VC.

Reports from Danang indicate that approximately 0800 parade of Buddhist about 60 bonzes and 12 Buddhist nuns proceeded to Mayor’s office. They carried international Buddhist flag and did not carry Vietnamese flag.

They now standing and sitting across street from his office. Street cleared of all civilians by police and soldiers for 3 blocks. Crowd started to collect and reached total of approximately 2000 on fringe areas by 0900 and were dispersed shortly thereafter by newly arrived troops with steel helmets and sub-machine guns.4

Situation in Saigon quiet.

Trueheart

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, SOC 14-1 S VIET Confidential; Priority. Repeated to CINCPAC.

2 Document 140.

3 Buddhist leaders in Hue were not mollified by the communique on religious freedom which was issued by the Diem government on May 29 and reaffirmed by the National Assembly on May 31. On May 30, the bonzes in Hue began a 48-hour hunger strike to emphasize Buddhist demands. The protest continued despite a government announcement on June 1 that the Province Chief, the Deputy Province Chief, and the Government Delegate for the Central Region of Vietnam were being replaced. All three had been involved in the May 8 incident in Hue.

4 At 5:30 p.m. on June 1, Helble reported to the Embassy in Saigon that the crowds in Hue had dispersed peacefully after being told by the bonzes to return to their homes. Helble noted that Buddhist plans called for a continuation of the hunger strike, but all the Buddhist tracts emphasized that only peaceful activities be employed until Buddhist demands were met. (Telegram 1089 from Saigon; Department of State, Central Files, SOC 14-1 S VIET)

143. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam 143. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam1

Washington, June 1, 1963, 1:59 p.m.

1168. Embtel 1085 [1084].2 Approve your careful and thoughtful handling this difficult and important matter in talks with Thuan. While recognizing Diem’s sensitivity it is also true that it is difficult for US with its large stake in Viet-Nam to support GVN in face almost worldwide liberal criticism plus growing Buddhist criticism.

Following thoughts may be helpful: 1. Diem or other GVN members should keep talking with Buddhists even if there is no one group of accredited leaders. Such talks should be reported in press (as done by VN press Embtel 1038).3 Would be useful if commission could be appointed, but meanwhile conversations should be kept open. Eventual appointment of a moderate lay Buddhist leader as Secretary of State Religious Affairs might be useful permanent channel. Buddhist demands and Diem’s replies reported Embtel 1038 both seem reasonable. Given peaceful nature and divided leadership of Buddhists continued talks may serve calm immediate crisis and give time for longer range constructive action.

2. Agree that unrest has political as well as religious motivation, but believe it would be unwise for GVN to make any further moves to place blame on Communists. Naming them would make them an officially recognized party to the dispute and downgrade genuine grievances Buddhists themselves have. Would seem best ignore Communists and deal as reasonably as possible with Buddhists.

3. Dept prepared appoint interagency committee under Heavner to prepare report for Embassy background on whatever information on Buddhism in Viet-Nam available here. Fear there is little but prepared move rapidly if requested by Embassy.

4. Believe it would be wise seek persuade GVN use only force necessary maintain order. Bringing in US supplied M-113’s and other heavy equipment likely increase resentment Buddhists. Can this type equipment be kept in background? Local US advisers might follow up. Is it true that M-113’s ran over bodies after May 8 incident Hue?4

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, SOC 14-1 S VIET Confidential; Priority. Drafted by Wood and cleared by Rice and Hilsman. Repeated to Bangkok and to CINCPAC for POLAD.

2 Reference is apparently to telegram 1084 from Saigon, which reported Trueheart’s conversation with Thuan on June 1 (see Document 141), rather than telegram 1085, Document 142.

3 Document 129.

4 In telegram 1112 from Saigon, June 5, the Embassy responded that “there were no M-113’s employed, only armed British and U.S. scout cars.” It was impossible to tell, from an examination of the bodies, how they were killed. (Department of State, Central Files, SOC 14-1 S VIET)

144. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 144. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, June 3, 1963, 6 p.m.

1093. CINCPAC for POLAD. US Consul Hue reports by phone this afternoon that around noon today crowd of approximately 500, primarily youths, gathered in front of Government Delegate’s office. Said about 300 troops were in evidence, but no armor. Crowd shouted at troops and accusations of foul play were hurled back and forth. German doctor spoke to crowd through interpreter, said as Catholic he could not counsel Buddhists but suggested they should pray instead of using violence. Crowd appeared responsive to him. GVN loudspeaker car then asked people to disperse, stating GVN could not be held responsible if trouble started. Crowd shouted back that GVN wished to kill them. GVN official responded over loudspeaker by saying that VC were among them in the crowd and could start trouble. Crowd expressed disbelief at loudspeaker’s statements.

Several GVN soldiers pointed weapons at crowd, then raised them above crowd. Latter shouted “stupid killers.” Troops then leveled bayonets, donned gas masks and proceeded in direction of crowd. Some people ran, others stayed and prayed, tear gas was thrown by soldiers and more of crowd ran away. Crowd was driven back several hundred yards and a second tear gas barrage was laid down by troops. Crowd shouted curses at troops. At this point representative of Buddhist Association chairman arrived, said chairman wished people either to go home or to pagoda. Most headed toward pagoda. Some youths, apparently injured by tear gas, were taken to pagoda dispensary. German doctor produced medicine for their eyes.

Crowd was prevented from getting to pagoda by barbed wire barrier. Many of them, mostly Boy and Girl Scouts, sat down and prayed. At about 3 PM troops said that more tear gas would be thrown if crowd did not disperse within three minutes. Stone was thrown at soldier, who dropped his tear gas grenades to protect himself. At same moment order apparently given to troops to throw tear gas. Boy and Girl Scouts stayed put.

Consul Helble reports that more troops are being moved into area, equipped with masks. So far no firing has occurred, but crowd obviously disturbed.

Helbel also reports that Buddhist leader Tri Quang, who has been fasting since last Thursday, has been examined by German doctor and is reportedly in serious condition.

Trueheart

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, SOC 14-1 S VIET. Confidential; Operational Immediate. Repeated to CINCPAC.

145. Current Intelligence Memorandum Prepared in the Office of Current Intelligence, Central Intelligence Agency 145. Current Intelligence Memorandum Prepared in the Office of Current Intelligence, Central Intelligence Agency1

Washington, June 3, 1963.

OCI No.1561/63

SUBJECT

Buddhist Demonstrations in South Vietnam

1. The Diem government has shown increased concern over recurrent Buddhist demonstrations in various South Vietnamese cities, but still appears unwilling to take more than limited, piecemeal steps to ease the situation. The demonstrations, in support of specific Buddhist grievances, have so far been peaceful, but serious disorders or widespread public and military disaffection, could result if they continue for a prolonged period.

2. Buddhist hostility first erupted on 8 May over regulations governing the display of flags in public religious ceremonies in the city of Hue, where at least eight deaths occurred during efforts of security forces to disperse a crowd. The severity of the outburst suggests long-simmering resentment among Buddhists over the pro-Catholic orientation of the Diem family and administration.

3. Many Buddhists, as well as other religious groups, feel that special privileges and favoritism toward Catholics, stemming from French rule, have been perpetuated by the Diem family’s partiality. The vast majority of South Vietnam’s population of 14 million is nominally Buddhist, even though only a small proportion have been considered active practitioners and these are loosely organized into regional congregations under Buddhist clergy. There has been no formal suppression of religious freedom in South Vietnam, but the government has successfully curbed the political influence of some religious groups, particularly the minority sects.

4. In a meeting with Diem on 15 May, a group of Buddhist leaders presented specific demands including the right to display their religious flag publicly (Catholics have been permitted to display the papal flag), the right to worship and propagate their faith freely, equal status with Catholics, and an end to arrests and mistreatment. They also demanded that the government acknowledge responsibility for the deaths in Hue and compensate families of the victims.

5. Diem has made limited concessions to the Buddhists, but believes full acceptance of their demands to be politically impossible. Despite the weight of evidence indicating that government cannon-fire caused the deaths in Hue, Diem insists they were due to a Viet Cong terrorist grenade. He promised assistance to the families involved, and on 1 June replaced three officials deemed partially at fault for the Hue disturbances. Diem, however, remains reluctant even to appoint a committee to negotiate with the Buddhists.

6. Buddhist spokesmen say the demonstrations will continue until all of their demands are met. A number have been held with no interference by the government, but reports now indicate renewed scuffling occurred again in Hue on 3 June. Further mass gatherings and heightened security precautions are likely to increase the danger of spontaneous or deliberately provoked riots.

7. There have been scattered reports that some army commanders, whose troops are predominantly Buddhist, are strongly reluctant to move against demonstrators and that troops might disobey such orders if issued. There was evidence in Hue on 8 May that some army troops refused to take action in the disturbances.

8. Although there has been no information to substantiate Diem’s apparent suspicion that Buddhist extremists are acting on behalf of the Viet Cong, there have been reports that some Buddhist leaders hope the demonstrations will lead to the overthrow of the Diem government. The leading Buddhist priest in Hue is reported to have said that the time for reconciliation has passed and that Viet Cong support will be sought, if necessary, to achieve Buddhist demands.

9. Communist propaganda has highlighted the Buddhist grievances, and at least one document now being clandestinely circulated may represent Viet Cong efforts to heighten tension. Various non-Communist opposition circles have also sought to publicize the affair to bring further discredit on Diem. A high official in the information service claims to be part of a group inside the government planning moves to seize control if violence should occur in Saigon. Some key military leaders are allegedly also alert to such opportunities.

10. Inept government handling has permitted a localized incident in Hue to grow into a potential political crisis. Unless Diem is able to reach a quick reconciliation with the Buddhists, the issue could have serious repercussions on governmental stability.

1 Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Vietnam Country Series, 6/63. Confidential; No Foreign Dissem.

146. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 146. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, June 4, 1963, 4 p.m.

1101. CINCPAC for POLAD. Following is text of joint situation report from Hue as of 2400 June 3 referred to in Embtel 1096:2

Begin text:

Since noon June 3 Hue security forces have utilized tear gas and/or other irritant chemicals to disperse Buddhist demonstrators on six occasions.

After 1300 incident which reported previously,3 demonstrators departed area near Delegate’s residence. At 1400 group again attempted approach Tu Dam Pagoda area and were repelled by ARVN using tear gas. At approximately 1500, groups of bicycle riding students were observed circuiting areas of approach to Tu Dam Pagoda. The majority of students were high school and college age group. Subjects circled area occasionally grouping at routes providing access to pagoda. Several times gas was utilized to control groups of mobs. Sound trucks were also ordered into action requesting demonstrating Buddhists return home attesting current situation Viet Cong motivated. These pleas were met with jeers from participants. No injuries were reported from dispersal actions up to this point.

It is suspected Buddhists were further motivated by circulation rumor announcing death chief bonze Tri Quang. Local sources claim bonze now serious physical condition but not dead.

Worst conflict occurred 1830 when security forces attempted disperse crowd estimated at 1500. Soldiers were observed dispersing crowd colored glass vial contained liquid over demonstrators (as received). Observers indicated troops pouring liquid on heads of praying Buddhists. Rumors of deaths resulting from this encounter range to three. However no deaths confirmed to date but 67 casualties actually observed Hue hospital in various states of distress. Reliable source denies any fatalities.

MAAG reports June 1 demonstration approximately 2000 in Quang Tri City dispersed peacefully at Province Chief’s office. However, June 2 demonstration Quang Tri of several hundred at pagoda broken up with tear gas. All roads into city barricaded as of June 3.

Events of June 3 in Hue have resulted in highly charged atmosphere and volatile situation needing only small spark such as failing Tri Quang health or incident involving demonstrator and soldier to set off serious clash.

June 4. As projected Contel 183,4 youths now in vanguard of demonstrations, with two hundred now fasting Tu Dam. Population furious at regime and ARVN, hurling vulgarities at latter all day June 3 but particularly incensed following day’s final incident which caused casualties. Buddhists have made clear change of 3 officials still leaves original 5 demands unanswered. Source close to Ngo Dinh Can indicates VN has set course on no compromise and prepared for military showdown. Conflict involving violence appears almost inevitable June 4 unless one side or other capitulates.

No evidence yet of any anti-American tenor these demonstrations, but given enough mob violence we are watching this aspect closely.

End Text.

Trueheart

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, SOC 14-1 S VIET. Secret; Operational Immediate. Repeated to CINCPAC.

2 Telegram 1096 from Saigon, June 4, 1 a.m., conveyed to the Department a message received from Consul Helble concerning the situation in Hue at 11 p.m. on June 3. Helble reported that the South Vietnamese Army had established martial law in Hue, and added that government officials continued to maintain that the Buddhist demonstrations were Communist-inspired. The Chief of Police for Central Vietnam told an American observer that the three leading bonzes in Hue were Viet Cong “without doubt”. The Embassy noted that it was Helble’s understanding that the local authorities had decided against further compromise with the Buddhists or the withdrawal of troops. (Ibid.)

3 Helble’s first report to the Department of State on the use of gas to disperse Buddhist demonstrators was sent in telegram 107 from Hue, June 3, 2 p.m., which noted that 67 youths had been hospitalized as a result of the use of tear gas, and that possibly 1 to 3 deaths had occurred as a result of the gas. (Ibid.)

4 Not found.

147. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam 147. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam1

Washington, June 3, 1963, 5:30 p.m.

1171. Appreciate very much prompt and full reports contained urtels 1095, 1096.2

Due very serious situation in Hue and grave implications for future, appears here that immediate GVN action required. We would recommend that GVN make quick conciliatory announcement, in Hue, of willingness discuss Buddhist grievances. Ideally announcement should be from Diem and include statement he coming to Hue himself to talk with Buddhist leaders. At same time troops should be withdrawn and replaced with police or gendarmerie. Seems most unlikely that chief bonzes are in fact VC and we even more doubtful Quyen (who well known here) could be VC. GVN must avoid mistake of identifying demonstrators and their leaders as automatically VC, both in public and in private, if it is to succeed in efforts control situation.

Feeling here is that GVN must be made to realize extent not only their own stake in amiable settlement with Buddhists but U.S. stake as well and that frequent approaches best way accomplish this. Realize, however, only man on ground can keep up with fast moving situation and you therefore authorized at your discretion seek immediate interview with Diem or with Thuan as you think best to urge necessary measures in strongest terms.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, SOC 14-1 S VIET Secret; Operational Immediate. Drafted by Heavner and cleared by Wood and Hilsman. Repeated to CINCPAC for POLAD.

2 In telegram 1095 from Saigon, June 3, midnight, the Embassy reported that Hue was effectively under martial law and tense but quiet. The Embassy noted that Consul Helble had reported that South Vietnamese troops had used tear gas and “possibly another type of gas which caused skin blisters” to disperse Buddhist demonstrators. (Ibid.) Regarding telegram 1096 from Saigon, see footnote 2, Document 146.

148. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam 148. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam1

Washington, June 3, 1963, 6:46 p.m.

1173. We very concerned by report blister gas may have been used.2 As you of course aware adverse effects such action could hardly be exaggerated. Request you ascertain whether poison gas in fact employed and if so, under what circumstances. If blister gas used, would appear imperative for GVN to promptly disassociate itself from such action and announce intention investigate and punish those responsible.

If report true, believe we must also consider best means indicating our thorough disapproval while at same time not appearing to withdraw general support from GVN. If GVN takes proper action problem need not arise. However, if use of poison gas not disavowed by GVN we may have to warn GVN we likely be faced with necessity making some fairly strong public statement of disapproval.

Would appreciate your views this problem.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27-10 S VIET. Secret; Operational Immediate; Limit Distribution. Drafted by Heavner and cleared by Wood and Hilsman. Repeated to CINCPAC for POLAD.

2 See footnote 2, Document 147.

149. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 149. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, June 4, 1963, 2 p.m.

1100. CINCPAC for POLAD. Reference: Embassy’s telegram 1097.2 I saw Thuan for about 15 minutes at 11:45, after which he returned immediately to President’s office.

In response my opening question re GVN plans for dealing with Hue situation, Thuan said that he could tell me in strict confidence that at Cabinet meeting yesterday afternoon presided over by Vice President Tho it had been decided to recommend to President that government reestablish direct contact with Buddhists. President had approved and arrangements were being made for Counselor Nhu to meet with Buddhist leaders from Hue. He repeated that this decision was still highly confidential but GVN wanted Washington to know of it.

I said that I was glad to hear that contact would be reestablished, as this was obviously essential to any solution. It seemed to us equally essential, however, that population in Hue know of what government was doing and that in our view more dramatic action was called for. Thuan urged me to put forward any suggestions—indeed his attitude throughout was most receptive, and worried—and I said that it seemed to us situation called for prompt and public announcement by President Diem of his readiness to discuss Buddhist grievances further and that effectiveness such move would be greatly heightened if President himself would go to Hue for these discussions and to assess situation generally. I said that I was aware of risks in this course. GVN concession in replacing principal officials in Hue June 1 apparently had no effect unless it was to stimulate further agitation. Nevertheless it seemed to me risk had to be taken. I told Thuan that I was diffident about making specific suggestions about handling of internal Vietnamese problems. Nevertheless U.S. was involved in this matter and I felt bound to tell him that in my opinion, U.S. support for GVN could not be maintained in face of bloody repressive action at Hue.

I said that problem was made vastly more difficult by reports of use of blister gas yesterday. Thuan seemed incredulous. (Believe this was first he had heard of this; I even had to explain what a blister is.) I said I was by no means sure what sort of agent was used but that evidence was compelling that something other than tear gas had been employed in last incident about 1800. Helble had himself observed blistering on victims and fact that some appeared be having respiratory difficulties. These were symptoms which could be associated with mustard gas. I added that it was probably well known in Hue that 60odd people had been hospitalized last night and that press reports could be expected at any time. It was therefore vital, I thought, for GVN to investigate matter immediately. If there were any suggestion of poisonous agent being used, GVN should at once disclaim responsibility and proceed to punish individuals who were responsible. I made it quite clear that unless effective measures of this sort were taken, U.S. would probably be forced to condemn action publicly.

In course of discussion, I pointed out that one of the unfortunate, and explosive, aspects of Hue situation was open hostility of population toward troops. I asked whether it would not be possible to remove them and leave security controls to police. Thuan said that it was his understanding that police in Hue (unlike those in Saigon) had not been trained in riot control techniques and the like. I also told Thuan that in my view, GVN made solution of problem more difficult by fixing blame for agitation on VC. There were many factors involved in situation. He indicated assent.

Thuan said he would report our conversation to the President immediately and would let me know the result. I said that I would like if at all possible to have a reaction during the course of the day and particularly on the matter of employment of blister gas. I stressed that Washington was very concerned over developments. Thuan indicated that he would do his best.

Trueheart

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, SOC 14-1 S VIET. Secret; Operational Immediate; Limit Distribution. Repeated to CINCPAC. Passed to the White House, OSD, Army, Navy, Air Force, and CIA.

2 In telegram 1097 from Saigon, June 4, noon, Trueheart reported that he was seeking an urgent appointment with Thuan to make the points outlined in telegrams 1171 and 1173 to Saigon (Documents 147 and 148). He noted that the gas used by government forces in Hue had not yet been identified, but he added that Helble had observed blistering on victims who appeared to be having respiratory difficulties. (Department of State, Central Files, SOC 14-1 S VIET)

150. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 150. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, June 4, 1963, 5 p.m.

1102. CINCPAC for POLAD. Vietnamese JGS this morning requested through JAOC channels urgent airlift for approximately 350 military police from Vung Tau (Cap St. Jacques) to Hue. Purpose of lift connected with civil disturbances at Hue. Under normal conditions USAF C-123’s would be used in this operation. Have discussed the matter with MACV. JGS is being informed by MACV that use of US airplanes will not be permitted.

I shall also inform Thuan at first opportunity explaining that US cannot become involved, even indirectly, in GVN control measures at Hue. I hope that GVN will interpret this decision as reinforcing our recommendations for different approach to this problem. FYI. Use of USAF planes would of course be immediately apparent to Hue population. Even if troops lifted only as far as Danang, which alternate possibility, word would presumably quickly reach Hue. This action will not prevent movement of MP’s, as GVN can provide its own lift.2

Trueheart

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, SOC 14-1 S VIET. Secret; Limit Distribution. Repeated to CINCPAC.

2 In telegram MAC J-3 5116 from COMUSMACV to CINCPAC, June 6, General Harkins reported to Admiral Felt that the following message concerning the Buddhist crisis had been dispatched on June 5 to all MAC/V subordinate units and corps advisers: “1. All US military personnel must recognize that subject problems are internal to Vietnam and section [action?] to solve them is the unilateral responsibility of the GVN. Members of this command will stand aloof from the controversy and will take no position nor action to aid or [abet?] either protagonist. Advisors will not accompany any units assigned an operational role against demonstrators or rioters. Any request by RVNAF authorities for US equipment or other support, which clearly or presumptively will be used in countermeasures against Buddhist groups, will be forwarded to this headquarters for decision.

“2. At such time as it appears that the VC become identified with the controversy, the foregoing instructions will be reviewed.” (Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Vietnam Country Series, 6/63)

151. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 151. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, June 4, 1963, 7 p.m.

1104. CINCPAC for POLAD. Embtel 1100.2 Thuan asked me to come to his house at 3 PM to inform me of following decisions taken at just-concluded meeting with President:

1. Re alleged blister gas, Thuan said authorities in Hue certain that tear gas only employed but thought it possible that individuals very close to exploding canister might have received skin burns. In any event, investigative commission had been appointed and had already left for Hue by air. Commission headed by General Don, head of ARVN, and includes Surgeon General and Chief of Ordnance Lt. Col. Liem of Thuan’s office. GVN does not plan to announce appointment this commission unless and until there is some public charge that agents other than tear gas employed.3

2. President has appointed commission to study and find solution to over-all Buddhist problem. Commission headed by Vice President Tho with Thuan and Minister of Interior Luong as members. Appointment of commission has already been publicly announced and first. meeting will be held this afternoon. In addition GVN already has “unofficial emissaries” in contact with Buddhist leaders and meeting of Nhu with leaders from Hue will proceed.

3. Mayor of Tourane (Danang), whom Thuan described as politically inept, has been replaced by Col. Chau, presently Province Chief in Kien Hoa. Chau is outstanding Province Chief, a Buddhist from Central Vietnam, who has demonstrated excellent political touch in Kien Hoa.

4. Authorities in Hue have been instructed to use “peaceful action” in dealing with crowds.

5. Thuan said that the President had taken no decision on whether to visit Hue himself but had at least not ruled it out.

Above strikes me as somewhat more than a half a loaf and action satisfyingly swift. I expressed appreciation to Thuan on both counts. He expressed hope that we would be reassured and asked that we now give Vice President’s commission a chance to see what it could do about finding a solution.

I recommend that we do so.4

Trueheart

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, SOC 14-1 S VIET Secret; Operational Immediate; Limit Distribution. Repeated to CINCPAC. A note on another copy of this telegram indicates that the President was briefed on its contents. (Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Vietnam Country Series, 6/63)

2 Document 149.

3 On June 6, the Embassy reported in telegram 1118 from Saigon that General Don’s commission had determined that the gas involved was a tear gas dispensed in glass ampoules as a liquid which became a gas on being released. The tear gas used was taken from old stocks left behind by the French. (Department of State, Central Files, POL 27-10 S VIET) On June 18, U.S. Army chemists at the Edgewood Arsenal in Maryland confirmed, from samples supplied, that the gas used was a tear gas of the type used by the French during World War 1. (Telegram 182130Z from CG USA Edgewood Arsenal to the Department of State, June 18; Ibid.)

4 In telegram 1176 to Saigon, June 4, 3:22 p.m., the Department responded as follows: “Agree on holding off further demarches for next 24 hours. Can barbed wire be removed from in front of the pagodas?” (Ibid., SOC 14-1 S VIET) The Embassy replied, in telegram 1109 from Saigon, June 5, that there was no barbed wire in front of the pagodas in Hue. There were barbed wire barriers on the streets leading to the pagodas, but they were used only to control rather than to block traffic. (Ibid.)

152. Letter From the Director of the United States Information Agency (Murrow) to the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Hilsman) 152. Letter From the Director of the United States Information Agency (Murrow) to the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Hilsman)1

Washington, June 4, 1963.

Dear Roger: Your suggestion that USIA undertake certain propaganda activities indicating that Communist North Viet-Nam is falling increasingly under Communist Chinese influence2 is and has been under serious consideration for some time. As you know, my people have been talking with representatives of the Working Group/Viet-Nam about this project for several months. In January there was an exchange of memoranda between Bill Jorden and Burnett Anderson, our Deputy Assistant Director (Policy and Plans) on this subject.3

I agree that the best way to handle this would be “by highlighting every visit or program between North Viet-Nam and Communist China and by frequently citing the innumerable instances in Vietnamese history when the Chinese have sought to or have actuallyr gained control of Viet-Nam.” We believe, however, that this will be a difficult thing to handle and should, if attempted, remain under constant and careful review. It should be done principally through editorial selection and emphasis in news output. As Burnett Anderson stated in his memo to Bill Jorden of January 25,4 the best way for USIA to plug this line aside from appropriate handling of spot news would be to prepare and place in some South Vietnamese publication an article or series of articles on the background of Sino-Vietnamese relations-articles which could be picked up and replayed by VOA with proper attribution to Vietnamese sources. It must be recognized that the only way USIA can reach audiences in North Viet-Nam is by radio, and we must constantly keep in mind that anything which VOA broadcasts in the Vietnamese language can be heard by listeners in both North and South Viet-Nam.

Our VOA Vietnamese specialists have pointed out that there are possible pitfalls in such an operation. In emphasizing that VOA Vietnamese broadcasts are heard in both North and South, they point out that emphasis on DRV-Chicom partnership may only serve to increase the dimensions of the threat that looms from the North. Since one of our propaganda objectives in South Viet-Nam has been to dispel the illusion that the Viet Cong are “ten feet tall,” unless very carefully handled the addition of the Chinese factor into the equation in propaganda output might prove counter-productive. Even the traditional ethnic enmity between the two races and the Vietnamese fear of the Chinese may be overshadowed by the elements of sheer power and geographic propinquity involved.

It should perhaps be further pointed out that with over one million Chinese residents in South Viet-Nam who will also hear these broadcasts,- we must exercise caution in emphasizing any traditional enmity between the two races per se, but rather concentrate on the present Chinese Communist regime.

VOA also raises the question: Even if we succeed in tarring Ho Chi Minh with the brush of Chicom satellitism, can we persuade the people of North Viet-Nam that they have any realistic alternative to coming to terms with the Chicoms while they still have a chance? After all, they say, Communist China is doing pretty well in its contest with the Soviets, and its victory over India proved that it’s also doing pretty well with its “adventurist” foreign policy.

In setting forth the foregoing caveats, I do not mean to imply that the project should not be undertaken; I only wish to emphasize that it is a difficult and delicate undertaking which must be carefully planned and constantly reviewed.

As a matter of information policy, we can begin immediately, in VOA news output, to lay a heavier emphasis upon all evidences of DRV-Chicom collaboration and less emphasis upon DRV-Soviet contacts. Further projects, such as placement of materials in Vietnamese publications and subsequent replay on the Vietnamese service of VOA naturally take considerably longer.

If you agree that even despite the aforementioned possible pitfalls, we should begin using VOA for this purpose, please let me know.5

Incidentally, we have within the past few months begun to devote considerably more attention to conditions in North Viet-Nam in our VOA broadcasts.

With regard to your request for information on VOA and South Vietnamese capacity to broadcast into North Viet-Nam, VOA states that the Voice of America short-wave signal in North Viet-Nam is 100 per cent receivable in terms of programs and 90 per cent in terms of frequencies. There is no jamming. There are no frequencies rated as unsatisfactory. The medium wave broadcasts relayed from our transmitters in the Philippines are rated 100 per cent receivable in all respects.

The GVN broadcast capabilities to North Viet-Nam are as follows: Radio Hue: Medium wave 20 KW, 670 KC, primary radius 48 miles, secondary radius 100 miles; short wave, 20 KW, 9670 KC, operates daily beamed to North Viet-Nam.

Saigon medium wave 50 KW, 870 KC, primary radius 106 miles secondary radius 200 miles plus, short wave 40 KW, 7245 KC. There is no information available here on Republic of Viet-Nam’s broadcast reception in North Viet-Nam.

Sincerely,

Ed

1 Source: Department of State, Vietnam Working Group Files: Lot 67 D 54, INF-Information Activities (Gen). Secret.

2 See Document 108.

3 A January 22 memorandum from Jorden to Anderson is in Department of State, Vietnam Working Group Files: Lot 67 D 54, INF-Information Activities (Gen).

4 Not found.

5 An undated copy of a letter from Hilsman to Murrow, drafted by Wood on July 9, with a marginal notation to indicate that the original was sent to Murrow, reads in part: “l agree that the program should be undertaken with all the care and caveats which your letter so clearly sets forth”. (Department of state, Vietnam Working Group Files: Lot 67 D 54, INF-Information Activities (Gen))

153. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 153. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, June 5, 1963, 1 p.m.

1107. For Hilsman from Trueheart. Embtel 1104.2 Thuan called me before breakfast this morning and asked me to come to his house at 8 AM. He said that since seeing me yesterday afternoon he had been involved continuously in a series of separate talks with President, Nhu and Hue Bonze Thich Thien Minh, whom he described as Deputy to Bonze Tri Quang with full power to negotiate with government. He wanted to inform me of these talks, which he believed held out real hope of prompt solution of problem, but he asked that I keep this information for time being strictly to myself in U.S. Mission and that I request Department to limit dissemination of information to greatest possible degree.

Thuan said that in his talks with Minh tentative agreement had been reached on five Buddhist demands. If after seeing President again this morning Thuan was able to assure Minh that there was “good chance” of GVN endorsement of Minh-Thuan agreement, a sort of truce would be put into effect immediately.

This truce would involve Buddhist undertaking to cease all demonstrations and agitation, while GVN would remove not only troops but all uniformed personnel from vicinity of pagodas. In addition there would be a stand-fast on propaganda. Buddhists would stop passing out tracts and GVN would cease radio and press propaganda, e.g., “spontaneous” declarations of support for GVN from obscure Buddhist groups in provinces. Thuan said that Minh had to return to Hue today, as his “delegation of powers expired today”. Although Thuan did not say so, this suggests that negotiations took place in framework of Buddhist ultimatum of some sort. Substance of agreement as described by Thuan is as follows: 1. Flags. Buddhists recognize the superiority of national flag and agree to display it outside pagodas on official, non-religious holidays. On religious holidays national flag and religious flag wil1 be displayed outside pagodas; any number of religious flags may be displayed inside.

2. Decree Law No. 10. GVN disclaims responsibility for this law which was promulgated under Bao Dai and suggests that Buddhists “through normal channels” ask National Assembly to amend it. Under questioning, Thuan admitted that what this really meant was that GVN would see to it that National Assembly passed a new law. (This may be a crucial concession because, according to some reports, Law No. 10 is grievance to which Buddhist leadership attaches most importance. New law would presumably put Buddhists on absolutely equal footing with Catholics in terms of ownership of property, etc.)

3. Right to worship and propagate creed. Buddhists accept that this is guaranteed by Constitution and government to undertake corrective action promptly if Buddhists will specify where Constitution not being respected.

4. Stop arbitrary arrests of Buddhists in Hue. GVN denies that there have been such arrests but undertakes to investigate any specific case cited by Buddhists.

5. Compensation for families of May 8 victims. This is not actually a question of compensation but of GVN acceptance of responsibility and/or punishment of guilty officials. Thuan said that payments of 10,000 plasters had already been made and GVN perfectly prepared to pay more but this had been ex gratia payment involving no acceptance of GVN responsibility. Thuan said that he and Minh had agreed that May 8 meeting had been unauthorized and also that some officials had misused their powers. GVN promised an investigation.

Thuan said that he was very hopeful that President would accept above and that truce would go into effect promptly. Pending action to implement agreement.

Thuan was vague about just how agreement would be implemented. In particular, it was not clear whether it would be a behind the-scenes or a publicly announced agreement. (On form, GVN would prefer the former.) Thuan did say that agreement would have to be put before Vice President’s new commission which would then recommend its formal acceptance by President. Commission, incidentally, did not in fact meet yesterday, owing to fact that Thuan (and Luong) fully occupied in backstage negotiations with Buddhists.

In response to my question, Thuan said that he had no doubt about Minh’s authority to speak for Buddhists in center and he was sure that anything acceptable to Buddhists in center would also be accepted in south-this notwithstanding his previous complaint about lack of Buddhist hierarchy.

Since reported agreement is not very different from what GVN has probably been prepared to accept all along, I am inclined to think that Thuan may not have fully disclosed GVN concessions. For example, I had to draw out of him the fact that GVN undertook to support change in law by National Assembly. I would not be surprised if there were other hidden features, such as government undertaking to wink at more extensive use of Buddhist flags than indicated above or to punish or remove specific officials guilty of abuses.

I am keeping my fingers crossed on all of this but meanwhile request that Thuan’s confidence be respected.

Trueheart

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 26 S VIET. Top Secret; Priority; Limit Distribution.

2 Document 151.

154. Editorial Note 154. Editorial Note

The ANZUS Council met in Wellington, New Zealand, on June 5 and 6, 1963. Australia was represented by Sir Garfield Barwick, Minister of Foreign Affairs and Attorney General, New Zealand by Prime Minister Keith Holyoake, who was also Minister of External Affairs, and the United States by Under Secretary of State W. Averell Harriman.

During the opening session of the Council meeting on June 5, Harriman stated that any additional assistance which Australia and New Zealand could provide in Vietnam would be of great political value as demonstrating multilateral support for the Republic of Vietnam. He noted that Diem had requested liaison pilots. Prime Minister Holyoake offered to provide such assistance, with the understanding that the New Zealand pilots would have a liaison but not a combat role in Vietnam. (Telegram 470 from Wellington, June 6; Department of State, Central Files, DEF 4 ANZUS)

The ANZUS Ministers devoted two paragraphs of the final communique issued on June 6 to the problems posed by the conflict in Vietnam.

For text of the final communique, see American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1963, pages 734-736.

155. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 155. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, June 6, 1963, 1 p.m.

1114. For Hilsman from Trueheart. Embassy telegram 1107.2 Thuan reports another full day on Buddhist problem yesterday and most encouraging progress. GVN commission (Vice President, Thuan and Luong) met from 4 to 10 pm with Buddhist leaders Thich Thien Minh (reftel) and Thich Thien Hoa (representing southern Buddhists). Entire ground had to be gone over again but result, Thuan said, was “precisely” same as Minh-Thuan agreement previously arrived at (reftel). Hence GVN representatives and Buddhist representatives have now officially reached full agreement on referendum. Thuan has assurance that President will ratify it and is also confident that Buddhists will. Minh left for Hue this morning, accompanied by Thuan’s “emissary,” and is expected to return in two or three days for final conclusion of agreement. At that point, full content of agreement will be published and Buddhist leaders will be received by President. Thuan said that Thich Tinh Khiet, octogenarian chief bonze now fasting in Hue, will also come to Saigon for final act. Thuan told me in great confidence that his “emissary”, who is sort of lay bonze—he lives the life of a bonze but does it at home—will live for the next few days with Minh and Khiet in pagoda at Hue to make sure that extremists do not upset agreement.

Meanwhile, truce as described reftel is to go into effect immediately. In this connection, Thuan said that in addition to removing uniformed men from vicinity of pagodas, he had this morning directed military authorities in I Corps area to avoid demonstrations of force as much as possible.

Also joint communique on yesterday’s GVN-Buddhist meeting was issued this morning. Full text follows.3 Operative portion states that exchange of views took place from 1600 to 2200 on the “desiderata of the faithful Buddhists enunciated by the General Association of Buddhists of Viet-Nam. The meeting took place in an atmosphere marked by cordiality and understanding”. Minh is described in communique as Vice President of Buddhist Association of Central Region and member of Committee of General Association of Buddhists of Viet-Nam charged with affairs of Buddhist students and youth.

Finally, President Diem is today delivering radio message.4 I do not yet have text but gist, according to Thuan, is that President has up to now left Hue affair to local authorities. Mistakes have been committed on both sides. President is concerned, asks for calm and time for him to settle problem.

I told Thuan that this was very gratifying and that I was sure that Washington was most appreciative of role he personally has played in it.

Thuan asked that we continue to hold closely details of agreement and means by which it was reached.

Trueheart

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, SOC 14-1 S VIET. Top Secret; Operational Immediate; Limit Distribution.

2 Document 153.

3 Telegram 1115 from Saigon, June 6. (Department of State, Central Files, SOC 14-1 S VIET)

4 The text of this address was transmitted to the Department in telegram 1125 from Saigon, June 7. (Ibid.)

156. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 156. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, June 7, 1963, 9 p.m.

1128. CINCPAC for POLAD. For Hilsman from Trueheart.2 In my view the political context in which requested $15 million NOA has to be considered, apart from broad question of US support, has two main elements: (1) recent negotiations on counterinsurgency funding, and (2) Vietnamese understanding of Staley-Thuc report.3 With regard to (1), results up to now exceed fondest expectations of anyone here and have totally confounded those who confidently predicted new system would spell end of CI program.GVN is holding up its end of bargain, has established special bank account and put money in it, and has issued Presidential decree defining procedures for use of these funds which accords with our understanding. What is more, in the provinces our Rural Affairs Advisers report that coordination with Vietnamese counterparts and readiness to accept and even seek US advice is greater than ever it was when we were signing the checks. This is no doubt too good to last, but I am certainly not keen to do anything which would rock the boat—as this would almost certainly do.

As for Staley-Thuc agreement, position is well understood in Washington. Suffice it to say that, in light of that report, Vietnamese consider that, at minimum, we have no right use against them rises in foreign exchange reserves below $200 million. As maximum, they feel we have positive obligation to help them bring reserve up to that level. (I am not arguing that we should or can ignore GVN foreign exchange level, simply reporting the way they look at it.) Moreover, at least since I came here in October 1961, Vietnamese have been led to believe that US would support CIP up to whatever level required for war effort, provided only that Staley-Thuc and limited worldwide procurement criteria respected. Their need, in budgetary terms, has never been greater, notwithstanding their acceptance of deficit financing and prospect of deficit this year on order of VN $4 to 5 billion (or 5 to 6 percent of GNP).

In this situation any backing off from CIP of about $100 million is bound to be interpreted by GVN as failure on our part to live up to a bargain. Perhaps we can read the fine print differently but this is certainly the way they feel.

It is on above grounds that I would urge that AID Administrator allot full $15 million from contingency fund. Recent events are, I think, probably not relevant in GVN eyes. Pressures have, it is true, been strong but actions GVN has taken have not been thought of, I believe, as a concession to US but as necessary, though belated, moves to retrieve a very dangerous situation.

Re your last paragraph,4 fully agree. We are becoming more and more convinced also that level of imports will continue to rise and that delay in payments may only increase problem next year.

Am surprised at reference to tightness [garble] contingency fund in view AID Administrator’s memorandum to Secretary of May 7,5 forecasting that substantial part of FY 63 contingency fund would be turned back.

Trueheart

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, DEF 19 US-S VIET. Secret; Operational Immediate; Limit Distribution. Repeated to CINCPAC.

2 Trueheart was responding to telegram 1188 to Saigon, June 6, in which Hilsman informed him that AID had recommended a $10 million new obligational authority to meet the shortfall in anticipated USOM requirements in Vietnam, rather than the $15 million authorization which the Embassy felt was necessary. Hilsman noted that “even this amount presents problem in view depleted condition contingency fund and we must explore how harmful delay until soon after July first would be. Request your estimate GVN reaction, especially in light of pressures you have exercised on GVN during past few days, if you let it be known at working levels that money would be soon forthcoming but because of bureaucratic delays not until after July first.” (Ibid., AID (US) S VIET)

3 See Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, vol. I, Documents 72 ff.

4 The final paragraph of telegram 1188 reads as follows:

5 Not found.

157. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 157. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, June 8, 1963, 6 p.m.

1134. CINCPAC for POLAD. Saw Thuan immediately after reading Women’s Solidarity Movement Resolution on Buddhist question (telegraphed separately).2 Thuan stated he had not previously seen resolution. Agreed that it could easily upset agreement reached with Buddhist leaders and was in general deeply discouraged. As Thuan is admittedly powerless to do anything about the declaration, I am with encouragement seeking immediate appointment with President Diem. I shall ask him to repudiate resolution publicly and promptly. Odds against his doing so are very heavy, but I see no other way of retrieving situation.

I have also problem of dealing with local press who are now waiting outside my office. I plan to make no statement for the moment but, depending on outcome of meeting with Diem, I am considering saying for attribution that I consider unfortunate that, at a time when fruitful discussions were apparently going on between GVN and Buddhists, anyone should impugn the motives of one of the parties. I will also indicate indignation at reference to involvement foreign powers.

Any guidance Dept may have would be welcome.

Fuller report follows later. I am now leaving for Presidency.3

“Two hour meeting with Diem, just concluded, produced no visible result. Full report follows. Meanwhile, wish Department to know that I have decided against making any statement here, at least for time being.” (Telegram 1135 from Saigon, June 8, 8 p.m.; Ibid.)

Trueheart

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, SOC 14-1 S VIET. Secret; Operational Immediate; Limited Distribution. Repeated to CINCPAC. Received at 7:20 a.m.

2 Telegram 1133 from Saigon, June 8, transmitted the text of a motion adopted by the Central Committee of the Women’s Solidarity Movement on June 7. The motion, which was released to the press on June 8, opened with an expression of respect for the Buddhist philosophy and veneration for Buddha, but castigated those Buddhists involved in demonstrations against the government as anti-nationalists “exploited and controlled by communism and oriented to sowing of disorder and neutralism.” The motion called upon the government to cease allowing itself to be deafened by idle clamor of political inspiration and immediately expel all foreign agitators whether they wear monks’ robes or not; that it keep vigilance on all others, particularly those inclined to take Viet Nam for satellite of foreign power or organization; that it treat as deserved, those who seek to disrupt public order.” (Ibid.)

3 Trueheart reported on his meeting with Diem as follows:

158. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam 158. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam1

Washington, June 8, 1963, 12:55 p.m.

1194. Embtel 1135.2 Agree your decision not make public statement at this time. Unable judge here but if occasion arises you think public statement would deter repetition this sort of thing by Madame Nhu, Dept would highly approve.

You are requested inform Thuan or Diem under instructions that to counteract regrettable effect Madam Nhu’s statement some immediate and concrete move by GVN is essential. U.S. urgently suggests for example that Diem, under emergency powers available to him repeal French Decree Law 10 which discriminates against Buddhists. You are also instructed inquire officially whether Madam Nhu’s statement, which has at least semi-official character, was cleared in advance by GVN.

You should inform GVN orally or by note that in official U.S. view Madame Nhu’s intolerant statement has seriously weakened GVN’s position as defender of freedom against Communist tyranny and has greatly increased difficulty of U.S. role as supporter of GVN. Her statement will damage American public and Congressional support for GVN. U.S. Government cannot be expected continue aid and assist GVN at heavy cost in men and material unless this policy fully supported by American citizens. Any more statements by her of this nature may irreparably damage US-GVN cooperative effort at very time when this cooperation is showing successful results in defending Viet-Nam against communist aggression.

FYI—Above sent without awaiting full report your talk with Diem. Should nevertheless be transmitted to GVN as official U.S. position unless you have very good reasons for not doing so of which Dept unaware.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, SOC 14-1 S VIET Secret; Operational Immediate; Limit Distribution. Drafted by Wood and cleared by Hilsman. Repeated to CINCPAC for POLAD.

2 See footnote 3, Document 157.

159. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam 159. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam1

Washington, June 8, 1963, 5:37 p.m.

1196. As result preliminary study Buddhist problem here, following suggestions submitted for your consideration:

A. Immediate Actions

(1) Since Decree Law 10 apparently one of chief Buddhist grievances, suggest GVN be urged repeal it immediately by decree without waiting for action by National Assembly, which we understand will not meet until September. Believe under his emergency powers Diem could thus demonstrate GVN good faith, move toward prompt solution this issue.

(2) You or Nuncio suggest GVN avoid giving mourning for Pope John2 any official cast.

(3) Believe might be well urge GVN at least temporarily play down Personalism in public pronouncements and GVN propaganda because of popular identification Personalism with Catholicism.

(4) Believe it would be helpful if RVNAF now appointed Buddhist chaplains. Understand Buddhists may later demand this move and see no reason why GVN should not forestall them. In urging such action you might point out even US army has few Buddhist chaplains. Perhaps this matter could be raised on strictly military level, between MACV and ARVN, without going to GVN.

B. Institutional Channels for Buddhist-GVN Communication

(1) At local level as we have previously suggested (Deptel 1170)3 believe recognition by GVN of village cult committees (Hoi Hung) would be most useful step. Probably GVN should not attempt create such committees where they don’t exist as they would then be patently creatures of GVN. Rather local GVN officials should be ordered to meet with them regularly, even if meetings non-productive, and meetings should be publicized.

(2) At national level we earlier suggested creation of Dept Religious Affairs under direction respected lay Buddhist. After further consideration realize it would be difficult find person who could represent and be respected by all citizens of Viet-Nam with their wide variety of religious beliefs. Further, position of such a person in GVN would soon be made impossible by members President Diem’s family.

Alternatively suggest for Embassy’s consideration that GVN might be encouraged to create a National Religious Council (under whatever name seemed best) to which leaders all Buddhist and Christian denominations and sects would be invited to send representatives. Such an organization could be somewhat on model National Economic Council which has been favorably regarded by the GVN and would deal with Vice President Tho’s Commission.

(3) DRV has two monks in National Assembly (point which was emphasized last meeting World Federation Buddhists). Might be very effective gesture for GVN to permit several monks or lay Buddhist leaders run for and win seats in August National Assembly elections.

C. In addition your consideration and comments on above suggestions, also request your estimate of whether or not specific political groups are behind Buddhist unrest, degree of political motivation Buddhist leaders and demonstrators, any evidence political groups gaining control of Buddhist organizations. Is there evidence Buddhist leaders are trying to organize rural population to support their demands? Also believe it important that we know whether Diem regards Buddhist “revolt” as primarily political or religious in motivation and would like your view.4

Department is preparing on crash basis draft study on Buddhism in Viet-Nam based on consultation with Gard and other knowledgeable persons here and on quick review available documentation. Recommendations this telegram based on this study.5

Dept will pouch study next week and suggests Embassy use it as starting point for more thorough study in Viet-Nam. This might be responsibility qualified Embassy officer who would be given authority work with and call on all parts Saigon Task Force. If Embassy desires, Dept will try arrange send Heavner who was in charge study here, to Saigon for about 10 days to help out with understanding final study would be Embassy responsibility.6 It would be difficult spare Heavner now and funds always a problem, but Dept prepared make every effort if requested by Embassy.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, SOC 14-1 S VIET. Secret; Priority. Drafted by Heavner and Wood and cleared by Hilsman. Repeated to CINCPAC for POLAD.

2  Pope John XXIII died on June 3.

3 In telegram 1170 to Saigon, June 3, the Department asked whether the Hoi Hung could be “officially reconstituted to include reps all local religions as well as village cult, officially recognized, and given advisory role to village and hamlet councils? Such step could be billed as GVN effort provide full religious freedom and representation within context strategic hamlet program.” (Department of State, Central Files, SOC 14-1 S VIET)

4 On June 9, the Embassy replied, in telegram 1138 from Saigon: “Appreciate Department’s suggestions reference telegram. First two suggestions under immediate actions have already been discussed informally with Thuan (National Assembly in session until end June; would not propose insist on presidential action if GVN can produce prompt Assembly action on decree 10).” (Ibid.)

5 The results of the draft study on the Buddhist problem were summarized in a June 8 memorandum from Wood to Hilsman. (Ibid., Vietnam Working Group Files: Lot 67 D 54, POL 25 Demos Protests Riots) A more comprehensive study of the Buddhist problem was submitted to Hilsman on July 2 in a memorandum by Richard A. Gard entitled “U.S. Policy and Program Considerations Regarding Buddhism in Asia.” (Washington National Records Center, RG 306, USIA/IAF/VN Files: FRC 68 A 4933, POL 13-6 Political Affairs and Relations, Buddhists 1964/1965)

6 A June 20 letter from Trueheart to Wood indicates that Wood had enclosed the draft study on Buddhism in a letter to Trueheart on June 10. Trueheart wrote that the background provided by the study was “most helpful”, but that “events have gone beyond the stage where a study of Buddhism in Vietnam in greater depth by the Task Force here would be worth the considerable effort it would entail.” Consequently, Trueheart did not feel that it would be necessary for Heavner to come to Saigon. (Ibid., RG 84, Saigon Embassy Files,FRC 67 A 677, 570.3 Religion, Church, Buddhist Affairs (May-June 1963)

160. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 160. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, June 9, 1963, 1 a.m.

1136. CINCPAC for POLAD. For Hilsman from Trueheart. Embtel 1135.2 President received me at 5 PM this afternoon (June 8) within minutes after my request. He was throughout two hour interview entirely relaxed and friendly, and he permitted frequent interruptions in a way that is rare for him. Unfortunately, I have no reason to believe that anything I said to him moved him. Opened by giving him French text of Women’s Solidarity Movement (WSM) resolution. He read it line by line as if he had never seen it before. (Nothing he said subsequently indicated prior knowledge.) I went on to explain that I had been profoundly disappointed to see this resolution. I had understood that GVN commission under Vice President had achieved large measure of agreement with Buddhist leaders on their demands (late in conversation he himself summarized terms of agreement very much as Thuan had given them to me), and that among other things it had been understood that there would be a truce (detente) on propaganda from both sides pending final settlement. WSM resolution seemed to me a violation of this. I wanted therefore to ask if he would disavow it, would dissociate GVN from it. I feared that otherwise we might see renewal of agitation and demonstrations bringing on government repressive measures and in effect loss of all that had been achieved in past week. I pointed out also that if this came to pass my government would very likely consider that GVN was at fault and would have to dissociate itself from GVN actions—as it had already done in denying that USAF planes had been used in lifting troops to Hue (Diem confirmed that he had read Department’s statement).3

Diem said at once that he could not disavow WSM resolution. In light of his later remarks, I fear that the general sentiments of resolution are close to his own. However, he limited himself to saying that it was necessary to warn people against extremists who were misusing affair to further their own interests. (He rarely referred to VC in frequent repetitions of this theme.)

I then turned to report I had from Helble that Buddhists still in pagoda at Hue were not being allowed to receive food or medical attention from outside. Diem said he was sure this could not be true and he promptly telephoned Minister of Interior and asked for report. It had not been received by time I left. (Helble subsequently reported that some food was brought into pagoda late this morning but no doctors had entered permitted or not.)4

I also said I had heard reports that GVN planes had dropped leaflets over Hue yesterday which had agitated populace. I was not sure of facts but wondered if he knew of it. Diem said he did not and was sure report was incorrect. Helble subsequently informed me that leaflets were in fact dropped and that one of them consisted of strong attack on bonze Tri Quang—generally considered leader of Hue demonstrations-followed by passage demanding [arrest?] of bonze Khiet—octogenarian nominal leader—who is really in charge. This sounds rather more inflammatory than WSM resolution and I shall follow up.

Remainder of conversation consisted largely of Diem’s exposition of GVN position. Main points of this are outlined below. In general, it was a hard line and, although he said he was ready to continue talks with Buddhists, neither his attitude nor his words suggested that he saw this as solution. at least until Buddhists “found themselves isolated”.

Diem considers that Buddhists have themselves violated propaganda truce. Many bonzes, he said, are continuing to distribute tracts and to pass out tendentious information to foreign press. He brushed aside my argument that there has not been time for word to filter down on Buddhists’ side and charged that BonzeThich Minh (principal negotiator from Hue) was passing out line that government has capitulated.

At one point in long conversation, Diem charged in terms [sic] that Buddhists had been negotiating in bad faith.

Diem also believes that troubles in Hue stem primarily from ineptitude of local GVN officials. But fault is not their actions on May 8 but rather that prior to that date they had given too much encouragement to “certain” Buddhist elements. Thereafter their delinquencies consisted in not carrying out effective security measures and in not filing prompt reports on what had happened. It was not until May 24, for example, that chief medical official completed report showing that May 8 deaths resulted from concussion rather than fragmentation grenades.

I asked Diem if he was saying that, if disturbances resumed, stronger measures should be used. He replied “the necessary measures”. Public order had of course to be maintained. He went on to say things which suggested to me that he believes that improved situation in last few days is result of more effective security measures. He may of course be right but, in any event, he is clearly giving higher priority to security measures than to negotiations for immediate future.

In course of discussion I used every argument I could muster to persuade him that only satisfactory solution, at least from US point of view, was peaceful one, through negotiations. I also said quite flatly that, in my opinion, author of resolution (well known to both of us to be Madame Nhu) was seeking to undermine agreement already reached. Finally, I expressed resentment at reference in resolution to “those inclined to take Vietnam for a satellite of a foreign power”. This phraseology, I said, we had learned to translate as “USA”. All this he received with equanimity.

At end of meeting I repeated arguments used at beginning and asked him to reconsider question of disavowing resolution. He did not reply-and this is only possibly bright spot I have to report.

For the moment, I would recommend that Department make no statement and that we watch events for a day or so. It may be that Diem will react belatedly to my arguments today—he sometimes does. Or it may be that WSM resolution will not have effect on negotiations that I anticipate. In any event, there seems to be no advantage in precipitate action. I will of course be doing what I can with Thuan to try to keep negotiations on the track.

Trueheart

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, SOC 14-1 S VIET. Secret; Operational Immediate; Limit Distribution. Repeated to CINCPAC. Received at 2:47 p.m., June 8.

2 See footnote 3. Document 157.

3 On June 6, Department of State Spokesman Lincoln White stated at a press conference that “no US planes or personnel have been involved in any way in the transport of troops or police to Hue.” (National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Transcripts of Department of State News Briefings)

4 The reports from Helble cited here and below apparently were made by telephone.

161. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 161. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, June 9, 1963, 8 p.m.

1137. CINCPAC for POLAD. Deptel 1194.2 I had full discussion with Thuan on Buddhist problem and its ramifications at his home this afternoon. Following are major points: 1. I opened by telling him that I had come to discuss with him new instructions from Washington. I would wish later to carry out these instructions formally with Diem or, possibly, with him.

2. I then reviewed with him in detail conversation with President yesterday (Embtel 1136),3 explaining concerns which conversation raised in my mind.

3. I next gave him a very detailed run-down of my instructions (Deptel 1194), reminding him again that this was a simple preview.

4. Turning to related questions, I summarized for him CAS report4 of plans for GVN organized, ostensibly Buddhist counter-demonstrations scheduled to take place in Saigon June 10 or 11. Reportedly these demonstrations would use “false-bonzes” from southern provinces brought to Saigon by GVN, Republican Youths some disguised as Bonzes and some in regular uniform, and hoodlum elements from Cholon—the whole organized by Ngo Trong Hieu. I told Thuan that I could not vouch for this report but that if anything of this sort was being planned for Saigon or elsewhere, I wanted to ask that it be stopped instantly. This was not a preview but a request on which I wanted him to act this afternoon.

5. Similarly, I told him that I had intelligence reports that a Catholic ceremony in memory of Pope John was planned for Danang June 10. At this ceremony reportedly a resolution was to be passed calling for removal of Quang Nam Province Chief Major Thiet, on the ground that he had been too lenient with the Buddhists. I asked that this action; if in fact it was planned, be also stopped immediately.

6. I told Thuan I would like for him to get word to the President that I now had confirmed information that GVN aircraft had dropped leaflets in Hue on June 7 and that these leaflets contained attacks on principal Buddhist leaders in Hue.

7. I related to Thuan report I had that four newsmen (MichaudAFP, Sheehan UPI, Browne AP and Perry Times,) had been detained for one hour at third arondissement police station where they had gone to check on report that certain Bonzes had been arrested. Police questioned and photographed them and sought unsuccessfully have them sign long statement in Vietnamese which they were told was certification that they had come to police station solely to gather news. I told Thuan that this struck me as foolish and counterproductive action. (Browne subsequently told me that he had actually ridden to police station with Bonze called in for questioning, so I dare say police had reason to raise their eyebrows. Correspondents have also told me that some Bonzes are openly stating that they seeking to involve foreign press in their cause. Correspondents are consequently in a quandary, not wanting to miss any news but on other hand not wanting to be “used”. I told them they would have to use their own judgment.)

8. Reviewed with Thuan situation at Tu Dam Pagoda, on which neither he nor I had any new information (telephone circuits to Hue are out today). I stated that I was concerned with reports that people inside pagoda could not get food and medical care. It would be most regrettable and vastly damaging development if any one should die for lack of care. Thuan said President had asked him to tell me that a Dr. Buu Du, a Buddhist, was entering pagoda and caring for people inside. He was told also to say that President understood people did not want to leave pagoda. I said I had other reports that they were afraid to come out for fear of arrest and that police were also asking their friends and relatives to make written request for their release but many of these were also afraid do so.

9. I reminded Thuan of another earlier conversation of about a week ago (not reported) in which before Pope John’s death I had expressed concern over possible GVN-sponsored ceremony. Thuan said he knew of nothing planned except requiem mass June 11 organized by Papal Nuncio (I have accepted invitation by Nuncio to attend this mass and plan to do so). Thuan added President had also told him to tell me that he talked last night with Archbishop Thuc in Hue and that no Catholic demonstrations were being planned there (this is not a subject which I raised with the President, or which I wish to raise with him directly).

10. Finally Thuan told me, unofficially and strictly confidentially, that President had informed him that after our conversation yesterday he had directed that Madame Nhu’s statement (resolution) not be run on radio or in Vietnamese newspapers. Unfortunately, it is lead story under banner headline in today’s English-language Times of Viet-Nam, which probably went to press well before our meeting.I concluded meeting by telling Thuan that my concerns about this whole affair went far beyond religious issue involved. I thought that as a result of handling of this matter, GVN was in real and imminent danger of losing broad mass of its support in the country and that such a thing would more than offset all the progress which had been made here in the last year. Thuan indicated agreement with this. He also expressed dismay that he and GVN were unable to prevent the appearance of something like the WSM resolution.

We left it that Thuan would convey the above-numbered points to Diem and arrange for me to see him.

Trueheart

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, SOC 14-1 S VIET. Secret; Operational Immediate; Limited Distribution. Repeated to CINCPAC. Received at 9:16 a.m.

2 Document 158.

3 Document 160.

4 Not further identified.

162. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 162. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, June 10, 1963, 6 p.m.

1141. CINCPAC for POLAD. Embtel 1137.2 Thuan reported at 9 am that he had made some progress in talks with Diem and Nhu following our meeting yesterday (reftel): 1. Re Decree Law 10, Diem said he could not repeal it by Presidential action because National Assembly in session. (This is probably correct reading of Constitution; it is perhaps debatable whether he could act under emergency powers but that the latter apply only to matters of “security and manpower mobilization”.) I asked about possibility of quick action by Assembly. Thuan said that this would take time because law long and complicated. I said that if, for example, prominent Deputy announced intention to introduce legislation and government let it be known that it would support it, this might be all that was necessary. Thuan said that he would try for this.

2. Answer to our inquiry was that WSM resolution had not been cleared in advance by GVN. Diem had objected to characterization of resolution as “Madame Nhu’s statement,” pointing out that it was product bf popular organization. Latter remark was made (and received) with a smile.

3. Regarding reports of planned demonstrations in Saigon organized by Ngo Trong Hieu, Thuan said that President had telephoned Hieu in his presence and latter had denied report. In any case, Thuan said he had talked to Nhu as well about this and could assure me no such demonstrations would take place. Similarly for the reported action in Danang.

4. Re pagoda at Hue, Thuan said he was still working on this but r hoped to arrange for assurances to be given people inside that they could leave without fear of arrests or other reprisals. This might not apply to certain government functionaries who were in pagoda.

5. No GVN-sponsored ceremonies will be held for Pope John.

6. Thuan confirmed that WSM resolution banned on radio and will not appear in the Vietnamese newspapers. In fact, we have not found it in any papers and VTVN informed USIS this morning that resolution had been broadcast two or three times before presidential order received to ban it.

7. Regarding my statement to Thuan that I judged President was not interested in negotiations with Buddhist leaders until they were isolated, Thuan said President thought I had misunderstood; he wanted to isolate the extremists. I said I thought this was a distinction without a difference.

8. Thuan reported that Vice President Tho’s commission was meeting at 10 o'clock to consider new letter received from Saigon Buddhist leader.3 This letter was moderate in tone, acknowledged that GVN had taken certain steps in Hue, such as removing troops and traffic blocks, but asked for further action on cordoning off of pagoda. Thuan was hopeful that talks with Buddhists, including representatives from Hue, could continue.

9. Finally Thuan said that my remarks about air-dropping of leaflets in Hue and detaining of newsmen in Saigon had been passed to President, as had everything else I had told him.

Thuan asked when I would want to see the President to carry out my instructions officially. I replied that I had no particular interest in making demarches for their own sake, that I was primarily interested in seeing problem of Buddhists resolved. As Thuan seemed to be making some progress, I thought it might be a good idea to wait until after lunch before deciding about seeing the President. Thuan agreed but asked me to give him until tomorrow morning when we could have breakfast together and decide where to go from here. I said I would hold off until then, subject to any new instructions from Dept. I also said that what I would want to get across to President, apart from what was in my instructions, was that President should take this whole affair into his own hands and ensure that those negotiating with Buddhists were not undercut from any quarter.

In response to his query, I told Thuan that I had no plan to make any public statement at this time. He knows from our talk yesterday that I have authority to make one and I gathered from Thuan’s manner that this rather worries GVN.

Comment: Department will appreciate that I am handling instructions in such a way as in effect to be able to use them twice. Whether or not it will be desirable to repeat directly to Diem what Thuan has already told him is debatable. Unless the Department has objection, I propose to decide this in the light of progress Thuan is able to report tomorrow morning.4

Since dictating above have received word Thuan wants to see me at 6 pm.5

Trueheart

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, SOC 14-1 S VIET. Secret; Operational Immediate; Limit Distribution: Repeated to CINCPAC.

2 Document 161.

3 The substance of an exchange of letters between Vice President Tho and the Buddhist Executive Committee, including the June 9 letter under reference, was transmitted to the Department of State in telegram 1144 from Saigon, June 10. (Department of State, Central Files, SOC 14-1 S VIET)

4 In telegram 1199 to Saigon, June 10, 5:30 p.m., the Department agreed with this procedure and added: “Suggest you particularly press GVN on removing cordon from around Pagoda in Hue and on most rapid possible repeal law no. 10. Due rapidity developments you are authorized decide on your own the timing of these and other demarches.” (Ibid.)

5 See footnote 2, Document 165.

163. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 163. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, June 11, 1963.

1146. CINCPAC for POLAD. At about 1000 hours this morning Buddhist bonze burned himself to death2 at corner Phan Dinh Phung and Le Van Duyet Streets in Saigon. Preliminary information indicates Bonze (name unknown) was surrounded by massed ranks of from 200 to 300 Bonzes, applied gasoline to robe, and ignited it. Police tried vainly break through ranks of Bonzes. Embassy officer has viewed body. Burning viewed by crowd of 400-500 spectators.

Quang Duc’s suicide was photographed by Malcolm Browne of Associated Press. Several American newsmen had been informed in advance that something important might happen that morning near Xa Loi Pagoda, but only Browne responded. His photograph, taken an instant after the flames erupted, was published around the world. In John Mecklin’s view, the photograph “had a shock effect of incalculable value to the Buddhist cause, becoming a symbol of the state of things in Vietnam.” (Mecklin, Mission in Torment, p. 157)

Crowd orderly but growing. Police maintaining Bonzes in places and refusing permit procession to continue. Reportedly another Bonze prepared disembowel himself in protest today.

Trueheart

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, SOC 14-1 S VIET. Unclassified; Operational Immediate. Repeated to CINCPAC. The time of transmission is not given on the source text. The telegram was received at 12:08 a.m.

2 according to a report by COMUSMACV on June 12, the incident took place shortly after 11 a.m. The MACV report identified the bonze who died as Quang Duc, estimated the supporting group of bonzes and nuns at 400-500, and noted that the Buddhists used loudspeakers to proclaim that Quang Duc had died to emphasize the five demands made upon the South Vietnamese Government after the May 8 incident in Hue. (Telegram 121015Z from Admino COMUSMACV to the Joint Chiefs of Staff, June 12; Ibid.)

164. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 164. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, June 11, 1963, noon.

1147. CINCPAC for POLAD. Procession of approximately 400 bonzes carried body of dead bonze to Xa Loi Pagoda near USOM. At about 0130 an estimated 800-1000 bonzes now inside pagoda. Large group of pro-Buddhist students have now formed cordon around pagoda and refusing admission to anyone. Students have raised crude banner in English stating “This Buddhist priest cremated himself for five items demanded of the government.” Meeting at pagoda broke up at 1200 and bonzes quickly dispersed, leaving approximately 100 bonzes inside.

Very few spectators in evidence; however large group of bonzes and lay persons estimated at 2000 now gathering at site of cremation. Crowd orderly. Large number of police (estimated at 1000) in area. Police have allowed bonzes to proceed at will within area which is cordoned off and have attempted keep bonzes and spectators separate.2

Banners in English and Vietnamese carried by bonzes read as follows: “A Buddhist priest burns himself for our five requests,” and “Do not deceive us and the people in any way.”

Dead bonze identified as Thich Quang Duc, a middle level bonze from provinces (reportedly from Nha Trang but unconfirmed). He arrived on scene of his death in a vehicle with central Viet Nam license plates and carrying his own can of gasoline. Burning took place in front of Cambodian representation residence, apparently for purpose obtaining Cambodian attention.3

Colonel Tung, Commander Vietnamese Special Forces, has ordered two Ranger companies of Special Forces moved in from Long Thanh Camp (between Saigon and Vung Tau). Ranger companies will be disposed in the camp near Tan Son Nhut Airport. Colonel Tung stated that he expects further trouble today. Seventh Airborne Battalion also alerted according to MACV.

Reports persist that other bonzes may sacrifice themselves in front of public buildings.

Trueheart

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, SOC 14-1 S VIET. Confidential; Operational Immediate. Repeated to CINCPAC. Received at 2:21 a.m.

2 The Embassy reported later in the day that at 6 p.m. the police arrested some 30 nuns and 5 bonzes after they refused to move a prayer meeting into nearby Xa Loi Pagoda. Access to the area cordoned-off around the pagoda was then limited to residents of the immediate area. While disturbances mounted in Saigon, the Embassy noted that the situation in Hue seemed to have returned to normal. (Telegram 1158 from Saigon, June 11; Ibid.)

3 On June 13, Charles C. Flowerree of the Embassy sent a memorandum to Acting Deputy Chief of Mission Melvin L. Manfull in which he assessed the impact of the Buddhist problem on relations between South Vietnam and Cambodia. Flowerree pointed to a May 22 speech by Prince Sihanouk, in which Sihanouk charged that President Diem was mistreating both Vietnamese and Khmer Buddhists. Flowerree noted that on June 9 the Times of Viet Nam, which often spoke for the Diem government, published an article underlining the prominent role of Cambodian, or Hinayana bonzes in the Buddhist difficulties in South Vietnam, in line with what the paper charged was the Cambodian policy of attempting to impose neutralism on Vietnam through diplomatic and propaganda efforts. Noting that “the GVN is ready and eager to see a fine Cambodian hand in all the organized Buddhist actions,” Flowerree concluded that the self-immolation of the bonze Quang Duc in front of the Cambodian Embassy tended to feed the suspicions of the Diem government. (Washington National Records Center, RG 84, Saigon Embassy Files: FRC 67 A 677, 320 GVN-Cambodia Jan-June 63)

165. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 165. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, June 11, 1963, 5 p.m.

1151. CINCPAC for POLAD. Embtel 1148.2 Saw Thuan at his house at lunch time. He had talked with President and Nhu this morning. Contrary reftel, he said there had been no Cabinet meeting. President had talked with individual ministers, however, and might assemble Cabinet this afternoon. He was urging conciliatory action on President and thought he was making some headway. His mood was quite different from last night, and I would guess that events of this morning have considerably strengthened his personal position.

I told Thuan that, in my judgment, GVN position abroad and probably in the country was very precarious. I doubted that position could be restored without an immediate, dramatic and conciliatory move by President Diem personally. Concessions which should be made would, I thought, have to go beyond things Thuan had privately told me last week Diem was prepared to do, and he would have to make his move in a manner which I knew went against his grain. I told Thuan, again as a personal opinion, that I thought if President did not do something of this sort this afternoon he might well be faced with a public US Government disassociation of itself from whole affair, with quite possibly a strong overtone of disapproval of GVN handling Buddhist problem since May 8. (This is, in fact, what I now recommend to Department unless we have action or the promise of it before the day is out.) Thuan took more or less verbatim notes of this and said he would bring it to the attention of the President at once.3

I also told Thuan that since Buddhist action this morning so obviously planned in advance, it seemed reasonable to suppose that there would be other incidents today. I said I was aware of movement of certain troop units to Saigon today and alerting of others. Possibility of clashes was therefore very real.

I also called to Thuan’s attention that Women’s Solidarity Movement had today published long letter of protest to UPI management on reporting of Neil Sheehan.4 On past form, I expected move to expel Sheehan. I said this was a “stupid” action. (Thuan asked if he could quote me and I said yes.) I said that I was also incensed, and knew Washington would be, that two days after the strongest warnings against Madame Nhu’s sounding off, she had done it again. I also pointed out that notwithstanding earlier statement that previous outburst would not appear in Vietnamese press, we had found that it was printed in two papers yesterday afternoon.

Thuan said he would let me know later this afternoon what progress he is making.5

Late item: As of noon, usually reliable CAS source indicated all VNAF personnel restricted to base effective 1230 hours. Air Force personnel additionally informed that they would receive instructions from JGS in early afternoon. VNAF Chief of Staff (Lt. Col. Do Khac Mai is a Buddhist) reportedly remarked to source that he and other senior officers were fed up with situation and that he could not understand why Americans stood by and lost golden opportunity to rectify situation in Vietnam, by which he clearly meant overthrow of government.

American employees and dependents have been notified to avoid crowds and demonstrations. USOM employees dismissed for afternoon, as USOM building very close to Xa Loi Pagoda. I have also asked principal to close American community school this afternoon. All above without public announcement.

At present situation quiet at Xa Loi Pagoda and at National Assembly.

Trueheart

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, SOC 14-1 S VIET. Secret; Operational Immediate; Limit Distribution. Repeated to CINCPAC. Received at 7:37 a.m.

2 In telegram 1148 from Saigon, June 11, Trueheart reported that his conversations the previous evening with Thuan and Ngo Trong Hieu indicated that “as of that time Diem had decided situation fully under control and was preparing in a day or so to issue communique stating final government position.” Trueheart noted, however, that the situation had been “drastically changed by self-cremation of bonze in Central Saigon.” He stated that an emergency Cabinet session began sitting at 11:30 a.m. to consider the situation. Trueheart planned to see President Diem and “ask for dramatic conciliatory gesture.” (Ibid.)

3 In a radio address to the nation at 7 p.m., President Diem appealed for calm and noted that discussions with Buddhist leaders were continuing. He stated that extremists had distorted the facts of the situation, but he assured Buddhists that they “can count on the Constitution, in other words, on me.” (Telegram 1156 from Saigon, June 11, received at 8:59 a.m., Ibid.)

4 This letter, which was published in the Times of Viet-Nam on June 11, was summarized in telegram 1153 from Saigon, June 11. (Ibid.)

5 Trueheart saw Thuan at 6 p.m. and found him in a “relatively optimistic mood.” Thuan hoped that President Diem’s radio address would serve to maintain calm until the meeting scheduled for the following day with Buddhist leaders. Thuan would not say what concessions government negotiators would be prepared to make, but Trueheart noted that the Vice President’s Commission was “very much back in business today.” (Telegram 1157 from Saigon, June 11; received at 9:06 a.m; Ibid.)

166. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 166. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, June 11, 1963, 7 p.m.

1155. CINCPAC for POLAD. Deptel 1196; Embtel 1138.2

A. following are factors in current Buddhist situation as we currently see it:

Buddhists

1. Buddhist demonstrations and opposition to GVN began as reaction to specific GVN limitations on religious expression (i.e., flying of Buddhist flags outside pagoda premises). Whether Buddhist reaction was spontaneous or premeditated is not clear; however, those actions in fact articulated long-standing Buddhist sense of grievance at religious discrimination. By now Buddhist actions have taken on political significance, partly because of GVN’s slowness to react politically to Buddhist demands, speed with which it has exercised repressive measures, transparent attempts of GVN to draw up “spontaneous” expression of Buddhist support, and opportunity issue provided to other dissatisfied elements to express opposition to GVN. While Buddhists still seeking largely religious ends, fact is that Buddhist leaders question GVN’s intentions and sincerity to such degree that some of them beginning question whether GVN as presently constituted will ever bring them satisfaction.

2. Buddhist actions have not all been above reproach. Although to Embassy’s knowledge, they are still seeking satisfaction only on their five demands, sufficient momentum may have developed behind their protest movement so that five demands will themselves be given liberal interpretation or be overtaken by larger and more extensive demands. Some Buddhists are reportedly talking about bringing about overthrow of GVN. In addition Buddhists have not respected propaganda truce but have been distributing tracts, encouraging further demonstrations, and sought to enlist foreign press in their cause.

3. There is no evidence that any specific political group is behind Buddhist unrest. On contrary, there is evidence that Buddhists have resisted temptation enlist aid political opposition groups and that in fact have repelled effort by such groups to jump on bandwagon overtly. Similarly, there is no evidence that VC are exerting any direct influence on Buddhists at this juncture; there is, however, some evidence that VC are waiting expectantly in wings for propitious moment to exploit situation politically and/or militarily.

4. Opposition to GVN’s position has tended to unify Buddhist groups; moreover, there is evidence that Buddhists are trying at least inform, if not organize, rural population in bid for their support. Their reasonably successful resistance to GVN without serious punishment so far has given them confidence. Thus, it is quite possible that Buddhists will press GVN beyond five demands. What is not so certain, however, is whether Buddhist groups sufficiently organized and cohesive to back any agreement reached by Buddhist leaders negotiating with GVN.

GVN

1. In early stages “Buddhist revolt” GVN undoubtedly misjudged strength Buddhist emotions and determination and thought Buddhists would bow quickly to forceful measures.

2. Constructive steps taken by GVN have come too slowly to have maximum impact on Buddhists, and such steps have been taken only under pressure of events or at strong US urging. GVN has at times given impression of being divided within itself on how to cope with Buddhists.

3. GVN from beginning has regarded Buddhist “revolt” as political problem and politically motivated since potential threat it poses to regime is political. In this regard, GVN finds itself in quandary, which to some extent explains its slow and uncertain actions to placate Buddhists, its tendency to use forceful measures to restore status quo, and even Mme. Nhu’s unhelpful statement. GVN realizes that giving satisfaction to Buddhists could (a) lead to further Buddhist demands and (b) temptations on part of other groups to follow Buddhist example.

B. At this moment, we believe there is still some chance that GVN will come to satisfactory terms with Buddhists. This will depend on whether dialogue between two parties can be maintained and whether it succeeds in dispelling suspicion and distrust on both sides. Even assuming that agreement can now be reached—and that Buddhist leaders can rally rank and file support for it—Buddhist revolt and GVN’s record of response to it will leave mark in terms further gap in communication between GVN and people, as well as in terms GVN fear that similar trouble will pop up elsewhere.

It is in context possibility that two parties can come to terms that GVN will be most receptive to suggestions under parts A and B of Deptel 1196. Regarding part A, suggestions (1) and (2) have already been raised informally with Thuan, who indicated that GVN exploring what action feasible on Decree 10 and that no official GVN commemoration planned for Pope John. We would be reluctant pass on suggestion (3) which certain to irritate GVN but unlikely have any important benefits, if accepted, since we doubt seriously that public understands Personalism or its background sufficiently for soft-pedalling it to have any impact. Re (4), I will suggest to General Harkins that he explore ways and means to raise this with GVN.

Suggestions under part B are of course for longer term. Their implementation now unlikely aid current situation materially, since any impact would take time. We concerned at suggestion (3) under part B, since it implies “packing the Assembly” with US blessing; also, given nature Assembly, Buddhists likely consider Assembly monks as kept men. Further, we question whether good idea deliberately mix religion and politics. We will explore how handle this one, but inclined believe we should go no further than suggesting that GVN consider feasibility of monks presenting candidacies for Assembly.

Above estimate was prepared prior self-cremation incident and today’s talk with Thuan. If dialogue between GVN and Buddhists breaks down or becomes harsher GVN likely be unwilling take actions Buddhist could interpret as weakness. For example, in connection with suggestion regarding monks in National Assembly, believe we cannot rule out possibility that if Buddhist unrest continues, Diem will postpone Assembly elections altogether or carry them out in “safe” areas of country.

Appreciate Department’s effort in preparing background study on Buddhism in Vietnam. Would like examine it before deciding to ask for Heavner WG’s services.3

Trueheart

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, SOC 14-1 S VIET. Secret; Priority. Repeated to CINCPAC.

2 Telegram 1196 is printed as Document 159; regarding telegram 1138, see footnote 4 thereto.

3 See footnote 6, Document 159.

167. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam 167. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam1

Washington, June 11, 1963, 11:03 p.m.

1207. In our judgment the Buddhist situation is dangerously near the breaking point. Accordingly, you authorized to tell Diem that in the United States view it is essential for the GVN promptly to take dramatic action to regain confidence of Buddhists and that the GVN must fully and unequivocally meet Buddhist demands as set forth in Embtel 1038.2 Furthermore, we believe that meeting these demands must be done in a public and dramatic fashion if confidence is to be restored.

You further authorized to tell Diem that unless GVN is willing to take effective action along the above lines within the next few days the US will find it necessary publicly to state that it cannot associate itself with the GVN’s unwillingness to meet the reasonable demands of the Vietnamese Buddhist leaders.

There follows various argumentation which you authorized to use in whole or part at your discretion.

The US understands that a public statement may have political repercussions inside South Viet-Nam and would make such a statement most reluctantly since it continues to support President Diem. However, the international repercussions of the Buddhist troubles in South Viet-Nam cannot help but affect US world-wide responsibilities. In addition, US support of Vietnamese Government requires full support of Congress and American people and question as to our attitude towards and our involvement in Buddhist problem must be effectively dealt with if satisfactory solution is not arrived at very quickly. Furthermore, it is also in the interests of the Government of South Viet-Nam to take action to regain confidence of Buddhists. No government in Viet-Nam can survive without their support.

We realize that meeting Buddhist demands as set forth in Embtel 1038 runs risk of engendering further Buddhist demands and that GVN must be prepared to face and very likely accede to such further demands unless they are so substantive as to endanger GVN defense effort. Nevertheless fact is that Buddhist demands so far have been reasonable and/or insubstantial. In fact GVN has already gone most of way to meet them. What is necessary is that GVN so state clearly and that it abide by such decision firmly before it is too late.

Risk of GVN yielding now far less than pursuing continued standoff position when, actually, there is very little of substance separating GVN and responsible Buddhists. At present we believe situation has gone so far that to regain public confidence a joint statement by GVN and Buddhist leaders is needed to restore public confidence.

At same time we recognize risks to public order and safety if public gatherings are permitted at this time and importance to GVN of demonstrating that it is still in control of situation.

We therefore recommend that GVN seek work out joint communique to be issued with General Association making following points: 1. The five points suggested by Buddhists are considered as reasonable and proper rights which they and any other religious group may exercise m Viet-Nam.

2. In order to avoid any further incidents which could endanger innocent persons Buddhist leaders in their capacity as representatives of a religion which is opposed to violence and the GVN as the guardian of public safety ask that all loyal and virtuous citizens of Viet-Nam refrain from any actions in public places which could harm innocent persons. Until the situation is judged to be calmer Association leaders and the GVN join in requesting that there be no further public processions or demonstrations by any religious group in Viet-Nam. The right to worship privately according to one’s beliefs in pagodas, temples, or churches, and to own property, fly flags, enjoy freedom from unjustified arrest and to propagate religion will not be interfered with. All discriminatory laws and regulations will be promptly rescinded (the nicety of having this done by National Assembly seems brushed aside by Diem’s statement that Buddhists can count on Constitution, i.e. on him.) Finally, as soon as the tensions caused by recent events have relaxed, the privilege of conducting orderly religious processions which do not endanger public safety may be freely exercised. It is recognized that religious processions constitute an outward manifestation of faith which should be permitted so long as they do not endanger the welfare of the community or damage the essential unity of the Vietnamese people which has enabled them to survive throughout history.

3. It has been agreed between the GVN and Association that a permanent National Religious Council will be established which will have the right and duty of consulting with the Government on all matters affecting religious freedom as defined under the Constitution. This Council will have as members representatives of all established sects, churches and denominations which exist in Viet-Nam.

FYI—If Diem does not take prompt and effective steps to reestablish Buddhist confidence in him we will have to reexamine our entire relationship with his regime. End FYI.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, SOC 14-1 S VIET. Secret; Operational Immediate; Limit Distribution. Drafted by Wood and Hilsman and cleared in draft by Harriman. Repeated to CINCPAC for POLAD.

2 Document 129.

168. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 168. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, June 12, 1963, 2 p.m.

1161. Embassy telegram 1157.2 Saw Thuan at 1130 for review of Buddhist situation and found he had two concerns: Behavior of Buddhist leaders from Hue once they reach Saigon and lack of firm negotiating instructions on GVN side.

Buddhist leaders are due to arrive at 1:15 pm. They include Tri Quang as well as those mentioned reftel.3 Tri Quang has been real spark plug of activities in Hue and is reputed to have considerable flair as a demagogue. Thuan indicated GVN was worried that Hue delegation would not proceed promptly to conference table but devote themselves first to some agitation in Saigon. GVN concern was heightened when they received word that group wants to walk into Saigon from airport.

Re negotiating instructions, Thuan continues to believe that commission will get what it needs from President in way of concessions but he admitted that certain unspecified essential points had not as yet been firmly pinned down.

I told Thuan that I thought it essential in terms of US support that GVN be prepared to make meaningful and substantial concessions to the Buddhist demands. It was my assessment that GVN had consistently underestimated force and determination of Buddhists. After first talks with Buddhists last week, situation had quickly calmed down in Hue, whereupon GVN had decided that danger had passed and they could get away with reaffirmation of minor concessions already granted and prevent further outburst by security measures. This was situation as of June 10. Following regrettable incident on morning June 11, GVN had again begun to think of concessions. (Thuan did.not disagree with any of this.) Now situation again appeared relatively calm in Saigon. I hoped that GVN would not again conclude that it can get out of this affair on the cheap. I did not think the Buddhists would stand for this, and if they did not—and possibly even if they did-the US wouldn’t, in my opinion. I told him that Department was withholding statement (Deptel 1202)4 but that one could be made very quickly if developments warrant.

I told Thuan that I wanted to be very sure that President Diem understood seriousness with which US regarded this matter and asked whether it would not be a good idea for me to see him before decisions taken on negotiating instructions. Thuan at first said he thought it would be best to let him handle it and call for help if he bogged down. On reflection, however, he suggested that I put in request through regular channels to see the President this afternoon or tomorrow morning. This I have done. He recommended that I “talk as tough” to President as I have to him.

No time has been set for commencement negotiations. GVN would like to start this afternoon or at latest tomorrow, in view of their concerns about what Hue leaders are up to. However, latter will need some time to get together with southern representatives (still not named) and I am inclined to doubt that talks will start before tomorrow.

Since dictating above, have received word Hue delegation arrived as scheduled, proceeded from airport to Saigon by car and is now installed at Xa Loi Pagoda.

Trueheart

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, SOC 14-1 S VIET Confidential; Operational Immediate; Limit Distribution. Repeated to CINCPAC.

2 See footnote 5, Document 165.

3 In telegram 1157, Trueheart reported that the Buddhist negotiators from Hue “will include Khiet, Minh and Mat Nguyen.”

4 Dated June 11. (Department of State, Central Files, SOC 14-1 S VIET)

169. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 169. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, June 12, 1963, 8 p.m.

1168. Deptel 1207.2 I opened meeting with President Diem by saying that I had sought during recent days, in conversations with him and with Thuan (who was also present), to emphasize gravity with which my government regarded Buddhist situation. I had now received new instructions which went somewhat further than what I had been saying. I then handed him a paper,3 unsigned and headed “Memorandum,” which contained a paraphrase of most of reftel. In handing paper over I emphasized that I had not discussed it with anyone.

President read paper carefully, and without any comment except to ask for translation of word “reluctantly”. When he had finished reading, he handed paper to Thuan and sat in silence until Thuan had finished.

Diem then began an exchange with Thuan in Vietnamese, at the end of which Thuan said that the President wanted to point out that any statement by the United States at this juncture would be disastrous for the negotiations with the Buddhists which he expected would begin this evening or tomorrow morning. I pointed out that this was well understood in Washington and I gave him a copy of yesterday’s statement by Department Spokesman,4 to effect that US did not want to comment with negotiations in the offing.

Referring to point in suggested communique about banning of public processions by any religious group, Diem pointed out that tomorrow, June 13, is the Fete de Dieu (Corpus Christi), that Catholic processions were scheduled and indeed this was only day in religious calendar on which Catholic liturgy prescribes processions. If he banned them tomorrow, resentment of Catholics would be strong. I explained to president that burden of my demarche was in first three paragraphs of memorandum; remainder was argumentation and a suggestion for a communique. I doubted that Washington had considered the Fete de Dieu angle, but in any case the sentence to which he referred was put in, I was sure, to provide a rationale for temporary banning of Buddhist processions and demonstrations. With regard to tomorrow, he would have to decide whether to permit the Catholic processions, taking into account the expected effect on public order and on the negotiations with the Buddhists. I noted that, although Catholics would doubtless resent the banning of their processions, the gesture might be all the more appreciated by the Buddhists.

There was, rather surprisingly, no further discussion of substance of memorandum. Diem said [he] would have to reflect on it and would not, in any case, wish to take a decision until discussion with Buddhists had begun. I said that I had not expected an immediate reply but asked if I could expect that he or Thuan would keep me informed as discussions with Buddhists proceeded. He agreed.

Before leaving, I mentioned three items of information which I said had given me some concern: (1) A report that arrests were continuing June 11 in Danang and Hue. I thought it would be most regrettable if the authorities were retaliating against people involved in recent demonstrations. Diem did not reply but Thuan later told me that he would personally look into report. (2) I understood that some Vietnamese authorities (actually Minister of Interior, as I later told Thuan) were considering prosecuting for murder persons who had assisted bonze to cremate himself yesterday. Diem said he understood other persons had assisted bonze to cover himself with gasoline and had set fire to him. I said that I had talked to two eye witnesses who saw bonze set fire to himself but, whatever the facts, any action against others involved would be a very grave mistake. Thuan later said he would see to it that this idea was killed. (3) I had heard that entry to Saigon from the provinces had been barred to all monks. President and Thuan acknowledged that this was so and said that they considered it dangerous to public safety to permit bonzes to converge on Saigon at this particular time. I said that the public safety was of course his responsibility and I did not press the point.

Meeting with Diem lasted less than an hour.

Later, in Thuan’s office, he told me he had had a very serious (he called it climactic) conversation with President at mid-day, in which he had pressed President very hard to face facts and adopt conciliatory posture. He thought he had had some success. He said that he had emphasized to President that many people were afraid to tell him the truth but that he, Thuan, considered that it was his duty to tell the President “everything” and he had proceeded to do so.

Comment: Department’s instructions could not have been more timely, coming just before negotiations begin. They are of course very strong medicine and will be very hard for Diem to take.5 I would not care to predict outcome, but I believe we can be satisfied that we have done everything reasonably possible to get President Diem to save himself.

It is obviously vital that there be no leaks about this latest move and I am taking strictest precautions at this end.

Trueheart

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, SOC 14-1 S VIET. Secret; Operational Immediate; Limit Distribution.

2 Document 167.

3 No copy of this paper has been found.

4 Not printed. (National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Transcripts of Department of State News Briefings)

5 According to a memorandum for the record prepared in the White House on June 14, President Kennedy was unaware of the memorandum conveyed to Diem by Trueheart on June 12, on instructions from the Department, until it was summarized by the CIA in the President’s Intelligence Checklist on June 14. “The President noticed that Diem has been threatened with a formal statement of disassociation. He wants to be absolutely sure that no further threats are made and no formal statement is made without his own personal approval.” (Kennedy Library, National Security tales, Chester V. Clifton Series, President’s Intelligence Checklist)

170. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 170. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, June 13, 1963, 7 p.m.

1178. Embtel 1168.2 Following is situation as of 1500 on GVN-Buddhist negotiations.

1. Immediately after arrival of Buddhist delegation June 12, Vice President Tho sent them letter proposing that delegation meet with GVN commission at 1800 same day. (This and other letters mentioned this message cast in polite and respectful language.) Buddhists replied that head bonze Khiet was very weak and tired as a result of 5-day fast and flight to Saigon and would be “incapable of thinking or acting for 3 or 5 days, the more so since Buddhism is at present observing mourning (grand deuil) throughout the country.” Letter proposed meeting take place “on another day which would be more convenient.” Tho replied last night that his commission had proposed early meeting because of desire expressed by Buddhists in a June 8 letter “to proceed rapidly to a satisfactory arrangement.” Tho went on to propose that meeting take place today, June 13, at an hour to be selected by Khiet. Tho said commission considered that there would be many disadvantages in deferring meeting; as for “grand deuil”, Tho said this was a problem which should not be linked with the planned meeting “especially in the present situation.”

2. Thuan informed me at lunch time that Buddhists have now replied to Tho letter agreeing to meet tomorrow, June 14, provided GVN accepts in advance their ex parse version of agreement reached at meeting of June 5, terms of which are set out in Buddhists’ letter.

3. According to Thuan, Buddhist version differs from what GVN commission understood had been agreed. GVN version exactly as he had given it to me at the time (Embtel 1114).3 Moreover, Buddhist version amounts to acceptance of “5 points” in full plus broadening of certain of them. Finally, Buddhists have implied that commission’s acceptance June 5 agreement committed GVN, whereas it was ad referendum, as demonstrated by fact Minh had insisted on returning to Hue to put agreement before his principals. When I questioned Thuan as to nature of additional Buddhist demands, he said that there were several and some were complicated but he cited as examples that (a) on flag issue, GVN would agree authorization of local authorities would not be required, (b) pagodas, which for centuries have been community property in hamlets, should be “turned over to administration of Buddhists” (Thuan said he himself was not sure what this meant) and (c) on Law No.10 Buddhists proposed not only that Assembly amend it, as had been agreed, but that in meantime President should amend it by decree.

4. Thuan said GVN commission, which met this morning, was disturbed over Buddhist insistence on getting full satisfaction before coming to meeting. Commission also felt obliged to set record straight about June 5 agreement, particularly as they had described it to President in very different terms. Commission was therefore meeting at 1500 to draft reply, which he thought would first set out GVN version of June 5 agreement and propose that parties meet tomorrow to seek to iron out differences.

5. I told Thuan that I did not think this was nearly good enough. What we were talking about was dramatic, conciliatory move. Reply he described would have appearance of careful preparation for bazaar-type negotiation. Buddhists could use it as an excuse for breaking off talks, if that was what they wanted to do. Moreover, differences between two versions, as he described them, did not seem to me to be of great importance.

6. After some discussion-in the course of which I sought to revive yesterday’s mood of urgency and in which Thuan did not develop any other idea himself on how to deal with letter-I suggested that commission’s reply might state that, while Buddhists’ letter does not accord in all respects with commission’s understanding of June 5 agreement, commission in spirit of amity and in interests of moving forward accepts Buddhists’ statement of agreement in principle and as basis for discussion. Letter could also refer to need for clarification of certain points, if that was the case. Such a reply, it seemed to me, would be difficult for Buddhists to reject and was in keeping with spirit of conciliation and with object of restoring Buddhists’ confidence in GVN. I reminded Thuan also that while GVN and Buddhists were busy writing letters to each other, possibility of incidents was ever present, whereas I felt there was less chance of this while parties were actually at conference table. Thuan seemed immediately attracted by my suggestion and said without further discussion that he would proceed to try to sell it and let me hear from him later this afternoon.4

7. In reply to my question as to whether there had been any reaction to memorandum I left with President yesterday, Thuan said it was still being “studied”.

Trueheart

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, SOC 14-1 S VIET Secret; Operational Immediate; Limit Distribution.

2 Document 169.

3 Document 155.

4 Trueheart cabled the Department 2 hours later to report:

“Thuan telephoned me at 8:30 p.m.-believe he had been with Diem until that time-to say that reply being sent to Buddhists would quote from a previous Buddhist letter passage stating that agreement not reached at June 5 meeting and would go on to propose meeting at 9 a.m. tomorrow mornng. My suggestion paragraph 6 reference telegram not accepted, Thuan said. On other hand, GVN had apparently not found it necessary to include in reply its own version of June 5 agreement.” (Telegram 1180 from Saigon, June 13; Department of State, Central Files, SOC 14-1 S VIET)

171. Minutes of a Meeting of the Special Group for Counterinsurgency 171. Minutes of a Meeting of the Special Group for Counterinsurgency1

Washington, June 13, 1963, 2 p.m.

PRESENT

Governor Harriman, The Attorney General, Mr. Gilpatric, Mr. Bell, General Taylor, Mr. Murrow, Mr. Forrestal, Mr. Colby vice Mr. McCone

General Krulak was present for Item 1

Mr. Koren was present for Items 1, 2, and 3

Mr. Bowling was present for Item 4

Mr. Maechling was present for the meeting

1. Southeast Asia Status Report

Viet-Nam Mr. Koren commented that the Vietnamese action to follow through on funding of CI project has been most encouraging. About 64% of the rural population has been incorporated into the strategic hamlet program, and the hamlets now completed are over one-half of the projected goal. The press has reacted favorably to recent efforts to brief them on military operations. The Group reviewed the Buddhist problem and expressed concern over the hesitancy of the Vietnamese Government to take action to ease the situation. It was acknowledged that the situation could rapidly become more serious, but that the Country Team is handling the situation well.

Mr. Bell inquired about the validity of the number of returnees reflected in the status report, and what follow-through procedures are utilized to convert them into useful citizens. He observed that if good results have been achieved in this program, these facts should be exploited in the press. The Group requested State to submit a report on the results achieved in this program.2

“While there has been an impressive increase in surrenders under the surrender program the overwhelming portion of these are not true VC, but individuals who have come out of VC areas. It is impossible to determine how many VC have surrendered but one estimate is that not more than 20 out of a total of several thousand who have surrendered since the announcement of the surrender policy are VC. The government had done nothing to develop a program of rehabilitation of surrendered VC.” (Ibid., S/P Files: Lot 70 D 199, Chron File-Robert H. Johnson-1963-Jan-June)

In response to Mr. Gilpatric’s question on what else is being done in the Montagnard program, Mr. Koren stated that we are distributing food, medicine, and clothing to the tribesmen. Mr. Gilpatric commented that if we have a good story to tell on this program, it should be brought to the attention of the press. The Group requested State to submit a report on the successes achieved in this program.3

[Here follow discussion of Thailand and Cambodia under item 1; and items 2, “Progress Report on Internal Plan for Cambodia”; 3, “Progress Report on Internal Defense Plan for Thailand”; 4, “Follow-up Report on Iran”; and 5, “Miscellaneous”.]

Executive Secretary

James W. Dingeman

1 Source: Department of State, Special Group Counterinsurgency Files: Lot 68 D 451, Special Group (CI). Secret. Drafted by Dingeman who is not listed among the participants.

2 No such report has been found. On June 20, Robert H. Johnson of the Policy Planning Council addressed a memorandum to Rostow, in which he questioned the success of the returnee program as reflected by the statistics released by the South Vietnamese Government. Johnson had discussed the program with a member of the British mission in South Vietnam and concluded:

3 On June 19, Henry L.T. Koren circulated a memorandum to the Special Group for Counterinsurgency which summarized U.S. efforts with the Montagnards. (Ibid., Special Group Counterinsurgency Files: Lot 68 D 451, Special Group (CI))

172. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 172. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, June 14, 1963, 4 p.m.

1182. CINCPAC for POLAD. Thuan telephoned me at home at lunch time, in an obviously jubilant mood. GVN-Buddhist meeting this morning had gone well.2 All preliminaries (preambles) had been disposed of and full agreement reached on first of five Buddhist demands (flags). Thuan said this was most difficult of five points—presumably he meant for GVN—and he thought remainder could be agreed this afternoon or at latest tomorrow morning.

Meanwhile, chief bonze Khiet is sending out nationwide order this afternoon calling on all Buddhists to avoid all manifestations and incidents, in view of favorable progress of talks with GVN. For its part, GVN commission, on order of President (Thuan stressed this point), is directing GVN authorities throughout country to suppress all barriers around temples, and so forth, taking care only to be on alert against VC incidents. Thuan thought VC likely to move when they saw GVN-Buddhist agreement was imminent. (I am inclined to agree with him.)

At conclusion meetings, Thuan said there would be a joint press conference.

Buddhist delegation is headed by Thien Minh, who represented Central Region at June 5 talks and who has full powers in writing from Khiet, according to Thuan. Other members are Tam Chau, Duc Ngiep, Tien Hoa, and Huyen Quang. Tri Quang is alternate delegate but he was not present this morning’s meeting. This is puzzling and conceivably ominous. Fact Khiet did not appear in person perhaps explained on protocol grounds; possibly he is waiting to be received by Diem at end of drama.

More details as available.3

Trueheart

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, SOC 14-1 S VIET Secret; Operational Immediate; Limit Distribution. Repeated to CINCPAC.

2 According to telegram 1184 from Saigon, June 14, 5 p.m, the Buddhist delegation and the Vice President’s commission met in the morning in the Vice President’s office, and reconvened for further discussion at 3 p.m. (Ibid.)

3 At 8:30 p.m. Thuan informed Trueheart that negotiations continued to go well in the afternoon, with full agreement reached on the second Buddhist demand, which called for the revision of Decree No. 10. Negotiations on the remaining Buddhist demands gave over at that point to a joint consideration of measures to counter an anticipated effort by the Viet Cong to exploit the funeral services for Quang Duc. (Telegram 1187 from Saigon, June 14; Ibid.) On June 12, the South Vietnamese National Assembly had established a special committee to examine ways to revise Decree No. 10. (Telegram 1170 from Saigon, June 13; Ibid.)

173. Telegram From Prince Sihanouk to President Kennedy 173. Telegram From Prince Sihanouk to President Kennedy1

Phnom Penh, June 14, 1963.

161/SPU/T. For several years now we have followed with sorrow the development of the exceedingly cruel religious persecution of the monks and faithful of the Cambodian Buddhist community in South Viet-Nam. In vain, we have attempted to alert international public opinion.

Today, this persecution has overtaken the Vietnamese Buddhists themselves. Their nonviolent protests and the heroic act of martyrdom of the venerable Thich Quang Duc have roused the conscience of the world. Through my voice, Cambodia, where Buddhism is a State religion, and the Cambodian people, deeply moved by the suffering of the Buddhists of South Viet-Nam, beg Your Excellency to intercede with the full force of your moral prestige and that of your country to the end that the Catholic South Vietnamese Government may accord Buddhists the right to practice freely their religion of peace and brotherhood.

Here in Southeast Asia, where the coexistence of all religions had been established in an atmosphere of reciprocal tolerance and esteem, it rests with the great powers to bring back to reason a government that has revived religious conflicts that had been quiescent for more than a century.

Norodom Sihanouk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, SOC 14-1 S VIET. A copy of the original French text is Ibid. A notation on the French text indicates that the telegram was sent by MacKay Radio. In telegram 964 from Phnom Penh, June 14, the Embassy reported that Agence Khmere Presse in Phnom Penh had published in that day’s issue the text of Prince Sihanouk’s message to President Kennedy, along with the texts of similar telegrams sent by Sihanouk to U.N. Secretary-General U Thant, British Prime Minister Macmillan, French President De Gaulle, and Indian President Radhakrishnan. Ambassador Sprouse reported that the Foreign Ministry also told him the Cambodian Government had given a diplomatic note to the South Vietnamese Charge in Phnom Penh expressing concern over events in Vietnam following the deaths in May of Buddhists in Hue. (Ibid.) On June 18, Ceylonese Prime Minister Bandaranaike also sent a letter to President Kennedy expressing concern over developments in South Vietnam, and requesting that the United States use its good offices to enable the Buddhist majority in South Vietnam to enjoy the right to practice their religion. (Ibid.) And on June 28, the Representatives at the United Nations of Cambodia, Ceylon, and Nepal called on the U.S. Delegation at the United Nations to express mounting concern over religious difficulties in South Vietnam. (Telegram 4686 from USUN, June 28; Ibid.)

174. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam 174. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam1

Washington, June 14, 1963, 4:43 p.m.

1225. Embtel 1182, 1184, 1187; Phnom Penh’s 964 to Dept.2 Dept pleased note results reported reftel. You are to be congratulated.

Unfortunate New York Times story (septel)3 stating U.S. has warned Diem it will publicly condemn his treatment Buddhists unless he takes prompt action to meet their grievances will not be carried VOA. In response press queries here at noon press briefing today Dept spokesman stated this was speculative story on which he had no comment. Stated we following this sensitive internal issue very closely and were in touch with GVN officials. Pointed out Diem had set up GVN committee to meet Buddhist leaders in effort resolve this serious question. There were two meetings yesterday with apparently encouraging results. In reply query whether we would make statement spokesman replied we had made clear our concern. Queried as to why story described as speculative spokesman replied it was. Queried as to whether it was inaccurate spokesman replied “No”.

You authorized confirm to GVN under instructions that there has been no U.S. public official statement and that unfortunate New York Times story gives us most serious concern. There has been no change in our policy of supporting GVN and are gratified by news reported reftel.

If issues are resolved between GVN and Buddhists and there is joint press conference, would be helpful if Buddhist leaders could in turn express solidarity with GVN against VC aggression. Leave handling this matter to your good judgement.

Re 1184. Assume funeral will be June 16 and not June 23 as stated reftel. If reftel correct, please confirm.

Re 1187. Would you consider discussing with GVN whether prominent GVN officials should offer participate in funeral. Realize likely go against grain for them attend funeral of man who died protesting GVN actions. On other hand this would be eloquent mark GVN-Buddhists understanding achieved at meetings and reduce effectiveness possible VC attempt stir crowd into actions demonstrating Buddhists opposition to GVN. In view NYT story fully realize you, may wish make no demarches to GVN at this time.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, SOC 14-1 S VIET. Secret; Operational Immediate. Drafted by Wood and cleared by Rice and Forrestal. Repeated to CINCPAC for POLAD.

2 Regarding telegrams 1184 and 1187, see footnotes 2 and 3, respectively, to telegram 1182, Document 172. Regarding telegram 964, see footnote 1, Document 173.

3 Telegram 1222 to Saigon, June 14, 1:06 p.m., summarized an article by Max Frankel which appeared on the front page of The New York Times on June 14, entitled “U.S. Warns South Viet-Nam on Demands of Buddhists.” The article reported that the Kennedy government had warned President Diem that it would publicly condemn his treatment of Buddhists unless he took prompt action to meet their grievances. Frankel added that U.S. diplomats had told the South Vietnamese Government in blunt terms that continuing Buddhist dissatisfaction could become politically disastrous. (Department of State, Central Files, SOC 14-1 S VIET)

175. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam 175. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam1

Washington, June 14, 1963, 11 p.m.2

1219. Re contingency plan enclosed in May 23 letter Nolting to Hilsman3 suggest you consider: 1. Means whereby word [can] be gotten to Vice President that while there is no change in U.S. policy of supporting Diem, we want Tho to know that in event situation arises due to internal political circumstances (in which US would play no part) where Diem definitely unable act as President and only in this situation we would want to back Tho as constitutional successor and that we would assume he would need military support. In view present precarious situation it would seem worthwhile to run risk delivering such message now assuming Tho would not likely consider it in his interest to inform anyone else. We would have to tell Tho that if word leaked we would flatly deny. Assume message would have to be delivered directly by American official who had some reason for seeing Tho. You may wish consider whether it would be preferable to say this directly to Diem.

2. Suggest you consider steps gradually increase covert and overt contacts with non-supporters of GVN. In present situation this should only be done if you feel our (overt or covert) contacts with those who might play major roles in event of coup are now inadequate.

Request your views. You may consult within TF/Saigon if you consider necessary.

Rusk

1 Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 84, Saigon Embassy Files: FRC 68 A 5159, SGN (63) 19 GVN. Top Secret; Eyes Only. Drafted by Wood and cleared by Hilsman and Harriman.

2 Due to a delay in servicing, this telegram was not received in Saigon until June 16. Another copy of the telegram indicates that it was sent on June 14 at 10:25 a.m. (Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Vietnam Country Series, 6/63)

3 Document 133.

176. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 176. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, June 15, 1963, 2 p.m.

1189. CINCPAC for POLAD. Department telegram 1225.2 Saw Thuan 1230. He was deeply distressed and angry at NYT story. Said at first it would “ruin” negotiations.

Thuan reported talks with Buddhists this morning had made little progress. Buddhists had in fact asked unaccountably that meetings be adjourned until Monday, but under GVN prodding finally showed up hour late. Thuan now thought they had gotten word of NYT story (this entirely possible as US press fully aware from their headquarters).

I told Thuan I saw nothing to do at this point but press for quick agreement. He asked for our help. Could I state publicly that there has been no change in our policy of supporting GVN and that U.S. is gratified at reported progress yesterday? I said I would have to request instructions and could not be sure Dept would authorize such statement in present context. I would nevertheless inquire.

I cannot of course guarantee that statement will have any effect on negotiations. It would take some of curse off this affair in GVN eyes. Statement would have no value unless I can make it on explicit instructions. Please instruct.3

Trueheart

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, SOC 14-1 S VIET. Secret; Emergency. Repeated to CINCPAC. A note on another copy of this telegram indicates that the President read it. (Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Vietnam Country Series, 6/63)

2 Document 174.

3 The Department responded, in telegram 1228 to Saigon, June 15, sent out emergency at 3:22 a.m.: “You may state publicly there has been no change in U.S. policy of supporting GVN and U.S. gratified at progress thus far reported.” (Department of State, Central Files, DEF 19-2 US-S VIET) Trueheart reported, however, in telegram 1192 from Saigon, June 15, 7 p.m., that Thuan had informed him at 6:30 p.m. that negotiations with the Buddhist delegation had been successfully concluded, and Trueheart felt that, in light of that development, it was no longer necessary to make the statement. (Ibid., SOC 14-1 S VIET) On June 17, Foreign Minister Mau called in Trueheart to discuss handling press queries growing out of the story in The New York Times. Mau noted a report that the State Department spokesman had confirmed the story, and Trueheart explained that the report was inaccurate. (Telegram 1196 from Saigon, June 17; Ibid.)

177. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 177. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, June 16, 1963, 4 p.m.

1193. CINCPAC for POLAD. Following are today’s developments on Buddhist problem.

1. GVN and Buddhists issued joint communique announcing agreement on five Buddhist demands. Communique signed by members Buddhist delegation and GVN Interministerial Committee and by President Diem and supreme leader of Vietnamese Buddhists, Thich Tuch Khiet. Text read over radio this morning. Text being sent septel.2

2. Bonze Khiet also announced early this morning that rites for dead bonze postponed for “many reasons, particularly organizational difficulties”. News of postponement circulated by sound trucks near pagodas and by hand bill. However, many people gathered at pagodas and along anticipated route of cortege. Postponement apparently due to disagreement between GVN and Buddhists over size and character of funeral ceremony. Bonzes desired large impressive procession while GVN, for reasons public order among others, desired simple ceremony with limited number participants. Date of funeral not as yet announced.

3. Catholic Archbishop Paul Nguyen Van Binh of Saigon published pastoral letter reminding parishioners that Church and State must remain separate.

4. Police quelled sizable riot instigated by approximately 250 students among crowd estimated at 2000 persons gathered at intersection of Phan Than Gian and Le Van Duyet Streets. Riot began at about 0915 hours when students made rush on police cordoning off area around Xa Loi Pagoda. Youths threw thousands of rocks at police and latter employed tear gas and water from fire trucks. No bonzes involved in fighting. Demonstration was brought under control by police at about 1100. GVN communique later blamed incident on “extremist elements” (VC not mentioned) and loud speakers at Xa Loi now carrying Buddhist announcement to same effect and requesting people to remain calm. Communique also states thirty police were injured and hospitalized while no demonstrators were gravely injured or hospitalized. (Embassy officers present throughout this riot and report no doubt whatsoever it provoked by crowd not police.) As of mid-morning all military units in Capital Military District were on full alert on outskirts of city and available for immediate deployment, but not used.3

5. Between 0600 to 0830 approximately 300 paramilitary and regular members of Women’s Solidarity Movement gathered at their headquarters to hear broadcast over loud speaker of WSM resolution of June 7 and appeal by Madame Nhu for members to abide by spirit this resolution. Madame Nhu did not appear in person.

6. Today’s edition of Times of Vietnam carries VNP text of statement signed by thirty ranking military officers pledging to “close ranks behind Ngo Dinh Diem to defend constitution and the Republic”.

Trueheart

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, SOC 14-1 S VIET. Limited Official Use; Operational Immediate. Repeated to CINCPAC.

2 See Document 178.

3 The Daily Staff Summary, circulated to principal officers in the Department of State on June 17, drew on an Associated Press report of the riot, and described it as “the most violent anti-Government outburst in South Viet-Nam in years.” The Staff Summary noted that order was restored “with tear gas, clubs, and shots fired in the air.” According to the Staff Summary, “one person reportedly was killed and some Buddhists and policemen injured.” (Department of State, Top Secret and Secret Summaries: Lot 65 D 142)

178. Editorial Note 178. Editorial Note

On June 16 in Saigon, the Interministerial Committee of the Government of Vietnam and the Buddhist Delegation issued a joint communique on flying the Buddhist and national flags and on essential religious activities. The communique noted the debates held between the Interministerial Committee and the General Association of Buddhists of Vietnam June 14-16 “to seek a satisfactory resolution for the five demands” presented by the Buddhists. The following points were agreed on: 1. The conditions and circumstances for flying the national flea and the religious flag. “The national flag, the symbol of the spirit of the nation, should always be respected and be put at its appropriate place.”

2. A decision to “detach religious associations from the regulations of Ordinance No. 10 and set up new regulations suitable to the particular characteristics concerning the activities essential to these religious associations.” The communique noted that the National Assembly would consult with the religious associations concerning these new regulations.

3. Establishment of a “committee of investigation to re-examine the dossier of Buddhist complaints” concerning the arrest and detention of Buddhists. In addition, “all those who are involved in the movement” would receive a Presidential pardon.

4. The right to practice “normal and purely religious activities” within the boundary of the pagodas or the headquarters of the General Association of Buddhists without permission from the government.

5. An investigation to determine responsibility for the incidents since May 8, and punishment for those government officials responsible.

President Diem signed the communique under a paragraph that reads: “The articles written in this joint communique have been approved in principle by me from the beginning.”

For full text of the communique, see American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1963, pages 856-859. A copy was transmitted in telegram 1194 from Saigon, June 16. (Department of State, Central Files, SOC 14-1 S VIET)

179. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 179. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, June 16, 1963, 5 p.m.

1195. Deptel 12192 delayed due servicing and just received. Without speculating on actions which might have seemed advisable had message been received promptly, I do not think it would be wise to take any action now on numbered paragraph 1. At this time, we have formal agreement between GVN and Buddhist leadership and outward calm throughout the country, following a relatively minor outburst in Saigon this morning. Moreover, notwithstanding that my misgivings about Ngo family including Diem have greatly increased during last two weeks, I am still not impressed by the competition, nor do I think are any of my colleagues American or foreign.

Our best move at this juncture—and one I propose to make unless otherwise instructed—is to press Diem directly and indirectly to accept Buddhist crisis as blessing in disguise and to use agreement reached as stepping stone to concessions to other groups (before they demand them). The whole operation would be keyed to building up popular support for regime prior to August parliamentary elections and importantly also to making sure that paper undertakings to Buddhists are carried out in full measure.

This scheme will doubtless be regarded as naive by anyone who knows this country (and it is certainly the longest of shots). Moreover, I fear that my own ability to put it across may have been diminished by my actions on Buddhist affair and that GVN confidence in our ability to carry out private diplomacy is gravely undermined by NY Times story. I nevertheless think that we should give this approach a fair try. If we find Diem in a mood to freeze up, rather than move forward, then I think his days are indeed numbered and we must begin to make moves along the lines of para 1, Deptel 1219.

Re para 2, there are no bars whatsoever on contacts and we are receiving just now a surfeit of coup talk and anti-regime comment. It is to be expected in such circumstances that one is never in contact with the people (if any) who really mean business, but we have all the lines out that we know how to put out and have had for some days. However, everyone is as usual under strict instructions not to encourage coup talk and to meet any that arises with firm statement of US support for GVN.

For time being I am not discussing Deptel 1219 with anyone but Manfull.

Trueheart

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, SOC 14-1 S VIET Top Secret; Priority; Eyes Only.

2 Document 175.

IV. The Deepening Crisis, June 17-August 20: Repudiation of the June 16 Agreement, U.S. Efforts To Promote Conciliation, Press Coverage and International Opinion, July 18 Address by Diem, Renewed Denunciation of the Buddhists by the NhusIV. The Deepening Crisis, June 17-August 20:
Repudiation of the June 16 Agreement, U.S. Efforts To Promote Conciliation, Press Coverage and International Opinion, July 18 Address by Diem, Renewed Denunciation of the Buddhists by the Nhus

180. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, June 19, 1963, noon.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, SOC 14-1 S VIET Secret; Priority; Limit Distribution. Repeated to CINCPAC.

181. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam

Washington, June 19, 1963, 8:28 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, AID (US) S VIEI Secret; Limit Distribution. Drafted by Wood and cleared by Rice and, in draft by Hilsman. Repeated to CINCPAC for POLAD.

182. Message From President Kennedy to Prince Sihanouk

Washington, June 20, 1963.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, SOC 14-1 S VIET. Confidential. Transmitted to Phnom Penh in telegram 763, June 20, which is the source text. Telegram 763 was drafted by Daniel N. Arzac, Officer in Charge of Cambodian Affairs and cleared by Koren, Wood, Hilsman, and, in draft, by President Kennedy.

183. Research Memorandum From the Director of the Bureau of Intelligence and Research (Hughes) to the Secretary of State

Washington, June 21, 1963.

Source: Department of State,S/P Files: Lot 70 D 199, Vietnam 1963. Secret; No Foreign Dissem; Limit Distribution. A note on another copy of this memorandum indicates that it was placed in the President’s weekend reading file. (Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Vietnam Country Series, 6/63)

184. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, June 22, 1963, 11 a.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, AID (US) S VIET. Secret; Limit Distri” button. Repeated to CINCPAC.

185. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, June 22, 1963, 8 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, AID (US) S VIET. Secret; Operational Immediate; Limited Distribution. Repeated to CINCPAC.

186. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, June 25, 1963, 6 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, AID (US) S VIET. Secret; Priority; Eyes Only.

187. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam

Washington, June 26, 1963, 12:51 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, AID (US) S VIET. Secret; Operational Immediate; Eyes Only; Limit Distribution. Drafted by Wood and cleared by Rice and Hilsman.

188. Special National Intelligence Estimate

Washington, June 26, 1963.

Source: Department of State, INR-NIE Files. Secret; Controlled Dissem. Special National Intelligence Estimates (SNIEs) were high-level interdepartmental reports presenting authoritative appraisals of vital foreign policy problems on an immediate or crisis basis. According to a note on the cover sheet, “The following intelligence organizations participated in the preparation of this estimate: The Central Intelligence Agency and the intelligence organizations of the Departments of State, Defense, the Army, the Navy, the Air Force, and The Joint Staff.” All members of the United States Intelligence Board concurred in this estimate on June 26, except the Atomic Energy Commission Representative and the Assistant Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation, who abstained on the grounds that the subject was outside their jurisdiction.

189. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, June 27, 1963, 1 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, AID (US) S VIET Secret; Priority; Limit Distribution.

190. Central Intelligence Agency Information Report

Washington, June 28, 1963.

Source: U.S. Army Military Historical Institute, Kraemer Papers, VN 61-63. Secret; No Foreign Dissem; Background Use Only. TDCS information reports contained telegraphically-dispatched, unevaluated intelligence information which was distributed by the CIA to other appropriate government agencies.

191. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam

Washington, June 28, 1963, 5:48 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, SOC 14-1 S VIET. Secret; Operational Immediate. Drafted by Heavner and cleared by Hilsman. Repeated to CINCPAC for POLAD.

192. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, June 28, 1963, 3 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 15-1 S VIET. Secret; Priority; Limit Distribution. Received at 7:39 p.m.

193. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, June 29, 1963, 6 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, SOC 14-1 S VIET Secret; Operational Immediate; Limit Distribution. Repeated to CINCPAC for POLAD.

194. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, June 29, 1963, 7 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, SOC 14-1 S VIET. Secret; Priority; Limit Distribution.

195. Telegram From Michael V. Forrestal of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy), at Rome

Washington, July 1, 1963, 1:34 p.m.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Vietnam Country Series, 7/1/63-7/20/63. Secret. Bundy was in Italy with President Kennedy and Secretary Rusk on the last leg of a four-nation visit to Europe which concluded on July 3.

196. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam

Washington, July 1, 1963, 8:52 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POLS VIET-US. Secret; Operational Immediate; Limit Distribution. Drafted by Wood and cleared by Hilsman and Nolting. Repeated to CINCPAC for POLAD.

197. Research Memorandum From the Deputy Director of the Bureau of Intelligence and Research (Denney) to the Acting Secretary of State

Washington, July 1, 1963.

Source: Department of State,S/P Files: Lot 70 D 199. Vietnam 1963. Unclassified.

198. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, July 2, 1963, 3 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POLS VIET-US. Secret; Operational Immediate; Limit Distribution. Repeated to CINCPAC for POLAD. Received at 5:36 a.m.

199. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam

Washington, July 2, 1963, 2:33 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POLS VIET-US. Secret; Operational Immediate. Drafted by Wood and cleared by Hilsman, Harriman, Ball, and Forrestal. Repeated to CINCPAC for POLAD.

200. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, July 3, 1963, 8 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, SOC 14-1 S VIET Secret; Operational Immediate; Limit Distribution. Repeated to CINCPAC.

201. Letter From the Charge in Vietnam (Trueheart) to President Diem

Saigon, July 3, 1963.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, SOC 12 S VIET. Secret; Limit Distribution. Transmitted to the Department of State in telegram 18 from Saigon, July 3, which is the source text.

202. Memorandum From Michael V. Forrestal of the National Security Council Staff to the President

Washington, July 3, 1963.

Source: Kennedy Library, President’s Office File, Staff Memoranda, Forrestal. Secret. Also sent to McGeorge Bundy, under cover of a note from Forrestal which reads: “For your and the President’s week end reading.” (Ibid., National Security Files, Meetings and Memoranda Series, NSC Staff Memoranda: Michael Forrestal 11/62-11/63)

203. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, July 4, 1963, 3 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, SOC 12-1 S VIET. Secret; Priority; Eyes Only.

204. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, July 4, 1963, 5 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 15 S VIET. Secret; Priority; Limited Distribution. Repeated to CINCPAC.

205. Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, July 4, 1963, 11-11:50 a.m.

Source: Kennedy Library, Hilsman Papers, Memoranda of Conversation: 7/63. Top Secret. Drafted by Hilsman. The source text indicates that the meeting took place at the Department of State, but the President’s Appointment Book confirms that the meeting took place at the White House, as indicated on the copy printed in United States-Vietnam Relations, 1945-1967, Book 12, pp. 526-528.

206. Memorandum From the Counselor and Chairman of the Policy Planning Council (Rostow) to the Secretary of State

Washington, July 4, 1963.

Source: Department of State,S/P Files: Lot 70 D 199, Laos. Secret. Also sent to Harriman, Johnson, and Hilsman. A note on the source text indicates that Secretary Rusk saw the memorandum.

207. Report by the Joint Chiefs of Staff’s Special Assistant for Counterinsurgency and Special Activities (Krulak)

Washington, undated.

Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OASD/ISA Files: FRC 67 A 4564, Vietnam 1963. Secret. Attached to a brief transmittal memorandum sent on July 5 by General Taylor to Secretary of Defense McNamara. A handwritten note on the covering memorandum indicates that Secretary McNamara saw the report. On July 9, Michael Forrestal sent a copy of the report to McGeorge Bundy for the President. Forrestal indicated, in his covering memorandum, that he felt the report gave “a fair and soundly optimistic picture of the part of the iceberg which is under water, i.e. the war against the Viet Cong.” A note on the covering memorandum indicates that the report was placed in the President’s weekend reading file. (Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Vietnam Country Series, 7/1/63-7/20/63)

208. Memorandum of a Conversation

Washington, July 5, 1963.

Source: Department of State, Secretary’s Memoranda of Conversation: Lot 65 D 330, July 1963. Secret. Drafted by Wood and approved in U on July 18. The meeting was held in the Department of State. Also printed in Pentagon Papers: Gravel Edition, Vol. II, pp. 728-729.

209. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, July 6, 1963, 5 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, DEF 19 US-S VIET. Secret; Limit Distribution; Priority. Repeated to CINCPAC, Bangkok, Phnom Penh, Taipei, Singapore, Hong Kong, Hue, Kuala Lumpur, Rangoon, Vientiane, Manila, Paris, London, New Delhi, and Djakarta.

210. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, July 7, 1963, 6 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, PPV 7 S VIET-US. Limited Official Use; Operational Immediate.

211. Telegram From Malcolm Browne of the Associated Press, David Halberstam of The New York Times, Peter Kalischer of CBS News, and Neil Sheehan of United Press International to the President

Saigon, July 7, 1963, 10:20 a.m.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Vietnam Country Series, 7/1/63-7/20/63. The telegram was sent via commercial channels to the White House which repeated it as telegram HYWH 4-63 at 6:32 p.m. to the President at Hyannis Port, Massachusetts, where he was spending the weekend. A note on the source text indicates that a copy was sent to the Department of State for Wood.

212. Central Intelligence Agency Information Report

Washington, July 8, 1963.

Source: U.S. Army Military Historical Institute, Kraemer Papers, VN 61-63. Confidential; No Foreign Dissem. Regarding these CIA reports, see footnote 1, Document 190.

213. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, July 9, 1963, noon.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, SOC 14-1 S VIET. Secret; Priority; Limit Distribution.

214. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, July 9, 1963, 5 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, SOC 14-1 S VIET. Secret; Priority; Limit Distribution. Repeated to CINCPAC.

215. Memorandum From Michael V. Forrestal of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)

Washington, July 9, 1963.

Source: Kennedy Library, Schlesinger Papers, South Vietnam. Secret.

216. Telegram From the Embassy in the Philippines to the Department of State

Manila, July 10, 1963-5 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 S VIET. Top Secret; Eyes Only; Priority; Limited Distribution. A note on the source text indicates that a copy of this telegram was passed to the White House on July 10.

217. Special National Intelligence Estimate

Washington, July 10, 1963.

Source: Department of State, INR-NIE Files. Secret; Controlled Dissem. According to a note on the cover sheet, “The following intelligence organizations participated in the preparation of this estimate: The Central Intelligence Agency and the intelligence organizations of the Department of State, Defense, the Army, the Navy, the Air Force, and NSA.” All members of the U.S. Intelligence Board concurred in this estimate on July 10, except the Atomic Energy Commission Representative and the Assistant Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation, who abstained on the grounds that the subject was outside their jurisdiction. The full text is printed in United States-Vietnam Relations, 1945-1967, Book 12, pp. 529-535.

218. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, July 11, 1963, 8 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POLS VIET. Secret; Limit Distribution. Repeated to CINCPAC. Nolting returned to his post on July 11. An article in The New York Times on July 9, p. 6, stated that Nolting was returning to Vietnam with a personal message for President Diem from President Kennedy. Nolting did meet with President Kennedy on July 8 before he left Washington, but he was not given any message to convey. (Ibid., Office of the Historian, Vietnam Interviews, Nolting, June 1, 1984) On July 10, the Department of State informed the Embassy in Saigon that the Spokesman of the Department had denied the report and had stated: “There has been no change in our policy toward Viet-Nam, or our support for the program against the Communist Viet Cong in that country.” (Telegram 49 to Saigon, July 10; Ibid., Central Files,POLS VIET-US)

219. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, July 15, 1963, 1 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POLS VIET. Secret; Limit Distribution. Repeated to London, Paris, Phnom Penh, Vientiane, Bangkok, and CINCPAC.

220. Memorandum From the Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Rice) to the Secretary of State

Washington, July 15, 1963.

Source: Department of State, Vietnam Working Group Files: Lot 67 D 54, POL 26 Coup Rumors. Secret. Drafted by Heavner and initialed by Rice. A note on the source text reads: “Secretary Saw”. Also sent to Ball, Harriman, and Johnson.

221. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, July 16, 1963, 1 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, SOC 14-1 S VIET. Confidential; Operational Immediate. Repeated to CINCPAC.

222. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, July 16, 1963, 8 p.m.

Source; Department of State, Central Files, SOC 14-1 S VIET. Secret; Operational Immediate; Limit Distribution. Repeated to CINCPAC.

223. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, July 17, 1963, 11 a.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, SOC 14-1 S VIET. Secret; Operational Immediate Limit Distribution. Repeated to CINCPAC.

224. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, July 17, 1963, 6 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, SOC 14-1 S VIET. Secret; Operational Immediate; Limit Distribution. Repeated to CINCPAC.

225. Editorial Note

226. Memorandum of Conversation

Saigon, July 17, 1963.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Vietnam Country Series, 7/1/63-7/20/63. Secret. Drafted by Wright. The source text bears the incorrect date June 17. Manning was sent to Vietnam by President Kennedy to investigate and report on the type of problems relating to American journalists which had led to the telegram sent to the President by a group of journalists on July 7, Document 211.

227. Memorandum of Conversation

Saigon, July 18, 1963.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Vietnam Country Series, 7/1/63-7/20/63. Secret. Drafted by Wright.

228. Editorial Note

229. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, July 19, 1963, 5 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, SOC 14-1 S VIET Secret; Operational Immediate; Limit Distribution. Repeated to CINCPAC.

230. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam

Washington, July 19, 1963, 8:53 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, SOC 14-1 S VIET Secret; Operational Immediate. Drafted by Heavner and cleared by Kattenburg, Rice, and Rusk. Repeated to CINCPAC for POLAD.

231. Letter From the Ambassador in India (Bowles) to the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)

New Delhi, July 19, 1963.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Top Secret; Eyes Only; Personal.

232. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, July 20, 1963, 7 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, SOC 14-1 S VIET. Secret; Operational Immediate; Limit Distribution. Repeated to CINCPAC. Received at 8:24 a.m.

233. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam

Washington, July 20, 1963, 2:58 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POLS VIET-US. Secret; Operational Immediate. Drafted by Heavner and Kattenburg and cleared by Manell and by Rice. Repeated to CINCPAC for POLAD.

234. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam

Washington, July 23, 1963, 6:51 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, SOC 14-1 S VIET Top Secret; Operational Immediate. Drafted by Heavner and Kattenburg and cleared by Hilsman.

235. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, July 24, 1963, 7 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POLS VIET. Secret; Limit Distribution. Repeated to CINCPAC.

236. Memorandum From the Director of the Vietnam Working Group (Kattenburg) to the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Hilsman)

Washington, July 24, 1963.

Source: Kennedy Library, Hilsman Papers, Country Series-Vietnam. Secret. After initialing the memorandum, Kattenburg added the following note: “Please call me in on this tonight-will be gone all day tomorrow.”

237. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, July 25, 1963, 8 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, SOC 14-1 S VIET. Top Secret.

238. Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, July 26, 1963.

Source: Department of State, Vietnam Working Group Files: Lot 67 D 54, PR-11 Press Relations. Confidential. Drafted by Kattenburg who is not listed among the participants. The meeting was held at the Department of State.

239. Report From the Assistant Secretary of State for Public Affairs (Manning) to the President

Washington, undated.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Vietnam Country Series, 7/21/63-7/31/63. Secret; Eyes Only. Sent to McGeorge Bundy on July 26 under a covering memorandum from Executive Secretary Benjamin H. Read. Read commended the report, and the attached memoranda of conversation between Manning and Nhu on July 17, and Manning and Diem on July 18 (Documents 226 and 227), as providing “a lengthy but fascinating window into the present state of mind of both Ngo Dinhs.” Read noted that a copy of the report was also being sent to Presidential Press Secretary Salinger. A note on the covering memorandum indicates that the report was placed in the President’s weekend reading file.

240. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, July 27, 1963, 8 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, AID(US) S VIET . Secret.

241. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, July 28, 1963, 4 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, SOC 14-1 S VIET. Secret; Limit Distribution. Repeated to CINCPAC.

242. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, July 30, 1963, 1 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27-10 S VIET Secret. Repeated to CINCPAC.

243. Memorandum of Telephone Conversation Between the Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs (Harriman) and the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Hilsman)

Washington, August 1, 1963, 9:55 a.m.

Source: Library of Congress, Harriman Papers, Telephone Conversations. Transcribed by Eleanor G. McGann of Harriman’s staff..

244. Central Intelligence Agency Information Report

Washington, August 2, 1963.

Source: U.S. Army Military Historical Institute, Kraemer Papers, Vietnam. Secret; Routine; No Dissem Abroad; Background Use Only.

245. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam

Washington, August 5, 1963, 3:03 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, SOC 14-1 S VIET. Secret; Operational Immediate; Limited Distribution. Drafted by Heavner and Kattenburg and approved by Hilsman. Repeated to CINCPAC for POLAD.

246. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Hilsman) to the Acting Secretary of State

Washington, August 6, 1963.

Source: Kennedy Library, Hilsman Papers, Countries, Vietnam. Secret. Drafted by Kattenburg.

247. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, August 7, 1963, 9 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, SOC 14-1 S VIET. Secret; Priority; Limit Distribution. Repeated to CINCPAC.

248. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam

Washington, August 8, 1963, 8 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 15-1 S VIET Secret. Drafted by Heavner and Kattenburg, cleared in substance by Harriman and in draft by Forrestal, and approved by Hilsman. Repeated to CINCPAC for POLAD.

249. Memorandum From Michael V. Forrestal of the National Security Council Staff to the President

Washington, August 9, 1963.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Vietnam Country Series, 8/1/63-8/20/63. Secret. A note on the source text reads: “Taken from Pres. week-end reading dtd 8/9/63.”

250. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, August 10, 1963, 7 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 15-1 S VIET. Secret; Priority; Limit Distribution. Repeated to CINCPAC.

251. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, August 12, 1963, 6 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 15-1 S Viet. Secret; Operational Immediate; Limit Distribution. Repeated to CINCPAC. According to a note on another copy, this telegram was part of the President’s weekend reading file of August 13. (Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Vietnam Country Series, 8/1/63-8/20/63)

252. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam

Washington, August 13, 1963, 7:20 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, SOC 14-1 S VIET. Secret; Operational Immediate; Limit Distribution. Drafted by Heavner, cleared by Kattenburg, and approved by Hilsman. Repeated to CINCPAC for POLAD.

253. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, August 14, 1963, 8 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 15-1 S VIET. Secret; Operational Immediate; Limit Distribution. Repeated to CINCPAC.

254. Editorial Note

255. Memorandum From the Director of the Vietnam Working Group (Kattenburg) to the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Hilsman)

Washington, August 15, 1963.

Source: Department of State, Vietnam Working Group Files: Lot 67 D 54, POL-1, General Political. Secret. Drafted by Conlon.

256. Memorandum From the Deputy Director for Plans, Central Intelligence Agency (Helms), to the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Hilsman)

Washington, August 16, 1963.

Source: Department of State, Vietnam Working Group Files: Lot 67 D 54, POL 26, Coup Rumors. Secret. Copies of the covering memorandum and the attachments were sent to Krulak and Forrestal.

257. Memorandum From the Joint Chiefs of Staff’s Special Assistant for Counterinsurgency and Special Activities (Krulak) to the Secretary of Defense (McNamara)

Washington, August 16, 1963.

Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OSD Files:FRC 69 A 3131, Vietnam 331. Secret. A note on the source text indicates that McNamara saw this memorandum.

258. Memorandum From Senator Mike Mansfield to the President

Washington, August 19, 1963.

Source: University of Montana, Mansfield Papers, Series XXII, Box 103, Folder 14. A note attached to the source text reads: “Believe Senator took this and gave original to the President.”

259. Memorandum From Thomas F. Conlon of the Vietnam Working Group to the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Hilsman)

Washington, August 20, 1963.

Source: Department of State, Vietnam Working Group Files: Lot 67 D 54, Press Relations. According to a memorandum for the record, August 15, President Kennedy requested from Secretaries McNamara and Rusk information on “military operations in South Vietnam.” He did so, according to the memorandum, “after the President had read an article in today’s New York Times by David Halberstam which indicated that things are going badly in Vietnam.” (Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Chester V. Clifton Series)

260. Memorandum From the Joint Chiefs of Staff to the Secretary of Defense (McNamara)

Washington, August 20, 1963.

Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OSD Files: FRC 69 A 3131, Vietnam 321 thru 370. Secret. A note on the source text indicates that Deputy Secretary of Defense Gilpatric saw this memorandum.

180. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 180. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, June 19, 1963, noon.

1209. CINCPAC for POLAD. I called on Vice President Tho June 18 to congratulate him on success his mission in reaching agreement with Buddhists. He seemed genuinely to appreciate the gesture.

In course of conversation, Tho acknowledged that negotiations had been quite difficult. He denied, however, that Buddhist demands had gone so far as in effect to amount to demand that Buddhism become “established” church Vietnam. (British Ambassador had gotten this impression from his separate talk with Tho.) Vice President said that he thought Buddhists were satisfied with results and that if there were no misunderstandings (malentendus) in implementing agreement, there should be no further trouble. However, he made it clear that he thought there was considerable possibility of misunderstandings. For example, when I said I had been pleased to see that the communique2 provided for continuation of his commission to supervise implementation and asked how this would be accomplished, he said that complaints would be referred to commission and that Minister of Interior (member of commission) had all the means necessary to deal with them, provided he had the necessary support from above. Tho was obviously not sure that he would.

Vice President asked me whether I thought agreements were fair, and I said I thought they were. However, it seemed to me that they should be regarded by government as point of departure, rather than conclusion of a difficult episode. I thought that events since May 8 had left deep and widespread scars and that government had suffered severe loss of support in all important segments of population. Question now was whether government would conclude danger had passed and draw back and tighten up or whether it would move forward with actions to restore lost confidence. This I thought would require not only faithful carrying out of agreement but concessions to other grievances. Unfortunately, I said, such indications as had yet appeared suggested tightening up. Vice President nodded throughout this but limited himself to saying that I “understood the problem well”.

Earlier in the day, I talked to Thuan along much the same lines, only more bluntly. I told him that, in my opinion, President had not only suffered severe loss confidence in Vietnam but also in Washington. I also spelled out for him, as I had not done for Vice President, indications which led me to believe that there was at least strong pressure on the President to tighten up. I mentioned the anomalous meeting at headquarters of Women’s Solidarity Movement on the morning of announcement of agreement at which tape recordings of June 7 resolution3 had been read. I cited news reports in Times of Vietnam June 17 which sought to place “responsibility for hysteria which has been created in past week squarely on shoulders of those who for undisclosed reasons delayed final signing,” and another statement that, although communique states that those supporting Buddhists’ 5 demands will benefit from Presidential clemency, “there is no clear agreement to absolve completely those who provoked the affairs of the last two weeks.” I pointed out also that we had solid evidence that certain elements of security forces were devoting their major attention to activities and movements of Americans rather than VC or Buddhists. Finally I cited specific incident of apparent harassment of American (see separate CAS telegram).4 Thuan asked me what sort of further GVN concessions I had in mind. I replied that it would not be difficult to produce specific suggestions but I thought it would be better if GVN came up with ideas of its own. Specific suggestions from US would, I feared, be tainted in GVN mind. One area which immediately suggested itself, however, was that of justice, viz., bringing long-detained prisoners to trial, etc.

Thuan indicated agreement with my analysis of problem but did not otherwise react.

Unless Department has objection, I shall push along on these lines as I am able to find opportunities to do so.

Trueheart

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, SOC 14-1 S VIET Secret; Priority; Limit Distribution. Repeated to CINCPAC.

2 See Document 178.

3 See footnote 2, Document 157.

4 Not found.

181. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam 181. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam1

Washington, June 19, 1963, 8:28 p.m.

1247. For Trueheart from Hilsman. Embtels 1209,2 1211.3 Entirely concur with line you have been taking as reported reftels. Believe this line must now be followed by very hard-hitting approach to Diem.which you may put on paper as gist of an instruction from Department.

Unless you have most serious reservations you are instructed convey to Diem following as coming from Washington.

Until May 8 incident U.S. public and official opinion increasingly impressed by GVN success against Viet Cong. This favorable trend has now been dangerously reversed. Hilsman and other U.S. officials who must defend in current Congressional hearings U.S. aid and assistance programs for Viet-Nam are finding their position increasingly difficult in the face of grave political pressures and serious questions about the Buddhist problem.

There is room to be generous in dealing with the Buddhists and such dealing is necessary to rebuild the prestige of the Vietnamese Government in America.

While agreement on five points has been reached, suspicions and tensions are still most serious and a reasonable and friendly attitude is absolutely necessary if the GVN is to regain its prestige in Viet-Nam and its reputation in Washington. Also the GVN should not be equated with one individual. For example statement (Embtel 1156)4 “Buddhism can count on the Constitution, in other words, on me” made bad impression here. (FYI Preceding two sentences may be used at your discretion. End FYI)

There should be no separation between the Government and people of Viet-Nam the great majority of whom consider themselves to be Buddhists. The barricades in Saigon emphasize this serious separation and should be taken down. The highest leaders of the Government should meet Buddhist leaders regularly and treat them as respected equals.

The Government should consider other gestures of good faith which recognize that the Buddhists are sincere and that they are entitled to an honored place in the Vietnamese nation.

The joint communique of June 16 in which agreement was reached on the five demands should be scrupulously respected and promptly carried out so as to reduce the suspicions of the Buddhists who are watching the Government’s actions closely. The Buddhist leaders are well organized and have not permitted the Communists or political opposition elements to take control. They are a disciplined and peaceful people who must be treated without suspicion.

News of these events reaches Washington promptly and any evidence that elements within the GVN were seeking to hold back on the agreements or to criticize the Buddhists publicly or privately would have grave effects. Madame Nhu’s statements have caused such serious questions in Washington (and evidently in Saigon) as to the sincerity of the GVN’s intentions that a profound sense of irritation is already damaging the close U.S.-GVN sense of cooperation which must endure for a long time if Viet-Nam is to succeed against the Communists. (FYI Dept has just received [document number not declassified]. End FYI.

Other steps to win back the Buddhists should be considered and preparations should be started now to carry out free parliamentary elections in August. The GVN must seriously consider such steps as permitting opposition candidates to run without harassment, at least some trials of prisoners, and broadening the Cabinet.

In general the GVN should seek to convince its citizens that it is a reasonable Government dedicated to assisting, not harassing them and to preserving law and order without employing means so strong or so irritating as to cause divisions and dissensions.

Well realize difficulty of conveying these thoughts, but unless they are clearly understood the entire U.S. effort of supplying necessary support to Viet-Nam is in jeopardy. Enemies of foreign aid are making maximum use of all derogatory news from Viet-Nam.

As a specific example it will now be more difficult to approve recently requested crop destruction program (Deptel 1208)5 since any leak (and there are many) connecting U.S. with such activity now would be particularly difficult to handle here in U.S. and internationally.

FYI You may wish say you have received above as official assessment of situation as seen from Washington and that you have decided, despite its bluntness, that it in joint U.S.-GVN interest that President see it on confidential basis.

You may wish ask your British, Australian, or other colleagues follow up on at least some of these points. We could support such requests with Embassies here. End FYI.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, AID (US) S VIEI Secret; Limit Distribution. Drafted by Wood and cleared by Rice and, in draft by Hilsman. Repeated to CINCPAC for POLAD.

2 Document 180.

3 In telegram 1211 from Saigon, June 19, 5 p.m., Trueheart reported that Thuan had assured him that no additional bonzes had been jailed beyond those already known to the Embassy. Trueheart noted that he reiterated to Thuan the advice outlined in telegram 1209 from Saigon, and expressed his concern over the possibility of a further damaging statement from Madame Nhu. (Department of State, Central Files, SOC 14-1 S VIET)

4 See footnote 3, Document 165.

5 The reference should be to telegram 1208 from Saigon, June 19, 11 a.m., in which the Embassy reported on a South Vietnamese military operation and noted that the Diem government had made an urgent request to the Embassy for supporting crop destruction with herbicides in the area of the military operation. (Department of State, Central Files, DEF 19 US-S VIET)

182. Message From President Kennedy to Prince Sihanouk 182. Message From President Kennedy to Prince Sihanouk1

Washington, June 20, 1963.

I thank Your Royal Highness for the message sent to me on June 14.2 I have followed with concern the events within the Republic of Viet-Nam. The right of every individual freely to practice his faith is basic to my own philosophy and that of the United States. While recognizing that external interference from any source would be inappropriate, I share with Your Royal Highness the hope for a settlement of the recent misunderstandings. I was therefore relieved at the news of the agreement reached.

John F. Kennedy3

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, SOC 14-1 S VIET. Confidential. Transmitted to Phnom Penh in telegram 763, June 20, which is the source text. Telegram 763 was drafted by Daniel N. Arzac, Officer in Charge of Cambodian Affairs and cleared by Koren, Wood, Hilsman, and, in draft, by President Kennedy.

2 Document 173.

3 Telegram 763 bears this typed signature.

183. Research Memorandum From the Director of the Bureau of Intelligence and Research (Hughes) to the Secretary of State 183. Research Memorandum From the Director of the Bureau of Intelligence and Research (Hughes) to the Secretary of State1

Washington, June 21, 1963.

RFE-55

SUBJECT

Implications of the Buddhist Crisis in Vietnam

The Diem government’s manner of implementing its agreement with South Vietnam’s Buddhist leaders could give rise to renewed difficulties. This memorandum examines the implications of such difficulties for the stability of the regime.

ABSTRACT

What appeared to be an isolated Buddhist incident in the city of Hue quickly became a national crisis that crystallized long-standing resentment of what Buddhist leaders regard as the privileged position occupied by the minority Roman Catholic church of which President Diem, his family, and a disproportionate number of civil and military officials are members.

The speed with which the Buddhist issue reached critical proportions was largely the result of the position adopted by President Diem and his family who misread the seriousness of the Buddhist movement and attributed it to political and even Communist inspiration. Until June 16 such concessions as were made to the Buddhists were clearly piecemeal and grudging. On June 16, however, against a background of sharply-increased Buddhist tensions and United States pressure, the Diem government signed an agreement with Buddhist leaders that, for the first time, accommodated all their demands.

A degree of calm having been resolved [reached?] by the June 16 agreement, much will now obviously depend on the sincerity and speed with which it is implemented. If the regime is conspicuously dilatory, inept, and insincere in handling Buddhist matters, renewed tension would probably again reach crisis proportions. Disaffection within the bureaucracy and the army, coupled with popular discontent and disorders, would almost certainly give rise to coup efforts. Such an effort if led, as it probably would be, by top and middle-echelon military and civil officials, would probably have good prospects of success. A successful coup, while posing real dangers of major internal upheaval and a serious slackening of the military effort against the Viet Cong, could draw upon a reservoir of trained and experienced personnel for reasonably effective leadership of the government and the war effort.

[Here follow sections entitled “Buddhist Incident Builds into National Crisis”, “The Diem Position”, Prospects for Long-Range Settlement”, and “Implications for the Stability of the Diem Regime”.]

Coup Prospects

A new Buddhist crisis, in the wake of any failure on the part of the regime to fulfill its commitments, would almost certainly give rise to coup efforts. A resurgence of open Buddhist hostility would again be reflected in demonstrations and, almost inevitably, bloodshed. Most Buddhist leaders, although not themselves likely to assume command of a movement to overthrow the government, would probably be inclined to favor a drastic political change as the only means by which their grievances could [be] remedied. Even before Buddhist-led disturbances reached serious or widespread proportions, however, the Diem leadership would probably be faced with an open revolt within the bureaucracy and the military establishment.

Some of Diem’s principal supporters might seek to counsel compromise and reform, but the futility of such counsel in the past, knowledge that officials have been removed or isolated for urging compromise, and the substantially-increased influence of the Nhus would tend to deter this effort. In any event, Diem probably would not listen to such advice, particularly to any recommendations that suggest removing the Nhus or even restricting their authority.

A revolt against Diem’s leadership could occur in several ways. For example, an army unit commander in the field, reacting rather spontaneously and without prior planning, might refuse orders from Saigon to use force to suppress a demonstration and might even openly indicate his support of the Buddhist cause. Apart from his personal sympathies, he might be motivated by fear of mutiny by his troops or armed action by the local populace aided by the Viet Cong. In any event, this open defiance of the government could quickly spread to other units, gain support within the top military leadership and the civil bureaucracy, and reach a climax in a major coordinated coup effort against the Diem family in Saigon. Counteractions by Diem, which he would have time to prepare in a revolt of this kind, could lead to armed conflict within military ranks and a protracted struggle between pro and anti-Diem forces.

Alternatively a revolt could be precipitated in Saigon, aimed at resolving the situation quickly without excessive armed conflict and bloodshed and without weakening the military front against the Viet Cong. The initial action in Saigon would not preclude coordinated supporting actions elsewhere. A revolt staged in this fashion would almost certainly require considerable prior planning and probably the participation of middle and top military and civil officials. The abortive 1960 coup, however, may well have impressed potential coup leaders with the necessity of better planning and broader participation by army and government elements and with the potential dangers posed by succumbing to protracted negotiations with Diem.

The Viet Cong would probably not be able to initiate or gain control of a successful and ostensibly non-Communist revolt. More likely, they would make every effort to provoke militant action by the Buddhists and to encourage disaffection among local government officials and army field units. Once a revolt had been launched, they would attempt to strengthen their military and political positions locally. In the main, they would be looking for a general breakdown of government authority in the countryside.

Nor do we believe that the diversified array of non-Communist oppositionists outside the government could initiate or lead a successful coup. These oppositionists have consistently demonstrated their inability to unite under a common cause or leader. Many of them are opportunists whose political views range from neutralism to possible pro-Communist sympathies and who have little support outside their immediate personal following. However, some appear more responsible, have contacts within the government, and might be acceptable as participants although not necessarily as leaders in a revolt, particularly if they had gained support within Buddhist circles.

We believe that the most likely revolt, however staged, would be non-Communist and fully committed to the counterinsurgency effort, have appreciable support within the government, and include middle and top echelon military and civil officials. Nevertheless, we do not feel that a major polarization of the South Vietnamese military and civilian leadership into active coup and anti-coup groups will necessarily occur. While most of them would probably favor the coup, if it is clearly anti-Communist, many might still hesitate to commit themselves actively at the outset and would give their tacit or active support to whatever side appeared to have the best chance of winning. However, we believe that this would tend to work to the advantage of the coup leaders. Under these circumstances, the revolt would have a fair-to-good chance of succeeding.

We do not believe that Diem and his family are prepared to capitulate without a fight, but we see it as equally unlikely that they would be permitted any alternative other than to resign or face death. The removal of the Diem family would probably precipitate a power struggle within the government, but ultimately would tend to strengthen the role of the military. It is not impossible that Diem’s successor could come from outside the ranks of the present government. A government led by a military junta or by Vice President Nguyen Ngoc Tho is more likely, however, with the army, in the latter case, playing a major if not predominant role behind the scenes. On the one hand, the military might conclude that a military-led government would be better able to maintain national unity and internal political cohesion and, more importantly, to conduct a determined and effective campaign against the Viet Cong. On the other hand, they might conclude that Tho would share their views on the manner of conducting the fight against the Viet Cong and that his constitutional succession would legitimize the change in government and possibly avert a serious power struggle. The possibility for successful cooperation between Tho and military leaders is good; he is apparently on cordial terms with a number of them, and is also competent and widely respected in and outside the government.

The sudden removal of South Vietnam’s authoritarian and long-established regime, whatever the character of the successor government, would pose real dangers of major internal upheaval and a serious slackening of the military effort against the Viet Cong. Certainly it is open to question whether any successor to Diem could, on the one hand, provide the same firm anti-Communist leadership, or on the, other, assure a more efficient and less authoritarian administration. Nevertheless, there is a reasonably large pool of untapped or ineffectively used but experienced and trained manpower not only within the military and civilian sectors of the present government but also, to some extent outside, that, given the opportunity and continued support from the United States, could provide reasonably effective leadership for the government and the war effort and make possible broader participation in the administration.

Implications for the United States

The public reaction of the United States might well determine the failure or success of any armed revolt against Diem. Diem will almost certainly expect quick, publicly expressed, and strong support and would feel that he no longer had United States confidence if such support were not forthcoming. Indeed, he might immediately leap to the conclusion that the United States had inspired the action or was actively assisting the rebels. Under these circumstances, if Diem were able to defeat the rebels, the United States would meet with increased difficulty in efforts to guide and influence Diem’s policies. Even should the United States publicly come to Diem’s support in return for commitments on his part with respect to his future activities, these commitments might not be fulfilled were Diem to succeed in putting down the revolt. A victory in these circumstances would greatly reinforce Diem’s view that he is indispensable, that he knows best what the situation requires, and that he cannot trust anyone outside his immediate family.

The rebels and the fence sitters too would be looking for some indication of the United States position. Our silence over any period or indications that we regarded the revolt as an internal problem which we hoped to see quickly resolved would probably be taken as support for the rebels. This, or any other evidence that the United States was not supporting Diem, would probably inspire broader participation in the rebel effort, and if it were successful, enable the United States to influence the formation and policies of the successor government. On the other hand, obvious United States support for the Diem government would tend to deter participation in the rebel effort. If nevertheless the rebel effort were successful we could anticipate considerable hostility toward the United States in the new administration.

1 Source: Department of State,S/P Files: Lot 70 D 199, Vietnam 1963. Secret; No Foreign Dissem; Limit Distribution. A note on another copy of this memorandum indicates that it was placed in the President’s weekend reading file. (Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Vietnam Country Series, 6/63)

184. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 184. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, June 22, 1963, 11 a.m.

1224. CINCPAC for POLAD. Deptel 1247.2 I have requested appointment with Diem today.

As preliminary, I saw Thuan at 9 AM. I did not go over my instructions with him; I told him only that I had instructions to see President and would be speaking to him along same lines as I had taken on personal basis in recent talks with Thuan.

Main purpose of call on Thuan, I said, was to tell him that I was now convinced that—far from taking June 16 agreement as starting point and moving forward—a deliberate campaign was already being mounted, specifically by the Nhus, to sabotage the agreement. I cited following: 1. Nhu had ordered that signatures be obtained from Republican Youth to a petition protesting against June 16 agreement and asking that it be revoked, at least in part [document number not declassified].

2. Article in Times of Vietnam yesterday reporting “National Convention” in Saigon June 20 of Go Son Mon sect,3 at which sect pledged its allegiance to GVN and disassociated itself from “recent politico-religious controversy”. I said this sect was well known to us to be subsidized by GVN. I was also certain that this patently trumped-up convention would be deeply resented by Buddhists.

3. White paper prepared by Gregory4 for Madame Nhu [document number not declassified]. I repeated what I had previously told him about further statements by Madame Nhu, and said that I now had specific instructions on this matter (Deptel 1255)5 Of which I gave him substance. He said he had informed Diem in terms of what I had previously said (Embtel 1211).6

4. Deletion from latest GVN newsreel by Nhu of coverage of GVN Buddhist negotiations and settlement (Tousi 336, last para).7

5. Reported plans for three-day jubilee in Hue, and possibly elsewhere, June 25-27 celebrating 25th anniversary of elevation to Bishopric of Archbishop Ngo Dinh Thuc.

I also reminded Thuan that Buddhist leaders were still in Saigon and had let it be known publicly that they were giving GVN two weeks to show good faith, specifically by releasing persons arrested in connection with demonstrations.

Thuan did not dispute any of these charges. On contrary, he confirmed them indirectly by saying that he had been doing everything he could to persuade Diem not to accept advice being given him by his family (protect source).

I asked Thuan to try to bring each of above items to attention of Diem before I saw him. At that time I intended myself to repeat them all, plus any others that become available in meantime.

Trueheart

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, AID (US) S VIET. Secret; Limit Distri” button. Repeated to CINCPAC.

2 Document 181.

3 A marginal note on the source text at this point, in an unknown hand, reads: “Probably a small Buddhist sect. We have no info. yet.” The Co Son Mon sect was identified in a Special Report on “The Buddhists of South Vietnam,” prepared on June 28 in the Office of Current Intelligence of the Central Intelligence Agency, as one of the smaller Buddhist organizations, which claimed a following in the Mekong Delta provinces. “It is reported to be government-subsidized and government-manipulated.” (Department of State, Central Files, SOC 14 -US VIET)

4 Gene and Ann Gregory published the Times of Viet-Nam. They were the two Americans closest, both personally and through business connections, to Madame Nhu.

5 In telegram 1255 to Saigon, June 21, the Department of State indicated that the publication of a “white paper” on the Buddhist crisis, “whether as official GVN document in Times Viet-Nam or as statement Women’s Solidarity Movement, would have serious repercussions here.” Publication of such a document “might well cause such ground swell American opinion as to render continued U.S. support GVN much more difficult.” Trueheart was instructed to leave President Diem with no doubt as to the “importance killing this white paper.” (Department of State, Central Files, POL 1 S VIET-US)

6 See footnote 3, Document 181.

7 Not found.

185. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 185. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, June 22, 1963, 8 p.m.

1231. CINCPAC for POLAD. Deptel 1247.2 I saw Diem at 5 PM for about an hour. Conversation was businesslike and Diem let me do most of talking. If he was irritated at my bluntness, he did not show it, and his manner at end of talk was if anything rather warmer than at beginning.

I first gave Diem paper based on reftel3 describing it, as suggested, as official Washington assessment which I thought he should see. He read it rather rapidly but made no comment.

I then turned to my belief that deliberate effort was being made by Nhus to sabotage agreement of June 16 and reasons therefor. I cited each of numbered points in Embtel 12244 except one relating to jubilee for Archbisop Thuc. Discussion had become slightly heated by time I reached this item, and I judged it would be more offensive than productive to raise it. Whether Thuan had already gone over these points I do not know; Diem dodged my question on this.

Diem stated flatly that GVN intended to honor agreement—and this was only immediate, positive outcome of discussion. He denied that Nhu was organizing Republican Youth protest against agreement. (On this, as on other points which he disputed, I urged him to make inquiries.)

On Gregory-Madame Nhu paper I gave him full story as we have it; I repeated what I had said to Thuan about it; and I read him Deptel 1255.5 He listened attentively but neither confirmed nor denied charge, nor did he say whether he proposed to do anything.

On Co Son Mon6 “Convention” he defended right of this sect to have such a meeting and state its views. I said point was whether meeting was subsidized by GVN, whether it was spontaneous, and what would be its effect on Buddhists. There was also question of tendentious reporting of meeting in Times of Vietnam. Diem tended to brush this off. He said GVN and local authorities regularly gave financial and other support to all factors of Buddhist movement. He did not reply on question of censoring newsreel.

I wound up this part of discussion by saying that available information had convinced me and my colleagues that a deliberate effort was afoot to destroy the agreement. I felt obliged to tell him that, if agreement did break down and demonstrations resumed, I thought my government would as matters stood put the blame on GVN. I reminded him that Buddhist leaders were still in Saigon waiting, as they said, for evidence of GVN good faith and specifically for release of persons arrested. Diem said they were being released as fast as they could be processed. However, if processing turned up dossier showing that individual was Communist, Diem indicated he would not be released. (He said that some youths had been found to be members of Communist youth organization.) He also implied that he had at least serious doubts about releasing people who had thrown rocks at police during riot last Sunday.7 (Buddhists are demanding that everyone picked up in this affair be freed.)

I concluded talk by going over very frankly my assessment of situation and what needed to be done (Embtel 1209)8 repeating points in paper I had given him, stressing serious loss of support for GVN at home and abroad. I said I hoped he would believe I was speaking as a friend but in any event I had to tell him that he was in a very grave position, in my opinion, and had to take drastic measures, going beyond religious questions, if confidence in his government was to be restored.

I ended by saying that situation seemed to me to be especially tragic because there had been undeniable progress on the military side and in the Strategic Hamlet Program and this progress had continued all during Buddhist affair. It nevertheless had to be recognized that latter could overturn everything that had been accomplished. Whatever he might think about situation, he must accept that he was under most virulent editorial attack in US and that political pressure on US Government was intense.

Diem did not dispute any of this. He simply said sadly that Buddhist affair had been blown up out of all proportion. What people should be worried about was situation in Laos.9 I said this might be the right judgment strategically but, as he knew, politics did not always follow strategy.

Trueheart

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, AID (US) S VIET. Secret; Operational Immediate; Limited Distribution. Repeated to CINCPAC.

2 Document 181.

3 In telegram 1225 from Saigon, June 22, Trueheart reported that the paper which he prepared for Diem conformed to the instructions received in telegram 1247 to Saigon, with two omissions. Trueheart did not include a reference to Diem’s statement in his June 11 speech that “Buddhism can count on the Constitution, in other words, on me”, and he omitted the reference to the barricades in Saigon because they had been removed. Trueheart noted that the official English translation of Diem’s statement read: “Buddhism in Vietnam finds its fundamental safeguard in the Constitution, of which I personally am the guardian.” (Department of State, Central Files, SOC 15-1 S VIET)

4 Document 184.

5 See footnote 5, Document 184.

6 A marginal notation on the source text at this point reads: “GVN subsidized sect, presumably Buddhist”.

7 June 16.

8 Document 130.

9 A marginal note on the source text at this point, in an unknown hand, reads: “True enough.”

186. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 186. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, June 25, 1963, 6 p.m.

1236. Embtel 1231.2 Thuan called me in this morning for what turned out to be longish post-mortem on my meeting with Diem June 22. He said Diem had since discussed meeting with him twice and had shown him paper I had left. Diem was disturbed (I gathered he meant angry) over what he had been told and suspicious that we were trying to undermine him.

I recounted conversation for Thuan and again went over with him our thinking regarding gravity of situation arising from Buddhist affair. I said we had been supporting Diem and GVN for a long time and that what I had done my best to get over to President was that our pressure resulted from our real and serious concern that he must take steps to restore loss of support in this country. We were also trying to bring home effects of Buddhist affair in U.S. We were, in short, trying to help him rather than undermine him.

Thuan again said he agreed with our analysis of Buddhist problem, and he was doing and would do everything he could to see that June 16 agreement was faithfully carried out. He added, with great seriousness, that he was doing so because (a) he thought “the fate of the nation” depended on it, and (b) his personal good faith was engaged as one of the signers. I said I had never doubted his own role in this affair.

I hoped he would succeed (he had not predicted that he would), but Diem should bear in mind that immediate problem was not simply one of carrying out agreement to the letter but of genuinely convincing Buddhists of GVN good faith. This might well require, in spirit at least, something more than literal compliance. Burden of proof was rigidly and wrongly on the government, and Diem simply could not afford to have a revival of demonstrations or bonzes burning in the street.

I told him that, in my judgment, Buddhist leaders were not only suspicious re implementation of agreement but also very afraid that once public interest has abated, GVN will move in quietly to arrest principal leaders and take other repressive measures. This very natural feeling would probably cause Buddhists to hold out for maximum public action by GVN which would tend to get government openly committed on details and hence give Buddhists some measure of protection against reprisals. (Thuan agreed this was an important element in Buddhist thinking.) I urged him in this connection to have published immediately the detailed orders he said had been sent to provincial officials re implementation of agreement. Thuan thought he could arrange this.

Turning back to President—and I think this was main point he wanted to convey—Thuan said he was very concerned over attitude of Diem in face of pressures being exerted on him and of appointment of new Ambassador.3 Diem thought a new American policy was involved and an effort to force him to do our bidding or to unseat him. His reaction to this prospect, Thuan said, was one of extreme stubbornness. He had said, and Thuan said he was trying to quote him exactly, “they can send ten Lodges, but I will not permit myself or my country to be humiliated, not if they train their artillery on this Palace.” Thuan added that he knew, as I did, how stubborn Diem was, and he was most concerned over prospect of series of head-to-head confrontations.

I replied that I did not know what Ambassador Lodge’s instructions would be, but it seemed to me that the way to avoid confrontations was for GVN to begin to move now. They had to move immediately anyway, in their own interests, not only to overcome effects of Buddhist affair but also to prepare for August elections. Regarding latter they had only three choices: (a) to cancel them, (b) to rig them, or (c) to take actions designed to ensure heavy popular support (and vote) for the government. First two alternatives would amount to admission GVN did not have popular support and were therefore unacceptable. Hence, GVN really had no choice but to get busy on the third. I thought GVN would know better than we the sort of things it should do. Thuan said he agreed and he was sure elections would be held.

Trueheart

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, AID (US) S VIET. Secret; Priority; Eyes Only.

2 Document 185.

3 On June 20, the Department instructed Trueheart to approach the Diem government to request agrement to the appointment of Henry Cabot Lodge, Jr., to replace Frederick Nolting as Ambassador to Vietnam. (Telegram 1250 to Saigon; Department of State, Central Files, PER-Lodge, HENRY CABOT) Trueheart replied on June 22 that President Diem had agreed that afternoon to the appointment. (Telegram 1230 from Saigon; Ibid.)

187. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam 187. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam1

Washington, June 26, 1963, 12:51 p.m.

1271. Embtel 1236.2 Request you see Diem promptly and inform him orally or in writing that you have been instructed inform him officially there is no change in consistent U.S. policy supporting Vietnamese Government and people against Communist attack.

Change of Ambassadors was foreshadowed when Ambassador Nolting came to Viet-Nam for two year tour. Appointment of Lodge as Ambassador has been under consideration since late April. (FYI, prior May 8. End FYI.)

In designating a distinguished Republican who has a sympathetic interest in Viet-Nam (FYI, for example, he spent his active duty tour as Major General last year on Viet-Nam problems. You may use this orally. End FYI.), it is our purpose to demonstrate to President Diem, to the Vietnamese people, and to the world the importance which U.S. attaches to its support of Viet-Nam and to demonstrate that this policy has support of both political parties. As U.S. Ambassador, Lodge will continue carry out U.S. policy of supporting Viet-Nam and of perfecting effective cooperation with Government of Viet-Nam

Peril of the present situation has dictated that, as partners in Viet-Nam’s struggle, we present our views with utmost frankness.

Our belief that Viet-Nam’s continued success against Communist attack now requires the GVN to give continuing and unmistakeable proofs of good will to all its citizens and to the world remains unchanged.

Our clear intention is to warn a long time ally of a disaster which may yet be avoided; not to weaken him.

The decisions and actions are his sole responsibility.

FYI. Seems from here your demarches have helped Diem face facts, but that you must see him frequently to counteract suspicions which Nhu sows between your visits. When you have presented above you may wish ask Diem present his views with equal frankness and seek draw him out on reasons for his doubts of U.S. intentions.

While ensuing monologue may be painful; it may also help unburden Diem and regain his confidence. Leave completely to your discretion.

In dealing with press queries re Lodge appointment, you may use on background basis points in first three paras. Dept will do same.

Ball

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, AID (US) S VIET. Secret; Operational Immediate; Eyes Only; Limit Distribution. Drafted by Wood and cleared by Rice and Hilsman.

2 Document 186.

188. Special National Intelligence Estimate 188. Special National Intelligence Estimate1

Washington, June 26, 1963.

SNIE 14.3-63

THE IMPACT OF THE SINO-SOVIET DISPUTE ON NORTH VIETNAM AND ITS POLICIES

The Problem

To analyze the position of North Vietnam in the Sino-Soviet dispute and the effect this has upon Communist policies and actions in Laos and South Vietnam

Conclusions

A. North Vietnam has a large measure of independence within the Communist Bloc, and it has avoided committing itself to either side in the Sino-Soviet dispute. We believe that it will strive to continue avoiding such a commitment. (Paras. 4, 8)

B. In spite of its independent position, Hanoi has apparent sympathy toward certain of Peiping’s positions in the dispute, and its neutrality has recently shifted somewhat toward the Chinese. Hence, if Hanoi is moved to commit itself further, it will probably be in the direction of fuller support to Peiping. The development of an open, formal break between Moscow and Peiping or the death of the influential Ho Chi Minh would increase the pressures for a North Vietnamese commitment. Even so, Hanoi will almost certainly attempt to keep as great a measure of independence as possible, and to maintain ties with Moscow. (Paras. 9-10, 12)

C. Moscow almost certainly takes a more sober view than do Peiping and Hanoi of the risk of a US intervention, and probably lays more stress on political means for a Communist takeover in Laos. For their part, the Chinese and North Vietnamese seek a quicker victory through the application of military as well as political pressure. Nevertheless, at the present level of activity, Soviet and Chinese policies are in no essential conflict, and Hanoi has considerable initiative and freedom of action. A drastic change of the situation in Laos (e.g., the threat of large-scale US intervention) might exacerbate Soviet-Chinese differences over policies to be pursued in southeast Asia. However, in a crisis showdown with the US, we cannot assume that Moscow would fail to support Peiping and Hanoi. (Paras. 14-18)

Discussion

I. Sources of North Vietnamese Conduct

1. The announced objectives of the Government of North Vietnam (DRV) are: (a) “socialist construction”—i.e., economic and political consolidation of the territory controlled by the DRV; and (b) “peaceful unification” of all Vietnam—i.e., victory in the Hanoi-directed insurgency in the south. Hanoi wants the support of both Communist China and the USSR in the pursuit of these objectives.

2. North Vietnam’s internal problems are many and serious, reflecting the pressures of rapid population growth against limited agricultural resources and of an ambitious development program undertaken with an extreme shortage of skilled and trained personnel. Agricultural production is not fully adequate to meet the domestic needs of an expanding population, let alone yield an exportable surplus. Although North Vietnam appears to be reasonably well endowed with mineral resources, it lacks the technological competence to exploit them efficiently. Industry is rudimentary and inadequate to meet many consumer needs. As a result, North Vietnam is dependent on its Communist Bloc partners, principally Moscow and Peiping, for support in virtually every sector of the economy. This dependency limits to a considerable extent Hanoi’s power of decision over the pace and nature of its own economic development.

3. Hanoi’s leaders would like to see Vietnamese hegemony extended over all the states of former French Indochina. For the moment, their ambition appears to be focused primarily on taking over South Vietnam. Hanoi must move with circumspection in this effort, exercising care to consider the views of its senior Communist allies, Moscow and Peiping, and remaining alert to the danger of situations which might lead to drastic US action. This fear of a major military confrontation with the US places an upper limit on the scale and tempo of Hanoi’s militancy in South Vietnam and Laos.

4. Another basic factor shaping North Vietnamese conduct is the desire to retain a maximum amount of independence within the general framework of the Communist movement. Like Yugoslavia and Communist China, the North Vietnamese Communists came to power through a hard-won victory by their own forces, and in Ho Chi Minh they have a respected revolutionary leader and national founder in the mold of Tito and Mao. Hanoi has the self-confidence which comes with this heritage. Long oppressed by imperial China, the Vietnamese remain fearful of and resistant to renewed domination by the Chinese, or, for that matter, domination by any other alien power. So far Hanoi has maintained a degree of autonomy that is uncommon in the Communist Bloc. It has accepted aid from both Moscow and Peiping, and it has prevented either from assuming a preponderant influence in its affairs.

II. North Vietnam’s Position in the Sino-Soviet Dispute

5. North Vietnam’s jealousy of its independence and its desire for support from both Moscow and Peiping have been the primary determinants of Hanoi’s position in the Sino-Soviet dispute. Hanoi desires the military and political backing of as powerful a coalition as possible and is shaken by the prospect of a split or disintegration of the Communist Bloc. The DRV feels that the political support and military backing of both Communist China and the Soviet Union are essential to the maintenance of its integrity and as strategic supports for its foreign policy.

6. Accordingly, the North Vietnamese have avoided taking a clear-cut stand in favor of either party and have continually worked to bring the two together. Ho Chi Minh pursued the role of mediator, with at least superficial success, at the 1960 all-party conclave in Moscow, and has persisted in his efforts to heal the breach. Ho’s skill and his prestige as a senior Communist statesman, an associate of both Lenin and Stalin, has contributed to North Vietnam’s ability to avoid committing itself when all other Bloc parties have done so.

7. There are longstanding rivalries and jealousies within the North Vietnamese leadership, and factions have formed around various key personages. However, the association of a leader or a faction with a “pro-Moscow” or a “pro-Peiping” line is more likely to be based on considerations of Vietnamese national interests than on a desire to associate Hanoi with one side or the other in the Sino-Soviet dispute.

8. We believe that Hanoi’s self-interest will dictate a continuation of this attitude for as long as possible. We must keep in mind, however, that ardent Communist sectarians do not always follow the course which seems to us clearly in their best interest. Peiping’s costly challenge to Moscow in 1960 is a case in point. Therefore, we cannot rule out the possibility that Hanoi may decide or be forced to come down off the fence.

9. Two contingencies would make such a development more likely. The death of Ho would inaugurate a period of jockeying for power within the DRV leadership and the impulses toward Bloc unity and toward remaining aloof from the Sino-Soviet dispute would be weakened. During this period also, DRV actions toward Laos and South Vietnam might be less confident. A definite break between Moscow and Peiping would lead both parties to be more forthright and aggressive in seeking allies, and each would bring increased pressure upon Hanoi to commit itself.

10. Although Hanoi deplores the Sino-Soviet polemic and seeks to mitigate its bitterness, the DRV line on particular substantive issues more frequently corresponds to the Chinese than to the Soviet position. In general, Hanoi shares Peiping’s views on how the world Communist movement should be run. Hanoi’s desire to preserve its freedom of action leads it, like Peiping, to oppose Moscow’s demand that the movement observe the principle of “democratic centralism” (i.e., complete submission to the decisions of the majority, which is controlled by Moscow). Hanoi’s irredentism toward South Vietnam, like Peiping’s toward Taiwan, leads it to oppose devotion to “peaceful coexistence” and to object to disarmament efforts except as a device to “expose the insincerity of the imperialists.” Hanoi also joins Peiping in supporting maximum “struggle” and support of “liberation” movements. Cultural and racial affinities also incline the North Vietnamese toward the Chinese rather than the Russians and the overwhelming power of China is closer at hand. Hence, we believe that Hanoi, if moved to take sides, would throw its support to the Chinese.

11. If this came to pass, Hanoi would have to face the possibility of a curtailment or termination of Soviet economic and military support. But unless the scope of DRV military moves is considerably increased, Soviet military assistance is not vital. Moreover, it seems likely that Hanoi, in conducting its operations at current levels in Laos and South Vietnam, does not rely very heavily on the Soviet deterrent. In the economic field, both Chinese and Soviet aid programs are longterm,2 and though a withdrawal of Soviet assistance would cause inconvenience and some damage to DRV development schemes, it would not be critical; much of the slack would probably be taken up by expanded Chinese assistance and by purchases in the Free World.

12. It should be emphasized, however, that support of Peiping on the issues of the intra-Communist dispute does not automatically entail either Hanoi’s subservience to Peiping or a definitive severing of Hanoi’s ties to Moscow. There are a great variety of intermediate stages, and the DRV would strive, probably with considerable success, to retain a large measure of independence and an effective connection with Moscow as well as with Peiping.

III. Interaction of the Sino-Soviet Dispute and Communist Policies and Action in Laos and South Vietnam

The Situation in Laos

13. The primacy of Hanoi’s interest in Laos is almost certainly recognized by Moscow and Peiping. However, both of them would exert considerable pressure to prevent North Vietnamese actions which appeared to imperil broader Chinese or Soviet interests. At present levels of commitment and activity, Hanoi appears to have a relatively free hand within Laos, where it exercises a high degree of control over the Pathet Lao (PL)—the Communist military force in Laos—and its political counterpart, the Neo Lao Hak Xat (NLHX). Within the framework of political and military objectives laid down by North Vietnam, the PL/NLHX appears to exercise some degree of independent activity. Peiping appears to have some direct contact with the PL/NLHX, though Moscow does not.

14. In considering overall strategy in Laos, the Soviets almost certainly see their interests as best served by a continuation of the political “solution” achieved in the 1962 Geneva Conference on Laos; they probably still expect that Communist objectives would be eventually achieved almost wholly without risk, through penetration and subversion of Premier Souvanna Phouma’s coalition government. The Soviets feel that military pressures should be controlled so as to promote this aim.

15. For their part, Hanoi and Peiping almost certainly believe that a Communist takeover can be accomplished more quickly and more directly. Moreover, they may fear that the Soviet-preferred method would significantly delay, and perhaps prevent, this achievement by allowing the Souvanna regime to become stabilized and, given US assistance, strengthened. In their view, the way to win is through constant application of military and political pressure, capitalizing on quick, limited military victories and eroding the enemy’s determination to fight. Thus, the Pathet Lao and the North Vietnamese have acted to debilitate the neutralists by all available means, but particularly by limited military action to exploit Souvanna’s weakness and indecisiveness.

16. In any event, Moscow, Peiping, and Hanoi almost certainly agree on the classic principle of combining military and political action, with the differences being a matter of degree and emphasis. Bloc policy in Laos will almost certainly continue to reflect this overall Communist strategy, with Hanoi’s choice of tactics dictated primarily by its assessment of local developments rather than by considerations of the Sino-Soviet dispute.

17. The Soviets will probably continue to compete with Peiping for the allegiance of North Vietnam, and they almost certainly would prefer not to give Hanoi and Peiping a free hand to decide Communist policy in Laos. However, the Soviet Union’s interest in the Laos situation is peripheral in contrast to its deep involvement in Cuba, Berlin, the dispute with Peiping, and several other immediate issues. The Soviets almost certainly prefer not to make much out of the Laos crisis and are unlikely to do so unless the situation threatens to flare up and bring the risk of an East-West confrontation there. On the other hand, Communist China, bordering on Laos and loudly promoting the cause of national liberation wars, is more directly involved. In the coming months, as Moscow and Peiping approach another crisis in their relations, the Chinese may try to make Laos an issue in the Sino-Soviet dispute claiming that the Soviets are demonstrating an unwillingness to support wars of national liberation in underdeveloped areas. But it seems unlikely that Peiping would risk significantly escalating the conflict in order to put the Soviets on the spot.

18. In any case, so long as Moscow and Peiping continue to compete for the allegiance of Communists everywhere, we believe that Moscow will be inhibited in opposing Hanoi’s and Peiping’s desires in Laos and South Vietnam, unless these seem to be endangering Moscow’s own national interests. A drastic change of the situation in Laos (e.g., the threat of large-scale US intervention) might exacerbate Soviet-Chinese differences over policies to be pursued in southeast Asia. However, in a crisis showdown with the US, we cannot assume that Moscow would fail to support Peiping and Hanoi.

The Situation in South Vietnam

19. Communist policy and action in South Vietnam appears to be almost wholly dictated by Hanoi. As in Laos, Moscow and Peiping almost certainly have a voice in policy decisions involving their support or national interests, but, in general, both appear content to view the “struggle” in the south as an irredentist issue and to permit the North Vietnamese to pursue their subversive activity at a pace and in a manner which Hanoi deems appropriate. Neither Moscow nor Peiping is known to have any direct contact with either the Viet Cong or its political mechanism, the National Front for the Liberation of South Vietnam (NFLSV), although both, particularly Peiping, have made much of visiting NFLSV delegations.

[Here follow a two-page annex assessing “Sing-Soviet Bloc Aid to North Vietnam” and a table listing “Credits and Grants From the USSR, the European Satellites, and Communist China”.]

1 Source: Department of State, INR-NIE Files. Secret; Controlled Dissem. Special National Intelligence Estimates (SNIEs) were high-level interdepartmental reports presenting authoritative appraisals of vital foreign policy problems on an immediate or crisis basis. According to a note on the cover sheet, “The following intelligence organizations participated in the preparation of this estimate: The Central Intelligence Agency and the intelligence organizations of the Departments of State, Defense, the Army, the Navy, the Air Force, and The Joint Staff.” All members of the United States Intelligence Board concurred in this estimate on June 26, except the Atomic Energy Commission Representative and the Assistant Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation, who abstained on the grounds that the subject was outside their jurisdiction.

2 A brief description of the Soviet and Chinese economic aid programs is given in the Annex. [Footnote in the source text. The annex to the estimate is not printed.]

189. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 189. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, June 27, 1963, 1 p.m.

1243. Deptel 1271.2 I expect to see Diem this afternoon.

In brief talk with Thuan this morning, he informed me that he had followed up on my suggestion and that GVN orders to provincial officials re implementation June 16 agreement would be published immediately. He also informed me in great confidence that President would shortly make visit to Hue with object of talking directly to people there.

In addition Thuan said President was contemplating a major address (whether in connection with Hue trip was not clear). Thuan said he was fairly well satisfied with draft of this speech but was still working to improve it. Present draft reaffirms each of five points and concludes with what Thuan described as ringing personal promise of President to see that agreement is carried out. I said I hoped Diem would not find it necessary to say again that he has “always” accepted five points in principle. Thuan indicated that elimination of this from draft was one of points he was still working on.

Finally, two Hue student leaders (one of whom previously alleged to have been tortured to death) have been released. According to Thuan, Diem had intervened personally to effect release.

Thuan said that he had reported to Diem my statements to him on June 25 (Embtel 1236),3 including remark I had made that President ought to “start acting like an American politician”. He said that he had endorsed this recommendation to Diem, and he implied latter had not rejected it out of hand. We shall see.4

Trueheart

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, AID (US) S VIET Secret; Priority; Limit Distribution.

2 Document 187.

3 Document 186.

4 In telegram 1283 to Saigon, June 27, the Department endorsed Trueheart’s “firm persistent efforts to encourage GVN to live up to its side of the bargain.” The Department noted, however, that “intelligence reports still indicate GVN not living up to spirit of agreement.” Trueheart was instructed to “discourage GVN from organizing phoney Buddhist demonstrations and seeking obtain signatures under pressure to documents critical of Buddhists.” Trueheart was also asked to assess reports that Buddhists in South Vietnam were divided between an older, moderate element and younger activists, and to weigh the implications of such a split. (Department of State, Central Files, SOC 14-1 S VIET)

190. Central Intelligence Agency Information Report 190. Central Intelligence Agency Information Report1

Washington, June 28, 1963.

TDCS DB-3/655, 301

SUBJECT

Appraisal of the Ngo Diem Regime as of 26 June 1963

1. This is a field appraisal of the current situation. It is not an official judgment by this agency or any component. It represents the observations and interpretations of a staff officer based on information available to him at the time of its preparation. Prepared for internal use as a guide to the operational environment, this commentary is disseminated in the belief that it may be useful to other agencies in assessing the situation for their own purposes.

2. The Government of Vietnam (GVN) is now waging what it considers to be a war for survival with its difficulties expanded by the deteriorating military situation in Laos. In the GVN’s view, the Laos problem increasingly deprives them of an important buffer against Communist insurgency and opens the GVN frontier to direct Communist aggression. It is therefore most unlikely that the GVN will accept any advice which, in the opinion of its top officials, might undermine its control of the internal political situation. By this reasoning, it can be anticipated that recommendations looking toward broad political and social reforms will be strongly resisted, both by President Ngo Dinh Diem and his family, and by certain military and civilian officials.

3. Efforts to effect any changes, such as broadening the government to include selected oppositionists, relegating the President’s brother, Ngo Dinh Nhu, and his wife to less prominent roles, and permitting opposition delegates in the National Assembly, are not believed feasible at this time for the following reasons: a. President Diem will not discard any family member under pressure. He has a strong traditional sense of family loyalty and is convinced that he is the only person of sufficient stature to lead his country in the battle for survival. Any American demarche envisioning the dismissal of Nhu, Madame Nhu, or of his brother Ngo Dinh Can, political leader of Central Vietnam, would probably be adjudged by Diem as personally insulting and as a gross infringement of his sovereignty and would meet with his flat refusal. Requests or demands that his family members be relegated to positions of apparent honor but without real power would also draw a negative response, with the chances of success being hardly better than those for a demarche for their dismissal. In Diem’s view, either would be demanding not only that he fight on without the services of his most trustworthy advisers, but also that he forfeit the power factors which they represent, i.e. Ngo Dinh Can’s Movement of National Revolution, Ngo Dinh Nhu’s Republican Youth Organization, Strategic Hamlet Program and Can Lao Party, and Madame Nhu’s Women’s Solidarity Movement.

b. Proposals to permit opposition participation in the GVN and to institute political liberalization and reform would undoubtedly place Diem on the horns of an extremely painful dilemma. Diem may realize that he can no longer deal with the opposition in this customary stern fashion, but he almost surely reasons that reforms and other changes would probably give oppositionists the opportunity they need to effect his downfall. Oppositionists themselves have given every indication that they consider the overthrow of the present regime of paramount importance, even over the prosecution of the war against the Viet Cong. Furthermore, a review of various old opposition leaders and groups shows little to indicate that they would work in good faith, either with a reshaped GVN under Diem, or even among themselves.

4. The most noteworthy feature of the Buddhist crisis has been the shift of certain population segments from apparent apathy to active opposition. The students, for example, have identified themselves emotionally with the Buddhist cause, and on 16 June a pastoral letter was read in all Roman Catholic churches of the Saigon Archdiocese which tended to lend support to Buddhist demands for freedom of religion within all of South Vietnam.

5. The immediate test for the GVN in the eyes of the Buddhists, of politically motivated elements waiting on the sidelines, and of the general public is the prompt and full implementation of the 16 June GVN agreement to Buddhist demands. If the GVN fails to prove its sincerity to Buddhists within the near future, it will almost certainly be in for increased difficulties. Evolution in this direction has already started. On paper, the GVN went about as far in meeting Buddhist demands as could be expected, and both sides cooperated closely in achieving the agreements and in carrying off without incident the funeral of Thich Quan Duc, the self-immolated Buddhist priest. There are, however, concrete indications that certain elements of the GVN have no intention of accepting the agreements as a permanently valid solution. Newspapers, especially the English-language Times of Vietnam, have hinted strongly at the existence of Viet Cong and foreign intrigues and machinations behind the Buddhist protests. There are disturbing reports of efforts to start agitation to revise the agreement “by popular acclaim.” The Republican Youth Organization has been reported as directed to make personal contacts calling for such a revision, and Diem himself has been stated to be backing this effort. Against this must be set Diem’s statement to United States Charge d’Affaires Trueheart that he intends to abide fully by the 16 June agreement.2 The agreement, however, is not precise or detailed, and the execution of some points therein is a continuing matter with the possibility of real or manufactured misunderstanding great on both sides. Buddhist leaders who are watching the situation very closely for indications that the GVN is reluctant to implement various terms of the agreement have stated that they are especially attentive to the problems of the students who are still in jail as a result of participation in demonstrations. Leading monks have stated that GVN failure to fulfill the agreements in any way will result in further Buddhist action.

6. A GVN attempt to subdue the Buddhists by force is likely to fail in the long run because of broad popular discontent over the problem and support for the Buddhists. The use of force would also possibly start a chain of events relegating religious aspects of the Buddhist crisis to the background and supplanting them with cumulative political developments directed at toppling the regime. If the GVN makes an effective and early effort to handle this matter sincerely, the chances are good that Diem will ride out this storm as he has done others before. However, he is potentially in more serious danger now than at any time since the war with the religious sects in 1955.

7. Field Dissem. State CINCPAC PACFLT PACAF ARPAC.

1 Source: U.S. Army Military Historical Institute, Kraemer Papers, VN 61-63. Secret; No Foreign Dissem; Background Use Only. TDCS information reports contained telegraphically-dispatched, unevaluated intelligence information which was distributed by the CIA to other appropriate government agencies.

2 See Document 185.

191. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam 191. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam1

Washington, June 28, 1963, 5:48 p.m.

1286. Embtel 1243.2 In light Khiet letter to Diem, [2 document numbers not declassified], we fear renewal demonstrations, possible bloodshed, and serious deterioration whole situation as grace period “given” GVN by Buddhists ends this weekend. Therefore believe you should urge GVN haste in implementing measures indicated reftel.

In particular, immediate publication orders to provincial officials should be helpful. If in fact GVN has arrested and prosecuted GVN officials responsible for Hue May 8 affair as indicated [less than 1 line not declassified] (urtel 1249),3 this should also be publicized. On balance think it would also be well urge immediate action on proposed communique giving number of persons arrested and number still held, with reasons, as per your 1249.

You might consider letting Thuan know we have good information that indicates at least some elements Buddhist hierarchy may be moving rapidly toward more demonstrations and essentially political actions. We think it most important keep moderate elements in control of Buddhist movement by means concrete GVN action in consonance with June 16 agreement.

Ball

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, SOC 14-1 S VIET. Secret; Operational Immediate. Drafted by Heavner and cleared by Hilsman. Repeated to CINCPAC for POLAD.

2 Document 189.

3 In telegram 1249 from Saigon, June 28, the Embassy reported on a conversation on June 27 between Minister of the Interior Luong and a CIA officer. Luong discussed the evolution of the Buddhist crisis, which he felt was inspired by the Viet Cong. Luong indicated that the Diem government intended to defuse the crisis by releasing a communique within a day or two, which would set the record straight on the question of arrests made by the government during the crisis. (Department of State, Central Files, SOC 14-1 S VIET)

192. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 192. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, June 28, 1963, 3 p.m.

1246. Deptel 1271.2 Session with President Diem yesterday evening lasted over two and one-half hours. I believe that he was reassured by reftel, of which I gave him text appropriate paragraphs, and by my statement that we would be using first three paragraphs as background for press. However, Diem made no direct comment on demarche and he parried all efforts to get him to speak frankly and directly about his reactions to recent pressures or, indeed, to talk about Buddhist problem at all, except in very superficial way. He did not touch on any of actions and plans mentioned by Thuan (Embtel 1243).3 I concluded that he did not want to allow me to link these actions with U.S. pressures.

Meeting was thus largely a monologue in which Diem covered the waterfront: Laos, military operations, the Chieu Hoi program, Strategic Hamlets, the Republican Youth, and the Women’s Solidarity Movement. Except on Laos (see separate telegram),4 there was nothing essentially new in any of this in terms of information. What was remarkable was the stress he laid on his plans to democratize the country from the bottom up and his very evident intent to impress on me his solidarity with the Nhus (I have never heard him refer to them so frequently).

Diem spoke at length and with passion and considerable eloquence about the fundamental social and political revolution being carried out in Viet-Nam through the Strategic Hamlet Program. The theme was essentially that of Nhu, and Diem in fact specifically acknowledged this. Apart from Strategic Hamlet Program itself, revolution depended upon two things. First, development and instruction of youth, who must be infused with an ideal and with ideas which would enable them to carry on meaningful democratic process. For this, the instrument was Republican Youth led by his brother. He spoke with emotion of courage and devotion these “unpaid” youth had already shown in defending their hamlets, in aiding fire victims, etc. Second essential was to carry out much the same instruction and indoctrination of women “who make up more than half the population”. Instrument here is Women’s Solidarity Movement led by Madame Nhu. He acknowledged that this organization had not made as much headway in provinces as Republican Youth and attributed this in part to fact that Madame Nhu has not been able to travel widely.

Diem said that process he described was moving very rapidly, that one could look forward to full democracy and liberty in two or three years. At that point government sponsored Republican Youth would give way to a mass political and social organization entirely independent of government.

Meanwhile, Diem said government was doing everything possible to stimulate democratic processes and personal liberty. Hamlet elections had been successful and elections would be extended rapidly upwards to province level. In Strategic Hamlet and Republican Youth courses major effort was being made to encourage free and critical discussion and airing of new ideas. On justice, provinces had already been directed to institute as rapidly as possible, and where security conditions permitted, a system of habeas corpus under which no person could be held for longer than 24 hours without a court order., (With only one judge for every three provinces, he said, this was difficult to manage.) Diem again gave Nhu much of credit for this directive.

Diem spoke with great enthusiasm about all this, remarking that Viet-Nam would soon be a model of democracy for all of Southeast Asia. He also dropped a broad hint that he and his Ministers could get job done faster if they could be protected from outside pressures which took up so much of their time—a clear reference to recent events.

Comment: This is plainly some sort of response to our pressures for action to restore public support for government. However, apart from absolutely clear declaration of solidarity with Nhus. I am not sure what to make of it. Specifically, I am not sure whether it is merely a defense of what Diem has been doing all along (it is that all right), or whether it is a forecast of some new and perhaps fairly spectacular steps along same lines.5 For example, public announcement of habeas corpus directive would fit latter category.

I suppose in this case as in others we shall have to find answer to our demarches in actions rather than direct replies. In this connection, I have just received indirect confirmation that Diem leaves for Hue tomorrow.

Trueheart

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 15-1 S VIET. Secret; Priority; Limit Distribution. Received at 7:39 p.m.

2 Document 137.

3 Document 189.

4 Trueheart reported on Diem’s concern over developments in Laos in telegram 1245 from Saigon, June 28. (Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 LAOS)

5 A marginal notation on the source text at this point, in Wood’s hand, reads: “Doubtful.”

193. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 193. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, June 29, 1963, 6 p.m.

1261. Deptel 1286.2 I am quite as concerned as Department over possibility renewal demonstrations, etc. and need for GVN haste. Thuan, whom I saw few hours ago, is equally concerned.

Situation at moment (1530) is that Vice President has sent and published letter to Buddhists (Embtel 1256)3 which is helpful but does not go far enough. Series of following specific further actions are still in abeyance pending return of President Diem from Hue this afternoon: 1. Publication of actual text of orders to provincial officials.

2. Publication of Ministry of Interior balance sheet on persons arrested and released.

3. Publication of names of GVN officials found culpable of May 8 incident. (Thuan winced when I put this one to him but agreed it was desirable.)

4. Diem’s speech reaffirming five points, etc.

So far as I have been able to ascertain, and contrary to advance billing by Thuan, Diem did not make any public appearances at Hue except possibly to attend Te Deum service which was part of jubilee program for Archbishop Thuc.4 More significant, both Nhus also went to Hue, so that I have no doubt that there has been a major session of the family council. There may well be new decisions as result of this meeting, and I am not optimistic about them.

Meanwhile latest reports from Buddhist contacts are ominous [3 document numbers not declassified]. There are also reports on plans for a Tuyen-organized coup [1 document number not declassified] which I believe can not be dismissed.

Thuan said this morning that he was personally convinced that VC and oppositionists were now behind Buddhists. I said I had seen no evidence of VC involvement but was satisfied that oppositionists were seeking to exploit situation. However, this seemed to me not to affect action required from GVN; it was all the more urgent that GVNmake public moves such as those enumerated above with view to satisfying moderate elements and isolating the rest. He agreed but was plainly [not] in position to do anything until Diem returns.

I also repeated to Thuan that Diem must accept that he can not afford to have more demonstrations and bonze burnings, virtually no matter what concessions he has to make. I cited in this connection full-page advertisment in N.Y: Times signed by prominent US clergymen,5 text of which I had sent to his house last night.

Will continue to keep after GVN and to keep Department informed as currently as possible. As of now, Buddhist “deadline” is rather vague. They want convincing proof of GVN sincerity by July 1 but, according to Duc Ngiep, plan no action before July 3. I am not, however, counting on this time table.

Trueheart

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, SOC 14-1 S VIET Secret; Operational Immediate; Limit Distribution. Repeated to CINCPAC for POLAD.

2 Document 191.

3 In telegram 1256 from Saigon, June 29, the Embassy transmitted to the Department of State the text of a letter sent on June 28 by Vice President Tho to the leader of the Buddhist delegation, Thien Minh, in which he outlined government efforts to carry out the terms of the joint communique of June 16. (Department of State, Central Files, SOC 14-1 S VIET)

4 A marginal notation on the source text at this point, in Wood’s hand, reads: “Oh Gawd.”

5 The full-page advertisement ran in the June 27 edition of The New York Times under a copy of Malcolm Browne’s photograph of the self-immolation of Quang Duc. The text of the advertisement was signed by 12 prominent clergymen, including Dr. Reinhold Niebuhr and Bishop lames A. Pike.

194. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 194. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, June 29, 1963, 7 p.m.

1259. Deptel 1283.2 Following is our assessment two points reftel: 1. We do not believe Buddhists “clearly divided” between older, moderate element and younger activists, as stated reftel. Nevertheless, available evidence suggests that there is group of Buddhist activists who are dissatisfied with agreement Buddhist leaders reached with GVN. Members this group probably not wholly agreed on their demands. Some apparently not so opposed to terms of agreement with GVN as they are suspicious of GVN’s intentions; therefore, they seek get GVN so publicly committed in detail on implementation of agreement that it would be very difficult for GVN to renege in future or to take retaliatory action against them. Until GVN so committed, this group likely agitate for continued public Buddhist expressions of dissatisfaction. This group’s ends do not seem to exceed legitimacy but its suspicions of GVN’s intentions could be difficult for GVN to allay.

Others in activist group without doubt have “tasted blood” of. politics and either see religious issue as way for political changes or have discarded religious issue for outright political objective—change in regime. This latter group appears seek to discredit GVN to extent possible and is willing to receive overtures from political opposition groups. Thus, this group (which may include bonze Tri Quang) has aims going beyond legitimate ends originally sought by Buddhists.

2. As Deptel indicates, we have received reports that GVN not intending to live up to its end of bargain. Many of these reports, [document number not declassified], come from Buddhists, often Tri Quang, but there is very solid evidence, as Department aware, that Nhus were bitterly opposed to agreement. I have on several occasions since GVN-Buddhist agreement signed June 16 made points contained paragraph 2 reftel and others (e.g. Embtels 1224 and 1231)3 and since then we have had no further evidence that Nhus actively seeking upset agreement. Much, we believe, now depends on outcome of Ngo family conference which almost certainly took place in Hue yesterday and today. If various steps previously envisaged are in fact carried out, there will be chance of isolating extremists from moderate Buddhist leadership. Even if all these steps are accomplished in timely fashion, however, suspicion of GVN in minds some Buddhists, particularly young activists of both types, very likely will remain. We will nevertheless continue pressure on GVN for constructive steps as tactical situation demands.4

3. Thoroughly agree with last sentence reftel.5

Trueheart

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, SOC 14-1 S VIET. Secret; Priority; Limit Distribution.

2 See footnote 4, Document 189.

3 Documents 184 and 185.

4 On June 29, Trueheart received a telegram sent personally from Forrestal in the White House which reads: “Everyone here thinks you are doing a grand job. Keep up the good work.” (Telegram CAP 63357 to Saigon, June 29; Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Vietnam Country Series, 6/63)

5 The last sentence of telegram 1283 to Saigon reads: “General thought here with which we are sure you will agree is that U.S. must at all costs not be put in position of assuming the responsibility for this internal religious matter.”

195. Telegram From Michael V. Forrestal of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy), at Rome 195. Telegram From Michael V. Forrestal of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy), at Rome1

Washington, July 1, 1963, 1:34 p.m.2

CAP 63365. Sitto Nr 39.3 At meeting this morning Ball, Harriman, Hilsman and myself reviewed situation in SVN and following courses of action were discussed.4

1. In last 48 hours as two week truce between Buddhist and GVN draws to end, we have been receiving indications that Buddhists planning further anti-government demonstrations. This occurs against backdrop other reports that brother Nhu attempting sabotage agreements.

2. In light of this situation we believe Nolting must return Saigon by end of week at latest. Although Trueheart has done excellent job we feel U.S. must have Ambassador present during this dangerous period. We also hope to get Lodge move up his arrival Saigon from September to early August.

3. Among reports referred in para 1 is indication that Buddhists planning another self-immolation of bonze soon. We all believe one more burning bonze will cause domestic U.S. reaction which will require strong public statement despite danger that this might precipitate coup in Saigon. Demarche to Diem insisting on removal of Nhu and wife to post outside SVN before such statement becomes necessary under consideration. Trueheart and Nolting being consulted.

Believe you may wish bring President up to date this situation.

1 Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Vietnam Country Series, 7/1/63-7/20/63. Secret. Bundy was in Italy with President Kennedy and Secretary Rusk on the last leg of a four-nation visit to Europe which concluded on July 3.

2 The source text provides this date/time group and an indication that the message was sent on July 2. Internal evidence establishes the July 1 date as accurate.

3 The situation report cited here has not been found.

4 The minutes of the Secretary’s Staff Meeting, chaired by Acting Secretary Ball at 9:15 a.m., are in Department of State, Secretary’s Staff Meetings: Lot 66 D 147, Large Staff Mtgs, 1963.

196. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam 196. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam1

Washington, July 1, 1963, 8:52 p.m.

4. From Hilsman and Nolting to Trueheart. Thinking here is that unless GVN has in the meantime made further forthright efforts to meet tensions, domestic and international reactions to another Buddhist protest suicide or further bloodshed in connection with Buddhist demonstrations would compel us to make public statement disassociating ourselves from GVN policy vis-à-vis Buddhists. We fully aware likely impact such statement on GVN internal stability and strength, but see no alternative. US cannot take responsibility in any way for GVN religious discrimination, real or alleged.

You should seek appointment with Diem (or alternatively work through Thuan) for following purpose:

For you to decide whether to tell Diem that we may have to make public statement unless GVN makes forthright effort. You should however impress on him that it may be too late to forestall demonstrations and that you instructed suggest urgently that he should make speech which will, if possible, have dramatic impact to succeed in bridging gap of misunderstanding and of improving mutual good faith between GVN and Buddhists.

You should make clear that while you understand importance he attaches to working closely with members his own family and essential contribution which Nhu has made to Strategic Hamlet program, it is U.S. view that certain public statements from sources close to GVN (e.g. Times Viet-Nam story Embtel 6)2 or such other incidents as you may wish to mention have convinced U.S. press and Congress that persons close to President are seeking undermine June 16 agreement.

You should make clear to Diem that rightly or wrongly there is widespread belief in U.S. and in other countries that religious persecution does now exist in Viet-Nam and that both U.S. and GVN need dramatic and sincere public move by Diem to counteract this widely held opinion.

We suggest you quietly provide Diem (perhaps through Thuan) a piece of paper containing statement or thoughts which Diem might wish consider incorporating in speech. We leave drafting this paper to you but it might contain: 1. some or all points your 1261;3

2. announcement GVN intention establish National Religious Council (Deptel 1196);4

3. invitation Buddhist leaders confer with him urgently;

4. announcement re appointment Buddhist Chaplains (Deptel 1196);

5. clear statement re freedom forthcoming national elections (including hint that Buddhists can seek election).

You should point out to Diem that, in giving this warning, we are acting to help him preserve his government. We do not believe GVN can survive prolongation of Buddhist crisis at same time it is engaged in life and death struggle with Viet Cong.

Ball

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL S VIET-US. Secret; Operational Immediate; Limit Distribution. Drafted by Wood and cleared by Hilsman and Nolting. Repeated to CINCPAC for POLAD.

2 According to telegram 6 from Saigon, July 1, the Times of Viet-Nam on July 1 carried a front-page article entitled “Mysterious Scotch Tape and End to Schizophrenia In Sight,” which noted that the 2-week deadline established by the Buddhist delegation for government compliance with the June 16 agreement had passed. The article stated that Saigon was calm, and unless there was some dramatic evidence of Buddhist dissatisfaction, such as another suicide, it was reasonable to assume that Buddhist claims had been satisfied. (Ibid., SOC 14-1 S VIET)

3 Document 193.

4 Document 159.

197. Research Memorandum From the Deputy Director of the Bureau of Intelligence and Research (Denney) to the Acting Secretary of State 197. Research Memorandum From the Deputy Director of the Bureau of Intelligence and Research (Denney) to the Acting Secretary of State1

Washington, July 1, 1963.

RFE-58

SUBTECT

Strategic Hamlets

Public misconceptions concerning the strategic hamlet program in the Republic of Vietnam have prompted us to review its aims and development as well as assess its implications for future developments.

ABSTRACT

The basic purpose of the strategic hamlets is to achieve the widest possible popular response to the government’s counterinsurgency effort by (1) providing the peasant with an increasing degree of physical security from Communist intimidation and (2) enacting social, economic and political reforms meaningful to the peasants. In addition to arming volunteer peasant groups, elections, medical facilities, education, and social services provide a community development program within the strategic hamlets that may have favorable long-range social and political effects. Arising out of local initiatives in 1961, the program received full central government support in 1962 and has already proved effective in stemming Communist successes, as evidenced by military actions on the ground as well as Communist propaganda attacks, in Vietnam and abroad, against the strategic hamlets. While the program has moved too rapidly for adequate implementation in some areas, its general accomplishment to date has been highly promising.

Aims and Objectives

The basic purpose of the strategic hamlet program is to achieve the widest possible popular response to the government’s counterinsurgency effort by providing the peasants with an increasing degree of physical security from Communist intimidation and by enacting social, economic, and political reforms meaningful to the peasants in the context of their own traditions and expectations. It should be noted that in a country such as Vietnam, which has emerged only recently from almost a hundred years of colonial rule and where popular concepts of government have long been locally rather than nationally oriented, the very fact that a national government would seek to serve and protect the citizenry might itself be considered revolutionary.

The immediate security objectives of the program are two-fold—first, to sever Communist communication and control lines to the rural populace and thus deny the Communists the local resources (manpower, food, intelligence, and weapons) necessary to their operations; and second, to promote a nationwide self-defense effort at the rice-roots level by providing the peasant with weapons and other defense facilities. The immediate political objectives are to create the desire and will to resist Communist blandishments and, at the same time, strengthen the popular image of the government by providing the peasant with increased social and economic benefits and by improving political and administrative services in the hamlets.

In addition to these immediate objectives, the strategic hamlet program may well have important implications for long-range social and political development in Vietnam. President Diem and other high government officials have repeatedly stated that the strategic hamlet program will create a social, economic, and political revolution in the countryside which will uproot vested economic interests, implant lasting political democracy and efficient and benevolent administration at the local level, and raise the peasant to a new social status.

What is the Strategic Hamlet?

Although the village formally constitutes the lowest local administrative unit in Vietnam, each village actually consists of several almost self-sustaining settlements or hamlets of varying size, frequently scattered over an appreciable distance. (There are some 2,500 villages in Vietnam, while hamlets number about 14,000.) In an insurgency situation, this distribution pattern very obviously poses major problems for maintaining security and defense and would normally require an extraordinarily large police, security, and military force merely to maintain a presence, much less engage in effective operations. The strategic hamlet approach, therefore, replaces the soldier or policeman with the part-time “civilian volunteer,” or in the American tradition, the “minuteman.”

The strategic hamlet is essentially a fortified hamlet, as shown in Attachment A, a sketch.2 Generally, only hamlets in relatively insecure areas or fairly close to Communist strongholds are selected for fortification. Peasant huts removed from the hamlet concentration pattern are brought closer to the center of the pattern, thus limiting the, distance involved in the regroupment. A fence of bamboo and barbed wire is built around the entire hamlet, and a ditch or moat is dug around the fence; the ditch or moat, in turn, is encircled by an earthen mound. The area immediately around the village is cleared to permit fields of fire and to avoid giving guerrillas and terrorists hiding places close to the hamlet.

Inside the strategic hamlet, there are one or more observation towers, guardposts, and a defense post for storage of arms. An alarm system, either of the most rudimentary type (a bell, gong, or bamboo drum) or of field telephones, alerts the community to Communist attack. An increasing number of strategic hamlets have also received small radio sets which enable them to maintain direct communication with the government administrative and military-security structure at the district level, and ultimately with the central government complex m Saigon.

Defense is maintained largely by volunteers or recruits from the hamlet population and frequently from among the youth. They are given arms and trained in their use. The hamlet militia can also count on nearby units of the regular security services, the Self Defense Corps and the Civil Guard, and on the army for assistance in case of a major Communist attack. Some of the strategic hamlets, because of their proximity to Communist strongholds, are better fortified and frequently are referred to as “defended” hamlets.

Inside the hamlets, the government has taken increasing measures to improve the general lot of the peasant. It has established permanent dispensaries or sent in medical teams, where once modern medical attention was unknown; it has established or rebuilt schools, formerly non-existent or destroyed by the Communists; it has built market places where farmers can bring their produce in order to encourage business; and new roads, wells, and a number of community development projects have been started. Agricultural credit and fertilizer have been provided to the farmer, and agricultural technicians have come to help the farmer improve production. For example, loans by the National Agricultural Credit Office to peasant farmers and repayments of these loans have risen sharply since the beginning of 1963; farmers in strategic hamlets have received more that 50% by value of these loans. In 10 central provinces alone, the government is distributing more than 19,000 tons of fertilizer which will be in time for this season’s planting.

On the political side, the government has drawn up “communal charters” for the hamlets, legalized and developed a formal administrative structure heretofore lacking or very rudimentary, and has accelerated a training program for hamlet officials. Election of these officials by secret ballot, provided by law, has actually begun in many provinces and will be extended to all hamlets. These officials in turn vote for village officials; village elections have also started and are expected to take place in more than half of the 2,500 villages within the next few months.

Origins and Development

The strategic hamlet program in the Republic of Vietnam began during the latter part of 1961. It grew out of a variety of security and political measures adopted by local officials, acting to a considerable extent on their own initiative to defend their areas from the growing Communist campaign of guerrilla warfare, terrorism, and intimidation. The government of President Ngo Dinh Diem, recognizing the effectiveness of these scattered efforts, responded quickly and threw its entire resources behind the development of a national strategic hamlet program, drawing on its knowledge of the Communist insurgencies in Malaya and Indochina and even the Kibbutz program in Israel. In February 1962, a high level government inter-agency committee was established to coordinate, direct, and support the program on a national scale, and the following April, the National Assembly passed a resolution declaring the strategic hamlet program a national policy.

Before the end of 1962, the central government was providing funds, administrative and technical skills, and material through the United States assistance program for the construction of strategic hamlets. Training programs were instituted for hamlet administrative and self-defense personnel. Considerable progress was made in regularizing the procedures for implementing the hamlet program and in informing the public of its objectives. The government promulgated a body of laws and regulations which provide a legal basis for the administrative and governmental organization and internal security of strategic hamlets. As the construction of these hamlets progressed, the government proceeded to implement a variety of economic, social, and political measures within the hamlets, coordinating them with actual military operations against the insurgents. What has since emerged is a nationally directed and supported program, embodying a variety of military and non-military concepts designed to meet the Communist threat at the rice-roots level. Indeed, the strategic hamlet program is now the focal point of the Vietnam Government’s comprehensive counterinsurgency effort.

Despite the national character of the strategic hamlet program, the government continues to recognize that the effectiveness of the program depends largely on local initiative and response. Since July 1962, therefore, direct responsibility for planning and implementing the strategic hamlet program has been placed officially in the hands of local committees composed of civil and military officials and operating within each of Vietnam’s 41 provinces. These committees draw up detailed plans for strategic hamlets, and then submit them for approval by the central government. Since the program is largely locally initiated and directed, it does require local support contributions above those made by the central government. The importance of the strategic hamlet program is reflected in President Diem’s reference to the program in his state-of-the-union message to the National Assembly on October 1. 1962, as shown below: This vast movement, born in the heat of war, is our preemptory reply to the Communist challenge. It brings us, along with the certainty of victory, the pride to live as free men today and tomorrow … .3 The strategic hamlet is also and primarily the point of impact of a political and social revolution which will serve as a foundation for our economic revolution. On the political level, as security is restored by the defense system of the strategic hamlet and the careful screening of the local enemy elements, democracy and the guarantee of the law can be implemented.

Communist Reaction

Communist reaction to the strategic hamlet program has been intense. North Vietnam and its “National Front for the Liberation of South Vietnam,” as well as Moscow and Peiping, have called strategic hamlets “concentration camps” into which “people are forcibly herded.” North Vietnamese propaganda has charged that the Vietnam Government will “herd 14 million rural, urban, and mountain people” into strategic hamlets which will be used “to trample upon the life, customs, habits, democratic freedom, and the most common sentiments and interest of human beings”—ultimately to “annihilate” the Vietnamese people. Communist propaganda has blatantly called upon the Vietnamese people not only to resist the program but also to destroy hamlets wherever they exist.

On the ground, Communist guerrillas, terrorists, and agents are making a major armed and subversive effort against strategic hamlets. Armed attacks have risen sharply, but the percentage of their success has been very small. Attempts to destroy or burn fences are frequent. Communist agents use bribery, threats, and intimidation to gain entrance into the hamlets and to keep peasants from participating or to entice them to leave. Many local officials who refused to heed Communist threats have been assassinated or kidnapped.

Critique

It is still early to make definitive and detailed evaluations of the strategic hamlet program. It must be remembered that it has been in existence as a national program for just over one year. However impressive the claim by the Vietnam Government that more than 5,000 strategic hamlets have been constructed, many problems have arisen during this period requiring modification and readjustment in procedures. The Vietnam Government has recognized that this is a bold new effort and that mistakes will be made and has reacted quickly to remedy and improve the situation. For example, the physical defenses of strategic hamlets admittedly vary in quality and, in some cases, leave much to be desired. Since many hamlets are still in the early stage of development, defense and security measures as well as various political, social, and economic projects are still somewhat deficient. Finally, a program of this magnitude requires a large pool of administrative and technical personnel and a considerable effort by the government to educate and train such personnel in both the conceptual and practical requirements of a revolutionary program.

On balance, however, the strategic hamlet has been a success. Much of the concern and hesitation originally shown by the peasants has disappeared, partly because of the Vietnam Government’s improved public information program but also because of the security and other benefits the peasants have received once they moved into the hamlets. The hamlet militia is exhibiting both the desire and capability to fight, and there are increasing reports of peasants volunteering intelligence on the Communists and of welcoming the strategic hamlet program because it has freed them from Communist intimidation and “taxation.” Commerce has been considerably revived in the countryside, and there has even been a spurt in the construction and reconstruction of dwellings. More than one hundred thousand Montagnards or tribesmen have voluntarily left the Communist-controlled mountain areas in large groups and have asked for asylum in strategic hamlets. Finally, the strategic hamlet program has already reduced the total area and population under Communist control or influence and has weakened Communist strength and logistics capabilities. Communist guerrillas are reportedly experiencing morale problems and shortages of food and supplies in many areas, and have resorted increasingly to outright theft and harassment of the peasant in order to gain supplies and recruits. These tactics will only serve to decrease still further the Communist base of operations.

The conclusion that the strategic hamlet program has been successful is further supported by the very efforts the Communists are making to subvert it. Intelligence reports clearly indicate that the Communist insurgents regard the program as constituting one of the most serious threats to their continued operations and are now attempting to develop a strategy of their own to counter the strategic hamlet. The Communist propaganda line that the hamlets are “concentration camps” is obviously part of this strategy. Of course, the Communists fail to note that the “internees” are provided weapons. Admittedly, bamboo and barbed wire fences exist, but these are to keep Communist guerrillas and terrorists out rather than the villagers in. Identity cards have been issued to hamlet inhabitants, but these are to identify Communist agents rather than to control the peasants. There is thus a degree of regimentation, but the Vietnam Government is faced with a grim, prolonged war. Thus some form of regimentation is unavoidable and indeed desirable.

Strategic Hamlet: Citadel or Concentration Camp?

Communist charges from Moscow, Peiping, and Hanoi to the effect that strategic hamlets are “concentration camps” ignore one basic fact: the residents are armed. The barbed wire, bamboo spike barricades, and watch towers protect the hamlet and are manned by peasants. The immediate purpose of the strategic hamlet is to permit the peasant to protect himself. This purpose is already achieved throughout much of the countryside. Communist intimidation and recruitment of guerrillas through terrorization cannot succeed where effective strategic hamlets exist. Communist attempts to seize local food supplies fail when volunteer militia can provide a prompt and organized response.

Beyond this minimum purpose of security, however, the strategic hamlets have a much more fundamental and important purpose. They represent an experiment in community self-development on a nationwide basis, unprecedented in Vietnamese rural life. Local initiative and local choice prevails but with provincial and central government support. Medical and educational services advance under the direction of locally elected officials, with funds and teams provided by higher levels of government. Agricultural credits and technical services, particularly in fertilizer distribution, give outside assistance to the isolated and scattered hamlets. Over time, these measures should provide a greater sense of loyalty and positive identification between countryside and capital, as well as substantive improvements in local well-being.

Open to any visitor from any country at any time, and under constant review, the strategic hamlet program in Vietnam is moving from infancy to solid growth in a relatively short time and against determined Communist opposition. As the opposition is defeated, the negative aspects, manifested in regimentation and military defenses, should give way to increasing freedom and self-rule. This can lay the foundation for new political relationships in Vietnam extending from peasant to presidency. Whether, indeed, this will happen depends largely upon the environment within which the strategic hamlet program develops, not only in Vietnam but throughout the entire Indochina peninsula.

1 Source: Department of State,S/P Files: Lot 70 D 199. Vietnam 1963. Unclassified.

2 Not printed.

3 Ellipsis in the source text.

198. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 198. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, July 2, 1963, 3 p.m.

10. CINCPAC for POLAD. Deptel 4.2 Saw Thuan this morning before receipt reftel. I opened by asking him if he could report any progress on actions we had discussed (Embtels 1243 and 1261).3 He said he could not. He had seen Diem once since his return from Hue but said he did not know what decisions might have been taken.

I then had Thuan read Times of Vietnam article (Embtel 6)4 which he said he had not seen. I told him that following were significant points in my reading of article (text of which I am now cabling in full): 1. It was clear challenge (defi) to US, in particular our efforts to keep Madame Nhu quiet.

2. It contained veiled criticism of Vice President and his efforts in Buddhist affair and “end of schizophrenia” in headline could well refer to split views in GVN (Tho-Thuan vs Nhus).

3. There was obvious intent to denigrate Buddhists, especially in charges that Quang Duc drugged.

4. Article openly dared Buddhists to carry out further burnings immediately or by inaction admit that their claims have been satisfied.

Thuan accepted this interpretation of article. I then asked him if article reflected decisions taken at Hue. He said he did not know, but in response to further question said he was not in position to deny that article reflected government policy.

I told Thuan at end of conversation that I was beginning to feel helpless in this affair.5 Did the President not realize that another bonze burning would virtually force US Government to dissociate itself from GVN handling of Buddhist problem. He said Diem did not unless “you told him so yourself”. I asked for his suggestions as to what to do now, but he had none. I left with distinct impression that Thuan has again been cut out of the play, as he was prior to bonze burning incident.

This means that demarche prescribed reftel not likely be effective if made through Thuan. I frankly do not believe that it will have any positive effect on Diem either. I have already spoken in stronger terms to him (see particularly Embtel 1231).6 If I go in now and speak on instructions along lines Deptel 4, I believe there is very real risk that he will conclude that we are backing down. Note also that he was given, pursuant Deptel 1207,7 flat threat of dissociation if he did not promptly settle with Buddhists on five demands. Now he would be told that we may have to make public statement if in effect GVN does not make forthright effort to satisfy Buddhists that agreement will be carried out in good faith.

I am confident that Diem has already calculated that we may make public statement, and on basis present evidence he may well have discounted possibility.

I realize this is optional part of demarche but, without this threat, rest of demarche would, I believe, be sterile; it would irritate him to no purpose.

I appreciate fully problems involved in making definite threat to dissociate ourselves if there is further bloodshed or suicides-particularly when these may occur no matter what Diem does. I would in fact not recommend such a threat unless it has been definitely decided that we will be forced by domestic and international opinion to carry it out in any case. However, I repeat that, without such a threat, demarche to Diem along lines reftel and in context past approaches is much more likely to make him relax than to move. I would therefore appreciate reconsideration of instructions.

Trueheart

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL S VIET-US. Secret; Operational Immediate; Limit Distribution. Repeated to CINCPAC for POLAD. Received at 5:36 a.m.

2 Document 196.

3 Documents 189 and 193.

4 See footnote 2, Document 196.

5 A marginal notation on the source text at this point, in Wood’s hand, reads: “From Bill, this is serious.”

6 Document 185.

7 Document 167.

199. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam 199. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam1

Washington, July 2, 1963, 2:33 p.m.

10. Embtel 10.2 Purpose Deptel 4,3 which was not brought out sufficiently clearly, was not simply to threaten Diem with old threats but to say, in effect: “If you (Diem) will make statement designed to bridge gap of understanding and if there is then a Buddhist incident, GVN and US will be in position to point to your statement as evidence GVN good faith in trying convince Buddhists of genuine desire reach understanding. We believe present state of mistrust in Viet-Nam requires such statement from you very soon before there is another Buddhist incident and in view two week period now over. If there is another incident and you have not made a conciliatory statement, however, we believe the situation in Viet-Nam will soon get out of control. U.S. situation which must be clearly understood, will be as follows: 1. U.S. liberal and press opinion increasingly and now almost unanimously critical of religious situation in Viet-Nam.

2. There are now indications that matter may be brought up in United Nations where US, as chief supporter of Viet-Nam, would face difficult situation.

3. Justly or unjustly this is situation U.S. Government is facing vis-à-vis domestic and international opinion.

4. Most importantly religious toleration is one of the most basic tenets of American civilization. The U.S. Government does not believe that GVN has gone far enough to convince and explain to its people the basic importance it attaches to religious tolerance and national unity.

Therefore unless the GVN acts quickly, the U.S. will have to make its own position perfectly clear.”

You should convey these views officially and under instruction to Diem personally in writing or orally in whatever manner you think best.

You may wait not longer than twenty-four hours if you think a further period for Diem to reflect on situation would help your difficult task.

You are requested to give Diem a piece of paper containing thoughts he might express in such an address as suggested Deptel 4. Believe invitation to Buddhist leaders to confer with him should be given top billing.

Also, you should request separate interview with Nhu and convey to him that in U.S. view Times Viet-Nam article was clear challenge to U.S. and to Buddhists as well as being a denigration of Buddhists (points 1, 3 and 4 Embtel 10). You should tell Diem of what you will say to Nhu and make clear to Diem we believe no settlement possible until such statements are stopped. Assume you will wish see Diem first, but leave to you.

Realize these demarches may seriously impair your further ability to influence Diem, but believe strong medicine needed to clear his vision, especially in view of what is at stake.

FYI. We are fully conscious of the possibility that a stern warning to Diem will only make him more stubborn and the he might perform somewhat better if we made no warning but only gentle suggestions for positive steps. The fact is, however, that, if he is so incapable of rational consideration of what we believe are the extreme dangers of the Buddhist crisis, and can only behave emotionally, then we have no confidence in his ability to lead an effective fight against the Viet Cong.

Top level here admires courage and skill which you have displayed and fully supports you.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL S VIET-US. Secret; Operational Immediate. Drafted by Wood and cleared by Hilsman, Harriman, Ball, and Forrestal. Repeated to CINCPAC for POLAD.

2 Document 198.

3 Document 196.

200. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 200. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, July 3, 1963, 8 p.m.

24. CINCPAC for POLAD. I saw President Diem at 5:45 PM. I thanked him for receiving me promptly, and said that I was sorry to interrupt his busy schedule but the matter was important and, in our view, urgent.

I then gave him my letter (Embtel 18).2 After he had read it, I said that if he were disposed to make an address, we were prepared to offer some suggestions as to its content. He replied with marked politeness that he would be glad to consider any ideas we might have. I then outlined for him the main points in a paper3 which I subsequently left with him, emphasizing that we attach particular importance to his inviting Buddhist leaders to meet with him personally as a matter of urgency. He read over the list, put it to one side, and said that he would consider it, along with the letter, and his “collaborators”.

Diem then talked briefly and in general terms about difficulties of Buddhist problem, giving no hint of what if any action he has in mind. He spoke of difficulties of meeting demands which might in themselves be reasonable but would encourage further demands which government could not meet. He referred to inherent complexity of some of the problems, notably questions relating to ownership of property. He mentioned also, in surprisingly good natured way, that some of Buddhist leaders had political motives and used unfair tactics.

I said I thought we could grant all these things and that we understood very well that there were real risks in whatever course he took. Had not the time arrived, however, for him to take matters into his own hands? I was afraid that the letters being exchanged between Vice President and Buddhists were simply piling up charges and counter-charges and, if anything, making a solution more difficult. What was needed was for President personally to take actions which would firmly establish good faith of government and leave isolated those who still cavilled. Diem did not react.

I then said that I hoped in any case he understood gravity of situation from standpoint of U.S. He replied to effect that he understood we had a problem with public opinion. This arose, he felt, largely from news and information which was not strictly accurate and often exaggerated. U.S. Government should set record straight. I said that before we could set record straight we had to have further action by GVN on which to base ourselves. In this connection, I said, I could bring up, as I had been instructed to do, Times of Vietnam article.4 I told him I had been instructed to talk to Nhu also about this article and, as he said he had not seen it, I described main offensive features and gave him a copy of the newspaper. I told him with some (very genuine) feeling that unless such statements stopped no settlement was possible, in view of my government. Diem limited himself to saying that he would study the article. He then brought interview to a close ushering me out with great, but perhaps forced, politeness.

Whole meeting lasted less than half an hour, which may be a new record.

Trueheart

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, SOC 14-1 S VIET Secret; Operational Immediate; Limit Distribution. Repeated to CINCPAC.

2 Document 201.

3 No copy of this paper has been found.

4 See footnote 2, Document 196.

201. Letter From the Charge in Vietnam (Trueheart) to President Diem 201. Letter From the Charge in Vietnam (Trueheart) to President Diem1

Saigon, July 3, 1963.

I have been instructed to see Your Excellency once again on the Buddhist problem, primarily to make certain that you understand clearly the position in which the United States Government finds itself.

Liberal and press opinion in the United States is increasingly, and now almost unanimously, critical of the religious situation in Viet-Nam.

There are now indications also that the matter may be brought up in the United Nations. In that forum the United States, as the chief supporter of Viet-Nam, would face a difficult situation.

Justly or unjustly, this is the situation which the United States Government is facing vis-à-vis domestic and international opinion.

Most importantly, religious toleration is one of the most basic tenets of American civilization. The United States Government does not believe that the Government of Viet-Nam has gone far enough to convince and explain to its people the basic importance which it attaches to religious tolerance and national unity. It considers that the present state of mistrust in Viet-Nam requires a public statement from Your Excellency designed to bridge the gap of understanding.

Such a statement should, in our view, be made very soon, before there is another Buddhist incident. If an incident should nevertheless occur, the Government of Viet-Nam and the United States would be in a position to point to your statement as evidence of the good faith of the Government of Viet-Nam in trying to convince the Buddhists of a genuine desire to reach an understanding.

If, on the other hand, another incident occurs and Your Excellency has not made a conciliatory statement, then my government believes that the situation in Viet-Nam would soon get out of control. The United States Government would also have to make its own position perfectly clear.

Please accept, Mr. President, the renewed assurances of my highest consideration.

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, SOC 12 S VIET. Secret; Limit Distribution. Transmitted to the Department of State in telegram 18 from Saigon, July 3, which is the source text.

202. Memorandum From Michael V. Forrestal of the National Security Council Staff to the President 202. Memorandum From Michael V. Forrestal of the National Security Council Staff to the President1

Washington, July 3, 1963.

FAR EAST ROUND UP

There follows a summary of the principal problems which currently face us in the Far East.

South Vietnam

The two-week truce between the GVN and the Buddhists signed on June 16th ended yesterday. We have received various reports from Buddhist circles that they are not satisfied with the manner in which the Government is implementing the agreement, particularly with respect to the release of prisoners, instructions to the province chiefs and rumors which have reached Buddhist ears that the Government does not intend to carry out the agreement in good faith. We have also received reports of coup plotting among the Buddhists and threats to resume demonstrations and incidents of self-destruction.

On the GVN side, we have fairly reliable information that Brother Nhu has been actively working to stir up phony popular demand that the truce agreement be disavowed by the Government, using his Republican Youth organization for this purpose. After a meeting of Diem’s family in Hue, the Times of Vietnam, a government-sponsored newspaper, came out on July 1 with a provocative article daring the Buddhist to resume demonstrations.2

These events, plus increasing recalcitrance on Diem’s part which has almost reached the point where communication with him has become difficult, has led us to believe that the situation is now more serious than ever. It is entirely possible that there will be a resumption of demonstrations, including self-immolations; and the incentive for organized plots against the regime is getting very high.

We have given Bill Trueheart, our Charge in Saigon, instructions to go to Diem and tell him that unless he makes a dramatic political gesture to the Buddhists reaffirming the July 16th agreement, we would expect further demonstrations in Saigon and would then be forced to make a strong statement disassociating the United States from the GVN’s policies towards the Buddhists.3 Ambassador Nolting does not agree with this approach and argues that it will succeed only in destroying the last vestiges of Diem’s confidence in us. Secretary Ball, Governor Harriman, Roger Hilsman and I feel that the political problem has come to such a point in the United States that we could not avoid public comment in the face of another bonze suicide, and that therefore we should leave no stone unturned to persuade Diem to change his attitude. Everyone recognizes that Diem’s position in South Vietnam has now become as critical as it has ever been, and that the United States may have to grope its way through governmental upheaval in Saigon.

Ambassador Nolting is being asked to return to Saigon on Monday.4 He has severe family problems which make it almost inhuman to require that he leave earlier. We are considering asking Secretary Rusk to persuade Ambassador Lodge to move up his scheduled departure for Saigon from September to August. We may need your help in this respect. In the meantime, Bill Trueheart has been doing an outstanding job. The main reason for asking Fritz Nolting to go back early is the inappropriateness of having our Ambassador away from his post during a crisis period.

State, the Agency and Defense are reviewing contingency plans in the event of a coup. At present our best hope in the event of an accident is to have the Vice President succeed Diem with the support of the principal army senior officers. Our policy is still to discourage a coup.

Despite the political turmoil in South Vietnam, the war against the Viet Cong seems to be progressing surprisingly well. Indeed the activity of the Vietnamese Army against the guerrillas has increased in the last two weeks.

[Here follows a summary of developments in Laos, Korea, Indonesia, and Thailand.]

1 Source: Kennedy Library, President’s Office File, Staff Memoranda, Forrestal. Secret. Also sent to McGeorge Bundy, under cover of a note from Forrestal which reads: “For your and the President’s week end reading.” (Ibid., National Security Files, Meetings and Memoranda Series, NSC Staff Memoranda: Michael Forrestal 11/62-11/63)

2 See footnote 2, Document 196.

3 Document 196.

4 July 8.

203. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 203. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, July 4, 1963, 3 p.m.

26. Embtel 24.2 Thuan called me in this morning for specific purpose of asking me to transmit his personal recommendation that Ambassador Nolting return to Saigon as soon as possible.

He said that Diem had shown him letter3 and list of speech suggestions I had left with him yesterday, but had given him absolutely no idea of what action he proposed to take. Thuan had nevertheless concluded that he was probably going to do nothing. This view was reinforced when I told him something of yesterday’s conversation, particularly Diem’s rather excessive politeness. Thuan said “I would rather have him get red in the face and pound the table; after he cools down he may accept. The least encouraging posture is polite immovability.”

Thuan continued that both he and I had used all our ammunition. He still agreed on our assessment of situation and that we were “running a race with the bonzes”. He would continue to try to bring home to Diem the need to act, but he was plainly not hopeful.

Only thing he saw to do was to have Ambassador Nolting return. Diem attached great importance to personal friendship and was “sentimental.” Nolting might be able to move him, not only because of personal relationship, but also owing to fact that his position would be “detached” as result early departure from Vietnam. I pointed out latter would normally be considered disadvantage, but Thuan insisted it would be asset.

I asked whether Thuan had any views as to what Ambassador should do when he got here, pointing out he was likely to have same instructions as I had, if not stronger. Thuan said he had no suggestions; he was relying wholly on personal relationship and Nolting’s “detachment” to get Diem to move.

I questioned Thuan very closely as to whether this was his idea or Diem’s. He insisted it was his own and asked that I protect him as originator.

Trueheart

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, SOC 12-1 S VIET. Secret; Priority; Eyes Only.

2 Document 200.

3 Document 201.

204. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 204. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, July 4, 1963, 5 p.m.

28. CINCPAC for POLAD. Embtel 25.2 In statement Times of Vietnam today, Mme. Nhu appears to be denying that this paper is her spokesman and, further, to be saying that, even if statements therein should conform with her own, they would still not represent GVN positions since she does not agree with GVN.

On reading statement this morning, I put off request for appointment with Nhu, feeling that it was predictable that if I raised Times article of July 1 with him, he would simply confront me with Mme. Nhu’s formal statement. I can think of no response to latter except to say that Mme. Nhu is not speaking the truth or to propose that GVN close down Times of Vietnam. Neither response would be in our interest, in my opinion.

I can of course see Nhu, talk to him about a variety of things and find a way to bring up Times of Vietnam problem in less pointed way than suggested Deptel 10.3 In all the circumstances, however, I think it is preferable not to upgrade our very satisfactory contact with Nhu at this time. It could result in blurring of what we are trying to tell GVN and it could give Nhu some wrong idea.4

So far as concerns specific Times of Vietnam article of July 1, Thuan informed me the President had instructed him to translate article for Nhu, using copy of newspaper I had left with Diem yesterday. Thuan said he had done so, that Nhu understood what we found offensive in article but had not reacted in any way.

Trueheart

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 15 S VIET. Secret; Priority; Limited Distribution. Repeated to CINCPAC.

2 In telegram 25 from Saigon, July 4, the Embassy transmitted the text of a front-page article in the July 4 edition of the Times of Viet-Nam, entitled “Who is Spokesman of Whom” and signed by Madame Ngo Dinh Nhu. The article reprinted the text of a declaration released on July 3 by Madame Nhu in which she declared that, contrary to reports published by foreign correspondents, “I have no spokesman, for the well-known reason that I can speak for myself, even when my opinion is the least orthodox.” She denied that her opinions reflected those of the South Vietnamese Government, and suggested that the correspondents who accused her of manipulating the government and the press in South Vietnam were echoing “perfidiously and repeatedly all the enemies of Vietnam, among whom the most virulent are the Communists and their lackeys.” (Ibid.)

3 Document 199.

4 On July 5, the Department of State responded, in telegram 27 to Saigon, drafted by Wood: “To Nhu or not to Nhu is up to you.” (Department of State, Central Files, POL S VIET-US)

205. Memorandum of Conversation 205. Memorandum of Conversation1

Washington, July 4, 1963, 11-11:50 a.m.

SUBJECT

Situation in South Viet-Nam

PARTICIPANTS

The President

Mr. Ball

Mr. Harriman

Mr. McGeorge Bundy

Mr. Hilsman

Mr. Forrestal

The President was briefed on developments in Indonesia, Laos and Viet-Nam. The portion on Viet-Nam follows:

A joint agreement was signed on June 16 in which the Government met the Buddhists’ five demands. The Buddhists and the Government then worked together on the funeral arrangements for the bonze who burned himself to death so that incidents could be avoided. The funeral came off without trouble.

Since then there have been rumors circulating in Saigon that the Government does not intend to live up to the agreement. These rumors were given credence by an article appearing in the English language “Times” of Viet-Nam,2 which is dominated by the Nhus. The article contained a veiled attack on the US and on the Buddhists. There was a suggestion that the Monk who burned himself to death was drugged and a provocative challenge to the Buddhists that, if no further demonstrations occurred on July 2, this would amount to an admission by the Buddhists that they were satisfied with the Government’s action. (The President injected questions on the possibility of drugging, to which Mr. Hilsman replied that religious fervor was an adequate explanation.)

At this point there was a discussion of the possibility of getting rid of the Nhus in which the combined judgment was that it would not be possible.

Continuing the briefing, Mr. Hilsman said that the Buddhists contained an activist element which undoubtedly favored increasing demands as well as charging the Government with dragging its feet. There was thus an element of truth in Diem’s view that the Buddhists might push their demands so far as to make his fall inevitable.

During these events the US had put extremely heavy pressure on Diem to take political actions. Most recently we had urged Diem to make a speech which would include announcements that he intended to meet with Buddhist leaders, permit Buddhist chaplains in the army and so on. If Diem did not make such a speech and there were further demonstrations, the US would be compelled publicly to disassociate itself from the GVN’s Buddhist policy. Mr. Hilsman reported that Diem had received this approach with what seemed to be excessive politeness but had said he would consider making such a speech.

Our estimate was that no matter what Diem did there will be coup attempts over the next four months. Whether or not any of these attempts will be successful is impossible to say.

Mr. Hilsman said that everyone agreed that the chances of chaos in the wake of a coup are considerably less than they were a year ago. An encouraging sign relative to this point is that the war between the Vietnamese forces and the Viet Cong has been pursued throughout the Buddhist crisis without noticeable let-up.

At this point Mr. Forrestal reported on General Krulak’s views that, even if there were chaos in Saigon, the military units in the field would continue to confront the Communists.

Mr. Hilsman went on to say that Ambassador Nolting believes that the most likely result of a coup attempt that succeeded in killing Diem was civil war. Mr. Hilsman disagreed with this view slightly in that he thought civil war was not the most likely result but that it was certainly a possible result.

The timing of Ambassador Nolting’s return and Ambassador Lodge’s assumption of duty was then discussed. The President’s initial view was that Ambassador Nolting should return immediately and that Ambassador Lodge should assume his duties as soon thereafter as possible. The President volunteered that Ambassador Nolting had done an outstanding job, that it was almost miraculous the way he had succeeded in turning the war around from the disastrously low point in relations between Diem and ourselves that existed when Ambassador Nolting took over. Mr. Hilsman pointed out the personal sacrifices that Ambassador Nolting had been forced to make during this period, and the President said that he hoped a way could be found to commend Ambassador Nolting publicly so as to make clear the fine job he had done and that he hoped an appropriate position could be found for him in Washington so that he could give his children a suitable home in the years immediately ahead.

The President’s decision was to delegate the authority to decide on the timing of Ambassador Nolting’s return to the Assistant Secretary for Far Eastern Affairs; that Ambassador Lodge should report to Washington no later than July 15 so that he could take the Counterinsurgency Course simultaneously with the normal briefings for an ambassador, and that Ambassador Lodge should arrive in Saigon as soon as possible following completion of the CI Course on August 14. Arrangements were made for Ambassador Nolting to see the President at 4:00 p.m. on Monday, July 8.3

1 Source: Kennedy Library, Hilsman Papers, Memoranda of Conversation: 7/63. Top Secret. Drafted by Hilsman. The source text indicates that the meeting took place at the Department of State, but the President’s Appointment Book confirms that the meeting took place at the White House, as indicated on the copy printed in United States-Vietnam Relations, 1945-1967, Book 12, pp. 526-528.

2 See footnote 2, Document 196.

3 No record of this meeting has been found.

206. Memorandum From the Counselor and Chairman of the Policy Planning Council (Rostow) to the Secretary of State 206. Memorandum From the Counselor and Chairman of the Policy Planning Council (Rostow) to the Secretary of State1

Washington, July 4, 1963.

SUBJECT

The Viet Minh in Laos and the Harriman Mission2

I wish to call your attention to the situation in Laos and its relation to Governor Harriman’s mission.

Very substantial Viet Minh units are now in Laos, positioned to protect the infiltration corridor to South Vietnam. We now also have, for the first time, firm evidence, capable of diplomatic and public presentation, that the Viet Minh have violated the Geneva Accord of 1962 by introducing men (trained political agents) through Laos into South Vietnam after the October deadline.

Although equivalent, firm surfaceable evidence does not yet exist on military units, no one believes that such infiltration has been reduced since October 1962. It may run at a rate of 4-500 per month. To judge the burden imposed on the war effort in South Vietnam one must multiply this figure by about 15. It is evidently Ho’s policy to sop up the improved performance in South Vietnam by this cheap device awaiting either a break on the political situation in Saigon or US discouragement with our effort there. South Vietnam has always been Ho’s primary immediate objective in Laos rather than the control of the Mekong Valley.

It is evidently bad practice to connive at the violation of a solemn agreement by the Communists. I believe the time has come to call them on this; and the appropriate occasion is the Harriman mission, since he negotiated for us at Geneva and personally received the Pushkin assurances that Moscow would assume responsibility for stopping the use of Laos as an infiltration route into South Vietnam.

Both on principle and in terms of American politics I believe it would be unwise for us to permit a mood of detente to develop with Moscow until this matter is settled. American soldiers are committed in substantial numbers in South Vietnam and we are taking casualties.

(Incidentally, I would say the same about the continued presence of Soviet forces in Cuba. A detente will haunt us until the Soviet forces are substantially removed from Cuba.)

I propose, therefore, that Governor Harriman inform Moscow: 1. We. have firm evidence that the Viet Minh are violating the Geneva Accords by their continued presence in Laos and infiltration of South Vietnam.

2. Vital interests of the United States, symbolized by the presence of our forces in South Vietnam and our commitment to Thailand, are endangered by this fact.

3. Unless Viet Minh troops are withdrawn and infiltration ceases we shall shortly have to take compensatory action against North Vietnam.

4. In view of responsibilities formally assumed by Moscow at Geneva we request them promptly to bring about Viet Minh compliance with the Accord of 1962.

I would only add this: if we are to have a showdown with Ho (and, implicitly, Mao) on this matter, we should bring it about before the Chinese Communists blow a nuclear device. Such a symbolic capability would not alter the basic military equation in the Far East, but it could complicate the task of holding our alliances firm in the face of US action, introducing elements of a nuclear confrontation not now present.

1 Source: Department of State,S/P Files: Lot 70 D 199, Laos. Secret. Also sent to Harriman, Johnson, and Hilsman. A note on the source text indicates that Secretary Rusk saw the memorandum.

2 The Harriman mission involved joint U.S.-U.K. negotiations with the Soviet Union on a nuclear test ban treaty. The negotiations began in Moscow on July 15 and culminated in agreement on the text of a treaty on July 25. In his discussions with Soviet leaders during the course of these negotiations, Harriman, who led the U.S. delegation, touched on U.S. concern over developments in Laos and asked Premier Khrushchev to attempt to restrain North Vietnamese activity in Laos. Harriman did not, however, address the issue of Laos as an infiltration corridor into South Vietnam. Documentation on Harriman’s negotiations in Moscow is Ibid., Conference Files: Lot 66 D 110, CF 2284-2286.

207. Report by the Joint Chiefs of Staff’s Special Assistant for Counterinsurgency and Special Activities (Krulak) 207. Report by the Joint Chiefs of Staff’s Special Assistant for Counterinsurgency and Special Activities (Krulak)1

Washington, undated.

VISIT TO VIETNAM

This reports on a visit to Vietnam, made during the period 25 June to 1 July 1963, to review progress in the counterinsurgency campaign.

Time was spent mainly in the provinces, where affairs, within their purview, were discussed with United States and Vietnamese military and civilian personnel, at the various levels of authority. Places visited are portrayed on the facing page.2

As a supplement to the practical part of the visit, a series of specific questions were presented to the Military Assistance Command. The responses to those questions are appended.3 They, coupled with the field visits and personal conversations, and reflected against the backdrop of two previous visits at five month intervals, formed the basis for these conclusions: The counterinsurgency campaign is moving forward on the military and economic fronts. There is reason for optimism in both of these areas.

The strategic hamlet program, correctly characterized as the heart of the campaign, has acquired both momentum and balance. Its impact is most favorable.

Offensive operations against the Viet Cong are widespread and varied, and are growing steadily in intensity. While not always of high quality, their general effect has been to place the Viet Cong on the defensive.

The Buddhist issue is alive, serious and enmeshed with politics. It has not as yet affected adversely the essential operational programs.

The “Open Arms” amnesty program is effective, both as an index to progress achieved and as a weapon against the Viet Cong.

The operating relationship between US advisors and their counterparts is efficient and mutually respectful. It continues to be an essential to successful prosecution of the war.

Events in Laos are a source of growing concern to those charged directly with the conduct of the war in South Vietnam.

Field Visits

Field visits were conducted to: (a) Observe the evolution of the province rehabilitation program; (b) Note changes in the professional quality of the Vietnamese military, by observing units in actual operations; (c) Appraise the advisor/advisee relationship in action; and (d) Obtain low level views as to the progress of the war. The itinerary followed during the visit responded to these purposes.

The Province Rehabilitation Program

The constantly repeated assertion, heard over the past year and a half, that the strategic hamlet is the heart of the counterinsurgency strategy, is acquiring growing validation. Binh Duong Province-one in which province rehabilitation has lagged because of much hard core Viet Cong activity was first selected for a physical inspection. This is the province in which President Diem, against the counsel of others, launched the Sunrise strategic hamlet operation in 1962, at a time when the bulk of the population in the area was under Viet Cong control.

When the Secretary of Defense visited the Sunrise project in May of 1962, and despite the Vietnamese effort to conceal the fact, it was plainly far from a success. The only strategic hamlet in the province, its organization did not really extend far beyond a system of strong physical defenses. The inhabitants were there under duress. Combat capable men were conspicuous by their absence.

Fourteen months have seen a great change. There are now 92 strategic hamlets completed in the province, out of a programmed total of 302. Many have been carved out of areas wholly dominated by the Viet Cong for ten years or more. These, moreover, are now more than barbed wire enclosures into which women, children and aged men have been herded against their will, as was the case in Sunrise. The people have come willingly—in some cases having actually sent deputations to request the development of a hamlet. Economic and political developments have moved ahead in train with the defensive preparations. Two new hamlets visited—Bung Dia and Cau Dinh—had programs underway for pig raising, seed and fertilizer distribution, fruit tree planting, well digging and education. The people, unprepared for the visit, seemed enthusiastic. The hamlet chiefs had both been elected by the villagers. Neither had ever held any office before; both had just completed a province-run course in hamlet administration. These hamlets were impressive in every sense.

In Quang Ngai Province, also visited because of its long history of heavy Viet Cong infestation, progress was equally impressive. A year ago the province had no strategic hamlets deserving of the name. Today there are 273 completed and 125 more under construction, out of a total program of 419. Over two thirds of the people in the province are in hamlets, and the entire program is scheduled for completion by the end of this year. Here, as in Binh Duong Province, the people and the land have had to be wrested from the Viet Cong. The hamlet of Vinh Tuy, one of those visited in this province, rests on ground which only fell to Vietnamese forces after three attacks, in February of this year. It is still pretty crude, but the people in it, who were actually under Viet Cong control six months ago, seemed cheerful and busy. Most important, there was a reasonable percentage of young men of military age in evidence.

For contrast, a visit was also paid to Ninh Thuan Province, one of the two in which the strategic hamlet program is already fully completed. Here, 127 hamlets are in being, housing 97% of the people of the province. The hamlets differ greatly in quality and in physical character, being designed to suit the peculiarities of the varied population—which includes Vietnamese, Cham tribesmen and Montagnards. In several respects, however, they are similar. The all reflect a unified effort at training and equipping a hamlet militia contingent. They all are active in the radio warning system; and they all exhibit progress in the US/Vietnamese economic assistance program.

In fact, this province finds its problems now largely shifted from military matters to economic development. The area is tranquil-will probably soon be declared officially “white”. There are no regular military forces remaining in the province and the peoples’ concerns have now turned from the Viet Cong to an ambitious irrigation program and the development of rural power. The province, hopefully, is a foretaste of the future.

Throughout the visit to the central and northern parts of the country progress was noted in bringing together the US military and economic assistance programs. Every major military briefing attended in these regions included a presentation by a civilian member of the US Overseas Mission, and every discussion on strategic hamlets dwelt upon the indissoluble nature of our military/economic programs. This coordinated approach may have been in effect 15 months ago. If so, it was not nearly so obvious as today.

In the Delta, this degree of coordinated progress apparently has not yet been achieved. In Vinh Long Province, although the hamlet program is well along (206 out of 247) our economic participation is less in evidence. This may derive from the fact that there is not so much poverty in the Delta, or because the premium on security is still much greater than on economic improvement.

Military Operations

The Operational Phase of the National Campaign, directed to begin on 1 July, was actually in progress before that date. Over 1,000 assorted offensive operations are now conducted per month, over twice the level of a year ago. Not all are effectively executed, nor are all successful. In sum, however, they are putting great pressure on the Viet Cong, causing him casualties, degrading his resources and keeping him on the defensive.

In the forthcoming phase of the National Campaign, it is prescribed that every tactical unit-Regular, Civil Guard and Self Defense Corps—shall be offensively engaged in the field for twenty days per month. While somewhat unrealistic, the directive still promises even further intensification of operations and even greater stress on the Viet Cong.

Tactical operations of varying sizes were visited in the field. They varied in quality, from extremely impressive to just fair.

1. The 25th Division, in Quang Ngai has been in existence for exactly one year. During that period it has succeeded in driving the Viet Cong from the coastal plain into the mountains of the Annamite Chain, where they are now largely on the defensive. At the time of this visit all three regiments of the division were in the field, and some 50 small ambush type patrols were in progress. This effort has made the Viet Cong’s food problem a grave one, has rendered the kidnapping of conscripts most difficult, is the cause of continued defections, and diminishes the enemy’s capacity for coordinated offensive operations.

The division commander has the taste of blood and is convinced that he can destroy the Viet Cong forces in his province—or drive them elsewhere—by the end of the year.

2. The 23d Division, in Khanh Hoa Province is engaged in a similar campaign. At the time it was visited the division had two battalions, broken down into their small component units, patrolling in the mountainous area in the western part of the province. They had been continuously at this task for the preceding 26 days, concentrating on harrying the Viet Cong, making him move and destroying his resources. It is a well conceived and fruitfully executed effort. In the 26 day period they had seized sizeable grain stocks (120 tons), destroyed crops, bivouac areas and crude weapons shops. They had freed 293 persons from Viet Cong control-people who have hitherto been terrorized into tilling the Viet Cong fields and bearing their loads.

In all of this, only 26 Viet Cong had so far been killed and six captured, which seems somewhat disappointing until it is recalled that the total number of Viet Cong involved is probably small, and the task of bringing them to bay in the mountains very difficult. More important, by far, is that patrol and attack efforts of this type deprive the Viet Cong of his initiative. So long as he is on the defensive, it is plain that he cannot attack anyone.

3. A similar conclusion was reached concerning an operation in the Delta, where elements of five battalions combed an area where about 200 Viet Cong were supposed to be bivouacked. Some 60 were killed, and the disruption created by the operation certainly diminished greatly the capability of those who escaped to do anything offensive for some time to come.

4. A patrol type operation by an M-113 detachment into hard core Viet Cong territory adjacent to Zone D was a disappointment. By moving into the Viet Cong enclave, the unit struck a raw nerve. It was taking casualties from both mines and snipers, yet little was being done to develop the situation aggressively. At three o'clock on a bright afternoon the troops were already beginning to settle down for the evening, with the soldiers keeping very near to their vehicles-which they clearly regarded more as mobile redoubts than offensive conveyances Despite the demonstrated proximity of the enemy, there were no patrols; no aggressive activity. It will be remarkable if much comes of the operation, other than casualties. The unit commander (a captain) and his US advisor (a captain) had little to say, when questioned, beyond frustrated observations on the elusiveness of the Viet Cong.

The Buddhist Problem

The Buddhist matter seems to break cleanly into two separate problems—the question of the metropolitan political maneuverings in Saigon, Hue, etc. and the influence of the Buddhist issue on the actual counterinsurgency campaign.

This being essentially a military report, it will be pertinent, in connection with the first element, to state only that the issue is serving as nourishment for all varieties of dissidents, malcontents, king makers and coup plotters, and that some of the most articulate Buddhist Bonzes are probably motivated more by politics than by religious conviction. On this basis it is not likely that the problem will be allowed to reach an early or an agreeable end. The anti-Diemists will not relinquish lightly this Buddha-sent opportunity to attack Diem’s position.

As to whether the affair has affected the war itself, Americans and Vietnamese of all stations were queried, and the nearer to the battle, the less gravely the problem was regarded. There appeared no evidence that the front line counterinsurgency effort has yet been impeded or decelerated at all by the crisis.

In Quang Ngai, for instance, the Province Chief-himself a Catholic-handled a group of demonstrators in the capital by inviting them to a free meal. The demonstration collapsed. In Binh Dinh, the commander of the 9th Division (a Buddhist) characterized the problem as regrettable, but one which time would solve.

At the same time, several Americans stated that this attitude of detachment in the field could not persist indefinitely; that sooner or later, if the matter is not resolved, the mid-rank military of Buddhist persuasion will begin to worry as to just what they would do if their unit were told to take military action against Buddhist demonstrators.

A significant point in this unfortunate matter is that the religious aspect of the issue has a narrower base than public reports might suggest, since the true percentage of practicing Buddhists is smaller than generally represented. These is a tendency to classify all non-Christians as Buddhists. IN fact, many are simple ancestor worshippers in the Chinese tradition, while other major religions are also represented in the country—including Confucianists, Taoists and Moslems. Finally, there 7,000,000 Montagnards, of whom many are animists.

“Open Arms”—The Amnesty Program4

First thoughts on the amnesty program are usually, “Can the Vietnamese really distinguish between simple refugees and genuine returning Viet Cong Sympathizers?” and “What assurance is there that the returnees will not re-defect to the Communists?”

A hint of an answer was found at the Chieu Hoi reindoctrination camp at Than Xa, Quang Ngai Province, where 115 returnees were observed undergoing reindoctrination.

The group was mostly men. They had come in voluntarily; some bringing weapons; all bringing intelligence which ultimately they transmitted to our side.

About a quarter were hard core Viet Cong. Another quarter were political cadre. The remainder were people who willingly followed the Viet Cong when the hamlet program and widespread military attacks caused the Viet Cong to retire westward from the plains to the mountains.

Most of this group were described by the US Sector Advisor as politically astute. They show evidence of having had careful Communist indoctrination. Some are sufficiently articulate to confirm that they were political instructors themselves. There seemed little reason to doubt the word of the Province Chief when he said that these were truly Viet Cong sympathizers and not refugees.

There are many reasons given for accepting the amnesty offer (usually received through leaflets), but they are generally polarized around one abstract attitude—disillusionment, and one concrete reality—hunger. In the north, hunger probably leads all the rest, although this is not true in the more fruitful south. Every one of the returnees queried during the visit to the Quang Ngai center got around to talking about food very quickly. They looked hungry, and are in poor physical shape.

It is too early to address the second question—whether the returnees will redefect. When asked this question, the tactical zone commander responded in this fashion. The program in Quang Ngai was begun on 17 December 1962. Since that time 823 people have passed through the rehabilitation center and thence returned to their own villages. A check is kept on all of them; none have yet gone back to the Communists.

The total number of “Open Arms” returnees—country wide, stands at 11,700. While more surrendered in June than in the preceding two months put together, it is not likely that there will be any vast domino effect. The base is too small. Over 60% of the population are already in strategic hamlets. In a few months the figure will be much higher. So there will actually not be a very great number of people available for the amnesty program to attract.

Nevertheless, those who have rallied to the government have already cut in to the Viet Cong logistic support structure, in areas where it badly hurts—food production, porterage and probably most important, native intelligence.

The US Advisory Presence

Forty-eight US advisors, from the Saigon level to enlisted men with tactical units, were asked to comment on the US/Vietnamese relationship. Their answers were singularly similar: “There may be troubles, in this regard, elsewhere; but I have never had any difficulty at all.”

“My counterpart wants me here, and says so often. He takes my advice.”

“We have had our disagreements as to ways and means. Sometimes it takes a week for my advice to sink in; but we have come to understand one another.”

Of the forty-eight, none could recall any change in attitude since the subject was raised by Counsellor Nhu two months ago. Several have discussed it candidly with their Vietnamese counterparts. Among these, the general reaction obtained seems to be that the attitude of Mr. Nhu is remote from the realities of the war. Apart from this, the warm and respectful advisor/advisee relationship is quite evident. General Harkins, in this regard, lays the bulk of the trouble-making proclivity at Nhu’s door; considers Diem not to be an active participant.

One point noted frequently by the US advisors relates to language. The more senior Vietnamese commanders speak French, and some have fair English. The junior ones speak only Vietnamese, and struggle with English. Thus, ideally, they point out that we should send senior advisors with skill in French, while the lower ranking advisory personnel should have a basic grounding in Vietnamese before they come.

Laos

It is not difficult to synthesize the views of US/Vietnamese officialdom in Vietnam on the matter of Laos. They are all agreed on one point’ there is a direct and pressing relationship between affairs in the two countries and the worse things go in Laos, the more difficult matters will be in Vietnam.

Their viewpoints differ only as to degree. The Saigon CIA representative is unequivocal in his conviction that if Laos falls to the Communists the loss of Vietnam must inevitably follow. General Harkins believes that the loss of Laos would render our problem in Vietnam more difficult, but that it would not make a favorable conclusion impossible.

Meanwhile, Vietnamese commanders at all levels speak with feeling of the flow of warlike essentials and key personnel into their country via the Ho Chi Minh Trail. While generally unable to produce abundant hard evidence of the fact, they still, in recounting their day to day combat experiences, underscore that external influence on the battle—actual and potential—must form a part of every calculation. Certainly, the material flow could be greatly increased, should the Communists choose to do so, particularly were Tchepone, Attopeu and Saravane to come wholly under their control. It is for this reason that there is strong sentiment, on both the US and Vietnamese sides for more covert pressure on the Laos corridor and on North Vietnam.

Miscellaneous Observations

Visit with the Minister of Defense

Mr. Thuan expressed satisfaction with the growth of offensive military activity, and enthusiasm with President Diem’s formal approval of 1 July as the beginning of Phase II of the National Campaign.

In response to a question as to how the Viet Cong would react to this intensified effort, he responded that, in his judgment, they are already reacting—steadily acquiring forces and material in southern Laos. These, he says, will be used in a powerful attack in the highlands or Quang Ngai, to deal the Vietnamese military a hard blow, which can then be publicized as a basis for seeking a negotiated peace.

In this regard, Mr. Thuan is quite as alert as any interested American regarding the unfavorable image of the Vietnam war in the US press, and the necessity for getting what he called “the correct story” before the US Congress. Also, like the interested Americans, he was not prepared to offer any dramatic suggestions as to just how to achieve this purpose.

When asked what, in his view, most needed doing to get the National Campaign forward effectively, he responded with three specifics: a. Settle the Buddhist problem quickly and completely. (On this he expressed great determination and at best, restrained optimism.)

b. Undertake numerous small scale incursions into Southern Laos, for intelligence purposes and to disrupt development of the Viet Cong logistic mechanism.

c. Increase greatly our sabotage, harassment, intelligence and subversive activities in North Vietnam.

The Vietnamese Organization for Counterinsurgency

The Vietnamese have a Special Group (Counterinsurgency) too. They call it the “Interministerial Committee on Strategic Hamlets”. It is chaired by Counsellor Nhu, and includes the heads of all the civil ministries, the Chief of the Joint General Staff and the four Corps Tactical Zone commanders. It has much authority, in both the approval of plans for clear and hold operations and for hamlet development. It supervises execution closely through on-site observation and periodic progress reports.

The Continuity of Viet Cong Strength

The intensity of offensive operations is growing steadily, at a cost to the Viet Cong of over 2,000 battle casualties per month. Defections are increasing rapidly—from 200 per month in January to 450 in June. Over 60% of the Vietnamese rural population is in strategic hamlets, with a consequent narrowing of the Viet Cong recruitment base. Finally, the “Open Arms” amnesty program is beginning to diminish the number of active Viet Cong sympathizers and supporters.

Against this background, it is not surprising to find the Advisory Command’s best estimate of Viet Cong irregular strength to have dropped—from a high of 100,000 to 80,000. The Viet Cong now have less to offer the Vietnamese youth and, to the extent that they must rely on kidnapping to procure replacements, their problem is greatly complicated by the personal security afforded by the strategic hamlet.

Regular Viet Cong strength, on the other hand, remains about constant at 22,000-25,000. Both the Vietnamese and US authorities questioned were convinced that this strength is maintained largely by infiltration, supplemented by intensive training of selected local cadres.

Reduction in US Forces

It was not possible, in this brief visit, to do more than observe and to sample opinion on the subject, at various levels of authority.

Observation underscored these realities: a. The shooting part of the war is moving to a climax. Our help for the Vietnamese in logistic and tactical support is thus probably not susceptible of much reduction in the immediate future.

b. On the other hand, the training effort has passed its climax. All divisions are organized and re rapidly being trained. The Civil Guard and Self Defense Corps training programs are also well advanced; and training of strike forces and similar paramilitary elements is maturing rapidly. A reduction in the advisory area is thus a logical prospect.

Discussion of the problem with responsible officers elicited the general reaction that reduction is feasible in both advisory personnel and in the various US staff and administrative support forces. General Harkins considers that a reduction of 1,000 men could be accomplished now, without affecting adversely the conduct of the war. About half of the positions vacated, as he sees it, would come as a result of the Vietnamese achieving greater self-sufficiency in training and command matters, with the other half coming from a withdrawal or replacement of US units.

The Press

Very little observed during this visit had any real sensitivity or secrecy. Almost anyone could see it without violating security.

This gave rise to the thought that what is needed is a few venturesome newsmen who are willing to forego the comforts of the city, and endure a little mud and discomfort. Those so inclined would be rewarded with a picture of resolution and progress which they would not quickly forget.

Conclusion

Almost the whole of this visit was concentrated in the field, observing the people—military and civilian, US and Vietnamese—who are carrying the front line burden. From them the sounds of confidence, achievement and cautious optimism can be plainly heard, and with growing resonance.

Military operations are more effective; rural economic progress is manifest; US/Vietnamese coordination is heartening; and the morale of US military forces is classic.

Acknowledging that this trip dwelt mainly upon the rural sector; acknowledging further the potential gravity of the political vibrations in Saigon; and recognizing the rapidity with which the situation could be worsened by adverse developments in Laos, the visit still added substance to the view that we are indeed winning the war, that our present course is sound and that, resolutely pursued, it will see the job done.

1 Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OASD/ISA Files: FRC 67 A 4564, Vietnam 1963. Secret. Attached to a brief transmittal memorandum sent on July 5 by General Taylor to Secretary of Defense McNamara. A handwritten note on the covering memorandum indicates that Secretary McNamara saw the report. On July 9, Michael Forrestal sent a copy of the report to McGeorge Bundy for the President. Forrestal indicated, in his covering memorandum, that he felt the report gave “a fair and soundly optimistic picture of the part of the iceberg which is under water, i.e. the war against the Viet Cong.” A note on the covering memorandum indicates that the report was placed in the President’s weekend reading file. (Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Vietnam Country Series, 7/1/63-7/20/63)

2 The attached map, which details the 15 places visited by Krulak in South Vietnam, is not printed.

3 Not found attached.

4 See Document 92.

208. Memorandum of a Conversation 208. Memorandum of a Conversation1

Washington, July 5, 1963.

SUBJECT

Current Situation in Viet-Nam

PARTICIPANTS

George W. Ball, Under Secretary

Frederick E. Nolting, Jr., American Ambassador to Viet-Nam

Chalmers B. Wood, Director,WG/VN

George S. Springsteen (U)

Ambassador Nolting opened with a review of the Buddhist situation which he characterized as serious. He regretted that Diem had not taken it in hand earlier, but emphasized that Diem had given his word that the agreement would be carried out. It was Nolting’s experience that when Diem gave his word, he followed through although sometimes it was handled in his own way.

In reply to a question from the Under Secretary as to the future course of events, the Ambassador replied that although interference by the Nhus was serious, he believed that the GVN would be able to come through this one slowly. As to tactics, the more Diem was prodded the slower he went. While Nhu was troublesome he was chiefly responsible for gains which had been made in the provincial pacification program.

Giving a characterization of Mme. Nhu, Ambassador Nolting said that she was authoritarian to her finger tips, violently nationalistic and an attractive woman who was both glib and intolerant. She considered herself a most important person in her own right since she was head of the Women’s Solidarity Movement. Her manner was her worst drawback.

The Under Secretary asked what would happen if there were a change in government. The Ambassador replied that he would give his view which was not completely shared by Mr. Wood. In his view if a revolution occurred in Viet-Nam which grew out of the Buddhist situation, the country would be split between feuding factions and the Americans would have to withdraw and the country might be lost to the Communists. This led to the question of how much pressure we could exert on Diem. Mr. Nolting replied that if we repudiated him on this issue his government would fall. The Ambassador believed that Diem would live up to the agreement unless he believed that he was dealing with a political attempt to cause his overthrow.

As to the role of the Catholics in the Government, Ambassador Nolting did not believe that Diem gave them preference. Unfortunately, many persons in the government felt that it would help their careers if they became Catholic. It was true that the Government had been unwise in the ostentatious manner in which it supported and encouraged the publicizing of Catholic ceremonies, however. In general, Viet-Nam had been a country in which there was a great degree of religious tolerance. Now the situation seemed out of hand. It was deplorable because we had been winning.

Speaking of relations between the USSR and Communist China, the Ambassador added that if there were a political collapse in Viet-Nam and the U.S. had to withdraw, the Chinese would say that this proved that the right way to expand Communism was to use force.

The Under Secretary inquired whether there was any one person around whom conflicting groups in Viet-Nam might coalesce in the event of Diem’s disappearance from the scene. Ambassador Nolting replied that Vice President Tho, a Buddhist, would be the best person, but would be opposed by Nhu. The Under Secretary said that everyone agreed that the Ambassador had done a “swell job” in Viet-Nam. The Ambassador thanked the Under Secretary and said he had been pleased to have been able to speak to the Council on Foreign Relations in New York. The discussion seemed to have gone well and the questions had been friendly.

Turning to the appointment of Ambassador Lodge, Mr. Nolting commented that the more Lodge was built up as a strong man who was going to tell Diem where to get off, the harder it would be for Lodge to do his job in Viet-Nam.

The Under Secretary suggested that Ambassador Nolting could reassure President Diem on this point.

1 Source: Department of State, Secretary’s Memoranda of Conversation: Lot 65 D 330, July 1963. Secret. Drafted by Wood and approved in U on July 18. The meeting was held in the Department of State. Also printed in Pentagon Papers: Gravel Edition, Vol. II, pp. 728-729.

209. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 209. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, July 6, 1963, 5 p.m.

39. Dept pass DOD, MilRep to President,JCS/ISA, ACSI, CNO, CIA, HQUSAF (AFCIN & AFCIN-EI-A) AID, OIA, and USIA. CINCPAC also pass CINCPAC PO LAD, CINCPACFLT, CINCUSARPAC, CINPACAF,DOD/PRO. Bangkok also pass JUSMAAG and JUSMAAG, Deputy Chief. Phnom Penh also pass MAAG. Taipei also for Taiwan Defense Command. Ref: Embtel 1257.2 General Harkins has requested that following amplification of section B (1) of TF Saigon monthly report of June 29 be circulated to all addressees:

At repeated urging of General Harkins to President Diem, Secretary Thuan and General Ty, JGS, RVNAF, issued instructions to corps commanders as noted in monthly report of June 29. Principal political criterion for successful conclusion of Phase I of National Campaign Plan (NCP) was completion of 2/3 of Strategic Hamlet Program. This criterion had been met nationwide, except for Delta in IV Corps tactical zone, well before target completion date of 1 July 1963. It could have been serious set-back had RVNAF taken this opportunity to rest on their oars throughout rest of country while IV Corps, which has by far most difficult task politically and militarily, caught up. To lose or level out momentum built up by RVNAF at this stage would be unthinkable in terms of achieving quickest practicable victory over insurgency.

June 29th wrap-up report treatment is technically correct in terms of original NCP. JGS instructions of June 18 adjusts military tasks and concepts in manner acceptable to US. It accommodates situation and capabilities of both GVN and VC after four months of concerted and aggressive action in all arenas and with all instruments of conflict. Terms Phase I, II and III used in NCP have now lost all real validity in context evaluating over-all national progress. Tasks and objectives outlined in three nominal phases, however, remain essentially valid and provide solid guidelines for control, direction and evaluation of counter-insurgency military effort by GVN authorities and their US advisors. Depending on local RVN conditions, personalities and capabilities and VC counterparts which face them, there is every reason believe that, in many military and political subdivisions of country, pacification will shortly be so far along, if current rates are maintained, that major elements of regular RVNAF forces can be redeployed to more active areas where progress is not as fast and VC problem is tougher.

General Ty’s order might be narrowly construed as limited to psychological impact on recipients in some areas of RVN, principally in Delta. Even here, however, instructions clarify and re-emphasize uncompleted tasks and objectives of so-called Phase I of NCP. As a practical matter, NCP objectives of establishing GVN infrastructure of a broad population and land area base while destroying VC popular base, and destruction of main force VC installations and forces, are mutually supporting, though to different degrees in different areas of RVN. Current and continuing problem facing US military advisors in their military planning role is to determine logical balance of effort in each of several areas of RVN while local balances of VC versus GVN strength vary substantially. Persuading GVN and RVNAF authorities to accept these solutions or to devise and implement equally effective solutions of their own as aggressively and professionally as they possibly can, will determine rate of success in counter-insurgency. Progress here is afoot. There remains no doubts that military defeat of VC is attainable, barring catastrophic political or social development in RVN.

In summary, MACV notes that as of 1 July, over 2/3 of strategic hamlets planned have been completed, nationwide. Over eight million people are now living in these hamlets, who together with those living in secure metropolitan areas, comprise well over 2/a of population. RVNAF forces overall have attained required posture vis-à-vis VC forces to launch accelerated operations to destroy them. Conditions for launching Phase II as defined in original NCP have been met. Phase II has in fact been launched, while some tasks originally described for Phase I are being cleaned up concurrently.

It is requested that all holders of 29 June monthly report apply these contents to report and annotate section B, 1, of report to refer to them.

Trueheart

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, DEF 19 US-S VIET. Secret; Limit Distribution; Priority. Repeated to CINCPAC, Bangkok, Phnom Penh, Taipei, Singapore, Hong Kong, Hue, Kuala Lumpur, Rangoon, Vientiane, Manila, Paris, London, New Delhi, and Djakarta.

2 Telegram 1257 from Saigon, June 29, was the monthly report by the Saigon Task Force, containing an overall assessment of the success of the initial phase of the South Vietnamese Government’s National Campaign, which reads as follows: “Although directive states that Phase II of National Campaign Plan to be initiated on 1 July, specific tasks outlined are more in consonance with those prescribed for Phase I of Plan. Ngo Dinh Nhu had established 30 June as date Phase I of Plan would be completed. This based on projected completion of two-thirds of strategic hamlets then planned. This target has not been reached, and indications are that 31 December 1963 is more realistic target date for most provinces. Current analyses by MACV indicate that populace and land area base required to provide posture necessary for sustained operations against VC main forces has not, as yet, been obtained.

“It is apparent that reason for directing implementation of Phase II of National Campaign Plan is psychological and it cannot, in fact, be implemented at this time. Specific actions prescribed suggest that this is realized at least by military.” (Ibid.)

210. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 210. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, July 7, 1963, 6 p.m.

46. Dept pass USIA. Altercation took place this morning between Vietnamese plainclothes police and American correspondents, following Buddhist ceremony at Saigon Chantareansey Pagoda. One AP reporter (Arnett)2 roughed up; cameras at least two other reporters damaged by police.

I have talked to several of correspondents involved (Browne, Sheehan, Halberstam) as well as several Mission personnel present on scene. Appears that press had been informed by Buddhists in advance of ceremony (as had our people). They showed up at 0800 and were allowed to observe and photograph ceremony without hindrance. (I understand CBS had camera and lights actually mounted in window of pagoda.)

At about 0900 bonzes and bonzesses left pagoda and moved in procession up very narrow alley towards main street. Police stopped them at exit of alley with object of preventing their carrying procession further. This was eventually accomplished without apparently any serious protest from bonzes.

At point procession stopped American reporters moved into alley to take pictures. It seems clear that plain-clothes police sought to interfere with picture taking and that in process Arnett’s camera was snatched away from him and he was thrown to ground. Picture thereafter is far from clear but there seems no doubt that plainclothesmen sought to prevent picture taking and damaged cameras. Also clear that uniformed police made no effort to prevent damage to cameras and in fact tacitly abetted plainclothesmen. There is also no doubt that reporters, at least once fracas had started, acted in belligerent manner towards police.

Correspondents charge that above was deliberate GVN effort to provoke incident and indicative of tougher GVN line on foreign press and Buddhists. They demand formal Embassy protest to GVN3 and Embassy facilities to file their copy—which they claim to have information GVN will hold up.

On basis all available information, I am far from satisfied there was planned harassment of press in this instance, particularly considering fact that reporters had been operating freely for at least an hour before incident. Much more likely, in my view, that this was relatively commonplace contretemps in crowded place between reporters and police. Police officials on scene informed Embassy security officer that they so regard it and that incident, in their view, is closed.

Although I do not think there is basis for formal protest, we have nevertheless already expressed our concern to GVN and Mecklin is seeing DGI Tao at 4 PM for further discussion of matter, including making sure if possible that reporters’ cables are not held up.

I also do not believe that case of this kind justifies filing of copy by government channels but would welcome guidance on this point.

Since above written, Mecklin reports Tao and Khoi have told him that there no change in GVN policy towards press and that there will be no delay in transmission of press cables. According to Tao, police claim that correspondents provoked them by protesting police hold-up of procession and that one correspondent struck police first. Tao says he does not wish to pursue this, not feeling sure of police story. Given extreme emotional involvement of correspondents these days—amounting regrettably to intense hatred of all things GVN, in certain cases—I would not feel sure about refuting police.

Browne has just called to say he and Arnett have been ordered to report to police station 0730 tomorrow. At Browne’s request, I am assigning consular officer to go with them. We are also seeking explanation from DGI.4

Trueheart

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, PPV 7 S VIET-US. Limited Official Use; Operational Immediate.

2 Peter Arnett, a New Zealand national.

3 According to Mecklin, who was present, the correspondents had a “stormy session” with Trueheart in his office and demanded that a formal diplomatic protest of the incident be made to President Diem. Trueheart refused, on the grounds of inadequate information. (Mecklin, Mission in Torment, p. 173)

4 The Embassy reported on July 8 that assault charges were filed against Arnett and Browne. (Telegram 52 from Saigon, July 8; Department of State, Central Files, PPV 7 S VIET-US) The Department instructed the Embassy to request officially that the charges be dropped, taking the matter to President Diem if necessary to underline the importance of the request. (Telegram 38 to Saigon, July 8; Ibid.) Trueheart took up the pending charges with Thuan on July 8 and July 10, but President Diem did not agree to drop the charges until July 17, after the South Vietnamese Directorate General of Information issued a communiqué supporting the police account of the incident. (Telegrams 58, July 9; 67, July 10; 81, July 12; and 97, July 17, all from Saigon; telegrams 58, 67, and 97 are Ibid., PPV 7 S VIET-US; telegram 81 is Ibid., SOC 14-1 S VIET) In reporting on the incident, in telegram 65 from Saigon, July 10, Trueheart observed:

“Department should also be aware that in recent weeks resident correspondents have become so embittered towards GVN that they are saying quite openly to anyone who will listen that they would like to see regime overthrown. GVN no doubt has this well-documented. GVN also unquestionably considers that correspondents have been actively encouraging Buddhists. Diem is therefore most unlikely to accept view that correspondents merely carrying on normal functions of keeping US public informed.” (Ibid., PPV 7 S VIET-US)

211. Telegram From Malcolm Browne of the Associated Press, David Halberstam of The New York Times, Peter Kalischer of CBS News, and Neil Sheehan of United Press International to the President 211. Telegram From Malcolm Browne of the Associated Press, David Halberstam of The New York Times, Peter Kalischer of CBS News, and Neil Sheehan of United Press International to the President1

Saigon, July 7, 1963, 10:20 a.m.

Mister President, this Sunday morning at the entrance to Chantareansay Pagoda in Saigon nine representatives of American news organizations were subjected to a swift unprovoked and violent attack by government plain clothes police while covering an otherwise peaceful Buddhist religious ceremony. One correspondent was knocked down and kicked. Other newsmen were shoved, jostled and struck by rocks thrown by the plainclothesmen-all in full sight of forty to sixty uniformed metropolitan policemen and a squad of riot police. In the course of the attack one camera was smashed and several damaged.

The uniformed police did not offer any protection to the newsmen and in fact did everything to prevent the correspondents from apprehending the men who were attacking them.

The inescapable conclusion is that the Government of South Vietnam, a country to which the United States is heavily committed, has begun a campaign of open physical intimidation to prevent the covering of news which we feel Americans have a right to know.

Previously foreign correspondents have been expelled from South Vietnam. This is the first time they have been assaulted by representatives of the government. We believe a precedent has been set for increasing obstruction and violence. Since the United States Embassy here does not deem this incident serious enough to make a formal protest, we respectfully request that you, Mister President, protest against this attack and obtain assurances that will not be repeated.2

Sincerely yours—

Malcolm Browne
Associated Press
David Halberstam
New York Times
Peter Kalischer
CBS News
Neil Sheehan
United Press International

1 Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Vietnam Country Series, 7/1/63-7/20/63. The telegram was sent via commercial channels to the White House which repeated it as telegram HYWH 4-63 at 6:32 p.m. to the President at Hyannis Port, Massachusetts, where he was spending the weekend. A note on the source text indicates that a copy was sent to the Department of State for Wood.

2 The Department responded to this telegram on the same day by calling the Washington offices of AP, UPI, and The New York Times and reading them on background a paraphrase of telegram 46 (supra) except for the last two sentences of paragraph 6, the first clause of paragraph 7, paragraph 8, and the last sentence of paragraph 9. (Telegram 37 to Saigon. July 7; Department of State, Central Files, PPV 7 S VIET-US)

212. Central Intelligence Agency Information Report 212. Central Intelligence Agency Information Report1

Washington, July 8, 1963.

TDCS-3/552,770

SUBJECT

Situation Appraisal of the Political Situation as of 1200 hours on 6 July

1. This is a field appraisal of the current situation. It is not an official judgment by this organization or any component thereof. It represents the observations and interpretations of a staff officer based on information available to him at time of its preparation. Prepared for internal use as a guide to the operational environment, this commentary is disseminated in the belief that it may be useful to other agencies in assessing the situation for their own purposes.

2. In Saigon the political situation remains unsettled with both the government and the Buddhists continuing to exchange charges of bad faith. Elements on each side appear intent upon the submission of the other. Against this background, the coup atmosphere has become perceptibly heavier. During the past few days, coup groups have formed to take advantage of the instability attending the Buddhist crisis. It is not clear at this time whether these groups intend to await further emotional outbursts, which would occur if there are additional Buddhist self-immolations, or whether they are now prepared to move ahead at a time of their choosing, regardless of what the Buddhists do. Buddhist strategy is polarizing around the views of Thich Tri Quang, head of the General Association of Vietnamese Buddhists for Central Vietnam, who has openly stated his intention not to cease agitation until the Diem government falls. Thich Tri Quang also has indicated his intention, if necessary, to call for suicide volunteers. Among thpse allegedly ready to volunteer are Dieu Hue, the mother of Vietnam’s leading scientist and Ambassador to the Ivory Coast, Morocco, Niger and Senegal, and her sister, Tu Dieu, the aunt of the Government of Vietnam (GVN) Director of Youth, Cao Xuan Vy.

3. Three coup groups have been reported to be now cooperating, one headed by Lieutenant Colonel Pham Ngoc Thao, former Chief of Kien Hoa Province, and then Ngo Dinh Nhu’s special investigator for strategic hamlets, another characterized as the Tran Kim Tuyen group, and a third, primarily military in composition. Little is known about the Thao and the military groups; somewhat more about the Tuyen group.

4. Tran Kim Tuyen has been identified as an organizer, but not the leader, of a coup group which is said to include the Catholic Archbishop of Saigon, Pham Van Binh; some Buddhists and some military supporters, including Major General Duong Van Minh, military advisor to the President, and Brigadier General Ton That Dinh, Commander of the III Corps area, which borders on the Saigon metropolitan area. Tuyen has had recent contact and a long time friendship with two of the Buddhist activists, Thich Tam Chau, Vice President of the General Association of Vietnamese Buddhists, and Thich Thien Minh, Chairman of the Buddhist Intersect Committee dealing with the GVN and head of the Buddhist Students of Central Vietnam. Major General Tran Van Don, Commander of the Army of Vietnam, has also admitted that he too is also involved in coup plotting.2 Don has no direct command of troops, but could lend important support to military moves on the part of General Dinh from his General Staff position. Tuyen has requested the preparation of a manifesto for “a new government.” Plans also have allegedly been made by Tuyen to take over the Ministry of Civic Action and all public media at the first moment of a coup, which will not be a military putsch, but a Palace revolution involving the assassination of Ngo Dinh Nhu and his wife and the “elimination” of President by less forceable means if possible, but by assassination if necessary.

5. There is no direct evidence, but the inference can be drawn from available reports, that the chosen political leader of the Tuyen group would be Vice President Nguyen Ngoc Tho, who would represent legal succession in the event of the demise or resignation of President Diem. There is no intimation that Tho has participated in coup planning. There have been numerous rumors that Tho has resigned, and an individual who is in a position to have such access has confirmed Tho’s submission of his resignation. However, Secretary of State at the Presidency Nguyen Dinh Thuan on 4 July 1963 categorically denied that Tho had resigned. On the morning of 5 July Tho claimed that he had not resigned, although Tho, at the time, indicated his dislike for political problems and his personal upset in being involved in the present Buddhist controversy. Tho is the chief of the Interministerial Council which negotiated with the General Association of Buddhists. He was the only Buddhist member of that council and has been the object of some criticism for his alleged concessions to the Buddhists from Ngo Dinh Nhu and Madame Nhu.

6. If, as is suspected, the military group, the Tuyen group, and the Thao group have indeed combined in a marriage of convenience, their chances of maintaining unity after a successful coup would probably be poor because of the many personal animosities that would probably exist in such a group. Although Tuyen has strong support in the Civil Service, through persons he has carefully seeded in the bureaucracy over a period of years, he is generally openly and ardently despised by the military who would hold the predominance of power in a post-coup situation. Unless the military leaders opt for the legalities of Vice President Tho’s assumption of the Presidency, a military leader might arise to seize the office of Chief Executive. Such a seizure probably also would be accompanied by considerable instability as one of the Generals attempted to assert supremacy.

7. The timing of possible coup events is not yet clear. Allegedly, the military committee of the Tuyen group has recommended that the coup take place any time up until 10 July; however, the group’s central committee has not yet given its consent. Others have leaned toward the 7th of July, the traditional date for the celebration of Double 7 which commemorates President Diem’s accession to power in 1954. One individual indicated the timing to be prior to the end of August. We believe that any serious coup group may try to act before the 31 August elections.

8. Where the loyalties of the rank and file of the military would lie in a coup situation are hard to predict. Some of the Air Force personnel report considerable disaffection at high and medium levels. The paratroop brigade is also said to be disaffected and the loyalties of the Navy are uncertain, although in the past two coupe, the Navy commander, Captain Ho Tan Quyen, has proved to be a staunch supporter of Diem. The armored brigade is reported to be so split in opinion, because of the Buddhist situation, as to make its loyalties questionable. Recently, Major General Duong Van Minh, military advisor to the President, stated his fear that the Buddhist issue was definitely dividing the loyalties of the Vietnamese Army.

9. It is becoming increasingly clear that the Buddhist leadership, now ensconced at Xa Loi Pagoda in Saigon and eager to present its case to anyone who happens to come along, either is unable to believe, or prefers not to believe, that the GVN, as it is presently constituted, has any intention over the long run of living up to the letter or the spirit of the 16 June agreement. For the moment, the Buddhist complaints center on alleged chicanery concerning the number of arrested participants in the 16th June riot who have been released; alleged GVN support and encouragement of the discredited Co Son Mon sect; and charges, for which the Buddhists claim documentary proof, that the government, or elements thereof, have backhandedly encouraged the Republican Youth to question whether the government may not have been too generous in its concessions to the Buddhists. The Buddhists also claim that the GVN has quietly sent instructions to its provincial representatives to give pro forma lip service to the agreement with the Buddhists for the time being, but to ready themselves for future repressive measures. The Buddhist hierarchy alleges that even now Buddhist monks and nuns in the provinces are being subjected to various restraints.

10. It is difficult to pin down these charges. Judged by the regime’s past performance in dealing with political opponents, which is generally the way it views the Buddhist leadership, and by reports from others, there is probably considerable truth to these Buddhist assertions. However, the relative merit or truth of the Buddhist charges is not as important in the present context as the fact that the Buddhists are sticking to them, reflecting a profound chasm between them and the GVN. Buddhist spokesmen at Xa Loi convey the unmistakable impression that even if the government can satisfactorily refute these charges, the Buddhists will raise new charges and the militant wing indicate they intend to keep up the pressure until the Diem regime is overthrown. Thus, the Buddhists, at least those under the influence of Thich Tri Quang, appear to be consciously transferring their struggle to the political realm. Whether they are using political means to overthrow Diem out of honest conviction that only in this way can greater religious equality be assured in Vietnam, or whether more secular motives are also involved, can at this time only be a matter of surmise. The Buddhist leaders vigorously deny accepting the help of, or being influenced by, outside opposition political elements, and to date there is little evidence with which to challenge that claim. Nevertheless, it must be remembered that the line here between formal participation in religious affairs as a Buddhist monk and secular life is extremely fluid. The Buddhist struggle, adopted initially essentially to redress real and imagined religious grievances, may well have transformed itself into an entirely new political force whose aims transcend the basically religious purposes for which it was originally set in motion.

11. The two weeks deadline set by the Buddhists for GVN compliance with the 16 June accord passed without the previously threatened further Buddhist manifestations. Since then, while promising further suicides, the Buddhists have progressively pushed back the timetable for their threatened acts. Their hesitation may have been caused by a variety of reasons, perhaps including a desire to see the effect of international pressures on Diem; a suspicion or even knowledge that a coup would be shortly attempted; and/or, a determination to wait and see how the rumored struggle within the GVN itself over the Buddhist question played itself out. In any event, it would be a mistake to exclude the possibility of additional self-immolations or other equally upsetting methods of sacrificial self-destruction. Some of the Buddhist leaders appear completely set on the elimination of the Diem regime by one means or another.

12. There are indications that the Diem regime is aware of the peril which it is now in, but there are equally voluminous signs of divided counsel on how to cope with the problem. A Ngo family conference was held in Hue on 29 and 30 June, but unfortunately its results are still unknown. From the Times of Vietnam articles, which periodically refan the flames of controversy, from Ngo Dinh Nhu’s statements and from other bits of information, it appears clear that the Nhus were opposed to going as far as the government did in the 16 June agreement. It seems equally clear that Secretary of State at the Presidency Nguyen Dinh Thuan and Vice President Tho, with Minister of Interior Bui Van Luong included, but perhaps reluctantly, are in favor of the agreement they hammered out with the Buddhists and would like to see it honorably carried out. Ngo Dinh Can’s position on the Buddhist issue is the subject of conflicting reports, and the President’s mood is even more difficult to fathom. The best guess is that at the moment he is being buffeted by conflicting advice within his immediate entourage and by various domestic and international pressures, and that he has not yet made up his mind. Almost certainly, the Diem regime is currently undergoing a crisis of decision as to whether to adopt repressive tactics against the Buddhists or to make further conciliatory gestures toward them.

13. In making that decision, Diem faces a difficult dilemma. Repressive measures, such as the arrest of his leading Buddhist antagonists, might play into his enemies’ hands by creating just the pretext they have been looking for to move decisively against him. If he does nothing, he will invite international condemnation by elements ready to accept the Buddhists’ case against him lock, stock and barrel, as well as to permit the internal situation to drift even more dangerously close to disaster for his regime. However, if he makes the gestures of further conciliation toward the Buddhists currently being pressed upon him, he has no assurance that these will satisfy them and no guarantee that such gestures, which could be interpreted as additional signs of weakness, would not merely whet the appetite of his antagonists for further unsustainable concessions. Although the latter course would appear to be the least of several evils from Diem’s point of view, it is feared that it is the one least congenial to the President’s temperament, and it is not probable that he will adopt it, regardless of the pressures imposed upon him.

14. Field Dissem. State USMACV CINCPAC ARPAC PACAF PACFLT

1 Source: U.S. Army Military Historical Institute, Kraemer Papers, VN 61-63. Confidential; No Foreign Dissem. Regarding these CIA reports, see footnote 1, Document 190.

2 According to CIA Information Report TDCS-3/552,822, July 8, General Don said on July 8 that there was a military plan for the overthrow of the Diem government, and that, except for one or two general officers all were in agreement. Don did not specify the timing of the planned coup, but said that he did not plan to leave the Saigon area for the next 10 days. (Ibid.)

213. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 213. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, July 9, 1963, noon.

57. Following letter dated July 7, addressed to Ambassador and signed by Reverend Thich Tam Chau as Chairman of Inter-Sect Committee for Defense of Buddhism, received yesterday. Letter is typed on official stationery of above committee.

Begin verbatim text:

The series of misfortunes that have been occurring to Vietnam Buddhism since May 8, 1963, must not be unknown to Your Excellency. It is also believed that Your Excellency has been fully informed of the development of the situation since the signing of the joint communiqué between the Government of Vietnam and our Association.

The whole affair now seems to be moving to a new stage, since police have not hesitated to bully international reporters this morning, and we have every reason to expect the worst in the days to come.

We then have the honor to appeal to your assistance and that of the U.S. forces now living on the fend of Vietnam who represent, to our eyes, the noblest humanitarian traditions and the love for justice and freedom. We do not want to ask you and the citizens of the United States who have been giving considerable help to this country, even their own lives, to support us in order to overthrow the Ngo Dinh Diem government. We Just ask you-in the name of justice and humanity-to protect our Xa Loi Pagoda and the lives of Buddhist leaders from destruction and assassination. It could not be unknown to you that nothing will withhold our government when it wants to achieve its aim, and a St. Barthelemy Night2 is not to be excluded from our assumption.

Would you please then consider the possibility of placing the Xa Loi Pagoda under a discreet protection of the U.S. forces now available. in Saigon. Our promiscuity (sic)3 with U.S.O.M. headquarters seems to be a favorable factor for such an emergency.

Please accept, Excellency, our deepest gratitude for whatever you will be doing for Buddhism in Vietnam.

End verbatim text.

Comment: I plan to get word discreetly to Chau that letter received and that U.S. cannot meet his request. Given fact that GVN would probably consider letter sufficient basis to try Chau for treason-not to mention propaganda use that could be made of it in raising question about Buddhists’ real objective-it is difficult to believe Buddhists will publish it. However, I do not count on rational action these days, and it is possible that Buddhists might consider that by publicizing letter they would forestall GVN repressive action. If letter is published, believe we will have to send written reply stating U.S. does not intervene in internal Vietnamese affairs and has no authority to provide security protection for Vietnamese citizens or facilities.4

Trueheart

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, SOC 14-1 S VIET. Secret; Priority; Limit Distribution.

2 Reference is apparently to the “St. Bartholomew’s Day Massacre” of Protestants in France, August 23-August 24, 1572.

3 As on the source text. Presumably the word should be “proximity.”

4 In telegram 62 from Saigon, July 9, the Embassy reported that word had been passed to Chau that the United States could not accede to the request outlined in his letter. Chau responded that he understood the U.S. position and did not intend to publish his letter. (Department of State, Central Files, SOC 14-1 S VIET)

214. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 214. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, July 9, 1963, 5 p.m.

59. CINCPAC for POLAD. Embtel 44.2 Thuan informed me today that following conversation reported reftel he had asked Diem directly whether he planned speech on Buddhist problem. Diem said he did not. Thuan said he concluded that Luong in talking to CAS officer (Embtel 41)3 must have been referring to passage on problem contained Double Seven speech (Embtel 49).4 Thuan agreed with me that latter not helpful.

Thuan also indicated that he had had no success in getting GVN orders to provinces published and gave every evidence of having run out of steam on Buddhist problem.

I told Thuan I was most discouraged over situation and particularly lack of GVN actions. I also found offensive continuing articles in Times of Vietnam seeking link US with 1960 coup5 and taunt Buddhists.

I spent all day yesterday accompanying Ambassador Bowles on visits to Diem, Tho, Thuan and Mau.6 Buddhist problem not mentioned directly by Diem in session which lasted nearly four hours nor was it referred to in other talks except when Bowles complimented Tho on June 16 agreement. Tho did not follow up.

Trueheart

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, SOC 14-1 S VIET. Secret; Priority; Limit Distribution. Repeated to CINCPAC.

2 In telegram 44 from Saigon, July 6, Trueheart reported that he told Thuan that morning that he found the situation in Saigon increasingly puzzling. On the one hand, Vice President Tho was sending conciliatory messages to the Buddhists and Counselor Nhu had publicly called on the Republican Youth to support the June 16 agreement. On the other hand, the Times of Vietnam had published an attack on the Buddhists and had charged the United States with involvement in the 1960 coup attempt against the Diem government. At the same time, Trueheart had learned through other sources that President Diem was about to make a long-anticipated conciliatory speech on the Buddhist question. Thuan could not explain the conflicting signals issued by his government, and described the situation as “un pander de crabes.” He added that Diem’s speech was still being cleared within the government. (Ibid., POL 15 S VIET)

3 Telegram 41 from Saigon, July 6, reported on a conversation on July 5 between Minister of the Interior Luong and an American official. In the course of the conversation, Luong said that Diem would make a major speech on the Buddhist situation in the near future. (Ibid., POL S VIET)

4 Telegram 49 from Saigon, July 8, reported on a “Double Seven” statement made by President Diem on July 7. The statement contained a brief paragraph on the Buddhist problem, using it as an example of a problem “settled in spirit of community responsibility.” (Ibid.,POL 26 S VIET)

5 The Department of State reacted sharply to the allegation of U.S. involvement in the 1960 attempt to overthrow the Diem government. Telegram 31 to Saigon, July 5, instructed Trueheart to deny any U.S. involvement, and noted, for Trueheart’s information, that on November 11, 1960, when Diem’s palace was surrounded by artillery, Ambassador Durbrow had used every means at his disposal to urge both sides to avoid a bloodbath. (Ibid., POL S VIET-US) See Foreign Relations, 1958-1960, vol. I, pp. 631 ff.

6 Ambassador Chester Bowles visited Saigon on July 7 and July 8 on his way to take up his new post as Ambassador to India. See Documents 216 and 231.

215. Memorandum From Michael V. Forrestal of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) 215. Memorandum From Michael V. Forrestal of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)1

Washington, July 9, 1963.

SUBJECT

Vietnam

I attach an analysis of the Buddhist crisis in South Vietnam2 by [less than 1 line not declassified]. While I don’t believe it warrants being passed on to President, I think it does present a point of view which is shared by Ambassador Nolting.

The main points are: (a) The Buddhist crisis is more political than religious.

(b) Diem cannot be persuaded to dispense with the services of his family and will probably adopt more rigorous and oppressive policies toward the activist Buddhist leadership.

(c) While there has been a potentially dangerous increase in coup plotting, it is too early to predict an overthrow of the Government within the next few months.

Harriman and Hilsman would agree with (a) but would tend to disagree with (b) and (c). Their main point is that the United States must avoid allowing its own interests to be confused with those of the regime in Saigon. If our estimate is that Diem will take appropriate measures to pacify the situation and will thus survive, then in our own best interests we could be active in our support of him personally. If, on the other hand, our estimate is that his political ineptitude in recent weeks has so weakened his support within Vietnam that he cannot be expected to hold out much longer, then we should be careful to maintain a reasonably friendly touch with potential leaders of non-Communist coup attempts. Our dilemma at the moment is that we cannot yet agree on the estimate. In general, people in Washington are somewhat more pessimistic about Diem’s chances of riding this one out than people in the field. You can argue both ways on whose judgment is better at this particular moment. In light of this, my own judgment is that we are entering a period in which our policy must be one of fence sitting, realizing of course that such a policy constitutes something less than full identification between our own interests and those of President Diem.

As a practical matter, Ambassador Nolting’s return to Saigon will tend to encourage Diem to feel that he continues to enjoy our support. On balance I think that this is probably the right course to take, provided the Department is vigorous in needling Nolting to attempt to guide Diem into more political measures to stabilize the situation. It is, perhaps, the last effort we can make in this direction and should be taken if only for that reason.

It may not work, however; and we should be prepared to recall Nolting before Lodge’s arrival if our estimate of Diem’s surviveability turns markedly adverse. At such a time it would be better, in my opinion, to leave Trueheart (the DCM) in charge pending Lodge’s arrival. Trueheart has handled the situation with great skill and with somewhat less personal involvement than Nolting and could, I think, be useful in maintaining a degree of flexibility in the U.S. position which would give Lodge a reasonably clean slate to start with.

Michael V. Forrestal3

1 Source: Kennedy Library, Schlesinger Papers, South Vietnam. Secret.

2 Document 212.

3 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.

216. Telegram From the Embassy in the Philippines to the Department of State 216. Telegram From the Embassy in the Philippines to the Department of State1

Manila, July 10, 1963-5 p.m.

46. Eyes only Rusk, Ball, Bundy, Hilsman from Bowles.2 Two days in South Vietnam, during which I talked at length with Diem, his top colleagues, US Embassy and military officials, press representatives, Indian head of ICC and other informed individuals, left me with profound feeling of concern.

Situation appears paradoxical in that military measures against Viet Cong are making substantial progress while political outlook sharply deteriorates.

Many qualified observers, in and out of government, privately assert that Diem regime is probably doomed and that while political and military risks involved in a switchover are substantial they may now be less dangerous than continuation of Ngo family in present role.

My personal views are necessarily tentative due to shortness of stay and difficulty of forming objective judgments because of deep commitment of almost all American observers to positions which they have held over a period of time and bitter impasse between US officialdom and US press.

However, I left Saigon with feeling that a political explosion is likely in foreseeable future and that a fresh US government evaluation of political situation is urgently needed by someone who is not emotionally involved.

Embassy instructions for various overturn contingencies also needed.

Do not believe that re-evaluation should wait until new Ambassador arrives in September nor, with due respect to present incumbent, can we expect a fully balanced evaluation from those who have been directly concerned.

Therefore strongly suggest some informed US official who has full confidence of President and Secretary visit Saigon on a most urgent basis. Roger Hilsman would seem to be obvious choice. However Tom Hughes or Mike Forrestal would be less conspicuous.

Stevenson

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 S VIET. Top Secret; Eyes Only; Priority; Limited Distribution. A note on the source text indicates that a copy of this telegram was passed to the White House on July 10.

2 Regarding Bowles’ visit to Vietnam, July 7 and 8, see footnote 6, Document 214.

217. Special National Intelligence Estimate 217. Special National Intelligence Estimate1

Washington, July 10, 1963.

SNIE 53-2-63

THE SITUATION IN SOUTH VIETNAM

Scope Note

NIE 53-63, “Prospects in South Vietnam,” dated 17 April 19632 was particularly concerned with the progress of the counterinsurgency effort, and with the military and political factors most likely to affect that effort. The primary purpose of the present SNIE is to examine the implications of recent developments in South Vietnam for the stability of the country, the viability of the Diem regime, and its relationship with the US.

Conclusions

A. The Buddhist crisis in South Vietnam has highlighted and intensified a widespread and longstanding dissatisfaction with the Diem regime and its style of government. If-as is likely-Diem fails to carry out truly and promptly the commitments he has made to the Buddhists, disorders will probably flare again and the chances of a coup or assassination attempts against him will become better than even. (Paras. 4,14)

B. The Diem regime’s underlying uneasiness about the extent of the US involvement in South Vietnam has been sharpened by the Buddhist affair and the firm line taken by the US. This attitude will almost certainly persist and further pressure to reduce the US presence in the country is likely. (Paras. 10-12).

C. Thus far, the Buddhist issue has not been effectively exploited by the Communists, nor does it appear to have had any appreciable effect on the counterinsurgency effort. We do not think Diem is likely to be overthrown by a Communist coup. Nor do we think the Communists would necessarily profit if he were overthrown by some combination of his non-Communist opponents. A non-Communist successor regime might be initially less effective against the Viet Cong, but, given continued support from the US, could provide reasonably effective leadership for the government and the war effort. (Pares. 7, 15-17)

[Here follow Part I, “Introduction”; Part II, “The Buddhist Affair”; and Part III, “The Effect of Recent Developments on US-GVN Relations”.]

IV. The Outlook

14. If the Diem government moves effectively to fulfill its 16 June commitments, much of the resentment aroused by the Buddhist controversy could be allayed. However, even if relations between the GVN and the Buddhists are smoothed over, the general discontent with the Diem regime which the crisis has exacerbated and brought to the fore is likely to persist. Further, if—as is probable—the regime is dilatory, inept, and insincere in handling Buddhist matters, there will probably be renewed demonstrations, and South Vietnam will probably remain in a state of domestic political tension. Under these circumstances, the chances of a non-Communist assassination or coup attempt against Diem will be better than even. We cannot exclude the possibility of an attempted Communist coup, but a Communist attempt will have appreciably less likelihood of success so long as the majority of the government’s opponents and critics remain-as they are now-alert to the Communist peril.

15. The chances of a non-Communist coup—and of its success—would become greater in the event renewed GVN/Buddhist confrontation should lead to large-scale demonstrations in Saigon. More or less prolonged riot and general disorder would probably result-with the security forces confused over which side to support. Under such circumstances, a small group, particularly one with prior contingency plans for such an eventuality, might prove able to topple the government. Conversely, a continued or resumed truce between the GVN and the Buddhists would serve to reduce the likelihood of such an overthrow.

16. Any attempt to remove Diem will almost certainly be directed against Nhu as well, but should Nhu survive Diem, we are virtually certain that he would attempt to gain power—in the first instance probably by manipulating the constitutional machinery. We do not believe that Nhu’s bid would succeed, despite the personal political base he has sought to build through the Republican Youth (of which he is the overt, uniformed head), the strategic hamlet program (whose directing Interministerial Committee he chairs), and in the army. He and his wife have become too much the living symbols of all that is disliked in the present regime for Nhu’s personal political power to long outlive his brother. There might be a struggle with no little violence, but enough of the army would almost certainly move to take charge of the situation, either rallying behind the constitutional successor to install Vice President Tho or backing another non-Communist civil leader or a military junta.

17. A non-Communist successor regime might prove no more effective than Diem in fighting the Viet Cong; indeed at least initially it might well prove considerably less effective, and the counterinsurgency effort would probably be temporarily disrupted. However, there is a reasonably large pool of under-utilized but experienced and trained manpower not only within the military and civilian sectors of the present government but also, to some extent, outside. These elements, given continued support from the US, could provide reasonably effective leadership for the government and the war effort.

1 Source: Department of State, INR-NIE Files. Secret; Controlled Dissem. According to a note on the cover sheet, “The following intelligence organizations participated in the preparation of this estimate: The Central Intelligence Agency and the intelligence organizations of the Department of State, Defense, the Army, the Navy, the Air Force, and NSA.” All members of the U.S. Intelligence Board concurred in this estimate on July 10, except the Atomic Energy Commission Representative and the Assistant Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation, who abstained on the grounds that the subject was outside their jurisdiction. The full text is printed in United States-Vietnam Relations, 1945-1967, Book 12, pp. 529-535.

2 Document 94.

218. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 218. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, July 11, 1963, 8 p.m.

73. Hilsman from Nolting. CINCPAC for POLAD. Had long, private and very frank talk with Thuan this afternoon after briefings here. We discussed strategy for my talk with Diem tomorrow morning.2 Thuan feels dangers of Buddhist tensions somewhat reduced, but he still worried. I have conviction that he is honestly working for government and not infected by coup plotting.

One encouraging development is appointment this morning of government commission, headed by Inspector General of Administration, a Buddhist, to receive and investigate complaints from Buddhist association regarding implementation June 16 agreements. Offsetting this, Thuan told me of request to Vice President from Buddhist leaders to come to see them in Xa Loi Pagoda. Declining this invitation, Tho countered by inviting Buddhist leaders to meet with him, Thuan and Minister of Interior Luong, or with him alone either at office or homer Buddhists declined.

Further reports and assessment this situation will follow.

Trust statement made at airport upon arrival3 was acceptable. Tried to play it down the middle by statement prepared on airplane, rather than trying to field a raft of questions dealing with extremely sensitive points in this situation.

Nolting

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL S VIET. Secret; Limit Distribution. Repeated to CINCPAC. Nolting returned to his post on July 11. An article in The New York Times on July 9, p. 6, stated that Nolting was returning to Vietnam with a personal message for President Diem from President Kennedy. Nolting did meet with President Kennedy on July 8 before he left Washington, but he was not given any message to convey. (Ibid., Office of the Historian, Vietnam Interviews, Nolting, June 1, 1984) On July 10, the Department of State informed the Embassy in Saigon that the Spokesman of the Department had denied the report and had stated: “There has been no change in our policy toward Viet-Nam, or our support for the program against the Communist Viet Cong in that country.” (Telegram 49 to Saigon, July 10; Ibid., Central Files,POL S VIET-US)

2 Nolting did not cable a separate report of this conversation to Washington. For a combined assessment of his initial conversations with Diem. see telegram 85, Document 219.

3 No report of this statement has been found.

219. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 219. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, July 15, 1963, 1 p.m.

85. CINCPAC for POLAD. Herewith is interim report of situation here as I see it, after two days of intensive briefings, discussions with American, Vietnamese, and foreign officials and private citizens, including American newsmen, and some sampling of Saigon opinion.

Our patient, I think, is still on critical list, but improving. Difficulties seem to be confined mainly to larger cities, affecting only slightly peasant population in central coastal areas and not at all in Delta. Saigon and Hue are still very volatile and people are scared. Buddhist Association leaders, unfortunately, can still take initiative to bring down government, but seem to be hesitant to do so. Each day that passes slightly increases chances of surmounting this crisis. Coup rumors are rife and evidence of plotting exists, but it is my present judgment that no direct intervention in this matter on our part would be helpful or wise. (Have passed the word on position to be taken if approached, as per instruction.)2

Restoration of Diem’s confidence in US intentions, badly shaken by several happenings in past weeks, and subsequent leading of him to take more positive and sensible political actions, will take some time. I have spent seven hours with him since my return and have, Thuan reports, made some headway, but I have nothing of significance to report in terms of concrete actions or decisions. He is hurt by what he considers misrepresentations and calumnies (both in Viet-Nam and outside), torn by conflicting advice, resentful of US pressure, and not completely in control of his government’s actions (Nhus). He is, in brief, in a martyr’s mood himself. We have not yet been able to persuade him to snap out of it, make a virtue of necessity, and take his case fully and candidly directly to the people. We are still working on this. In my judgment, his motives and intentions are still good; some of his resentments and suspicions concerning the Buddhist agitation are well-founded. He is visibly tired. Our main problem at moment is to get him relaxed enough to take the helm and steer the ship on a true and sensible course.

[During] this difficult period, I think our best bet is to work quietly along existing guidelines. While making our views and especially US domestic considerations amply clear, we should not try to blueprint his course for him. Specifically, we should not reiterate our threat of disassociation, nor feel stuck with it if other means of easing the situation (even the passage of time) work in favor of a political modus vivendi here. Rather, I think, we should continue, as has been done, to tell him the facts of life about public opinion at home and let him work out his own accommodation. We will continue to defend the legitimate rights of US newsmen here (I have again made very firm representations to Diem on the Browne-Arnett case),3 but I think we must accept the fact that we will probably continue to have a generally bad press for some time, until political calm returns and we can demonstrate the success- of the overall strategy and plan. With luck—I emphasize this—[and?] an appearance of calm determination4 on the part of Americans to see this crisis surmounted, I believe there is a reasonably good chance of reestablishing the basis for continued progress here.

Nolting

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL S VIET. Secret; Limit Distribution. Repeated to London, Paris, Phnom Penh, Vientiane, Bangkok, and CINCPAC.

2 No such instruction has been found. Wood underscored the reference to an instruction in the source text, and put a question mark in the margin.

3 See Documents 210 and 211.

4 Wood underscored the reference to “an appearance of calm determination” in the source text, and added the marginal notation “N.B.”

220. Memorandum From the Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Rice) to the Secretary of State 220. Memorandum From the Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Rice) to the Secretary of State1

Washington, July 15, 1963.

SUBJECT

Reports that Brother Nhu is Planning a Coup

We have four reports2 from Vietnamese Generals of a July 11 meeting of Nhu with officers of that rank. Two (or possibly three) of these reports indicate that Nhu may be planning a coup. We think it not unlikely, however, that Nhu is responding to reports of coup plotting among the Generals themselves, seeking to confuse and divide them, smoke out their intentions, and rally those which he can reach by such blandishments as “active” assignments. He may have had the additional intention of improving his personal position with the Generals against the possibility that they will successfully mount a coup.

The four reports are not wholly consistent with one another, but the following emerges from all four: (1) Nhu asked the Generals for their support; (2) Nhu criticized the government and/or his brothers during the meeting; (3) Nhu extended an olive branch to the Generals by being very cordial and by promising “active” assignments to all.

General Khanh reported Nhu asked for “personal support”; General Kim stated Nhu said he would not blame the Generals if they were thinking of a coup and that he would be with them; General Cao merely said that Nhu had asked for their cooperation in meeting the present crisis. One unnamed “general officer” who may or may not have attended the meeting reported that Nhu had spoken of a “lightning” coup with himself leading it. But a large meeting of this sort would not provide a suitably secure forum in which to make a serious proposal of this sort, and Nhu’s position on the Buddhist crisis is not one which would be most likely to appeal to dissatisfied officers.

Unless the Buddhist crisis deepens, the longer the various coup plots incubate, the less likelihood of anything hatching. We have not yet heard that any coup group has developed a well articulated plan with much chance of success, nor do the Generals appear to be united-and Nhu’s move is probably shrewdly intended, among other things, to prevent their uniting. However, this does not eliminate the possibility of a plan being suddenly attempted. We have heard of several, but the better a plan was the less likely we would be to learn of it in advance.

The joint Embassy/CAS evaluation of the four reports (Tab A), together with the reports themselves (Tabs B to E) are attached.

Central Intelligence Agency Information Report3

Washington, July 13, 1963.

TDCSDB-3/655,524

SUBJECT

Comments on reports of Ngo Dinh Nhu’s coup plotting

Following are the joint Embassy/CAS comments on the four reports concerning the 11 July 1963 meeting at Joint General Staff Headquarters. The first of these came from Brigadier General Van Thanh Cao, delegate to the eastern provinces, Saigon AmEmbtel 80,4 two other reports on 12 July, one from Brigadier General Nguyen Khanh Commanding General II Corps, TDCSDB-3/655,512 [document number not declassified], and the other from a general officer, TDCSDB-3/655,512 [document number not declassified]. The fourth report is from Brigadier General Le Van Kim, Ministry of National Defense, TDCSDB-3/655,523 [document number not declassified].5

1. All of these reports have some elements in common. They differ widely in detail and emphasis. Common elements are: a. The meeting was called by Nhu;

b. Nhu criticized the Government of Vietnam (GVN) handling of the Buddhist crisis;

c. Nhu promised the Generals a more active role in the war and promised to give those Generals whose positions are sinecures legitimate responsibilities; and,

d. Nhu made an appeal for the loyalty of the Generals (to whom is the question).

2. Actually there may have been two meetings between Nhu and the Generals on 11 July. The first was a formal meeting at Joint General Staff offices. The second followed immediately after the first at the Officers Club at the Joint General Staff. The general officer states clearly that his report derives from the Officers Club talk, although he attended both meetings. We are not clear as to those present at either meeting. General Khanh states that there were “about fourteen” Generals in attendance when Nhu made the remarks he reported. Including newly appointed Brigadier General Do Cao Tri, there are now nineteen generals in the Army of the Republic of Vietnam (ARVN).

3. The general officer’s report is the only one of the three which is explicit with regard to a coup led by Nhu. With respect to specificity, it is worth noting that Khanh, Cao, and Kim have had long time relationships with the individuals to whom they spoke.

4. It is worthwhile to compare the remarks attributed to Nhu by the general officer with the report of the conversation between Nhu and an American observer on 25 June, CSDB-3/655,373.6 At that time Nhu indicated, as he had previously, that if he believed the government, meaning Diem, was becoming servile to the United States, he himself would lead a coup d’etat.

5. Both Cao’s report and Khanh’s reports indicate that Nhu’s remarks had some considerable impact upon the Generals. Cao believed that Nhu’s statements had relieved the critical situation, at least temporarily. Khanh stated that Nhu had been convincing in his request for loyalty and support, and that he believed that the majority of the general officers would support Nhu. It was not clear from Khanh’s remarks that this support would be provided within the context of a coup d’etat. On the other hand, Kim thought that the majority of the. Generals reacted negatively. According to the general officer, Major General Nguyen Ngoc Le, Chief of Veterans Affairs, commented on 12 July that he believed that the Generals should proceed without Nhu since Nhu only sought to save himself. We are inclined to believe that if the Generals should consent to support Nhu, it would be from their point of view a temporary marriage of convenience.

6. It is still too early to evaluate exactly what Nhu may have in mind. It is possible that the general officer has misread Nhu’s remarks which were possibly made in the same vein as Nhu”. comments to an American observer on 25 June. This interpretation, however, must take into consideration Nhu’s statement that the coup must be staged overnight and must be lightning fast followed by a turnover of power from the general officers to civilian control. It is difficult to believe that this construction could be based on the sometimes vague and theoretical utterances of Nhu.

7. We believe that some Generals are planning, or at the very least, far more intensively thinking about, coup action. How the Generals plans or intentions may be advanced or retarded by Nhu’s remarks is too early to tell.

8. Even if one accepts the general officer’s account, it does not necessarily follow that Nhu is in fact contemplating a coup. It is possible that Nhu is seeking to entrap the Generals in some fashion and might even be doing so with the knowledge of Diem.

9. As a subsidiary comment, we conclude from these four reports that Major General Tran Van Don, Commander of the ARVN, claim to be a member of a coup group, TDCS-3/552,8227 [document number not declassified] comprising most of the general officers is exaggerated. From these reports, it does not emerge that the Generals have reached a consensus or are plotting as a single group, rather that there may be two or more groups among them.8

10. Field Dissem. None.

1 Source: Department of State, Vietnam Working Group Files: Lot 67 D 54, POL 26 Coup Rumors. Secret. Drafted by Heavner and initialed by Rice. A note on the source text reads: “Secretary Saw”. Also sent to Ball, Harriman, and Johnson.

2 These reports are identified and analyzed in Tab A below. The four reports were also attached to the source text, but not printed.

3 Secret; No Foreign Dissem; No Dissem Abroad; Background Use Only.

4 Dated July 12, not printed. (Department of State, Central Files, POL 15 S VIET)

5 Dated July 12, not printed.

6 Not found.

7 See footnote 2, Document 212.

8 On July 15, an individual associated with the Tuyen group reportedly said that their coup would occur “soon”, but not before July 20. (CIA Information Report, TDCSDB-3/655,588, July 16; U.S. Army Military Historical Institute, Kraemer Papers, VN 61-63) According to another report, on July 16, General Duong Van Minh, Military Adviser to President Diem, lent weight to reports of the general military desire to remove President Diem and “advocated” a change of government in South Vietnam. (CIA Information Report TDCS DB-3/655,605, July 18; Ibid.)

221. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 221. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, July 16, 1963, 1 p.m.

91. CINCPAC for POLAD. At 0900 group estimated at over 100 bonzes gathered before Ambassador’s residence (Amb was at office). Bonze Nghiep who has covered public relations for Buddhists made address in English over portable loud speaker. Nghiep requested US Government pursue any possible means solve Buddhist problem in Vietnam as soon as possible. Stated Buddhists are not VC and have never made use of anyone including VC nor are Buddhists exploited by VC. Buddhists are anti-Communist but want cessation of GVN terrorizing, kidnapping and arresting Buddhist monks and nuns. Buddhists completely disagree with GVN communiqué on flying of flag; believe flag symbol of all Buddhist aspirations not of only one Buddhist association. Buddhists favor US aid, US weapons, etc. but disagree with use of aid and weapons to suppress Buddhism in South Vietnam.

Following Nghiep address bonzes commenced chanting. Reporters for international and local press were present (reportedly were advised that some event was forthcoming). Buddhist signs displayed following slogans: “Buddhist flag must be for all Buddhists”; “request government keep its promises faithfully”; “free world and USA are expected to do anything possible for Buddhist problem”. Police cordoned off residence from block away. Small crowds gathered on fringe cordoned area.

At 10:30 approximately 140 bonzes and nuns formed square in front of residence. Bonze speaking in Vietnamese and English repeated appeal to US and free world nations to intercede with GVN to force GVN implement joint communiqué. Bonze also stated demonstration was sample of what would continue take place and someone will be sacrificed if Buddhist demands not met. Initial reports indicated Buddhists might be planning carry out burning on spot. Spectators, uniformed police and plainclothesmen estimated at 500 people. At 10:55 group dispersed with bonzes and nuns proceeding to Xa Loi Pagoda, where they state they will commence two-day fast.

As of 11:20 area quiet.

Foreign press operated freely throughout demonstration and were in no way interfered with by police.

Nolting

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, SOC 14-1 S VIET. Confidential; Operational Immediate. Repeated to CINCPAC.

222. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 222. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, July 16, 1963, 8 p.m.

92. CINCPAC for POLAD. Reference: Embassy’s telegram 91.2 When it appeared at about 10:30 that another self-immolation might be imminent, I telephoned Thuan and asked him to see Diem urgently. I proposed that President get word to demonstrators immediately by loudspeaker truck that he would be addressing people personally at a stated hour, preferably noon. Told Thuan I judged we’re at eleventh hour and personal action by Diem required. Thuan said he agreed and would go immediately to Diem. I asked to see Diem myself if Thuan thought it would be helpful.

About 15 minutes after above call, word received that demonstration at residence appeared be breaking up and Bonzes planning return to Xa Loi to commence fast. I relayed this to Thuan (who had not yet been able to see Diem), but told him in my judgment personal address by President still urgently required. I offered provide some suggestions on content and am doing so.

Nolting

1 Source; Department of State, Central Files, SOC 14-1 S VIET. Secret; Operational Immediate; Limit Distribution. Repeated to CINCPAC.

2 Document 221.

223. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 223. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, July 17, 1963, 11 a.m.

95. CINCPAC for POLAD. Reference: Department’s telegram 81.2 In confused situation here, believe I should state my present views on basic issue involved before possible decisions taken Washington regarding “disassociation” or other public statement changing US official position. My view is that Buddhist agitation is now predominantly controlled by activists and radical elements aimed at the overthrow of GVN. It may or may not be deliberately connected with coup plots by military officers, but Buddhists almost certainly aware of these.

This is said without condoning Diem’s failure to meet the problem in a timely and politically realistic way. (Report just received on what may be some forward movement by him will follow soonest.)3 In present circumstances, believe US Government should take no immediate action to change balance of its position, even though I realize press reports of what appear to be repressive police actions today will generate a good deal of heat.4

Nolting

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, SOC 14-1 S VIET. Secret; Operational Immediate Limit Distribution. Repeated to CINCPAC.

2 In telegram 81 to Saigon, July 16, the Department asked, inter alia, for the Embassy’s assessment of whether, in light of the demonstration before the Ambassador’s residence and other Buddhist gestures looking for U.S. support, radical and activist elements might be assuming control of the Buddhist leadership. (Ibid.)

3 Document 224.

4 The Embassy reported, in telegram 96 from Saigon, July 17, that a series of Buddhist demonstrations in and around Saigon that morning had twice led the police to take demonstrators away in trucks to the outskirts of the city. At Giac Minh Pagoda in Cholon, the police action involved violence: “US eyewitnesses report that without any apparent provocation from crowd, police kicked, slugged and clubbed bonzes and la)r people and loaded them forcibly in trucks. Beatings continued while people on floors of trucks. Police then proceeded strip loud speaker and banners from pagoda and sealed off pagoda with barbed wire.” (Department of State, Central Files, SOC 14-1 S VIET)

224. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 224. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, July 17, 1963, 6 p.m.

98. CINCPAC for POLAD. Almost continuous discussions, probings and negotiations with Diem, Nhu and Thuan have been aimed at averting political upheaval here. Some results beginning to show. Question of course, is whether Diem will take action and demonstrate his sincerity to his people (and to the world) in time and in manner to save himself and his government. I hence bore down increasingly hard on requirements from our side-in terms of U.S. public and Congressional opinion. In very frank discussion with Nhu yesterday (during which there was no sign whatsoever of any designs on his part to overthrow Diem), I was able to get his promise to support a move by

Diem to take GVN’s case to the people in a broad and magnanimous way aimed at calming the situation. This promise extracted despite Nhu’s conviction that Buddhist agitation represents no real threat.

Thuan reports this morning that Diem talked with Nhu last night following our conversation, agreed in principle that he would make such a move, and directed that speech be written by Tho committee. Speech, according to Thuan, was to contain not only a general appeal but further specifics for guaranteeing full religious liberties and implementation June 16 agreements.

Upon hearing of further demonstrations in Saigon this morning (septel),2 I called Thuan stressing necessity to act quickly. I urged that Diem not wait until committee had completed draft speech, but that he should immediately make a general appeal for calm and order and engage his own prestige re fulfillment June 16 agreements; this to be followed as soon as possible by fuller and more specific delineation of measures to be taken. Thuan is now trying to sell this. I have given draft speech3 to Thuan for possible use in this connection.

Incidentally, Thuan reported that Diem agreed last night not to rely exclusively on Province Chiefs’ reports re religious grievances, but to make special investigations from Saigon of all Buddhist complaints. This may be belated reaction to our continued questioning of information on which some of his decisions and non-actions have been based.

As to prospects here, experience has demonstrated, I think, that there is enormous potential for stretch in Vietnamese body politic. Events which normally would indicate imminent downfall of a government would not necessarily do so here. I continue to feel there is reasonably good prospect of GVN’s surmounting the present two-headed crisis (Buddhist agitation and coup plotting). It is, of course, imperative that Diem come forward with positive appeal and measures, and this has been made amply clear to him. We have the promise of Nhu’s support to this end. We may therefore have sufficient influence working in same direction to get Diem to move, although no one can guarantee what the baby will look like if and when it is born.

Thuan has just informed us that he expects President will deliver speech today. If it is sufficiently forthcoming and conciliatory (will cable opinion this point when text available), I believe it is important that US promptly make supporting statement,4 expressing confidence in GVN intent to carry through on June 16 agreement and to pursue anti-Communist struggle with support of all patriotic Vietnamese.

Prompt action of this sort by USG will, I believe, have important effect in getting Buddhists to limit themselves to religious objectives and in discouraging coup plotters.

Nolting

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, SOC 14-1 S VIET. Secret; Operational Immediate; Limit Distribution. Repeated to CINCPAC.

2 See footnote 4, Document 223.

3 Not found.

4 See Documents 228 and 229.

225. Editorial Note 225. Editorial Note

On July 17, 1963, at 4 p.m., President Kennedy held a press conference at the Department of State. A correspondent asked if the difficulties between the Buddhists and the South Vietnamese Government were impeding the effectiveness of U.S. aid in the war against the Viet Cong. The President answered: “Yes, I think it has. I think it is unfortunate that this dispute has arisen at the very time when the military struggle has been going better than it has been going in many months. I would hope that some solution could be reached for this dispute, which certainly began as a religious dispute, and because we have invested a tremendous amount of effort and it is going quite well.”

He next expressed his hope that the dispute would be settled to allow a stable government in South Vietnam, able to maintain national independence, and that “behind this military shield put up by the Vietnamese people they can reach an agreement on the civil disturbances and also in respect for the rights of others. That’s our hope. That’s our effort.” (Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: John F. Kennedy, 1963, page 569)

226. Memorandum of Conversation 226. Memorandum of Conversation1

Saigon, July 17, 1963.

PARTICIPANTS

Mr. Ngo Dinh Nhu, Political Counselor to the President of the Republic of Vietnam

The Honorable Robert J. Manning, Assistant Secretary of State for Public Affairs

Mr. John M. Mecklin, Counselor of Embassy for Public Affairs

Mr. Truong Buu Khanh, Vietnam Press

Mr. Marshall Wright, Special Assistant to Mr. Manning

Mr. Manning expressed his appreciation for this chance to talk with Mr. Nhu and said he had wanted for some time to come to Southeast Asia, an area he had never visited. Mr. Manning said that he was responsible in the Department of State for dealing with matters bearing upon public and political opinion, and hoped to be able to return to Washington with more complete information and a better understanding of this area of US/Vietnamese relations.

Mr. Nhu said he was very glad to see Mr. Manning, particularly because the area of Mr. Manning’s responsibility, public and political opinion, is the area in which the Government of Vietnam is weakest. Mr. Nhu said that Vietnam is a very underdeveloped country insofar as public relations are concerned and in its sensitivity to U.S. and world public opinion. Mr. Nhu said the two fields in which GVN development was most laggard were: 1) the collection and use of security intelligence; 2) dealing with public opinion and public relations.

Mr. Manning said that as a former journalist and a political appointee of the Kennedy Administration, he was deeply interested in the practical aspects of government public relations work. Sometimes the practical solution to Government public opinion problems lies in simplicity, rather than a massive and formal government public relations program.

Mr. Nhu agreed but said that there were certain principles which are traditional and which have not been respected and which must be observed.

Mr. Manning said that there are two kinds of principles, both very important. The first has to do with reporting itself, and is the justification for the resentment which the victims feel when they are subjected to unfair and unobjective reporting. Secondly, there is also the important operating principle for the United States in the kind of involvement in which it finds itself in Vietnam. The realities of American politics make it essential that there be some kind of scrutiny in reporting of U.S. involvement. The American political system is such that U.S. Government involvement in a situation such as obtains in Vietnam requires, as air requires oxygen, that U.S. correspondents be present to observe and to formulate and transmit reports back to the American people.

Mr. Nhu said that in theory he agreed with Mr. Manning and he thought it would all work well if we could cap our efforts with success, but, Mr. Nhu asked, is it possible to reach success if the U.S. correspondents do not stick to the principles of fair and objective reporting? Mr. Nhu said that the GVN feeling of irritability at the American correspondents was due not so much to unjustified as to unfair reporting. He understood how the American reporters had arrived at their views and even recognized that there is some justification for their point of view, for the following three reasons.

First, the many “bad rumors” both in the United States and in Vietnam, start with high GVN officials in authoritative positions close to the President. This is an old phenomenon, and there have been fewer bad rumors from Vietnamese Government officials in the past year. However, the U.S. press, Congressional figures, and even many U.S. executive officials, have received their “inside information” not from opposition sources but from GVN officials themselves. Mr. Nhu said he could not blame the Americans for attaching credence to antigovernment information received from such sources.

Mr. Nhu digressed to observe that he was speaking to Mr. Manning very frankly about this matter, for without candor there could be no useful results from their talk.

Mr. Manning expressed his appreciation and agreed that candor was needed.

Mr. Nhu said he was not simply imagining that GVN officials were the source of many of the bad rumors. He knew of many specific cases. For example, he knew who had given Senator Mansfield misleading and inaccurate information. How, Mr. Nhu asked, can you expect U.S. reporters not to believe these close friends of President Diem? However wrong, therefore, the views of the American correspondents, Mr. Nhu did not blame them and, in fact, understood them and their point of view.

Rhetorically, Mr. Nhu asked why the high-ranking GVN officials disseminated these untruths, and more importantly, the half truths? He said such behavior was characteristic of underdeveloped countries where information is imperfect and public relations policies were ineffective. The Government officials themselves know most imperfectly the true situation and in their own confusion and ignorance lead them to confuse and to pass on inaccurate impressions to newsmen on subjects in which they had no real competence. From his own experience, Mr. Nhu thought that the study system which the Government of Vietnam has been holding for the past year had obtained great results in giving to high GVN officials a more complete and more accurate understanding of the national situation and of the activities of the Vietnamese Government.

Mr. Nhu said it had been American friends who had advised of this system and that American money had been made available in some cases to help finance the activity. Mr. Nhu said that a wide range of people from university professors to village leaders have personally told him that these study sessions have afforded them their first real opportunity to make a proper assessment of the situation in Vietnam.

Mr. Nhu said that there had been a number of innovations since the creation of the Committee for Strategic Hamlets: 1) institutional reform; 2) study sessions and a more active public information program; 3) the Montagnard program; 4) (translated incomprehensively not understood in French). These innovations plus the Strategic Hamlet program, had created a sense of momentum as well as a better understanding among the people of Vietnam’s just cause.

Mr. Nhu then said there were two other reasons why high government officials gave misleading and inaccurate information to correspondents, and both of these reasons were also related to the fact that Vietnam is an underdeveloped country. First, it is characteristic of officials in underdeveloped countries to think themselves capable of holding higher positions. Mr. Nhu emphasized he was speaking not of the opposition but of GVN officials. This dissatisfaction with their position led them sometimes into captious and critical remarks concerning government programs. Second, a lack of candor and honesty is a requisite among the subject peoples under a colonial government. People therefore learn never to speak with complete honesty and candor but to color their remarks according to their auditors. Many of the Vietnamese people and officials have yet to grow out of this colonial mentality. On every issue they have three or four attitudes to express, depending upon their interlocutor. It therefore becomes very difficult for Americans (both reporters and other Americans) to know what is objective and what is not.

Mr. Nhu said he had made a special study of this matter and had to confess that despite his study and despite the fact that he was a Vietnamese himself, he found it extremely difficult to know the real opinion of the Vietnamese who came to see him.

For the reasons stated above, Mr. Nhu said, Americans of all kinds (professors, intellectuals, government officials) cannot be blamed if their talks with Vietnamese leave the Americans confused as to where the truth stands. Mr. Nhu said he knew that his government’s efforts could not succeed unless a favorable climate for the free discussion of all problems was created. However, a great effort had been made in this direction in the past year and there had been progress. The U.S. public opinion at the present time is founded on the total sum of the rumors built up over the last seven or eight years. It is this foundation which makes American public opinion so hostile to the Government of Vietnam. Mr. Nhu said he was trying to dissipate the rumors and untruths through frank talks with Americans, particularly American officials. He stated that he would continue to try to sit down and talk with Americans as brothers and comrades. Mr. Nhu said it was not his job to defend the present regime. Rather, it was his ambition to solve the very problem of underdevelopment and the effects of underdevelopment on public opinion.

Mr. Nhu said he recognized fully the importance of Mr. Manning’s second principle. He understood that the United States cannot change its institutions to please the Vietnamese Government, but the situation is a very delicate one. He recognized that U.S. opinion is impatient with the fact that, despite the massive infusion of U.S. aid to Vietnam, the political, economic and social situation in Vietnam still does not correspond perfectly to the U.S. pattern.

Mr. Nhu stated he realized there was a kind of “bad U.S. conscience about this war, but one cannot win a war with a bad conscience.” What is needed, Mr. Nhu said, is not perfection-but improvement.

The problem is not merely a Vietnamese problem but a worldwide one. The starting point here and in Thailand, and in all other underdeveloped countries, is the serious difficulty of trying to create a democracy in an underdeveloped land. The critical and almost insoluble problem is how to build democratic institutions upon an underdeveloped foundation. In Vietnam the Strategic Hamlet program aims at solving this contradiction between the state of development and yearnings for democracy.

Mr. Nhu observed wryly that he had now done his mea culpa and would like to speak about the American correspondents. Their attitude is a systematic refusal to listen to, to understand or to report the attitude of the Vietnamese Government. The American correspondents deliberately reflect in their reporting only one point of view and that is the point of view of those hostile to the GVN. This applies not only to Vietnamese officials but also to sympathetic American officials. For example, the American correspondents were not interested in Admiral Felt’s ideas. They refused to attend a press conference of Admiral Felt’s last week. In fact, they consistently refused even to approach anyone who had a view or a vision different than their own. This attitude does not accord with a true journalistic attitude. The U.S. public needs to be informed of the whole picture. Mr. Nhu said he did not ask that the American correspondents tell lies, but was offended by their refusal of invitations to see or to hear anything not in accord with their own views.

Mr. Nhu said that these young reporters want nothing less than to make a government. This was, indeed, an exalting ambition. It was a stimulating pastime indeed for three or four of them to get together on a concerted effort to overthrow and to create governments. They find in the United States an atmosphere receptive to their efforts because U.S. Congressional and executive officials have, for years, been influenced by GVN officials to adopt attitudes inimical to the Diem regime. Everything is set for a fundamental reassessment by the United States of the situation in Vietnam. All conditions are favorable for a complete U.S. change of policy in Vietnam. It is a great opportunity and it would be tremendous sacrifice for those hostile to the Diem regime to give up this opportunity.

Mr. Nhu said that these were the realities and it was necessary for a Vietnamese patriot to face them squarely. He said that a change of government now would be of benefit only to the Communists. Yet he realized how difficult it was for the Americans, and for this reason he had been thinking of a different kind of aid, a kind of aid which would not involve any moral commitment on the part of the United States to the Vietnamese Government, but would, nonetheless, continue to be effective in content.

Mr. Nhu said he was thinking along these lines because he realized that what is now going on in Vietnam, if presented in a certain way, cannot but affect the state of the Kennedy Administration. Mr. Nhu observed that President Kennedy is a Catholic and therefore is in a kind of minority. Mr. Nhu said that he, too, was a Catholic, but tended to mistrust other Catholics because he found that Catholics always have a guilt complex. Mr. Nhu said that if one is afflicted with a guilt complex there is a very great difficulty in following through on an effective program of action.

Mr. Nhu said that he was thinking of aid along the lines of the wartime Lend Lease program. Such a program would have the advantage of more flexibility and it would not commit the United States Government in the Vietnamese fight against communism. Mr. Nhu said he did not know very much about Lend Lease but believed that such a program presupposed the existence of a plan. In an underdeveloped country a perfect and complete plan was, by definition, impossible. Insisting upon one has only the effect of delaying the provision of aid.

Mr. Nhu said that he was attracted to the idea of changing the U.S. assistance to Vietnam to a Lend Lease type program because of the precedent of such a program in World War II. He said that American aid to Stalin in World War II obviously involved no moral commitment. The United States was fighting Hitler and was prepared to help anyone who was fighting Hitler. In that situation U.S. aid did not imply any approval of the aid recipient.

Mr. Nhu said that his idea on Lend Lease was a strictly personal thing. However, he observed, if we are to succeed in Vietnam-and if the United States’ worldwide strategy against communism is to succeed-the U.S. aid policy must be revised.

Mr. Mecklin asked if, under the type program envisioned by Mr. Nhu, the United States would continue to have an advisory role in Vietnam. Mr. Nhu responded that he supposed it would work as it had in Russia where he understood there were a number of American advisors. In fact, said Mr. Nhu, Vietnam would doubtless ask for more. Vietnam had a great need for advisors, particularly editors. The Vietnamese can write nothing effective publicizing their own cause because they are too scrupulous. People ask why President Diem does not talk more often to the Vietnamese people, as do the American presidents. A major reason is simply the lack of ghost writers.

As an example of the inability of the Vietnamese Government to present its own case, Mr. Nhu cited the GVN White Paper on Communist violations of the Geneva Convention.2 He said the United States had to send Mr. Jorden to Vietnam in order to get an effective job done.

Mr. Nhu said the Vietnamese cannot understand Americans. Therefore they needed someone to help them interpret themselves for American consumption. Yet, when the GVN tried to hire an American Public Relations firm it was accused of trying to create a lobby. Mr Nhu said the GVN had neither the means nor the intention to create a lobby. He said the United States is new and strange and foreign to Vietnamese. He said that he himself had come to understand his American friends better in the last three weeks. It was this lack of understanding which led the GVN to try to use someone who would understand Americans and know how to convey to Americans the Vietnamese point of view. As of now, Mr. Nhu said, the American people do not know our point of view and cannot get to know it since the public has access only to the point of view of those opposed to the Vietnamese Government. Mr. Nhu said the GVN was the target of a campaign, whether deliberate or not, to convince the U.S. public that the GVN is not sincere. The United States now believes that. If Mr. Manning could somehow, during his short stay, reverse that belief it would be a large accomplishment indeed. That, of course, was too much to expect, Mr. Nhu said. However, he said he placed his trust in American fair play.

Mr. Manning said he would not attempt to speak to all of the points raised, but did wish to address himself to several matters. Mr. Nhu urged that Mr. Manning be frank and said that he considered himself a soldier fighting in a mortal war. Mr. Manning said that Mr. Nhu had expressed the belief that there was wide-spread disillusionment about the situation in Vietnam, both on the part of U.S. leaders and the U.S. public. Mr. Manning said that this belief was in no sense justified. The views of the United States Government and of the American public must be measured in terms of results. The results show that the American commitment to Vietnam, which was inherited by the Kennedy Administration from its predecessor, has been accepted and is being carried out by President Kennedy and by the American people. Moreover, contrary to the views expressed by Mr. Nhu, there is a conviction within the United States Government that we are involved in a winning program in Vietnam.

Mr. Manning said that the question of changing the nature of the American commitment will not be decided by journalists either in Vietnam or elsewhere. Such decisions will be made by the United States Government, and the position of the United States Government at the present time is clear as is the support of the American people for that commitment.

Mr. Manning said that his next point might appear to be contradictory, but that it was important that Mr. Nhu understand the point. Mr. Manning could understand the GVN’s resentment of the criticism to which it had been subjected. In similar circumstances, Mr. Manning said, he would be furious. Certainly, it would be better if the criticism of the GVN in the American press were less intense. However, the very existence of this criticism is one of the things that makes the U.S. commitment to Vietnam and the U.S. effort in Vietnam possible. Mr. Manning said he was not attempting to be glib. No one likes to be subjected to criticism and Mr. Manning was not suggesting that the GVN should be happy about criticism of it appearing in the American press. But President Kennedy and the Secretary of State, both of whom are earnestly determined to carry out the American commitment to Vietnam, must have the tools to do their part of the job. President Kennedy is a political leader. He is carrying out a program which, as Mr. Nhu had observed, was bound to create concern and, as time goes on, impatience in the United States. Nonetheless, the President is determined to continue with the effort in Vietnam and to continue to generate the kind of leadership which will give that effort the necessary kind of support in the United States. At the present time, the program does have such support.

Next year is an election year in the United States and as the campaign heats up, it will become more and more necessary that the President have the necessary tools to insure a continuance of American public support for the effort in Vietnam. Just as in Vietnam, the opposition will look for weaknesses or for situations which can be interpreted as weaknesses, with which to criticize either the program of the Administration or its implementation.

Mr. Manning said he was not referring to the question of images or public relations in the normal sense, but to the fact that the existence in Vietnam of an American press corps free to observe and report on the American involvement was a tool which it was essential that the President have in dealing with public criticism of this policy. If an attempt were made to handcuff the press corps and prevent them from filling their traditional role of reporting to the American public, this would give the critics of the policy a tremendous advantage, and it would make it extremely difficult for the President to answer the critics and maintain public support of the U.S. involvement in Vietnam.

Mr. Manning said he agreed that there had been much progress in Vietnam that had not completely come through to the American people. He said it was not necessary that the United States and Vietnamese Governments simply accept that situation. Instead, we should seek ways to get the news of the progress through to the American public.

But is necessary that Mr. Nhu understand that, in spite of the sometimes obnoxious reporting from Saigon, the state of United States public opinion on the Vietnamese program is not bad. The President r still has public support for his policy despite the criticisms that have been levied at those policies. Mr. Nhu said he was glad to hear that, and observed that because we are facing hell, all the forces of hell are leagued against us.

Mr. Manning said that he had, since his arrival in Saigon, met with the American correspondents. As Mr. Nhu would doubtless expect, the correspondents were passionate in their views. Mr. Manning said that he wished in all candor to tell Mr. Nhu what the correspondents are concerned about. The correspondents, and some of their superiors, with whom Mr. Manning had spoken before coming to Vietnam, are deeply fearful that the Government of Vietnam has, or is about to embark on, a campaign here of physical and technical harassment of the correspondents, or of expulsion.

Mr. Manning said that he had come to Vietnam mainly to listen rather than to talk. But in view of the concern of the correspondents he hoped strongly that he would be able to take back to Washington with him certain knowledge as to whether or not the fears of the correspondents were justified. Mr. Manning said he thought it possible that the correspondents, because of their passionate, emotional involvement, may be magnifying one incident out of proportion. But their concern, whether justified or not, was real, and was to some extent shared by their superiors elsewhere.

Mr. Nhu said that there was a need on both sides for wisdom. He said that it was his very firm impression that the Government of Vietnam was being oppressed by the U.S. press rather than the American correspondents being oppressed by the Vietnamese Government.

If, in fact, the American correspondents in Saigon think that the Government of Vietnam could oppress them, then the correspondents are unrealistic indeed. The Government of Vietnam is weak and in no position to oppress the American correspondents. The fears of the correspondents are based on passion, not on reality. Mr. Nhu said that an examination of the press despatches from Saigon for the past several years would show that the American correspondents have systematically and consistently been extremely critical of the Vietnamese Government. That is the permanent frame of mind of the American correspondents. As a result, the Government of Vietnam has not only to cope with its hot war, but also a continuing cold war with the American correspondents in Saigon. There is no use to go on with the fight. The American correspondents have succeeded in isolating the Government of Vietnam and then presenting us as monsters to the American people and to the world. Mr. Nhu asked “What do we want, to win the war or to lose the war?” Mr. Nhu said he had asked the American correspondents not to judge the situation in Vietnam only in its local context, but to view it as part of a world problem of underdeveloped countries engaged in the fight against communism. In Vietnam it is a hot war. The United States is involved in that war because it is in the interest of the United States to see that the war is won, not because it is in the interest of the family of President Diem. In World War II the United States had no intention of glorifying or stabilizing the Stalin regime. Yet the United States assisted the Stalin regime because it wanted to use all available tools in the fight against Hitler.

Mr. Nhu asked why the American correspondents never try to see him. He said that he would be happy to talk with them and try to convey to them a better understanding of the real situation. Mr. Mecklin asked if Mr. Nhu would consider holding a press conference. Mr. Nhu said he did not like press conferences but some of the correspondents could come together if they wished. Mr. Manning pointed out that such a meeting need not be a formal press conference on the record and Mr. Nhu agreed that a background conference would suit him better. Mr. Nhu said he was prepared to receive the correspondents and to talk with them upon any issue in complete candor and honesty. He said that all issues could be considered and that the correspondents could insult him if they wished. Mr. Nhu said he would not mind if he were insulted for he considered that the correspondents, although their attitude might be wrong, were actually comrades-in-arms in the struggle against communism. Mr. Nhu said that in dealing with the American correspondents it was good to remember the Biblical observation, “ …3 in the House of the Lord there are many Houses”.

Mr. Nhu said he knew that the American correspondents carried a very bad opinion of him. He knew that the correspondents considered him basically anti-American, and that they thought that he was constantly seeking to deceive them. If this were so, asked Mr. Nhu, what would be “my reason for living?” Mr. Nhu said that one correspondent in a recent Newsweek issue said that Nhu spent all his time reading poetry, but in the same article charged him with controlling everything in Vietnam, the Government, the police, the army, everything.4 Mr. Nhu said that neither charge was true. Mr. Nhu said that so far as poetry was concerned, he supposed that the idea stemmed from a conversation he had once with a reporter in which Mr. Nhu referred to Moses and to the lonely and solitary role he had had to fill in leading the children of Israel to the Promised Land. In this connection, Mr. Nhu had mentioned a French poem.

Mr. Nhu said that Moses had not really been lonely because he had God with him. But, said Mr. Nhu, “I do not feel a divine presence in the American leadership”. When the correspondent asked why, Mr. Nhu replied because he found the American press to be very inhuman in its treatment of him. Mr. Manning said that it was unnecessary for r Mr. Nhu to be concerned at the charge that he read poetry, for many Americans admired poetry. Mr. Nhu said he had only been joking.

Mr. Manning said that he agreed with Mr. Nhu on one important point. That point was that the present state of mind of the American correspondents is grounded on passion. This being so, the problem was not a technical one of press treatment, but a problem of tone. It was not a question of giving to the reporters access to more complete information, but of somehow affecting their treatment of the information already available to them. Mr. Nhu said that this was true, that the problems with the correspondents were all long-standing and old problems but that what had changed in recent times was the tone. Mr. Nhu then apologized for not speaking English and said it would be possible to establish greater intimacy if he spoke English.

Mr. Manning said that he was not proposing that either the Vietnamese Government or the American Government get into the business of holding the hands of the correspondents. They were, and should be, on their own. But perhaps some small things could be done to improve the present atmosphere. If anything could improve that atmosphere, Mr. Manning said that he thought it would be the readmission to Vietnam of Mr. Robinson, the NBC correspondent.

Mr. Manning asked if Mr. Nhu had yet seen the cable which Mr. Robinson recently sent to President Diem.5 Mr. Nhu said he had just read the cable

Mr. Nhu said that he presently believed that the correspondents should be allowed to come freely to Vietnam, and in greater numbers than were now present. But Mr. Nhu asked that each reporter observe self-discipline. Without self-discipline on the part of the correspondents Mr. Nhu said, it was impossible to do anything constructive about the present situation. Mr. Nhu asked Mr. Manning to tell the American correspondents on his behalf that he asks of them nothing but objective, fair reporting. He did not ask them to tell lies favorable to the interest of the Government of Vietnam. Mr. Nhu said he would personally tell the correspondents that when he saw them.

Mr. Manning said that he wished he could offer some over-night solution to the problem created by the hostility between the correspondents and the Government of Vietnam. But he had no solution to offer. He thought that what was needed was time, and he believed that the solution to the present situation would be a slow process of evolution. However, Mr. Manning added he believed that in the end the facts of the situation as seen by both the Government of Vietnam and the American government would prevail and would provide American public opinion with a balanced and accurate picture of the Vietnamese situation.

Mr. Manning said that he was in a position to go back to the United States and to see a number of influential and fair minded editors and to discuss with them candidly the situation in Vietnam. He would convey to them the fact that it was necessary to view developments in Vietnam in the total world context. He would convey to them the need in the complex Vietnam situation for self-discipline on the part of the American correspondents. Mr. Manning said he did not know what the results of his efforts would be but that he thought it both necessary and wise to make the effort.

Mr. Nhu said that he thought the change might take place overnight. He said the Americans were capable of that. He said he did not think that it was really a political problem but was instead a kind of hysteria—a disease.

Mr. Manning said he did not think it was that bad. Certainly the American correspondents were motivated by passion but he thought their involvement still was somewhat short of hysteria.

Mr. Nhu said that he had an example which he thought would illustrate the present situation. When Ambassador Nolting returned (and Mr. Nhu said he admired Ambassador Nolting greatly in having the courage to return at all), the Ambassador had made a statement at the airport. At this point, Mr. Nhu digressed to say that he was not being critical of Mr. Trueheart for whom he had great sympathy in view of the way everything fell in on him during Ambassador Nolting’s absence. Mr. Nhu then reverted to the Nolting statement and said that some of the Cabinet Ministers were not much pleased by it.

Some of his colleagues criticized the statement as not clear cut. However, Mr. Nhu said, he personally thought it was a very good statement because Ambassador Nolting had said exactly what he thought. Mr. Nhu had asked his colleagues whether they expected the Americans to say what they did not think. Mr. Nhu said the Vietnamese had no right to expect such a thing. He personally thought the statement was excellent because it was an honest statement of Ambassador Nolting’s views.

Mr. Nhu said that we need only be sincere in order to win the war. He asked how a little country like Vietnam, underdeveloped and with a population of only 14,000,000, could hope to stand up to the world communist colossus. He asked if the Vietnamese people could assume this burden on their narrow shoulders. He said such an effort would be pure folly except with the assistance of sincere friends. For this reason, Mr. Nhu said, U.S. aid was extremely important to Vietnam. But, he asked, how many Vietnamese die and get crippled everyday? Mr. Nhu said that what the GVN wanted was understanding, that Vietnam was an underdeveloped and not an advanced country, and the actions of the government be judged in that context. Also, it should be understood that President Diem does not promise much and that his few promises are given slowly and only after long consideration. But once a promise is given, it is always honored completely.

Mr. Mecklin said that his office was under daily pressure from NBC to obtain the readmission of Mr. Robinson. He asked what word he could give to NBC.

Mr. Nhu said that he could not promise the result, but that he personally had no objection to the readmission of Mr. Robinson, and that he, Mr. Nhu, would try to obtain permission for Robinson to return to Vietnam, provided that Robinson would give the GVN too a chance to be heard in the world. That would be only fair play, he said. Mr. Mecklin said that it would be very good if Mr. Robinson could return in time for Mr. Nhu’s meeting with the press.

Mr. Nhu said he was always prepared to meet with the correspondents provided they did not distort his remarks. He said he was not too keen about interviews on the record because it seemed to him that in such interviews it was always necessary to play a defensive role. Mr. Nhu said he preferred to talk with the correspondents on a background only basis because this would permit full and free discussions on all issues. Mr. Nhu said that he liked full and free discussions because he was sincere.

Mr. Nhu said he knew there had been mistakes made by the GVN. Still he was prepared to recognize these mistakes because only through correcting errors could progress be made. Vietnam must either progress or die. Vietnam could not stand still. Therefore, Mr. Nhu said, he was willing to do whatever must be done to make progress.

Mr. Manning said that despite the ofttimes unfavorable coverage by the American correspondents of the Vietnam situation, it is a fact that an understanding and sense of involvement in the Vietnam situation is deeply embedded in the American mind. At least in part this is so because of the casualties which Americans have suffered in Vietnam, as slight as those casualties are in comparison to the sufferings of the Vietnamese people. Although the American casualties in some way constitute a great political liability, they also have the result of getting the United States really committed to success in Vietnam just as we were committed in Korea. The United States Government is determined to carry out its commitment to the Vietnamese.

Mr. Nhu expressed his deep appreciation of this statement and said that he would relay it to the other Ministers in the GVN. Mr. Nhu said the other Ministers were, at the present time, very much “intoxicated” with the idea that the United States is slowly preparing for a withdrawal from Vietnam.

Mr. Nhu said that he once had a conversation with Admiral Felt in which the Admiral told him not to fear American imperialism but to be confident that the Americans would withdraw when their assistance was no longer needed. Mr. Nhu said that the Vietnamese fear was exactly the opposite of what Admiral Felt apparently thought. The Vietnamese did not fear that the Americans would implant themselves in Vietnam, but feared instead an American withdrawal before Vietnam could survive alone. But Mr. Nhu said, if Americans and Vietnamese are to live together in great numbers they must have a modus vivendi. Mr. Nhu said that before the GVN had given agreement to the introduction of 10,000 to 12,000 American troops, he had told General Taylor that the American soldiers would be bored to death without the amusements to which they were accustomed. He urged General Taylor to make full provision for regular rotation to Hong Kong and other places for relaxation. Mr. Nhu said his advice had not been heeded. He said there was still a great need for such a rotation program at short intervals and that it would be a very good and important psychological move if the United States were to institute such a program.

Mr. Nhu said that another psychological problem stemmed from the fact that the Americans in Vietnam did not feel that their losses and their sacrifices were understood by the American people. Mr. Nhu wondered if it would not be good to “magnify” the American casualties.

Mr. Manning said he understood the point but felt that if the casualties were “magnified” there would be a risk of making an even greater problem. Mr. Nhu said he recognized that danger and observed that his wife wrote to the families of all U.S. soldiers killed in Vietnam.

Mr. Nhu referred to the ad which appeared in American newspapers recently calling for a US. withdrawal from the war in Vietnam.6 He said that a certain group of American intellectuals look upon the Vietnam war as a dirty war. It was a dirty war, but it was dirty for the communists, not the GVN side. Mr. Nhu said it was astonishing to him that a group of American intellectuals could still believe that the American soldiers were involved in Vietnam in fighting a dirty war.

Mr. Nhu said the communists realized themselves that they are fighting a dirty war. He referred to a recent Viet Cong Battalion Commander who had defected and had informed the GVN that the communists keep the location of their units secret from all except Battalion Commanders, in order to prevent the troops from escaping.

Mr. Manning said that he appreciated this chance to discuss so many different subjects so candidly. He hoped that he would be able to return to the United States with some sense of assurance for the President that the press situation in Vietnam would settle down and not give an additional weapon to the critics of the President’s Vietnam policy. Mr. Manning said he wanted to stress that if anything occurs to prevent American correspondents from covering the Vietnam situation, it would constitute an extreme danger to the continuity of the President’s policy. Mr. Manning said that in the kind of operation upon which the United States was embarked in Vietnam, the reporting of the American correspondents played an essential role. The position of the correspondents was analogous to that of building inspectors. The American public expected that they would be there to observe and comment and criticize. Their recommendations are not always accepted nor always believed but the existence of the correspondents and their ability to report on the American involvement is a deeply important psychological and political fact both in Washington and for the American public in general.

1 Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Vietnam Country Series, 7/1/63-7/20/63. Secret. Drafted by Wright. The source text bears the incorrect date June 17. Manning was sent to Vietnam by President Kennedy to investigate and report on the type of problems relating to American journalists which had led to the telegram sent to the President by a group of journalists on July 7, Document 211.

2 Reference is presumably to the letter from the Government of Vietnam to the International Control Commission, dated October 24, 1961, charging North Vietnam with a massive infiltration of agents into the south for the purpose of overthrowing the Government of Vietnam. Regarding the U.S. attitude toward the release of this letter by the Government of Vietnam, see Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, vol. I, Document 262.

3 Ellipsis in the source text.

4 Newsweek, July 15, 1963, p. 37.

5 Not found.

6 Reference is to an advertisement which ran in the June 27 edition of The New York Times; see footnote 5, Document 193.

227. Memorandum of Conversation 227. Memorandum of Conversation1

Saigon, July 18, 1963.

PARTICIPANTS

His Excellency Ngo Dinh Diem, President of the Republic of Vietnam

Ambassador Frederick E. Nolting, Jr. American Ambassador

The Honorable Robert J. Manning, Assistant Secretary of State for Public Affairs

Mr. John M. Mecklin, Counselor of Embassy for Public Affairs

Mr. Marshall Wright, Special Assistant to Mr. Manning

Mr Truong Buu Khanh, Vietnam Press

Mr. Manning said that he considered his trip an opportunity to learn about the situation in Vietnam. He hoped to learn enough to be able, upon his return to the United States, to convey to American editors and journalists both the complexity and the progress of the Vietnam situation. It was very difficult for people outside Vietnam to understand the complexity of the situation here, but Mr. Manning hoped that American journalists would recognize the necessity of viewing developments in Vietnam in their worldwide context. Mr. Manning said that much of the present press difficulty stems from the fact that the day-to-day events in Vietnam are judged narrowly and only in a local context. Mr. Manning said he would much appreciate having the President’s views on how the press problem should be handled.

President Diem said Vietnam would always welcome journalists with hospitality and expected only that the journalists would meet their primary duty of reporting objectively. Mr. Manning said there were differing interpretations of objectivity, and this difference in interpretation was the core of the problem in Vietnam. Correspondents have a different function than Government officials and this fact often creates problems. Journalists are free agents and part of their function is to be critical of governments. For the United States it is a necessity that Government activities be submitted to press scrutiny.

Ambassador Nolting said that he thought there was agreement on the fundamental point, that the tone of the American press would change for the better as the evidence of military success became clearer. Ambassador Nolting said he understood Mr. Manning’s remarks to mean that both the Vietnamese and United States Governments should relax about the press stories and live with the criticism gracefully until our success solves the problem.

Mr. Manning said that the existence of press scrutiny, even though the reporting was critical, was preferable to no press scrutiny at all. It was essential to President Kennedy’s efforts to continue his support of the winning program in Vietnam, that American correspondents be free to scrutinize and criticize that program. The worst thing that could happen was not bad reporting but the possibility that the reporters could be made martyrs by being denied the right of scrutiny.

President Diem said he could not see how the correspondents could consider themselves martyrs. A country which for twenty years had been involved in a hot war should not also have to deal with a cold war waged against the Vietnamese Government and people by their friends. President Diem said the calibre of American reporters was low.

Mr. Manning said he agreed that the President had reason to complain of the coverage his Government was receiving but could not agree that the American correspondents were not competent journalists trying to do a good job. It was necessary to distinguish between being wrong and being evil. The correspondents may be wrong but they are not evil nor are they maliciously motivated. The Ambassador agreed. President Diem said that the American reporting has had a deplorable effect on Vietnamese public opinion, and in a general discussion, it was agreed that, in many ways, Vietnamese opinion was more influenced by the American press than by the local Vietnamese press.

President Diem said that some of the reporting was insulting to the Army and it had a bad effect on Army morale. Mr. Manning suggested that this effect would be overcome by the actual success of military operations, but the President replied that the American correspondents seemed unaware of any gains made in Vietnam. Mr. Thuan, upon the President’s instructions, was always ready to arrange for correspondents to cover military campaigns but the correspondents were unwilling to accept the offer.

Mr. Manning suggested that some very high GVN official should, from time to time, have conferences with the correspondents to convey to them the general situation and the GVN version on matters of dispute. For instance, on the Buddhist problem, the correspondents could not get access to an authoritative GVN official to discuss the matter. Thus, they had the benefit only of the Buddhist version of events and the Buddhist interpretation of the problem.

The President said that if the Government tried, on a day-to-day basis, to deal with Buddhist complaints, this would simply prove Government insincerity for it took time to investigate the complaints and know where truth lies. The President stressed that all the Buddhist charges did not have validity but that each charge would get a serious reception and investigation.

Ambassador Nolting stated that sometimes the Vietnamese Government did respond quickly, and perhaps too quickly, with its version of events. He cited the demonstrations at the Giac Minh Pagoda yesterday. The Ambassador said that the GVN statement on this incident was absolutely contrary to the unanimous account given to the Ambassador by many eye-witnesses. According to the eye-witnesses, the police, without physical provocation, charged and badly mauled about 100 demonstrators including women and children. Yet the GVN statement issued several hours later said only that the demonstrators attacked and injured eight policemen. This kind of thing completely destroyed the credibility of statements by the GVN and its friends. President Diem then criticized the inaccurate nature of the reporters’ dispatches and gave several examples. Ambassador Nolting repeated that the GVN statement was in complete conflict with eye-witness accounts and that the effect of such a statement was to destroy the credibility of the accurate reports made from time to time of genuine progress on the military side of the Vietnam war. President Diem again referred to the inaccuracy of the reporting of the American correspondents. There was a lengthy discussion in which the President indicated his conviction that the American reporters were consistently irresponsible and unfair in their criticism of the actions of the Vietnamese Government.

Mr. Manning then reverted to his previous suggestion that there was a great need for a high GVN official to give occasional background conferences to the reporters. Such a conference would have the effect of putting the correspondents under a kind of psychological obligation to the news source. Even though the same information might be available from a lower level official, it was good public relations policy that the Government attitude from time to time be conveyed to reporters from a really authoritative source. Otherwise a vacuum was created which was usually filled by forces hostile to the Government. The President said such conferences had been tried in the past but the Government was disappointed at the results.

Mr. Manning said that he had discussed one problem in detail with Counselor Nhu the previous day2 but wanted to make the same point to the President. The American correspondents feared that the GVN might inaugurate a policy of harassing and possibly expelling the correspondents. Mr. Manning had been assured by Counselor Nhu and others that this fear was a figment of the correspondents’ imagination. Mr. Manning wanted to convey this to the correspondents before his departure from Vietnam. Mr. Manning asked if the President thought this would be a useful thing to do.

The President said “Yes, but the correspondents should not put themselves into a position where they would face expulsion.” The President said he thought the correspondents’ fears stemmed from their own guilty consciences about their own irresponsibility.

The President said again that the American reporting had had a deplorable effect on opinion in America, and particularly in Vietnam. The behavior of the correspondents was neither correct nor responsible considering that Vietnam was at war and that the Government had accomplished so much. The President said some people had told him that this kind of unfair criticism was the kind of thing which had to be put up with because Vietnam received foreign aid.

Mr. Manning said that whether or not the reporting was deplorable, it should be remembered that President Kennedy still had public support for his policy of helping Vietnam win its war. The reporting has not changed that. The reporting was not one-tenth as harmful in its effects on American public opinion as would be an attempt to expel or harass the reporters. Such a policy would make martyrs of the reporters and would deprive President Kennedy of the essential tool which he needs. The American involvement in the Vietnam war is a new type of experience for the American people and the United Sates Government has been both surprised and pleased with the mature way that the public has accepted the situation. Mr. Manning said that the present kind of reporting was something which we could live with.

President Diem responded that the erroneous reports must inevitably have a bad effect on American opinion. Mr. Manning agreed but said it was necessary to choose between bad effects. The harassment or expulsion of the reporters would have an immeasurably worse effect than would the mere continuation of the present critical reporting. There was then a general discussion concerning Ambassador Nolting’s hope that President Diem would publicly take personal charge of the Buddhist crisis. The President did not commit himself.

There was a lengthy discussion of the progress being made by the Vietnamese Government in its various economic and social programs. The President said that the progress of these programs proved conclusively that the war was being won.

1 Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Vietnam Country Series, 7/1/63-7/20/63. Secret. Drafted by Wright.

2 See Document 226.

228. Editorial Note 228. Editorial Note

On July 18, 1963, President Diem broadcast a message in which he informed the nation that, “at the proposal of the Interministerial Committee,” he had issued the following instructions: “1—Ministerial order N. 358, dated July 9, 1963 regulating the display of Buddhist flag[s], be amended to extend its provisions, formerly applicable to the General Association of Buddhist[s] of Viet-Nam, to all sects which on their own initiative adopt the same flag.

“2—The Interministerial Committee closely cooperate with the Buddhist delegation in order to consider, inquire into and settle together, either by using reports and records or by investigation on the spot, if necessary, all complaints related to the implementation of the Joint Communiqué.

“3—That all cadres of the public and private sectors at all levels, each in his own sphere, by word and deed, actively contribute to the implementation of the Joint Communiqué.”

President Diem concluded his message by expressing his “hope that all of you, my compatriots, will take note of the utmost desire of conciliation of the government in settling the Buddhist problem.” He asked his listeners to “judge the facts objectively and to adopt an attitude and a behaviour which will permit no one to impede the march forward of our people in its mission of crushing the Communists for the salvation of the nation.” (American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1963, pages 860-861)

A translation of the message was transmitted to the Department in telegram 107 from Saigon, July 19. (Department of State, Central Files,POL 15-1 S VIET)

229. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 229. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, July 19, 1963, 5 p.m.

109. CINCPAC for POLAD. Reference: Embtel 107.2 Urge that Dept. Spokesman make statement along following lines at noon press briefing:

Begin Text.

“President Diem’s broadcast of July 18 strikes us as forthright and statesmanlike. It reaffirms in unmistakeable terms the government’s intention to carry out in letter and in spirit the agreement of June 16. And it provides a mechanism whereby any complaints about implementation can be amicably settled with the participation of the Buddhists themselves. It would seem to us that the way is clear for the settlement of all religious issues that have arisen in Viet-Nam.”

End text.

In making statement, Dept. should be aware that— a) Saigon pagodas still barricaded,

b) Bonzes and others detained after Wednesday’s3 demonstrations still held; and

c) Buddhists reportedly about to make further demands regarding (a) and (b) above and perhaps other points.

I am working urgently to get GVN open pagodas and release persons arrested. However, I do not think we should wait for GVN to do this before making statement above. Statement in my opinion is a fair characterization of Diem’s broadcast. Moreover, it will help me to move GVN and to prevent any undercutting of Diem’s broadcast. It may well also cause Buddhists to hesitate before making further demands.

Nolting

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, SOC 14-1 S VIET Secret; Operational Immediate; Limit Distribution. Repeated to CINCPAC.

2 See Document 228.

3 July 17.

230. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam 230. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam1

Washington, July 19, 1963, 8:53 p.m.

103. Ref: Embtels 109,2 112, and 111.3 In view Buddhist reaction to Diem broadcast and your estimate (Embtel 95)4 that Buddhist agitation now controlled predominantly by activists aimed at overthrow of GVN, believe we must anticipate further Buddhist demonstrations and violence. In these circumstances and in light coup rumors, it clear we have to deal with most uncertain and volatile situation.

It seems to us that outcome remains obscure: We do not know whether Diem really will do the things he must if his regime is to survive. We therefore inclined continue for present public posture of noninterference this internal affair, neither favoring Buddhists or Diem in public statements, but merely expressing approval all helpful steps and hope for peaceful settlement.

At same time we think it essential to continue press Diem resolve situation by actions and statements designed to meet squarely Buddhists’ legitimate grievances. We much encouraged by progress you have registered to date and hope you can prevail on Diem to insure removal barricades around pagodas, release those arrested during Buddhist demonstrations, and pay compensation to those injured. These Buddhist demands seem reasonable even if motivated by political aims. Meeting them appears to be essential if moderates are to regain control Buddhist movement and if Diem is to rally sufficient support to reestablish stability.

For above reasons we made text of Diem broadcast available to newsmen today and commented on it only as follows: “This broadcast reaffirms the Government’s intent to carry out the June 16 agreement. It provides a procedure whereby differences over implementation of the agreement can be amicably settled between the Government and the Buddhists. We hope that with this new procedure and with good will among all concerned, that the issue can be resolved.”

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, SOC 14-1 S VIET Secret; Operational Immediate. Drafted by Heavner and cleared by Kattenburg, Rice, and Rusk. Repeated to CINCPAC for POLAD.

2 Document 229.

3 Telegram 111 from Saigon, July 19, transmitted a translation of a letter reportedly sent to President Diem by the Intersect Committee for the Protection of Buddhism in response to Diem’s July 18 radio broadcast. The letter welcomed Diem’s statement but asked for concrete steps to implement the June 16 agreement, such as the release of all Buddhists arrested since May 8, punishment of those responsible for Buddhist deaths on May 8, and indemnification of the families of those injured. (Department of State, Central Files, SOC 14-1 S VIET) In telegram 112 from Saigon, July 19, 8 p.m., Ambassador Nolting reported on what he saw as positive developments: Diem had ordered the barricades removed from all pagodas, and bonzes were permitted to return to their pagodas, but could not congregate at Xa Loi Pagoda. Nolting noted that he had urged the government to go beyond those steps and release those jailed following the July 17 demonstration, offer compensation to those injured by police on July 17, and establish the practice of handling future demonstrations by non-forceful means if possible. South Vietnamese officials with whom Nolting had talked felt that President Diem was now moving in the right direction on the Buddhist issue, and Nolting recommended again that the statement which he had urged the Department to make in telegram 109 would foster this positive movement. (Ibid.)

4 Document 223.

231. Letter From the Ambassador in India (Bowles) to the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) 231. Letter From the Ambassador in India (Bowles) to the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)1

New Delhi, July 19, 1963.

Dear Mac: In addition to the more or less routine report of my impressions of East Asia which I have just sent through the regular channels,2 I feel that I must write to you directly about the situation in Vietnam. Here in brief is the way it appears to me: 1. The highly contradictory nature of reports from South Vietnam is largely the result of a paradox: while the military situation is steadily improving, the political situation is rapidly deteriorating. Thus those who concentrate on military developments are optimistic while those who focus on the political aspects are gloomy. This state of affairs cannot continue indefinitely. If the political situation is not vastly improved, our ability to control the Viet Cong situation is almost certain to deteriorate.

2. Our mission in Saigon is on the edge of severe demoralization. The bitter conflict between the U.S. press and our mission is symptomatic. The morale of our military people, particularly the junior ones who are dealing with the military situation in the field, is high and they appear to be putting on an extraordinary performance. The same is true in the aid program. As you move further up the scale of authority, however, you encounter increasingly emotional differences and antagonisms.

3. We cannot achieve our objectives in Southeast Asia as long as Diem and his family run Vietnam. I met no one who was in a position to judge the attitudes of the Vietnamese people who did not stress this fact.

My own impression of Diem was that of a man quite remote from reality. For three hours and fifty-two minutes he gave me his version of what was happening in the country—a version which on key questions was inaccurate or distorted, and with respect to the U.S. not only misinformed but insulting.

In Diem and his family we have a set-up comparable to that presented by the Generalissimo in China in the 1940’s. We failed in China largely because we failed to find an effective means of dealing with an inept ruling power that had lost touch with the people. We will fail in Southeast Asia, and perhaps even more decisively, if we repeat this mistake in Vietnam.

Although the risks in any political switchover are formidable, the risks of staying on dead center are, in my opinion, substantially greater. Nor am I impressed by the familiar argument that “there is no available successor”. It is not too much to say that almost any articulate, courageous, anti-communist Vietnamese with a good reputation who puts himself at the head of a group to overthrow Diem, and who outlines a policy of continued vigorous anti-communism combined with anti-favoritism, better government administration and land reforms, would find himself a national hero in a matter of weeks.

Admittedly this would be merely the first stage; the ultimate test would be his capacity to carry out the promises which enabled him to take charge. However, it is defeatist in my opinion to assume that there is no anti-communist leadership other than Diem’s ready to blossom in Vietnam.

4. I think it would be a mistake to assume that Cabot Lodge by some magic can change the fundamental situation which I have described. Lodge has strong convictions and bluntly expresses his views. But Diem, according to every observer with whom I talked, is impervious to argument or threat.

It would therefore appear likely that Lodge will either find himself in a head-on conflict with Diem or be forced into a position of relative impotence. If the government is to change in Vietnam, there is much to be said for having the change occur before his arrival.

5. Although a new deal in Saigon appears to me an essential first step, we still may fail to achieve stability unless we can find some means of coming to grips with the deteriorating situation in southern Laos. For the last two years it has been my belief that the only feasible solution is likely to be partition by a line running across Laos from the 17th parallel then moving north and west along the Mekong. In my opinion we now have very little time to lose in securing this crucial area. Although I hesitate from this distance to attempt to outline a specific program, my previous knowledge of the area and what I heard and saw on my recent visits leads me to suggest a procedure along the following lines. a. Once we are convinced that the neutrality experiment is unworkable under present conditions, an indigenous government (preferably-that of Souvanna Phouma) might issue a statement that the Geneva agreements have been subverted by the Pathet Lao and that he is now calling on all loyal government troops to defend the southern Laos area.

b. With a minimum of fanfare introduce some U.S. special service troops and advisors into Laos to beef up and train the best Laotian troops. It is estimated by the military men with whom I talked that 2000 could do the job. At the same time persuade the Vietnamese or Thai Governments to provide modest contingents of troops with the Thais assigned perhaps to the defense of a few strategic points along the left bank of the Mekong including the capital.

There is considerable doubt as to whether the Thais would agree to move unless we introduce at least a battle group of U.S. troops. However, in this first stage at least I suggest that every effort should be made to avoid this direct commitment since it would almost certainly involve us in difficulties with Congress. Several military experts were of the opinion that we could get by with the 2000 special service troops with perhaps [less than 1 1ine not declassified]Thailand [less than 1 line not declassified]occupy the area between the western border and the right bank of the Mekong in what is now northwestern Laos. [1 sentence (2 lines) not declassified]

c. Simultaneously a strong effort should be made to keep Cambodia as quiet as possible. Although Sihanouk cannot be expected publicly to applaud the proposed action, I believe that in his heart he might welcome it. Nguyen Ngoc Tho, Vice-President of Vietnam, offered the same judgment. Although the Malayans are currently occupied with the problems of Malaysia and the demagogy of Sukarno, I found them deeply concerned by the Laotian situation, [1-1/2 lines not declassified].

All of this would take a great deal of doing. However, I believe that the long struggle to create a basis for stability in Southeast Asia on which we have spent several billion dollars since 1951 is now calling for a major decision. I recognize the risks in the suggestions I have outlined, yet our continuing support of Diem and our relative inaction in Laos may result in the entire situation getting wholly out of control within a matter of months.

On the other hand, a bold political program with modest U.S. military commitments plus a bit of luck may enable us to turn the tide our way and to lay the basis for a far more favorable situation in Southeast Asia than seemed possible a few months ago.

I am sending this to you on a Personal Eyes Only basis with no copies to anyone as I do not want these observations to rattle too loosely around the Department.

The situation here is sensitive and complex; the staff is riddled with departures and home leave. I am bogged down with protocol and it is hot. Otherwise I have no complaint.

Warmest regards.

Sincerely,

Chester Bowles3

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Top Secret; Eyes Only; Personal.

2 See Document 216.

3 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.

232. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 232. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, July 20, 1963, 7 p.m.

117. CINCPAC for POLAD. Deptel 103.2 I am very much disappointed in reftel. It gives us nothing to work with, on either side of equation. A wait-and-see attitude on our part at this juncture will lead only, in my judgment, to further undermining of stability here and to further jeopardizing U.S. vital interests. It will encourage more agitation and demand on part of Buddhists; it will discourage further conciliatory action on part of government; it will increase prospects of a coup.

For two years (and longer), the U.S. has had to make hard choices here. We have made them pretty forthrightly, and the more forthrightly we have made them, the better they have panned out. On these hard choices, clearly taken, we have helped build what is admittedly a much stronger defense against Communist takeover than was thought possible. This has been done despite inefficiencies and goofs on part GVN (and on our part too). Experience has shown that GVN can be counted on to be slow, sticky, and uncoordinated in adopting and implementing any policy. There are many cross-currents of opinion and many free-wheelers. Nevertheless, our best bet still lies in encouraging and prodding and helping them to accept and follow through on policies that look reasonably good, as was done successfully in military strategy and tactics, in clear-and-hold operations, in rural development, in Strategic Hamlet concept and execution, in financing, and in many other fields.

GVN has badly underestimated and mishandled Buddhist problem. It may—although I do not think so—have gotten out of hand, but at last Diem has come out with something that looks good (and has already taken certain concrete actions to back it up), publicly committing his government to a conciliatory course. We should by all available means encourage the GVN in this.

Diem’s statement, and the response to it, may offer the last opportunity to surmount this difficulty and to get this effort back on the tracks. The Buddhist response depends in great degree on U.S. official and press reaction. (Their agitation and appeals are now directed apparently as much toward Americans as toward Vietnamese.) I think the government’s offer is sincere and that we can help them carry it out successfully. The government’s position promises satisfaction on religious grievances. It would be a pity if the scepticism reflected in reftel were to increase Buddhist scepticism and/or intransigence, and thus lose the opportunity to move this problem towards solution.

I again recommend statement along lines previously suggested, which certainly does not go overboard but would be effective, and possibly decisive here.

Nolting

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, SOC 14-1 S VIET. Secret; Operational Immediate; Limit Distribution. Repeated to CINCPAC. Received at 8:24 a.m.

2 Document 230.

233. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam 233. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam1

Washington, July 20, 1963, 2:58 p.m.

104. Ref: Embtel 117.2 Reaction of press here to our statement made re Diem broadcast (Deptel 103)3 was that events (i.e. Buddhist reaction making acceptance conditional on series GVN actions and repositioning of barricades) had already overtaken our statement. As practical matter do not see how we can further comment without another news peg. If Diem releases those arrested in demonstrations, lifts barricades, meets with Buddhist leaders, or takes further constructive action in line with promising [promised?] approach his broadcast, we could again express satisfaction and hope. Until then do not feel. that further comment on Diem broadcast would result in anything here but hostile speculation.

We assume you will tell GVN we encouraged by Diem’s broadcast and accompanying orders as constructive steps towards easing situation, and that we are hopefully waiting for more of same sort.

Reftel, well as whole situation, under careful study. We intend by septel send you for comment our estimate situation as it looks from here and avenues open to us.4

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL S VIET-US. Secret; Operational Immediate. Drafted by Heavner and Kattenburg and cleared by Manell and by Rice. Repeated to CINCPAC for POLAD.

2 Document 222.

3 Document 230.

4 The source text bears no signature.

234. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam 234. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam1

Washington, July 23, 1963, 6:51 p.m.

112. For Nolting from Hilsman. As indicated Deptel 104,2 we have carefully considered present Buddhist problem against backdrop successful CI program. Current thinking here on stability Diem regime in general represented by SNIE 53-2-63 (July 10)3 sent you separate cover. We keenly aware of distance which separates us from fast moving situation, and most anxious have your comments on following estimate which represents our present thinking: 1. We inclined anticipate further Buddhist demonstrations and resulting unrest, and believe more protest suicides should be expected. This view based on: (1) Continuing GVN failure act promptly enough to meet legitimate Buddhist grievances and to show true spirit of conciliation; (2) Belief that Buddhist protest movement likely become increasingly militant. Buddhists probably more and more inclined regard overthrow of regime as only possible solution, thus attracting growing support (and conversely) from other major elements plotting regime’s overthrow, particularly in armed forces.

2. We also expect that Buddhist unrest and demonstrations will increasingly agitate urban populace, and that this agitation, to degree, may be expected extend to countryside also, with resulting slowdown in war effort.

3. In these circumstances and in light growing crop of reports on coup plans, we judge odds favor attempted coup within next few months if not weeks.

4. Odds also seem to favor success of such coup, although we keenly aware of strong possibility the GVN might still successfully weather Buddhist storm by combination conciliation and repression and that consequently coup attempts may fail or abort.

5. In these circumstances, following courses seem open to us: (a) We can attempt actively influence events by public statements disassociating ourselves from GVN handling of Buddhist issue, with likely result being encouragement or even triggering of coup attempt. (b) We can go even further and seek directly to encourage certain military leaders seek “Constitutional solution” under Tho. (c) Conversely, we can seek actively discourage coup plots by both high-level public statements of support to GVN, and private statements to Buddhist-s and potential coup leaders although this, like the above might have unpredictable results. (d) Finally, we can hold to present posture of watchful waiting while continuing privately to press GVN to demonstrate proper spirit and to take all necessary measures to finally resolve issue.

6. On balance we continue be inclined favor last course for time being. More active role runs obvious risk of putting us in position of having backed loser, and even of prolonging crisis and increasing violence, with all bad effects on war effort that would flow from such error. We may well come to point where we would want to throw all our influence behind either Diem or an acceptable alternative leader or junta (preferably Constitutional successor supported by military) in order to stabilize situation as rapidly as possible. But in light info now available to us here, we do not believe situation has yet jelled to that point. At this moment, though alternatives to Diem seem to be emerging, it is not yet clear who and what they are.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, SOC 14-1 S VIET Top Secret; Operational Immediate. Drafted by Heavner and Kattenburg and cleared by Hilsman.

2 Document 233.

3 Document 217.

235. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 235. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, July 24, 1963, 7 p.m.

130. CINCPAC for POLAD. Had a rather reassuring and encouraging session with Thuan today. Discussed many subjects bearing on political situation here, including attitudes of various GVN officials toward Buddhist problem, military attitudes bearing on possible coup d’etat, and Diem’s own convictions and especially his control of government.

I found Thuan in more sanguine frame of mind than heretofore. He confirmed that Diem, having finally adopted conciliatory line toward Buddhist problem, was now confidently pursuing that course. I asked whether he was being undercut from any quarter, or whether Thuan expected such undercutting. Thuan replied that, at least for time being, all Cabinet ministers and Nhu were lined up together on line Diem had adopted. He said disciplinary action taken against Lt. Col. Chieu (who had organized yesterday’s S.D.C. Veterans’ demonstration against Buddhists) had been ordered by Diem with approval of Nhu, who wished it in first place. I asked whether this demonstration had been ordered by anyone above Lt. Col. Chieu. Thuan replied that insofar as he could discover it had not been, but was Chieu’s own idea. He also said that at President’s request he had just given orders to Ranger company which was planning pro-government demonstrations against Buddhists (in retaliation for alleged Buddhist manhandling of member of company distributing literature at Xa Loi Pagoda) to refrain from any such action.

Remarking that these signs looked good, I asked Thuan how we could help move this problem along. I referred to Washington’s encouragement to date, to talks with a number of other Mission heads here, all of whom agree that Diem is now on right line. I urged specifically: (a) that explicit instructions be given to Minister of Interior and through him to police re tolerant and gentle handling any further Buddhist demonstrations; (b) that President continue to take every possible initiative to demonstrate good faith and increase perceptible trend in public opinion toward clarification this issue. Thuan remarked that he had noted from talks with several U.S. newsmen that they were becoming more balanced in reporting on this situation. (Perhaps it is more accurate to say they are becoming somewhat disenchanted with Buddhists.) He said he would speak to Diem along suggested lines this evening. Diem is now on trip in provinces-second trip this week.

I took occasion to leave with Thuan a piece of paper2 containing suggestions for another initiative on part of Diem-namely to invite Thinh Khiet to confer with him, and in such public invitation, to express President’s own distress at loss of life in Hue, his determination to prevent repetition and to compensate insofar as possible for loss of innocent victims. I urged that would not involve government’s assuming responsibility deaths, but would transcend this point, in manner which could only redound to President’s credit. It might also well break deadlock with Buddhists. At least, such action would show government’s intent to meet 100 percent religious grievances, leaving burden of proof on Buddhists if in fact their aims are to overthrow government. Thuan seemed very receptive to this idea, took the paper and promised to let me know if I could help sell it to Diem. He was appreciative of our continued support of line he had been advocating. He felt that government had at last put itself in stronger position, and had a good chance of weathering this storm. I believe he is sincere in this. Nevertheless, there are obviously a number of explosive possibilities which have not yet been defused-including further manifestations and resulting police actions, human sacrifices, counter-propaganda manifestations, etc.

I sounded Thuan out on his thoughts on possibility of military coup, factionalism and division in GVN itself, about President’s leadership. On all these points he was reassuring. I do not believe he is ignorant of kind of reports reaching us (although I did not spell them out). He seemed rather to discount them as more of same old stuff. Specifically regarding Nhu, Thuan said that he had apparently had a change of heart and is now supporting Diem’s conciliatory line. He said that this might be attributed to recent talks that we have had together. He also warned that it might not be permanent. On question regarding President’s control of government, Thuan was quite forthright, saying he felt Diem, once he had reached a clear decision, was very much in control of government and able to have his decision carried out.

I do not attach too much significance to this conversation, as there are many obvious pitfalls ahead, but I do believe it represents the assessment of some one who is much less worried now than he has been in the recent past. My own estimate of the chances of survival of this government has risen accordingly.

Nolting

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL S VIET. Secret; Limit Distribution. Repeated to CINCPAC.

2 Not found.

236. Memorandum From the Director of the Vietnam Working Group (Kattenburg) to the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Hilsman) 236. Memorandum From the Director of the Vietnam Working Group (Kattenburg) to the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Hilsman)1

Washington, July 24, 1963.

SUBJECT

Luncheon with Lansdale

1. The luncheon convinced me that Lansdale assesses the situation quite objectively. He is most cognizant of the steady deterioration in the Diem regime over a period of years. He alluded several times to the difficulties he found on his last trip in late 19612 and which he felt to a large degree remained uncorrected.

2. He mentioned that his judgments must be based on what he sees in the reports, and not on what on what he feels since he has not been there for nearly two years. “There is nothing like talking to someone face to face in order to assess him.”

3. He brought up himself the idea of a possible trip on his part to suggest to me that if we wanted him to he would be willing to go out for an assessment of the whole picture. I moved into this opening and asked him how he felt this would be received by various elements on the spot. He thought he could play out any problems on this score and that he could have contact with, and come up with an assessment of, both elements in and closest to the regime and those plotting its overthrow.

4. He definitely does not seem to me to be wedded to the regime. He has, I think, felt for a long time that it is moving to its own funeral but he is not sure whether the moment has yet arrived.

5. For these reasons and because of point 3 in the message to you3 —i.e., “I think Lansdale would be helpful in discovering intents among the generals and relieving pressures; in event coup is attempted Lansdale would be most helpful in assessing prospects and in evaluating potential leadership.”—I continue to urge that you favor this move, subject to Lodge’s approval. As far as I am concerned there are no “eyes and ears” at this time whose assessment I would rather have.

6. If you were to decide positively, and to discuss the matter with Lodge, I would suggest you waited until after Lodge’s own talk with Lansdale, which is now scheduled for 0900 Thursday morning.4 In such case, however, Lodge will not be available until some time late Friday morning.

1 Source: Kennedy Library, Hilsman Papers, Country Series-Vietnam. Secret. After initialing the memorandum, Kattenburg added the following note: “Please call me in on this tonight-will be gone all day tomorrow.”

2 Reference is to the Taylor-Rostow mission to South Vietnam, of which Lansdale was a part, in October 1961. For documentation relating to the mission, see Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, vol. I, Documents 169 ff.

3 Not found.

4 No record of a Lodge-Lansdale meeting: on July 25 has been found.

237. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 237. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, July 25, 1963, 8 p.m.

134. Hilsman from Nolting. Deptel 112.2 delayed by servicing. I find myself more sanguine about prospects of GVN’s settling Buddhist problem and avoiding coup d’etat than general tenor reftel and SNIE.3 I would put question marks by all of first four numbered paragraphs reftel, which seem to me too gloomy—or at least too logical—for this situation. Without trying to spell out nuances of difference between our respective analyses, perhaps it is sufficient I feel that heat is slowly going out of this crisis and that this government is quite likely survive this crisis, as it has many others in past.

As you know, I also hold that, despite shortcomings of present GVN, it is government which stands best chance (as compared with realizable alternatives) of carrying to successful conclusion counterinsurgency effort here. Therefore, without putting all our eggs in one basket or alienating possible successor governments or leaders, we should, I think, help, by all means consistent with our own principles, to maximize this government’s chances of survival.

Since transmission your message, atmosphere has perceptibly calmed, at least on surface. GVN has at last gotten itself into sound posture on religious issue and may be said to be “one up” on Buddhists. In effect, GVN has pledged and repledged itself to implementation June 16 agreement and has offered Buddhists joint investigation any complaints on this score by examination of records or on-the-spot investigations.

If GVN pursues its initiative and avoids actions inconsistent with its announced policy of conciliation, Buddhist leadership may well find it best to settle on basis June 16 agreements and more radical elements will then, I think, cease agitation.

Just how solution of Buddhist issue will affect coup plotting it is impossible to say, but this is a threat which is always with us.

Thus for present I would advocate a course somewhere between para 5 (d) and (c). Specifically, I think we should publicly welcome conciliatory steps as they are taken by GVN, and any constructive steps taken by Buddhists, with view to encouraging more of same and disabusing those Buddhist leaders whose aims appear to be open-ended.4

Finally, I agree that situation has not reached point where we can sensibly think about throwing our support to any particular alternative to Diem regime5 (para 6 reftel).

Nolting

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, SOC 14-1 S VIET. Top Secret.

2 Document 234.

3 Document 217.

4 A marginal notation on the source text at this point, in an unknown hand, reads: “No.”

5 A marginal notation on the source text at this point, in the same hand, reads: “We didn’t mean this and I don’t think we said it.”

238. Memorandum of Conversation 238. Memorandum of Conversation1

Washington, July 26, 1963.

PARTICIPANTS

Roger Hilsman

Robert Manning

Ambassador Henry Cabot Lodge

SUBJECT

Press Problems in Viet-Nam

Mr. Manning, who had just returned from a trip to Saigon, thought that the essence of the press problems lay in getting more of the members of the press corps in that city in frequent and meaningful touch with the “horse’s mouth”, i.e. the Ambassador and other top U.S. officials. This was certainly not the best press corps in the world nor the worst. It was divided between those who remained permanently in Saigon and who tended to be somewhat in-bred and to suffer from localitis and those coming in on trips from the outside who were more seasoned and had better perspective. Key reporters among. the first group were Halberstam of the New York Times and the AP and UPI correspondents. In the second group the leading reporters were Keyes Beech, Pepper Martin of U.S. News and World Report, and Jim Robinson of NBC.

Mr. Manning thought the main aspect in removing the dissatisfaction of some of these correspondents was to take them into our confidence more, give them an “in” feeling, and invite them more often not only to ritualistic type functions but specifically to say small dinners given by the Ambassador for Vietnamese officials and leading personalities including perhaps one correspondent at a time.

Ambassador Lodge indicated he intended to do just that, that one of the first things he planned to do was to have lunch with several of the key correspondents. Mr. Manning said as a whole the correspondents approved the program we are pursuing in Viet-Nam and supported our effort there—though they were unanimous in despising the Diem regime and in their conviction that we could not win with it.

The impasse between the GVN and the American press corps was well nigh insoluble. Diem’s and Nhu’s recent offers to have back-grounders with the American press, laudable as this offer was on their part, would almost certainly not result in changing the conviction of the correspondents that the government is doomed. Yet Mr. Manning thought that we should continue encouraging Diem and Nhu in this direction and to seek as much contact with the correspondents as possible. Ambassador Lodge indicated that he was well aware of this whole problem and very concerned about it. He was also concerned at the feeling among American intellectuals regarding the Diem government and had been harassed by communications on their part advocating that we change our policy on the Diem regime. He thought it likely he would try to return here after some six months in Saigon to make several speeches to improve the domestic atmosphere.

Mr. Manning suggested that Ambassador Lodge may wish to keep the present USIS team and the press attache in Saigon who he thought were handling the situation well. Ambassador Lodge agreed and indicated he did not intend to make personnel changes in this area.

Mr. Manning referred to Director of Information Dang Duc Khoi who is under Civic Action Secretary Hieu and who he said was very savvy. There had been some discussion in Saigon of sending Khoi to New York to endeavor to correct editorial impressions there on Viet-Nam. Mr. Manning thought this suggestion had merit.

1 Source: Department of State, Vietnam Working Group Files: Lot 67 D 54, PR-11 Press Relations. Confidential. Drafted by Kattenburg who is not listed among the participants. The meeting was held at the Department of State.

239. Report From the Assistant Secretary of State for Public Affairs (Manning) to the President 239. Report From the Assistant Secretary of State for Public Affairs (Manning) to the President1

Washington, undated.

REPORT ON THE SAIGON PRESS SITUATION

The press problem in Viet-Nam is singular because of the singular nature of the United States involvement in that country. Our involvement is so extensive as to require public, i.e., press, scrutiny, and yet so hemmed by limitations as to make it difficult for the United States government to promote and assure that scrutiny. The problem is complicated by the long-standing desire of the United States government to see the American involvement in Viet-Nam minimized, even represented as something less than in reality it is. The early history of the handling of the situation is marked by attitudes, directives and actions in Washington and in the field that reflect this United States desire.

The effect of these generally restrictive practices had the short-term virtue of keeping the escalating American involvement in a low key in the world and United States press. But a long-term result has been serious deterioration in the credibility attached by American correspondents to the information and assessments given to them by United States military and political authorities in Viet-Nam, and to a certain extent in Washington. Additionally, it can be argued that, whatever the merit of those practices in earlier days of the involvement in Viet-Nam, the public attitude in the United States has been mature and unexcitable—so much so that earlier fears of reaction to American casualties and other aspects of the program may be said to have been exaggerated. This last point argues strongly for relaxation of some—but not all—of the strictures still imposed on American press coverage of the Vietnamese situation, and it argues for a more relaxed attitude on the part of US officials to the reports and assessments of the US press. This would do much to reduce the somewhat sullen Alice in Wonderland miasma that surrounds the Vietnamese press situation, and it would help to build a degree of mutual confidence and mutual credibility between American authorities and American correspondents covering Viet-Nam.

The absence of this confidence and credibility lies close to the core of the press problem as it appears on the conclusion of a four-day mission to Saigon. The situation is a troublesome one, and it is unlikely to evolve into a happy one. There are, however, possibilities of improvement. The basic problem will be removed as a critical factor in the US operations in Viet-Nam only by time and decisive GVN victory over the Viet-Cong. But it can be ameliorated.

First, a look at the parties involved:

1. The American Correspondents

The Saigon press corps consists of a dozen Americans, mostly staffers but some (Time, Newsweek) stringers. These are augmented by periodic visits by Far Eastern correspondents from the Tokyo, Hong Kong or New Delhi bureaus of AP, UP, the networks and major US publications. With two exceptions those we talked to at length were regularly stationed in Saigon. It became apparent that, save for a higher intensity on the part of the locals, the locals and the periodic visitors share generally similar views and assessments of the press situation. The local correspondents verge on unanimity also in their assessments of the Vietnamese government, the effectiveness of GVN-US military and political programs and the virtues or shortcomings of the American involvement and American officials. The periodic visitors may differ somewhat with many of the locals’ assessments, but for practical purposes they differ chiefly in degree only.

At the time of the visit to Saigon, the correspondents were concerned with their own safety and ability to operate, almost to the exclusion of problems of access and other relations with the GVN and US officials. Several maintained in fact that they feel able to get all the information they need (a statement which many will probably qualify once their concern over the recent roughing-up by GVN police fades away).2 The main burden of their several hours’ discussion was a desire for assurances that they could continue to work in Viet-Nam without threat of physical or technical harassment, or the threat of expulsions by the GVN. They were more scared than hurt by the fracas with police on July 7. Reporters covering the South have had rougher experiences. But the problem goes deeper than the matter of these fears.

The correspondents reflect unanimous bitterness toward, and contempt for, the Diem government. They unanimously maintain that the Vietnamese program cannot succeed unless the Diem regime (cum family) is replaced; this conviction, though it does not always appear in their copy, underlies all the reports and analyses of the correspondents

The correspondents profess to have little faith in the information or guidance they are given by top officials of the US Embassy, and they treat with disdain what they believe to be the over-optimism of General Harkins and his top command. Where US officials maintain that the military program is making decided progress, and the strategic hamlet program is developing favorably, the correspondents maintain either the direct opposite—that the situation is retrogressing—or, that the situation is little better than a stalemate. Some correspondents go so far as to charge that they are systematically lied to by US officials. All of them maintain that to get what they consider to be “straight facts” on given operations, battles or situations (e.g., how well the Vietnamese fight), they have to go to lower echelons in the field. However justified these attitudes and allegations (I believe many are exaggerations), their very existence deserves to be recognized and attacked as a major obstacle to a healthy information situation in Saigon.

Beyond their own treatment at the hands of US officials, the newsmen generally feel that US officials have become so committed themselves to “winning with Diem” that their own official reporting is subject to serious question. This finds many of the correspondents convinced that their own assessments represent a more authoritative and more realistic picture than is being given to Washington by its own representatives. One need not agree with this view of correspondents in order to suggest that it must change before we can expect healthy press relations in Saigon.

Amid these many unpleasant facts about the correspondents’ state of mind sits a most important and encouraging fact: They seem to agree to a man that the US involvement in Viet-Nam is a necessary free world policy and that the programs, military and political, are basically necessary and feasible. Without this, the situation would be discouraging to the extreme; with this belief on the correspondents’ part, there is much to build on. Where they disagree is in questions of assessment of the progress and, more precisely to the point, the wisdom of continuing to rely for the program’s execution on the Diem regime.

From all of this, it is obvious that the correspondents place much faith in their own abilities to report and assess a situation that is as complex and as tricky as any in the world today. Is such self-confidence, coupled as it is with considerable disdain for the official assessments, justified?

The local correspondents for the most part are young and of limited experience. There are some more seasoned correspondents among the periodic visitors and this, combined with their ability to get frequent relief from the confines of Viet-Nam, often produces more balanced reports of the fighting and the political situation. The locals seem for the most part to be given to quick-rising emotionalism, and they unquestionably are severely afflicted with “localitis,” the disease which causes newsmen long assigned to the confines of one given situation to distort perspective by over-concentration on their own irritations, adventures and opinions.

This group contains no journalistic giants, though at least one is very promising and several are obviously bright men. And I would say that all are decent, patriotic Americans who are striving to do credit to themselves and their profession. The personal manners of some vis-a-vis the Viet-Nam officials leave something to be desired, and they suffer the common newspaper tendency to let the immediate dominate the long view.

As an overall assessment of the correspondents, I am inclined to accept the following opinion of John Mecklin, US Public Affairs Officer in Saigon: “The American newsmen working here are as good or better than the average in such boondocks assignments. They are exceptionally hard-working; they manage to stay on top of the news despite extraordinary handicaps; they are unafraid to face frequent personal danger; and they must work under conditions of notable emotional stress. Their reporting has thrown light on the sordid, bitter depths of the situation here which would not otherwise be generally known, thus in effect forcing a healthy confrontation between the American people and the reality of this kind of big power responsibility. This has inevitably complicated US operations in Viet-Nam, but ironically it has also reinforced US efforts to persuade the GVN to take various unpalatable actions by providing the argument that US public opinion cannot be ignored.

“The newsmen have often been accused of ‘irresponsibility.’ In general, I don’t think this is either accurate or fair, though there have been some damaging errors. There have been numerous occasions when the reporters have deliberately withheld information that would have damaged the US interest; e.g., a number of shabby incidents between American military personnel and Saigon police, and the case some months ago of a homosexual American civilian official who was attacked and seriously wounded by his Vietnamese partner. The newsmen have, however, insisted on reporting matters that they considered of true significance to the US position here, regardless of the resulting broken crockery, and thus in effect have forced a basic issue: that just as the US will not attempt to unseat a sovereign government, however tempting, so it cannot engage in a semi-covert struggle such as this except in the full glare of the free American press.

“This is a reality which had been widely overlooked in developing the US advisory role here. It will be equally important if and as the US is obliged to engage in similar efforts elsewhere. How to handle it hopefully, should be one of the major ‘lessons learned’ in Vietnam.”

2. Vietnamese Officials

The bitterness and contempt displayed by American correspondents for President Diem and his top officials (especially for Counselor and Madame Nhu) is fervently reciprocated by Diem and company. Madame Nhu has repeatedly remarked that the American correspondents are “Communists” or “as bad as Communists.” The government says (and, I believe, has become convinced) that the newsmen are chiefly concerned with bringing about the downfall of the Diem government. “These young reporters want nothing less than to make a new government,” said Ngo Dinh Nhu bitterly in my talk with him. “This is an exalting ambition, a stimulating pastime for three or four of them to get together to overthrow a government and create another.” (Please see attached memos of conversations with Nhu and President Diem.)

More perhaps than American officials on the scene, the Vietnamese see the American press in Saigon (and back home in the US) as an important political factor, one that can in fact play a large role in altering or even undermining the American commitment to Viet-Nam. Believing this, and believing that the correspondents are eager for Diem’s overthrow, the GVN officials see the correspondents as deliberately cooperating with and encouraging any and all political opposition—such as the Buddhist protests—as a means of achieving said overthrow.

Extremely sensitive to personal criticism, Diem and his relatives take particular affront at the kind of personal references that enter (inevitably, in view of the autocratic family role) into much American reporting. While on the one hand reacting by expelling correspondents who displease them (both expulsions, of Francois Sully of Newsweek and James Robinson of NBC, were for stories dealing with family personalities), GVN officials talk of needing “public relations advice” to improve their image with the American public. They have plainly given up hope of achieving any of this improvement through an improvement in relations with the correspondents stationed in Viet-Nam, and talk somewhat wishfully of trying to reach over their heads to editors and editorial writers in the United States. They are insistent that the American correspondents willfully refuse to talk with officials or recognize facts that tell the favorable side of the Vietnamese story. (On the other hand, correspondents say that when they try to talk with a Vietnamese official they get either lies or lectures.)

In talks with Nhu and Diem, it was apparent that they are bitterly resigned to the conviction that the newsmen are incorrigible. For our part, we believe that the point was clearly made that the United States cannot guarantee its ability to maintain its full effort in Viet-Nam if the GVN, by expulsions or harassment of correspondents, turns the entire American press into enemies of the program. Interestingly, Nhu at one point conceded that much information unfavorable to the regime has been given to American correspondents, and visiting US officials and legislators, by officials of the Vietnamese government. Said Nhu with a wan sneer: “All conditions are favorable for a complete US change of policy in Viet-Nam. It is a great opportunity and it would be a tremendous sacrifice for those hostile to the (Diem) government to give up this opportunity.”

3. US Officials

The senior American officials of the Embassy and MAC/V view the correspondents with a distaste that is difficult to conceal. They consider most of the correspondents young, immature and irresponsible. Some consider that the correspondents’ criticism of and opposition to the American effort in Viet-Nam transgress the line between journalistic independence and patriotism. They consider the correspondents’ behavior toward GVN and US officials to be sometimes rude, insulting, and insufferable. There is some justification for the above views, but the fact remains that the responsibility for the gulf between the correspondents and the senior American officials is something the two groups share.

To put it bluntly, the senior US officials have not been good enough in their handling of the press. Although they devote perhaps more time and effort than any post in the world to press problems, their contacts with the press often serve to make the situation worse. The major cause for this is the complete difference in the official and the correspondents’ assessment of the situation, but another serious cause is the reluctance of the official family to treat the press with candor. Background information is, apparently, almost never given. A too determined effort is made to give a rosy picture, with the result that the correspondents consider themselves to have been lied to. In short, the correspondents are viewed as a nuisance and an inconvenience to be endured, not as a valuable tool.

The Embassy’s instincts are to keep from the press all but the most transparently desirable stories. Thus the Embassy either refuses to talk about, or is disingenuously selective in its information, about even minor stories which might prove unhelpful to the GVN or to the US effort in Viet-Nam. Faced with a passionately hostile press corps, the Embassy is entitled to sympathy for its wariness in dealing with the correspondents. But the result of its efforts has been the complete destruction of the Embassy’s credibility.

Senior US officials should not be condemned for the situation which exists. It was in part inherited and in part predestined by the unrealistic policy directives under which they were forced to deal with the press until recently. Finally, they are dealing with an almost unique public relations problem which grows out of the almost unique nature of the American involvement in Viet-Nam and the peculiar nature of the Vietnamese government. No one—until recently—has realized how essential a role the press would play in our policies in Viet-Nam.

Nonetheless, it has now become essential that the Embassy recognize the press as what it is-an independent and important separate force bearing upon both the political situation in Viet-Nam and the all-important matter of domestic support in the United States for the American involvement in Viet-Nam. Unless I am mistaken, one element in the present hostility between the press and the Embassy is wounded ego on the part of the correspondents who have a highly developed sense of importance. The Embassy certainly possesses the diplomatic skill and maturity to bring the correspondents at least partly into a deeper sense of participation. It requires only that the correspondents be viewed and treated as politically important individuals, rather than as a group of socially objectionable and professionally incompetent young cubs.

A word on the USIS installation in Saigon. Under John Mecklin, a long-time journalism pro, the public affairs activities are in especially talented and dedicated hands. He seems to have achieved the confidence of top officers and the fullest access to important Embassy, MAC/V and intelligence information. He, too, has been severely handicapped by the restrictive regulations imposed from Washington and by the tendency of his superiors to over-caution. It is likely that the Mecklin team is one of the best USIS combines in the world; certainly it is superior to most, seasoned in the tough complexities of the Vietnamese situation and convinced that the job is a compelling challenge. Relations between USIS and the military, both PIO’s and top officers, appear to be excellent and Mecklin has taken great pains to familiarize himself with officials in the field. He also has obviously close and friendly contacts with many Vietnamese officials and has had considerable direct contact with Diem and Nhu.

It should be noted most correspondents, while satisfied to get most of their information from public information officials, and to a great extent dependent on it, still feel a strong need for steady and mutual confident relations with the major officials themselves.

4. The Buddhist Issue

The Buddhist controversy in Viet-Nam is pertinent to this report for two reasons. First, an incident growing out of the controversy inspired the visit to Saigon. Second, the controversy itself demonstrates the direct and potentially influential role that correspondents on the scene can play in the execution of a foreign policy. The Buddhist activities, however genuine their original religious motivation, have evolved into political activities aimed at the overthrow of the Diem government. The Buddhist activists, and whoever on the Viet-Nam scene is encouraging or supporting them, premise their potential effectiveness to a large extent on exploitation of the American correspondents. With a press agent’s flair, Buddhist leaders take pains to notify newsmen in advance of processions or other activities. They count heavily on word and photo coverage to keep the issue alive, and to extend and illustrate the evident unwillingness of the American government to condone Diem’s handling of the crisis, thus separating Diem and the US.

In view of the correspondents’ hostility to the government and in view of their concentration on spot news, the anti-government activists sense that the newsmen are predisposed to give full play to the demonstrations, the Buddhist grievances and the government’s countermeasures.

The GVN, on the other hand, knows full well that its life is at stake, and considers the American correspondents to be an essential and enthusiastic element in the attempt to bring down the Government. Despite the correspondents’ complaints of Embassy indifference, there is little doubt that the GVN would have moved against the correspondents some time ago were it not for the cloak of sanctity which they wear because of their nationality and the representations made on their behalf by the Embassy.

The GVN is belatedly attempting to deal helpfully with Buddhist complaints. The GVN is attempting to stave off the religious issues and to do this in such a way as to make it clear to all that subsequent demonstrations are political. The success of this effort is problematical, among other reasons because the American correspondents are apt to be sympathetic and understanding to opposition efforts to keep the crisis alive.

The GVN policy implies (and Minister Hieu explicitly told my Special Assistant) that subsequent demonstrations will be put down “with brutality if necessary”. At that point, Vietnamese and world opinion must either accept the Government’s version of events, which is unlikely, or the crisis will continue to grow in intensity. The American correspondents may well be the prime determinants of opinion-and they are hostile to the Government.

It is unlikely that the crisis can be settled without considerable violence. It is still possible the GVN will decide that it cannot be settled unless some way is found to moderate press coverage of the situation. If the crisis is not settled, the Government will probably fall.

Ironically, this crisis comes at a time when US and GVN officials are convinced that we have turned the corner in our efforts to defeat Communist subversion. There is general agreement that the Strategic Hamlet program is the answer, and that progress, although still spotty, is real. According to the official assessment (with which the correspondents passionately disagree) we need only keep the political situation under control in order to reap significant and lasting successes from our present effort. Yet, all agree that the present crisis can easily undo the progress made thus far, and seriously reduce if not destroy the prospects for early success.

Thus, even though there can be no great improvement in relations between the GVN and the press, an improvement in relations between the US press and the Embassy-MAC/V has become an exigent requirement of American policy in Vietnam, both for reasons of domestic US public support and, if it is desired, for the immediate survival of the Diem government in Viet-Nam.

Usefulness and Accomplishments of the Mission

Despite some initial doubts, I am now convinced that the mission was timely, necessary, and useful. The accomplishments were as follows:

1. It was made completely clear to the three highest officials of the Vietnamese Government that continuing scrutiny and criticism by the American press of the American involvement in Viet-Nam constituted an absolute requirement of United States policy. Diem and his principal advisors were made to understand that free reporting from Viet-Nam (however unfavorable it might be) was infinitely preferable to the situation in which expulsion or physical harassment made martyrs of the pressmen. Criticism of the Viet-Nam program was the essential ingredient to a public debate on the merits of the program. Press scrutiny and criticism enable the President to defend his program on its merits and accomplishments. But such a defense would be effective and credible only so long as free press scrutiny and criticism were allowed.

I believe Diem and company understand this argument and its validity. They have no reason for failing to understand the importance attached by the U.S. Government to continuing free press scrutiny of the American involvement in Viet-Nam.

2. We received from Diem, Counselor Nhu, and Secretary of State Thuan a virtual pledge against harassment of correspondents. The value of this pledge is tempered by the fact that the correspondents are so passionately opposed to the Government, and could conceivably engage in activity so clearly upsetting or insulting as to leave the GVN little alternative but expulsion. Barring such activity on the part of the pressmen I think it unlikely that the GVN will undertake either harassment or expulsion of correspondents.

There remains, however, the possibility of inadvertent contact between police and U.S. correspondents in the event of further street violence with the Buddhists, and such a clash—even though accidental—could revive fears that correspondents are in danger. I would not predict calmness on the part of correspondents were this to happen.

3. We obtained the permission of the GVN for the readmission to Viet-Nam of NBC Correspondent Robinson. His actual re-entry took place prior to our departure from Viet-Nam. This action served not only to moderate the passion of the correspondents and to improve the tone of the moment, but also served to underline the fact that the U.S. Government has both the intention and some capability of protecting legitimate interests of the correspondents in Viet-Nam.

4. We reduced substantially the fear of the correspondents for their own physical safety. Although their concern was probably exaggerated, the correspondents genuinely feared, upon our arrival, that the GVN had embarked upon a deliberate campaign of harassment and intimidation which, some of them maintained, might well culminate in either the savage beating or actual death of one or more correspondents. The correspondents’ reaction to their fear was embittered determination not to give in, and passionate resentment of what they considered the Embassy’s inability or unwillingness to give them protection.

The correspondents now at least partly recognize that the atmosphere is changed and the physical harassment by the GVN is unlikely.

5. We received a pledge from Counselor Nhu to try background briefings with selected groups of the correspondents. Such meetings, if they go well, could contribute toward filling the vacuum which now exists in regard to authoritative GVN presentations of policy and interpretations to the American pressmen. With uncertain results, we pressed President Diem to hold similar meetings occasionally with individual American pressmen. The Times correspondent is now seeking a Presidential appointment.

6. During the visit, the GVN agreed to drop the charges against two correspondents of assaulting Vietnamese police. (Nolting had this in train before our arrival.) Similarly, we were able to get the American AP correspondent, Browne, to agree to drop his own charges against the Vietnamese police. This issue now seems dead.

7. Finally, and importantly, the visit gave the American correspondents a chance to blow off steam and to voice their own views to a receptive official American audience. How lasting the benefits may be of this psychological release will depend on an improved public relations program in Viet-Nam, but there is no question that there has been a temporary improvement in the atmosphere.

Recommendations

1. That the President direct that the occasional meetings on Viet-Nam between the President’s Press Secretary and the principal information officers of State, Defense and USIA undertake on a regular basis to give centralized, professional and authoritative direction to the effort to improve U.S. public relations in connection with our involvement in Viet-Nam. The Group should, at an early date, formulate new and comprehensive guidance applicable to all elements of the U.S. involvement in Viet-Nam.

Justification: An improvement in relations between Embassy-MAC/V and the press corps in Saigon has become an exigent requirement of U.S. policy in Viet-Nam. The present relations are poisonous, and an improvement will require continuing leadership and momentum from Washington of the type that can only be given by an inter-Departmental authority.

Without such leadership, a substantial improvement is not likely. Professional diplomatic and military minds find it difficult to accept and even more difficult to deal with a situation in which public relations must take precedence over all but the gravest military and diplomatic requirements. Without centralized direction, the requirements of military security, the privacy of diplomatic negotiations, and protocol and procedural considerations will continue to dilute and frustrate the effort to improve relations between the press and the official family in Viet-Nam.

It is not intended that major substantive decisions should be shaped to meet the need of public relations. But it is imperative that the requirements of an improved public relations program no longer be subordinated to and thwarted by routine diplomatic and military procedures and considerations.

2. That Ambassador Lodge’s arrival in Saigon be used to involve the correspondents as participants in a reassessment of the real situation in Viet-Nam.

Justification: At the present time there is an unbridgeable gap between the official and the correspondent’s assessment of the Vietnamese situation. The officials believe that the war is showing great progress and that success is predictable if the political situation can be kept in hand. The correspondents believe that the program is stalled, that no progress is being made, and that no success is possible so long as the Diem Government is in power. In the present situation no dialogue is possible between the two parties for each dismisses with contempt the views of the other.

Ambassador Lodge’s arrival presents an opportunity to get before the correspondents in credible form the evidence upon which the official views are based. It also affords an opportunity to bring the correspondents into the official family in a sense, by giving them a purposeful opportunity to present to senior American officials their own views and information.

The mechanics for doing this should be Ambassador Lodge’s reassessment, for his own purposes, of the situation. He can tell the correspondents that he is aware that their assessment is in conflict with the official one, and intends to arrive at his own assessment through an examination of all the facts available including their own. He can seek their assistance, and thus possibly involve them in a reassessment of their own. The correspondents in Viet-Nam are sincere and deeply committed to the success of the U.S. effort to thwart Communist subversion. If they can be brought to consider the evidence of progress it is not credible that their views would not be influenced and moderated thereby. Moreover, the correspondents have sources and information of their own, more knowledge of which would doubtless be useful to the Embassy.

3. That a concerted effort be undertaken to obtain the publication in a broad range of U.S. periodicals of authoritative articles on the situation in Viet-Nam. These articles should stress the exciting end unique nature of the U.S. involvement in Viet-Nam and the appositeness of the effort to the Communist penchant for victory by subversion. Classified information should be made available as necessary to ensure that these articles reflect both the difficulties and the progress which characterize our effort.

4. No effort should be made to underplay or hide the magnitude of the U.S. involvement and casualties in Viet-Nam. In the first place, the effort will certainly fail in the end. In the second, as stated before, the reaction of American public thus far to news of U.S. casualties has been remarkably mature. Thirdly, there is even a chance that U.S. public support for the effort in Viet-Nam will be enhanced, not lessened, by the knowledge of American sacrifices made in this struggleÄ providing the unhealthy political situation in Saigon is cured. Finally, any attempt to disguise the American casualties or involvement in Viet-Nam will (as it has in the past) poison relations between Embassy-MAC/V and the correspondents and ensure the failure of efforts to create a more sympathetic and understanding press treatment of the U.S. effort in Viet-Nam. Similarly, we should be more honest and outgoing with the correspondents about our setbacks and our difficulties with the GVN. Our progress will become credible only when our failures (which the correspondents know about anyway) are admitted freely.

5. The American press, both here and in Viet-Nam, should be made aware that the U.S. Government considers continuing press scrutiny and free coverage of the U.S. involvement in Viet-Nam to be an absolute requirement of American policy in Viet-Nam. The press should be informed-on a background basis-that this has been vigorously conveyed to the highest levels of the Vietnamese Government, and that we have reason to believe that American correspondents will be free from harassment and expulsion.

The press should be informed of the attitude of the Vietnamese Government toward the American correspondents, and reminded that the unprecedented support which the correspondents are receiving from the U.S. Government makes it incumbent that their personal behavior toward the Vietnamese Government and its officials be proper and circumspect. The U.S. Government has used some of its currency with Diem in its effort to guarantee to the press the right to report freely and honestly. We can succeed in this effort only if the correspondents in Viet-Nam behave and report with responsibility and reasonable objectivity and fairness. No one can protect the press against retaliation for public and profane insults to GVN officials. No one can protect them against retaliation for participation in coup movements. No one can protect them against retaliation for contemptuous behavior toward the GVN (e.g. refusing to accept interviews with President Diem or Counselor Nhu).

6. A deliberate and calculated effort should be made to establish good personal relations between senior Embassy-MAC/V officers and individual correspondents. This effort should be pursued with the same tact and skill that is used in establishing personal relationships with GVN officials.

At the present, the correspondents are too in-bred. Conscious of the distaste and disapproval with which they seem to be viewed by senior Embassy and some military officials, they respond with a passionate and unanimous contempt of their own. They have formed a closed group, cemented together by a sense of maltreatment from the GVN and the Embassy. They have convinced themselves that they are the only ones who know or will recognize the truth about the situation in Viet-Nam. Any contrary views from Embassy-MAC/V officials are dismissed as untruthful and deceitful.

It is essential that a useful dialogue be re-established and this can be done if Embassy-MAC/V officers embark upon a concerted effort to woo individual reporters.

1 Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Vietnam Country Series, 7/21/63-7/31/63. Secret; Eyes Only. Sent to McGeorge Bundy on July 26 under a covering memorandum from Executive Secretary Benjamin H. Read. Read commended the report, and the attached memoranda of conversation between Manning and Nhu on July 17, and Manning and Diem on July 18 (Documents 226 and 227), as providing “a lengthy but fascinating window into the present state of mind of both Ngo Dinhs.” Read noted that a copy of the report was also being sent to Presidential Press Secretary Salinger. A note on the covering memorandum indicates that the report was placed in the President’s weekend reading file.

2 See Documents 210 and 211.

240. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 240. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, July 27, 1963, 8 p.m.

143. For Lodge from Nolting.

1. When I was in Washington, I had some discussion on economic aid levels for FY 1964. These conversations neither very definitive nor conclusive largely for lack time to go deeply into matter. Since my return Saigon, have reviewed five-year military plan prepared by MAAG connection 1965 MAP submission and economic projections prepared by USOM. In my view, most difficult economic-financial-political problem looms ahead here during next few years. Elements of problem are: meeting security objectives in face increasing belligerence part ChiComs, getting GVN come forward with necessary increased levels financing necessary prosecute war, avoidance dangerous inflation, planned reductions U.S. economic aid.

2. Last year U.S. provided $95 million for commercial import program; there was additionally available about $30ÿ0935 million from prior years’ funds (pipeline), making total $125 million approximately for licensing imports. Most recent messages from Washington indicate plans for $cS0 million or less this year with no prior years’ funds to add. This figure should not be frozen, I think, until all elements of equation have had careful consideration by you.

3. In summer 1961, U.S. and GVN undertook joint study which resulted in what is now referred to as Staley-Thuc report2 in context of conditions as they existed that time. From this study resulted mutual understanding and/or governmental agreement on force levels, exchange rates, appropriate levels of GVN exchange reserves, deficit financing of war expenditures, and need for other economic reforms on part GVN. Though their performance uneven with respect such matters as in deal [sic] tax collections, reduction unessential imports, etc., GVN have followed through on important parts undertakings including deficit financing for war activities, and exchange rate revisions. Furthermore, they have drawn down exchange reserves substantially below figure set in report. It is perhaps unfortunate that level of reserves only item quantified giving VN strong talking point whereas other measures connected austerity which do not have such benchmarks have not been pursued to our satisfaction.

4. We now facing changed set of conditions from those confronting us in 1961 when primary emphasis on war build-up. We now (in terms military planning) looking to termination active insurgency by end 1965, involving changes force levels thereafter with its own set political problems, peak military expenditures 1964, 1965 and high plateau continuing expenditures for economic development, expanded police, and essential military needs thereafter. We encountering increasing difficulty obtaining large-scale appropriations for mutual security in light our domestic budgetary deficits and balance payments problems. GVN image in U.S. has not improved-quite the contrary in recent months. Lack of forcefulness their part in imposing austerity, by decreasing unessential imports and increasing tax collections (there has been increase in tax collections, but not enough) and their lack of drive in promoting exports make case for more economic aid difficult. Nevertheless, even if they take all possible measures, the facts would argue for amounts substantially greater than those now being proposed.

5. I therefore come to conclusion it in our interest to undertake a new study, preferably by same people (Staley and Thuc), in light of new conditions both here and in U.S. Otherwise we face series partial negotiations, some dealing with force levels and military expenditures, some with austerity and self-help measures, others with aid levels and local currency financing of war. And yet these all inter-related in fact and, equally as important, inter-related in a political and psychological sense. When Staley Mission first proposed in 1961, many skeptical as to this approach as substitute for normal bilateral negotiations. When completed, we all convinced results good especially since GVN recognized study as sincere joint effort get at facts and reach conclusions on basis those facts rather than as exercise in negotiation from preconceived position. This both tribute to Staley’s and Thuc’s handling of study and sine qua non for confidence and performance on part GVN. I would hope that a new study would lead not only to understandings on a broad front in specific and quantified terms but also agreement on specific measures to be taken during next few years.

6. In light foregoing, I would suggest that before your departure, you might wish fully explore all aspects this thorny problem with Washington offices concerned, with view to— (a) Obtaining Department approval to proposal for new study and determine if and when Staley available three-four week study.

(b) Urging DOD reach early decision on military plan submitted by CINCPAC to JCS. This important element in any study to be made.

(c) Urging AID/W hold open question economic aid levels 1964 and be prepared accept major changes to 1965 submission which just going forward.

We believe GVN would welcome broad-scale review this type at this time.3

Nolting

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, AID(US) S VIET . Secret.

2 See Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, vol. I, Documents 72 ff.

3 On August 13, the Department of State and AID responded to Ambassador Nolting’s proposal that a decision regarding a “Staley-type mission” should be deferred “until after Ambassador Lodge has had time formulate his own evaluation.” (Telegram 191 to Saigon; Department of State, Central Files, AID(US)S VIET)

241. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 241. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, July 28, 1963, 4 p.m.

144. Some encouraging news and symptoms over past several days re Buddhist problem-but also several perplexing developments.

Was assured yesterday by Bui Van Luong (Interior Minister) that government would use no repressive measures against further Buddhist demonstrations, having concluded that most people bored with Buddhist agitation and becoming convinced that GVN proposals just and sincere attempt settle religious problem. Thus he thought no real risk in letting up on security measures. This checks with info received independently from Diem’s doctor, who told me that in his presence Diem had called Interior Minister, Colonel Y (secret police chief), and Saigon Police Chief to instruct them not to use force or arrests against Buddhist agitators or demonstrators. This may be overly optimistic reading, but nevertheless instructions are along lines we have been advocating. May be crucial in connection with big demonstration planned by Buddhists for Tuesday, July 30, which is seventh and final weekly memorial of Quang Duc’s death. There has been much publicity about this, with Buddhist appeals to shopkeepers and civil servants and others to quit work and demonstrate. Self-sacrifice of Buu Hoi’s mother also forecast by her for this date. (Buu Hoi has not yet returned to Saigon as expected and requested by government, and this is disturbing.)

Meanwhile, Vice President Tho tells me that Buddhist leaders have semi-agreed to meet with government commission on provisional basis (i.e., with no terms of reference set and free to leave if they don’t like set-up) on July 31. Tho said that in telephone talks his contact, a moderate Buddhist leader, said in effect that they (Buddhist leaders) wanted to try one more wingding before agreeing to sit down in joint sessions. Tho worried re outcome Tuesday’s events, but unable persuade Buddhists to meet beforehand.

Thuan tells me that Diem couldn’t bring himself to invite directly and publicly Tich Tinh Kiet to come to see him, but did send word through Tho that he would see him if requested. (This of course misses main point my recommendation, but may nevertheless help some.)

Talked to Mau about getting Buu Hoi back here quick, and he agreed to send him another SOS. Said Buu Hoi had heart condition which made it dangerous for him to travel (somebody else said bad liver). I said I reckoned he’d have worse than that if he didn’t come back soon.

Several members of government have assured me that, for present, nobody seems to be trying to undercut policy of conciliation. However, one report to contrary is that Nhu did order veterans demonstration, which he later repudiated (cannot vouch for accuracy).

Finally, I have had serious word from Vice President, Thuan, and Mau that GVN continues to receive reports (with some details) that several official Americans are encouraging Buddhists to continue agitation until Lodge arrives and U.S. pulls rug on Diem. Disavowing again such nonsense (which my informants also discounted), I am nevertheless taking measures to cut to essential minimum contacts of American officials with Buddhists in pagodas (especially Xa Loi), and investigating certain apparently unauthorized contacts, which may have given rise to suspicions among many gullible people. One good reason for doing so is possibility that Saigon police, already overstrained, may come to put credence in such rumors, which would be bad. I shall lay out facts fully to Diem and Tho when I get them.

Atmosphere calm over weekend.

Nolting

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, SOC 14-1 S VIET. Secret; Limit Distribution. Repeated to CINCPAC.

242. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 242. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, July 30, 1963, 1 p.m.

151. CINCPAC for POLAD. Dept pass DOD, JCS for action. Task Force/Saigon Message. Deptel 10552 requested by first week July full report and evaluation all herbicide operations to serve as basis decision whether to continue defoliation and crop destruction.

During period 1 Jan-30 June 63, only two herbicide operations conducted, first consisting of crop destruction in western Thua Thien Province and second of defoliation of segments of Cua Lon-Bo De Rivers in An Xuyen.

Crop Destruction

Crop destruction operation by hand spray was initiated 6 Feb but discontinued after destruction approximately 12 hectares as result change in military plans and logistical difficulties. Operation which resumed 13 May 1963 has resulted in destruction of approximately 75 percent of approved 140 hectares. Crops include rice, corn and manioc; susceptibility to agent demonstrated by fact marked changes visible 30 minutes to one hour after treatment. In 24 to 48 hours crops lose all color and signs of life.

It is considered too early to evaluate effects on VC of destruction these crops. Moreover, it will be difficult differentiate between food denied VC as result use herbicides and that resulting from crop destruction by other means. Nevertheless, there numerous indications VC food shortage Thua Thien Province, and it is estimated that destruction capability of unit using herbicides as much as four times that of hand destruction. As part of 1st ARVN Division food denial program, it is estimated that a total of 69.8 tons of food will be denied to VC as result current Thua Thien food destruction operations (this is in addition to 140 tons of VC stored food destroyed).

No Montagnards have been relocated as result this operation. Active psywar program using leaflets carried on.

Defoliation

An Xuyen defoliation operation carried out June 6-9, 1963. Complete evaluation of the results of this operation are premature since reaction time of different species involved varies from 15-60 days. In those target areas where growth consisted of mangrove, complete defoliation occurred within two weeks after treatment. Approximately one to five percent of leaves on hardwood trees appear to have turned yellow and fallen off to date. Continuing evaluation in process.

Although in mangrove areas visibility has increased 60-70 percent, no change in VC tactics as yet reported. Intelligence indicates few people in the target area at time of spraying aware mission had been executed. Psywar efforts were directed to leaflet distribution immediately after spraying.

There has been no apparent damage to crops in sprayed area. In view of limited extent and recent execution of these operations, they are not considered to provide sufficient information on which to base decision on future use of herbicides. TF/Saigon is hopeful operations scheduled for near future will provide additional information on which base such decision. One additional defoliation operation, Danhim powerline, was completed on July 27. Approval for three additional defoliation (including defoliation of road and road right of way Zone D) and two crop destruction operations has been requested by RVNAF.

There have been a total of 10 defoliation projects to date in addition to a number of defoliation research trials. Of these, 8 were essentially concerned with proof test of the system in the environment of which 6 designed to function. As such tact wage [tactical?] considerations were not in all cases paramount. The remaining two projects, i.e. Vau Lon-Be De rivers and Danhim powerline, have been based, in toto, on tactical needs and considerations.

TF/Saigon recommends Washington decision on future use herbicides be deferred until results further evaluation report, which we propose send prior October 1, are received.

Nolting

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27-10 S VIET Secret. Repeated to CINCPAC.

2 Document 110.

243. Memorandum of Telephone Conversation Between the Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs (Harriman) and the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Hilsman) 243. Memorandum of Telephone Conversation Between the Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs (Harriman) and the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Hilsman)1

Washington, August 1, 1963, 9:55 a.m.

WAH told RH that he was disturbed about the reports of Nolting’s statement on the Buddhists2 —WAH said he ought to be recalled at once. RH said he couldn’t agree more but in his defense he ought to say that it was distorted and taken out of context. WAH said why should he make public statements and RH replied he shouldn’t. WAH said he thought when he leaves he ought to be instructed not to make any public statement—or on second thought WAH said that might be awkward but should clear his statement first in the Dept. WAH also said since he was due to come home about the 13th it was probably not necessary to recall him. RH said he would draft a cable.3

1 Source: Library of Congress, Harriman Papers, Telephone Conversations. Transcribed by Eleanor G. McGann of Harriman’s staff..

2 In an interview with UPI on July 28, Nolting replied to a question about religious persecution and the Buddhist crisis as follows: “I myself, I say this very frankly, after almost two and one half years here, have never seen any evidence of religious persecution, in fact I have the feeling that there is a great deal of religious toleration among Vietnamese people at all levels.” (Telegram 161 from Saigon, August 1; Department of State, Central Files, SOC-1 S VIET) On July 31, the Inter-Sect Committee for the Defense of Buddhism released a statement taking issue with Nolting’s statement. An open letter to Nolting, August 1, signed by “a group of Vietnamese patriots” and distributed to the news media at Xa Loi Pagoda on August 1, attacked Nolting’s integrity and understanding of the Buddhist situation. Superior Bonze Tien Khiet on behalf of the Inter-Sect Committee sent President Kennedy a telegram protesting Nolting’s statement. Nolting also received a letter from bonze Tam Chau deploring his statement to the UPI correspondent. (Telegrams 156, 159, and 160 from Saigon, July 31, August 1, and August 1, respectively; all Ibid.)

3 The cable, telegram 144 to Saigon, August 1, 7:25 p.m., reads as follows: “Press play here of Buddhist communiqué (Embtel 156) commenting on your statement is, as you can imagine, unfortunate, preserving distortion your actual statement. This raises question of how to handle your farewell remarks, which I presume you could not avoid. What ideas do you have about this? Would appreciate opportunity to comment on planned remarks from Washington vantage point.” (Ibid., POL S VIET-US)

244. Central Intelligence Agency Information Report 244. Central Intelligence Agency Information Report1

Washington, August 2, 1963.

TDCS-3/655,859

SUBJECT

Assessment of the Progress of the War Against the Viet Cong in South Vietnam During the First Half of 1963

The following assessment was prepared by the source in response to a request and also reflects the opinions of Ambassador Frederick E. Nolting, Jr. and other Embassy officers.

1. Summary. Although the progress made in the complex counterinsurgency program in the last six months failed to produce a turning point in the war against the Viet Cong (VC), nothing occurred to change our basic belief that the VC will eventually be defeated, provided that the Buddhist crisis is resolved satisfactorily and the security of South Vietnam is not endangered by the deterioration of the situation in Laos. The war with the VC is being brought under control through the successful implementation of: a. The isolation of the VC from the people by means of the Province Rehabilitation Program and the Strategic Hamlet Program, which have as yet not completed the task, but which have made solid progress as evidenced by the increasing VC harassment and attacks on strategic hamlets and the initially encouraging results of the Chieu Hoi (Surrender) program.

b. Military operations designed to keep the VC off balance, harass their base areas, and ultimately to destroy the regular VC formations are difficult to assess. However, the VC have been hurt in I and II Corps areas, to a lesser extent in III Corps area, but, whether they have been significantly hurt in IV Corps area is problematical.

c. Interdiction of reinforcements from North Vietnam through an effective border program is most difficult to implement, but the training and emplacement of border control teams have accelerated during the period. The problem of patrolling the long borders between South Vietnam and Laos and Cambodia is a staggering one and perhaps the ultimate answer to the problem of infiltration is to deny the infiltrators, along with the VC already in South Vietnam, any theater of operations within the country.

2. The Buddhist crisis has placed an increased strain on the Diem regime and raises the possibility of jeopardy to future progress in counterinsurgency operations. Much will depend on the manner in which the crisis is resolved, most particularly with respect to the degree to which the Diem regime has been weakened or to the viability of any successor regime should Diem fall. At the moment, Diem seems to have an at least temporary advantage over his Buddhist antagonists.

For the first six months of 1963, there is little evidence that the counterinsurgency campaign is materially affected by the Government of Vietnam (GVN) difficulties with the Buddhists. In any event, a recapitulation of the developments over the past six months is valid at this time if only to show how much we have to lose in terms of momentum in the anti-VC operations if the current crisis persists and becomes more serious.

3. Although the past six months failed to produce a turning point in the war against the VC, a slow but steady progress was recorded in the many facets of the complex counterinsurgency program. The period under review saw the essential completion of the joint GVN/US buildup of the necessary manpower and resources to do the job; the refinement of the National Campaign Plan guiding the war against the VC was worked out jointly by the USMACV and the GVN Joint General Staff; and, in an accelerated implementation of these programs in the field, marked especially by the stepped-up infusion of American fiscal and material aid into the Province Rehabilitation/Strategic Hamlet Programs. The progress made perhaps failed to live up to the expectations held at the beginning of the year and was of course more discernible in some areas than in others, but nothing occurred to change our basic belief that the GVN/US partnership is on the right track and that the VC will eventually be defeated, provided that the Buddhist crisis is resolved shortly in a reasonably satisfactory manner, and provided that the deterioration in Laos does not further endanger the security of South Vietnam.

4. In order to provide a more detailed analysis of the counterinsurgency effort during the past six months, the balance of this report is divided into three parts according to what we consider the broad areas of endeavor which must be successfully carried out if the war is to be brought under control. A. The isolation of the VC from the people with the progressive constriction of the enemy into mountain, piedmont and delta wastelands, and the channelling of the peoples’ energies into political, economic and social development of their hamlets;

B. The military operations designed to keep the VC off balance, harass their base areas and ultimately to destroy the regular VC formations; and,

C. The interdiction of reinforcements from North Vietnam through an effective border program.

[Here follows a 16-page detailed analysis of parts A, B, and C.]

1 Source: U.S. Army Military Historical Institute, Kraemer Papers, Vietnam. Secret; Routine; No Dissem Abroad; Background Use Only.

245. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam 245. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam1

Washington, August 5, 1963, 3:03 p.m.

160. Embtel 173.2 Madame Nhu’s attack on Buddhists plus reported threat by Nhu (Reuters despatch of August 3)3 to crush Xa Loi as part of “coup” attempt appears here to indicate GVN may well be preparing move from conciliatory to strong repressive policy. Burning of second monk4 and “fortification” Xa Loi suggests Buddhists will not be easily put down.

If you have not already done so, you are to make it clear to Diem and Nhu that we regard both Nhu’s statements as inflammatory and most unwise. These statements give us as well as Buddhists little ground to hope GVN is actually interested in carrying out conciliatory policy promised by Diem on several occasions. You may say further that public opinion in US is such that if Xa Loi is “crushed”, they must expect that USG would promptly and publicly denounce the action.

Ball

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, SOC 14-1 S VIET. Secret; Operational Immediate; Limited Distribution. Drafted by Heavner and Kattenburg and approved by Hilsman. Repeated to CINCPAC for POLAD.

2 Telegram 173, August 3, reported on Madame Nhu’s August 3 speech before a Women’s Paramilitary Youth training class. She “denounced the Buddhists as seditious elements who use the most odious Communist tactics to subvert the country.” (Daily Summary; Ibid., Daily Summaries: Lot 65 D 142. Telegram 173 is Ibid., Central Files, POL 6 S VIET)

3 The Reuters despatch was printed in The New York Times, August 5.

4 At noon, August 4, novice bonze Huyhn Van Le burned himself to death in front of the Monument aux Morts, Phan Thiet, Binh Thuan Province. This self-immolation was not part of a larger demonstration nor procession, and it was not witnessed by news reporters or photographers. Telegrams 178 and 183 from Saigon, August 5 and 6, contain reports of U.S. officials who later investigated the suicide. (Ibid., SOC 14-S VIET) Both telegrams are published in Declassified Documents 1975, 319B and 319C, respectively.

246. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Hilsman) to the Acting Secretary of State 246. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Hilsman) to the Acting Secretary of State1

Washington, August 6, 1963.

SUBJECT

Buddhist Problem in Viet-Nam

The following is a status report on the Buddhist situation in South Viet-Nam.

1. Situation Summary

Certain events in the last two weeks have pointed to an amelioration of the situation: a. Diem’s radio broadcast of July 182 expressing the Government’s “utmost spirit of conciliation;”

b. Removal of the barricades around the pagodas in Saigon

c. Release by the Government of most, if not all, those arrested in the Buddhist demonstrations;

d. The July 30 Buddhist manifestations were orderly and peaceful and the Government police were at pains to avoid incidents.

On the other hand, the following events of the last two weeks point to continued trouble and unrest: a. The Buddhists continue to refuse to meet with Vice President Tho’s committee to investigate complaints.

b. The Government continues to refuse to identify and punish the officials responsible for the May 8 deaths, which it considers an impossible Buddhist demand.

c. Ngo Dinh Nhu, in an August 3 interview,3 virtually threatened to crush the Buddhist headquarters at Xa Loi Pagoda. On the same day, Madame Nhu made a speech violently attacking the Buddhist leadership.4

2. Analysis

We conclude that the situation remains tense, volatile and potentially explosive. We anticipate further Buddhist demonstrations quite possibly resulting in violence and additional incidents.

a. There are increasing signs that the Buddhist leadership will attempt to prolong the dispute until the Government is overthrown.

b. It is increasingly likely that the Buddhist leaders now feel that they have gone too far to stop and revert to patience and conciliation. They may well fear later retaliation by Ngo Dinh Nhu if the dispute is resolved and Diem remains in power.

Continued unrest will, of course, play into the hands of the various coup groups which we know to be plotting Diem’s overthrow.

a. We estimate the chances of an attempted coup in the next few months at 50-50.

b. The odds of success of a coup are much more difficult to estimate but may also be about 50-50.

If Diem is overthrown, the risks of the interregnum period are great but they are probably less great than they were a year ago.

a. The insurgency situation is under considerably better control.

b. There still has not emerged a clear alternative leadership to Diem, but a military junta—with or without Tho as figurehead—is the most likely. Yet, neither the rise of Ngo Dinh Nhu to power, at least for a period, nor civil war between several non-Communist factions can be ruled out of the equation.

c. We have an approved contingency plan,5 which [we?] are continuously reviewing and attempting to perfect, to throw all our influence behind Tho and the military if a serious, and likely successful, attempt were made against Diem.

d. In addition, we are urgently seeking further but discreet contact with oppositionist elements, military and civilian, in order to give us a better chance to manipulate the outcome of a coup attempt.

If Diem is not overthrown, it is becoming increasingly likely that he will ultimately try to resolve the Buddhist problem by means of repression.

If so, it is quite possible that his popular support will be so reduced that he could no longer hope to defeat the Viet Cong.

3. Policy Guidelines

On the Buddhist issue, we should continue privately to press Diem and the GVN to take all measures required to conciliate the dispute. Our public praise of the GVN should continue to be reserved for specific acts, and we should avoid praise of the regime in general.

On the more general question of Diem and his regime, our policy should continue to be neither to encourage nor to discourage coup attempts. We do not know whether or not Diem can survive. With all that is at stake in Viet-Nam, we obviously cannot afford to back a loser but we are not yet in a position to pick a winner with any confidence.

This should remain our posture until the trend of events has further crystallized and Ambassador Lodge has had a chance to establish himself.

1 Source: Kennedy Library, Hilsman Papers, Countries, Vietnam. Secret. Drafted by Kattenburg.

2 See Document 228.

3 Nhu also warned that if the Buddhist crisis was not resolved, it would lead to an anti-American and anti-Buddhist coup. See footnote 3, Document 245.

4 See footnote 2, Document 245.

5 Enclosure to Document 133.

247. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 247. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, August 7, 1963, 9 p.m.

189. CINCPAC for POLAD. Deptel 160.2 I have received today categoric assurances from Ngo Dinh Nhu that he is supporting fully and with both hands Diem’s announced policy of conciliation vis-a-vis the Buddhists. In answer to direct question of whether he favors “crushing” Xa Loi Pagoda or its inmates through any means (i.e. directly, or by means of a coup d’etat or by a false coup d’etat), he said that he did not favor any such move. On contrary, he is convinced, he said, that government must continue to try to conciliate Buddhists, to make further concessions, and to demonstrate to Vietnamese people and to world absolute sincerity of President Diem’s July 18 declaration.3 He claimed that he had been urging this course upon the Tho commission as well as upon Diem, specifically that Tho commission should commence investigations of all complaints immediately, unilaterally if necessary, keeping door always open for Buddhist participation. (I understand from other sources that this is going to be done next week.) Nhu stated that any other interpretation of Reuters dispatch was erroneous. I summarized long discussion this point in approximately above language and told him I was going to so report to my government. He said that this would be an accurate report and a truthful statement of his position. He added that this position represented a politically risky course in Viet-Nam, since many people, including large segment of the Army, felt that it represented weakness on the part of the government towards a movement which was standing in the way of, if not actually subverting, the war effort and victory over the Viet Cong. He nevertheless reiterated that he would stand behind this policy, since he was convinced it offers the best way out. I told him, as I have once before, that if he was telling me the truth, he is a most misunderstood man. He replied that he knew he was misunderstood, but I could rely on his word. The conversation was direct but friendly.

Regarding Madame Nhu’s speech to the Women’s Solidarity Movement, I told him that it was considered by my government and myself, as well as by a number of Vietnamese with whom I had spoken, as inflammatory and directly contrary to the President’s policy of conciliation. I said that our own governmental, Congressional and public opinion could not understand or accept the contradictions between the government policy and her speech. I was sorry to say this but it was necessary if we were to retain our present relationships. Nhu did not defend the content of his wife’s speech, but defended at great length her right to make it as a private citizen who “does not speak for the government”. I told him in all frankness that he and the President could not expect this explanation to be accepted in my country, and I thought not in Viet-Nam. He said nobody realized, for example, that Madame Nhu had not seen President Diem for two months, that he and his family do not have meals with the President except on special occasions (under a mutually satisfactory arrangement), that she is in fact a private citizen who, he insisted, has the right to express her own views.

I am seeing President Diem on this matter and on others early tomorrow morning.

Nolting

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, SOC 14-1 S VIET. Secret; Priority; Limit Distribution. Repeated to CINCPAC.

2 Document 245.

3 See Document 228.

248. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam 248. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam1

Washington, August 8, 1963, 8 p.m.

178. Just as report your interview with Ngo Dinh Nhu (Embtel 189)2 reassured us somewhat, Halberstam story carrying Mme Nhu’s latest outburst appeared this morning NY Times (see septel).3

You are accordingly to seek new interview with Diem and tell him again that while we recognize Mme Nhu is private citizen rather than GVN official it clear we cannot ignore such destructive and insulting statements by person so clearly identified with him. Diem cannot overlook effect this has of undercutting his authority and creating image abroad that he being led around by apron strings.

Contradictory statements on Buddhist policy by President and Mme Nhu leave us, and Vietnamese people as well, in dark as to actual policy GVN pursuing. Seems essential to us that GVN at this time and without any equivocation publicly reaffirm conciliatory posture on Buddhist issue. This will require at lease implied repudiation Mme Nhu’s remarks.

Tell Diem that since he has assured us he following policy of conciliation and since Nhu has reiterated his support this policy to you as late as August 7, USG now regards it as absolutely required that Nhu make public statement confirming he in fact supports this policy.

Public statement Nhu and further conciliatory statements by Diem would go some ways toward assuaging doubts in USG. Tell Diem frankly, however, that at this crucial juncture most convincing action vis-a-vis both Vietnamese and US opinion would be to remove Mme Nhu from scene. We have in mind action similar to that taken in early years Diem regime when she sent to Hong Kong convent.

You could note that in Halberstam’s story Mme Nhu claims Diem has no following his own right, and that he must depend on her and his brothers for popular support.4 In Time magazine cover story,5 Mme quoted as stating “scornfully,” connection Diem’s policy of conciliation: “President too often wants what French call ‘a circle with corners’. He would like to conciliate as the Americans desire, smooth, no bloodshed, everyone shaking hands.”

Ball

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 15-1 S VIET Secret. Drafted by Heavner and Kattenburg, cleared in substance by Harriman and in draft by Forrestal, and approved by Hilsman. Repeated to CINCPAC for POLAD.

2 Document 247.

3 Reference is to telegram 175 to Saigon, August 8, in which the Department sent the Embassy summaries of two related front-page stories on Vietnam in The New York Times, August 8. The first was by David Halberstam in Saigon, entitled “Mrs. Nhu Denounces U.S. for ‘Blackmail’ in Vietnam”; the second was by Tad Szulc in Washington and reported on growing concern in the Kennedy administration that the Diem government would not survive unless it became more willing to compromise on Buddhist demands. (Department of State, Central Files, POL S VIET-US)

4 In telegram 180 to Saigon, August 9, the Department of State informed the Embassy that The New York Times and The Washington Post of August 9 both contained editorials critical of Madame Nhu. The Department provided extracts and noted that they might also be useful to Nolting in his upcoming discussion with Diem. (Ibid.)

5 Time, August 9, 1963, pp. 21-25.

249. Memorandum From Michael V. Forrestal of the National Security Council Staff to the President 249. Memorandum From Michael V. Forrestal of the National Security Council Staff to the President1

Washington, August 9, 1963.

SOUTH VIETNAM

The principal recent development in the situation in South Vietnam has been the growing number of contradictory statements made by official and semi-official Vietnamese on the Buddhist question.

Brother Nhu was reported late last week to have told a Reuters correspondent that he favored the forceful crushing of Buddhist political activity.2 Two days later, when queried by Ambassador Nolting, he denied having made such a statement and insisted that he was “2-fistedly behind the Government’s policy of conciliation.”3

Three days ago Madame Nhu, in a speech to a graduating class of the Women’s Solidarity League, attacked the Buddhists violently and followed this up in an interview with a New York Times correspondent (Halberstam) which I am sure you have seen.4

The Department has instructed Nolting to go back to Diem and suggest to him that Madame Nhu is undermining his position as President and should be sent out of the country. Nolting has also been instructed to ask Diem publicly to reaffirm the Government’s policy of conciliation (Saigon 178 attached).5

In the meantime Madame Nhu has issued another blast, which is carried on the front page of the government newspaper “Times of Vietnam”. (Saigon 190 attached)6

Hilsman is opposed to going any further at the moment and specifically does not think that the time has come for the United States publicly and officially to indicate disapproval of the GVN’s actions and policies. My own feeling is that we must take into consideration a growing domestic and international body of opinion which is becoming more and more critical of our intimate association with Diem.

Cambodia, Ceylon and Nepal have raised the Buddhist issue with the Secretary General of the UN and it is our best judgment that it is likely that the matter will come up in the General Assembly.

I am suggesting to Roger and Averell that we consider the kind of U.S. statement which will tread the difficult line between accidentally precipitating an upheaval in Saigon and affirming publicly the U.S. position on questions of religious tolerance, specifically in Vietnam.

Military and economic activities against the VC in the provinces still show no signs of having been adversely affected by the Buddhist controversy; but it is now the estimate of the intelligence community that the possibilities of a successful coup in the next 3 months are about even. In this connection, I have asked on your behalf that the Defense Department review their contingency planning for the protection and evacuation of Americans who are in Saigon; and the CIA to work with State in producing a re-evaluation of all information we have on coup plotting, so as to give the Department and the field a basis for decision in the event an accident occurs.

No decisions are required from you at this time, but you may wish to give some guidance during the next week when it becomes more clear what the real intentions of the GVN or the Buddhists are.

1 Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Vietnam Country Series, 8/1/63-8/20/63. Secret. A note on the source text reads: “Taken from Pres. week-end reading dtd 8/9/63.”

2 See footnote 3, Document 245.

3 See Document 247.

4 See footnote 3, Document 248.

5 Document 248. Telegram 178 to Saigon was not attached to the source text, but a copy is in the Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Vietnam Country Series.

6 According to telegram 190 from Saigon, not attached, the Times of Viet-Nam on August 8 carried a declaration by Madame Nhu reiterating her contention made in a CBS News interview of August 1 that the Buddhist leaders were trying to topple the Government of the Republic of Vietnam. She defended her statement made on the news broadcast that all the Buddhists had done was to “barbecue a bonze” with “imported gasoline.” Madame Nhu claimed the Buddhist leaders were neither true religious leaders nor representative of the Vietnamese people. (Department of State, Central Files, SOC 14-1 S VIET) A copy of telegram 190 is in the Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Vietnam Country Series, 8/1/63-8/20/63.

250. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 250. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, August 10, 1963, 7 p.m.

204. This report dictated before receipt Deptel 178.2

Regret my delay reporting series talks with Diem, Nhu and others in effort curb Madame Nhu and make clear GVN policy conciliation on Buddhist issue. This business has been fast-moving, and Dept will appreciate difficulties keeping reporting up to date.

Fact is Madame Nhu is out of control of everybody—her father, mother. husband and brother-in-law.

President Diem promised me, after talks in which I pulled no punches (Deptel 178), to “consider” what he could do about her; said he’s been thinking she ought to take a rest. That is as far as he would go. Results to date have been worse than negative. At same time, there have been positive developments on side of GVN: reaffirmations by Diem, as well as Nhu, that GVN through Tho committee intends faithfully to pursue policy of conciliation. Tho committee’s announcement of investigation of all complaints and request for details,3 keeping door open for joint investigations—measures which are having, I think, noticeable effect on Vietnamese public opinion, despite Madame Nhu.

I told President Diem very frankly, when he said that she spoke only as a private citizen, that this would not wash in the outside world and I did not think it would wash in Viet-Nam. I told him he could not expect to maintain present relationship with US Government if he would not take this matter into his own hands, back-up his Ambassador in Washington,4 and remove the appearance of schizophrenia from his government. He took this seriously and promised to consider what he could do. I also bore down heavily on the UN aspect.

In talks with Vice President, Thuan, Nhu, Mau, [less than 1 line not declassified], Buu Hoi, and others, have been trying to line up ideas and solid front on next moves.

Following are possibilities: (a) “Leave of absence” for Madame Nhu, perhaps in Rome;

(b) Further church admonition to Archbishop Thuc;

(c) Direct approach to Madame Nhu by me, after telling Diem that I intend doing so.

Re Deptel 178, action proposed para 2, 3 and in part 5 already taken and being pressed. I do not think it is a good idea to urge Diem to have Nhu make public statement of support for Diem’s policy, as this brings into question who is running the GVN and related problems. Please reconsider.5 Meanwhile I am seeking another appointment with President Diem.

Nolting

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 15-1 S VIET. Secret; Priority; Limit Distribution. Repeated to CINCPAC.

2 Document 248.

3 In telegram 191 from Saigon, August 8, the Embassy reported that on August 7 the Interministerial Committee on the Buddhist problem, headed by Vice President Tho, issued a communique inviting relatives of any person detained as a result of the events of July 16-17 in Saigon to write or telephone the Committee and provide details so that the Committee could begin any necessary investigation. (Department of State, Central Files, SOC 14-1 S VIET)

4 Apparent reference to the statement by the Vietnamese Ambassador in Washington, Tran Van Chuong (Madame Nhu’s father), that Madame Nhu’s remarks that all the Buddhists had done was “barbeque a bonze” with “imported gasoline” were impertinent and disrespectful. Ambassador Choung’s remarks were broadcast by the Voice of America in Vietnam, August 6. (Telegram 190 from Saigon, August 8; Ibid.)

5 According to telegram 185 to Saigon, August 12, the Department of State, including Ambassador-designate Henry Cabot Lodge, reconsidered and agreed with the Embassy that Diem himself should make a gesture in support of the policy of conciliation with the Buddhists. (Ibid.,POL 15-1 S VIET)

251. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 251. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, August 12, 1963, 6 p.m.

208. CINCPAC for POLAD. Deptel 178.2 Had very serious talk with President Diem this morning. I feel he is impressed by gravity of situation confronting him, both internal and external. When he told me that he would take seriously what I had said and would consider what he could do to meet our demands, I told him this was not enough—that time was running out and that he had promised me the same last week. Since then the situation had been made much worse by Madame Nhu’s intemperate utterances. He then promised to let me know this afternoon what he would do.

During course of lengthy conversation (in which I did most of talking), read him reftel word for word, explained points and pointed out inter alia that we were now talking about doubts and misgivings in US Government itself, not in US public opinion. I drew heavily, perhaps exhaustively, on store of goodwill and confidence, spoke absolutely frankly from point of view of partner in joint enterprise, could detect no resentment but rather a great sense of struggle between family loyalties and public duty. In this connection I stressed to him that as President his family is entire Vietnamese people and it must be their welfare which must prevail.

My talk with Diem was preceded by a visit at my home last night by Thuan (please protect source). Thuan summed up the feelings of most Cabinet members and his own by saying that it was the 11th hour for Diem to take charge of the government and to act as President. I have reason to believe that this is an accurate summary of most Cabinet opinion from conversations I have had separately with nearly all of them. I gave President Diem my own observations and convictions regarding the attitude, not only of high officials of his own government, but of many lower Vietnamese; stressed absolute necessity for him to take account personally of the crisis resulting from Buddhist problem. I told him that not only abroad, but here in Viet-Nam, it seemed clear that Madame Nhu, with the support of his brother, was usurping his prerogatives and control in this matter (he vehemently denied this) and that in my opinion and in that of my government nothing would now eradicate that impression except vigorous and positive public action by him, demonstrating his control over his own government and repudiating Madame Nhu.

I will report further after hearing from him.

Another point should be added: Thuan (protect source) told me last evening that he was convinced Madame Nhu had organized a secret police squad of her own, headed by her brother, Tran Van Khiem, and that already “illegal arrests” have been made by this group. I asked him whether Nhu was in on this and he said he found it impossible to believe that he was not. I told Diem that I had received certain unverified information to this effect. He flatly denied that there was any substance to it, saying among other things that he disliked and distrusted Khiem and that his family would never do such a thing. I told him I thought he had better look into it.

Throughout discussion, there was evident on Diem’s part a feeling that it was not so much what Madame Nhu said but how she said it that gave him trouble. He reverted again and again to the bad faith of the bonzes, to their sabotage of the war effort, etc. He also mentioned the pressure he was under from “good people” in the provinces and elsewhere not to knuckle under to the false monks. He complained that nobody in the outside world recognized the falsity of the religious issue or the fact that it was being used for subversive action. I told him that what he had just said confirmed my suspicion that his policy was in fact schizophrenic, that he had entrusted a policy of conciliation to the Vice President to implement and was himself condoning public attacks upon the Buddhists which made that policy impossible to implement; that he had to choose and do so decisively; that so far as the US was concerned he had to stick to and implement fully the policy of conciliation, and had to make certain public demonstrations that he was doing so. Otherwise, we could not support him.

He said that Vice President Tho was scheduled to make a restatement of government policy tomorrow, and that he expected, after talks with certain bonzes, that they would agree to joint investigations of the events in Phan Thiet. I seized upon this to press him most strongly to make that public declaration himself, in his own name and to take advantage of this opportunity to subdue the rising tide of public feeling, at home and abroad, that he is not master of his own government. If he responds at all positively to our demarche, I think it will be to make this declaration himself, as a first step.

Nolting

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 15-1 S Viet. Secret; Operational Immediate; Limit Distribution. Repeated to CINCPAC. According to a note on another copy, this telegram was part of the President’s weekend reading file of August 13. (Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Vietnam Country Series, 8/1/63-8/20/63)

2 Document 248.

252. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam 252. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam1

Washington, August 13, 1963, 7:20 p.m.

193. Embtels 219 and 220.2 Appears here that Tho press conference projects essentially unbending and non-conciliatory policy which is in flat contradiction to Diem promise to take our advice and make an announcement of GVN determination to follow policy of conciliation. We note that Tho appears indicate GVN intends prosecute Buddhists for May 8 affair, which is in direct conflict with Buddhist insistence GVN officials responsible for May 8 deaths. Such action is not only refusal of Buddhist request that these officials be identified and punished but is sure to provide further and legitimate grounds for Buddhist charges of persecution. Tho statement to effect that Buddhists arrested after June 16 may not enjoy clemency also sure to stimulate further Buddhist protest. Comparison of Madame Nhu and Senator Mansfield will not be well accepted here, and his remarks on Mme Nhu will not suffice as GVN repudiation of her intemperate attacks on Buddhists.3

Request your comments on above4 and estimate Diem intentions at this time. FYI: Unless he takes appropriate actions soon we will be compelled make public statement strongly critical of GVN handling religious issue. End FYI.

Do you believe there is any chance that Diem would be willing to take a “vacation” together with Nhus at this time?5 It is conceivable that Buddhist issue could be resolved in his absence, by Tho as Acting President and brother Luyen filling Nhu’s role (or new job as caretaker “Premier”) and defending Ngo family interests. We suspect Diem was fishing when he mentioned vacation, seeking to discover US desire to get him off scene in order promote coup, but if there is possibility he was in earnest, believe he should be taken up promptly on it. Would be absolutely essential of course that both Nhus accompany him. Worst sort of situation would be Diem on vacation and Nhus in full charge.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, SOC 14-1 S VIET. Secret; Operational Immediate; Limit Distribution. Drafted by Heavner, cleared by Kattenburg, and approved by Hilsman. Repeated to CINCPAC for POLAD.

2 In telegram 219 from Saigon, August 13, the Embassy sent highlights of Tho’s press conference of August 13 based on the notes of a USIA employee who attended it. (Ibid.) In telegram 220 from Saigon, also August 13, Nolting reported that at a farewell dinner in his honor on the evening of August 12, Diem promised to take U.S. advice and issue a declaration conciliatory to the Buddhists. According to Nolting, Diem also implied, without actually saying it, that his declaration would repudiate Madame Nhu. (Ibid.,POL 15-1 S VIET)

3 According to the account contained in telegram 219 from Saigon, Tho, in the question-and-answer part of his press conference, described Madame Nhu’s recent public statements as the “personal opinions” of a prominent member of the Vietnamese National Assembly and compared them to Senator Mansfield’s earlier reports which were critical of South Vietnam. Tho noted that Mansfield was a prominent member of the U.S. Congress and his criticism did not result in a change in the Kennedy administration’s support of South Vietnam. Tho suggested that Madame Nhu and Senator Mansfield’s situations were comparable.

4 In telegram 222 from Saigon, August 14, the Embassy replied that it believed the Department of State had interpreted the Tho press conference too negatively. (Department of State, Central Files, SOC 14-1 S VIET)

5 In telegram 222 from Saigon, the Embassy stated that it believed there was no chance that Diem would take a vacation in company with the Nhus.

253. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 253. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, August 14, 1963, 8 p.m.

226. CINCPAC for POLAD. Deptels 178, 185, 193, Embtels 208, 220.2 Delay and much hard negotiation on issuance of statement by Diem. I saw him early this morning and he had slipped back into postponement and vacillation, which he attributed to Buddhist attacks (banners, etc. in Saigon) against him and government and to attacks in US press, especially New York Times story by Szulc from Washington sources that Buddhist affair was affecting, or about to affect, war effort.

In face these factors, he said that Ministerial Council had advised him not to issue another conciliatory statement. I told him bluntly that for our part we could not accept this; I had given him before our reasons and he had promised to take positive action explaining clearly government’s position and, at least by implication, repudiating position set out so intemperately by Madame Nhu. This exchange occurred following ceremony this morning. I was supported by Chinese Ambassador Yuen and Australian Ambassador Hill.

At eleven o'clock appointment to say goodbye to President Diem, the exchange continued. We were absolutely frank with one another. I drew heavily on reftels (minus last para Deptel 193 re vacation). He maintained stoutly that neither the American press nor apparently the American government understood the real dimensions or all complexities of Buddhist problem, nor did we understand the true situation concerning the Ngo family and their individual contributions to the independence of Viet-Nam. He went into great detail on this, stressing particularly the absolute selflessness of Ngo Dinh Nhu’s contribution to the cause. I stuck to the position it would be impossible for the US Government to continue our present relationship to him and to his government if he did not promptly make a declaration which would show clearly who was running the country, would undo some of the damage done by Madame Nhu’s statements and would restore faith in GVN’s intention to carry out its announced policy of conciliation. Upshot finally was that he promised to make such a statement, if possible before I leave tomorrow. We are working hard on the follow up.3

At the close of this rather strenuous goodbye, President Diem was courteous enough to say that he considered my tenure here to have been one of the best souvenirs of his life, and that such frank exchanges as we had today would in no way mar our friendship. I said I heartily reciprocated his sentiments, and I felt that Ambassador Lodge would wish to deal with him on a similar basis of absolute frankness in the interests of our two countries. He asked me to thank President Kennedy for all he has done for Viet-Nam.4

“a. It took more pressure from Ambassador Nolting during their final meeting yesterday to get Diem to issue any statement at all reaffirming his government’s policy towards the Buddhists.

“b. The statement seems to do this well enough and, implicitly at least, to rebuke Mme. Nhu, but it takes the form of an answer to a question from Marguerite Higgins for publication in today’s Herald Tribune. Thus it could be disavowed if need be, and few Vietnamese are likely to be aware of it anyway.”

It was also noted that tension in Hue was mounting and more Buddhist monks and nuns were volunteering to sacrifice themselves. (Kennedy Library, National Security Files. Chester V. Clifton Series)

Nolting

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 15-1 S VIET. Secret; Operational Immediate; Limit Distribution. Repeated to CINCPAC.

2 Telegrams 178 and 193 to Saigon and telegram 208 from Saigon are Documents 248, 252, and 251, respectively. Regarding telegrams 185 to Saigon and 220 from Saigon, see footnote 5, Document 250, and footnote 2, Document 252.

3 Diem’s statement was made to newspaper correspondent Marguerite Higgins. As quoted in The Herald Tribune, August 15, Diem stated “the policy of utmost reconciliation is irreversible” and “that neither any individual nor the government could change it at all.” In a veiled reference to Madame Nhu, Diem was quoted as saying, “It is only because some have contributed, either consciously or unconsciously, to raising doubts about this government policy that the solution of the Buddhist affair has been retarded.”

4 On August 15, President Kennedy received and read the President’s Intelligence Checklist, August 15, which contained an item entitled “South Vietnam”:

254. Editorial Note 254. Editorial Note

Ambassador Henry Cabot Lodge met with President Kennedy on August 15, 1963, from 11 to 11:35 a.m. at the White House. (Kennedy Library, President’s Log Book) No record of their discussion has been found. Lodge subsequently recalled that when he met with President Kennedy on this occasion, he found the President “very much concerned by what was going on in Vietnam. He referred particularly to the famous Associated Press picture of the Buddhist monk, Quang Duc, burning himself alive. I suppose that no news picture in recent history had generated as much emotion around the world as that one had. President Kennedy referred to that picture, to the overall importance of Vietnam, and to what was going on in Saigon—to the fact that apparently the Diem government was entering a terminal phase. He also mentioned the extremely bad relations that the Embassy had with the press. He said, ‘I suppose that these are the worst press relations to be found in the world today, and I wish you, personally, would take charge of press relations.”’ (Oral history interview with Henry Cabot Lodge, August 4, 1965; Kennedy Library, Oral History Program)

William J. Miller’s biography of Lodge, Henry Cabot Lodge, pages 337-338, also contains an account of this meeting based on Lodge’s recollections

255. Memorandum From the Director of the Vietnam Working Group (Kattenburg) to the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Hilsman) 255. Memorandum From the Director of the Vietnam Working Group (Kattenburg) to the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Hilsman)1

Washington, August 15, 1963.

SUBJECT

GVN Progress in Struggle Against the Viet Cong During First Six Months 1963

REFERENCE

Saigon 203, August 102

Reftel provides an excellent, thorough, very detailed account of progress made by the GVN in the struggle against the Viet Cong during the first six months of 1963. The most important aspects of the progress made are as follows:

Population: MACV estimates GVN effectively controls 6,766,000 as of July 1, 1963, increase of 966,000 over July 1, 1962. (Total population SVN approximately 14.8 million.) GVN has predominant control of 3.5 million, decrease of about 100,000. Under neither GVN nor VC control, about 600,000, increase of 489,000. Viet Cong controls about 700,000, decrease of over 400,000. Viet Cong has predominant control over 1,000,000, decrease of almost 700,000. Overall, changes reflect shift of population into GVN effective control category at more rapid rate than a shift of territory into GVN effective control category.

Villages: GVN effectively controls 939 villages as of July 1, 1963, an increase of 80 over July 1, 1962. GVN has predominance in 741 villages, an increase of 41. Neither GVN nor VC control 148, an increase of 114. VC controls 341 villages, a decrease of 113. Viet Cong has predominance in 375 villages, a decrease of 47.

VC Attacks: The VC was responsible for 6929 incidents of all kinds during the first six months of 1963, compared to 10,270 during the first half of 1962. VC attacks dropped by 36% and the scale of attacks also declined. ARVN forces, during the first six months of 1963, inflicted casualties on the VC at a somewhat higher rate than during the first six months of 1962. Although weapons losses by GVN forces continue to be a problem, improvement has been noted on a statistical basis, and greater proportion of ARVN weapons losses occurred during a few well-conducted actions on the part of the VC. In contacts with VC forces the GVN forces continued to show improvement in offensive capability.

1 Source: Department of State, Vietnam Working Group Files: Lot 67 D 54, POL-1, General Political. Secret. Drafted by Conlon.

2 Telegram 203 contained the summary highlights of the Embassy’s Task Force Weekly Progress Report. (Ibid., Central Files, POL 2 S VIET)

256. Memorandum From the Deputy Director for Plans, Central Intelligence Agency (Helms), to the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Hilsman) 256. Memorandum From the Deputy Director for Plans, Central Intelligence Agency (Helms), to the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Hilsman)1

Washington, August 16, 1963.

SUBJECT

Transmittal of Estimates on Situation in South Vietnam

Attached hereto are estimates prepared by CIA in Saigon with regard to Government of Vietnam instability, and the likelihood of a coup d’etat, brought on by the continuing Buddhist crisis. Discussions held at our 14 August meeting2 were based upon these reports.

For the Deputy Director (Plans):

W. E. Colby

Attachment 13

SUBJECT

Provisions of the Constitution which Deal with the Succession to the Presidency

1. The President and the Vice President of South Vietnam are elected for five year terms. after initial election they are eligible for reelection for two more terms and can therefore serve a total of 15 years. Consequently, if Diem remains in office, he can run for re-election in 1966 for the third and final time, unless the Constitution is amended in the interim. See Article 32.

2. Article 33 notes that apart from death in office, the President may, after a medical examination, be declared incapacitated because of serious illness by a four-fifths majority of the total number of delegates in the National Assembly. Also, he may tender his resignation to the National Assembly, and Article 33 puts no limitations upon his reasons for resigning. Article 33 also provides for the President’s deposition by the Special Court of Justice, which consists of the President of the High Court of Appeals and 15 deputies elected by each house of the National Assembly, or 30 in all.

3. The Constitution provides for the simultaneous election of the President and Vice President. In the event of departure of the former from office for any reason, it is further provided that the Vice President shall assume the title and office of President, with full rights and duties, for the balance of the five year term. If both the President and the Vice President fail to complete their term, however, an interim caretaker arrangement is prescribed as indicated below.

4. Article 34 provides that in a circumstance in which there is no President and no Vice President, the President of the National Assembly shall temporarily exercise the function of the President of the Republic in order to expedite current affairs and to organize the election of a new President and a new Vice President within a maximum period of two months.

5. Articles 41 and 42 conceivably could have some bearing on this subject. Article 41 provides that for reasons of emergency the President may, between two sessions of the National Assembly, sign orders in council (meaning, presumably, that he can govern by decree). Article 42 provides that in case of emergency, war, internal disturbances or financial or economic crisis, the National Assembly may vote a law conferring on the President the power to sign orders in council for a definite time and within definite limitations, with a view to enforcing the policy defined by the National Assembly in the law by which it delegates power to the President. Article 42 says nothing one way or the other about whether the National Assembly could pass such a law in favor of a former President of the National Assembly who might be temporarily exercising the function of President of the Republic as prescribed under Article 34. In other words, the Constitution does not provide a mechanism under which a caretaker head of state may govern by decree although neither is forbidden.

Attachment 24

SUBJECT

The Possibility of Ngo Dinh Nhu Succeeding President Ngo Dinh Diem

1. The circumstances of President Ngo Dinh Diem’s departure from the scene will be an extremely important predeterminant to Ngo Dinh Nhu’s succession as President of South Vietnam. The possibilities include: a. Resignation

b. Death by natural or accidental means

c. Death by assassination

d. Overthrow by coup d’etat, possibly, but not necessarily involving death.

2. Nhu is, of course, a member of the National Assembly, Khanh Hoa Province being his home constituency. Given the elimination of Diem, it therefore follows that Nhu could, without violating the constitution, aspire under Article 34 to exercise the powers of the President for a period not exceeding two months, if he could first persuade both Vice President Nguyen Ngoc Tho and Truong Vinh Le, President of the National Assembly, to resign their present offices, and then contrive his own election by the Assembly as successor to Le. Nhu would then have two further months during which to arrange and win a general election which would legally install him in the office of President. Vice President Tho, in this connection, represents an imponderable. Although he has never been considered a particularly strong man, he is probably not a cipher like Le and has never had an opportunity to show his mettle. It is possible that in a Government of Vietnam (GVN) crisis Tho might, on his own initiative, generate enough support to thwart Nhu’s ambitions, even if he might not ultimately succeed in maintaining himself in the Presidency long enough to finish out the constitutional term. Although it is extremely difficult to assess the likelihood that Nhu could successfully carry off this gambit, it is technically possible and could be done within the letter of the law, if not its spirit, provided Diem had left office under circumstances not involving a coup d’etat as such. It is clear that Nhu, second only to Diem, is at this time the strongest political power in Vietnam.

3. In the aftermath of the fourth possibility, namely violent overthrow of Diem, Nhu’s chances of succession would be poor, whether he tried to do so by either constitutional or unconstitutional means. While perhaps conceding Nhu’s competence to hold high office, in terms of experience, organizational capability, and as the driving force behind the strategic hamlet program, etc., there exists considerable opposition to him among the educated and articulate elements of the population, including the military. Unquestionably, his greatest liability is Madame Nhu, towards whom these same elements express an intense and indeed very personal hostility on the ground that she is vicious, meddlesome, neurotic, or worse. Whether this opposition to Nhu and his wife is based on cold logic or on supercharged emotions is immaterial, it is important because it exists. It would be difficult, if not almost impossible, for Nhu to install himself in office, by any method whatever, after the removal of his brother by a coup d’etat. Nhu and his wife would be fortunate to escape with their lives, and in fact there have been reports of at least one plot in which the Nhus would be murdered, but Diem retained in power to preside over a reoriented GVN.

4. In a conversation with an American observer on 25 June (TDCSDB-3/655,297 and CSDB-3/655,373),5 Nhu gradually worked himself into a highly emotional state of mind. Among other things he expressed strong opposition to Diem and his government, to such an extent that it would be unwise to exclude totally the possibility that Nhu would be capable of attempting a coup d’etat against Diem. This is not the first time Nhu has expressed himself so violently. In a conversation about two months ago, in which Dang Duc Khoi interpreted for Nhu and two Time/Life staffers, Nhu flatly said that the present regime (though not necessarily Diem himself) must be destroyed. He repeated this statement several times and lent emphasis to it by resorting to the Latin “Carthago delenda est”. On many occasions in the past he has then qualified such remarks by saying that he views the Diem regime as a transitional stage and the child of historical necessity, but neither to the Time/Lifers nor to the American observer on 25 June did he express such an intermediate point of view. In general, Nhu’s chances for succession to the Presidency tend to diminish as the extent of violence attending Diem’s removal increases, but there does remain a possibility that Nhu could attain the Presidency even in a violent situation, perhaps even including assassination of Diem, provided such situation had been organized by Nhu and was controlled by him.

5. The key to any plan to prevent Nhu’s accession to the Presidency will be Vice President Tho, and the best plan would be to form a nationally supported action committee, outside the present government, whose task would be, in the event of Diem’s departure, to assist Tho to attain the Presidency and then to maintain himself in power as prescribed by the Constitution.

6. We are pessimistic about the possibility of improving Nhu’s domestic or international image by any means which we can envision. He has been the subject of volumes of adverse comment both in Vietnam and abroad, and the importance of Madame Nhu as a liability has been mentioned above. So far as the Army of the Republic of Vietnam (ARVN) is concemed, it can probably be said that Brigadier General Huynh Van Cao, Commander, IV Corps, is the only general officer who has a reputation of having unequivocally supported Nhu thus far—even this statement must be qualified, however, by noting that it is a moot point whether the troops of the two divisions in Cao’s command would remain loyal to him. It thus follows that it would be as difficult to raise Nhu’s stature in the ARVN eyes as in the case of the Vietnamese and foreign public at large. As the ARVN commanders are certainly fully aware, Diem has always exercised close personal control over the assignment of his top military leaders, and the military leaders have no compelling reason for being deeply loyal to Nhu on this score.

7. The relationship between Nhu and Ngo Dinh Can involves a number of complexities. The two brothers have differed on many issues over the years and have constructed internal political organizations which frequently compete with one another on such matters as appointment to lower and medium level jobs and access to lucrative economic franchises. Madame Nhu is again a factor, in that she and Can detest each other. Additionally, Can has often expressed a low opinion of Nhu’s judgment and practical ability as a leader. Nevertheless, in a crisis involving Nhu’s efforts to attain the Presidency, after—and only after—Diem’s disappearance from the scene, Nhu could probably count upon Can’s assistance and would make strenuous efforts to obtain it. A large measure of Can’s power in Central Vietnam is derived from support from Saigon, and to retain that power over a long period, he must have continued support. Can would reason that with Nhu in office in Saigon, he would stand a better chance of continued support than he would from any other leadership. Can’s influence during a crisis period would be in a measure independent of Saigon, in that it is based upon a sense of identification with him on the part of provincial authorities, both civil and military, who obtained and hold their own positions with, at the very least, his concurrence. Can’s hold over his subordinates is not so much a matter of their loyalty to him as a realization on their part that without him they could very likely lose their own positions. In speculating upon Can’s relations with Nhu, and his likely course of action if the latter makes a bid for power, past experience suggests that Can, in a crisis, cannot always be counted upon to play a rational role, even in terms of his own best interests. Though a shrewd politician, he nevertheless has several times shown a tendency to panic in emergencies, or simply to withdraw in the face of situations which he regards as presenting difficult problems.

8. In conclusion, Nhu’s chances of achieving the Presidency are assessed as follows: a. In a situation other than a coup d’etat directed against Diem, Nhu’s chances of initially taking over the Presidency are fair.

b. In a coup d’etat against Diem, it would be almost impossible for Nhu tQ become President. In fact, he and his wife could very well be victims of the coup.

c. If Nhu should initially take over the Presidency, his chances of solidifying his position and maintaining himself in power over an extended period are poor.

Attachment 36

SUBJECT

Contingency Planning for Succession Crisis

Section I: The Stable Transfer of Power

1. Vice President Nguyen Ngoc Tho would, at least initially, succeed to the Presidency through the normal constitutional processes should anything happen to President Ngo Dinh Diem. Tho’s possible succession immediately presents basic policy questions requiring a United States Government decision. If Diem should leave the Presidency under any circumstances whatever, constitutional succession of Tho would be the most desirable next step and the least dangerous in terms of both Vietnamese and U.S. Government self-interest. Implicit in this statement would be a decision (a) to strengthen Tho’s position by all the means at our disposal, as soon as Diem was out of the way, and (b) to oppose a power grab by Nhu, either initially or at some later date. It is obvious that if Diem should be overturned in a chaotic and violent situation, it might be extremely difficult for the U.S. Government to contribute significantly to bringing the situation under control. In this eventuality the most readily presentable outcome would probably be some form of military junta or other “abnormal transfer of power”.

2. A U.S. Government decision to back the constitutional succession of Tho would be thus based on a number of factors: a. The conclusion that Nhu’s chances of maintaining himself in power for an extended period are poor.

b. Acceptance of the opinion that, regardless of his chances of survival, Nhu’s past behavior and that of his wife are such that we could not tolerate him as president, in terms of U.S. Government policy.

c. Agreement that Tho represents the only presently foreseeable alternative to Nhu who would have a fair chance of survival and whom we might be able to guide along lines acceptable to U.S. Government policy.

d. Acceptance of the view that strong and immediate expressions of U.S. Government support of Tho, following the departure of Diem, would make it more difficult for Nhu to attract and consolidate various Vietnamese power factors which he would need to install and maintain himself m power.

3. We should be under no illusions as to the sanctity of the Vietnamese constitution in the eyes of many Vietnamese. Some of its provisions are a legal fiction (e.g., prohibitions against illegal arrest, brutal treatment, etc.) and, in any case, the constitution has not existed long enough to develop deep-rooted prestige in terms of tested historical precedent. From the American point of view, however, the constitution probably does provide the best available tool with which to force a succession solution which we can accept, and thwart the ambitions of Nhu, whom we cannot accept, in such a way as to maintain a tenable U.S. Government policy stance in the eyes of American and world opinion.

Section II: Abnormal Transfer of Power

1. It is difficult to forecast with any degree of confidence how an abnormal transfer of power might come about, nor precisely who might be involved. General possibilities include the following, descending order of likelihood: a. A non-communist coup d’etat by the army, perhaps drawing on civilian oppositionists, though not necessarily.

b. A palace” coup d’etat, perhaps engineered by Dr. Tran Kim Tuyen and his colleagues, directed against the entire Ngo family (probably with cooperation of the military).

c. A “palace” coup d’etat engineered by Nhu in an effort to unseat Diem and install himself in office.

d. A communist coup d’etat mounted by the Viet Cong.

2. Key power centers among the military and police services are as follows: a. Presidential Guard. Strength 2,500. Heavily armed with ten M-24 tanks, six M-113 armored personnel carriers, six M-114 armored personnel carriers, vehicles with mounted quad 50’s, recoilless rifles, bazookas. Some personnel billeted on palace grounds, but most are at other locations in Saigon. This unit will probably remain completely loyal to Diem. There is strong friction between the Presidential Guard and the Airborne Brigade.

b. Armor command, which is controlled by the Joint General Staff UGS) and has subordinate squadrons under operational control of corps commanders (except III Corps, where the JGS still exercises operational control). There are considerable armor units scattered at various points in and around Saigon. These units could, under their own power, be brought into play within various periods of time up to four hours, depending upon their distance from the center of the city. The different units of the 1st armor squadron are the most significant as they have many access routes to Saigon and cannot easily be blocked. Owing in considerable part to the divisive effect of the Buddhist question, the loyalty of the armor command to Diem may have been impaired.

c. Airborne Brigade. There are six battalions, all based in the vicinity of Saigon. Whenever trucks are made available to one of the battalions for an operation, an armor unit is placed on alert. Recently armor units have been attached to two airborne units in an operation near Saigon. Airborne Brigade has mounted one coup d’etat, and indications are that it might be willing to mount another. Many of the key officers participated in the first coup, and some have recently expressed regret that it did not succeed. The loyalty of the Airborne Brigade to Diem is very doubtful.

d. Marine Brigade. There are four marine battalions. The 3rd battalion is based near Saigon, and the 4th battalion is currently stationed in the city to help during the crisis situation. The loyalties of the Marine Brigade were split during the 1960 coup.7 Diem has worked hard to gain the marines’ loyalty, and he has probably succeeded. The Brigade Commander, however, has just rotated battalions on emergency duty in Saigon, thus removing from the city a strong Catholic battalion commander and replacing him with a Buddhist whose loyalties, while unknown, might be mixed.

e. Ranger Companies. The loyalty of these companies, of which there are perhaps 200, is difficult to assess. Some companies reportedly were formed predominantly of Catholics. A number of the companies have been brought into Saigon during the Buddhist situation. In a crisis they will be led by picked Vietnamese Special Forces officers who are considered loyal to the Diem regime. The Ranger Commander, Colonel Ton That Xung, has no great loyalty to the regime.

f. ARVN Corps Units: (1) III Corps. Troops from the III Corps would be the first to arrive in Saigon during a crisis, apart from special units, such as those mentioned above. Brigadier General Ton That Dinh is reportedly engaged in coup plotting, but the information is rather scanty on this point.

(2) IV Corps. The Corps Commander, Brigadier General Huynh Van Cao, is considered to be the general most loyal to Diem. It is doubtful, however, that he could control the two divisions under his command unless there was an identity of interests between them and himself. The 7th Division Commander, Lieutenant Colonel Bui Dinh Dam, is said to be loyal to Secretary of State Nguyen Dinh Thuan. The troops of the IV Corps could be blocked from entering Saigon by the destruction of several highway bridges or by the second armor squadron, which holds a potential locking position at My Tho.

(3) The I Corps and the II Corps are too far from Saigon to play an immediate role in a coup crisis.

g. Navy. Captain Ho Tan Quyen, Navy Commander, personally led two companies of marines to the defense of Diem in the 1960 coup, and is generally believed to be loyal. The Navy vigorously defended the palace against the air attack on 27 February 1962.8

h. Air Force. It is at least doubtful that the air force would defend Diem. Several high level air force officers have advocated a coup d’etat.

i. Police and Security Services: (1) The latest strength figures show 21,000 uniformed regular police, of which 5,900 are in Saigon, and 1,301 combat police, of which 534 are in Saigon. So far as is known, the combat police have no heavy weapons except a few old Malayan (British) armored cars and a very few 30 caliber machine guns. The uniformed police have nothing heavier than submachine guns.

(2) During the 1960 coup, large numbers of Saigon police, including several of their leaders, absented themselves from their duty posts and thus were not of help to the government. There is no reporting to suggest that leaders of the police could be counted among the oppositionists, but conversely there is little to suggest that the police would be any more effective in behalf of the regime than they were the last time, if another coup should be attempted. An important factor is that the police are well aware that they are unable to stand up against heavily armed regular military units.

3. Even if the foregoing assessment of the loyalties of the armed services and police is not certifiably accurate, it can be said, with some confidence, that the regime has sustained a significant loss of prestige and support in these services. The Buddhist unrest of the past two months has had a divisive effect, and in a new crisis the Diem government would be leading from a much weaker position than in November 1960.

4. Conclusions and recommendations: In the event of an attempted coup d’etat, there will be an initial period of confusion, perhaps characterized by fighting in the streets of Saigon and other disturbances. This phase may be a matter of hours, or it may extend over several days. After this period, it will be clear either that Diem has put down the coup and will remain in office, or that he has failed in this objective. The following actions will be called for from the U.S.: a. Initial period of confusion. All assets will be utilized to obtain as much information as possible-identify coup leaders, their plans, the extent of their armed support, etc. During this period it seems doubtful that the U.S. Government could take any definitive position. If Diem should succeed in putting down the coup, he will later resent the U.S. Government inaction, but this cannot be helped.

b. Diem victory. If Diem wins, or if the indications that he is going to do so are sufficiently convincing, the U.S. Government will have no alternative but to issue a statement reaffirming support.

c. Successful coup d’etat. The U.S. Government position should be to intercede with the coup leaders to the extent that this may be feasible to urge that they set up a stable, broadly based, anti-communist and anti-neutralist regime. They should be urged to put as good a face as possible on the new government, in terms of its legality and constitutionality, putting Tho in office as Diem’s successor as provided under the constitution. If the coup leaders are a form of military junta we should still urge them to utilize Tho, even if only as a front man. It should be pointed out that in attempting to influence American and world opinion in favor of the new regime, the task will be more easily done if the new regime installs itself in an orderly way.

d. Unavailability of Tho. The remaining contingency is that the coup will succeed, but that Tho either is swept away in the course of it or is unacceptable to the ruling group, even as a front man. In this situation, and bearing in mind the need to put a facade of respectability on the new government, the best, if not the only U.S. Government course, would be to recognize the status quo and take all possible steps to influence the junta to install a broadly based government which would also utilize competent civilians.

5. A change of government in Vietnam could occur at any time, with little or no warning and in an orderly or disorderly fashion. It is recommended that the policy questions herein presented be resolved as quickly as possible, in order that we can move quickly in Saigon if the need arises.

Attachment 49

SUBJECT

Vietnamese Personalities Who Might Play a Dominant Role in a Succession Crisis

1. The type of succession crisis is the determining factor in judging which personalities will play important roles. Those persons involved in a stable transfer of power are likely to be different from those figuring prominently in an abnormal situation, e.g., an assassination or an attempted coup d’etat. However, there will be some overlap in the personalities listed due to the fact that certain key military units provide a common denominator in the analysis of any succession crisis. The degree of loyalty toward the regime and the probable actions of the commanding officers, the dominant officers and the men in these key units must be considered by participants in any succession crisis, since they are the final arbiters re success or failure in establishing a successor government.

2. The dominant personalities of the key units: a. Lt. Col. Nguyen Ngoc Khoi, CO Presidential Guard. All reports indicate that Khoi is strongly loyal to President Diem, Ngo Dinh Nhu and Ngo Dinh Can. Following the 11 November 1960 coup attempt, Khoi assumed command of the demoralized guard, and proved highly capable in the improvement of the morale and the efficiency of the unit by intensive training, including patrol action against the Viet Cong near Saigon. High morale combined with heavy armament make the guard an important power center.

b. Col. Nguyen Van Thien, CO, Armor Branch. A devout Buddhist from Central Vietnam, Thien has expressed dissatisfaction with the regime apparently because of current Buddhist crisis. The Armor Branch has no operational control over armor units and is the repository for officers not trusted by the regime. Chief of Staff Major Nguyen Dinh Bang, Chief of Operations Captain Nguyen Quang Nguyen, and Major Duong Hieu Nghia, a Dai Viet, are among this group. They are listed here because they have influence among the officers and men of the armor squadrons. This is especially true of Thien.

c. Major Huynh Ngoc Diep, CO, First Armor Squadron, outskirts Saigon. A passionate defender of the regime in the Buddhist crisis, Diep is undoubtedly loyal. Strongly pro-regime company commanders Captain Bui Nguon Ngai and Captain Tran Van Thoan assist Diep to maintain the loyalty of the squadron to the Government of Vietnam (GVN).

d. Major Nguyen Van Ba, CO, Second Armor Squadron, two hours from Saigon. His loyalty to the regime is unknown. He is highly regarded by Col. Thien and commands a unit whose composition is mostly Buddhist. Probably Ba would respond to Thien’s orders in a crisis.

e. Col. Cao Van Vien, CO, Airborne Brigade. Vien describes himself as the only loyal officer to the GVN in the Airborne. He is not popular with the men, but is respected because of his leadership ability. In a crisis, he would probably not be able to rally the Airborne behind him against a coup with good potential success.

f. Major Ho Tieu, Second Task Force Commander, Airborne. Tieu participated in the aborted 11 November 1960 coup and frequently expresses regrets that it failed. He is considered, like most Airborne officers, as highly likely to join coup forces, and may be able control the Airborne as a unit.

g. Lt. Col. Le Nguyen Khang, CO, Marine Brigade, Saigon, is a nominal Buddhist from North Vietnam. Privately, he has expressed some dissatisfaction with the regime, but is believed to be strongly loyal to the GVN. He is an exceptional officer as commander, trainer, and in staff work. He has won the loyal support of almost all his subordinates because of his interest in their welfare. He could probably swing the Brigade as a unit behind the regime in a crisis.

h. Captain Nguyen Van Tinh, CO, Fourth Battalion, Marine Brigade. Located in Saigon. Tinh is regarded by advisors as an exceptional officer. He is very close to Khang, but nothing is known of his loyalty to the regime.

i. Captain Ma Viet Bang, CO, Third Battalion, Marine Brigade, Saigon. Bang is a maverick in the Brigade and is considered the least likely Battalion CO to remain loyal to Khang and the regime.

j. Col. Le Quang Tung, Commander, Special Forces, Saigon. Tung is a key officer in the Can Lao party from Central Vietnam. Both Tung and his outfit are considered to have unquestioned loyalty to the regime, and reports concerning various coup plots refer to the necessity of eliminating Tung.

k. Col. Huynh Huu Hien, CO, Air Force, Saigon. A nominal Buddhist, Hien supports the regime but not strongly. He is commander of an Air Force whose senior officers have expressed extreme criticism of the regime. Hien is close to Brigadier General Nguyen Khanh, CO, II Corps, and would probably support Khanh if the latter organized a coup.

1. Lt. Col. Nguyen Cao Ky, CO, First Transport Group, Air Force, is a swashbuckler type and idolized by pilots. He has many adherents among Air Force officers and is known to be close to Tran Kim Tuyen.

m. Captain Ho Tan Quyen, CO, Navy, led two companies of Marines to aid President Diem during the 11 November 1960 abortive coup. He is considered loyal to the regime and is a capable administrator but has had little background experience for his present position.

n. Brigadier General Ton That Dinh, CG, III Corps, bordering Saigon on the North. If any unit could be considered as the key unit, this is it. Dinh is a member of the Can Lao and nominally a Catholic. He has been reported as plotting a coup, but nothing is definitive. Dinh is an opportunist who would probably choose the winning side in a crisis.

o. Col. Nguyen Van Thien, CO, Fifth Division, III Corps, is a Catholic from Central Vietnam. A supporter of Ngo Dinh Nhu, he is probably loyal to the regime. There is no information on Thien’s ability to command the loyalty of his division, which has a high percentage of Nungs.

p. Brigadier General Huynh Van Cao, CG, IV Corps, bordering Saigon on the South, is probably loyal to the regime. He is a Catholic and a member of the Can Lao. Highly intelligent with an excellent record as a division CO, there is some doubt if he could swing the Corps as a unit to support the regime in a crisis.

q. Lt. Col. Bui Dinh Dam, CO, Seventh Division, immediately South of Saigon, is a Catholic from North Vietnam. Dam is close to Major General Tran Van Minh, Permanent Secretary General, Ministry of National Defense, and Inspector General, ARVN, and Secretary of State at Presidency Nguyen Dinh Thuan. He would be likely to support the latter in a crisis. According to Gen. Minh, Dam would support a nationalist, anti-communist movement aiming at overthrow of the regime.

r. Brig. Gen. Mai Huu Xuan, CO, Quang Trung Training Center, is a key figure because Quang Trung has a large quantity of weapons and is close to Saigon. Xuan is a Buddhist from South Vietnam, and is believed to be a dissident, but to an unknown degree. He is friendly with Brigadier General Pham Xuan Chieu and Major General Tran Van Don. He is an excellent administrator and an experienced security officer.

s. Col. Phan Dinh Thu (nickname, Lam Son), CO, Thu Duc Reserve Officers School, is a Buddhist from Central Vietnam and close to Ngo Dinh Can. The regime has made efforts to insure Thu’s loyalty He was promoted to a full colonel and his promotion was made permanent; he was awarded the National Order Third Class, which previously was given to only three other officers. Thu’s loyalty is difficult to assess, but he certainly has the courage to mount a coup if he is so inclined. Thu Duc, which is near Saigon, has many students who are discontented because they were drafted and for various other reasons.

3. The personalities who would be involved in a stable transfer of power and who might be recommended to Vice President Tho for appointment to the key positions cited are: a. Major General Duong Van Minh as Chief, Joint General Staff. “Big Minh” is close to Tho and is a Southerner. He probably has more prestige with other Army officers than any other single officer, and could swing the Army behind Tho.

b. Brigadier General Le Van Kim as Chief of Staff, JGS. He is probably the best staff man in the Army and its most fully qualified officer. He is close to General Duong Van Minh.

c. Maj. Gen. Tran Van Minh, as alternate to General Kim as COS, JGS. He is a capable staff man but not as good as Kim. He is a Southerner and close to Duong Van Minh.

d. Nguyen Dinh Thuan as Secretary of State at Presidency. Tho may not approve of this appointment as Thuan is publicly associated with the present regime. However, Thuan is by far the most capable civil servant extant and works well with the U.S. mission.

e. Dr. Pham Huv Quat, former Dai Viet leader and founder of The Front for National Unity, as an alternate to Thuan. He is a former Minister of Defense and Minister of Education, and helped draft the code of military justice and the curriculum now used m the public schools. He is a moderate oppositionist.

f. Tran Trung Dung as Secretary of State/Assistant Minister of National Defense. Formerly held this position, as well as other public posts and is a good administrator. He has impressed American officials m the past with his ability.

g. The Ministries of Interior, Civic Action, and Information are key ministries. (Directorate General of Information should be elevated in status.) The following list of qualified men should be presented to Tho for serious consideration for appointment to these or other Cabinet positions: (1) Tran Van Lam, Ambassador to New Zealand and Australia. A Southerner, former National Assembly President, and a delegate for the southern provinces.

(2) Tran Quoc Buu, President of the General Confederation of Vietnamese Labor. He turned down the Vice Presidency at one time, is dedicated to the cause of labor, and is honest and intelligent.

(3) Tran Kim Phuong, Charge d’Affaires in Malaya and Consul General in Singapore. One of the younger men who is qualified for a high rank. He has impressed American officials with a mature outlook and grasp of problems, particularly those connected with foreign affairs and economics.

(4) Tran Le Quang, Secretary of State for Rural Affairs: He has handled a difficult job well because he is a generally good administrator and understands peasant problems.

(5) Pham Khac Suu, an oppositionist now under sentence for participation in 11 November 1960 abortive coup d’etat. He is included here because he is held in high Dublic regard, and is renowned for personal and moral courage. He could be the means of selling the public on the sincerity of Tho’s government.

(6) Dinh Trinh Chinh, Counselor at Law, is highly regarded by many oppositionists. He has a brilliant mind, particularly in the political field. He is regarded by some Vietnamese as a Tuyen man, but this is not true. Politically ambitious, he would work well with Americans, whose viewpoint on anti-communist war he largely shares.

(7) Luu Van Tinh, Director General of Budget and Foreign Aid and also acting chief of the Foreign Exchange Office. He is generally accorded recognition by U.S. mission economists as quite knowledgeable in his field. Probably he should be only appointed as an economist or to a position with similar functions to those which he now holds.

(8) Brigadier General Le Van Kim, has been proposed as COS, JGS, but he could also fill position as Minister of Interior or of National Defense.

4. Power grab by Ngo Dinh Nhu. It is almost impossible to categorize those who would support Nhu in this venture, and who would turn on him. His assets include the ability to divide his opposition, considerable political acumen, support of his brother Ngo Dinh Can (a case of preserving Can’s own position) and a few persons who depend upon Nhu for their own positions or who genuinely feel Nhu is necessary for the stability of the country.CIA feels that he could reasonably expect support from: Ngo Dinh Can, Lt. Col. Nguyen Ngoc Khoi, Lt. Col. Le Quang Tung, General Huynh Van Cao, Lt. Col. Le Nguyen Khang, Col. Nguyen Van Thieu, Major Huynh Ngoc Diep, and Madame Nhu. Gen. Dinh could be expected to give support to Nhu if he thought that the latter had a good chance of success.

5. Personalities involved in coups d’etat. All officers listed in paragraph 2 will figure in varying degrees of importance in any coup. Their reaction will depend upon who the coup leaders are, and their chances of success. Some, like Nguyen Ngoc Khoi will fight for the regime, others, e.g., Major Ho Tieu will probably be against it; most, if not actually part of the coup, will wait and see how the coup is going before commitment. CIA does not assess many high ranking officers as having the necessary courage to initiate genuine coup. Brig. Gen. Do Cao Tri, CO, First Division, I Corps, and dominant officer in that Corps, Col. Lam Son, Brig. Gen. Nguyen Khanh, CG, II Corps, possess this moral courage. Other possibilities are, in lesser degree, Duong Van Minh and Maj. Gen. Tran Van Don, Commander, Land Forces. CIA still does not have sufficient information accurately to assess possibilities of a revolt by a group composed solely of captains, majors, or lieutenant colonels.

6. CIA is well aware most civilian old line oppositionists want the regime deposed. Many engaged in coup plotting to some extent, but so far this amounts only to talk without adequate military backing. Good examples of this type oppositionist are the “caravellistes”. An exception may be Tran Kim Tuyen who reportedly is engaged in serious coup plotting, as has been reported.

7. In the event of a successful coup, CIA believes a great effort should be made to convince the leaders (who would probably be some form of military junta) to honor constitutional procedure as far as possible. The United States may well be confronted with a fait accompli in which civilian leaders have been appointed, but the recommendations contained in paragraph 3 provide a good basis for negotiations. CIA has yet to discover an outstanding civilian personality acceptable to all factions.

8. Assassination may be an integral part of projected coups or may be done in hope that something better will somehow emerge from the resulting chaotic situation. This was apparently the plan of the instigators of the palace bombing in February 1962. Tran Kim Tuyen is allegedly plotting a palace coup with assassination of the Ngo family planned. Paragraph 3 still appears valid in such a case but with this difference, the U.S. should notify appropriate military leaders that the Tuyen group is not acceptable and ask them to install Nguyen Ngoc Tho as President. If this is not done, it is likely that coup will follow coup in an increasingly anarchic situation.

1 Source: Department of State, Vietnam Working Group Files: Lot 67 D 54, POL 26, Coup Rumors. Secret. Copies of the covering memorandum and the attachments were sent to Krulak and Forrestal.

2 No record of these discussions has been found.

3 Secret.

4 Secret.

5 Neither found.

6 Secret.

7 For documentation on the unsuccessful coup of November 1960, see Foreign Relations, 1958-1960, vol. I, pp. 631 ff.

8 For documentation on the air attack on the Presidential Palace in Saigon, see Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, vol. II, Documents 87 ff.

9 Secret.

257. Memorandum From the Joint Chiefs of Staff’s Special Assistant for Counterinsurgency and Special Activities (Krulak) to the Secretary of Defense (McNamara) 257. Memorandum From the Joint Chiefs of Staff’s Special Assistant for Counterinsurgency and Special Activities (Krulak) to the Secretary of Defense (McNamara)1

Washington, August 16, 1963.

SACSA 468-963

SUBJECT

Vietnam

1. I know you are aware of and concerned with yesterday’s Halberstam article in the Times.2 We, as well as others, are dissecting it, exposing its factual and statistical weaknesses.

2. This is easy, but misses a key point, which I feel may be of use to you apart from our point-by-point analysis, which is coming. It is this—Halberstam, in his comments on the temperature of the battle in the Delta, exhibits a lack of understanding of our entire Vietnam strategy. From the start, that strategy involved a purification process, north to south; driving the Viet Cong southward—away from their sources of strength and compressing them in the southernmost area of the peninsula. This has proceeded. I Corps is fairly clean; II Corps, not much less so; III Corps, warmer; and IV Corps, still tough.

3. This was expected. The gradual redisposition of Vietnamese power, from the less to the more critical areas, portrays this. As General Cao, CG, IV Corps, said in June, “We want to see all the Viet Cong squeezed into the Ca Mau Peninsula, and then rot there.”

4. If Halberstam understood clearly this strategy, he might not have undertaken to write his disingenuous article. Perhaps this strategy should be more fully explained to the press.

Respectfully,

V. H. Krulak
Major General, USMC

1 Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OSD Files:FRC 69 A 3131, Vietnam 331. Secret. A note on the source text indicates that McNamara saw this memorandum.

2 In a New York Times article of August 15, entitled “Vietnamese Reds Gain in Key Area,” Halberstam concluded that the military situation in the Delta had seriously deteriorated over the past year. This decline, Halberstam reported, occurred notwithstanding the previous 20 months of a U.S. build-up of South Vietnamese forces there. Halberstam noted that while the Delta comprised less than a quarter of South Vietnam’s land mass, it contained a majority of its population and resources. According to the Halberstam article, U.S. military sources stated that the Viet Cong moved large units of 600 to 1,000 men into the Delta and were well armed with captured American weapons. Instead of attacking the paramilitary Self-Defense Corps or the Civil Guard, the Viet Cong now took on the regular Armed Forces of South Vietnam.

258. Memorandum From Senator Mike Mansfield to the President 258. Memorandum From Senator Mike Mansfield to the President1

Washington, August 19, 1963.

SUBJECT

Observations on Viet Nam

If the conflict in Viet Nam is at least as important to us as it is to the Vietnamese, then there is little room for manoeuvre in the present situation. We are stuck with it and must stay with it whatever it may take in the end in the way of American lives and money and time to hold South Viet Nam.

In such circumstances whether to support the present government or not is the secondary or tactical question. It is the question, to state it simply and frankly, of which way is likely to be least costly in American lives and money. Indeed, the reports in the press suggest that this is now the subject of intense discussion among the agency-technicians. In any event, those in day-to-day command of policies should be best qualified to advise on this question since they will have to make the day-to-day decisions on operations which, in effect, act either to bolster the present government’s position or to encourage a replacement.

Certainly, the selection of Mr. Lodge for a principal role in these decisions is an excellent one. The framework in which he is to make them ought to be clear in his instructions. It ought to be made equally clear to all concerned—Americans and Vietnamese alike—in Viet Nam and in Washington that on behalf of the President, Mr. Lodge is the man who will make the decisions and, insofar as official Americans are concerned, their obligation is to support his decisions fully and actively. If it is necessary to remove personnel to make the point emphatic that should be done promptly.

However, it is necessary to face the fact that either way—with the present government or with a replacement—we are in for a very long haul to develop even a modicum of stability in Viet Nam. And, in the end, the costs in men and money could go at least as high as those in Korea. This is the reality of our situation, if we remain wedded to the premise that South Viet Nam is at least as important to us as it is to the Vietnamese. At this point, with the changing of Ambassadors, therefore, it is pertinent to examine this present premise of policy. The die is not yet finally cast but we are very close to the point when it will have to be. Therefore, we may well ask ourselves, once more, not the tactical question, but the fundamental question: Is South Viet Nam as important to us as the premise on which we are now apparently operating indicates? Is it really as important to us as it is to the Vietnamese themselves? Or have we, by our own repeated rhetorical flourishes on “corks in bottles” and “stopping Communism everywhere” and loose use of the phrase “vital interests of the nation” over the past few years given this situation a highly inflated importance and, hence, talked ourselves into the present bind? In short, have we, as in Laos, first over-extended ourselves in words and in agency programs and, then, in search of a rationalization for the erroneous initial over-extension, moved what may be essentially a peripheral situation to the core of our policy-considerations?

It would appear that there is, at least a presumption that such is the case in Viet Nam and for the following reasons: 1. Even the most sanguine view of defense needs in the Western Pacific, such as the so-called MacArthur Line of a decade or so ago, never envisioned the inclusion of a direct U.S. defensive bastion in Viet Nam.

2. It is almost inconceivable that any policy for the defense of the United States in the Western Pacific would be based upon the commitment of hundreds of thousands or millions of Americans on the Asian mainland, where our naval and air power would be least effective; (Recall Eisenhower’s dictum: “Let Asians fight Asians”). Note, too, the decision not to pursue the conflict in Korea into Manchuria and beyond which was made as much by President Eisenhower and Secretary Dulles in negotiating the truce, as it was by President Truman and Mr. Acheson in initiating those negotiations. Are we now to find, at an enormous potential cost, “vital U.S. interests” in South Viet Nam when we did not find them in Korea?

3. The most compelling argument for a vast commitment in South Viet Nam and Southeast Asia in terms of U.S. interests is the negative one of denying the resources of the region to Chinese domination and, thereby preventing China from solving its food and other resource-problems. This is an understandable argument but it presupposes a genuine common international interest in this objective. If such cooperation is not forthcoming, a real question arises as to the point at which the cost in men and money to the United States of essentially unilateral action to achieve the objective outweighs any possible advantage which it might provide to the security and welfare of this nation.

4. Certainly, there is no case for holding South Viet Nam on the positive grounds of commercial or other economic interests to this nation. We will be decades, at least, in recouping from all of Southeast Asia, in a commercial sense, what the attempt to hold Viet Nam alone has already cost the people of the United States, let alone what it promises yet to cost.

What the above suggests is that the situation in Viet Nam is not “at least of as much importance to us as it is to the Vietnamese” (the present premise under which we are apparently operating) but that we have talked ourselves and “agencied” ourselves into this premise. It suggests that Viet Nam is not central to our defense interest or any other American interest but is, rather, peripheral to these interests. It suggests, further, that the way out of the bind is certainly not by the route of ever-deeper involvement. To be sure it is desirable that South Viet Nam remain free of Communism but it is also desirable that we do not spend countless American lives and billions of dollars to maintain an illusion of freedom in a devastated South Viet Nam. And it is also desirable that we do not find ourselves, militarily, so bogged down in South Viet Nam or throughout Southeast Asia that we have few resources, short of nuclear, for deployment elsewhere in other critical peripheral situations.

If we go back to the period prior to the first Geneva conference we may find the clue to a valid premise of United States policy in South Viet Nam which can be supported at a cost somewhat commensurate with our peripheral national interests in the situation. We did not, at that time, have even the remotest idea of becoming involved, as the French were, with armies on the mainland of Southeast Asia. The most sanguine proposal, as I recall, was for a one-strike aerial attack to relieve the French garrison at Dien Bien Phu and, in the end, even that was rejected by Mr. Eisenhower.

And when the civil war against the French finally came to an end, the extent of our commitment was, at most, for financial and economic aid to the successor non-Communist government in Saigon and, militarily if at all, through S.E.A.T.O. which was thoroughly international in original concept, if not in its subsequent evolution. It is this limited commitment which has been agencied, through the years, to what is now close to irrevocable total commitment.

In terms of specific U.S. interests, however, it would seem that any premise for Vietnamese and Southeast Asian policy should bind us less not more tightly now than it did at the outset of our involvement. A reasonable premise for present U.S. policy might follow these lines:

We are concerned with the freedom of Viet Nam and the other nations of Southeast Asia, as we are with freedom throughout the world. We join with other nations, within and without the region, via the United Nations or other international combinations in support of such social evolution as these nations seek. But we do not propose to attempt, unilaterally, on behalf of any government what it can only do for itself; that is, to so conduct itself as to marshal its own peoples in support of free political evolution. We reserve to ourselves the right to determine when such circumstances exist and, hence, when to assist, when not to assist, and when, if necessary, to withdraw assistance. In the absence of responsible and responsive indigenous leadership or adequate international cooperation in supporting social evolution in freedom, the essential interests of the United States do not compel this nation to become unilaterally engaged in any nation in Southeast Asia. Indeed, it is doubtful that it is in the interests of the peoples of those nations themselves, for the United States to become so engaged.

If this is the more valid premise for United States policy than the present premise, then certain courses of action stem from it: 1. Agency spokesmen should cease to indulge in rhetorical flourishes about what we are going to do in Viet Nam and stress, if we must have rhetorical flourishes, what we are not going to do.

2. We should stress not the vague “vital importance” of the area to the U.S., but in cold logic, the relatively limited importance of the area in terms of specific U.S. interests as compared, for example, with Latin America.

3. We should stress publicly the international aspects of the problem of preserving freedom in Viet Nam and minimize our unilateral responsibility, while at the same time we make it clear to other non-Asian nations-notably France and Britain-that in the absence of increased international participation we may be compelled to reconsider our own commitment in Viet Nam.

4. We should keep in the background, the possibility of referral of the matter at some point to the Geneva Conferees or to the United Nations if the pressure grows for increasing our involvement.

5. Specifically, in terms of the internal situation in South Viet Nam, we might withdraw abruptly and in a matter-of-fact fashion a percentage—say, 10 per cent—of the military advisors which we have m Viet Nam, as a symbolic gesture, to make clear that we mean business when we say that there are some circumstances in which this commitment will be discontinued and, in justification, point to the comment of Ngo Dinh Nhu on too many Americans in South Viet Nam.

6. We should accent not so much our contribution of genius and men and money to the strategic hamlet program or the operations of the special forces, but our concern with the welfare of the Vietnamese people in the cities and villages.

7. We should stress our desire for peaceful solutions not only of inner South Vietnamese political difficulties but of all-Vietnamese problems and of all Asian problems.

In these and in other ways, in short, we should cease to speak and act on a premise which commits this nation increasingly to solutions, preponderantly by force, not only in South Viet Nam but, possibly throughout Asia, unless we recognize fully that we will pay the great preponderance of the costs of pursuing that premise and unless we are prepared to pay these cost in lives and money, whether the premise involves just South Viet Nam or, in the end, all of Viet Nam and Southeast Asia, if not the Chinese mainland itself.

1 Source: University of Montana, Mansfield Papers, Series XXII, Box 103, Folder 14. A note attached to the source text reads: “Believe Senator took this and gave original to the President.”

259. Memorandum From Thomas F. Conlon of the Vietnam Working Group to the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Hilsman) 259. Memorandum From Thomas F. Conlon of the Vietnam Working Group to the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Hilsman)1

Washington, August 20, 1963.

SUBJECT

Article by David Halberstam in New York Times of August 15 Alleging Viet Cong Gains in Mekonz Delta Area2

Detailed comments have been received from Task Force Saigon and separately through military channels on the subject article. These comments are unanimous in contradicting the essential thesis developed in the article. Contrary to the assertions by Mr. Halberstam, attributed for the most part to unidentified American military sources, the conclusion of Task Force Saigon is that the overall military situation in the Mekong Delta area has improved steadily during the past year, although at a slower rate than in the High Plateau area of Central Viet-Nam, for example.

Attached as Tab A is Saigon’s 261 of August 19,3 which contains the detailed comments of Task Force Saigon on the Halberstam article and on the numerous errors and inaccuracies contained therein. Attached as Tab B is a detailed analysis of the article prepared by General Krulak’s office for the Joint Chiefs, containing the text of the Halberstam article, as well as statistical and other comments thereon.4 Tab C is a report on the same subject from the Naval Attache in Saigon.5 The study prepared for the Joint Chiefs (Tab B) is the most complete of the three attachments.

In view of the well-organized and systematic presentation of the attachments, there is little purpose to be served in going into the details of the rebuttals to the Halberstam article. Perhaps it will suffice for your purposes to note Task Force Saigon’s overall comment. that the IV Corps Area, which is that covered by the Halberstam article, is a well-established Viet Cong base area, long neglected by the GVN, and therefore the most difficult for the Government to operate in. As the Naval Attache notes, the National Military Campaign plan was developed on the premise that the Mekong Delta area would be the most difficult in which to defeat the VC and reestablish GVN control. Techniques which have worked well elsewhere, such as the food control program on the High Plateau, have been impossible to execute in the Mekong Delta. With its abundant supplies of food, the Mekong Delta has not been a suitable area for application of food control programs. The low-lying, swampy nature of the terrain has seriously hampered military operations. Accordingly, there has been a lag in the progress of the military and strategic hamlet programs in the Delta, as compared to other Corps areas.

However, Task Force Saigon concludes that the situation in the Delta as a whole has not only not deteriorated in the past year but that continual progress has been made in isolating the Viet Cong from the population. There is no doubt that continuing intensified effort, tailored to its special problems will be required for the Delta area in the future.

1 Source: Department of State, Vietnam Working Group Files: Lot 67 D 54, Press Relations. According to a memorandum for the record, August 15, President Kennedy requested from Secretaries McNamara and Rusk information on “military operations in South Vietnam.” He did so, according to the memorandum, “after the President had read an article in today’s New York Times by David Halberstam which indicated that things are going badly in Vietnam.” (Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Chester V. Clifton Series)

2 See footnote 2, Document 257.

3 Not attached and not printed. (Department of State, Central Files, DEF 19 US-S VIET)

4 A copy of this detailed analysis, entitled “A Critical Analysis of the Article: Vietnamese Reds Gain Key Area,” August 19, is Ibid., Vietnam Working Group Files: Lot 67 D 54, PR-11, Press Relations. President Kennedy was given a copy of the analysis by Forrestal. Krulak gave a copy to McNamara, who read it on August 28. Krulak informed McNamara: “It was easy to discredit the article, but it has not silenced—or influenced—Halberstam.” (Undated covering memorandum from Krulak to McNamara, attached to the analysis)

5 Message from CINCPAC to the JCS and DIA, DTG 172325Z August 1963, not printed here. (Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Vietnam Country Series) It is published in Declassified Documents, 1975, 267B.

260. Memorandum From the Joint Chiefs of Staff to the Secretary of Defense (McNamara) 260. Memorandum From the Joint Chiefs of Staff to the Secretary of Defense (McNamara)1

Washington, August 20, 1963.

JCSM-629-963

SUBJECT

Summary Report on Eighth Secretary of Defense Conference, Honolulu, 7 May 19632 (Withdrawal of 1,000 US Military From Vietnam)

1. During the Honolulu Conference on 6 May 1963, you directed that a plan be prepared for the withdrawal of 1,000 US military personnel from the Republic of Vietnam by the end of CY63.

2. A proposed plan for conducting the withdrawal, prepared by the Commander in Chief, Pacific (CINCPAC) and concurred in by the Joint Chiefs of Staff, is attached hereto.

3. In reviewing the CINCPAC plan, the Joint Chiefs of Staff agreed that no US units should be withdrawn from the Republic of Vietnam for purely psychological purposes until the political and religious tensions now confronting the Government of Vietnam have eased. For that reason, the final decision to implement the withdrawal plan should be withheld until late October. This will allow ample time for all US personnel to arrive home by Christmas.

4. The CINCPAC plan to withdraw US personnel in three or four increments is favored over a one-time withdrawal of 1,000 personnel for the following reasons: a. Minimum impact on US/GVN military activities.

b. Opportunity for news prominence and coverage over an extended period of time.

c. Creation of fewer personnel, administrative, and transportation problems, i.e., holding over personnel in order for them to depart with their unit, diverting transport aircraft for return to the United States, and overcrowding facilities in Saigon for staging and departure.

5. If you approve the proposed plan, a public affairs annex designed to produce the desired psychological impact, both domestic and foreign, will be prepared and forwarded for your approval.

6. It is recommended that you approve the withdrawal plan for planning purposes, and withhold final decision pending a reevaluation of the situation by the Joint Chiefs of Staff that will be forwarded to you by 20 October 1963.

For the Joint Chiefs of Staff:

Maxwell D. Taylor
Chairman
Joint Chiefs of Staff

Appendix

Honolulu, undated.

Plan Submitted by the Commander in Chief, Pacific (Felt)3

CINCPAC’S WITHDRAWAL PLAN

1. The main emphasis would be on withdrawal of units rather than individuals.

2. Training RVNAF units to replace US elements to be withdrawn has been in effect since the Comprehensive Plan for the Republic of Vietnam was first developed.

3. In order to achieve maximum press coverage, and at the same time cause the least impact on US/RVN military operations, the withdrawal should be programmed over approximately two months. For compassionate and psychological reasons, the last increment of personnel should be withdrawn in time to arrive home by Christmas.

4. Recommended list of units to be withdrawn:

Unit Strength Destination

Army:

One Platoon 560 Military Police Co. 33 CONUS

CV-92B (Caribou) Test Unit 3 CONUS

Engineer Construction/Advisory Teams 36 CONUS

Six Medical Civic Action Teams 57 CONUS

UTT Helicopter Co (Minus 1 platoon) 117 Okinawa

Army Support Unit 155 CONUS

Three Machine Gun Platoons 63 25th Division

Air Force:

Detachment 1964 Communications Group 56 CONUS

Detachment 5th Tactical Control Group 25 CONUS/Clark AFB

Air Force Support Unit 105 CONUS

C-123 Detachment Spray (Ranch Hand) 16 Clark AFB

F-102 Detachment (Water Glass) 48 Clark AFB

Precision Measuring Equipment Lab 15 Clark AFB

Detachment 6091st Recce Squadron 13 CONUS

Navy:

Headquarters Support (HSAS) Element 21 CONUS

Marine Corps:

Security Platoon 47 CONUS or Okinawa

Joint:

MAAG Element 167 CONUS

MACV Element 26 CONUS

Total Strength: 1,003

5. The withdrawal should be accomplished in three or four increments, each large enough and sufficiently spaced to obtain news prominence and coverage. The first increment, clearly the most important from a publicity viewpoint, should therefore contain more colorful units, a wide spectrum of skills, and representatives from all Services. The first increment is composed tentatively of the following units:

Unit Strength

Army:

Medical Civic Action Teams 30

Engineer Construction/Advisory Teams 36

One Platoon UTT Helicopter Co. 66

MAAG Advisors 25

Air Force:

Detachment 1964 Communications Group 56

MAAG Advisors 12

Marine Corps:

Security Platoon 47

Navy:

MAAG Advisors 4

Total Strength: 276

1 Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OSD Files: FRC 69 A 3131, Vietnam 321 thru 370. Secret. A note on the source text indicates that Deputy Secretary of Defense Gilpatric saw this memorandum.

2 Regarding this conference, see Document 107. The summary report is not printed. (Washington National Records Center, RG 84, Saigon Embassy Files: FRC 68 A 5159, Eight Sec Def Conf., May 6, 1963)

3 Secret. No drafting information appears on the source text, but for a narrative summary of the preparation of this plan, see United States-Vietnam Relations, 1945-1967, Book 3, pp. 12-16.

V. Raids on the Pagodas and a Possible Coup, August 21-28, 1963: Martial Law, Lodge’s Arrival, Responsibility for the Crackdown on the Buddhists, the Cable of August 24, NSC Subcommittee Meetings on Vietnam, New Assessments From the Field, U.S. Support of the CoupV. Raids on the Pagodas and a Possible Coup, August 21-28, 1963:
Martial Law, Lodge’s Arrival, Responsibility for the Crackdown on the Buddhists, the Cable of August 24, NSC Subcommittee Meetings on Vietnam, New Assessments From the Field, U.S. Support of the Coup

261. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, August 21, 1963, 10 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 2-4 S VIEI Secret; Operational Immediate. Repeated Operational Immediate to CINCPAC and Tokyo. Received at 1:28 p.m. Relayed to the White House, CIA, Office of the Secretary of Defense, and the Departments of the Army, Navy, and Air Force. Ambassador Nolting left Saigon on August 15; Ambassador Lodge was in Tokyo en route to Vietnam.

262. Editorial Note

263. Department of State Daily Staff Summary

Washington, August 21, 1963.

Source: Department of State, Top Secret and Secret Summaries: Lot 65 D 142. Top Secret; Eyes Only for Designated Recipient. This summary was part of a daily series prepared in the Operations Center of the Department of State and made available to the Secretary of State and other principal officers in the Department.

264. Memorandum From the Director of the Defense Intelligence Agency (Carroll) to the Secretary of Defense (McNamara)

Washington, August 21, 1963.

Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OSD Files: FRC 69 A 3131 Vietnam 381. Secret. A note on the source text indicates McNamara saw this memorandum.

265. Memorandum for the Record by the Joint Chiefs of Staff’s Special Assistant for Counterinsurgency and Special Activities (Krulak)

Washington, August 21, 1963.

Source: National Defense University, Taylor Papers, T-172-69. Secret.

266. Memorandum Prepared by the Office of Current Intelligence, Central Intelligence Agency

Washington, August 21, 1963.

Source: Department of State, Vietnam Working Group Files: Lot 67 D 54, POL 26 Coup Rumors. Secret; No Foreign Dissem.

267. Memorandum From the Acting Secretary of State to the Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs (Harriman)

Washington, August 22, 1963.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 1 S VIET. Secret. Drafted by Ball. An attached note from Ball to Harriman reads as follows: “Averell: I am really worried about how we will establish an effective relationship between Washington and Saigon, now that Cabot is on the spot. I would like very much to talk with you about this and would appreciate it if you would call me when you have read the attached. George” No record of a Ball-Harriman conversation on this matter has been found.

268. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam

Washington, August 22, 1963, 7:56 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 2-4 S VIEI Secret; Operational Immediate. Drafted by Hilsman and Ball and cleared in substance with Ball and Harriman. Repeated to CINCPAC.

269. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, August 23, 1963, 8 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 2-4 S VIET. Secret; Operational Immediate; Limit Distribution. Repeated to CINCPAC.

270. Memorandum From the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (Taylor) to the Secretary of State

Washington, August 23, 1963.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 S VIET Secret; Sensitive. A note on another copy of this memorandum by Chester V. Clifton, Military Aide to the President, indicates that the President saw it. Clifton also wrote the following comments: “Don/anti-Nhu; respected by the Army. Ty in Walter Reed (cancer).” (Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Vietnam Country Series, 8/21/63-8/23/63)

271. Editorial Note

272. Department of State Daily Staff Summary

Washington, August 23, 1963.

Source: Department of State, Top Secret and Secret Daily Summaries: Lot 65 D 142. Top Secret; Eyes Only for Designated Recipient.

273. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, August 24, 1963, 11 a.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 15-1 S VIEI Secret; Operational Immediate; Limit Distribution. Repeated to CINCPAC and relayed upon receipt at the Department of State to the White House. Roger Hilsman, in To Move a Nation, p. 485, describes this cable as “perhaps the most convincing judgment of all” of the reports from Saigon on Vietnamese dissatisfaction with the campaign of Nhu against the Buddhists.

274. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, August 24, 1963, 6 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, SOC 14-1 S VIET. Secret; Operational Immediate; Limit Distribution. Repeated to CINCPAC. Hilsman cites this telegram in To Move a Nation, pp. 484-485, as part of an approach by Vietnamese Generals to American officials.

275. Telegram From the Central Intelligence Agency Station in Saigon to the Agency

Saigon, August 24, 1963, 6:45 p.m.

Source: Library of Congress, Harriman Papers, Vietnam Policy. Secret. Also sent to Honolulu. The source text is a copy sent by the CIA to the Department of State for Hilsman and Hughes; also sent to the White House for Bundy and to JCS for Krulak. According to a note on the source text, TDCS dissemination of this cable would follow. That report, TDCS DB-3/656,252, August 24, is published in Declassified Documents, 1977, 93C.

276. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, August 24, 1963, 11 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 2-4 S VIET Secret; Operational Immediate; Limit Distribution. Received at 2:05 p.m. Repeated to CINCPAC.

277. Memorandum From the Counselor for Public Affairs of the Embassy in Vietnam (Mecklin) to the Ambassador (Lodge)

Saigon, August 24, 1963.

Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 306, USIA Files:FRC 68 A 5160, Vietnam Working Group. Secret; Eyes Only.

278. Memorandum From Michael V. Forrestal of the National Security Council Staff to the President

Washington, August 24, 1963.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Vietnam Country Series, 8/24/63-8/31/63, Memos and Miscellaneous. Top Secret. A note on the source text indicates that this document was taken from the President’s weekend reading, dated August 24.

279. Editorial Note

280. Telegram From Michael V. Forrestal of the National Security Council Staff to the President, at Hyannis Port, Massachusetts

Washington, August 24, 1963, 4:50 p.m.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Vietnam Country Series 8/24/63-8/31/63, State Cables. Top Secret; Eyes Only. A note on the source text in Clifton’s hand reads: P[resident]—as discussed with Secretary Ball.”

281. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam

Washington, August 24, 1963, 9:36 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Har-Van Files, Overthrow of the Diem Government in South Vietnam, 1963. Top Secret; Operational Immediate. Printed also in United States-Vietnam Relations, 1945-1967, Book 12, pp. 536-537 and Declassified Documents, 1975, 321B. Drafted by Hilsman and cleared by Hilsman, Forrestal, and Ball. Approved by Harriman for transmission and classification. The drafting and clearance of this message has occasioned subsequent controversy which is reflected in the memoirs and recollections of some of the principal personalities involved at the time. General Maxwell Taylor stated in Swords and Plowshares, pp. 292-294, that the cable was an “end run” by an anti-Diem faction in Washington including Hilsman, Harriman, and Forrestal. Taylor believed the cable was ill-conceived, confusing, and would never had been approved had Hilsman and his colleagues not taken advantage of the absence from Washington of most of the high-level officials of the administration. Hilsman, in To Move a Nation, pp. 487-488, and in a later oral history interview (Kennedy Library, Oral History Program) maintained that the cable was cleared by the President and all representatives of the relevant agencies.

282. Memorandum for the Record by the Joint Chiefs of Staff’s Special Assistant for Counterinsurgency and Special Activities (Krulak)

Washington, August 24, 1963.

Source: National Defense University, Taylor Papers, T-172-69. Top Secret.

283. Telegram From the Commander in Chief, Pacific (Felt) to the Joint Chiefs of Staff

Honolulu, August 25, 1963, 10:58 a.m.

Source: National Defense University, Taylor Papers, Tÿ09172-69. Secret; Priority. Repeated to the Commanders of the U.S. Army, Pacific; U.S. Fleet, Pacific; and Pacific Air Force.

284. Telegram From the Central Intelligence Agency Station in Saigon to the Agency

Saigon, August 25, 1963.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Vietnam Country Series, 8/24/63-8/31/63, CIA Cables. Secret. The CIA sent copies to the White House for Forrestal, to the Department of State for Hughes and Hilsman, and to the Joint Chiefs of Staff for Krulak. The telegram was received at the White House at 10:41 a.m.

285. Telegram From Michael V. Forrestal of the National Security Council Staff to the President, at Hyannis Port, Massachussets

Washington, August 25, 1963, 5:34 p.m.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Vietnam Country Series, 8/24/63-8/31/63, State Cables. Top Secret; Eyes Only; Operational Immediate. The substantive portion of this telegram is printed in the Pentagon Papers: Gravel Edition, vol. 11, p. 735.

286. Message From the Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Vietnam(Lodge)

Washington, August 25, 1963.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Vietnam Country Series, 8/24/63-8/31/63, State Cables. Top Secret. Apparently sent via CIA channels to Saigon. The message is unsigned, and there is no time of transmission or receipt on the source text.

287. Voice of America Broadcast

Saigon, August 26, 1963.

Source: Library of Congress, Harriman Papers, Vietnam Policy. A note on the source text indicates that this was a copy of “VOA 2-One Thirty AM Breakfast Show.” Apparently this is the text of the relevant portion of a prerecording of the 8 a.m. broadcast in Saigon on August 26. In To Move a Nation, p. 489, Hilsman explained that the broadcaster did not check the broadcast against the press guidance (telegram 244 to Saigon; see footnote 7, Document 281), and therefore made the “flat statement” in the last paragraph that the United States might reduce its aid to Vietnam.

288. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, August 26, 1963.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 5 VIET-US. Top Secret; Eyes Only; Operational Immediate. Sent via CIA channels as CAS 0329 from Saigon. The Department of State passed the message to the White House and to the Office of the Secretary of Defense exclusive for McNamara, Gilpatric, Taylor, and Krulak. There is no time of transmission on the source text, but it was received at the Department of State at 3:11 p.m. The source text is not signed.

289. Memorandum for the Record

Washington, August 26, 1963, noon.

Source: National Defense University, Taylor Papers, Vietnam, chap. XXIII. Top Secret; Sensitive. Drafted by Krulak. The meeting was held at the White House. A memorandum of conversation of this meeting by Hilsman is in the Kennedy Library, Hilsman Papers, Countries, Vietnam, White House Meetings, State Memcons.

290. Telegram From the Central Intelligence Agency Station in Saigon to the Agency

Saigon, August 26, 1963.

Source: National Defense University, Taylor Papers, T-172-69. Top Secret. Also printed in summary form in Pentagon Papers: Gravel Edition, vol. 11, pp. 735-736.

291. Telegram From the Central Intelligence Agency Station in Saigon to the Agency

Saigon, August 26, 1963.

Source: National Defense University, Taylor Papers, T-172-69. Top Secret. There is no telegram number indicated on the source text.

292. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, August 26, 1963, 10 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL US-S VIET. Secret; Priority; Eyes Only; Limit Distribution. Repeated priority to CINCPAC. Received at 3:36 p.m. Passed by the Department of State to the White House.

293. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam

Washington, August 26, 1963, 8:18 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, INF 8 US. Top Secret; Operational Immediate. Drafted by Hilsman, cleared with Forrestal, and approved by Ball.

294. Telegram From the Central Intelligence Agency Station in Saigon to the Agency

Saigon, August 26, 1963.

Source: National Defense University, Taylor Papers, T-172-69. Top Secret. The source text is a copy sent by the CIA to the Joint Chiefs of Staff exclusive for Krulak who was to pass it exclusive to Lansdale. Copies were also sent to the White House for Forrestal and the Department of State for Hughes and Hilsman.

295. Telegram From the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (Taylor) to the Commander, Military Assistance Command, Vietnam (Harkins)

Washington, August 26, 1963, 8:31 p.m.

Source: National Defense University, Taylor Papers, T-172-69. Top Secret; Operational Immediate. Repeated to CINCPAC for Felt. The source text is labeled as a draft, but has a date-time-group and JCS number written on it, indicating that it was sent.

296. Memorandum From Michael V. Forrestal of the National Security Council Staff to the President

Washington, August 26, 1963.

Source: Kennedy Library, President’s Office Files, Countries, Vietnam Security, 1963. Top Secret.

297. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, August 27, 1963, 4 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, INF 8 US. Top Secret; Eyes Only; handling indicator not declassified. Relayed by the Department of State to the White House, CIA, and the Office of the Secretary of Defense.

298. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, August 27, 1963, 5 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 15 S VIET-US. Secret; Eyes Only; Limit Distribution. Repeated to CINCPAC. Received at 11:30 a.m. and relayed to the White House, Office of the Secretary of Defense, and CIA exclusive for principal officers there.

299. Telegram From the Central Intelligence Agency Station in Saigon to the Agency

Saigon, August 27, 1963.

Source: National Defense University, Taylor Papers, T-172-69. Top Secret. The source text is a copy sent by the CIA to the JCS exclusive for McNamara, Gilpatric, Taylor, and Krulak. Copies were also sent to the Department of State exclusive for Rusk, Ball, Harriman, and Hilsman and to the White House exclusive for Bundy. This copy was received at the JCS at 11:36 a.m.

300. Telegram From the Commander, Military Assistance Command, Vietnam (Harkins) to the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff(Taylor)

Saigon, August 27, 1963, 8:05 p.m.

Source: National Defense University, Taylor Papers, T-172-69. Top Secret; Eyes Only. Repeated to Honolulu for Felt.

301. Memorandum of Telephone Conversation Between the Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs (Harriman) and the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Hilsman)

Washington, August 27, 1963, 1:50 p.m.

Source: Library of Congress, Harriman Papers, Telephone Conversations. Transcribed by Dolores P. Perruso of Harriman’s staff.

302. Memorandum From Michael V. Forrestal of the National Security Council Staff to the President

Washington, August 27, 1963.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Vietnam Country Series, 8/24/63-8/31/63, Memos and Miscellaneous. Top Secret.

303. Memorandum of Conference With the President

Washington, August 27, 1963, 4 p.m.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Meetings and Memoranda, Meetings on Vietnam. Top Secret. Drafted by Bromley Smith. The meeting was held at the White House Also published in Declassified Documents, 1982, 648 B. A memorandum for the record of this meeting by Krulak is in the National Defense University, Taylor Papers, Vietnam, chap. XXIII.

304. Memorandum for the Record by the Secretary of Defense’s Assistant for Special Operations (Lansdale)

Washington, August 27, 1963.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Vietnam Country Series, 8/24/63-8/31/63, Memos and Miscellaneous. Secret. Lansdale passed this memorandum to Forrestal on August 28 and wrote on an attached covering note: “You might find this of interest.” Forrestal passed it on to Bundy on the same day with the written comment: “Mac: This is not hard stuff.”

305. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam

Washington, August 27, 1963, 8:11 p.m.

Source Department of State, Central Files, POL 26 S VIET Top Secret; Emergency. Drafted by Hilsman and cleared in draft with McGeorge Bundy, McNamara, and Taylor and in substance with Rusk. Repeated to CINCPACPOLAD exclusive for Felt.

306. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, August 28, 1963, 6 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 26 S VIET Top Secret; Emergency. Repeated to CINCPAC Operational Immediate. Received at 7:18 a.m. and relayed to the White House, Office of the Secretary of Defense, and CIA at 8:30 a.m.

307. Telegram From the Central Intelligence Agency Station in Saigon to the Agency

Saigon, August 28, 1963.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Vietnam Country Series, 8/24/63-8/31/63, CIA Cables. Secret. Also printed in Pentagon Papers: Gravel Edition, Vol. II, p. 736.

308. Memorandum From the Director of the United States Information Agency(Murrow) to the President

Washington, August 28, 1963.

Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 306, USIA/TOP Files: FRC 67 A 222, IAF-1963. Drafted by B. Anderson of the Office of Plans and Research, USIA. Copies were sent to Donald M. Wilson, Ralph Bunce, and Orem Stephens, all of USIA.

309. Telegram From the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (Taylor) to the Commander, Military Assistance Command, Vietnam (Harkins)

Washington, August 28, 1963, 10:02 a.m.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Vietnam Country Series, 8/24/63-8/31/63, Defense Cables. Secret; Eyes Only. The source text indicates that copies were to be sent to Bundy at the White House; to Rusk, Ball, Harriman, and Hilsman at the Department of State; and to each of the Joint Chiefs of Staff. Hilsman refers to this cable as a back-channel message in To Move a Nation, p. 492, and recalls that he never saw it. (Department of State, Office of the Historian, Vietnam Interviews, Roger Hilsman, May 15, 1984) Michael V. Forrestal also remembers it as a back-channel message, but does recall seeing it. (Ibid., Michael V. Forrestal, May 16, 1984) Harriman saw a copy of it and subsequently complained to General Carter of the CIA that this was the first occasion he could recall of the military backing off their commitments. Harriman maintained to Carter that Taylor had cleared telegram 243 to Saigon, Document 281. (Memorandum for the record by Krulak, August 28; National Defense University, Taylor Papers, Vietnam, chap. XXIII) On the morning of August 29, Hilsman called Krulak about clearance of telegram 243 to Saigon. According to Krulak’s record of the conversation, Hilsman admitted “that he was probably wrong to say that Taylor was involved [with clearance], but that Defense concurrence originated with Mr. Gilpatric.” (Memorandum for the record by Krulak, August 29; Ibid.)

261. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 261. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, August 21, 1963, 10 p.m.

299. Department pass CAS HQ. CINCPAC for POLAD. Tokyo for Lodge. Following is preliminary CAS/Embassy analysis situation: 1. Indications have accumulated over day suggesting that impetus for crackdown on Buddhists and imposition of state of siege2 came from senior military leadership and that decision to embark on this course taken by President with very little reference to his Cabinet or other civilian advisors with exception Ngo Dinh Nhu. Such high civil functionaries as Secretary of State at the Presidency Thuan, Interior Minister Luong and Police/CIO Chief appear confused, concerned and out of picture both in terms of planning which led to this morning’s events and of their present roles. Military now have a dominant role and although for time being they profess loyalty to President, latter’s position would seem currently or potentially precarious with generals appearing have option of deposing him now or much more likely at a later stage in developments. His main hope for escaping figurehead role would be rapid restoration civil governmental control through ending state of martial law or divisions in ranks of military which he could exploit to maintain some kind of intra-military power equilibrium.

2. Although in initial phases Buddhist affair the military tended sympathize with Buddhists and to be resentful of GVN’s inept handling, in recent weeks there have been indications that military beginning to tire of issue, becoming concerned over impact of prolonged impasse on morale of troops, and beginning to fear that Buddhists had escalated dispute to point where it posed possibly grave threat to security of country and struggle against VC. We have several reports of dissatisfaction on part of military leadership with indecisiveness of GVN’s handling of Buddhist question and ineffectuality of senior civilian officials. Events of Sunday,3 including large and responsive crowd at Xa Loi, student unrest in Hue, and attack by Buddhist supporters on ARVN Captain in Da Nang may finally have impelled military into action. Expertness, speed, and coordination with which operations carried out against Buddhists in widely separated cities indicate that careful and detailed prior planning must have been carried out on contingency basis before final decision to move taken. This also suggested by dispatch with which banners appeared in city this morning proclaiming Army’s determination to defeat Communists and by remarkably expeditious appearance of ARVN psywar pictures purporting to show evidence of VC penetration of Buddhist movement.

3. Luong’s claim (see Embtel 293)4 that generals confronted Diem in all day session 20 August with urgent request that he give them power to deal with situation, while possibly self-seeking attempt dissociate himself with [from] Buddhist repression, has ring of truth to us. Also see FVS 94815 for Diem’s part, aside from question as whether he had much choice, generals’ proposals may have had certain attractions for him. Rightly or wrongly President appears to have believed that his government had genuinely attempted path of conciliation with Buddhists. He could claim that this policy had been unsuccessful in placating Buddhists and had in fact merely led to expanded Buddhist activity. In short, Diem probably concluded that this policy had become one-way street to catastrophe for him, his family and his government. Early action against Buddhists would also have advantage of presenting Ambassador Lodge with fait accompli before latter’s arrival. Also by involving military in repressive actions against Buddhists, he may have thought that he could taint with same brush as his regime only real alternative which US would have accepted should public opinion over Buddhist issue force change in American policy of support for his regime.

4. Joining military in crackdown on Buddhists might also have appealed to Ngo Dinh Nhu, only other non-military participant in Monday meeting according to Luong, as being in accord with his long-standing prescription for solution to problem. Would also tie in with his previously reported blandishments toward generals; Nhu may have encouraged his brother to go along with generals confident in his ability to manipulate them and to make them bear equal onus for strong measures against Buddhists.

5. Two most immediate sources of danger are possibilities of mass agitation in protest against Buddhist repression and break out of fighting between various military elements now in control of country. Re first, generals moved so swiftly and effectively in establishing martial law that, with exception Hue, people seem too stunned to react. As result stringent security controls now in force will be difficult for agitators to organize demonstrations. However, judging by sentiment in their favor generated by Buddhist leadership in recent weeks, particularly among students, possibility of unrest in main cities cannot be excluded.

6. Probably more serious is threat that various elements of military, even though now ostensibly united, may begin maneuver for power in very amorphous and anomalous situation. General Dinh, who is Military Governor of Saigon, is an emotional and somewhat extremist officer who might break facade of army unity in present situation. Also uncertain is present locus of loyalties of Colonel Le Quang Tung, Vietnamese Special Forces Commander who has long served as Ngo family’s watchdog among military. Tung has an estimated 1,000 highly trained troops in and around Saigon. Although he appears to be going along with General Don for moment, he is much hated and distrusted by other senior officers, especially Dinh and Khanh. Trouble could well break out between various factions.

Trueheart

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 2-4 S VIEI Secret; Operational Immediate. Repeated Operational Immediate to CINCPAC and Tokyo. Received at 1:28 p.m. Relayed to the White House, CIA, Office of the Secretary of Defense, and the Departments of the Army, Navy, and Air Force. Ambassador Nolting left Saigon on August 15; Ambassador Lodge was in Tokyo en route to Vietnam.

2 According to CINCPAC telegram 210030Z, August 20, received in Washington at 10:34 p.m., Secretary Thuan informed U.S. officials that President Diem in Executive Council on August 20 decided to proclaim martial law via radio to begin at 6 a.m., August 21, local Saigon time. As a practical matter, Thuan stated, martial law was in effect from midnight of August 20. (Ibid., POL 23 S VIET) For text of Diem’s proclamation, see American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1963, p. 862.

3 August 17.

4 In telegram 293, August 21, 9 p.m., the Embassy transmitted the salient points of that afternoon’s discussion between a U.S. official and Vietnamese Interior Minister Luong concerning the declaration of martial law and the action against the Buddhists. (Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 S VIET)

5 Not found.

262. Editorial Note 262. Editorial Note

The President’s Intelligence Checklist, August 21, 1963, which was read by the President, contains the following summary of events in Vietnam under an item entitled “South Vietnam”: “a. Diem’s regime seems determined to repress forcefully the rising Buddhist agitation, despite strong advice from US representatives and an urgent plea from Saigon’s ambassador to Washington.

“b. Police and army personnel raided Buddhist pagodas in Saigon and Hue yesterday using arms, grenades and tear gas.

“c. A number of Buddhists were reported killed or wounded, and many others were arrested. The fate of key Buddhist leaders is not yet known.

“d. Martial law has been declared throughout the country, and all communications are in military hands.

“e. These harsh measures may only serve to further alienate the Vietnamese public and will further damage Diem’s image throughout the world.

“f. Some senior Vietnamese officers may have agreed with this action as necessary to prevent the spread of unrest. However, we know little of the attitude of junior officers and enlisted men, most of whom are Buddhists, or how they would react if ordered to quell popular disturbances.” (Kennedy Library, National Security Files Chester V. Clifton Series)

263. Department of State Daily Staff Summary 263. Department of State Daily Staff Summary1

Washington, August 21, 1963.

Far East:

GVN Military Moves to Crush Buddhists2 —Although the forcing of Saigon’s Xa Loi Pagoda was apparently not the basis for GVN declaration of martial law, the Pagoda was the scene of the first known action under the proclamation. Xa Loi has been cleared and it like other Saigon pagodas has been cordoned off by police and ARVN troops. Communications facilities are under heavy guard, military censorship on press cables has been imposed and the Saigon airport has been closed. Security forces are in the streets in number and are guarding the roads into Saigon.

The situation in Hue is reported to be very tense, but reasonably quiet. Hue’s main pagodas are reported to have been largely destroyed inside earlier in the day by Saigon combat police and there were ugly incidents between highly excited crowds and security forces. Our Consul in Hue reports that anti-US feeling there is at an all-time high in his experience.

A problem in US-Vietnamese relations has been created by the escape of two Buddhist priests from Xa Loi into the adjacent USOM building where they sought and obtained refuge. After the police were refused permission by US officials to enter the building, a cordon was thrown around the building and the police denied Americans permission to enter or leave it and demanded that all Vietnamese nationals leave the premises.

In the wake of police threats to enter the USOM building, our Chargé was called in by Foreign Minister Mau who demanded the priests be handed over. The Chargé demurred stating he would have to seek instructions first, meanwhile he noted his concern over possible violations of the diplomatic immunity of the USOM building. He reports the Foreign Minister implied the effort to enter the building would be dropped.

We have urgently responded to Trueheart’s request for guidance on the problem of the priests by saying that they should not, for the time being, be turned over to GVN authorities.

We expect to issue a statement on August 213 stating that the repressive measures against the Buddhists undertaken by the GVN represent a direct violation of its assurances that it was pursuing a policy of reconciliation with the Buddhists and consequently the actions of the GVN cannot be condoned by the United States. (Secret) CINCPAC 210030Z, August (S);4 Saigon 271, 8/20 (U); Saigon 274, 275 and 277, 8/20 (C); Saigon 276, 8/20 (LOU); to Saigon 224 and 225, 8/21 (C).5

[Here follow a section on the Near East, an Addendum on the Far East dealing with Malaysia, and Notes.]

1 Source: Department of State, Top Secret and Secret Summaries: Lot 65 D 142. Top Secret; Eyes Only for Designated Recipient. This summary was part of a daily series prepared in the Operations Center of the Department of State and made available to the Secretary of State and other principal officers in the Department.

2 See Document 262.

3 Text in American Foreign Policy: Current Document, 1963, p. 864.

4 See footnote 2, Document 261.

5 Telegram 271 is not found; telegrams 274 and 275 are in Department of State, Central Files, POL 25 S VIET; telegram 224 to Saigon is Ibid., DEF 6 S VIET; and 225 is Ibid., SOC 14-91 S VIET. None is printed.

264. Memorandum From the Director of the Defense Intelligence Agency (Carroll) to the Secretary of Defense (McNamara) 264. Memorandum From the Director of the Defense Intelligence Agency (Carroll) to the Secretary of Defense (McNamara)1

Washington, August 21, 1963.

SUBJECT

(S) Martial Law in South Viet-Nam2

S-18,548/P-3

1. The declaration of martial law and repression of Buddhist agitation in Viet-Nam are likely to further alienate the public from the Diem Government and will have serious repercussions throughout the country. Although the military moves are based on an alleged presidential proclamation, the military leaders have, in effect, assumed full control.

2. Shortly after the declaration of martial law at midnight last night, Army and combat police elements assaulted Buddhist pagodas in Saigon and other principal cities. A number of Buddhist priests were r reportedly killed or injured, and many others were arrested. The purpose apparently was to seize Buddhist leaders capable of organizing and sustaining continued Buddhist agitation. A senior Vietnamese military officer claimed on 19 August that top-ranking officers felt that some action was required to prevent the spread of popular unrest.

3. Government troops, including a marine battalion, two special forces groups, military police and combat police moved quickly during the night to secure all key installations in Saigon and the approaches to the city; the Saigon District has been placed under the command of the III Corps Commander. Stringent security measures have been imposed in other cities also. Some disturbances were reported in Hue, where Buddhist pagodas were damaged. CINCPAC says the situation appears to be under control and that comparatively few troops have been withdrawn from normal missions.

4. Commercial flights to Saigon were canceled today, and full press censorship has been instituted.

5. Although senior military commanders are apparently enforcing the presidential martial law decree, further coup or countercoup activity may be in the making. The Armed Forces Chief of Staff implied that martial law may be only temporary. The Army has announced the appointment of general officers to positions of civil, military, and economic responsibilities. The Army-controlled radio has also appealed to the populace to back the Army, without referring to the government. A major uncertainty in the situation continues to be the attitude of junior officers and enlisted personnel, most of whom are Buddhists.

6. A copy of this correspondence [to?] Chairman, Joint Chiefs of Staff, Director, Joint Staff, J-3 and J-5.

Joseph F. Carroll
Lieutenant General. USAF

1 Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OSD Files: FRC 69 A 3131 Vietnam 381. Secret. A note on the source text indicates McNamara saw this memorandum.

2 See footnote 2, Document 261.

265. Memorandum for the Record by the Joint Chiefs of Staff’s Special Assistant for Counterinsurgency and Special Activities (Krulak) 265. Memorandum for the Record by the Joint Chiefs of Staff’s Special Assistant for Counterinsurgency and Special Activities (Krulak)1

Washington, August 21, 1963.

SUBJECT

Vietnam

1. At 1900, Mr. Hilsman, having just returned from Honolulu, assembled Mr. Forrestal, Mr. Colby and me to discuss the Vietnam problem.

2. He reported that Ambassadors Lodge and Nolting and Admiral Felt were unanimous in the conviction that precipitate action should be avoided. He then stated that, in his view, the content of Saigon message 299 (attached)2 is a logical appraisal of the matter-that the military were a dominant factor in bringing the current martial law arrangement into being.

3. He then asked how we might exploit the situation, which generated the following comments: From Colby:—endeavor to induce the GVN quickly to take a series of favorable actions respecting the Buddhists to exhibit that the repressive measures were necessary to establish the tranquillity in which the religious problem could be solved; generate some favorable public reaction from the Buddhist leadership.

From Forrestal:—the same; specifically do not press the Government either to abolish martial law quickly nor to return to the status quo ante, but to use the military regime to achieve some of the reforms which we have been advocating, not just in connection with the Buddhists, but in other areas of weakness; get press censorship withdrawn quickly and get the best possible picture before the world.

From me:—as a matter of first importance, find out who is in charge-whether the military are taking orders from Nhu or whether Diem is taking orders from the military; then put our influence on whomever is actually in authority to show, by concrete action, their determination to end the religious crisis; press the military to intensify their operations against the VC; get Madame Nhu out of the country.

4. Hilsman agreed with the above; asked Colby to bend every effort to learn the status of Nhu and the relationship between Diem and the military. He asked his State subordinates to work on a message to Ambassador Lodge3 conveying the initial Washington reaction to the situation, and asked all present to think of specific actions which we should, at the proper time, press the GVN to take.

V. H. Krulak4 Major General, USMC

1 Source: National Defense University, Taylor Papers, T-172-69. Secret.

2 Document 261.

3 Document 268.

4 Printed from copy that bears this typed signature.

266. Memorandum Prepared by the Office of Current Intelligence, Central Intelligence Agency 266. Memorandum Prepared by the Office of Current Intelligence, Central Intelligence Agency1

Washington, August 21, 1963.

SUBJECT

Rumors in South Vietnam

OCI No. 2341/63

Summary

Additional reports of plotting against the Diem government have been received. While there is no hard evidence of imminent action, the Buddhist issue continues to make the situation dangerous.

1. Buddhist agitation seems to be turning farther away from strictly religious issues and toward political questions. At least some Buddhist leaders appear convinced that Diem’s overthrow will be only a matter of time if pressure can be maintained in the form of further suicides and public demonstrations. Buddhist demonstrations against the government are, in fact, drawing larger crowds in the principal cities. Student participation in these demonstrations is also increasing, particularly in Hue, where the firing this week of the university rector, who is known to be sympathetic to the Buddhists, has led to the resignation of many faculty members.

2. A group of alleged coup plotters headed by former presidential security service director Tran Kim Tuyen is reported to be ready for an early move against the government. Two sources in contact with members of the Tuyen group maintain that previously reported coup deadlines were practice runs for various units headed by junior officers. The plan is for these units to seize vital installations in Saigon while a small group armed with automatic weapons executes a palace revolt against the Ngo family. Available information points to the existence of serious plotting by Tuyen, but the firmness of the group’s resolve and the extent of its capabilities are uncertain.

3. There have been no recent reports of plotting among top-ranking military officers. Contrary to his earlier statements, the commander of the II Corps area in central South Vietnam, Brigadier General Khanh, told a US observer on 17 August that general officers did not intend to carry out a coup d’etat. Khanh claimed that the military leaders would act only if the country were on the verge of chaos. He claimed that the generals were in control of their subordinates down to the battalion level and would act to prevent a take over by any civilian plotters. The III Corps commander, General Dinh, states that he has six battalions on alert around Saigon for the purpose of supporting Diem in case of trouble from the Buddhists or in the event of a coup attempt.

4. Generals Khanh and Dinh probably are considered opportunists by their peers and not fully trusted within the military establishment. Khanh, in particular, may have tailored his comments for US consumption. His statement that the generals would not support a government headed by Vice President Tho contradicts the expressed views of other key officers.

5. It is difficult to assess recent statements attributed by the press to Ngo Dinh Nhu to the effect that a coup is inevitable if the present trend continues. It may be that Nhu expects a coup attempt and that his remarks were designed to throw plotters off stride. In a report of 13 August, the US air attaché in Saigon reported that Madame Nhu had told an Australian correspondent that she expected a military coup within a few days. At the same time, the possibility of a take over by Nhu cannot be discounted.

1 Source: Department of State, Vietnam Working Group Files: Lot 67 D 54, POL 26 Coup Rumors. Secret; No Foreign Dissem.

267. Memorandum From the Acting Secretary of State to the Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs (Harriman) 267. Memorandum From the Acting Secretary of State to the Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs (Harriman)1

Washington, August 22, 1963.

I think that the first telegram which our new Ambassador to Saigon receives should not display the pomposity and verbosity of the Department of State at its worst.

Moreover, I think we ought to go slow on advising Cabot to “eliminate the Nhus” as one of his first acts. After all, we ought to offer him a chance to look the situation over and give us a fresh reading.

I think that Cabot will resent being told the obvious and that we will get off on a very bad foot in creating effective working relations between Washington and Saigon. I feel that everything useful contained in the long draft telegram2 can be said in a relatively few words, as per the attached.3

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 1 S VIET. Secret. Drafted by Ball. An attached note from Ball to Harriman reads as follows: “Averell: I am really worried about how we will establish an effective relationship between Washington and Saigon, now that Cabot is on the spot. I would like very much to talk with you about this and would appreciate it if you would call me when you have read the attached. George” No record of a Ball-Harriman conversation on this matter has been found.

2 Not found.

3 Apparent reference to a draft of telegram 235, Document 268.

268. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam 268. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam1

Washington, August 22, 1963, 7:56 p.m.

235. Saigon’s 299.2 To Lodge from Hilsman. As situation develops, we await further clarification of what has happened and what the present distribution of power may be. As we are sure you will agree, three possibilities appear still open: (a) that military are in fact in control and that Diem continues as President by sufferance; (b) that Diem with military cooperation has strengthened his own position; and (c) that Nhu is actually calling the shots. Possibility also exists that even though military not in saddle now, they may use martial law period to their advantage. If so, might be wise not to press to have martial law removed too quickly.

As the facts emerge, we would appreciate your appraisal of the relative power situation of specific groups and individuals, both military and civilian.

Regardless of who is running the show, we should continue to seek the same objectives. These are acceptable solution to the Buddhist problem and a more responsive and representative government capable of carrying on the war effectively. GVN must show own population and world that improvement in Buddhist position will be eventual outcome of evolving situation. If we impress this need on both civilians and military at all levels GVN, we may be able to achieve some progress not only on immediate Buddhist problem (with all implications this has for U.S. and world opinion) but also on longer range objective of broadening regime and limiting Diem’s exercise of arbitrary power. As situation develops, we may deem it useful to throw our influence toward reducing or eliminating the power of the Nhus. However, we will welcome your fresh reading of this and other aspects of the situation.

Ball

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 2-4 S VIEI Secret; Operational Immediate. Drafted by Hilsman and Ball and cleared in substance with Ball and Harriman. Repeated to CINCPAC.

2 Document 261.

269. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 269. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, August 23, 1963, 8 p.m.

314. CINCPAC for POLAD. For Hilsman. This is preliminary reply your 235.2

As of now, we feel reasonably sure that no military coup has taken place and that Palace is in control. Exact roles of Diem, Nhu and Madame Nhu are not clear but weight of evidence is that influence of Nhus has not diminished. Tone of Army radio broadcasts has a strong Nhu flavor; it is also to be noted that within 24 hours of coup, radio broadcast lengthy Nhu directive calling on Republican Youth to support government action.

Military are ostensibly working together and we know of no disagreements among them. However, we do not believe that military should be regarded as monolithic structure at this point. Specifically, we believe that there are at least three power elements in Army, represented by General Don, General Dinh and Colonel Tung. We are reasonably sure that Dinh and Tung are not taking orders from Don and we believe that each of three is getting direction from Palace. Further, both Dinh and Tung (who are known to detest each other) have military forces in Saigon. Should regular Army decide to take over in earnest, i.e., depose Diem, possibility of serious fighting in Saigon would be considerable, as Tung could be expected to defend Diem. He is thoroughly disliked and distrusted by Army and has always derived all his authority from Palace.

Lodge3

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 2-4 S VIET. Secret; Operational Immediate; Limit Distribution. Repeated to CINCPAC.

2 Document 268.

3 On August 21, Ambassador Lodge was in Tokyo en route to Vietnam. He planned to stop off in Hong Kong before proceeding to Saigon. In the middle of the night he received a telephone call from the White House briefing him on the Diem government’s declaration of martial law and its attacks on the pagodas. Lodge was instructed to go to r Saigon as soon as possible, and the President authorized that a U.S. military airplane be made available to him. On the morning of August 22, Lodge took off for Saigon, an 11hour, non-stop flight from Tokyo. He arrived at Tan Son Nhut airport at 9:30 p.m., August 22. (Interview with Henry Cabot Lodge, August 4, 1965; Kennedy Library, Oral History Program) Mecklin in Mission in Torment, pp. 189-190, provides a dramatic account of Lodge’s arrival. Lodge did not present his credentials until August 26 and technically he was not U.S. Ambassador to Vietnam until then.

270. Memorandum From the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (Taylor) to the Secretary of State 270. Memorandum From the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (Taylor) to the Secretary of State1

Washington, August 23, 1963.

SUBJECT

Attached Cable from General Harkins

At the direction of the President, I have queried General Harkins as to his evaluation of the present relationship between the Diem government and the Armed Forces of South Vietnam. Specifically, I inquired whether the declaration of martial law indicated that Diem had confidence in his armed forces or that he had become a hostage to them. Also what was General Harkins’ estimate of the effect of recent events on our common programs in Vietnam?

Attached herewith is his reply. The informal tone results from the fact that this is a private exchange between two old friends.

Maxwell D. Taylor

Telegram From the Commander, Military Assistance Command, Vietnam (Harkins) to the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (Taylor)2

Saigon, August 22, 1963, 8:33 a.m.

MAC 1495. Eyes Only for Gen. Taylor and exclusive for Adm. Felt. Reference your JCS 3284.3

1. It’s a bit premature to crystal ball the hidden machanisms [mechinisms?] and internal machinations of this mixed-up country. However, my first thought is that Diem still has confidence in the armed forces otherwise he would not have put them in charge at such a critical time, the Buddhist situation such as it was and he, himself, rapidly losing station in the eyes of the world, as indicated by press reports. As you know, Gen Don, now acting chief of the JGS in the absence of Ty, has been one of the most vociferous in saying Diem and the Nhus must go before this country can make any headway. He has made these remarks so outward I feel certain the President is cognizant of how Don feels.

2. Last week I told Diem someone must be appointed in Ty’s place so that we can get on with the war. Don was appointed Tuesday and at midnight martial law was declared. My first thought was that he really was a fast worker. However, when he called me early Tuesday morning,4 he told me the President wanted me to know that he, the President, has declared martial law in order to secure the rear areas.

3. Gen Dinh (III Corps) another coup slinger, has been named Commander of the Saigon-Cholon area during the emergency. Big Minh, advisor to the President, remains in place.

4. So you see the stage is set for an easy military take-over.

5. However, in the midst of everything yesterday, Gen Don had the courtesy to come over and explain the reasons for the “State of Siege.”5

6. He again assured me the President himself had made the declaration. He did this because the Buddhist situation was getting out of hand. It had gone from religious controversy to political incitation of rebellion.

7. I asked Don how long he thought martial law would stay in effect and he replied if things remained quiet maybe only a short time because he remarked, “you know how the President does not want the military to be in control.” I asked if it would remain in effect until after the elections on the 31st. He assured me it would not. Otherwise the elections could not be considered free elections (as if they ever were).

8. Don said he wanted my assistance in carrying the war against the VC to a successful conclusion. I said I was at his beck and call. He stated the war would continue, the state of martial law should not affect operations as he was only using the reserve forces to make a show of military force in the cities. We’ll have to wait and see on this—so far only one paratroop and one marine battalion, plus some MP’s have been used in Saigon. In Hue, they moved two tens from the training center to keep order in the city. However, other battalions in the vicinity are on the alert. Armored vehicles have been seen in both cities.

9. All corps senior advisors have reported that the operations against the VC were continuing apace in their areas. Again, it’s a bit early to say they’ll continue in such magnitude as the VC were not prepared and have not yet reacted to the military take-over. As to the effect of the new relationship to our common programs—I hope there will be no change if I can believe Don in saying the war will continue against the VC.

10. As you know, our programs are completed. We have accomplished our part of everything we set out to do after your visit in the fall of '61—all except ending the war, and that is not far off if things continue at present pace.

11. The I Corps is quiescent. In the II Corps, Gen Khanh said yesterday things were going so well he was looking for a place of more action. Well, I agree it’s the best corps of all, but there is a bit left to be done—not much, however.

12. The III Corps has its biggest headaches in the provinces around Saigon, and in the past two weeks I have succeeded in moving two additional regiments into the area from the I and II Corps.

13. The IV Corps is where the war is being fought. 70 per cent of the weekly incidents are there. Today I’m asking Thuan to move the 9th Div intact from II Corps to the Delta area to clean up Long An, Dinh Thuong, Kien Hoa and Vinh Binh provinces. The rest of the Delta will be slow but easy if we can get these provinces settled. They’re coming along—but it’s difficult terrain, particularly in the rainy season. They have more VC than most of the provinces, and the people are harder to convince. They just don’t like the government—just want to be left alone with their rice and fish.

14. So as far as our programs are concerned, at least the military, they are paying off, and all that is needed to end the conflict is the will and determination of the Vietnamese to win. This I believe is evidenced by the fact that they have averaged about two or three thousand operations a week since July, and last week they had over 4,000. This counts everything from patrols and ambushes to the larger type. However, in my opinion, I think we will see a drop in the number of operations against the VC until things settle down a bit.

15. I’m afraid I have rambled in answering your questions; however, as it looks from here at this time the fact that Diem placed the military in command indicates he still has confidence in them. Though Don is nominally in command, it appears that the usual multiple channels still exist and run to the Palace. I’m not able to answer what’s going on between them. I’ll keep my ear to the ground and try to determine. It could be they (the military) through threats or persuasion told him he’d better do something or else. I can not prove this with what information I have at this time, nor can I state flatly he’s not a hostage of the military as I have not seen him since the announcement of martial law.

16. The effect on the programs should be nil if they continue carrying the war to the enemy.

17. In closing, the present situation might be a blessing in disguise. There exists for all practical purposes a military take-over with minimum violence. A few bones were bruised as the police and military took over the main Pagodas yesterday. Not that I’m for the military taking over—no indeed—but the state of affairs as they were, it was becoming evident things were getting out of control, and some measure of authority had to be established. That it was done without firing a shot and thru the nominal chain of command precluded a lot of bloodshed which would have spilled if the rival factions tried to take over.

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 S VIET Secret; Sensitive. A note on another copy of this memorandum by Chester V. Clifton, Military Aide to the President, indicates that the President saw it. Clifton also wrote the following comments: “Don/anti-Nhu; respected by the Army. Ty in Walter Reed (cancer).” (Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Vietnam Country Series, 8/21/63-8/23/63)

2 Secret; Noforn; Eyes Only.

3 A summary is in the covering memorandum. A copy of the telegram is in National Defense University, Taylor Papers, Vietnam Chap. XXIII.

4 Harkins reported to CINCPAC the gist of his August 20, 6 a.m. telephone conversation with Don as well as a briefing he received later in the morning on the situation from a Don aide. Felt transmitted the information to JCS and DIA as CINCPAC telegram 210535Z, August 20, 7:35 p.m. (Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Vietnam Country Series, 8/21/63-8/23/63)

5 Harkins sent a report of this conversation with Don in MAC J00 6835, to CINCPAC, August 21, repeated to Washington. (Department of State, Central Files,POL 23 S VIET) A note on a copy of MAC J00 6835 in the Kennedy Library indicates that the President saw a wire (advance) copy of the message. (Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Vietnam Country Series, 8/21/63-8/23/63)

271. Editorial Note 271. Editorial Note

The President’s Intelligence Checklist, August 23, seen by the President, contains the following item entitled “South Vietnam”: “a. Tight security precautions are still being enforced in Saigon and Hue, but troop presence is less obtrusive.

“b. Nhu told a US source yesterday that the generals recommended the imposition of martial law. He denied this amounted to a coup, but warned it could become one if Diem vacillated or compromised on the Buddhist issue.

“c. Ambassador Lodge notes that the resignation of Foreign Minister Mau ‘obviously caught the government flatfooted’.” (Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Chester V. Clifton Series)

272. Department of State Daily Staff Summary 272. Department of State Daily Staff Summary1

Washington, August 23, 1963.

Far East:

Tension in Vietnam Continues—Ambassador Lodge has not yet been able to present his credentials owing to the unexpected resignation of Foreign Minister Maul According to CAS, Vice President Tho’s assistant also indicated that Tho may decide to resign “at the right moment.”

Meanwhile, Vietnamese harassment continues. USOM vehicles leaving the compound are still being searched on orders from “higher authority.” Some press despatches have gone out, but censorship is apparently very heavy-handed.

The two bonzes in the USOM building are being cared for satisfactorily and can be held there for some time if necessary, Lodge believes. If adequate formal assurances on their treatment subsequent to release are not forthcoming from the Vietnamese Government, Lodge thinks that we should hold them at least until martial law has been lifted, since martial law by definition means suspension of due process. (Secret) Saigon 302, 8/22 (C); Saigon 306, 8/23 (C); Saigon 307, 8/23 (S) (LD).2

[Here follow the remaining sections of the summary.]

1 Source: Department of State, Top Secret and Secret Daily Summaries: Lot 65 D 142. Top Secret; Eyes Only for Designated Recipient.

2 None printed. (Ibid., Central Files, PVV 1-2 S VIET; POL 17-2 US-S VIET; and POL 15-1 S VIET, respectively)

273. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 273. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, August 24, 1963, 11 a.m.

324. Following is memorandum of conversation between Rufus Phillips, Director of USOM Rural Affairs, and Nguyen Dinh Thuan held on August 24.

Begin Text: 1. I received a call from Secretary Thuan on the evening of 23 August. He said he had been trying to reach me for two days, that he wanted to see me as soon as possible and wanted me to come for breakfast on the morning of 24th. Thuan is a personal friend whom I first got to know in 1955 and with whom I have maintained a relatively close relationship since. I do not entirely trust his personal motives at present because his honesty has been too thoroughly compromised (in contrast to Vo Van Hai, the President’s secretary) by his past association and cooperation with Counselor Nhu and Nhu’s protégés, especially Dr. Tuyen. (Thuan once confided to me that he had been obliged to cooperate “in everything” with Tuyen in order to remain in the Palace.) However, much of what he had to say this morning had the ring of truth about it.

2. Thuan said that he had decided not to resign but to stick with the President a while yet for three reasons: his personal feelings of loyalty to Diem and the Nhus and for the safety of his family (his family is now all in Saigon). Thuan said that the President had sent Madame Nhu, on 23 August, on his own volition (Thuan took no direct credit for it) a letter in which he ordered her to make no public statements and give no press conferences. The President also instructed General Oai and the Director General of Information not to print any statement she might make. Both Counselor and Madame Nhu were “furious,” according to Thuan.

3. Thuan conceded that it would be difficult to split the Nhus off from the President but he felt strongly that the U.S. should attempt this. He said he could see no alternative to the President as a leader for Viet-Nam, no one else was as widely respected, or would be generally acceptable within Viet-Nam. Thuan felt that the U.S. had to exercise leadership and must be very firm, otherwise chaos was likely to result. Under no circumstances, he said, should the U.S. acquiesce in what the Nhus had done. This would be disastrous.

4. Thuan went on to say that Nhu was in a dangerously triumphant mood. Nhu believed himself in full control of the situation and was contemptuous of the Americans. Thuan said that Nhu had been very successful in tricking the Army (in answer to a direct question he said the Generals did not know beforehand of the planned raid on Xa Loi, nor did he), and in dividing it into three commands. However, he felt that Nhu had very little real support in the Army and that the Army would turn firmly against Nhu if it knew that the U.S. would under no circumstances support a government with the Nhus in control.

5. Thuan also said that the U.S. must not be afraid of leaving the door open to the Communists by withdrawing support from the government as long as it contained the Nhus. He reiterated that the U.S. had to be firm. If it was, the Army would respond. End Text.

Lodge

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 15-1 S VIEI Secret; Operational Immediate; Limit Distribution. Repeated to CINCPAC and relayed upon receipt at the Department of State to the White House. Roger Hilsman, in To Move a Nation, p. 485, describes this cable as “perhaps the most convincing judgment of all” of the reports from Saigon on Vietnamese dissatisfaction with the campaign of Nhu against the Buddhists.

274. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 274. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, August 24, 1963, 6 p.m.

320. CINCPAC for POLAD. Following is memorandum of conversation between Rufus Phillips, Director of USOM Rural Affairs, and General Le Van Kim held on August 23:

Begin Text: Following are statements made to me by General Le Van Kim, currently acting as Deputy for Public Relations to General Don, during course of a conversation with him on 23 August 1963. General Kim is an old personal friend and asked that this conversation be kept in closest personal confidence.

General Kim opened conversation by saying, bitterly, that Army is now acting as puppet of Counselor Nhu, who tricked it into establishing martial law. The Army, including Generals Dinh and Don knew nothing of plans to raid Xa Loi and other pagodas. This was carried out by Colonel Tung’s Special Forces and combat police on Nhu’s secret orders. Nhu is now in control and General Don is taking orders directly from him.

According to Kim, 1426 people (Buddhist monks and laymen) have been arrested. All of explosives and arms found in pagodas were planted. Now the population believes the Army was responsible for repression of Buddhists and is turning against Army. Unless this situation is corrected and people are told truth, Army will be seriously handicapped in its fight against Communists.

General Kim said students from Faculties of Medicine and Pharmacy had held demonstrations on morning of 23rd. Kim felt these demonstrations were bound to spread, that students were on verge of violence. Riot control briefings had just been given to ARVN unit leaders on morning of 23rd and he hoped violence between Army and students could be avoided. However, Nhu had ordered Cao Xuan Vy (Director General of Youth) to organize a massive demonstration of Republican Youth involving over 500,000 people for 25th of August. Kim believes that such a demonstration, if it could be organized, would produce a riot of unimaginable proportions and, therefore, must be avoided. He said he doubted that Nhu would listen to any contrary advice about demonstrations.

I asked Kim if the Army was united. He said that Nhu had deliberately split the command between Colonel Tung, General Dinh and General Don and was dealing with each separately. Don (who is his brother-in-law) does not command much natural support among officer corps but most of other Generals and senior officers, he felt, could be rallied around him (Don). Key question was where did US stand. If US took clear stand against Nhus and in support of Army action to remove them from government, the Army (with exception of Colonel Tung) would unite in support of such an action and would be able to carry it out. He felt that retaining President, even though he personally did not like him, would be preferable providing all Ngo family influence could be permanently and effectively eradicated. It was not just a question of getting rid of Nhus, he said, but of also removing their followers from scene.

Finally, Kim said that he and seven other general officers had been obliged on 22 August to sign an oath of loyalty to President Diem which fully supported actions taken by government against Buddhists. He said US must not be fooled by this document, that vast majority of Army and most of Generals who signed document, did not approve of repression of Buddhists but had to sign at this time or expose themselves to individual elimination by Counselor Nhu.

Lodge

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, SOC 14-1 S VIET. Secret; Operational Immediate; Limit Distribution. Repeated to CINCPAC. Hilsman cites this telegram in To Move a Nation, pp. 484-485, as part of an approach by Vietnamese Generals to American officials.

275. Telegram From the Central Intelligence Agency Station in Saigon to the Agency 275. Telegram From the Central Intelligence Agency Station in Saigon to the Agency1

Saigon, August 24, 1963, 6:45 p.m.

0265. 1. [less than 1 line not declassified] had almost three hour meeting with General Tran Van Don2 evening 23 August in Don’s office at General Staff. Following summarizes discussion.

2. Don was asked who was in control and replied President Diem is in control through Counselor Ngo Dinh Nhu. All the Generals check with Nhu prior to seeing Diem . Explained this by saying Diem uses Nhu as his “thinker” and advisor but does not at all times follow Nhu’s advice. President is jealous of his authority and prerogatives. Dongave an example. At midnight on 22 Aug, Generals Don, Ton That Dinh and Tran Thien Khiem went to see Nhu about the students, recommending that schools all be closed in Saigon by the martial law, because they had information that on 23, 24, and 25 Aug there would be student demonstrations in Saigon. Nhu concurred with Generals’ recommendation, told them he had to check with the President. Nhu and Generals went to see Diem recommending closing of schools. Diem said “no. The young people must have means of expressing themselves.” Don repeated that Diem is the man who makes final decisions.

3. Don went on to explain relationships in the Palace. Said it must be remembered that for years President has been agitator against colonialist regimes. During this time Diem did a lot of thinking himself. When he took over govt in 1954 he found it was different and he would have to have people around him who think. He turned to his brother Nhu who is a thinker, an individual who has theories, a philosophy. As time went on, Diem has allowed Nhu to do most of the thinking. This does not mean President will take all of Nhu’s advice. Diem likes Nhu to write presidential proclamations, speeches. Diem prefers himself to meet the people and talk to people. In this way Nhu has special power as a thinker for the President.

4. In describing relationship of Madame Nhu in the Palace, Don said that in Diem ‘s mind Madame Nhu has status of being Diem ‘s “wife”. President has never married and not used to having women around him. For past nine years Diem has Madame Nhu to comfort him after day’s work is Done. She is charming, talks to him, relieves his tension, argues with him, needles him and, like a Vietnamese wife, she is dominant in the household. President and Madame Nhu live two apartments apart. There are no sexual relations between Diem and Madame Nhu. In Don’s opinion, President has never had sexual relations.

He likened the situation to that of Hitler and Eva Braun. Don also said, the President likes good looking men around him. Don cited the case of handsome young sergeant who planted a public garden in Dalat. President asked who had planted the garden and when informed, called the sergeant to the Palace and immediately promoted him to Lt. Colonel and put him in charge of military agriculture. Diem has intense passions. When he likes somebody, he likes them all the way; when he hates someone, he hates completely. There is no in-between. Madame Nhu uses her privileged position with President to make him say yes when he wants to say no, but he is won by her charm. Don said, “as I know, Madame Nhu can be extremely charming.” Don said it would be practically impossible to get rid of the Nhus because of special positions they hold; Ngo Dinh Nhu being President’s thinker and Madame Nhu his platonic wife.

5. The decision for the action of 20-21 August was reached by ten Generals during the evening of 18 Aug: Tran Van Don, Ton That Dinh, Do Cao Tri, Tran Thien Khiem, Nguyen Khanh, [less than 1 1ine not declassified], Mai Huu Xuan, Nguyen Ngoc Le, Le Van Kim, and Duong Van Minh. According to Don, they had not been encouraged to reach this decision by Nhu. Only time Nhu had talked about any planning was at meeting 11 July with all Generals present. Don did not say who brought Generals together 18 Aug.

This planning included martial law and eventual taking of bonzes who came from outside Saigon and returning them to their own provinces and pagodas. Plan was presented by Generals to Nhu on 20 Aug. Nhu told them to discuss plans with President. Nhu was not present when Generals presented their plan to Diem . Generals present were: Khiem, Tri, Khanh, Dinh, [less than 1 1ine not declassified], Kim and Don. Don headed the group that presented the plan to the President.

6. Generals told President that morale of troops was deteriorating, and in fact they feared that one military post was near state of desertion. Generals said that wives of soldiers and junior officers were getting upset. They explained to President the situation as the military saw it vis-a-vis the Buddhists. Don claims he told Diem that 8 May affair in Hue could have been settled but that the VC had penetrated Buddhists in Xa Loi Pagoda. Don described tactics used in demonstrations on 11 Aug when bonze Thich Tam Chau was haranguing the crowd at Xa Loi. Chau held crowd spellbound with questions like “are we going to march in streets”? Crowd would call back “yes”. Suddenly Chau would say “no, we will not march in the streets. The fact that you have said we are going to march in streets is same as marching in the streets.” Don felt that the bonze who spoke English, Thich Duc Nghiep, was very dangerous and the Generals feared that if the Buddhist leaders assembled a large enough crowd they could order a march toward Gia Long Palace and the army would not stop them.

7. Don said the President made decision to establish martial law after the Generals had recommended it. Diem made the decision to bring in troops to occupy strategic points of Saigon/Cholon and approved the recommendation to move bonzes visiting Saigon back to their provinces and their pagodas. President insisted however that none of the bonzes be hurt. Don said this touched him very much that the President should insist on their not harming the Buddhists. Diem appointed General Don as temporary successor to General Le Van Ty. Diem made Don responsible for all troops in SVN, the conduct of martial law, and implementation of necessary measures. General Ton That Dinh was appointed Military Governor of Saigon/Cholon. Colonel Le Quang Tung’s troops of Special Forces High Command remain under the control of the Presidency. Don pointed out that Dinh did not command Tung’s troops even though he is Military Governor of Saigon/Cholon. Dinh as Military Governor coordinates with Don but Don does not command Dinh. Dinh does ask General Staff for guidance but he does not execute all General Staff orders. He receives his orders as Military Governor from the Presidency just as Colonel Tung does. Don said Col. Tung is dangerous because he is not subject to military control and executes orders only from Presidency. Don also said that the Generals hate Tung’s guts. Tung is responsive to both Diem and Nhu. Tung coordinates with Nhu, but when decision is made, it comes from the President. General Don said that the other Generals support him (Don) except some of the younger Generals. These younger Generals are jealous of Don’s having assumed General Ty’s command. Don did not name any of these younger Generals. Don was criticized by these younger Generals for the action that was taken against the Buddhists. Majority of Vietnamese Generals are Buddhist. For example, Don said, “when I want to tell General Tran Tu Oai something, Oai tells me he is a civilian; he has civilian responsibility”. When asked specifically if General Nguyen Khanh supported Don, Don replied that Khanh was 100 percent with him. Don said also that Duong Van Minh, Tran Van Minh, Generals Tri, Khiem, Kim and “even Xuan” were with him. When asked if General Van Thanh Cao, the delegate, was in on any of the planning, Don said Cao was left completely out. He is considered by the other Generals to be a civilian.

8. General Don said he was not aware that the Buddhists were going to be attacked by the Police and Vietnamese Special Forces. Dinh, as Military Governor, received his orders from the Presidency and was told Colonel Tung’s troops would be used to reinforce Police because VNSF had “special means”. Don intimated but did not state that the orders came from Nhu. First indication General Don had that pagodas were attacked was when he received call on his command radio. Generals Khiem and Don were at JGS when they heard that pagodas had been attacked. Don went immediately from his command post to Xa Loi. Police commissioner Tran Van Tu was in command at Xa Loi Pagoda backed up by Colonel Tung’s Special Forces in the periphery of the area. The Police were the first to enter the pagoda. When Don arrived at Xa Loi, a police lieutenant was already in charge of a detail inside Xa Loi. The Xa Loi bonzes had already been taken away when Don arrived. In the whole operation a total of thirty people were wounded, five seriously, This figure includes GVN and Buddhist casualties. No bonzes were killed at Xa Loi. At 0430 hours on morning of 21 Aug the military operation had been completed as far as the occupation of the strategic points by the military were concerned. Don said that 1420 bonzes were under detention throughout SVN.

9. General Don was very proud of the fact that the Generals had been able to maintain secrecy prior to initiation of this operation. He was also proud of the technique employed by the troops and he said “everybody always talks of colonels who will pull coups d’etat. They are incapable. We have proven this by our planning and our technique”. He cited as an example the 11 November 1960 coup d’etat which was planned by colonels and failed. Don did not express his personal reaction to the attack on the pagodas. Don did say that he wants to carry out his original plan to screen all the bonzes and return them to their provinces and to their pagodas. Don also said that the US is holding Thich Tri Quang in USOM. Don added that Tri Quang was one of the the main agitators and the GVN wants to take him in custody. (Field comment: Don apparently believes Tri Quang is one of the two bonzes taking refuge in USOM. A CAS officer who knows Tri Quang well saw both of the bonzes in USOM on 24 August and confirmed that neither is Tri Quang.)

10. General Don has heard personally that the military is being blamed by Vietnamese public for the attack on the pagodas. He said that the US Govt is at fault for this misconception because VOA announced that the military took action against the pagodas. Don queried why VOA did not admit that Colonel Tung’s Special Forces and the Police carried out the action. Don believes this would help the military at this point. Don stated that the USA should now make its position known. Don does not want Diem replaced, for example, by an exile like Hoan (possibly Nguyen Ton Hoan) who is presently in the US. He admitted that within the military there is no one who could replace Diem . He cited, as an example, himself, saying, “I’m not smart nor am I ambitious. I only took the job to keep the Generals together”.

11. Don implied he is aware of planned future developments. He said “This is the first step, and the secret of what is going to happen is not mine to give”. When asked how long he thought martial law would last, Don said it depended on what is going to happen. When asked if the National Assembly elections on 31 Aug would be held he said the elections will probably be delayed, but there will be a relaxation of martial law on 24 Aug as far as curfew is concerned.

12. Don did not say anything about keeping Diem in power or replacing him with someone inside SVN beyond his statement that he did not want one of the Vietnamese exile politicians to achieve power and that no military figure could do the job. CAS officer received the impression, and it was an impression only, that Don and his group wished to retain Diem in power for the present phase of their plan.

13. Don also said that he realizes he will probably be “sacrificed” as a result of the martial law action but this is not too important because there are other military leaders who will take his place. He did not name them. Don gave the impression that he is not the man behind the whole thing. He is the figurehead. He is responsible for the first phase. There are others in the group who will take over other phases. Nothing Don said implied who the man or men might be who would take over other phases. Don mentioned the fact that VOA is playing up the resignation of Ambassador Chuong. He repeated that VOA broadcasts are hurting the military. He said it does no good to say that military action has been taken against the Buddhists and that the U.S. Govt deplores this action and at the same time say that the USA continues aid. He did not expand on this to indicate what action the USA should take.

14. Don made no mention of Vice President Tho or of any other Cabinet members.

15. Don said that after this first phase, things cannot revert back to what was before. When asked if he referred to the government, Don said, “yes, I’m talking about the government. The President has got to change some of his Ministers. “ Don did not name any specific ministers. He said events are controlling the situation. Don said if he had to choose between President Diem and Nhu, he would choose the President. He gave no indication of what other officers might be thinking about Nhu. When asked if something happens, and the President is no longer in power, would Don go with Nhu, Don said “if I have the choice between the President and Nhu, Nhu is going.” He doesn’t want Nhu.

16. Reporting officer received the impression from Don that although the President is still in the saddle what is going on now is being controlled by Nhu. The impression is strong that General Don is not completely aware of everything that is going on around him. From Don’s statements it appears that there is a junior element among the Generals causing him trouble. Don indicated that he wants assurances one way or the other from the U.S. Govt. He appears not to know what to do next. He is completely controlled by events and reacts rather than plans next moves. It seems Don himself feels he does not have the power of [or?]enough influence over the Generals to overthrow the President. However Don did not give the impression that he wants by choice to overthrow the President. Don evidently wants to conciliate the Buddhists and said that the military should restore the pagodas and the holy statues that were destroyed in some of the pagodas. Don made no statements on the second phase of the plan. Don did not indicate how long the first phase would last but did indicate it would last beyond the scheduled National Assembly elections.

17. Our impression is that there is considerable significance in Don’s statement that this is only the first phase and the secret of future phases is not his to tell. We cannot determine whether Don means that future phases containing the “secret” will be controlled from within the military or, for example, by Nhu, or by other civilian figures. Donmade no comment on any civilians by name. He said the Army’s primary aim is to fight the Viet Cong. Don also said that there was no 10 August Generals’ meeting with Ngo Dinh Nhu.

18. Have disseminated to Lodge and Harkins.

1 Source: Library of Congress, Harriman Papers, Vietnam Policy. Secret. Also sent to Honolulu. The source text is a copy sent by the CIA to the Department of State for Hilsman and Hughes; also sent to the White House for Bundy and to JCS for Krulak. According to a note on the source text, TDCS dissemination of this cable would follow. That report, TDCS DB-3/656,252, August 24, is published in Declassified Documents, 1977, 93C.

2 For Don’s recollections of the discussion, see Tran Van Don, Our Endless War, pp. 90-91.

276. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 276. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, August 24, 1963, 11 p.m.

329. CINCPAC for POLAD. For Hilsman. Embtel 3142 We are reporting separately conversations with Vo Van Hai (Embtel 316),3 General Kim (Embtel 320),4 Thuan (Embtel 324)5 and General Don (C-AS Saigon 0265).6

These conversations confirm fully conclusions contained reftel. In addition, they indicate that: a) Nhu, probably with full support of Diem , had large hand in planning of action against Buddhists, if he did not fully master-mind it. His influence has also been significantly increased.

b) He probably found relatively fertile soil in which to work, i.e. certain of Generals were genuinely worried about GVN handling of Buddhist situation and ready for decisive military action, such as martial law.

c) It is nevertheless also possible that Regular Army was not cut in fully on planned action against pagodas, which was carried out by Police and Colonel Tung’s Special Forces. (On other hand, Don’s statement that Army planned simply to return bonzes to their own pagodas is disingenuous, if he meant to do this could be Done peacefully.)

d) Finally, and most important, we do not conclude that any of officers with actual military strength in Saigon (Don, Dinh, Tung) is at this point disaffected with President or with Nhu. We must assume that latter have, or may well have, strings of power still in their hands.

Suggestion has been made that U.S. has only to indicate to “Generals” that it would be happy to see Diem and/or Nhus go, and deed would be Done. Situation is not so simple, in our view. Specifically, as indicated (d) above, we have no information that officers with troops in Saigon are disposed to act in this way. Moreover, there is no showing that military have agreed among themselves on a leadership.

Action on our part in these circumstances would seem to be a shot in the dark. Situation at this time does not call for that, in my judgment, and I believe we should bide our time, continuing to watch situation closely.

Lodge

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 2-4 S VIET Secret; Operational Immediate; Limit Distribution. Received at 2:05 p.m. Repeated to CINCPAC.

2 Document 269.

3 Paul Kattenburg was in Saigon, August 22-30. He reported to Hilsman in telegram 316, August 24, on a conversation he had with Vo Van Hai, Chief of Diem ‘s private staff. Although a long-time Diem loyalist, Hai confided that he feared for his life and thought he was under surveillance by Nhu’s agents. Hai told Kattenburg that Nhu had “carefully stage-managed” the crackdown on the Buddhists, had used Madame Nhu to further his own campaign against the bonzes, and had arranged for the Generals to meet with Diem just hours before the raids on the pagodas. Hai said that Nhu decided to act before Lodge’s arrival so as to confront the new Ambassador with a fait accompli. He complained about the Nhu system of favoritism and privilege and pointedly told Kattenburg that the Generals would move against Nhu if only they were given the word. “It would not be difficult,” Hai reportedly said. (Department of State, Central Files, POL 25 S VIET)

4 Document 274.

5 Document 273.

6 Document 275.

277. Memorandum From the Counselor for Public Affairs of the Embassy in Vietnam (Mecklin) to the Ambassador (Lodge) 277. Memorandum From the Counselor for Public Affairs of the Embassy in Vietnam (Mecklin) to the Ambassador (Lodge)1

Saigon, August 24, 1963.

SUBJECT

Press Relations

It is, of course, notably presumptuous for me to attempt to discuss press relations with a man of your experience in this field. I am nevertheless attempting to do so because the problem here is not only extraordinarily difficult but also unique. It is one of the toughest problems you must face, as I’m sure you have been advised by Ambassador Nolting.

Attached is a copy of the memo I wrote for Robert Manning, Assistant Secretary of State for Public Affairs, on the occasion of his visit here just over a month ago to investigate the question of GVN and US relations with the foreign press.2 What follows is an updating, plus some after-thoughts. Also attached is some comment on the press situation by Colonel Lee Baker, the MACV Public Information Officer.3

We are faced with a crisis of credibility such as seldom has happened before in a situation as critical as this. You will hear indignant contrary views, but my observation is that not only the newsmen here but also a good many Americans in relatively senior official positions believe very nearly nothing that any official U.S. Agency says about the situation in Vietnam.

Just a week ago, for example, I visited a MAAG outpost in the Delta. The senior officer told me that things were going exceptionally well. After he left, his deputy told me that the situation was rapidly deteriorating. The deputy, frankly, was more persuasive. This is typical. You are confronted here with a community of some 18,000 or 19,000 Americans who are torn by doubt, distrust of their own leadership, deep frustration in the face of personal danger, contempt for the GVN yet often a real affection for the low-level Vietnamese with whom they work, disgust mixed with a wonderful determination to win, and equally wonderful morale in spite of everything.

Which suggests an example: I said 18,000 to 19,000 Americans. There are just over 16,000 military personnel in Vietnam, plus 2,000 to 3,000 civilians. The military figure is scheduled to peak at 16,700 this fall. It is official policy (supporting documents on request) that there are “about” 14,000 military personnel here. Colonel Baker and I have been trying for more than a month to persuade the authorities to allow us to leak the true figure to the press-along with pleas not to make a story of it-but in vain. We are invited, in effect, to lie to the American people on this question. It is very nearly a certainty that the correct figure will be found out, resulting in another body blow to the credibility of the U.S. Mission here.

MACV says the war is developing favorably. David Halberstam of the New York Times recently wrote to the contrary.4 President Kennedy cabled MACV for an explanation.5 Very few objective Americans here-like Mr. Kennedy?-believe either Halberstam or MACV. This is symptomatic. MACV’s daily OPSUM does not regularly indicate facts and statistics that have been confirmed by American advisors, which of course means that one must assume everything in the OPSUM comes from Vietnamese sources. Result: the OPSUM has lost credibility, not only here but among a good many people in Washington. (I was present at a meeting of the Vietnam Working Group in May when this was said in so many words. Nobody objected.)

Recently an old-hand correspondent in Southeast Asia was here for a visit. After a fortnight, he told me he thought the war was going badly. I said: “If this is true, then the leadership of the American mission here is committing an astonishing mistake in judgment.” He said: “The French thought they were going to win, too.” This, of course, is glib. Drawing a parallel with the French is notably unjustified. But I was here, too, during the period of Dienbienphu, and I think it is true that the psychological atmosphere has a similar flavor. This seems to be characteristic of a Western nation engaged against guerrillas …6 to subsist on statistics of casualty ratios and weapons-lost ratios, reluctant to face up to the profound, unmeasurable unknowns of a quicksilver war.

These are intangible questions. The issue is not who is right. Nobody can prove an argument on any subject in Vietnam. The issue is the extraordinarily urgent need for the U.S. Government to recognize the reality that Vietnam remains in doubt, and to stop pontificating. In my opinion, the American people Don’t duck a struggle, nor setbacks, much less a candid admission of setbacks. But they do react to false optimism. One of the reasons for the present explosive reaction of the American press to the GVN, and to U.S. policy, is the fact that most American newsmen feel they have been misled. To put it bluntly, if it had been freely conceded that this is something less than the best regime ever, there would be a lot less bitterness now that the fact has been conclusively established.

On the question of your own posture vis-à-vis the press, my most urgent recommendation is that you attempt from the outset to engage the newsmen in your own problems. You face the immediate, indigestible possibility, for example, that thoughtful analysis of the political situation may lead to the conclusion that the U.S. must still support the Diem regime. If you will invite the newsmen, in effect, to share in the agonizing, and level with them on details of the problem (most of which they will find out anyway), there is at least a chance that you can carry some of them along in your eventual decision, as well as the subsequent pulling and hauling to make it work. My candid belief is that a decision reached in lonely, highly-classified isolation from the press is unlikely to be supported, however sensible.

Ambassador Nolting was an open-season target on the grounds that he was too “soft” with Diem . I was here as a correspondent in 1955 when Ambassador Collins was attacked by the press (including me) with equal ferocity because he was too “tough” with Diem . In both cases, the prosecuting correspondents argued that the Ambassador did not understand Asians. In both cases, the Ambassador was also reluctant to share his problems with the press. And in both cases, it worked out that the Ambassador’s problems were shared anyway with the press, via leaks in Washington on anything he did of much significance. As noted in my memo to Manning, experience has proved that secrets simply Don’t keep in a situation as explosive and vital as this.

Some specific suggestions:

Limit your public comment to an absolute minimum, and always avoid any kind of public judgment on how things are going. Most of all, Don’t be optimistic in public; American officials who talk about optimism in Vietnam remind most newsmen of Chinese Communists talking about “peace”. Don’t be too easily accessible to correspondents, but when you do see one, give him a lot of time and level to the most intimate degree possible. Never be defensive about U.S. policy here and emphatically not about the GVN; try to maintain a detached, gee-what-should-we-do atmosphere. Try to include a responsible correspondent in as many social functions as possible, including high-level dinners (you will do your business anyway in a talk in a corner after dinner when none of the guests can eavesdrop), but never invite all the press as a group, which makes it look like charity.

Most importantly, treat the newsman as an ally, never as an antagonist. Assuming the present line-up stays in office, you will find that you can negotiate, albeit with notable difficulty, on material issues, e.g. military strategy and economic planning, but that efforts to persuade the GVN to change its ways on domestic political questions almost always come a cropper. If nothing else, this is surely the lesson of the regime’s solemn commitment to Mr. Nolting to pursue a policy of conciliation with the Buddhists. Generally speaking, negotiations with hope of success should not be made public, but negotiations with no hope of success should be pursued, in part, through the pressures of stateside publicity.

Specifically, the latter means mainly the social and political reforms that are so badly needed here. If you level, I think most newsmen will go along with you in both cases. If you Don’t level, you not only fail to achieve the reforms, but it also looks as though you’re not trying.

Finally, a word on the mood of the moment among the 30 or 40 foreign newsmen in Saigon. Many of the visitors are here for the first time, or anyway for the first time in months or years, insensitive to the maddening complexities of the story, and determined to report whether Lodge looks good or bad. I think you can duck trouble with them simply by begging time to sort things out. Among the regulars, however, there is a mood that verges on hysteria. They are exhausted after three months of an extraordinarily difficult story, emotionally engaged in the most violent four-letter terms, full of extravagant hopes that Lodge can square things away, and scared. Three of them have been sleeping at my house for the past three nights for fear of raids on their homes.

This is a time to be cautious, to avoid any kind of opinion on controversial issues, e.g. who’s winning the war, but also a time to invite and share confidences and hopefully establish a new base of understanding between the newsmen and the official American community that is urgently needed.

1 Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 306, USIA Files:FRC 68 A 5160, Vietnam Working Group. Secret; Eyes Only.

2 Not found. Manning’s report is Document 239.

3 Not found.

4 See footnote 2, Document 257.

5 See footnote 1, Document 259.

6 Ellipsis in the source text.

278. Memorandum From Michael V. Forrestal of the National Security Council Staff to the President 278. Memorandum From Michael V. Forrestal of the National Security Council Staff to the President1

Washington, August 24, 1963.

I attach the latest cables2 on the situation in Saigon. It is now quite certain that Brother Nhu is the mastermind behind the whole operation against the Buddhists and is calling the shots. This is now agreed by virtually everyone here.3

Agreement is also developing that the United States cannot tolerate a result to the present difficulties in Saigon which leaves Brother Nhu in a dominating position. There is disagreement on whether Diem has any political viability left, and on whether he could ever be brought to acquiesce in the removal of his brother.

Averell and Roger now agree that we must move before the situation in Saigon freezes. I am pressing them to get John McCone’s endorsement of one of several courses of action which can be presented to you at the earliest opportunity. We are still trying to keep all of this as closely held as possible.

Mike

1 Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Vietnam Country Series, 8/24/63-8/31/63, Memos and Miscellaneous. Top Secret. A note on the source text indicates that this document was taken from the President’s weekend reading, dated August 24.

2 No cables were attached to the source text, but apparently the reference is to Documents 273-276.

3 See Document 279.

279. Editorial Note 279. Editorial Note

The President’s Intelligence Checklist of August 24, sent to the President at Hyannisport, Massachusetts, assesses Nhu’s role and responsibility for the situation in Saigon. The checklist on South Vietnam reads as follows: “A. We cannot determine as yet who is calling the shots in Saigon-Diem or the Nhus.

“B. General Don told a US observer that Diem is making the decisions, but that he is acting through Nhu.

“C. Nhu has been given credit by a usually reliable source as the prime mover in the crackdown on the Buddhists and the imposition of martial law.

“D. General Don also stated that the Palace is issuing orders directly to the Saigon Commander General Dinh and to the Special Forces Commander Colonel Tung rather than through himself as top commander.

“E. Ambassador Lodge thinks—and General Don tends to confirm this—the military is not at present a monolithic structure and warns of serious fighting between competing military elements if the military should decide on a coup.

“F. Our CIA people received the impression from General Don’s statements that the current unstable situation may be the first of several as yet unrevealed phases.” (Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Chester V. Clifton Series)

In its Current Intelligence Memorandum, OCI No. 2343, August 26, the CIA concluded: “Ngo Dinh Nhu is the key to the situation in Saigon and appears to be the controlling figure, possibly without President Diem ‘s assent.” (Ibid., Vietnam Country Series, 8/24/63-8/31/63, Memos and Miscellaneous)

280. Telegram From Michael V. Forrestal of the National Security Council Staff to the President, at Hyannis Port, Massachusetts 280. Telegram From Michael V. Forrestal of the National Security Council Staff to the President, at Hyannis Port, Massachusetts1

Washington, August 24, 1963, 4:50 p.m.

CAP 63460. Please pass following to President “eyes only”. Harriman, Hilsman and Forrestal have drafted following telegram to Saigon and CINCPAC. Substance generally agreed to by Admiral Felt and clearances being obtained, from Ball and Defense. Since situation in Saigon may not remain fluid for long, Department believes desirable transmit this message tonight. Ambassador Lodge agrees with assessment that Nhu in control but does not know whether military would act against him. Lodge recommends wait and see. Harriman, Hilsman and I favor taking this action now. Will advise you reactions Ball and Defense, but suggest you let me know if you wish comment or holdup action. Begin text draft cable:2

1 Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Vietnam Country Series 8/24/63-8/31/63, State Cables. Top Secret; Eyes Only. A note on the source text in Clifton’s hand reads: P[resident]—as discussed with Secretary Ball.”

2 No draft telegram was attached, but the reference is to a draft of telegram 243, Document 281. That draft is filed immediately after this telegram in the Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Vietnam Country Series, 8/24/63-8/31/63, State Cables. See footnote 8, Document 281, for the difference between the draft and the final version.

281. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam 281. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam1

Washington, August 24, 1963, 9:36 p.m.

243. Eyes only Ambassador Lodge. For CINCPAC/POLAD exclusive for Admiral Felt. No further distribution. Re CAS Saigon 02652 reporting General Don’s views; Saigon 3203 Saigon 316,4 and Saigon 329.5 It is now clear that whether military proposed martial law or whether Nhu tricked them into it, Nhu took advantage of its imposition to smash pagodas with police and Tung’s Special Forces loyal to him, thus placing onus on military in eyes of world and Vietnamese people. Also clear that Nhu has maneuvered himself into commanding position.

US Government cannot tolerate situation in which power lies in Nhu’s hands. Diem must be given chance to rid himself of Nhu and his coterie and replace them with best military and political personalities available.

If, in spite of all of your efforts, Diem remains obdurate and refuses, then we must face the possibility that Diem himself cannot be preserved.

We now believe immediate action must be taken to prevent Nhu from consolidating his position further. Therefore, unless you in consultation with Harkins perceive overriding objections you are authorized to proceed along following lines: (1) First, we must press on appropriate levels of GVN following line: (a) USG cannot accept actions against Buddhists taken by Nhu and his collaborators under cover martial law.

(b) Prompt dramatic actions redress situation must be taken, including repeal of decree 10,6 release of arrested monks, nuns, etc.

(2) We must at same time also tell key military leaders that US would find it impossible to continue support GVN militarily and economically unless above steps are taken immediately which we recognize requires removal of the Nhus from the scene. We wish give Diem reasonable opportunity to remove Nhus, but if he remains obdurate, then we are prepared to accept the obvious implication that we can no longer support Diem . You may also tell appropriate military commanders we will give them direct support in any interim period of breakdown central government mechanism.

(3) We recognize the necessity of removing taint on military for pagoda raids and placing blame squarely on Nhu. You are authorized to have such statements made in Saigon as you consider desirable to achieve this objective. We are prepared to take same line here and to have Voice of America make statement along lines contained in next numbered telegram whenever you give the word, preferably as soon as possible.7

Concurrently with above, Ambassador and country team should urgently examine all possible alternative leadership and make detailed plans as to how we might bring about Diem ’s replacement if this should become necessary.

Assume you will consult with General Harkins re any precautions necessary protect American personnel during crisis period.

You will understand that we cannot from Washington give you detailed instructions as to how this operation should proceed, but you will also know we will back you to the hilt on actions you take to achieve our objectives.

Needless to say we have held knowledge of this telegram to minimum essential people and assume you will take similar precautions to prevent premature leaks.8

Ball

1 Source: Department of State, Har-Van Files, Overthrow of the Diem Government in South Vietnam, 1963. Top Secret; Operational Immediate. Printed also in United States-Vietnam Relations, 1945-1967, Book 12, pp. 536-537 and Declassified Documents, 1975, 321B. Drafted by Hilsman and cleared by Hilsman, Forrestal, and Ball. Approved by Harriman for transmission and classification. The drafting and clearance of this message has occasioned subsequent controversy which is reflected in the memoirs and recollections of some of the principal personalities involved at the time. General Maxwell Taylor stated in Swords and Plowshares, pp. 292-294, that the cable was an “end run” by an anti-Diem faction in Washington including Hilsman, Harriman, and Forrestal. Taylor believed the cable was ill-conceived, confusing, and would never had been approved had Hilsman and his colleagues not taken advantage of the absence from Washington of most of the high-level officials of the administration. Hilsman, in To Move a Nation, pp. 487-488, and in a later oral history interview (Kennedy Library, Oral History Program) maintained that the cable was cleared by the President and all representatives of the relevant agencies.

2 Document 275.

3 Document 274.

4 See footnote 3, Document 276.

5 Document 276.

6 Regarding Decree No. 10 of August 6, 1950, see footnote 2, Document 116.

7 Reference is to telegram 244 to Saigon, August 24, 9:37 p.m., in which Hilsman provided the Embassy with a guidance for simultaneous play in Washington and Saigon. This guidance and the proposed VOA broadcast were supposed to separate in the public's mind the South Vietnamese Army's press imposition of martial law and the attacks by Tung's Special Forces and the secret police on the pagodas and the large-scale arrests of Buddhist leaders and demonstrators. The guidance pointed out that the secret police and the Special Forces were not under the command of the Armed Forces. (Department of State, Central Files, SOC 14-1 S VIET) For text of the VOA guidance as actually broadcast, see Document 287.

8 The last three paragraphs of this telegram were not in the draft copy cited in footnote 2, Document 280.

282. Memorandum for the Record by the Joint Chiefs of Staff’s Special Assistant for Counterinsurgency and Special Activities (Krulak) 282. Memorandum for the Record by the Joint Chiefs of Staff’s Special Assistant for Counterinsurgency and Special Activities (Krulak)1

Washington, August 24, 1963.

SUBJECT

Vietnam

1. At about 1800 I received a telephone call on the Command Center System from Admiral Riley, who recounted conversations with Mr. Hilsman and Admiral Felt concerning messages which had come in on the situation in Saigon. He referred to a proposed course of action deriving from recommendations made by Thuan, said that the course of action was viewed favorably by Hilsman, Felt and himself.

2. I told Admiral Riley that I had been called by Forrestal, doubtless on the same subject. With Admiral Riley also on the phone, a call was put through to Forrestal. He asked if I had seen the messages, to which Admiral Riley had earlier alluded. I replied that I had not. He then said that they made clear a course of action, which he, Hilsman and Governor Harriman had converted into an instruction to Ambassador Lodge.2 He said that it had been sent to the President for approval; that it was not something on which Defense clearance was desired, but that he was seeking to advise Mr. Gilpatric of the message. He asked if I could show it to General Taylor, to which I assented. He asked me to come to the White House situation room and get the message.

3. Admiral Riley interjected the information that he had been in communication with Hilsman and Felt, and agreed that the general course of action appeared sound, although he had not seen the draft message referred to.

4. I went to the White House situation room at about 1900 and read all the related incoming messages. Forrestal then showed me the enclosure,3 saying that it had been sent to the President for approval. He stated that he had just finished discussing it with Mr. Gilpatric by telephone, and that Mr. Gilpatric was in accord with its content.

5. Forrestal did not solicit my views on the content of the enclosure; however, I made two observations. First, where the words “press on all levels of the GVN” appear, that my interpretation is that it means we must start with Diem himself, and not foreclose him. Second, where it speaks of “key military leaders” that it is delusive to think of the Vietnamese military as united and homogeneous. It is, in fact and by design, fragmented. Forrestal concurred with these comments, without elaboration.

6. I asked to have a copy of the draft made, which I could take to General Taylor; called his quarters and requested that I be notified when he returned. I then went to my quarters and, at about 1930, notified Admiral Riley of above. He said he intended to call Admiral Felt and bring him up to date.

7. Immediately after finishing the call to Riley, I was called by Forrestal, who wanted me to report that the President had in fact approved the message, with only the addition that the means of its implementation would be in the discretion of Ambassador Lodge and General Harkins. I reported this to Admiral Riley, who stated that he had already called Admiral Felt, and would not give him the additional information since he would probably get it in an information copy of the message. I told him that Felt did not show up as an addressee on the draft that I had.

8. I called General Taylor’s quarters and made specific arrangements for him to call me at the command center, on his return. At about 2145, not having been called, I called General Taylor’s quarters, found him there and took the enclosure to him.

9. General Taylor read the message, questioned me on the nature of the incoming messages which gave rise to it, and upon the earlier events of the day, of which I had knowledge. He then observed that he would not wish to be on the receiving end of the message, that it is not sufficiently explicit, that it does not give Diem adequate chance to do what we want. He stated that it reflects the well-known compulsion of Hilsman and Forrestal to depose Diem and, had McGeorge Bundy been present, he would not have approved the message. Finally, he stated that the message had not been given the quality of interdepartmental staffing it deserved, and that he would be prepared to say so at a proper time.

V. H. Krulak
Major General, USMC

1 Source: National Defense University, Taylor Papers, T-172-69. Top Secret.

2 See Document 281.

3 Telegram 243, Document 281.

283. Telegram From the Commander in Chief, Pacific (Felt) to the Joint Chiefs of Staff 283. Telegram From the Commander in Chief, Pacific (Felt) to the Joint Chiefs of Staff1

Honolulu, August 25, 1963, 10:58 a.m.

251958Z. Situation in RVN.

1. Following are highlights of conversation Gen Harkins had with Gen Don on Saturday:2 A. Don’s aim is to keep buffer between populace and troops, utilizing police to maintain order and employing Army only if police unable cope with situation.

B. Don reiterated he takes his orders from Diem not Nhu. Said I should bring to him any matters heretofore handled by Thuan.

C. Power alignment such that difficult for army to call the shots. Solidarity does not exist. Appears Dinh and his forces receiving instructions direct rather than thru Don. Obvious Special Forces and police also receiving orders direct and not thru Don and/or Dinh. A neatly engineered stalemate.

D. Don indicated stalemate could be broken by U.S. and that we must continue support Diem , forcing him to clean house. His suggestion, and definitely not to be attributed to him, was for the duration of the crisis to have an interim mixed Cabinet, military and civilian. Military should have three Cabinet posts. Interior—most important to preserve law and order. He suggested B/G Minh for this. Minister of Information-incumbent General Oai is OK. Minister of Defense-not too important in his mind but should be military. Thuan should remain as Secy of State to Presidency. He feels President should do this to show he’s really trying to clean house. He wants martial law to end soonest. Don’t blame him as he’s really in a quandary with so many cooks stirring the Nuoc Mam. Also he hopes U.S. will truly try bear down on Diem —and try to show him how to run government—by delegating authority of [to?] Ministers and broadening his narrow outlook. This we have tried to do without much success—but we should keep trying if we’re going to stick with Diem .

E. He reaffirmed that war against VC would go on. It does, but at somewhat reduced tempo. 300 to 400 opns a day vs 700 to 800.

1 Source: National Defense University, Taylor Papers, Tÿ09172-69. Secret; Priority. Repeated to the Commanders of the U.S. Army, Pacific; U.S. Fleet, Pacific; and Pacific Air Force.

2 August 24.

284. Telegram From the Central Intelligence Agency Station in Saigon to the Agency 284. Telegram From the Central Intelligence Agency Station in Saigon to the Agency1

Saigon, August 25, 1963.

0291. 1. Brigadier General Nguyen Khanh requested immediate meeting with CAS officer at 1330 local 25 August and in half hour conversation preceded by frank plea that regardless of our ultimate decision we not declare his stand to Counsellor Nhu, he proceeded along following lines.

2. The Generals still taking orders within the legal framework of the Constitution, even though some of them have a heartache over some of the actions taken by the government in the process of restoring order.

3. Some of the Generals (he refused to identify further, stating it was not necessary to put any other head on the block at this point beside his own) are however determined to stop taking orders from the politicians (queried for definition he flatly stated the Ngo family) the very minute South Vietnam’s anticommunist stand comes in question. These Generals now fear that the politicians are now thinking in the direction of an arrangement with the DRV.

4. Khanh remarked that the United States has not taken any stand over recent events beside bland statements of disapproval of some of the incidents. Khanh now wants to know (and soon, he asked for a reply by 1530 this afternoon when he would return to Pleiku and was told a reply by that time would be impossible) whether the United States would support “the Army” should it move to take over the country. Regardless of our decision, he reiterated, the Army would go it alone should it become clear that the politicians were heading for any softening on anticommunism.

5. Asked to amplify he declined, but offered “as an example” the following hypothesis: let’s assume that United States decides to curtail or cut aid to Viet Nam in order to force the Ngo family to toe the line, and the politicians decide to seek an agreement with the DRV or even with Communist China for a neutralization of Viet Nam. If this were to happen he, Khanh, and his General friends would definitely revolt. What would the American military, who have fought side by side with the Vietnamese soldiers so far, do?

6. Khanh stated he has four divisions under his command and he can do “pas mal des choses”, quite a few things. Declining once again to name Generals allied with him, he acceded only to replying that while General Tran Van Don is a good and respected friend, he, Khanh cannot afford to trust him at this moment and that General Tran Thien Khiem is completely on Khanh side.

7. Throughout the conversation there was a strong plea for a very rapid assessment of the situation by the United States, to determine if any errors had been committed in the past and should this be established to be the case, prompt, immediate, intelligent and strong remedial action. Asked if he and his Generals have any plan for follow through on political plane, Khanh said they were only military trying to keep the country from being turned over to communism: it was up to the United States to take care of the political part. At any rate, he reiterated at the end, the Generals would go down fighting if the politicians now in power moved in the wrong direction, which the Generals now fear is the case.

8. Khanh has not visited the Palace since 20 Aug. Was asked (did not say by whom) to remain in Saigon tonight but chooses to return to Pleiku instead. Hopes we will contact him there soonest

1 Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Vietnam Country Series, 8/24/63-8/31/63, CIA Cables. Secret. The CIA sent copies to the White House for Forrestal, to the Department of State for Hughes and Hilsman, and to the Joint Chiefs of Staff for Krulak. The telegram was received at the White House at 10:41 a.m.

285. Telegram From Michael V. Forrestal of the National Security Council Staff to the President, at Hyannis Port, Massachussets 285. Telegram From Michael V. Forrestal of the National Security Council Staff to the President, at Hyannis Port, Massachussets1

Washington, August 25, 1963, 5:34 p.m.

CAP 63461. For President’s information following cable received from Lodge2 in answer message of last night.3 Begin text: Believe that chances of Diem ‘s meeting our demands are virtually nil. At same time, by making them we give Nhu chance to forestall or block action by military. Risk, we believe, is not worth taking, with Nhu in control combat forces Saigon. Therefore, propose we go straight to Generals with our demands, without informing Diem . Would tell them we prepared have Diem without Nhus but it is in effect up to them whether to keep him. Would also insist Generals take steps to release

Buddhist leaders and carry out June 16 agreement.4 Request immediate modification instructions. However, do not propose move until we are satisfied with E and E plans. Harkins concurs. I present credentials President Diem tomorrow 11 a.m. Lodge. End text. Ball, Harriman and. Hilsman have answered Department approves modification.

1 Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Vietnam Country Series, 8/24/63-8/31/63, State Cables. Top Secret; Eyes Only; Operational Immediate. The substantive portion of this telegram is printed in the Pentagon Papers: Gravel Edition, vol. 11, p. 735.

2 This cable, August 25, was received via CIA channels as CAS 0292 from Saigon. (Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Vietnam Country Series, 8/24/63-8/31/63, State Cables)

3 Document 281.

4 See Document 178.

286. Message From the Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Vietnam(Lodge) 286. Message From the Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Vietnam(Lodge)1

Washington, August 25, 1963.

Re CAS Saigon 0292.2

1. Agree to modification proposed.

2. Re CAS Saigon 02913 reporting approach by General Khanh. Our impression is that Khanh one of best of Generals, both courageous and sophisticated. His analysis seems to confirm other evidence indicating need for speed in making US position clear to Generals. Hope review E and E plans can be accomplished quickly.

3. Re Deptel 244.4 Press already aware general picture from own sources, e.g. NY Times today says “reports from Saigon indicate top Vietnamese Generals did approve plans for martial law, but not for raids on Buddhist pagodas, shooting and widespread arrests carried out by the special forces under Mr. Nhu’s control.” Will therefore proceed background press along lines Deptel 244 this afternoon and VOA will broadcast Monday morning Saigon time.

4. Re CAS Saigon 0293.5 Suggest Ambassador decide best means getting word to Generals.

1 Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Vietnam Country Series, 8/24/63-8/31/63, State Cables. Top Secret. Apparently sent via CIA channels to Saigon. The message is unsigned, and there is no time of transmission or receipt on the source text.

2 See footnote 2, Document 285.

3 Document 284.

4 See footnote 7, Document 281.

5 Not found.

287. Voice of America Broadcast 287. Voice of America Broadcast1

Saigon, August 26, 1963.

In South Vietnam, the new American Ambassador, Henry Cabot Lodge, meets President Ngo Dinh Diem today to deliver a special message from President Kennedy.

The meeting comes immediately after Vietnam police arrested a reported one thousand students demonstrating against the government.

In Washington, officials said it was Vietnam’s secret police—not the Army—which made the raids against Buddhist pagodas last week. Thousands of Buddhists were reported arrested, and at least four killed.

American officials said that based on latest reports from Vietnam, the army agreed to the plan to put the nation under military law-but it did not know about the police plans to attack the Buddhists. These Washington officials say the raids were made by police under the control of President Diem’s brother, Ngo Dinh Nhu. They say America may cut its aid to Vietnam if President Diem does not get rid of the, police officials responsible.

1 Source: Library of Congress, Harriman Papers, Vietnam Policy. A note on the source text indicates that this was a copy of “VOA 2-One Thirty AM Breakfast Show.” Apparently this is the text of the relevant portion of a prerecording of the 8 a.m. broadcast in Saigon on August 26. In To Move a Nation, p. 489, Hilsman explained that the broadcaster did not check the broadcast against the press guidance (telegram 244 to Saigon; see footnote 7, Document 281), and therefore made the “flat statement” in the last paragraph that the United States might reduce its aid to Vietnam.

288. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 288. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, August 26, 1963.

To State attention Governor Harriman. Do not question good intentions animating decision directing VOA broadcast 8:00 A.M., August 26.2 But Department should know this action has complicated our already difficult problem as follow: 1. It has eliminated the possibility of the generals effort achieving surprise. This is definitely not practical politics even though I still hope. that the Generals will succeed. Purpose of my message of yesterday (CAS Saigon 0292)3 was to make clear our view that in the interest of achieving Washington objective and at same time of minimizing loss of life (including American life), we should not tip off Nhu on our decision.

2. The statement that I am “under instructions” to say certain things to Diem is not true. And even if it were true, the VOA would not be the vehicle through which I get such instructions. Also if it were true, the instructions would be fallacious since nothing is accomplished with any man by making him lose face. If our objective is to be achieved at all, it must be achieved by the Vietnamese themselves and must look natural. The US must not appear publicly in the matter, thus giving the “kiss of death” to its friends.

3. Believe Department’s earlier telegram4 giving me charge of tactics is sound and should be adhered to. Obviously the VOA statement cuts right across tactics I had planned.

4. Possibility inherent in [that?] VOA broadcast will tend to increase chance of bloodshed should there be a violent reaction to what is building up. This is a time which calls for action and very few words.

5. If VOA causes failure of our plan the effect in Congress will certainly be unfortunate.

Would appreciate your comment.5

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 5 VIET-US. Top Secret; Eyes Only; Operational Immediate. Sent via CIA channels as CAS 0329 from Saigon. The Department of State passed the message to the White House and to the Office of the Secretary of Defense exclusive for McNamara, Gilpatric, Taylor, and Krulak. There is no time of transmission on the source text, but it was received at the Department of State at 3:11 p.m. The source text is not signed.

2 Document 287. On August 28 the CIA distributed TDCS 3/557,818, which stated that, “by 28 August 1963 Ngo Dinh Nhu had interpreted the 26 August Voice of America broadcast and other U.S. actions since the arrival of Ambassador Lodge as clear indications that the U.S. Government desires Nhu’s removal from any position of influence in the government.” The report also stated that Nhu did not think these actions necessarily meant that the U.S. Government desired the departure of Diem from power. Nhu reportedly ordered the arrest of civilian oppositionists. (Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Vietnam Country Series, 8/24/63-8/31/63, CIA cables)

3 See footnote 2, Document 285.

4 Apparent reference to telegram 244 to Saigon, August 24; see footnote 7, Document 281.

5 In telegram 248 to Saigon, August 26, drafted by Rusk, the Department replied: “Deeply regret VOA broadcasts which complicate your situation. This resulted from failure of machinery here over weekend to carry our policy instructions which would have prevented these broadcasts. Dept and VOA will do utmost to avoid any comment not coordinated with you. VOA will broadcast only hard news for the next few days as part of its general news coverage but will refrain from relaying press speculations as they did on this occasion. We are all deeply aware of delicacy and danger of situation in Saigon and are determined to prevent actions or statements here would catch you by surprise or make your formidable task more difficult. Again my regrets.” (Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Vietnam Country Series, 8/24/63-8/31/63, State Cables)

289. Memorandum for the Record 289. Memorandum for the Record1

Washington, August 26, 1963, noon.

SUBJECT

Vietnam

1. Present, in addition to the President, were:

Secretary Rusk

Secretary McNamara

General Taylor

Mr. Ball

Govemor Harriman

Mr. Gilpatric

General Carter

Mr. Helms

Mr. Bundy

Mr. Forrestal

Major General Krulak

2. Mr. Hilsman summarized the current situation concerning the execution of the plan outlined in State Cable 243,2 to include the visits contemplated with Generals Khiem and Khanh.

3. The President asked if we are adequately prepared for protecting and/or evacuating U.S. citizens in Vietnam. He was shown the’ summary of military preparations to back up the Embassy program and was told that we have a battalion landing team at sea, 24 hours distant from Saigon now.

4. The President observed that Mr. Halberstam of the New York Times is actually running a political campaign; that he is wholly unobjective, reminiscent of Mr. Matthews in the Castro days. He stated that it was essential that we not permit Halberstam unduly to influence our actions.3 Mr. Hilsman assured the President that this was not the case.

5. Governor Harriman interjected the opinion that in this case we have acted at the first opportunity; that at an earlier moment we could not have accurately located the sources of strength and support.4

6. The President observed5 that Diem and his brother, however repugnant in some respects, have done a great deal along the lines that we desire and, when we move to eliminate this government, it should not be a result of New York Times pressure.

7. General Taylor observed that there are many military difficulties involved in the execution of the plan embodied in the 243 cable; that the Vietnamese military is split three ways; that Diem is truly the focus and that we should put our first effort on him.

8. Secretary Ball raised the question of whether Diem knows the extent to which his brother is undermining him, offering as an example the thousands of his personal pictures which have been printed and displayed.

9. The President recalled that about six weeks ago Nhu had a meeting with the Generals6 and raised the question of whether he is trying to take over himself. Hilsman responded that Nhu is riding the fence. He continued on the Nhu subject by stating that Admiral Felt had called him, referred to various cables involved in the situation, and expressed concern as to what would happen unless the Nhus were removed. Hilsman quoted him as saying that unless the Nhus were eliminated the middle level enlisted men would soon lose their interest in fighting. Felt believed that the Generals could handle the situation but that we will have to make known our willingness to support them. Hilsman said that subsequent to this call Felt called him again and counselled against delay. He reiterated, following a query from General Taylor, that Admiral Felt had called him.7

10. The President asked General Taylor, in light of his experience in the Pentagon, what chance a plan such as outlined in State Cable 243 would have of succeeding. General Taylor replied that in Washington we would not turn over the problem of choosing a head of state to the military.

11. Mr. Hilsman then raised the question of whether it would be wise to have a public or a classified statement concerning the curtailment of travel. The President approved a classified approach to the problem, following Hilsman’s advice that a public statement might in some way tip our hand.

12. The President asked what the Voice of America is saying on the subject, to which Mr. Hilsman replied that they were guilty of an error today when they speculated on our use of aid cuts as a sanction against the Vietnamese. He stated that this was contrary to explicit instructions that Voice of America should not become involved in speculation.

13. Mr. Rusk asked when Ambassador Lodge plans to have a business session with Diem. Hilsman had no knowledge of any planned meeting.

14. Mr. McNamara stated that a study of the problem raised these questions in his mind:

a. Exactly what Generals are we speaking of when we address the, subject of a “general officers group”?

To this Hilsman replied that while we have contacted only three (Khiem, Khanh and Minh) there are others, although these three declined to name their colleagues. Mr. McNamara then expressed the view that we should query Saigon as to exactly who the loyal Generals are.

b. His second question was: what exactly do we mean in State Cable 243 by the term “direct support”?

Hilsman replied that this meant finding ways to support the Vietnamese military logistically, not using Saigon as a port of entry.

Mr. Rusk asked me if I was familiar with the geography of the area, to which I replied in the affirmative. He then asked if I believed it would be practical to provide logistical support to the military forces directly, without the use of Saigon as a logistic base. I stated that it would be extremely difficult, involving major changes in our system and equipment and would require considerable time to develop a completely new arrangement. General Taylor stated that, in any case, this idea had not been examined by the military and that he would estimate it to be a very difficult project.

Mr. McNamara concluded the discussion on this question by stating that he believed we should query our representation in Saigon and find out more on their interpretation of what the “direct support” requirement embodies.

c. Mr. McNamara’s third question was what Ambassador Lodge is to say to Diem. There never really was a response to this question.

The President commented that he did not believe that Diem would let his brother be ejected from the scene. Secretary Rusk demurred from this viewpoint stating that he was not at all sure this was the case, while Mr. Hilsman said that the Country Team believes that Diem and Nhu will rise or fall together.

15. Mr. McNamara then raised the question of who Ambassador Lodge believes could replace Diem, stating that if we stand by and let a weak man get in the Presidency we will ultimately suffer. In this regard the President asked if the Foreign Minister who recently resigned8 might be a good candidate, to which Hilsman replied in the negative—stating that it is his view that the Generals would probably support Big Minh.

16. Secretary Rusk suggested that it might be possible to survive with Vice.President Tho at the head, supported by a strong military junta.

17. The President asked what would happen if we find we are faced with having to live with Diem and Nhu, to which Hilsman replied this would be horrible to contemplate because of Nhu’s grave emotional instability.

18. Mr. Rusk then stated that, in the broad sense, it appears that unless a major change in GVN policy can be engineered, we must actually decide whether to move our resources out or to move our troops in.

19. The President asked if we are being blamed in Vietnam for the situation, to which Hilsman responded that we may be suffering slightly but that mostly the people seem to want to get rid of the Nhus, but clearly need U.S. support to do so. He stated that, on these terms, it is imperative that we act.

20. The President stated that there should be another meeting tomorrow to discuss the matter further. Mr. McNamara stated that, as a matter of first priority, we should procure biographical sketches of the key personalities involved, following which General Taylor suggested that we should talk to Ambassador Nolting. The President agreed and stated that Nolting should be brought to the meeting tomorrow, following which Mr. Hilsman commented that Nolting’s view are colored, in that he is emotionally involved in the situation. Upon hearing this, the President observed, “Maybe properly.”

21. The President then stated that the matters discussed in the room should be held very closely and that the need-to-know group should be kept in the minimum number.

V.H. Krulak
Major General, USMC

1 Source: National Defense University, Taylor Papers, Vietnam, chap. XXIII. Top Secret; Sensitive. Drafted by Krulak. The meeting was held at the White House. A memorandum of conversation of this meeting by Hilsman is in the Kennedy Library, Hilsman Papers, Countries, Vietnam, White House Meetings, State Memcons.

2 Document 281.

3 In Hilsman’s record of the meeting he paraphrased the President as follows: “Halberstam was a 28-year old kid and he [the President] wanted assurances we were not giving him serious consideration in our decision.”

4 In Hilsman’s record of the meeting he reported Harriman’s observations as follows: “Governor Harriman pointed out that the decision was taken at the earliest possible moment that it could have been; that Saturday [August 24] was the first day that we knew the situation and that no such decision could ever have been taken unless the people of Viet-Nam had themselves fumed against the government; i.e., the act of beating up the Pagodas swung people against the regime and that we had made our decision at the earliest possible moment after that act.”

5 Hilsman’s record of the President’s observations at this point reads: “The President asked a number of questions about the personalities and the relationships between Khiem, Khanh, Minh, Nhu, General Don and so forth. The relative strength of the various forces in Saigon was also discussed-the impression being left that Colonel Tung’s forces were the only military now present in Saigon with the exception of some Marine battalions which might in fact be loyal to Nhu.”

6 See Document 220.

7 In Hilsman’s record, he observed: “Maxwell Taylor was visibly upset that Felt had called Hilsman and I am sure Felt will hear about it.” In JCS telegram 2219, August 26, Taylor queried Felt if Hilsman’s account of these telephone conversations was accurate. (National Defense University, Taylor Papers, Vietnam, chap. XXIII) In CINCPAC telegram 262317, August 27, Felt responded that he made two calls to Hilsman on August 24. In the first he recommended U.S. support for a move by the Generals against Nhu; in the second Felt stated he did not counsel against delay, but merely asked to be included as an information recipient of appropriate telegrams on this question. (Ibid., T-172-69) In JCS telegram 2253, August 27, Taylor on behalf of the Joint Chiefs reprimanded Felt for expressing his views on a substantive issue outside of proper channels. (Ibid.)

8 Vu Van Mau.

290. Telegram From the Central Intelligence Agency Station in Saigon to the Agency 290. Telegram From the Central Intelligence Agency Station in Saigon to the Agency1

Saigon, August 26, 1963.

[document number not declassified] Embassy requests pass appropriate State Dept officials. Ref: DIR 63869.2

1. During meeting with General Harkins, Trueheart, Mecklin and COS on morning 26 Aug, Lodge made decision that American official hand should not show. Consequently, Harkins will take no initiative with Vietnamese Generals. Decision was in line with Harkins’ own view.

2. We agreed also that Colonel Conein would proceed immediately to convey points listed below to General Tran Thien Khiem. There was agreement that [less than 1 line not declassified] would proceed immediately to Pleiku to advise General Nguyen Khanh. Conein and [less than 1 line not declassified] are already under way to carry out these contacts. Conein will tell General Khiem that [less than 1 line not declassified] is enroute to talk with General Khanh in Pleiku.

3. During subsequent discussion, Trueheart and COS agreed that Conein will ask Khiem’s advice on Conein’s talking with General Tran Van Don. If Khiem agrees, Conein will make immediate contact with Don. If Khiem demurs, Conein will return to obtain further instructions. At moment, our planning is to inform only these three Generals.

4. Conein and [less than 1 line not declassified]conveying to General Khiem and Khanh the following points. a. Solicitation of further elaboration of action aspects of present thinking and planning. What should be done?

b. We in agreement Nhus must go.

c. Question of retaining Diem or not up to them.

d. Bonzes and other arrestees must be released immediately and five-point agreement of 16 June3 be fully carried out.

e. We will provide direct support during any interim period of breakdown central government mechanism.

f. We cannot be of any help during initial action of assuming power of the state. Entirely their own action, win or lose. Don’t expect be bailed out.

g. If Nhus do not go and if Buddhists’ situation is not redressed as indicated, we would find it impossible continue military and economic support.

h. It hoped bloodshed can be avoided or reduced to absolute minimum.

i. It hoped that during process and after, developments conducted in such manner as to retain and increase the necessary relations between Vietnamese and Americans which will allow for progress of country and successful prosecution of the war.

1 Source: National Defense University, Taylor Papers, T-172-69. Top Secret. Also printed in summary form in Pentagon Papers: Gravel Edition, vol. 11, pp. 735-736.

2 A note on the source text summarizes this message as “Hqs guidance regarding future course of action in directing the leadership in the days ahead.” The message has not been found.

3 See Document 178.

291. Telegram From the Central Intelligence Agency Station in Saigon to the Agency 291. Telegram From the Central Intelligence Agency Station in Saigon to the Agency1

Saigon, August 26, 1963.

1. Colonel Conein spoke with General Tran Thien Khiem approximately 1245 hours local and reviewed points contained [document number not declassified] (IN 06507).2

2. General Khiem replied as follows: a. Generals were in accord with points expressed. Pleased to know US position.

b. These points should not be raised with General Tran Van Don at this time since Nhu has certain officers on General Don’s staff and might become aware of this from them.

c. Colonel Conein should stand by for later pickup by jeep by an officer sent by General Khiem. This jeep will take Colonel Conein to immediate future meeting with General Duong Van Minh.

d. General Khiem concurred in contact with General Khanh by [less than 1 line not declassified] on these points and stated that he would inform General Khanh by secure means available to him that he is aware of [less than 1 line not declassified] mission and in agreement with it.

1 Source: National Defense University, Taylor Papers, T-172-69. Top Secret. There is no telegram number indicated on the source text.

2 Document 290.

292. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 292. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, August 26, 1963, 10 p.m.

340. CINCPAC for POLAD. Herewith report on my private talk with Diem which lasted from 5 to 7:10 pm.

He began by expressing particular appreciation for President Kennedy’s personal letter introducing me which he said he had carefully read.2 He was pleased to have someone like me as Ambassador who was out of American public life.

I said that it had been a particular honor for me when the President had offered me the post of Ambassador to Vietnam and had thought I could be useful in it. I realized I knew little about Vietnam, but felt I knew something about the United States and also something about the United Nations and hoped I might advise him on American affairs and that he would listen to my advice whether or not he took it.

I said that the United States Government, as the term is used in foreign affairs, does not include Congress and that in the broad sense it is impossible to hook the United States of America because public opinion is essential to any long range policy and without the support of public opinion you can not get the support of Congress and without the support of Congress you can not get funds. It was interesting to me that people whom I had known all my life in politics thought that Madame Nhu was the Chief of State of Viet-Nam and that I had met several people in Massachusetts who had seen her picture on the covers of magazines and had read some of her statements about barbecuing the priests and total destruction of the Buddhists and that this had shocked public opinion. The idea that the government was persecuting the Buddhists was also shocking to American opinion which favors religious toleration. All these things were threatening American support of Viet-Nam.

Diem said that he had done his best to get Madame Nhu to keep quiet and that he had spoken to her several times. He said jokingly that he had even threatened to take a wife but that she said that she was a member of the Assembly and had a right to make speeches.

I told him that a dramatic gesture such as liberating the Buddhist prisoners would have a good effect on American opinion. He said he had liberated most of them and to prove in [the]point that Buddhists were small percentage of population gave me book which I am pouching entitled “Buddhism in Viet-Nam”3 published by the Xa Loi Pagoda in Saigon which states “under the General Buddhist Association’s authority and general direction, are grouped, on the one hand, 3 sanghas numbering well over 3,000 monks and about 600 nuns, on the other hand, three communities of disciples which branch out their ramification as far as to remote hamlets. The figures of adherents to these three legally constituted lay associations and their affiliates reach about 1,000,000, to which it should be added an important number of non-associate disciples by as much as threefold.”

The next two hours were spent by him in a remarkable discourse about his own family and extent to which Viet-Nam was an underdeveloped country. The serious lack of educated people, the difficulty which he had in finding people who could write a simple statement for him, how he had to write most of his own proclamations himself, how inferior persons held posts in universities who abused their trust by turning educational institutions into centers of unrest.

He then talked about the way in which a small Buddhist sect had been taken over by agitators and how plastic explosives had been distributed one of which could knock down a whole house. He said that delinquents were used to agitate the people in the market place and that often the police had no choice but to fire in self defense. He said that there was a well organized plan to create unrest around the country which would pull the troops out of the city, leaving the capital defenseless. It was under these circumstances that he had decreed martial law. In response to questions from me he said he did not know how long marital law would continue.

At the very end of the meeting, he said he hoped there would be discipline, particularly as regards the United States’ activities in Saigon and that there would be an end to reports of diverse activities interfering in Vietnamese affairs by various United States agencies.

I said that I had just arrived and naturally could not know everything that was going on but would look into it.

Lodge

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL US-S VIET. Secret; Priority; Eyes Only; Limit Distribution. Repeated priority to CINCPAC. Received at 3:36 p.m. Passed by the Department of State to the White House.

2 Copies of this ceremonial letter, August 16, are Ibid., Presidential Correspondence: Lot 66 D 476 and Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Vietnam Country Series, 8/1/63-8/20/63. The signed original was given to Lodge on August 15 to take with him to Vietnam. At this meeting, Lodge presented his credentials.

3 Not found.

293. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam 293. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam1

Washington, August 26, 1963, 8:18 p.m.

249. Eyes only for Ambassador. Following summarizes FYI highest level meeting noon Aug. 26.2

After discussion E & E plans DOD was directed to consider prepositioning US forces in case they required in Viet-Nam. Circular message3 approved to discourage travel by private US citizens to Viet-Nam and to permit US official travel only as authorized by Department. No public announcement would be made at this time. Also decided to make Saigon’s 3274 on GVN censorship available to editors in unclassified version not for publication.

Agreed answers to three questions were urgently needed.

1. What exactly meant by “direct support to the military in an interim period if the central government is ineffective”. This interpreted at meeting as possibility of supplying military leaders in the field with logistic support directly without going through central government. Urgent study will be made to see whether alternatives could be worked out to prevent heavy concentration through Saigon. (This being done by Joint Staff with immediate query to lIarkins on this point.)

2. What is the power status and interrelationship of generals? Which generals are involved with Minh, Khan, and Khiem? What are their plans?

3. Generals should be queried as to who their alternative leadership candidates would be.

A Who’s Who of key personalities in present situation being urgently prepared here.

Another meeting will be held late afternoon August 27. Trust you will give us soonest and if possible in time for meeting your continuing assessment on number points 2 and 3 above.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, INF 8 US. Top Secret; Operational Immediate. Drafted by Hilsman, cleared with Forrestal, and approved by Ball.

2 See Document 289.

3 Circular telegram 370, August 26, not printed. (Department of State, Central Files, TRV 9)

4 According to telegram 327, August 24, military censorship on all outgoing press copy, still pictures, and film was imposed by the Diem government a few hours after the raids on the Saigon pagodas. A censorship office was set up, but it operated sporadically. (Ibid., PPV 1-2 S VIET)

294. Telegram From the Central Intelligence Agency Station in Saigon to the Agency 294. Telegram From the Central Intelligence Agency Station in Saigon to the Agency1

Saigon, August 26, 1963.

[document number and 1 sentence containing document number not declassified]

1. Following message received from CAS officer who now at Pleiku: a. Khanh was not ready move now. Plan was to wait until Nhu moved in direction rapprochement with DRV then strike. This would give Generals some legal grounds for move.

b. Still hopes Nhu will provide pretext on which Generals can hang action. Quoting VOA broadcast said hope was we would cut aid and if Diem yields and fires Nhu then no need revolt. My impression he much prefers it that way. Wanted know if “secret police to be punished Der VOA includes Nhu.” I replied Nhu must go. He nodded.

c. Talking to Khiem without his approval was wrong move but no damage. Khanh going Saigon for hour or so tonight.

d. We must not talk to Dinh. Also CAS officer be careful of tight surveillance.

e. Wants immediate reply to single request: will we guarantee safe haven and support to families in case Generals fail? Have no money stashed away.

f. Impression: Khanh caught off base by our timing does not quite know what to do.

g. Recommend phone Khiem number 30102 that I returning Saigon tonight, if you so instruct. We awaiting your instructions.

2. CAS officer being instructed return tomorrow after an additional meeting with Khanh or without, whichever seems useful. We not replying pare 1e pending discussion with Ambassador.

1 Source: National Defense University, Taylor Papers, T-172-69. Top Secret. The source text is a copy sent by the CIA to the Joint Chiefs of Staff exclusive for Krulak who was to pass it exclusive to Lansdale. Copies were also sent to the White House for Forrestal and the Department of State for Hughes and Hilsman.

295. Telegram From the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (Taylor) to the Commander, Military Assistance Command, Vietnam (Harkins) 295. Telegram From the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (Taylor) to the Commander, Military Assistance Command, Vietnam (Harkins)1

Washington, August 26, 1963, 8:31 p.m.

JCS 3354-63. For General Harkins; info Admiral Felt; from General Taylor. State Cable 243 to Saigon2 and its implications have raised numerous military questions in minds of SecDef and JCS.

Here are a few of the points which concern us, and on which we would like your observations prior to 271300Z: (1) In the emerging situation, what is your assessment of danger to US personnel, military and civilian, and are arrangements for security or evacuation adequate? Specifically, SecDef noted that the Embassy relies on commercial air for evacuation, with military as back-up when it would seem more realistic to do the reverse, [less than 1 line not declassified].

(2) State 2-43 refers, in subparagraph (2), to the provision of “direct support.” In a pure military sense this may have serious implications. 1iNthat does direct support mean to you, and how feasible would such support be under circumstances of non-cooperation on part of GVN?

(3) Who are the reliable GVN military personalities? How do you estimate they will align in terms of their loyalties, to Diem, to Nhu, the US and to each other?

(4) Whom, among the civilians and military, do you believe the military might support as a presidential successor?

We are keenly aware that this crisis could result in major requirements for US military assistance, and in the need for rapid decisions related thereto. For these reasons we would appreciate personal reports from you on matters related to the crisis; understanding always that you will keep Ambassador Lodge and Admiral Felt fully informed of what you are doing.

1 Source: National Defense University, Taylor Papers, T-172-69. Top Secret; Operational Immediate. Repeated to CINCPAC for Felt. The source text is labeled as a draft, but has a date-time-group and JCS number written on it, indicating that it was sent.

2 Document 281.

296. Memorandum From Michael V. Forrestal of the National Security Council Staff to the President 296. Memorandum From Michael V. Forrestal of the National Security Council Staff to the President1

Washington, August 26, 1963.

VIETNAM

Lodge-Diem Conversation

Ambassador Lodge met with President Diem from 5 to 7 p.m. (Saigon time) today.2 Lodge described the dangers to U.S. assistance to South Vietnam which would be incurred if U.S. public opinion turned against the GVN as a result of the Buddhist crisis. Diem replied by minimizing the importance of the organized Buddhists and the difficulties he had in running a country which had such a dearth of educated people.

General Khanh’s Reaction

General Khanh is not ready to move immediately. CAS reports that he is looking for a pretext on which to hang action, such as an attempt by Nhu to negotiate with the North Vietnamese. CAS comments that Khanh was caught off base by the swiftness of our response and needs time to organize himself.3

Voice of America Goof

VOA goofed badly in failing to follow instructions given them last night by State. In their Vietnamese broadcast they said that U.S. officials were considering cutting off aid to Vietnam. They added, as they had been instructed, that it appeared to us that the Vietnamese Army was not involved in police action against the pagodas.

Lodge wired back an angry telegram4 pointing out that this announcement could conceivably trigger a violent reaction by Nhu. State has told him of the mistake5 and this morning briefed the U.S. press to the effect that we were not considering cutting off aid to Vietnam. As might be expected, this attempt to correct the Voice of America broadcast itself is producing bad speculation in the wire services. Hilsman is taking steps to get control of all U.S. government output.

Vietnamese Public Opinion of the United States

The attached cable (Saigon [document number not declassified])6 gives in a fair summary the answer to the question you raised this morning on what the Vietnamese think.

Comment: The problem in Vietnam is rapidly becoming an operational one, and it is of the utmost importance that the execution of your decisions be lodged in one person, in one office. Mac agrees that Roger Hilsman is the logical person and office for this, for the time being. It would be helpful if you mentioned that at your meeting tomorrow at 4 o'clock.

If you need more information, I shall be near the telephone and available throughout the night.

Mike

1 Source: Kennedy Library, President’s Office Files, Countries, Vietnam Security, 1963. Top Secret.

2 See Document 292.

3 See Document 294.

4 Document 233.

5 See footnote 5, Document 283.

6 This telegram, August 26, which was not attached, reads: “Past few days we have been hearing increasing comments from Vietnamese from many walks of life criticizing US to effect that events of past few days would not have been possible without US equipment (not a little of which has familiar handclasp emblem), asking why US refrains from stopping [garble] and observing that only US can solve present difficulties. Strong implication in these comments (and frequently overtly stated) is that Diem government and family must go. Here again, those who openly state Diem and family must go invariably add that Vietnamese people powerless to change government and only US can bring about change. Significant that such comment now coming from Vietnamese who normally quite careful about discussing political topics.

“Wish emphasize Vietnamese attitudes have not reached point of hostility toward Americans but if current situation persists likely that criticism will increasingly be tinged with hostility. Some Vietnamese tending to equate use US equipment and US ‘hands-off’ stance as acquiescence in GVN suppression of populace, which is only one step removed from placing share of blame on US shoulders.” (Department of State, Central Files, POL 25 S VIET)

297. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 297. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, August 27, 1963, 4 p.m.

[document number not declassified] Reference: Department telegram 249.2 I believe only fair answer at this time to three questions in numbered paragraph 2 reference telegram is that we do not know. A further meeting with Khiem is scheduled for 2:30 p.m. and Minh may be seen at same time or soon thereafter. Information bearing on your questions may emerge from this meeting, but it may not. As of now, there are no signs, apart from Khiem’s receptiveness to initial approach, that these or any other generals are really prepared to act against the government. (See separate message CAS channels for further details).3

Unless and until we receive some sure sign of willingness and power to act, I believe it would be both pointless and dangerous to query generals about alternate leadership candidates. If meeting this afternoon develops favorably, however, soundings will be made.

Since above drafted have received CAS report [document number not declassified]suggesting Minh may be moving.

Lodge

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, INF 8 US. Top Secret; Eyes Only; handling indicator not declassified. Relayed by the Department of State to the White House, CIA, and the Office of the Secretary of Defense.

2 Document 293.

3 According to telegram 352 from Saigon, August 27, this reference is to Document 299. (Department of State, Central Files, INF 8 US)

298. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 298. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, August 27, 1963, 5 p.m.

346. CINCPAC for POLAD. Report of one hour meeting with Nhu.

1. After exchange of amenities, he called attention to the comment by the Department of State Spokesman on the VOA broadcast2 and said that such statements from Washington should stop. He used the French phrase “doivent s'arreter”, which could be translated “must stop”. U.S. statements about Vietnam were accepted at face value by many other governments and U.S. was therefore injuring Vietnam’s standing with foreign countries. He said that Washington should await my report before making any further comment. Moreover the Washington statement was wholly false as regards the facts, inasmuch as it was the Generals themselves who had specifically demanded the action which had been taken. He thought that the U.S. people talked too much, whereas in Vietnam they did not talk enough.

2. I said that I did not know the details of the statement, but that there were some things that were very real to me as a man who had spent many years in public life and one of them was that no long range foreign policy could be carried out by the U.S. Government without the support of Congress and public opinion. I said that public opinion in the U.S. was much distressed by the treatment of the Buddhists and statements made in connection therewith. These have greatly complicated the job of the Executive branch of the U.S. Government in aiding Vietnam and that frankly I sympathized with whatever efforts the Executive branch might make to make clear to U.S. public opinion that our Vietnam policy did not involve stultifying ourselves-which would definitely be the case if we underwrote some of Madame Nhu’s statements like “barbecuing the Buddhists” and her last interview with Life which proposed total destruction of Buddhists.3 I said I was receiving letters about these statements and asked whether I should say in reply that Madame Nhu was not an official person and was speaking only for herself, to which he said that she was a member of the Assembly and was therefore a public person.

3. All of this took place in a pleasant conversational tone on both sides.

4. Other points made by Nhu:

5. 35 percent of the population were not in first class Strategic Hamlets. All of the people would be in Strategic Hamlets of some kind by the end of the year and the guerrilla war would then be over. Perhaps there would then be a conventional war.

6. There have been no more suicides since July 20. [?] This was because of the initiative which he had taken. Occidental people should understand that these suicides are brought about within the pagoda where in an atmosphere filled with incense and incantation, an individual is hypnotized, intoxicated and intimidated. This is how suicides are organized. That there have been no more suicides is proof that the measures that have been taken have had effect. He said he had wanted to clear up the matter before my arrival which, he thought, would be on August 26.

7. I said it would be very helpful in the U.S. if there could be some dramatic gesture here regarding the liberation of Buddhist prisoners.

8. He said it was now a fact that all the Buddhist prisoners were being released but he wanted this done quietly with the bonze in each area handling this himself and he could not make a dramatic gesture out of it.

9. He stressed the importance of winning the guerrilla war in terms of worldwide communist objectives and stressed the fact that he had invented personally the concept of the strategic hamlet.

10. When he accompanied me to the door to say goodbye, he said he hoped there would be no more statements out of Washington and I said I hoped there would be no more inflammatory speeches out of Vietnam.

11. This is a highly intelligent and effective man, and would be so considered in any country. My guess is that he is ruthless, not wholly rational by our standards and that he is interested above all in survival of himself and family.

Lodge

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 15 S VIET-US. Secret; Eyes Only; Limit Distribution. Repeated to CINCPAC. Received at 11:30 a.m. and relayed to the White House, Office of the Secretary of Defense, and CIA exclusive for principal officers there.

2 Apparent reference to a reply by the Department of State’s Spokesman, Richard 1. Phillips, to a question posed at a press and radio news briefing, August 26. Phillips amplified the VOA broadcast of August 26, Document 287, but without any reference to U.S. aid being cut off. For text, see American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1963, p. 865.

3 For text of the interview, see Life, August 16, 1963, p. 31.

299. Telegram From the Central Intelligence Agency Station in Saigon to the Agency 299. Telegram From the Central Intelligence Agency Station in Saigon to the Agency1

Saigon, August 27, 1963.

[document number not declassified] 1. Colonel Conein met with General Tran Thien Khiem at the latter’s invitation at JGS Hqs 1450 local 27 August. General Khiem stated that the question of a military coup against the government had been discussed by a committee of Generals headed by General Duong Van Minh, and that they are agreed a coup will take place within one week.

2. The committee of Generals in addition to General Duong Van Minh includes the following additional personalities: General Le Van Kim; General Nguyen Khanh; General Pham Xuan Chieu; General Nguyen Ngoc Le; General Tran Tu Oai is not a member of the committee but has indicated he will cooperate. General Tran Van Don is a member of the committee but cannot act because he is surrounded by personalities from the Presidency who block effective action on his part.

3. The Generals who are not included in the planning and who must be neutralized include: General Ton That Dinh; General Huynh Van Cao.

4. Colonel Le Quang Tung is considered a primary target by the coup committee and will be destroyed together with his entire encampment as one of the first acts of the coup.

5. In connection with the destruction of Colonel Tung and his Special Forces, General Khiem requested and was told he would receive a complete inventory of the ordnance now in stock at the Long Thanh training camp.

6. Vice President Nguyen Ngoc Tho is aware of the coup planning and supports it. He is the choice of the Generals as civilian leader of the succeeding government. He is aware of the seven points presented by Conein to Khiem 26 August.2

7. The government to be formed after the coup will be headed by Vice President Tho but will include some military officers in Cabinet positions. The government will not be a military government or junta since the coup committee believes that circumstance would lead to instability as is the case in Korea at present.

8. General Khiem stated that General Duong Van Minh had specifically requested it be passed to Colonel Conein that General Minh feels his position is so precarious at the present moment that General Minh cannot make contact with any Americans at the present time. Americans should not try to contact General Minh.

9. Likewise, General Khiem stated that he did not wish Colonel Conein to visit JGS again on these matters until the coup has been completed. Alternatively, General Khiem suggested that [4 lines not declassified].

[Numbered paragraph 10 (5 lines) not declassified]

11. General Khiem also requested that all official American media cease all discussion of extension or cut-off of aid to Vietnam. General Khiem states that the recent statements on this matter by VOA have been confusing and could hurt the Generals’ cause by leading people to believe that the U.S. will continue aid to the present government regardless of circumstances.

12. General Khanh came to Saigon on night of 26 August and contacted General Khiem. General Khanh is in complete agreement with the coup plan.

13. General Khiem asked for and received assurance that the U.S. would do all in its power to assist the families of the Generals engaged in the coup plot in the event of its failure.

1 Source: National Defense University, Taylor Papers, T-172-69. Top Secret. The source text is a copy sent by the CIA to the JCS exclusive for McNamara, Gilpatric, Taylor, and Krulak. Copies were also sent to the Department of State exclusive for Rusk, Ball, Harriman, and Hilsman and to the White House exclusive for Bundy. This copy was received at the JCS at 11:36 a.m.

2 See Documents 290 and 291.

300. Telegram From the Commander, Military Assistance Command, Vietnam (Harkins) to the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff(Taylor) 300. Telegram From the Commander, Military Assistance Command, Vietnam (Harkins) to the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff(Taylor)1

Saigon, August 27, 1963, 8:05 p.m.

MAC 1540. Ref A. JCS 3354-63.2 B. CINCPAC 260302Z.3 Following observation keyed to paras of ref A:

1. US personnel, military and civilian are in no more immediate danger than usual. However, recognize full well that in atmosphere which exists here this situation could change momentarily. Situation is being closely monitored continuously. Arrangements for security and evacuation well covered in existing plans which support and are compatible with Embassy E & E plan. Am in direct liaison Embassy E & E officer on details. Published plans all based on assumption that friendly local government will be in control. Possibility that this assumption may not be valid has stimulated our thoughts along alternative lines.

Ref B indicates CINCPAC’s thoughts along this line and action he has taken and is prepared to take in such an eventuality. We are in detailed development and review of alternative courses of security and emergency evacuation actions based on degree of loss of control by friendly government. Cataloging of location of some 5000 US noncombatants in RVN in good shape, various notification nets appear adequate and procedures checking out okay.

Concur in SecDef observation on use of commercial air as primary evacuation mode. For alternative actions utilizes in country and other immediately available govt evacuation transportation assets as primary mode. [sic]

2. In context of State 243 to Saigon4 “direct support” interpreted here as indicating that US diplomatic recognition will be forth coming promptly and that US economic and military assistance to RVN will continue as at present, even under most extreme contingency of military coup in which not only Nhus but also Diem is removed from scene.

Specifically unless I receive other instructions I interpret “direct support” of military as covering the following: a. Full military backing, military counsel and advice.

b. Use of US communications and unarmed aircraft for troop transport, supply, recce and command liaison.

c. Denial of further funds, equipment, advice, communication and aircraft to opposing military and paramilitary forces, and in particular, Col Tung’s units. CAS must of course also deny.

Feasibility of foregoing direct support measures in event pressure on armed intervention from forces loyal to Palace depends in large part on how play develops. Category of support covered in pare a above feasible under all conditions, though effectiveness can be reduced should key MACV staff be restricted in freedom of movement’ Believe however, we have enough good people to carry on despite some interruptions.

As to pare b above, a hostile VNAF could [garble] deny use of Tan Son Nhut and Bien Hoa. We will have to make tough decisions as between further concentration of aircraft VN-USA-Bien Hoa complex which is pertinent to E and E planning and dispersion suggested by maximum support of coup. Present disposition of USAF/USA/USMC aircraft outside Saigon area insures that we can provide considerable but not optimum assistance to forces converging on capital. Deployment of forces estimated to side with military takeover is reasonable assurance that major part of communication net would be preserved.

My best judgment as to reliability and alignment of senior military leaders is as follows: a. Composition of group which would coalesce to plan and execute a military takeover: (1). Gen Big Minh, Advisor to Pres Gen Don

Gen Le, former JG of CG, now deputy to Don

Gen Little Minh, IG, ARVN

Gen Khiem, C/S, JGS

Gen Khanh, II Corps

Gen Tri, I Corps

Gen Le Van Kim, currently deputy to Don

Gen Chien, currently deputy to Don

Col Vien, CO ADH Brigade

(2). Loyalty of all runs to Diem not Nhu. Estimate that all, except Don and Le, convinced that both Nhu and Diem must now go. bon and Le would probably accept retention of Diem as nominal head of state.

(3). All are firmly pro-US with possible exception of Tri,. given his violent nationalism.

(4). The only general to whom others would subordinate themselves is Big Minh.

(5). Those most qualified and also in positions to take lead in planning are Khanh, Khiem, Tri, Kim, and Little Minh. Don is, of course, completely boxed in.

b. Those who will stick with status quo, opposing takeover: (1). Gen Dinh, III Corps Gen Cao, IV Corps

Col Tung, Cmdr Special Forces

Col Hien, Co VNAF

(2). Estimate Dinh and Cao would eventually attempt switch but too late. Tung would go down swinging. Hien not likely to rally any significant portion of VNAF. No loyalty ties among any of four.

c. The opportunists, who likely be aloof from planning but ready to jump quickly: Gen Oai, RVNAF psywar chief

Gen La, CG Capital Mil Dist

Capt Quyen, Cmdr, VNH

Col Khang, Cmdr VNMC

4. Consensus here is that Vice President Tho is best candidate as man who all might rally behind as Presidential successor.

Will continue to maintain close liaison with Amb. Lodge. Keeping him informed of what I am doing and will file personal reports to JCS and CINCPAC as matters of significance [garble—occur?].

1 Source: National Defense University, Taylor Papers, T-172-69. Top Secret; Eyes Only. Repeated to Honolulu for Felt.

2 Document 295.

3 In this telegram, August 26, CINCPAC stated that Embassy and COMUSMACV plans for security and evacuation in the event of a coup were sound. CINCPAC also believed that Harkins had enough U.S. troops to evacuate the estimated 4,600 American noncombatants in Vietnam. (Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Vietnam Country Series, 8/24/63-8/31/63, Defense Cables)

4 Document 281.

301. Memorandum of Telephone Conversation Between the Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs (Harriman) and the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Hilsman) 301. Memorandum of Telephone Conversation Between the Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs (Harriman) and the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Hilsman)1

Washington, August 27, 1963, 1:50 p.m.

Hilsman said he thought he could bring Nolting around.

Harriman asked if some people were getting cold feet.

Hilsman said he was afraid of Maxwell Taylor. He said we have to make this work. Hilsman said he was going to the Hill and thought the Governor should be available to go to the White House.

Harriman said I hope you won’t let them spoil the image of the US.

1 Source: Library of Congress, Harriman Papers, Telephone Conversations. Transcribed by Dolores P. Perruso of Harriman’s staff.

302. Memorandum From Michael V. Forrestal of the National Security Council Staff to the President 302. Memorandum From Michael V. Forrestal of the National Security Council Staff to the President1

Washington, August 27, 1963.

VIETNAM

You will meet this afternoon at 4 p.m. with the principal officials concerned with our policies in South Vietnam, including Mr. Murrow and Ambassador Nolting.

Roger Hilsman and Bill Colby (CIA) will be prepared to report to you on the most recent developments. A committee of generals has been formed for the purpose of bringing about a military coup within a week. It is contemplated that the government would be formed after the coup, to be headed by Vice-President Tho, and will include some military officers in cabinet positions. The generals have asked for a token of U.S. good faith in the form of an innocuous message over the Voice of America.

We also have a report of parallel coup plans by certain civilian leaders. This group includes the labor leader, Tran Quoc Buu, and puts up General (Big) Minh as President.

The purpose of the meeting is largely to inform you of latest developments and progress in planning. Ambassador Nolting will be available.

You may wish to close the meeting by restating the present policy toward South Vietnam in something like the following terms: (a) The United States cannot support a government in South Vietnam which is dominated by Counselor Nhu.

(b) While the United States would prefer to retain President Diem in office, we have serious doubts that it can effectively be done. We should leave to the Vietnamese military leaders the decision whether Diem can be preserved.

(c) The fundamental objective of the United States in South Vietnam has not changed: it will continue to give wholehearted support to the prosecution of the war against the Viet Cong terrorists, and will continue assistance to any government in South Vietnam which shows itself capable of sustaining this effort.

You may wish to emphasize the great importance of highly coordinated collective action by the government officials and agencies involved here in Washington.

At the moment coordination is being carried on through Roger Hilsman’s office.

MF

1 Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Vietnam Country Series, 8/24/63-8/31/63, Memos and Miscellaneous. Top Secret.

303. Memorandum of Conference With the President 303. Memorandum of Conference With the President1

Washington, August 27, 1963, 4 p.m.

SUBJECT

Vietnam

OTHERS PRESENT

Secretary Rusk, Under Secretary Ball, Secretary McNamara, Deputy Secretary Gilpatric, Attorney General, General Taylor, General Carter, Director Murrow, Ambassador Nolting, General Krulak, Assistant Secretary Hilsman, Mr. Helms, Mr Colby (CIA), Mr. McGeorge Bundy, Mr. Forrestal, Mr. Bromley Smith

Before the President arrived, Secretary McNamara made four points: 1. We need to appraise the situation in Vietnam and plan our techniques.

2. We should reconstitute the Executive Committee of the National Security Council.

3. We should list the contingencies which may develop and decide what we would do if a coup d’etat fails.

4. We need ask the President for no decisions today.

When the President arrived Secretary Rusk opened the meeting by suggesting that for the immediate future it might be necessary to have daily meetings with the President and carry on an exercise comparable to that done by the NSC Executive Committee for Cuba. He asked for a report on the situation in Vietnam.

Mr. William Colby, the Vietnam expert from CIA, said that the situation in Saigon was quiet. He summarized a situation report which concluded that unrest was not apparent in the Vietnam countryside. He referred to the efforts of Foreign Minister Mau to resign and leave the country. On the operations side, Mr. Colby reported that CIA officials had interviewed two Vietnamese generals yesterday. One general said the situation for a coup was favorable and forecast that one would take place within a week. The second general gave what was described as a jumpy answer in response to the CAS initiative. Mr. Colby concluded by summarizing Ambassador Lodge’s report of his talk with Nhu (see attached [document number not declassified]).2

Secretary Rusk commented that Lodge hasn’t come to grips with the problem in Vietnam in his talks with Diem or Nhu. He may be waiting to see what the Vietnamese generals are going to do.

Mr. Bundy asked what elections the Vietnamese government had postponed. Mr. Colby replied that the elections were similar to our Congressional elections. Ambassador Nolting said that these elections were not significant and would not change the composition of the government.

In reply to the President’s question, Nolting said that the Vietnamese generals haven’t the guts of Diem or Nhu. They will not be a unified group but will be badly split. They do not have real leadership, and they do not control the predominant military force in the country. He expressed grave doubt that the generals could carry out a clean coup in a split second.

Secretary McNamara circulated a list of the coup generals and the forces they control. He noted that these military forces were few and scattered. He also had a list of generals loyal to Diem who had forces in Saigon and near at hand which they controlled. In addition, General Tung commanded the elite corps of special forces which were loyal to Diem. He concluded by reading extracts from General Harkins’ cable summarizing the disposition and loyalty of Vietnamese forces.3

In response to the President’s question as to the effect of the civil disturbances on the military campaign against the Viet Cong, General Krulak replied that the effect was slight and that there had been no dramatic degradation of South Vietnamese military capability.4

Secretary Rusk commented that there had not been sufficient time for the Viet Cong to react by taking advantage of the internal disturbances. Ambassador Nolting added that the effect of the unrest was limited to the cities and had not yet affected the countryside. He said that whatever happened in the city of Saigon would have little effect in the rural areas in the long run because the peasants were uninformed and interested primarily in obtaining sufficient food. Although the unrest would be bound to seep down into the countryside, he doubted that the rural people would be affected unless their personal security is involved and unless their food supply is reduced.

In response to the President’s question as to why the peasants were not upset by Diem’s attack on the Buddhists, Ambassador Nolting replied that the Buddhists were not organized as a religion such as we have in the West. The Buddhist church in Vietnam is not a real force.

The President asked whether Diem had ever explained to us why he had not kept his promises to us. Ambassador Nolting replied that Diem had kept his promises. He said that there was no promise made to us which he had not tried to keep. Ambassador Nolting said Diem should be given “E” for effort. Diem is not a liar and is a man of integrity. In response to a question about Madame Nhu, Ambassador Nolting said Diem had disavowed Madame Nhu by means of replying to a question put to him by Marguerite Higgins of the New York Herald Tribune.5

The President said that Mr. Hilsman had told him that Diem was not forthright. Mr. Hilsman referred to a Honolulu meeting with Ambassador Nolting6 which had left him with the impression that Diem had not carried out commitments made to Ambassador Nolting.

Ambassador Nolting read from his report of August 13th7 which stated that Diem had promised to be conciliatory toward the Buddhists and to remove Madame Nhu from Vietnam. Diem had asked the Australians to invite Madame Nhu to visit there. On August 12th Nhu had promised to be conciliatory in order to satisfy world public opinion even though he believed that the Buddhist movement was subversive.8 Diem had said that their military officers were worried by the Buddhist movement because of its possible effect on fighting the war against the Viet Cong. Ambassador Nolting said that on August 14th he thought we had won a real victory in Vietnam. He said that he was not convinced at that time that Diem’s conciliatory policy would end the unrest.

The President asked whether between the 14th and the 29th of August the rioting and the unrest had changed Diem’s mind or whether Diem had lied to Nolting. Nolting said he believed Diem and Nhu had changed their minds after they had talked to him on August 14th. He said they appeared to have decided to end the unrest once and for all and together they had moved from conciliation to the use of force. He said that they apparently had decided that conciliation would not pay off because the Buddhists would not cooperate with Diem after Madame Nhu had made her public attack on the Buddhists.

In response to the President’s question about Madame Nhu’s authority, Ambassador Nolting said that Nhu himself is an able person who organized and is responsible for the success of the strategic hamlet program. He had been cooperative with us and was not anti-American but pro-Vietnamese. He said that both Diem and Nhu had separately denied that they were fighting each other. He predicted that Nhu would not be disloyal to his brother and throw him out, but probably the younger man, aged 54, would replace the older, who is 62. He said that Nhu was feared by the people and by the Vice President. However, he could see Nhu in a position of authority because Nhu can command people and the Vietnamese are respectful of those who can command. In his view, the Vietnamese generals had asked for martial law, Nhu had checked their request with Diem, and when the proposal was approved, Nhu ordered his secret police to arrest the Buddhists at the same time that martial law came into effect. Ambassador Nolting acknowledged that the secret police had used brutal methods but he believed they had not been ordered to do so. He felt that the secret police were jumpy and therefore resorted to greater use of force than was anticipated. Ambassador Nolting cited reports that there were 1400 Buddhists arrested and about 1000 students. He pointed out that Nhu had told Ambassador Lodge that the monks were being released quietly and returned to their pagodas.

Secretary Rusk suggested that the group turn its attention to a list of contingencies which might face us in Vietnam. He listed two. What would our position be if some generals remained loyal to Diem and some generals attempted a coup. The second dealt with what we should do if the generals attempted a coup and were defeated by Diem.

The President commented that he saw no point in trying a coup unless there was a chance of its success. He asked what military support there would be for a coup.

Ambassador Nolting replied that military support for a coup did not now exist. There might be such support if the U.S. said that the Vietnamese must get rid of Diem and Nhu. A larger number of generals would rally to a coup aimed at ousting Nhu. Most of the generals would be reluctant to oust Diem. Diem and Nhu were Siamese twins who could not be forced apart. If the generals moved against Nhu, Diem would go down with him in the palace, or, if he escaped, return to Saigon to resist the rebel generals. Or Diem might quit the fight and leave the country. Ambassador Nolting said it would be impossible to engineer separation of the two men-the only possible way would be to persuade Diem to send Nhu abroad.

Ambassador Nolting recalled that the circle had nearly been completed in a three-year period. Ambassador Durbrow had told Diem three years ago that Nhu must go. Diem refused to accept the suggestion and Durbrow was removed from Vietnam. (The President recognized the irony of this situation by smiling.) Ambassador Nolting said we should not fight the internal political situation in Vietnam too hard. He urged that we keep our eye on fighting the Viet Cong. In his view, newspaper pressure cannot clean up the messy internal politics of Vietnam which will be with us for a long time.

The President asked whether Ambassador Nolting agreed that Diem’s actions in the last few months would prevent him from carrying forward the war against the Communists. Ambassador Nolting responded that he thought we should take it slow and easy over the next several weeks. It is possible that the brutal surgical operation may succeed as Diem and Nhu have predicted. We will take our lumps because of the actions of Diem and Nhu, but if they succeed, we will have preserved a base for the fight against the Viet Cong. If the smouldering resentment of the Vietnamese people grows and begins to show up in the Vietnamese military units to such an extent that the war effort is blocked, then we have an entirely different problem of creating an acceptable political base. Ambassador Nolting called attention to the fact that the CAS agents had already told some generals to undertake a coup. If we go back on these generals now, we will lose them. He asked why we should jump unless we have some place to jump.

The President noted that we hadn’t gone so far we can’t delay. He recalled that one general had said the generals needed a week to effect their plans. [1 sentence (3 lines) not declassified]

Mr. Hilsman referred to Harkins’ estimate that the generals would delay a few days until they knew the reaction of the general officers. If the general officers decided they could not live with the Diem regime, then the senior officers would move forward to a coup.

Secretary McNamara said he believed we should ask Ambassador Lodge and General Harkins for an appraisal as to whether a coup by the generals can be successful. If our officials doubt that the generals can pull off a coup, then the generals should be cautioned not to move. The danger already exists that Diem and Nhu know of the generals’ coup planning and of U.S. interest in their plans. He believed that we could slow up the CAS action with the generals.

Mr. Hilsman said that the longer we wait the harder it would be to get Diem out.

The President asked what General Harkins’ position is. General Taylor responded that General Harkins had never been asked for his views-that he merely got orders.

Secretary Rusk said that in his view the crucial factor is the effect of the current unrest on the other side. Does the existing unrest make it impossible to carry out the war against the Viet Cong? If the Buddhists and the anti-Diem groups do not give up their attacks on Diem, how can the war go on? If Vietnamese opposition to Diem is great, it is very hard for us to support Diem.

In response to the President’s question, Ambassador Nolting evaluated the Vietnamese Vice President as a respected person who was neither forceful nor ambitious.

Mr. Bundy noted that the generals did not appear very forceful. He suggested that General Harkins and Ambassador Lodge be asked to report on the exact operational situation. He believed that we should ensure that if a coup were attempted and failed, there was no evidence of U.S. interest in the attempt.

Mr. Murrow asked whether the generals we were talking to would be able to reach an accommodation with the Buddhists. He thought we should be certain that if a coup succeeded, the resulting situation would be better than the present one.

The President said we should send a cable to Ambassador Lodge and General Harkins asking for their estimate of the prospects of a coup by the generals. They should also be asked to recommend whether we should proceed with the generals or wait. He also wanted their views on what we should do if the situation deteriorates.

Nolting commented that he would not be happy if the present situation calmed down and Nhu got more power. Diem must be forced to limit authority of Nhu and get Madame Nhu out of the country. Diem would not respond if he were pushed, but he could be convinced by Ambassador Lodge that the situation must improve if we were to continue assisting Vietnam.

Secretary McNamara agreed that we should obtain an immediate appraisal from the officers on the ground and should ask them whether chances of a successful coup would be increased by delay.

The President said he thought they should also be asked whether the effect would be harmful if we decided now to cut our losses.

Ambassador Nolting said we should try once again to persuade Diem to limit the authority of Nhu and to force the political liquidation of Madame Nhu.

Secretary Rusk stated that we should make clear to our officials in Saigon that we were not changing their existing directive on which they had already proceeded to take numerous actions.

The President concluded the meeting by repeating Ambassador Nolting’s view that the generals interested in the coup were not good enough to bring it about.

Bromley Smith9

1 Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Meetings and Memoranda, Meetings on Vietnam. Top Secret. Drafted by Bromley Smith. The meeting was held at the White House Also published in Declassified Documents, 1982, 648 B. A memorandum for the record of this meeting by Krulak is in the National Defense University, Taylor Papers, Vietnam, chap. XXIII.

2 Not attached, but see Document 298.

3 Document 300.

4 In his memorandum for the record, Krulak noted that he “stated that friendly operations have diminished, both in the large scale and as to small scale efforts, but the reduction was not as yet great; that Viet Cong operations are continuing at the low level to which they had dropped after the Geneva Accords offensive. “The President asked if the low level of Viet Cong activity was due to the weather, to which I replied in the negative”.

5 See footnote 3, Document 253.

6 Lodge and Nolting accompanied by Hilsman and Kattenburg met in Honolulu to confer on Vietnam on August 20 and 21 Lodge was going to Saigon, Nolting was resuming to Washington. Kattenburg went on to Vietnam for a 10-day stay and Hilsman returned to Washington. No account of their discussions has been found. Hilsman mentions Nolting’s reaction to the pagoda raids of August 21 in To Move a Nation, pp. 482-483. In an oral history interview, Nolting remembers that he was “shocked” at the raids and that he sent Diem a personal message from Honolulu in which he told Diem: “This is the first time that you have ever gone back on your word to me.” (Johnson Library, Oral History Program, Frederick E. Nolting, Jr., November 11, 1982)

7 See footnote 2, Document 252.

8 No record of this promise has been found.

9 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.

304. Memorandum for the Record by the Secretary of Defense’s Assistant for Special Operations (Lansdale) 304. Memorandum for the Record by the Secretary of Defense’s Assistant for Special Operations (Lansdale)1

Washington, August 27, 1963.

SUBJECT

Vietnam

At the invitation of Mme. Tran Van Chuong, I visited her at the Vietnamese Embassy this evening. Shortly after I arrived, Ambassador Chuong joined us and remained for much of my visit. The highlights remarks are:

Both: The US must act firmly and quickly to replace both Diem and Nhu with a new government. The Vietnamese people are aroused far more than ever before, and it is too late even to save Diem as a figure-head. The people, seeing VN special forces and police with US weapons and equipment, knowing that Diem can only stay in power with US support, will turn against the US unless there is a change of the whole top of government. If the US is satisfied merely with a change of Diem policy towards Buddhists and students, including release of Buddhist and student prisoners, this will not change the hate of the Vietnamese people for the acts already committed.

Amb. Chuong: The US will sell out the Vietnamese people to the Communists if there is any truth to the story that the US is getting ready to place Buu Hoi in as Premier under Diem as a figure-head President. Buu Hoi, with his Communist connections, would be a Vietnamese version of Souvanna Phouma and the Communists would take over. Admittedly, this would give the US “grandeur” of looking like it was solving a hard Vietnamese problem, without being directly responsible for sell-out-but the Vietnamese people would know.

Mme. Chuong (privately): You must go to Saigon fast and tell Diem and the Nhu’s to leave the country now. The people hate them and they shouldn’t stay for the people to kill them. They will surely be killed if they stay, and nobody at the Palace now is telling them how the people really feel. They are cut off from reality. Why do they need power, after nine years of it, if the family is killed? The US told Syngman Rhee to leave. Why not Diem and Nhu?

Both: We will reside in the Embassy until Ly, the new Ambassador, arrives from New Delhi, then stay in the Washington area as private citizens. Tran Van Dinh, now in Saigon [less than 1 1ine not declassified], was expecting to return to Washington as charge; [2-1/2 lines not declassified].

1 Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Vietnam Country Series, 8/24/63-8/31/63, Memos and Miscellaneous. Secret. Lansdale passed this memorandum to Forrestal on August 28 and wrote on an attached covering note: “You might find this of interest.” Forrestal passed it on to Bundy on the same day with the written comment: “Mac: This is not hard stuff.”

305. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam 305. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam1

Washington, August 27, 1963, 8:11 p.m.

256. Eyes only—Ambassador Lodge. Examination of reports to date gives considerable hope but leaves unanswered questions regarding: a. present balance of forces between coup and counter-coup elements

b. personal force of character of coupe participants, and

c. security of the operation.

Proceeding from the concept outlined in Deptel 2432 as modified, now desire your prompt interim appraisal of present prospects include specifically: 1. Are Generals now committed to coup plan [document number not declassified]3 sufficiently strong and sufficiently united to give high prospect of success in immediate future?

2. Would their chances be improved or lessened by delay, with respect to such factors as: a. additional local military and political support at critical moment?

b. Security, including hazard to coup participants and compromise of U.S. role?

c. Public attitudes?

d. Nhu’s own capability for counter-coup or further action of his own?

3. In particular, what is your best estimate or orientation and comparative strength of forces in Saigon area?

4. If operation is initially indecisive how is balance likely to tip as other forces become involved?

5. More generally, highest authority asks whether you and Harkins, in light of developing situation, presently favor operation as currently planned by Generals.

We wish to give you all possible support in best available course but not to insist on any decision that developing evidence makes it wise to modify.

Rusk

1 Source Department of State, Central Files, POL 26 S VIET Top Secret; Emergency. Drafted by Hilsman and cleared in draft with McGeorge Bundy, McNamara, and Taylor and in substance with Rusk. Repeated to CINCPAC POLAD exclusive for Felt.

2 Document 281.

3 Document 299.

306. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 306. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, August 28, 1963, 6 p.m.

364. Department eyes only for Secretary. CINCPAC exclusive for Felt. Deptel 256.2 In appraising current prospects, it must be borne in mind that our knowledge of composition of coup group and their plans is derived from single source. We have high confidence authenticity of this information but are taking steps assure ourselves that General Minh is involved. (Contrary [document number not declassified],3 Minh has asked see CAS representatives tomorrow morning at JGS.) Vice President Tho’s remarks to me this morning (reported below) were entirely consistent with his having been brought in on plans but do not prove he has been. Turning to numbered questions reftel: 1. Generals cited [document number not declassified] as members coup committee are best group that could be assembled in terms of ability and orientation. Certain of them (Big Minh, Khanh and Kim) are considered to have personal force of character. We believe that they would all unite under leadership of Big Minh. Question of their strength is dealt with in pare 3 below.

2. We believe that all factors cited pare 2 reftel argue for prompt action and that chances of success would be diminished by delay. In particular, we are concerned over possibility attempt by Nhu to arrest leaders. We assume Generals are guarding against this possibility.

3. Lineup and orientation of forces in metropolitan area; for detailed listing, refer to MACV 1551 Intel DTG: 280625Z, repeated State.4 A. The forces listed in above message as non-ARVN total 7,750 and must be considered committed to defense of Palace, if all are in fact aligned under Tung. Possibility exists, however, that Generals may be able to drive wedge between Tung and Tu, Police Commissioner, who commands bulk of Police.

B. The ARVN forces listed are all under the command of General Dinh with exception 6th ABN BN mentioned below. Significant, however, that with minor exceptions, troops are not organic to the III Corps, which he normally heads. These troops fall into two main categories: (1) The forces of the Capital Military District, headed by General La who is Dinh’s deputy for the Saigon-Cholon area, and (2) units of the general reserve (airborne and Marine brigades), normally controlled by the JGS.

C. Colonel Vien, commanding the ABN Brigade, has the single most powerful and cohesive unit in Saigon. Thus, his actions are crucial to the success of initial moves. His loyalties have run to Diem and he is close to Dinh. But he is also aware of the outspoken opposition of the bulk of his officers to the present regime. We have reports that this has caused a reorientation of his thinking and that he would immediately swing if Dinh swung, and, alternatively, that he could be persuaded to swing without Dinh before or in the opening stages of the revolt. If the Generals can count on the airborne, success might come quickly and with minimum violence. If not, the struggle might be bloody and extended. Under latter circumstances, estimate here is that the Generals would resort to stratagem to neutralize Vien, rather than assault forces he commands. On balance, we believe that Generals cannot count on Vien, but may have support of certain units of the brigade. Certainly, the 6th BN has been positioned at JGS Hq, under JGS control, because the coup group is confident of its commander’s loyalty.

D. The two Marine BNs are also in key positions. Security mission of one battalion (second is nearby in reserve) extends from Palace to waterfront, an area which includes numerous VITJM installations: PTT, National Assembly, American billets. This BN is closest regular unit to Palace. Estimate is that Commander, Colonel Khang, will opt for the Generals.

E. We must assume bulk of remaining ARVN forces are under effective control of General La. His troops are numerous but lack cohesion, being primarily independent companies and lightly armed. They are certainly not shock troops. In a showdown, La would not necessarily take orders from Dinh.

F. In general, above remarks apply equally to air and naval elements in Saigon area. They are not organized or equipped for ground combat and their effectiveness therefore limited. Neither is likely to act as a cohesive entity.

G. Implicit in foregoing is theme that while Dinh is commander, his control of the heterogeneous forces assigned is far from assured. His major subordinates may follow his bidding, but they also preserve freedom of action to non-comply or even act in diametrically opposed manner. Should Dinh be removed or neutralized, his deputy (Colonel Co), is competent to carry on and would, unquestionably, side with the Generals.

H. Should the initial moves result in stalemate, the issue may turn on relative ability to reinforce. Our estimate is that time as well as force will work to advantage of insurgents and for the following reasons: (1) The most immediately available troops are the 2 ABN BNs and units of the III Corps. Balance here might not be in favor of Generals.

(2) First reinforcement from IV Corps would be 47th Regt from Long An Province, bordering the Saigon area on the south. Newly arrived from II Corps, it would be responsive to Khanh rather than Cao-and latter could not stop its movement to capital.

(3) Most readily deployable major unit in north is Khanh’s 9th Division. If Tan Son Nhut and/or Bien Hoa open, 3-4 tens could be shifted Saigon daily via C-123’s.

(4) Over the long run, the coup group has more force at its disposal than do Dinh, Cao, Tung. And most of all, their thinking reflects the sentiments of the majority of the officer corps.

4. As stated above, we believe balance would tip in favor of coup group in event initial statement [stalemate]. Chances of this would be greatly enhanced if at critical juncture U.S. publicly announced that all aid through the Diem government had ceased and would be resumed as soon as conditions warranted It would be somewhat better for public standing of future government if this were not done. However, believe I should have standby authority to make declaration to this effect, implying termination of aid to present GVN if in my judgment it is necessary to success coup.

Another factor favoring coup forces in stalemate would be U.S. assistance in terms military advice, communications, troop lift, etc.

5. On basis of what we now know both General Harkins and I favor operation.

Following is brief memo my conversation with Tho this morning: Begin text. At call on Vice President Tho I began by saying how honored I was to be in Viet-Nam and began a very conventional conversation about his home in the Delta, the U.N., and the possibility of Viet-Nam some day having a favorable trade balance. All of a sudden he stopped and his whole tone of voice changed and he said: “It can’t go on in this way. We absolutely must get out of the state we are in. Emotions are rising so high that it is very dangerous. Relations between the U.S. and Viet-Nam are becoming question of internal politics both here and in your country. You have a very great responsibility as Ambassador. People expect much from you. I don’t know how to do it but it absolutely must be done.” End text.

Report of further meeting with Khiem follows via CAS channels.5

Lodge

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 26 S VIET Top Secret; Emergency. Repeated to CINCPAC Operational Immediate. Received at 7:18 a.m. and relayed to the White House, Office of the Secretary of Defense, and CIA at 8:30 a.m.

2 Document 305.

3 Document 299.

4 Not found.

5 Document number not declassified, not printed. (Kennedy Library, Vietnam Country Series)

307. Telegram From the Central Intelligence Agency Station in Saigon to the Agency 307. Telegram From the Central Intelligence Agency Station in Saigon to the Agency1

Saigon, August 28, 1963.

[document number not declassified] Situation here has reached point of no return. Saigon is armed camp. Current indications are that Ngo family have dug in for last ditch battle. It is our considered estimate that General officers cannot retreat now. Conein’s meeting with Gen. Khiem [document number not declassified]2 reveals that overwhelming majority of General officers, excepting Dinh and Cao, are united, have conducted prior planning, realize that they must proceed quickly, and understand that they have no alternative but to go forward. Unless the generals are neutralized before being able to launch their operation, we believe they will act and that they have good chance to win. If General Dinh primarily and Tung secondly cannot be neutralized at outset, there may be widespread fighting in Saigon and serious loss of life.

We recognize that crucial stakes are involved and have no doubt that the generals do also. Situation has changed drastically since 21 August. If the Ngo family wins now, they and Vietnam will stagger on to final defeat at the hands of their own people and the VC. Should a generals’ revolt occur and be put down, GVN will sharply reduce American presence in SVN. Even if they did not do so, it seems clear that American public opinion and Congress, as well as world opinion, would force withdrawal or reduction of American support for VN under Ngo administration.

Bloodshed can be avoided if the Ngo family would step down before the coming armed action. If General Dinh would join with the other Generals, it is conceivable Ngo family might surrender without a final fight. Up to now, Dinh has remained firmly on the family’s side. [2 sentences not declassified]

[3 sentences not declassified] It is obviously preferable that the generals conduct this effort without apparent American assistance. Otherwise, for a long time in the future, they will be vulnerable to charges of being American puppets, which they are not in any sense. Nevertheless, we all understand that the effort must succeed and that whatever needs to be done on our part must be done. If this attempt by the generals does not take place or if it fails, we believe it no exaggeration to say that VN runs serious risk of being lost over the course of time.

1 Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Vietnam Country Series, 8/24/63-8/31/63, CIA Cables. Secret. Also printed in Pentagon Papers: Gravel Edition, Vol. II, p. 736.

2 Document 299.

308. Memorandum From the Director of the United States Information Agency(Murrow) to the President 308. Memorandum From the Director of the United States Information Agency(Murrow) to the President1

Washington, August 28, 1963.

SUBJECT

Foreign Reaction to Diem Repression and U.S. Foreign Policy

Press and public reaction to the events in Viet-Nam received to date is almost universally critical of Diem and, directly or by implication, the United States.

The closest thing to a sympathetic comment appeared in Rome’s right-wing Il Tempo: “The background of the crisis is in fact political …2 The neutralist orientation of the Buddhist clergy in a country at war becomes an indirect support for the enemy to the degree to which it prevents general psychological mobilization.”

Far East

Editorialists are almost unanimously critical of the Diem Government actions and generally blame the U.S. for continuing it in power. The pro-communist press of the area is playing the obvious theme that the U.S. always supports unpopular dictatorships. Official spokesmen in Japan, Thailand, and Korea have maintained a cautious attitude, aside from Marshal Sarit’s announced willingness to host a conference of Buddhist countries to consider the problem.

The Malayan Straits Times called the Diem Government action the. beginning of disaster and added: “What the U.S. does in principle is the fact on which the future of Diem hangs. The U.S. may accept what is a fait accompli and press for concessions or back up indignant words with indignant deeds.”

Burma’s English language Guardian called the crackdown a “colossal blunder.” It asked the Saigon regime to stop this “mad war” against Buddhists, and called on the U.S. to give the regime an ultimatum.

According to the Manila press, the Philippine Government is considering following the Cambodian lead in breaking diplomatic relations with Saigon, and hopes other Asian nations will do the same.

Hanoi has gone all out on what it calls the “white terror drive.” Peking has given heavy news coverage, but so far no original comment. North Korean papers find a parallel between South Vietnamese events and the collapse of Syngman Rhee’s government as a result of “ruthless suppression of the people by the U.S. imperialists and their stooges.

Western Europe

Some of the French press has been particularly scathing. Le Combat (anti-Gaullist) said, “Washington has committed a capital error. To erect the detestable regime of the Diem clan as … a barrier would have been justified … for a short time if the barrier had not been rotten.” Les Echos (financial) wrote: “In taking over our (the French) role, the U.S. has inherited our difficulties but has not remembered the lesson. To drop Diem in favor of whom?” Le Figaro (conservative), typical of the more balanced comments, took due note of the increasing dissatisfaction with Diem’s course in the United States.

La Stampa (liberal, Turin) said perhaps the Diem regime “has dug its own grave.” The Vatican Osservatore Romano saw the conflict as more political than religious, but the Catholic Avvanire d’Italia of Bologne said that between the Diem Government and the Buddhists it would have to declare flatly for the Buddhists.

Die Welt (independent, Hamburg) called on Washington to let the Diem regime fall, and to “establish contact with the non-communist opposition.”

The Scotsman (conservative) speculated that Diem was forcing the U.S. to look for new Vietnamese leadership. The London Times (independent) warned Diem that his “dangerous game,” which could prolong the war, might cut off American aid. The Guardian (liberal) said the difficulty lies not in alternative leadership but the absence of an alternative U.S. policy.

Africa

In the only African comment received, the Algerian radio reported that Algeria’s delegation to the U.N. has been instructed to support measures putting an end to “the inhuman reprisals to which 70 per cent of the South Viet-Nam population has been subjected.”

Near East and South Asia

News coverage has been unusually heavy in Ceylon and India. Editorialists in those countries, Iran, Pakistan, and Lebanon are universally critical of Diem and the United States for keeping him in power. There is growing sentiment in Ceylon and India to take the problem to the U.N.

The Ceylon Observer flatly accused the U.S. of being “committed, to the cynical view that it matters not whom it hires to engage the enemy in the outlying marshes if they will help to keep Fortress America safe.” Critical comments by Buddhist leaders in Ceylon have been widely reported, including one to the effect that the “dollar-Vatican axis” is responsible for the events in Viet-Nam.

The Times of India credited the U.S. with a “large part of the blame” for the situation, and said that “one would have thought that after what happened in South Korea… the U.S. State Department would have realized that the communists’ worst enemies are not necessarily democracy’s best friends.”

The Indian Express asked: “Will Washington at last realize that nothing will be gained, and much will be lost, by propping up such a thoroughly unpopular regime in Saigon?”

Dawn of Karachi caricatured the State Department shedding crocodile tears over a Buddhist corpse. Ettelaat of Teheran, in an editorial titled “Dark Future for South Viet-Nam,” claimed Viet-Cong forces had increased from 15,000 to 25,000 in the last year “despite substantial U.S. economic and military aid.”

Soviet Union

After a slow start, Moscow press and radio is now playing the crisis heavily. Moscow domestic radio said August 27 that Lodge’s arrival coincides with “an unprecedented wave of terrorism against the population.” It asserted that the Diem “autocracy” exists “only by the kind consent” of Washington.

Other broadcasts asserted that Lodge’s instructions are to restore order and “to see that the local puppet rulers act against the people more flexibly and without undue publicity,” and that, although the U.S. has full control, it has not lifted a finger to stop the “bloody terror.

Edward R. Murrow2

1 Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 306, USIA/TOP Files: FRC 67 A 222, IAF-1963. Drafted by B. Anderson of the Office of Plans and Research, USIA. Copies were sent to Donald M. Wilson, Ralph Bunce, and Orem Stephens, all of USIA.

2 All ellipses in this document are in the source text.

2 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.

309. Telegram From the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (Taylor) to the Commander, Military Assistance Command, Vietnam (Harkins) 309. Telegram From the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (Taylor) to the Commander, Military Assistance Command, Vietnam (Harkins)1

Washington, August 28, 1963, 10:02 a.m.

JCS 3368-63. Reference State to Saigon 256 Aug 27.2

1. Important White House meeting on subject message scheduled for 1200 28 August EDT,3 your views urgently needed on reference message and on overall feasibility of operation contemplated in [document number not declassified].4

FYI State to Saigon 243 was prepared without DOD or JCS participation. Authorities are now having second thoughts.

1 Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Vietnam Country Series, 8/24/63-8/31/63, Defense Cables. Secret; Eyes Only. The source text indicates that copies were to be sent to Bundy at the White House; to Rusk, Ball, Harriman, and Hilsman at the Department of State; and to each of the Joint Chiefs of Staff. Hilsman refers to this cable as a back-channel message in To Move a Nation, p. 492, and recalls that he never saw it. (Department of State, Office of the Historian, Vietnam Interviews, Roger Hilsman, May 15, 1984) Michael V. Forrestal also remembers it as a back-channel message, but does recall seeing it. (Ibid., Michael V. Forrestal, May 16, 1984) Harriman saw a copy of it and subsequently complained to General Carter of the CIA that this was the first occasion he could recall of the military backing off their commitments. Harriman maintained to Carter that Taylor had cleared telegram 243 to Saigon, Document 281. (Memorandum for the record by Krulak, August 28; National Defense University, Taylor Papers, Vietnam, chap. XXIII) On the morning of August 29, Hilsman called Krulak about clearance of telegram 243 to Saigon. According to Krulak’s record of the conversation, Hilsman admitted “that he was probably wrong to say that Taylor was involved [with clearance], but that Defense concurrence originated with Mr. Gilpatric.” (Memorandum for the record by Krulak, August 29; Ibid.)

2 Document 305.

3 A memorandum of this conference with President Kennedy is printed in Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, vol. IV, Document 1.

4 Document 299.

Index Index

Acheson, Dean, 586 [Pg. 586 is part of Doc. 258]

Agency for International Development (AID): Commercial Import Program, 360n [Pg. 360 includes portions of Doc. 155 and Doc. 156]

Reassessment of assistance program, proposed, 546n [Pg. 546 includes portions of Doc. 240 and Doc. 241]

Rural development program, 62 [Pg. 62 is part of Doc. 19]

Air Force, Vietnamese: Change of government and, 577 [Pg. 577 is part of Doc. 256]

Escort aircraft for helicopter missions, 10 [Pg. 10 is part of Doc. 4]-11 [Pg. 11 is part of Doc. 4]

Force structure, 41 [Pg. 41 is part of Doc. 18]-42 [Pg. 42 is part of Doc. 18]

Improvements in, 77 [Pg. 77 is part of Doc. 26]

Joint Air Operations Center, 85 [Pg. 85 is part of Doc. 26]-86 [Pg. 86 is part of Doc. 26]

Training for, 268 [Pg. 268 is part of Doc. 107], 293 [Pg. 293 is part of Doc. 121], 298 [Pg. 298 is part of Doc. 123]

Algeria, 674 [Pg. 674 is part of Doc. 308]

An, Col., 273 [Pg. 273 is part of Doc. 109]

Anderson, Bumett, 354 [Pg. 354 is part of Doc. 152], 672n [Pg. 672 includes portions of Doc. 307 and Doc. 308]

Anderson, Brig. Gen. Norman J., 74 [Pg. 74 is part of Doc. 26]

Anthis, Brig. Gen. Roland H., 15 [Pg. 15 is part of Doc. 7]-16 [Pg. 16 includes portions of Doc. 7 and Doc. 8], 189n [Pg. 189 includes portions of Doc. 71 and Doc. 72], 268 [Pg. 268 is part of Doc. 107]-269 [Pg. 269 is part of Doc. 107]

ANZUS Council meeting Oune 1963), 358 [Pg. 358 includes portions of Doc. 153 and Doc. 154]-359 [Pg. 359 includes portions of Doc. 154 and Doc. 155]

Ap Bac, battle of, 1 [Pg. 1 is part of Doc. 1]-3 [Pg. 3 includes portions of Doc. 1 and Doc. 2], 98 [Pg. 98 includes portions of Doc. 29 and Doc. 30]

Army of the Republic of Vietnam (ARVN): Change of government and, 576 [Pg. 576 is part of Doc. 256]-578 [Pg. 578 is part of Doc. 256]

Force structure, 41 [Pg. 41 is part of Doc. 18]

Psychological warfare, 239 [Pg. 239 is part of Doc. 96]

Reluctance to fight, 8 [Pg. 8 is part of Doc. 4]-9 [Pg. 9 is part of Doc. 4]

Reorganization of, 119 [Pg. 119 is part of Doc. 41]-120 [Pg. 120 is part of Doc. 41]

Tactics of, 77 [Pg. 77 is part of Doc. 26]

Weapons captured and lost, 568 [Pg. 568 is part of Doc. 255]-569 [Pg. 569 includes portions of Doc. 255 and Doc. 256]

Arnett, Peter, 470 [Pg. 470 includes portions of Doc. 209 and Doc. 210], 471 [Pg. 471 is part of Doc. 210]

ARVN. See Army of the Republic of Vietnam.

Arzac, Daniel N., 404n [Pg. 404 includes portions of Doc. 181 and Doc. 182]

Australia: Economic assistance to Vietnam, 24 [Pg. 24 is part of Doc. 12], 25 [Pg. 25 is part of Doc. 12]

Military assistance to Vietnam, 358 [Pg. 358 includes portions of Doc. 153 and Doc. 154]

Bagley, Lt. Cmdr. Worth H., 30 [Pg. 30 includes portions of Doc. 14 and Doc. 15]-32 [Pg. 32 includes portions of Doc. 15 and Doc. 16], 84n [Pg. 84 is part of Doc. 26]

Baker, Col. Basil L., 68 [Pg. 68 is part of Doc. 24], 622 [Pg. 622 is part of Doc. 277]

Ball, George W.: Buddhist crisis, 432 [Pg. 432 is part of Doc. 195], 451 [Pg. 451 includes portions of Doc. 204 and Doc. 205]-452 [Pg. 452 is part of Doc. 205] Agreement of June 16, 426 [Pg. 426 is part of Doc. 191]

Control operations by govemment, 553 [Pg. 553 is part of Doc. 245]

Madame Nhu’s attacks on Buddhists, 557 [Pg. 557 includes portions of Doc. 247 and Doc. 248]-558 [Pg. 558 is part of Doc. 248]

U.S. disassociation from Vietnamese policy, threatened, 433 [Pg. 433 is part of Doc. 196]-434 [Pg. 434 includes portions of Doc. 196 and Doc. 197], 443 [Pg. 443 includes portions of Doc. 198 and Doc. 199]-444 [Pg. 444 is part of Doc. 199], 448 [Pg. 448 is part of Doc. 202]

Coup against Diem: Generals’ plan, U.S. support for, 628 [Pg. 628 includes portions of Doc. 280 and Doc. 281]-629 [Pg. 629 is part of Doc. 281], 635 [Pg. 635 includes portions of Doc. 285 and Doc. 286], 639 [Pg. 639 is part of Doc. 289], 646n [Pg. 646 is part of Doc. 293], 659 [Pg. 659 includes portions of Doc. 302 and Doc. 303], 675n [Pg. 675 includes portions of Doc. 308 and Doc. 309]

Nhu as planner of, 488n [Pg. 488 includes portions of Doc. 219 and Doc. 220]

Joint Counterinsurgency Fund, 215 [Pg. 215 includes portions of Doc. 83 and Doc. 84]-216 [Pg. 216 includes portions of Doc. 84 and Doc. 85], 259 [Pg. 259 is part of Doc. 103]

Lodge’s appointment as ambassador, 415 [Pg. 415 is part of Doc. 187]-416 [Pg. 416 includes portions of Doc. 187 and Doc. 188]

Lodge’s relations with Washington officials, 604 [Pg. 604 includes portions of Doc. 267 and Doc. 268]

Martial law, 604 [Pg. 604 includes portions of Doc. 267 and Doc. 268]-605 [Pg. 605 includes portions of Doc. 268 and Doc. 269]

Nhu’s removal from power, U.S. demand for, 627 [Pg. 627 is part of Doc. 280], 628 [Pg. 628 includes portions of Doc. 280 and Doc. 281]-629 [Pg. 629 is part of Doc. 281]

Nolting, meeting with, 466 [Pg. 466 is part of Doc. 208]-467 [Pg. 467 is part of Doc. 208]

U.S. information programs and policies in Vietnam, 313 [Pg. 313 is part of Doc. 130]

Bandaranaike, 392n [Pg. 392 is part of Doc. 173]

Barnes, Gen., 186n [Pg. 186 includes portions of Doc. 70 and Doc. 71]

Barnett, Leo, 148n [Pg. 148 is part of Doc. 57]

Barnett, Robert W., 259n [Pg. 259 is part of Doc. 103], 280n [Pg. 280 includes portions of Doc. 113 and Doc. 114]

Barwick, Sir Garfield, 358 [Pg. 358 includes portions of Doc. 153 and Doc. 154]

Beech, Keyes, 113 [Pg. 113 is part of Doc. 36], 170 [Pg. 170 is part of Doc. 65], 530 [Pg. 530 is part of Doc. 238]

Belgium, economic assistance to Vietnam, 25 [Pg. 25 is part of Doc. 12]

Bell, David E., 29 [Pg. 29 is part of Doc. 14] Joint Counterinsurgency Fund, 302 [Pg. 302 is part of Doc. 124]

Special Group for Counterinsurgency, 28 [Pg. 28 is part of Doc. 14], 29 [Pg. 29 is part of Doc. 14], 103 [Pg. 103 includes portions of Doc. 31 and Doc. 32], 150 [Pg. 150 includes portions of Doc. 58 and Doc. 59], 201 [Pg. 201 is part of Doc. 78], 279 [Pg. 279 is part of Doc. 113], 280 [Pg. 280 includes portions of Doc. 113 and Doc. 114], 315 [Pg. 315 is part of Doc. 132], 389 [Pg. 389 includes portions of Doc. 170 and Doc. 171], 390 [Pg. 390 is part of Doc. 171]

Bigart, Homer, 170 [Pg. 170 is part of Doc. 65]

Blick, Milton H., 333n [Pg. 333 includes portions of Doc. 136 and Doc. 137]

Boggs, J. Caleb, 68n [Pg. 68 is part of Doc. 24]

Bowles, Chester A.: Laos, proposed partitioning of, 519 [Pg. 519 is part of Doc. 231]-521 [Pg. 521 includes portions of Doc. 231 and Doc. 232]

Reassessment of U.S. policy in Vietnam, proposed, 136 [Pg. 136 includes portions of Doc. 51 and Doc. 52]-140 [Pg. 140 is part of Doc. 52]

Vietnam, Republic of: Change of government, possible, 482 [Pg. 482 includes portions of Doc. 215 and Doc. 216]-483 [Pg. 483 includes portions of Doc. 216 and Doc. 217], 518 [Pg. 518 includes portions of Doc. 230 and Doc. 231]-519 [Pg. 519 is part of Doc. 231]

Vietnam visit, 480 [Pg. 480 is part of Doc. 214], 482 [Pg. 482 includes portions of Doc. 215 and Doc. 216]-483 [Pg. 483 includes portions of Doc. 216 and Doc. 217]

Brent, Joseph L., 156 [Pg. 156 includes portions of Doc. 60 and Doc. 61], 186 [Pg. 186 includes portions of Doc. 70 and Doc. 71], 225 [Pg. 225 includes portions of Doc. 88 and Doc. 89], 254 [Pg. 254 is part of Doc. 101] Honolulu Conference, 270 [Pg. 270 includes portions of Doc. 107 and Doc. 108]

Joint Counterinsurgency Fund, 214 [Pg. 214 is part of Doc. 82], 301 [Pg. 301 is part of Doc. 124], 302 [Pg. 302 is part of Doc. 124]

Strategic hamlet program, 256 [Pg. 256 includes portions of Doc. 101 and Doc. 102]

Vietnam, Republic of, economic situation, 270 [Pg. 270 includes portions of Doc. 107 and Doc. 108]

Browne, Malcolm, 370 [Pg. 370 is part of Doc. 161], 374n [Pg. 374 is part of Doc. 163], 470 [Pg. 470 includes portions of Doc. 209 and Doc. 210], 471 [Pg. 471 is part of Doc. 210], 472 [Pg. 472 is part of Doc. 211]-473 [Pg. 473 includes portions of Doc. 211 and Doc. 212], 540 [Pg. 540 is part of Doc. 239]

Brubeck, William H., 237n [Pg. 237 is part of Doc. 96]

Brui, 106 [Pg. 106 is part of Doc. 33]

Buddhist crisis: Agreement of June 16 (see also Conciliatory policy of government below; Negotiations below): Implementation issue, 413 [Pg. 413 includes portions of Doc. 185 and Doc. 186]-414 [Pg. 414 is part of Doc. 186], 422 [Pg. 422 includes portions of Doc. 188 and Doc. 189], 423n [Pg. 423 includes portions of Doc. 189 and Doc. 190], 424 [Pg. 424 is part of Doc. 190]-425 [Pg. 425 is part of Doc. 190], 426 [Pg. 426 is part of Doc. 191], 429 [Pg. 429 is part of Doc. 193]-430 [Pg. 430 includes portions of Doc. 193 and Doc. 194], 466 [Pg. 466 is part of Doc. 208], 486 [Pg. 486 is part of Doc. 218]

Misunderstandings, possible, 400 [Pg. 400 is part of Doc. 180]

Sabotage by Nhus, 409 [Pg. 409 includes portions of Doc. 183 and Doc. 184]-413 [Pg. 413 includes portions of Doc. 185 and Doc. 186], 429 [Pg. 429 is part of Doc. 193], 431 [Pg. 431 is part of Doc. 194], 433 [Pg. 433 is part of Doc. 196], 441 [Pg. 441 includes portions of Doc. 197 and Doc. 198]-442 [Pg. 442 is part of Doc. 198], 444 [Pg. 444 is part of Doc. 199], 446 [Pg. 446 includes portions of Doc. 200 and Doc. 201], 448 [Pg. 448 is part of Doc. 202], 450 [Pg. 450 includes portions of Doc. 203 and Doc. 204]-451 [Pg. 451 includes portions of Doc. 204 and Doc. 205], 452 [Pg. 452 is part of Doc. 205], 477 [Pg. 477 is part of Doc. 212]

Text of, 397 [Pg. 397 includes portions of Doc. 177 and Doc. 178]-398 [Pg. 398 includes portions of Doc. 178 and Doc. 179]

Trueheart’s assessment of, 398 [Pg. 398 includes portions of Doc. 178 and Doc. 179]-399 [Pg. 399 is part of Doc. 179]

U.S. position, 403 [Pg. 403 is part of Doc. 181]

Violations by government, 476 [Pg. 476 is part of Doc. 212]

Background report on, 366 [Pg. 366 includes portions of Doc. 159 and Doc. 160]

Buddhist motives and tactics, 365 [Pg. 365 is part of Doc. 159], 378 [Pg. 378 includes portions of Doc. 165 and Doc. 166]-379 [Pg. 379 is part of Doc. 166], 476 [Pg. 476 is part of Doc. 212]-477 [Pg. 477 is part of Doc. 212]

Buddhist request for U.S. assistance, 492 [Pg. 492 is part of Doc. 221], 493n [Pg. 493 includes portions of Doc. 222 and Doc. 223]

Buddhist request for U.S. protection, 478 [Pg. 478 includes portions of Doc. 212 and Doc. 213]-479 [Pg. 479 includes portions of Doc. 213 and Doc. 214]

Burial of Buddhist martyr, 391n [Pg. 391 is part of Doc. 172], 393 [Pg. 393 is part of Doc. 174]-394 [Pg. 394 includes portions of Doc. 174 and Doc. 175], 396 [Pg. 396 is part of Doc. 177], 425 [Pg. 425 is part of Doc. 190]

Cambodian-Vietnamese relations and, 375 [Pg. 375 is part of Doc. 164]

Cambodia’s position, 392 [Pg. 392 is part of Doc. 173], 404 [Pg. 404 includes portions of Doc. 181 and Doc. 182], 560 [Pg. 560 includes portions of Doc. 249 and Doc. 250]

CIA assessments of, 344 [Pg. 344 includes portions of Doc. 144 and Doc. 145]-346 [Pg. 346 includes portions of Doc. 145 and Doc. 146], 424 [Pg. 424 is part of Doc. 190]-425 [Pg. 425 is part of Doc. 190], 473 [Pg. 473 includes portions of Doc. 211 and Doc. 212]-478 [Pg. 478 includes portions of Doc. 212 and Doc. 213], 481 [Pg. 481 is part of Doc. 215]

Commission on (see also Negotiations below), 338 [Pg. 338 is part of Doc. 140], 339 [Pg. 339 includes portions of Doc. 140 and Doc. 141], 372 [Pg. 372 is part of Doc. 162], 561n [Pg. 561 is part of Doc. 250], 563 [Pg. 563 is part of Doc. 251]-564 [Pg. 564 includes portions of Doc. 251 and Doc. 252] Appointment of, 353 [Pg. 353 is part of Doc. 151]

Meetings with Buddhists, proposed, 546 [Pg. 546 includes portions of Doc. 240 and Doc. 241]-547 [Pg. 547 is part of Doc. 241]

Communist involvement issue, 379 [Pg. 379 is part of Doc. 166], 429 [Pg. 429 is part of Doc. 193] Thuan’s position, 351 [Pg. 351 includes portions of Doc. 149 and Doc. 150]

U.S. position, 348 [Pg. 348 is part of Doc. 147]

Communist propaganda re, 346 [Pg. 346 includes portions of Doc. 145 and Doc. 146]

Conciliatory policy of government, 348 [Pg. 348 is part of Doc. 147], 376 [Pg. 376 includes portions of Doc. 164 and Doc. 165]-377 [Pg. 377 is part of Doc. 165], 525 [Pg. 525 is part of Doc. 235], 526 [Pg. 526 is part of Doc. 235] Abandonment of, reasons for, 662 [Pg. 662 is part of Doc. 303]

Diem’s endorsement of, 561 [Pg. 561 is part of Doc. 250], 563 [Pg. 563 is part of Doc. 251]-564 [Pg. 564 includes portions of Doc. 251 and Doc. 252], 565 [Pg. 565 includes portions of Doc. 252 and Doc. 253]-566 [Pg. 566 is part of Doc. 253]

Nhu’ssupport for, 556 [Pg. 556 is part of Doc. 247]

Nolting’s position, 528 [Pg. 528 includes portions of Doc. 236 and Doc. 237]-529 [Pg. 529 includes portions of Doc. 237 and Doc. 238]

Conciliatory speech by Diem, 479 [Pg. 479 includes portions of Doc. 213 and Doc. 214]-480 [Pg. 480 is part of Doc. 214] Broadcast of, 514 [Pg. 514 includes portions of Doc. 227 and Doc. 228]-515 [Pg. 515 includes portions of Doc. 228 and Doc. 229]

Buddhist response, 517n [Pg. 517 is part of Doc. 230]

Diem’s agreement re, 494 [Pg. 494 includes portions of Doc. 223 and Doc. 224]-496 [Pg. 496 includes portions of Doc. 224, Doc. 225, and Doc. 226]

U.S. response, 515 [Pg. 515 includes portions of Doc. 228 and Doc. 229]-516 [Pg. 516 is part of Doc. 229], 518 [Pg. 518 includes portions of Doc. 230 and Doc. 231], 522 [Pg. 522 includes portions of Doc. 232 and Doc. 233], 523 [Pg. 523 includes portions of Doc. 233 and Doc. 234]

Control operations by government (see also Pagodas, raids on below; Poison gas issue below), 311 [Pg. 311 is part of Doc. 129]-312 [Pg. 312 is part of Doc. 129] Arrests of demonstrators, 426 [Pg. 426 is part of Doc. 191]

Leaflet dropping, 367 [Pg. 367 is part of Doc. 160]-368 [Pg. 368 is part of Doc. 160], 370 [Pg. 370 is part of Doc. 161]

Repressive measures, 277 [Pg. 277 is part of Doc. 112]-278 [Pg. 278 is part of Doc. 112], 343 [Pg. 343 includes portions of Doc. 143 and Doc. 144]-344 [Pg. 344 includes portions of Doc. 144 and Doc. 145], 346 [Pg. 346 includes portions of Doc. 145 and Doc. 146]-347 [Pg. 347 is part of Doc. 146], 494n [Pg. 494 includes portions of Doc. 223 and Doc. 224]

Repressive measures, halt to, 546 [Pg. 546 includes portions of Doc. 240 and Doc. 241]

Repressive measures, resumption of, 553 [Pg. 553 is part of Doc. 245]

Security measures, focus on, 368 [Pg. 368 is part of Doc. 160]

Special forces for, 376 [Pg. 376 includes portions of Doc. 164 and Doc. 165]

U.S. arms used in, 342 [Pg. 342 is part of Doc. 143]-343 [Pg. 343 includes portions of Doc. 143 and Doc. 144]

U.S. assessment of, 379 [Pg. 379 is part of Doc. 166]-380 [Pg. 380 is part of Doc. 166]

U.S. blamed for, 650n [Pg. 650 includes portions of Doc. 296 and Doc. 297]

U.S. involvement in, 351 [Pg. 351 includes portions of Doc. 149 and Doc. 150]-352 [Pg. 352 includes portions of Doc. 150 and Doc. 151], 367 [Pg. 367 is part of Doc. 160]

Counterinsurgency operations, impact on, 460 [Pg. 460 is part of Doc. 207]-461 [Pg. 461 is part of Doc. 207], 496 [Pg. 496 includes portions of Doc. 224, Doc. 225, and Doc. 226], 551 [Pg. 551 is part of Doc. 244]-552 [Pg. 552 is part of Doc. 244], 661 [Pg. 661 is part of Doc. 303]

Coup against Diem and, 405 [Pg. 405 is part of Doc. 183], 406 [Pg. 406 is part of Doc. 183]-408 [Pg. 408 is part of Doc. 183], 473 [Pg. 473 includes portions of Doc. 211 and Doc. 212]-476 [Pg. 476 is part of Doc. 212], 483 [Pg. 483 includes portions of Doc. 216 and Doc. 217]-485 [Pg. 485 is part of Doc. 217], 523 [Pg. 523 includes portions of Doc. 233 and Doc. 234]-524 [Pg. 524 is part of Doc. 234], 554 [Pg. 554 is part of Doc. 246]-555 [Pg. 555 is part of Doc. 246]

Decree Law 10 issue, 357 [Pg. 357 is part of Doc. 153], 364 [Pg. 364 includes portions of Doc. 158 and Doc. 159], 371 [Pg. 371 includes portions of Doc. 161 and Doc. 162]-372 [Pg. 372 is part of Doc. 162], 388 [Pg. 388 is part of Doc. 170], 391n [Pg. 391 is part of Doc. 172], 397 [Pg. 397 includes portions of Doc. 177 and Doc. 178]

Demonstrations by Buddhists, 340 [Pg. 340 includes portions of Doc. 141 and Doc. 142]-341 [Pg. 341 is part of Doc. 142], 429 [Pg. 429 is part of Doc. 193], 492 [Pg. 492 is part of Doc. 221], 493 [Pg. 493 includes portions of Doc. 222 and Doc. 223] Countrywide demonstrations, planning for, 310 [Pg. 310 is part of Doc. 129]-311 [Pg. 311 is part of Doc. 129]

Initial demonstrations at Hue, 277 [Pg. 277 is part of Doc. 112]-278 [Pg. 278 is part of Doc. 112], 283 [Pg. 283 includes portions of Doc. 114 and Doc. 115], 284 [Pg. 284 is part of Doc. 116]-286 [Pg. 286 is part of Doc. 117], 312 [Pg. 312 is part of Doc. 129], 336 [Pg. 336 includes portions of Doc. 138 and Doc. 139]

Pagodas, demonstrators in, 367 [Pg. 367 is part of Doc. 160], 370 [Pg. 370 is part of Doc. 161], 372 [Pg. 372 is part of Doc. 162]

Suicides, 374 [Pg. 374 is part of Doc. 163], 375 [Pg. 375 is part of Doc. 164], 386 [Pg. 386 is part of Doc. 169], 430 [Pg. 430 includes portions of Doc. 193 and Doc. 194], 432 [Pg. 432 is part of Doc. 195], 553n [Pg. 553 is part of Doc. 245], 652 [Pg. 652 is part of Doc. 298]

Demonstrations by students, 396 [Pg. 396 is part of Doc. 177]-397 [Pg. 397 includes portions of Doc. 177 and Doc. 178]

Diem’s assessments of, 314 [Pg. 314 is part of Doc. 131], 445 [Pg. 445 is part of Doc. 200]-446 [Pg. 446 includes portions of Doc. 200 and Doc. 201]

Diem’s efforts to keep his promises, 661 [Pg. 661 is part of Doc. 303]-662 [Pg. 662 is part of Doc. 303]

Diem’s meetings with Buddhists, 340 [Pg. 340 includes portions of Doc. 141 and Doc. 142], 342 [Pg. 342 is part of Doc. 143], 345 [Pg. 345 is part of Doc. 145], 356 [Pg. 356 includes portions of Doc. 152 and Doc. 153], 526 [Pg. 526 is part of Doc. 235]

Diem’s speeches on (see also Conciliatory speech by Diem above), 360 [Pg. 360 includes portions of Doc. 155 and Doc. 156]

Divisions among Buddhists, 423n [Pg. 423 includes portions of Doc. 189 and Doc. 190], 430 [Pg. 430 includes portions of Doc. 193 and Doc. 194]-431 [Pg. 431 is part of Doc. 194]

Exploitation by government opponents, 337 [Pg. 337 includes portions of Doc. 139 and Doc. 140]-339 [Pg. 339 includes portions of Doc. 140 and Doc. 141], 342 [Pg. 342 is part of Doc. 143]

Five demands (see also Negotiations below), 287 [Pg. 287 is part of Doc. 118]-288 [Pg. 288 is part of Doc. 118] Government-Buddhist meetings re, 288n [Pg. 288 is part of Doc. 118], 309 [Pg. 309 includes portions of Doc. 128 and Doc. 129]-310 [Pg. 310 is part of Doc. 129], 311 [Pg. 311 is part of Doc. 129]

Flag law, 278n [Pg. 278 is part of Doc. 112]

Hughes’ assessment of, 405 [Pg. 405 is part of Doc. 183]-409 [Pg. 409 includes portions of Doc. 183 and Doc. 184]

Krulak’s assessment of, 460 [Pg. 460 is part of Doc. 207]-461 [Pg. 461 is part of Doc. 207]

Madame Nhu’sattacks on Buddhists, 553 [Pg. 553 is part of Doc. 245], 556 [Pg. 556 is part of Doc. 247]-557 [Pg. 557 includes portions of Doc. 247 and Doc. 248], 559n [Pg. 559 is part of Doc. 249] Government’s response, 560 [Pg. 560 includes portions of Doc. 249 and Doc. 250]-563 [Pg. 563 is part of Doc. 251]

Tho’s defense of, 564 [Pg. 564 includes portions of Doc. 251 and Doc. 252]-565 [Pg. 565 includes portions of Doc. 252 and Doc. 253]

U.S. response, 557 [Pg. 557 includes portions of Doc. 247 and Doc. 248]-558 [Pg. 558 is part of Doc. 248]

Media coverage of, 370 [Pg. 370 is part of Doc. 161], 488 [Pg. 488 includes portions of Doc. 219 and Doc. 220], 492 [Pg. 492 is part of Doc. 221] Balanced reporting, 525 [Pg. 525 is part of Doc. 235]-526 [Pg. 526 is part of Doc. 235]

Buddhist leaders’ use of press, 537 [Pg. 537 is part of Doc. 239]-538 [Pg. 538 is part of Doc. 239]

Government’s attitude toward, 538 [Pg. 538 is part of Doc. 239]

Harassment of reporters by government, 470 [Pg. 470 includes portions of Doc. 209 and Doc. 210]-473 [Pg. 473 includes portions of Doc. 211 and Doc. 212]

Negotiations, 393 [Pg. 393 is part of Doc. 174], 395 [Pg. 395 includes portions of Doc. 175 and Doc. 176]

Suicides, 374n [Pg. 374 is part of Doc. 163]

Vietnamese press releases, 512 [Pg. 512 is part of Doc. 227]-513 [Pg. 513 is part of Doc. 227]

Military’s attitude toward, 345 [Pg. 345 is part of Doc. 145], 377 [Pg. 377 is part of Doc. 165]-378 [Pg. 378 includes portions of Doc. 165 and Doc. 166], 596 [Pg. 596 is part of Doc. 261]

Negotiations: Buddhist position, 388 [Pg. 388 is part of Doc. 170]-390 [Pg. 390 is part of Doc. 171]

Conclusion of, 395n [Pg. 395 includes portions of Doc. 175 and Doc. 176], 396 [Pg. 396 is part of Doc. 177], 397 [Pg. 397 includes portions of Doc. 177 and Doc. 178]-398 [Pg. 398 includes portions of Doc. 178 and Doc. 179]

Government’s approach to, 383 [Pg. 383 includes portions of Doc. 167 and Doc. 168]-384 [Pg. 384 is part of Doc. 168]

Media coverage of, 393 [Pg. 393 is part of Doc. 174], 395 [Pg. 395 includes portions of Doc. 175 and Doc. 176]

Progress of, 391 [Pg. 391 is part of Doc. 172]

Timing of, 387 [Pg. 387 includes portions of Doc. 169 and Doc. 170]

Nhu’smeeting with Buddhists, 350 [Pg. 350 is part of Doc. 149]

Nolting’s assessments of, 487 [Pg. 487 is part of Doc. 219]-488 [Pg. 488 includes portions of Doc. 219 and Doc. 220], 662 [Pg. 662 is part of Doc. 303]-663 [Pg. 663 is part of Doc. 303]

Nolting’s personal involvement, Vietnamese desire for, 449 [Pg. 449 includes portions of Doc. 202 and Doc. 203]-450 [Pg. 450 includes portions of Doc. 203 and Doc. 204]

Nolting’s statement on religious persecution, 550 [Pg. 550 is part of Doc. 243]

Pagodas, raids on: Buddhist anticipation of, 478 [Pg. 478 includes portions of Doc. 212 and Doc. 213]-479 [Pg. 479 includes portions of Doc. 213 and Doc. 214]

Defense Intelligence Agency reports on, 600 [Pg. 600 is part of Doc. 264]-601 [Pg. 601 includes portions of Doc. 264 and Doc. 265]

Diem’s decision to undertake raids, 595 [Pg. 595 is part of Doc. 261]-597 [Pg. 597 includes portions of Doc. 261 and Doc. 262], 616 [Pg. 616 is part of Doc. 275]

Don’s account of, 616 [Pg. 616 is part of Doc. 275], 617 [Pg. 617 is part of Doc. 275]-618 [Pg. 618 is part of Doc. 275]

Military’s loyalty oath re, 614 [Pg. 614 includes portions of Doc. 274 and Doc. 275]

Nhu’srole in, 612 [Pg. 612 is part of Doc. 273], 613 [Pg. 613 is part of Doc. 274], 616 [Pg. 616 is part of Doc. 275], 620 [Pg. 620 includes portions of Doc. 275 and Doc. 276]

Nhu’sthreats re, 553 [Pg. 553 is part of Doc. 245], 554 [Pg. 554 is part of Doc. 246], 556 [Pg. 556 is part of Doc. 247]

Nolting’s assessment of, 662 [Pg. 662 is part of Doc. 303]-663 [Pg. 663 is part of Doc. 303]

Report for Kennedy on, 597 [Pg. 597 includes portions of Doc. 261 and Doc. 262]-598 [Pg. 598 includes portions of Doc. 262 and Doc. 263]

State Department reports on, 598 [Pg. 598 includes portions of Doc. 262 and Doc. 263]-599 [Pg. 599 is part of Doc. 263]

U.S. response to, 599 [Pg. 599 is part of Doc. 263]

VOA broadcasts on, 618 [Pg. 618 is part of Doc. 275], 619 [Pg. 619 is part of Doc. 275], 629n [Pg. 629 is part of Doc. 281], 635 [Pg. 635 includes portions of Doc. 285 and Doc. 286], 636 [Pg. 636 includes portions of Doc. 287 and Doc. 288]

Poison gas issue, 348n [Pg. 348 is part of Doc. 147] Commission to investigate, 352 [Pg. 352 includes portions of Doc. 150 and Doc. 151]

U.S. position, 349 [Pg. 349 includes portions of Doc. 148 and Doc. 149]

U.S.-Vietnamese discussion re, 350 [Pg. 350 is part of Doc. 149]-351 [Pg. 351 includes portions of Doc. 149 and Doc. 150]

Political motives of Buddhists, 365 [Pg. 365 is part of Doc. 159], 476 [Pg. 476 is part of Doc. 212]-477 [Pg. 477 is part of Doc. 212]

Radicals and activists in leadership

roles, 493 [Pg. 493 includes portions of Doc. 222 and Doc. 223]-494 [Pg. 494 includes portions of Doc. 223 and Doc. 224]

Refugee priests issue, 599 [Pg. 599 is part of Doc. 263], 610 [Pg. 610 includes portions of Doc. 270, Doc. 271, and Doc. 272]-611 [Pg. 611 includes portions of Doc. 272 and Doc. 273], 618 [Pg. 618 is part of Doc. 275]

Religious freedom issue, 335 [Pg. 335 includes portions of Doc. 137 and Doc. 138]-337 [Pg. 337 includes portions of Doc. 139 and Doc. 140]

Resolution of crisis, U.S. recommendations reI 335-336 [Pg. 336 includes portions of Doc. 138 and Doc. 139], 364 [Pg. 364 includes portions of Doc. 158 and Doc. 159]-365 [Pg. 365 is part of Doc. 159], 380 [Pg. 380 is part of Doc. 166], 381 [Pg. 381 includes portions of Doc. 166 and Doc. 167]-383 [Pg. 383 includes portions of Doc. 167 and Doc. 168], 517 [Pg. 517 is part of Doc. 230]-518 [Pg. 518 includes portions of Doc. 230 and Doc. 231], 521 [Pg. 521 includes portions of Doc. 231 and Doc. 232]-523 [Pg. 523 includes portions of Doc. 233 and Doc. 234] Diem’s response, 385 [Pg. 385 is part of Doc. 169]-387 [Pg. 387 includes portions of Doc. 169 and Doc. 170]

Truce agreement of June 5, 356 [Pg. 356 includes portions of Doc. 152 and Doc. 153]-358 [Pg. 358 includes portions of Doc. 153 and Doc. 154], 359 [Pg. 359 includes portions of Doc. 154 and Doc. 155]-360 [Pg. 360 includes portions of Doc. 155 and Doc. 156]

United Nations and, 392n [Pg. 392 is part of Doc. 173], 560 [Pg. 560 includes portions of Doc. 249 and Doc. 250]

U.S. disassociation from Vietnamese policy, threatened, 442 [Pg. 442 is part of Doc. 198]-443 [Pg. 443 includes portions of Doc. 198 and Doc. 199], 452 [Pg. 452 is part of Doc. 205], 553 [Pg. 553 is part of Doc. 245], 559 [Pg. 559 is part of Doc. 249]-560 [Pg. 560 includes portions of Doc. 249 and Doc. 250], 565 [Pg. 565 includes portions of Doc. 252 and Doc. 253] Diem informed of U.S. position, 446 [Pg. 446 includes portions of Doc. 200 and Doc. 201]-447 [Pg. 447 includes portions of Doc. 201 and Doc. 202]

Forrestal’s report on, 447 [Pg. 447 includes portions of Doc. 201 and Doc. 202]-449 [Pg. 449 includes portions of Doc. 202 and Doc. 203]

Initial proposal of, 433 [Pg. 433 is part of Doc. 196]-434 [Pg. 434 includes portions of Doc. 196 and Doc. 197]

State Department instructions re, 443 [Pg. 443 includes portions of Doc. 198 and Doc. 199]-444 [Pg. 444 is part of Doc. 199]

U.S. officials’ contacts with Buddhists, 547 [Pg. 547 is part of Doc. 241]

“Vacation" for Diem and, 565 [Pg. 565 includes portions of Doc. 252 and Doc. 253]

VOA broadcasts on, 618 [Pg. 618 is part of Doc. 275], 619 [Pg. 619 is part of Doc. 275], 629n [Pg. 629 is part of Doc. 281], 635 [Pg. 635 includes portions of Doc. 285 and Doc. 286], 636 [Pg. 636 includes portions of Doc. 287 and Doc. 288], 651 [Pg. 651 includes portions of Doc. 297 and Doc. 298]-652 [Pg. 652 is part of Doc. 298]

Women’s Solidarity Movement resolution on, 362 [Pg. 362 includes portions of Doc. 156 and Doc. 157]-364 [Pg. 364 includes portions of Doc. 158 and Doc. 159], 367 [Pg. 367 is part of Doc. 160], 368 [Pg. 368 is part of Doc. 160], 369 [Pg. 369 includes portions of Doc. 160 and Doc. 161], 371 [Pg. 371 includes portions of Doc. 161 and Doc. 162], 372 [Pg. 372 is part of Doc. 162], 397 [Pg. 397 includes portions of Doc. 177 and Doc. 178]

Bui Dinh Dam, Lt. Col., 576 [Pg. 576 is part of Doc. 256], 580 [Pg. 580 is part of Doc. 256]

Bui Van Luong: Buddhist crisis, 309 [Pg. 309 includes portions of Doc. 128 and Doc. 129], 426n [Pg. 426 is part of Doc. 191] Agreement of June 16, 477 [Pg. 477 is part of Doc. 212]

Commission on, 353 [Pg. 353 is part of Doc. 151]

Conciliatory speech by Diem, 480 [Pg. 480 is part of Doc. 214]

Pagodas, raids on, 596 [Pg. 596 is part of Doc. 261], 597 [Pg. 597 includes portions of Doc. 261 and Doc. 262]

Truce agreement of June 5, 359 [Pg. 359 includes portions of Doc. 154 and Doc. 155]

Bunce, Ralph, 672n [Pg. 672 includes portions of Doc. 307 and Doc. 308]

Bunce, W. Kenneth, 144n [Pg. 144 is part of Doc. 55], 152n [Pg. 152 is part of Doc. 60]

Bundy, McGeorge, 142n [Pg. 142 includes portions of Doc. 53 and Doc. 54], 221 [Pg. 221 is part of Doc. 87], 447n [Pg. 447 includes portions of Doc. 201 and Doc. 202], 660 [Pg. 660 is part of Doc. 303], 665n [Pg. 665 includes portions of Doc. 303 and Doc. 304] Buddhist crisis, 451 [Pg. 451 includes portions of Doc. 204 and Doc. 205]-452 [Pg. 452 is part of Doc. 205]

Counterinsurgency operations, 189n [Pg. 189 includes portions of Doc. 71 and Doc. 72]

Coup against Diem, U.S. support for Generals’ plan, 664 [Pg. 664 is part of Doc. 303], 667n [Pg. 667 is part of Doc. 305], 675n [Pg. 675 includes portions of Doc. 308 and Doc. 309]

Crop destruction and defoliation, 237n [Pg. 237 is part of Doc. 96], 245n [Pg. 245 includes portions of Doc. 97 and Doc. 98], 274n [Pg. 274 includes portions of Doc. 109 and Doc. 110]

Krulak report, 455n [Pg. 455 includes portions of Doc. 206 and Doc. 207]

Media coverage of Vietnam, 531n [Pg. 531 is part of Doc. 239]

Special Group for Counterinsurgency, 28 [Pg. 28 is part of Doc. 14]

U.S. information programs and policies in Vietnam, 263n [Pg. 263 includes portions of Doc. 105 and Doc. 106]

U.S. official visits to Vietnam, 63 [Pg. 63 includes portions of Doc. 20 and Doc. 21]

Vietnam, Republic of, change of government, possible, 481 [Pg. 481 is part of Doc. 215], 518 [Pg. 518 includes portions of Doc. 230 and Doc. 231]

Bundy, William P., 638 [Pg. 638 is part of Doc. 289] Buddhist crisis, 432 [Pg. 432 is part of Doc. 195]

Commercial Import Program, 283n [Pg. 283 includes portions of Doc. 114 and Doc. 115]

Counterinsurgency operations, 189n [Pg. 189 includes portions of Doc. 71 and Doc. 72]

Crop destruction and defoliation, 226n [Pg. 226 includes portions of Doc. 89 and Doc. 90], 232n [Pg. 232 includes portions of Doc. 93 and Doc. 94]

Montagnards, arming and training of, 104 [Pg. 104 is part of Doc. 32]

RVNAF paramilitary force levels, 131 [Pg. 131 includes portions of Doc. 48 and Doc. 49]-132 [Pg. 132 includes portions of Doc. 49 and Doc. 50]

Special Group for Counterinsurgency, 103 [Pg. 103 includes portions of Doc. 31 and Doc. 32], 104 [Pg. 104 is part of Doc. 32], 315 [Pg. 315 is part of Doc. 132]

U.S. military assistance to Vietnam:Funding for, 275n [Pg. 275 includes portions of Doc. 110 and Doc. 111], 333n [Pg. 333 includes portions of Doc. 136 and Doc. 137] Jets, provision of, 26 [Pg. 26 includes portions of Doc. 12 and Doc. 13], 28n [Pg. 28 is part of Doc. 14], 102n [Pg. 102 includes portions of Doc. 30 and Doc. 31], 260 [Pg. 260 is part of Doc. 104]

Burchinal, Lt. Gen. David A., 74 [Pg. 74 is part of Doc. 26]

Burma, 190 [Pg. 190 is part of Doc. 72], 673 [Pg. 673 is part of Doc. 308]

Buu, 58 [Pg. 58 is part of Doc. 19]

Buu Du, Dr., 370 [Pg. 370 is part of Doc. 161]

Buu Hoi, 273 [Pg. 273 is part of Doc. 109], 314 [Pg. 314 is part of Doc. 131], 546 [Pg. 546 includes portions of Doc. 240 and Doc. 241], 547 [Pg. 547 is part of Doc. 241], 666 [Pg. 666 is part of Doc. 304]

Ca MauPeninsula operation, 12 [Pg. 12 is part of Doc. 5]

Cambodia: Buddhist crisis, 560 [Pg. 560 includes portions of Doc. 249 and Doc. 250] Relations with Vietnam and, 375 [Pg. 375 is part of Doc. 164]

Support for Buddhists, 392 [Pg. 392 is part of Doc. 173], 404 [Pg. 404 includes portions of Doc. 181 and Doc. 182]

Communist infiltration through, 31 [Pg. 31 is part of Doc. 15]

Communist sanctuaries, 92 [Pg. 92 is part of Doc. 26]

Neutrality issue, 13 [Pg. 13 is part of Doc. 5]

Soviet arms for, 197 [Pg. 197 is part of Doc. 76]

U.S. bilateral guarantees for, 6 [Pg. 6 is part of Doc. 3]

Vietnam, Republic of, relations with, 326 [Pg. 326 is part of Doc. 134], 375 [Pg. 375 is part of Doc. 164]

Cao. See Ngo Dinh Can.

Canada (see also International Control Commission), economic assistance to Vietnam, 25 [Pg. 25 is part of Doc. 12]

Cao. See Huynh Van Cao, Gen.

Cao Van Vien, Col., 579 [Pg. 579 is part of Doc. 256], 656 [Pg. 656 is part of Doc. 300], 669 [Pg. 669 is part of Doc. 306]

Cao Xuan Vy, 613 [Pg. 613 is part of Doc. 274]

Carroll, Lt. Gen. Joseph H, 600 [Pg. 600 is part of Doc. 264]-601 [Pg. 601 includes portions of Doc. 264 and Doc. 265]

Carter, Lt. Gen. Marshall S., 638 [Pg. 638 is part of Doc. 289], 659 [Pg. 659 includes portions of Doc. 302 and Doc. 303], 675n [Pg. 675 includes portions of Doc. 308 and Doc. 309]

Central Intelligence Agency, U.S. (CIA): Buddhist crisis, assessments of, 344 [Pg. 344 includes portions of Doc. 144 and Doc. 145]-346 [Pg. 346 includes portions of Doc. 145 and Doc. 146], 424 [Pg. 424 is part of Doc. 190]-425 [Pg. 425 is part of Doc. 190], 473 [Pg. 473 includes portions of Doc. 211 and Doc. 212]-478 [Pg. 478 includes portions of Doc. 212 and Doc. 213], 481 [Pg. 481 is part of Doc. 215]

Civilian Irregular Defense Group program, 62 [Pg. 62 is part of Doc. 19]

Communist insurgency, assessment of, 20 [Pg. 20 is part of Doc. 11]-21 [Pg. 21 is part of Doc. 11]

Counterinsurgency operations, assessments of, 19 [Pg. 19 includes portions of Doc. 10 and Doc. 11]-20 [Pg. 20 is part of Doc. 11], 551 [Pg. 551 is part of Doc. 244]-552 [Pg. 552 is part of Doc. 244]

Coup against Diem: Assessments of, 473 [Pg. 473 includes portions of Doc. 211 and Doc. 212]-476 [Pg. 476 is part of Doc. 212], 575 [Pg. 575 is part of Doc. 256]-583 [Pg. 583 is part of Doc. 256], 602 [Pg. 602 includes portions of Doc. 265 and Doc. 266]-603 [Pg. 603 is part of Doc. 266]

Generals’ plan, reports on, 614 [Pg. 614 includes portions of Doc. 274 and Doc. 275]-620 [Pg. 620 includes portions of Doc. 275 and Doc. 276], 633 [Pg. 633 is part of Doc. 284]-634 [Pg. 634 includes portions of Doc. 284 and Doc. 285], 642 [Pg. 642 is part of Doc. 290]-643 [Pg. 643 includes portions of Doc. 290 and Doc. 291], 647 [Pg. 647 is part of Doc. 294], 653 [Pg. 653 includes portions of Doc. 298 and Doc. 299]-655 [Pg. 655 includes portions of Doc. 299 and Doc. 300], 671 [Pg. 671 includes portions of Doc. 306 and Doc. 307]

Nhu as planner of, 489 [Pg. 489 is part of Doc. 220]-491 [Pg. 491 is part of Doc. 220]

Montagnards, disarming of, 6 [Pg. 6 is part of Doc. 3]

Political reforms, assessment of, 423 [Pg. 423 includes portions of Doc. 189 and Doc. 190]-425 [Pg. 425 is part of Doc. 190]

U.S. military involvement in Vietnam:

Force reductions, proposed, 246 [Pg. 246 includes portions of Doc. 98 and Doc. 99]-247 [Pg. 247 includes portions of Doc. 99 and Doc. 100]

Vietnam, Republic of: Change of government, possible, 569 [Pg. 569 includes portions of Doc. 255 and Doc. 256]-583 [Pg. 583 is part of Doc. 256]

Political situation, assessment of, 423 [Pg. 423 includes portions of Doc. 189 and Doc. 190]-425 [Pg. 425 is part of Doc. 190]

Central Intelligence Organization, Vietnamese, 238 [Pg. 238 is part of Doc. 96]

Ceylon, 560 [Pg. 560 includes portions of Doc. 249 and Doc. 250], 674 [Pg. 674 is part of Doc. 308]

Chapman, Lt. Col. Harry M., 74 [Pg. 74 is part of Doc. 26]

Chau, Col., 353 [Pg. 353 is part of Doc. 151]

Chieu, Lt. Col., 525 [Pg. 525 is part of Doc. 235]

Chieu Hoi (Call to Return) program. See Communist surrender programitem.

China, People’s Republic of, 71 [Pg. 71 is part of Doc. 25]-72 [Pg. 72 is part of Doc. 25] Communist insurgency, policy on, 80 [Pg. 80 is part of Doc. 26], 421 [Pg. 421 is part of Doc. 188]-422 [Pg. 422 includes portions of Doc. 188 and Doc. 189]

Diem, criticism of, 673 [Pg. 673 is part of Doc. 308]

Laos, policy toward, 420 [Pg. 420 is part of Doc. 188]-421 [Pg. 421 is part of Doc. 188]

Soviet Union, dispute with, 416 [Pg. 416 includes portions of Doc. 187 and Doc. 188]-422 [Pg. 422 includes portions of Doc. 188 and Doc. 189]

Vietnam, Democratic Republic of, relations with, 416 [Pg. 416 includes portions of Doc. 187 and Doc. 188]-422 [Pg. 422 includes portions of Doc. 188 and Doc. 189] U.S. propaganda re, 271 [Pg. 271 is part of Doc. 108]-272 [Pg. 272 includes portions of Doc. 108 and Doc. 109], 354 [Pg. 354 is part of Doc. 152]-355 [Pg. 355 is part of Doc. 152]

Vietnam policy, 109 [Pg. 109 is part of Doc. 35]

China, Republic of, economic assistance to Vietnam, 25 [Pg. 25 is part of Doc. 12]

Chuong. See Tran Van Chuong.

CINCPAC. See Felt, Adm. Harry D.

Civil Guard: Force structure, 42 [Pg. 42 is part of Doc. 18], 131 [Pg. 131 includes portions of Doc. 48 and Doc. 49]-132 [Pg. 132 includes portions of Doc. 49 and Doc. 50]

Improvements in, 78 [Pg. 78 is part of Doc. 26], 297 [Pg. 297 is part of Doc. 123]

Training for, 266 [Pg. 266 is part of Doc. 107]

Civilian Irregular Defense Group (CIOG) program (Switchback), 21 [Pg. 21 is part of Doc. 11], 36 [Pg. 36 is part of Doc. 18], 37 [Pg. 37 is part of Doc. 18], 38 [Pg. 38 is part of Doc. 18], 134 [Pg. 134 is part of Doc. 51] Absorption into army and police, 181 [Pg. 181 is part of Doc. 67]

Air support for, 146 [Pg. 146 is part of Doc. 56]-147 [Pg. 147 is part of Doc. 56]

Force structure, 42 [Pg. 42 is part of Doc. 18]

Funding for, 47 [Pg. 47 is part of Doc. 18], 331 [Pg. 331 is part of Doc. 136]

Improvements in, 298 [Pg. 298 is part of Doc. 123]

Recruits for, 331 [Pg. 331 is part of Doc. 136]

Strategic concept of, 40 [Pg. 40 is part of Doc. 18], 331 [Pg. 331 is part of Doc. 136]-332 [Pg. 332 is part of Doc. 136]

Training for, 62 [Pg. 62 is part of Doc. 19]

U.S. policy on, 330 [Pg. 330 includes portions of Doc. 135 and Doc. 136]-333 [Pg. 333 includes portions of Doc. 136 and Doc. 137]

Clifton, Maj. Gen. Chester V., 2 [Pg. 2 is part of Doc. 1], 606 [Pg. 606 includes portions of Doc. 269 and Doc. 270]

Co Son Mon sect, 409 [Pg. 409 includes portions of Doc. 183 and Doc. 184]-410 [Pg. 410 is part of Doc. 184], 411 [Pg. 411 is part of Doc. 185]-412 [Pg. 412 is part of Doc. 185]

Coffin, Frank M., 201 [Pg. 201 is part of Doc. 78], 315 [Pg. 315 is part of Doc. 132]

Colby, William, 327 [Pg. 327 includes portions of Doc. 134 and Doc. 135], 569 [Pg. 569 includes portions of Doc. 255 and Doc. 256], 660 [Pg. 660 is part of Doc. 303] Martial law, U.S. response to, 601 [Pg. 601 includes portions of Doc. 264 and Doc. 265], 602 [Pg. 602 includes portions of Doc. 265 and Doc. 266]

Montagnards, arming and training of, 104 [Pg. 104 is part of Doc. 32]

Special Group for Counterinsurgency, 103 [Pg. 103 includes portions of Doc. 31 and Doc. 32], 104 [Pg. 104 is part of Doc. 32], 279 [Pg. 279 is part of Doc. 113], 389 [Pg. 389 includes portions of Doc. 170 and Doc. 171]

Collins, Gen. J. Lawton, 143n [Pg. 143 is part of Doc. 54], 623 [Pg. 623 is part of Doc. 277]

Commercial Import Program (CIP), 360 [Pg. 360 includes portions of Doc. 155 and Doc. 156]-362 [Pg. 362 includes portions of Doc. 156 and Doc. 157], 544 [Pg. 544 is part of Doc. 240]

Communist insurgency (see also Counterinsurgency operations): Aerial flights, 168 [Pg. 168 is part of Doc. 64]

Ap Bac, battle of, 1 [Pg. 1 is part of Doc. 1]-2 [Pg. 2 is part of Doc. 1]

Attacks in 1963, number of, 568 [Pg. 568 is part of Doc. 255]

Buddhist crisis and, 346 [Pg. 346 includes portions of Doc. 145 and Doc. 146]

Casualties, 20 [Pg. 20 is part of Doc. 11]

Chinese policy on, 80 [Pg. 80 is part of Doc. 26], 421 [Pg. 421 is part of Doc. 188]-422 [Pg. 422 includes portions of Doc. 188 and Doc. 189]

CIA assessment of, 20 [Pg. 20 is part of Doc. 11]-21 [Pg. 21 is part of Doc. 11]

Coup against Diem, possible response to, 407 [Pg. 407 is part of Doc. 183]

Decline in activity, 119 [Pg. 119 is part of Doc. 41], 150 [Pg. 150 includes portions of Doc. 58 and Doc. 59]

Front groups, use of, 109 [Pg. 109 is part of Doc. 35]

Future developments, 108 [Pg. 108 includes portions of Doc. 34 and Doc. 35]-109 [Pg. 109 is part of Doc. 35]

Helicopters used in, 199 [Pg. 199 is part of Doc. 77]

Infiltration, evidence of, 104 [Pg. 104 is part of Doc. 32], 111 [Pg. 111 is part of Doc. 35]-112 [Pg. 112 includes portions of Doc. 35 and Doc. 36], 202 [Pg. 202 is part of Doc. 78]-203 [Pg. 203 includes portions of Doc. 78 and Doc. 79] Jorden’s report on, 165 [Pg. 165 includes portions of Doc. 63 and Doc. 64]-168 [Pg. 168 is part of Doc. 64]

Infiltration capabilities, 90 [Pg. 90 is part of Doc. 26]-91 [Pg. 91 is part of Doc. 26], 109 [Pg. 109 is part of Doc. 35]-110 [Pg. 110 is part of Doc. 35]

Infiltration routes, 30 [Pg. 30 includes portions of Doc. 14 and Doc. 15]-31 [Pg. 31 is part of Doc. 15], 51 [Pg. 51 is part of Doc. 19], 454 [Pg. 454 is part of Doc. 206]-455 [Pg. 455 includes portions of Doc. 206 and Doc. 207], 463 [Pg. 463 is part of Doc. 207]

Laos, drive to conquer, 327 [Pg. 327 includes portions of Doc. 134 and Doc. 135]-330 [Pg. 330 includes portions of Doc. 135 and Doc. 136]

Massive intervention, possible, 112 [Pg. 112 includes portions of Doc. 35 and Doc. 36], 137 [Pg. 137 is part of Doc. 52]-138 [Pg. 138 is part of Doc. 52]

Military development, 21 [Pg. 21 is part of Doc. 11]-22 [Pg. 22 is part of Doc. 11], 50 [Pg. 50 is part of Doc. 19]-51 [Pg. 51 is part of Doc. 19]

Mobile warfare, 20 [Pg. 20 is part of Doc. 11]

Montagnards and, 166 [Pg. 166 is part of Doc. 64]-167 [Pg. 167 is part of Doc. 64]

Morale problems, 104 [Pg. 104 is part of Doc. 32]

NIE on, 233 [Pg. 233 is part of Doc. 94]

Political activities, 21 [Pg. 21 is part of Doc. 11], 239 [Pg. 239 is part of Doc. 96]

Sanctuaries in Laos and Cambodia, 92 [Pg. 92 is part of Doc. 26]

Shortages of food and medicine, 80 [Pg. 80 is part of Doc. 26]-81 [Pg. 81 is part of Doc. 26]

Sophisticated weaponry, 168 [Pg. 168 is part of Doc. 64]

Soviet policy on, 421 [Pg. 421 is part of Doc. 188]-422 [Pg. 422 includes portions of Doc. 188 and Doc. 189]

Special forces, 327 [Pg. 327 includes portions of Doc. 134 and Doc. 135]-328 [Pg. 328 is part of Doc. 135]

Strategic hamlets, targeting of, 439 [Pg. 439 is part of Doc. 197]

Strategy changes, 71 [Pg. 71 is part of Doc. 25]

Terrorism, 200 [Pg. 200 is part of Doc. 77]

Thompson’s assessment of, 199 [Pg. 199 is part of Doc. 77]

Troop strength, 5 [Pg. 5 includes portions of Doc. 2 and Doc. 3]-6 [Pg. 6 is part of Doc. 3], 20 [Pg. 20 is part of Doc. 11], 51 [Pg. 51 is part of Doc. 19], 194 [Pg. 194 is part of Doc. 73], 464 [Pg. 464 is part of Doc. 207]

Villagers’ attitudes toward, 51 [Pg. 51 is part of Doc. 19]-52 [Pg. 52 is part of Doc. 19], 53 [Pg. 53 is part of Doc. 19]

Villages controlled by, 21 [Pg. 21 is part of Doc. 11]

Communist surrender (Chieu Hoi) program, 55 [Pg. 55 is part of Doc. 19], 390 [Pg. 390 is part of Doc. 171] Krolak’s assessment of, 461 [Pg. 461 is part of Doc. 207]-462 [Pg. 462 is part of Doc. 207]

Loudspeaker operations, 266 [Pg. 266 is part of Doc. 107]

Mansfield report and, 153 [Pg. 153 is part of Doc. 60]

Number of returnees, 462 [Pg. 462 is part of Doc. 207]

Plan for, 18 [Pg. 18 is part of Doc. 10]-19 [Pg. 19 includes portions of Doc. 10 and Doc. 11]

Proc1amation on, 229 [Pg. 229 includes portions of Doc. 91 and Doc. 92]

Redefect issue, 461 [Pg. 461 is part of Doc. 207]-462 [Pg. 462 is part of Doc. 207]

Thompson’s assessment of, 194 [Pg. 194 is part of Doc. 73], 200 [Pg. 200 is part of Doc. 77]

Comprehensive Plan for South Vietnam (CPSVN): Costs of, 181 [Pg. 181 is part of Doc. 67]-182 [Pg. 182 is part of Doc. 67]

Country Team assessments of, 148 [Pg. 148 is part of Doc. 57]-149 [Pg. 149 includes portions of Doc. 57 and Doc. 58], 178 [Pg. 178 includes portions of Doc. 66 and Doc. 67]-183 [Pg. 183 includes portions of Doc. 67 and Doc. 68]

Felt’s assessment of, 35 [Pg. 35 includes portions of Doc. 17 and Doc. 18]-37 [Pg. 37 is part of Doc. 18]

Honolulu Conference discussion re, 267 [Pg. 267 is part of Doc. 107]-268 [Pg. 268 is part of Doc. 107]

JCS assessment of, 133 [Pg. 133 includes portions of Doc. 50 and Doc. 51]-136 [Pg. 136 includes portions of Doc. 51 and Doc. 52]

Text of, 37 [Pg. 37 is part of Doc. 18]-49 [Pg. 49 includes portions of Doc. 18 and Doc. 19]

Wheeler Mission endorsement of, 93 [Pg. 93 is part of Doc. 26]

Conein, Col. Lucien, 642 [Pg. 642 is part of Doc. 290], 643 [Pg. 643 includes portions of Doc. 290 and Doc. 291], 653 [Pg. 653 includes portions of Doc. 298 and Doc. 299]-654 [Pg. 654 is part of Doc. 299]

Congress, U.S.: Acts and resolutions: P.L. 480, 216 [Pg. 216 includes portions of Doc. 84 and Doc. 85], 236 [Pg. 236 is part of Doc. 95]

Conlon, Thomas E, 589 [Pg. 589 is part of Doc. 259]-590 [Pg. 590 includes portions of Doc. 259 and Doc. 260]

Cooper, Chester L., 202 [Pg. 202 is part of Doc. 78]

Council on Foreign Relations, 467 [Pg. 467 is part of Doc. 208]

Counterinsurgency operations (see also Civilian Irregular Defense Group program; Communist insurgency; Comprehensive Plan for South Vietnam; Crop destruction program; Defoliant operations; Joint Counterinsurgency Fund; Strategic hamlet program; U.S. military assistance to Vietnam; U.S. military involvement in Vietnam), 291n [Pg. 291 is part of Doc. 120] Air power used in (see also Farmgate operation), 4 [Pg. 4 is part of Doc. 2] Anthis assessments of, 189n [Pg. 189 includes portions of Doc. 71 and Doc. 72], 268 [Pg. 268 is part of Doc. 107]-269 [Pg. 269 is part of Doc. 107]

Bombing of populated places, 131 [Pg. 131 includes portions of Doc. 48 and Doc. 49]

Casualties caused by, 249 [Pg. 249 is part of Doc. 100]-250 [Pg. 250 is part of Doc. 100], 253 [Pg. 253 is part of Doc. 100]

Country Team assessment of, 247 [Pg. 247 includes portions of Doc. 99 and Doc. 100]-253 [Pg. 253 is part of Doc. 100]

Flare missions, 268 [Pg. 268 is part of Doc. 107]-269 [Pg. 269 is part of Doc. 107]

Harkins’ assessment of, 186 [Pg. 186 includes portions of Doc. 70 and Doc. 71]-189 [Pg. 189 includes portions of Doc. 71 and Doc. 72]

Helicopter operations, support for, 10 [Pg. 10 is part of Doc. 4]-11 [Pg. 11 is part of Doc. 4]

National Campaign Plan and, 33 [Pg. 33 is part of Doc. 16], 146 [Pg. 146 is part of Doc. 56]

Political consequences, 56 [Pg. 56 is part of Doc. 19]-57 [Pg. 57 is part of Doc. 19]

Pros and cons of, 175 [Pg. 175 is part of Doc. 66]-177 [Pg. 177 is part of Doc. 66], 188 [Pg. 188 is part of Doc. 71], 250 [Pg. 250 is part of Doc. 100]-252 [Pg. 252 is part of Doc. 100]

State Department assessment of, 173 [Pg. 173 includes portions of Doc. 65 and Doc. 66]-178 [Pg. 178 includes portions of Doc. 66 and Doc. 67]

Strikes, types of, 15 [Pg. 15 is part of Doc. 7]

Tactical missions, 195 [Pg. 195 includes portions of Doc. 73, Doc. 74, and Doc. 75], 200 [Pg. 200 is part of Doc. 77]

Target selection, 15 [Pg. 15 is part of Doc. 7], 248 [Pg. 248 is part of Doc. 100]-249 [Pg. 249 is part of Doc. 100], 251 [Pg. 251 is part of Doc. 100]-252 [Pg. 252 is part of Doc. 100]

Airlift and air logistics, 87 [Pg. 87 is part of Doc. 26]-88 [Pg. 88 is part of Doc. 26], 92 [Pg. 92 is part of Doc. 26]

Ap Bac, battle of, 1 [Pg. 1 is part of Doc. 1]-3 [Pg. 3 includes portions of Doc. 1 and Doc. 2], 98 [Pg. 98 includes portions of Doc. 29 and Doc. 30]

Attacks in 1963, number of, 568 [Pg. 568 is part of Doc. 255]

Border control and surveillance, 167 [Pg. 167 is part of Doc. 64]-168 [Pg. 168 is part of Doc. 64], 267 [Pg. 267 is part of Doc. 107]

Buddhist crisis, impact of, 460 [Pg. 460 is part of Doc. 207]-461 [Pg. 461 is part of Doc. 207], 496 [Pg. 496 includes portions of Doc. 224, Doc. 225, and Doc. 226], 551 [Pg. 551 is part of Doc. 244]-552 [Pg. 552 is part of Doc. 244], 661 [Pg. 661 is part of Doc. 303]

Ca Mau Peninsula operation, 12 [Pg. 12 is part of Doc. 5]

“Cautious” approach of Vietnamese, 113 [Pg. 113 is part of Doc. 36]

CIA assessments of, 19 [Pg. 19 includes portions of Doc. 10 and Doc. 11]-20 [Pg. 20 is part of Doc. 11], 551 [Pg. 551 is part of Doc. 244]-552 [Pg. 552 is part of Doc. 244]

CINCPAC control of, 7 [Pg. 7 includes portions of Doc. 3 and Doc. 4]-8 [Pg. 8 is part of Doc. 4], 11 [Pg. 11 is part of Doc. 4]

Civilian casualties, 174 [Pg. 174 is part of Doc. 66], 175 [Pg. 175 is part of Doc. 66], 177 [Pg. 177 is part of Doc. 66], 187 [Pg. 187 is part of Doc. 71], 249 [Pg. 249 is part of Doc. 100]-250 [Pg. 250 is part of Doc. 100], 253 [Pg. 253 is part of Doc. 100]

Clear and hold operations, 9 [Pg. 9 is part of Doc. 4], 12 [Pg. 12 is part of Doc. 5], 21 [Pg. 21 is part of Doc. 11], 55 [Pg. 55 is part of Doc. 19]

Communications system, 61 [Pg. 61 is part of Doc. 19]-62 [Pg. 62 is part of Doc. 19], 297 [Pg. 297 is part of Doc. 123]

Economic and social projects, funding for (see also Joint Counterinsurgency Fund), 280 [Pg. 280 includes portions of Doc. 113 and Doc. 114]-281 [Pg. 281 is part of Doc. 114], 289 [Pg. 289 is part of Doc. 119]-290 [Pg. 290 is part of Doc. 119]

Explosion Plan. See National Campaign Plan below.

Government’s hindrance of, 21 [Pg. 21 is part of Doc. 11]

Guerrilla tactics, 191 [Pg. 191 is part of Doc. 72]

Harkins’s assessments of, 118 [Pg. 118 is part of Doc. 41]-122 [Pg. 122 includes portions of Doc. 41 and Doc. 42], 186 [Pg. 186 includes portions of Doc. 70 and Doc. 71],-189 [Pg. 189 includes portions of Doc. 71 and Doc. 72], 296 [Pg. 296 includes portions of Doc. 122 and Doc. 123]-300 [Pg. 300 is part of Doc. 123]

Hit and withdraw operations, 55 [Pg. 55 is part of Doc. 19]

Infiltration, actions against, 110 [Pg. 110 is part of Doc. 35]-111 [Pg. 111 is part of Doc. 35], 112 [Pg. 112 includes portions of Doc. 35 and Doc. 36] Thompson’s assessment of, 201 [Pg. 201 is part of Doc. 78]

Intelligence capabilities, 296 [Pg. 296 includes portions of Doc. 122 and Doc. 123]-297 [Pg. 297 is part of Doc. 123]

Krolak’s assessment of, 103 [Pg. 103 includes portions of Doc. 31 and Doc. 32]-104 [Pg. 104 is part of Doc. 32]

Large-scale operations, 56 [Pg. 56 is part of Doc. 19]

Long-range patrolling, 56 [Pg. 56 is part of Doc. 19], 202 [Pg. 202 is part of Doc. 78]

Mackaday Zone 0 operations, 14 [Pg. 14 is part of Doc. 6]

“Maginot Line” defensive measure, 225 [Pg. 225 includes portions of Doc. 88 and Doc. 89]

Martial law and, 608 [Pg. 608 is part of Doc. 270]

Mekong Delta situation, 584 [Pg. 584 is part of Doc. 257], 589 [Pg. 589 is part of Doc. 259]-590 [Pg. 590 includes portions of Doc. 259 and Doc. 260]

Military and civilian activities, coordination of, 55 [Pg. 55 is part of Doc. 19]

Mobility concerns, 297 [Pg. 297 is part of Doc. 123]

Movement and population control measures, 129 [Pg. 129 includes portions of Doc. 46 and Doc. 47]-130 [Pg. 130 includes portions of Doc. 47 and Doc. 48], 141 [Pg. 141 is part of Doc. 53]-142 [Pg. 142 includes portions of Doc. 53 and Doc. 54], 194 [Pg. 194 is part of Doc. 73], 568 [Pg. 568 is part of Doc. 255]

Napalm use, 12 [Pg. 12 is part of Doc. 5]-13 [Pg. 13 is part of Doc. 5]

National Campaign Plan (NCP), 13 [Pg. 13 is part of Doc. 5], 16 [Pg. 16 includes portions of Doc. 7 and Doc. 8], 118 [Pg. 118 is part of Doc. 41], 120 [Pg. 120 is part of Doc. 41], 121 [Pg. 121 is part of Doc. 41], 134 [Pg. 134 is part of Doc. 51], 267 [Pg. 267 is part of Doc. 107], 552 [Pg. 552 is part of Doc. 244] Air support for, 33 [Pg. 33 is part of Doc. 16], 146 [Pg. 146 is part of Doc. 56]

Date advancement, proposed, 328 [Pg. 328 is part of Doc. 135], 329 [Pg. 329 is part of Doc. 135]

Delta strategy, 590 [Pg. 590 includes portions of Doc. 259 and Doc. 260]

Phase II implementation, 468 [Pg. 468 is part of Doc. 209]-470 [Pg. 470 includes portions of Doc. 209 and Doc. 210]

Progress reports, 458 [Pg. 458 is part of Doc. 207]-460 [Pg. 460 is part of Doc. 207]

Strategy of, 39 [Pg. 39 is part of Doc. 18], 84 [Pg. 84 is part of Doc. 26]

Thuan’s assessment of, 463 [Pg. 463 is part of Doc. 207]-464 [Pg. 464 is part of Doc. 207]

Wheeler Mission report on, 83 [Pg. 83 is part of Doc. 26]-86 [Pg. 86 is part of Doc. 26], 92 [Pg. 92 is part of Doc. 26]

NIE on, 233 [Pg. 233 is part of Doc. 94]-234 [Pg. 234 is part of Doc. 94]

Overall plan, lack of, 53 [Pg. 53 is part of Doc. 19]-54 [Pg. 54 is part of Doc. 19]

Patrol-type operations, 460 [Pg. 460 is part of Doc. 207]

Plei Mrong operation, 14 [Pg. 14 is part of Doc. 6]

Political activities, 20 [Pg. 20 is part of Doc. 11]-21 [Pg. 21 is part of Doc. 11]

Progress made by, 49 [Pg. 49 includes portions of Doc. 18 and Doc. 19]-50 [Pg. 50 is part of Doc. 19], 306 [Pg. 306 includes portions of Doc. 125 and Doc. 126]-307 [Pg. 307 includes portions of Doc. 126 and Doc. 127]

“Security for villages” strategy, 189 [Pg. 189 includes portions of Doc. 71 and Doc. 72]-192 [Pg. 192 is part of Doc. 72]

Strategic concept of, 52 [Pg. 52 is part of Doc. 19]-53 [Pg. 53 is part of Doc. 19]

Success, measurement of, 202 [Pg. 202 is part of Doc. 78]

Sweep-type operations, 4 [Pg. 4 is part of Doc. 2], 12 [Pg. 12 is part of Doc. 5]

Tactical operations, 459 [Pg. 459 is part of Doc. 207]

Task Force assessment of, 568 [Pg. 568 is part of Doc. 255]-569 [Pg. 569 includes portions of Doc. 255 and Doc. 256]

Tay Ninh operations, 12 [Pg. 12 is part of Doc. 5], 14 [Pg. 14 is part of Doc. 6]

Thompson’s assessments of, 199 [Pg. 199 is part of Doc. 77], 201 [Pg. 201 is part of Doc. 78]

Timespan for, 70 [Pg. 70 is part of Doc. 25]

Typical operation, 8 [Pg. 8 is part of Doc. 4]-9 [Pg. 9 is part of Doc. 4]

Victory, prospects for, 608 [Pg. 608 is part of Doc. 270]-609 [Pg. 609 is part of Doc. 270]

Weapons captured and lost, 20 [Pg. 20 is part of Doc. 11], 50 [Pg. 50 is part of Doc. 19], 568 [Pg. 568 is part of Doc. 255]-569 [Pg. 569 includes portions of Doc. 255 and Doc. 256]

Weapons systems for, 298 [Pg. 298 is part of Doc. 123]

Coup against Diem (see also Change of government, possible under Vietnam, Republic of): Assassination as element of, 583 [Pg. 583 is part of Doc. 256]

Buddhist crisis and, 405 [Pg. 405 is part of Doc. 183], 406 [Pg. 406 is part of Doc. 183]-408 [Pg. 408 is part of Doc. 183], 473 [Pg. 473 includes portions of Doc. 211 and Doc. 212],-476 [Pg. 476 is part of Doc. 212], 483 [Pg. 483 includes portions of Doc. 216 and Doc. 217]-485 [Pg. 485 is part of Doc. 217], 523 [Pg. 523 includes portions of Doc. 233 and Doc. 234]-524 [Pg. 524 is part of Doc. 234], 554 [Pg. 554 is part of Doc. 246]-555 [Pg. 555 is part of Doc. 246]

Chuong’s position, 143 [Pg. 143 is part of Doc. 54], 665 [Pg. 665 includes portions of Doc. 303 and Doc. 304]-666 [Pg. 666 is part of Doc. 304]

CIA assessments of, 473 [Pg. 473 includes portions of Doc. 211 and Doc. 212]-476 [Pg. 476 is part of Doc. 212], 575 [Pg. 575 is part of Doc. 256]-583 [Pg. 583 is part of Doc. 256], 602 [Pg. 602 includes portions of Doc. 265 and Doc. 266]-603 [Pg. 603 is part of Doc. 266]

Civilian plan for, 658 [Pg. 658 includes portions of Doc. 301 and Doc. 302]

Communist response, possible, 407 [Pg. 407 is part of Doc. 183]

Generals’ plan, 474 [Pg. 474 is part of Doc. 212], 475 [Pg. 475 is part of Doc. 212], 491 [Pg. 491 is part of Doc. 220], 653 [Pg. 653 includes portions of Doc. 298 and Doc. 299]-655 [Pg. 655 includes portions of Doc. 299 and Doc. 300], 658 [Pg. 658 includes portions of Doc. 301 and Doc. 302] CIA reports on, 614 [Pg. 614 includes portions of Doc. 274 and Doc. 275]-620 [Pg. 620 includes portions of Doc. 275 and Doc. 276], 633 [Pg. 633 is part of Doc. 284]-634 [Pg. 634 includes portions of Doc. 284 and Doc. 285], 642 [Pg. 642 is part of Doc. 290]-643 [Pg. 643 includes portions of Doc. 290 and Doc. 291], 647 [Pg. 647 is part of Doc. 294], 653 [Pg. 653 includes portions of Doc. 298 and Doc. 299]-655 [Pg. 655 includes portions of Doc. 299 and Doc. 300], 671 [Pg. 671 includes portions of Doc. 306 and Doc. 307]

Combat, possibility of, 671 [Pg. 671 includes portions of Doc. 306 and Doc. 307]

Don’s account of, 618 [Pg. 618 is part of Doc. 275]-620 [Pg. 620 includes portions of Doc. 275 and Doc. 276]

Forces in Saigon area for, 667 [Pg. 667 is part of Doc. 305], 668 [Pg. 668 includes portions of Doc. 305 and Doc. 306]-670 [Pg. 670 is part of Doc. 306]

Lodge-Harkins position, 664 [Pg. 664 is part of Doc. 303], 667 [Pg. 667 is part of Doc. 305], 668 [Pg. 668 includes portions of Doc. 305 and Doc. 306]-670 [Pg. 670 is part of Doc. 306]

Military support for, 663 [Pg. 663 is part of Doc. 303]-664 [Pg. 664 is part of Doc. 303]

Reliability and alignment of military leaders, 640 [Pg. 640 is part of Doc. 289], 646 [Pg. 646 is part of Doc. 293], 648 [Pg. 648 is part of Doc. 295], 650 [Pg. 650 includes portions of Doc. 296 and Doc. 297]-651 [Pg. 651 includes portions of Doc. 297 and Doc. 298], 656 [Pg. 656 is part of Doc. 300]-657 [Pg. 657 includes portions of Doc. 300 and Doc. 301], 660 [Pg. 660 is part of Doc. 303]

Stalemate, possible outcome of, 667 [Pg. 667 is part of Doc. 305], 670 [Pg. 670 is part of Doc. 306]

Success, chances of, 663 [Pg. 663 is part of Doc. 303], 664 [Pg. 664 is part of Doc. 303]-665 [Pg. 665 includes portions of Doc. 303 and Doc. 304], 667 [Pg. 667 is part of Doc. 305], 668 [Pg. 668 includes portions of Doc. 305 and Doc. 306]

Successor question, 641 [Pg. 641 is part of Doc. 289], 646 [Pg. 646 is part of Doc. 293], 648 [Pg. 648 is part of Doc. 295], 654 [Pg. 654 is part of Doc. 299], 657 [Pg. 657 includes portions of Doc. 300 and Doc. 301]

Unpreparedness of Generals, 647 [Pg. 647 is part of Doc. 294], 649 [Pg. 649 is part of Doc. 296]

U.S. assistance to Generals’ families in case of failure, 647 [Pg. 647 is part of Doc. 294], 655 [Pg. 655 includes portions of Doc. 299 and Doc. 300]

U.S. contacts with Generals, 642 [Pg. 642 is part of Doc. 290]-643 [Pg. 643 includes portions of Doc. 290 and Doc. 291], 647 [Pg. 647 is part of Doc. 294], 653 [Pg. 653 includes portions of Doc. 298 and Doc. 299]-655 [Pg. 655 includes portions of Doc. 299 and Doc. 300]

U.S. “direct support” issue, 629 [Pg. 629 is part of Doc. 281], 640 [Pg. 640 is part of Doc. 289], 646 [Pg. 646 is part of Doc. 293], 648 [Pg. 648 is part of Doc. 295], 656 [Pg. 656 is part of Doc. 300]

U.S. evacuation planning, 648 [Pg. 648 is part of Doc. 295], 655 [Pg. 655 includes portions of Doc. 299 and Doc. 300]

U.S. role, concealment of, 664 [Pg. 664 is part of Doc. 303], 672 [Pg. 672 includes portions of Doc. 307 and Doc. 308]

U.S. support for, question of, 628 [Pg. 628 includes portions of Doc. 280 and Doc. 281]-631 [Pg. 631 is part of Doc. 282], 633 [Pg. 633 is part of Doc. 284]-635 [Pg. 635 includes portions of Doc. 285 and Doc. 286], 638 [Pg. 638 is part of Doc. 289]-641 [Pg. 641 is part of Doc. 289], 657 [Pg. 657 includes portions of Doc. 300 and Doc. 301]-660 [Pg. 660 is part of Doc. 303], 663 [Pg. 663 is part of Doc. 303]-665 [Pg. 665 includes portions of Doc. 303 and Doc. 304], 667 [Pg. 667 is part of Doc. 305]-670 [Pg. 670 is part of Doc. 306], 675 [Pg. 675 includes portions of Doc. 308 and Doc. 309]

Inevitability of, 671 [Pg. 671 includes portions of Doc. 306 and Doc. 307]-672 [Pg. 672 includes portions of Doc. 307 and Doc. 308]

Loyalties of the armed services and, 475 [Pg. 475 is part of Doc. 212]-476 [Pg. 476 is part of Doc. 212], 574 [Pg. 574 is part of Doc. 256]-578 [Pg. 578 is part of Doc. 256]

Nhu as planner of, 488 [Pg. 488 includes portions of Doc. 219 and Doc. 220]-491 [Pg. 491 is part of Doc. 220], 572 [Pg. 572 is part of Doc. 256]

Nhu’sexpectation for, 603 [Pg. 603 is part of Doc. 266]

People involved in, CIA assessment of, 582 [Pg. 582 is part of Doc. 256]-583 [Pg. 583 is part of Doc. 256]

Tuyen group, 474 [Pg. 474 is part of Doc. 212]-475 [Pg. 475 is part of Doc. 212]

U.S. evacuation planning, 560 [Pg. 560 includes portions of Doc. 249 and Doc. 250], 648 [Pg. 648 is part of Doc. 295], 655 [Pg. 655 includes portions of Doc. 299 and Doc. 300]

U.S. policy re, 322 [Pg. 322 is part of Doc. 133], 449 [Pg. 449 includes portions of Doc. 202 and Doc. 203], 452 [Pg. 452 is part of Doc. 205]-453 [Pg. 453 is part of Doc. 205], 523 [Pg. 523 includes portions of Doc. 233 and Doc. 234]-524 [Pg. 524 is part of Doc. 234], 528 [Pg. 528 includes portions of Doc. 236 and Doc. 237], 529 [Pg. 529 includes portions of Doc. 237 and Doc. 238], 555 [Pg. 555 is part of Doc. 246]

U.S. prevention of, proposed, 192 [Pg. 192 is part of Doc. 72]

U.S. response: CIA position re, 577 [Pg. 577 is part of Doc. 256]-578 [Pg. 578 is part of Doc. 256]

Implications of, 408 [Pg. 408 is part of Doc. 183]-409 [Pg. 409 includes portions of Doc. 183 and Doc. 184]

Vietnamese public support for, 650n [Pg. 650 includes portions of Doc. 296 and Doc. 297]

Coup against Diem (1960), 480 [Pg. 480 is part of Doc. 214]

Couve de Murville, Maurice, 215 [Pg. 215 includes portions of Doc. 83 and Doc. 84]

Crop destruction program (see also Defoliant operations): Authority over, 164 [Pg. 164 is part of Doc. 63], 242 [Pg. 242 is part of Doc. 96], 245 [Pg. 245 includes portions of Doc. 97 and Doc. 98]-246 [Pg. 246 includes portions of Doc. 98 and Doc. 99], 274 [Pg. 274 includes portions of Doc. 109 and Doc. 110]

Chemicals used in, 226 [Pg. 226 includes portions of Doc. 89 and Doc. 90]

Compensation program, 239 [Pg. 239 is part of Doc. 96]-240 [Pg. 240 is part of Doc. 96]

Continuation of, U.S. decision re, 241 [Pg. 241 is part of Doc. 96]-243 [Pg. 243 includes portions of Doc. 96 and Doc. 97], 245 [Pg. 245 includes portions of Doc. 97 and Doc. 98]-246 [Pg. 246 includes portions of Doc. 98 and Doc. 99]

Future operations, 163 [Pg. 163 is part of Doc. 63]-164 [Pg. 164 is part of Doc. 63]

Guidelines for, 274 [Pg. 274 includes portions of Doc. 109 and Doc. 110]-275 [Pg. 275 includes portions of Doc. 110 and Doc. 111]

Military effectiveness of, 238 [Pg. 238 is part of Doc. 96]-239 [Pg. 239 is part of Doc. 96], 241 [Pg. 241 is part of Doc. 96]-242 [Pg. 242 is part of Doc. 96]

Political repercussions, 164 [Pg. 164 is part of Doc. 63], 231 [Pg. 231 is part of Doc. 93], 239 [Pg. 239 is part of Doc. 96]-241 [Pg. 241 is part of Doc. 96], 242 [Pg. 242 is part of Doc. 96]

Reductions in, proposed, 304 [Pg. 304 is part of Doc. 125]

Results, reports on, 149 [Pg. 149 includes portions of Doc. 57 and Doc. 58]-150 [Pg. 150 includes portions of Doc. 58 and Doc. 59], 162 [Pg. 162 includes portions of Doc. 62 and Doc. 63]-163 [Pg. 163 is part of Doc. 63], 164 [Pg. 164 is part of Doc. 63]-165 [Pg. 165 includes portions of Doc. 63 and Doc. 64], 230 [Pg. 230 is part of Doc. 93]-232 [Pg. 232 includes portions of Doc. 93 and Doc. 94], 548 [Pg. 548 is part of Doc. 242]

State Department assessment of, 237 [Pg. 237 is part of Doc. 96]-243 [Pg. 243 includes portions of Doc. 96 and Doc. 97]

Target selection, 231 [Pg. 231 is part of Doc. 93]

Test operations, 226 [Pg. 226 includes portions of Doc. 89 and Doc. 90]

Thompson’s assessment of, 199 [Pg. 199 is part of Doc. 77]

U.S. information policy on, 144 [Pg. 144 is part of Doc. 55]-145 [Pg. 145 includes portions of Doc. 55 and Doc. 56], 240 [Pg. 240 is part of Doc. 96]-241 [Pg. 241 is part of Doc. 96]

Vietnamese requests re, 403 [Pg. 403 is part of Doc. 181]

Dang, Province Chief, 278 [Pg. 278 is part of Doc. 112], 284 [Pg. 284 is part of Doc. 116], 285 [Pg. 285 includes portions of Doc. 116 and Doc. 117], 286 [Pg. 286 is part of Doc. 117], 311 [Pg. 311 is part of Doc. 129]

Dang Duc Khoi, 471 [Pg. 471 is part of Doc. 210], 530 [Pg. 530 is part of Doc. 238], 572 [Pg. 572 is part of Doc. 256]

De Gaulle, Charles, 392n [Pg. 392 is part of Doc. 173]

Defense, U.S. Department of (see also Joint Chiefs of Staff, U.S.; McNamara, Robert S.; Military Assistance Command, Vietnam): Farmgate operation, augmentation of, 34n [Pg. 34 includes portions of Doc. 16 and Doc. 17]

Montagnards, arming and training of, 104 [Pg. 104 is part of Doc. 32]

U.S. military assistance to Vietnam, jets, provision of, 26 [Pg. 26 includes portions of Doc. 12 and Doc. 13]-27 [Pg. 27 is part of Doc. 13]

U.S. military involvement in Vietnam, force reductions, proposed, 244 [Pg. 244 is part of Doc. 97]-245 [Pg. 245 includes portions of Doc. 97 and Doc. 98]

Defoliant operations (see also Crop destruction program): Authority over, 164 [Pg. 164 is part of Doc. 63], 242 [Pg. 242 is part of Doc. 96], 245 [Pg. 245 includes portions of Doc. 97 and Doc. 98]-246 [Pg. 246 includes portions of Doc. 98 and Doc. 99], 274n [Pg. 274 includes portions of Doc. 109 and Doc. 110]

Chemical warfare issue, 272 [Pg. 272 includes portions of Doc. 108 and Doc. 109]-274 [Pg. 274 includes portions of Doc. 109 and Doc. 110]

Chemicals used in, 226 [Pg. 226 includes portions of Doc. 89 and Doc. 90]

Compensation program, 239 [Pg. 239 is part of Doc. 96]-240 [Pg. 240 is part of Doc. 96]

Continuation of, U.S. decision re, 241 [Pg. 241 is part of Doc. 96]-243 [Pg. 243 includes portions of Doc. 96 and Doc. 97], 245 [Pg. 245 includes portions of Doc. 97 and Doc. 98]-246 [Pg. 246 includes portions of Doc. 98 and Doc. 99]

Future operations, 163 [Pg. 163 is part of Doc. 63]-164 [Pg. 164 is part of Doc. 63]

Guidelines for, 274 [Pg. 274 includes portions of Doc. 109 and Doc. 110]-275 [Pg. 275 includes portions of Doc. 110 and Doc. 111]

Military effectiveness of, 237 [Pg. 237 is part of Doc. 96]-238 [Pg. 238 is part of Doc. 96]

Political repercussions, 164 [Pg. 164 is part of Doc. 63], 231 [Pg. 231 is part of Doc. 93], 239 [Pg. 239 is part of Doc. 96]-241 [Pg. 241 is part of Doc. 96], 242 [Pg. 242 is part of Doc. 96]

Railroad security and, 231 [Pg. 231 is part of Doc. 93]

Reductions in, proposed, 304 [Pg. 304 is part of Doc. 125]

Results, reports on, 149 [Pg. 149 includes portions of Doc. 57 and Doc. 58]-150 [Pg. 150 includes portions of Doc. 58 and Doc. 59], 162 [Pg. 162 includes portions of Doc. 62 and Doc. 63]-163 [Pg. 163 is part of Doc. 63], 164 [Pg. 164 is part of Doc. 63]-165 [Pg. 165 includes portions of Doc. 63 and Doc. 64], 230 [Pg. 230 is part of Doc. 93]-232 [Pg. 232 includes portions of Doc. 93 and Doc. 94], 548 [Pg. 548 is part of Doc. 242]-549 [Pg. 549 is part of Doc. 242]

State Department assessment of, 237 [Pg. 237 is part of Doc. 96]-243 [Pg. 243 includes portions of Doc. 96 and Doc. 97]

Target selection, 231 [Pg. 231 is part of Doc. 93]

Test operations, 206 [Pg. 206 includes portions of Doc. 79 and Doc. 80]-207 [Pg. 207 includes portions of Doc. 80 and Doc. 81], 226 [Pg. 226 includes portions of Doc. 89 and Doc. 90]

Thompson’s assessment of, 199 [Pg. 199 is part of Doc. 77]

U.S. information policy on, 144 [Pg. 144 is part of Doc. 55]-145 [Pg. 145 includes portions of Doc. 55 and Doc. 56], 240 [Pg. 240 is part of Doc. 96]-241 [Pg. 241 is part of Doc. 96]

Denney, George C., 434 [Pg. 434 includes portions of Doc. 196 and Doc. 197]-441 [Pg. 441 includes portions of Doc. 197 and Doc. 198]

Diem. See Ngo Dinh Diem.

Dingeman, Maj. James W., 30 [Pg. 30 includes portions of Doc. 14 and Doc. 15], 105 [Pg. 105 includes portions of Doc. 32 and Doc. 33], 151 [Pg. 151 is part of Doc. 59],

203, 280 [Pg. 280 includes portions of Doc. 113 and Doc. 114], 316 [Pg. 316 includes portions of Doc. 132 and Doc. 133], 390 [Pg. 390 is part of Doc. 171]

Dinh. See Ton That Dinh, Brig. Gen.

Dinh Trinh Chinh, 582 [Pg. 582 is part of Doc. 256]

Do Cao Tri, Brig. Gen., 490 [Pg. 490 is part of Doc. 220], 582 [Pg. 582 is part of Doc. 256], 616 [Pg. 616 is part of Doc. 275]

Do Khac Mai, Lt. Col., 377 [Pg. 377 is part of Doc. 165]

Dobrynin, Anatoly, 140 [Pg. 140 is part of Doc. 52]

Don.See Tran Van Don, Maj. Gen.

Drachnik, Capt., 265 [Pg. 265 is part of Doc. 107]

Duc Ngiep, bonze, 391 [Pg. 391 is part of Doc. 172], 430 [Pg. 430 includes portions of Doc. 193 and Doc. 194], 616 [Pg. 616 is part of Doc. 275]

Dulles, John Foster, 586 [Pg. 586 is part of Doc. 258]

Dungan, Ralph A., 28 [Pg. 28 is part of Doc. 14], 66 [Pg. 66 is part of Doc. 23]

Duong Van Minh, Maj. Gen., 608 [Pg. 608 is part of Doc. 270] Buddhist crisis, 476 [Pg. 476 is part of Doc. 212]

Coup against Diem, 474 [Pg. 474 is part of Doc. 212], 491n [Pg. 491 is part of Doc. 220], 583 [Pg. 583 is part of Doc. 256] Generals’ plan, 643 [Pg. 643 includes portions of Doc. 290 and Doc. 291], 651 [Pg. 651 includes portions of Doc. 297 and Doc. 298], 653 [Pg. 653 includes portions of Doc. 298 and Doc. 299], 654 [Pg. 654 is part of Doc. 299], 656 [Pg. 656 is part of Doc. 300], 657 [Pg. 657 includes portions of Doc. 300 and Doc. 301], 668 [Pg. 668 includes portions of Doc. 305 and Doc. 306]

Diem’s death, possible response to, 321 [Pg. 321 is part of Doc. 133]

Martial law, 616 [Pg. 616 is part of Doc. 275]

Succession crisis, possible role in, 581 [Pg. 581 is part of Doc. 256]

Durbrow, Elbridge, 480n [Pg. 480 is part of Doc. 214]

Dutton, Frederick G., 124 [Pg. 124 is part of Doc. 43]

Economic assistance to Vietnam. See Third country economic assistance to Vietnam; U.S. economic assistance to Vietnam.

Eisenhower, Dwight D., 137 [Pg. 137 is part of Doc. 52], 586 [Pg. 586 is part of Doc. 258], 587 [Pg. 587 is part of Doc. 258]

Ely, Gen. Paul, 137 [Pg. 137 is part of Doc. 52]

Engle, Byron, 107n [Pg. 107 is part of Doc. 34]

Ethnic specialist teams, 203 [Pg. 203 includes portions of Doc. 78 and Doc. 79]-204 [Pg. 204 is part of Doc. 79]

Farmgateoperation: Air interdiction missions, 247 [Pg. 247 includes portions of Doc. 99 and Doc. 100], 250 [Pg. 250 is part of Doc. 100], 251 [Pg. 251 is part of Doc. 100], 252 [Pg. 252 is part of Doc. 100]

Anthis assessment of, 15 [Pg. 15 is part of Doc. 7]-16 [Pg. 16 includes portions of Doc. 7 and Doc. 8]

Augmentation of, 4 [Pg. 4 is part of Doc. 2], 11 [Pg. 11 is part of Doc. 4], 15 [Pg. 15 is part of Doc. 7]-16 [Pg. 16 includes portions of Doc. 7 and Doc. 8], 32 [Pg. 32 includes portions of Doc. 15 and Doc. 16]-34 [Pg. 34 includes portions of Doc. 16 and Doc. 17], 61 [Pg. 61 is part of Doc. 19] JCS position, 145 [Pg. 145 includes portions of Doc. 55 and Doc. 56]-147 [Pg. 147 is part of Doc. 56]

Media coverage of, 101n [Pg. 101 is part of Doc. 30], 116 [Pg. 116 is part of Doc. 39]

Reductions in, proposed, 304 [Pg. 304 is part of Doc. 125]

Felt, Adm. Harry D. (CINCPAC), 3n [Pg. 3 includes portions of Doc. 1 and Doc. 2], 509 [Pg. 509 is part of Doc. 226], 632 [Pg. 632 is part of Doc. 283] Air Force, Vietnamese, training for, 293 [Pg. 293 is part of Doc. 121]

Ap Bae, battle of, 3 [Pg. 3 includes portions of Doc. 1 and Doc. 2]

Buddhist crisis, 352n [Pg. 352 includes portions of Doc. 150 and Doc. 151]

Civilian Irregular Defense Group program, 330 [Pg. 330 includes portions of Doc. 135 and Doc. 136]-333 [Pg. 333 includes portions of Doc. 136 and Doc. 137]

Communist insurgency, 330 [Pg. 330 includes portions of Doc. 135 and Doc. 136]

Comprehensive Plan for South Vietnam, 35 [Pg. 35 includes portions of Doc. 17 and Doc. 18]-37 [Pg. 37 is part of Doc. 18]

Counterinsurgency operations: Air power used in, 186 [Pg. 186 includes portions of Doc. 70 and Doc. 71]

Detailed control of, 7 [Pg. 7 includes portions of Doc. 3 and Doc. 4]-8 [Pg. 8 is part of Doc. 4], 11 [Pg. 11 is part of Doc. 4]

Harkins’ assessment of, 122n [Pg. 122 includes portions of Doc. 41 and Doc. 42]

Coup against Diem, U.S. support for Generals’ plan, 630 [Pg. 630 is part of Doc. 282], 631 [Pg. 631 is part of Doc. 282], 639 [Pg. 639 is part of Doc. 289], 648 [Pg. 648 is part of Doc. 295]

Farmgate operation, augmentation of, 32 [Pg. 32 includes portions of Doc. 15 and Doc. 16]-33 [Pg. 33 is part of Doc. 16]

Honolulu Conference, 267 [Pg. 267 is part of Doc. 107]

Joint Counterinsurgency Fund, 215 [Pg. 215 includes portions of Doc. 83 and Doc. 84]

Laos, communist drive to conquer, 330 [Pg. 330 includes portions of Doc. 135 and Doc. 136]

MACV, command autonomy for, 7 [Pg. 7 includes portions of Doc. 3 and Doc. 4]-8 [Pg. 8 is part of Doc. 4], 196 [Pg. 196 is part of Doc. 75]

Martial law, 601 [Pg. 601 includes portions of Doc. 264 and Doc. 265], 607 [Pg. 607 is part of Doc. 270]

Press briefings issue, lOIn

RVNAF force stnlcture, 267 [Pg. 267 is part of Doc. 107]

U.S. military assistance to Vietnam: Funding for, 268 [Pg. 268 is part of Doc. 107], 276n [Pg. 276 is part of Doc. 111], 292 [Pg. 292 is part of Doc. 121]-293 [Pg. 293 is part of Doc. 121], 333 [Pg. 333 includes portions of Doc. 136 and Doc. 137]

Jets, provision of, 26n [Pg. 26 includes portions of Doc. 12 and Doc. 13]

U.S. military involvement in Vietnam: Force reductions, proposed, 276n [Pg. 276 is part of Doc. 111], 293 [Pg. 293 is part of Doc. 121], 591 [Pg. 591 is part of Doc. 260]-594 [Pg. 594 is part of Doc. 260]

Peak military strength, proposed, 135n [Pg. 135 is part of Doc. 51]

Flowerree, Charles C., 375n [Pg. 375 is part of Doc. 164]

Forrestal, Michael V., 94 [Pg. 94 includes portions of Doc. 26 and Doc. 27]-95 [Pg. 95 is part of Doc. 27], 97 [Pg. 97 is part of Doc. 29]-98 [Pg. 98 includes portions of Doc. 29 and Doc. 30], 112n [Pg. 112 includes portions of Doc. 35 and Doc. 36], 193 [Pg. 193 is part of Doc. 73], 431n [Pg. 431 is part of Doc. 194], 569n [Pg. 569 includes portions of Doc. 255 and Doc. 256], 665n [Pg. 665 includes portions of Doc. 303 and Doc. 304] Buddhist crisis, 432 [Pg. 432 is part of Doc. 195], 451 [Pg. 451 includes portions of Doc. 204 and Doc. 205]-452 [Pg. 452 is part of Doc. 205] Madame Nhu’sattacks on Buddhists, 557n [Pg. 557 includes portions of Doc. 247 and Doc. 248]

Negotiations, 393n [Pg. 393 is part of Doc. 174]

U.S. disassociation from Vietnamese policy, threatened, 443n [Pg. 443 includes portions of Doc. 198 and Doc. 199], 447 [Pg. 447 includes portions of Doc. 201 and Doc. 202]-449 [Pg. 449 includes portions of Doc. 202 and Doc. 203], 559 [Pg. 559 is part of Doc. 249]-560 [Pg. 560 includes portions of Doc. 249 and Doc. 250]

Chuong and, 142 [Pg. 142 includes portions of Doc. 53 and Doc. 54]-143 [Pg. 143 is part of Doc. 54]

Counterinsurgency operations, 189n [Pg. 189 includes portions of Doc. 71 and Doc. 72] Bombing of populated places, 131 [Pg. 131 includes portions of Doc. 48 and Doc. 49]

Mekong Delta situation, 589n [Pg. 589 is part of Doc. 259]

Progress made by, 306n [Pg. 306 includes portions of Doc. 125 and Doc. 126]

Coup against Diem: Generals’ plan, U.S. support for, 628n [Pg. 628 includes portions of Doc. 280 and Doc. 281], 630 [Pg. 630 is part of Doc. 282], 631 [Pg. 631 is part of Doc. 282], 633n [Pg. 633 is part of Doc. 284], 634 [Pg. 634 includes portions of Doc. 284 and Doc. 285]-635 [Pg. 635 includes portions of Doc. 285 and Doc. 286], 646n [Pg. 646 is part of Doc. 293], 647n [Pg. 647 is part of Doc. 294], 649 [Pg. 649 is part of Doc. 296]-650 [Pg. 650 includes portions of Doc. 296 and Doc. 297], 658 [Pg. 658 includes portions of Doc. 301 and Doc. 302]-659 [Pg. 659 includes portions of Doc. 302 and Doc. 303], 675n [Pg. 675 includes portions of Doc. 308 and Doc. 309]

U.S. policy re, 453 [Pg. 453 is part of Doc. 205]

Crop destruction and defoliation, 149 [Pg. 149 includes portions of Doc. 57 and Doc. 58]-150 [Pg. 150 includes portions of Doc. 58 and Doc. 59], 226 [Pg. 226 includes portions of Doc. 89 and Doc. 90], 245 [Pg. 245 includes portions of Doc. 97 and Doc. 98]-246 [Pg. 246 includes portions of Doc. 98 and Doc. 99], 274n [Pg. 274 includes portions of Doc. 109 and Doc. 110]

Krulak report, 455n [Pg. 455 includes portions of Doc. 206 and Doc. 207]

Martial law, U.S. response to, 601 [Pg. 601 includes portions of Doc. 264 and Doc. 265]-602 [Pg. 602 includes portions of Doc. 265 and Doc. 266]

Nhu’sremoval from power, U.S. demand for, 625 [Pg. 625 includes portions of Doc. 277 and Doc. 278], 627 [Pg. 627 is part of Doc. 280], 628n [Pg. 628 includes portions of Doc. 280 and Doc. 281], 634 [Pg. 634 includes portions of Doc. 284 and Doc. 285]-635 [Pg. 635 includes portions of Doc. 285 and Doc. 286]

Special Group for Counterinsurgency, 103 [Pg. 103 includes portions of Doc. 31 and Doc. 32], 150 [Pg. 150 includes portions of Doc. 58 and Doc. 59], 201 [Pg. 201 is part of Doc. 78], 279 [Pg. 279 is part of Doc. 113], 315 [Pg. 315 is part of Doc. 132], 389 [Pg. 389 includes portions of Doc. 170 and Doc. 171]

Trueheart, attitude toward, 482 [Pg. 482 includes portions of Doc. 215 and Doc. 216]

U.S. ambassadorship, 291 [Pg. 291 is part of Doc. 120]

U.S. information programs and policies in Vietnam, 128n [Pg. 128 includes portions of Doc. 45 and Doc. 46]

Vietnam, Republic of: Change of government, possible, 481 [Pg. 481 is part of Doc. 215]-482 [Pg. 482 includes portions of Doc. 215 and Doc. 216]

Opposition parties, U.S. contacts with, 105 [Pg. 105 includes portions of Doc. 32 and Doc. 33]-106 [Pg. 106 is part of Doc. 33], 132 [Pg. 132 includes portions of Doc. 49 and Doc. 50]-133 [Pg. 133 includes portions of Doc. 50 and Doc. 51]

Police services, 107 [Pg. 107 is part of Doc. 34]-108 [Pg. 108 includes portions of Doc. 34 and Doc. 35]

Vietnam visit, 3n [Pg. 3 includes portions of Doc. 1 and Doc. 2], 11 [Pg. 11 is part of Doc. 4], 14 [Pg. 14 is part of Doc. 6], 49 [Pg. 49 includes portions of Doc. 18 and Doc. 19]-62 [Pg. 62 is part of Doc. 19]

Wheeler Mission, 63 [Pg. 63 includes portions of Doc. 20 and Doc. 21]-64 [Pg. 64 is part of Doc. 21]

Forsythe, Col. George I., 74 [Pg. 74 is part of Doc. 26]

Fowler, James, 259n [Pg. 259 is part of Doc. 103]

France, 220 [Pg. 220 is part of Doc. 86] Criticism of Diem, 673 [Pg. 673 is part of Doc. 308]

Economic assistance to Vietnam, 24 [Pg. 24 is part of Doc. 12], 25 [Pg. 25 is part of Doc. 12]-26 [Pg. 26 includes portions of Doc. 12 and Doc. 13]

Frankel, Max, 393n [Pg. 393 is part of Doc. 174]

Gard, Richard A., 366 [Pg. 366 includes portions of Doc. 159 and Doc. 160]

Garvey, Paul, 173 [Pg. 173 includes portions of Doc. 65 and Doc. 66]

General Accounting Office (GAO), report

on Vietnam, 161 [Pg. 161 includes portions of Doc. 61 and Doc. 62]-162 [Pg. 162 includes portions of Doc. 62 and Doc. 63]

Germany, Federal Republic of: Criticism of Diem, 673 [Pg. 673 is part of Doc. 308]

Economic assistance to Vietnam, 24 [Pg. 24 is part of Doc. 12], 25 [Pg. 25 is part of Doc. 12]

Gilpatric, Roswell L., 2 [Pg. 2 is part of Doc. 1] Counterinsurgency operations, 4n [Pg. 4 is part of Doc. 2]

Coup against Diem, U.S. support for Generals’ plan, 630 [Pg. 630 is part of Doc. 282], 638 [Pg. 638 is part of Doc. 289], 659 [Pg. 659 includes portions of Doc. 302 and Doc. 303], 675n [Pg. 675 includes portions of Doc. 308 and Doc. 309]

Special Group for Counterinsurgency, 28 [Pg. 28 is part of Doc. 14], 103 [Pg. 103 includes portions of Doc. 31 and Doc. 32], 150 [Pg. 150 includes portions of Doc. 58 and Doc. 59], 201 [Pg. 201 is part of Doc. 78], 279 [Pg. 279 is part of Doc. 113], 315 [Pg. 315 is part of Doc. 132], 389 [Pg. 389 includes portions of Doc. 170 and Doc. 171], 390 [Pg. 390 is part of Doc. 171]

U.S. military involvement in Vietnam, 590n [Pg. 590 includes portions of Doc. 259 and Doc. 260]

Gore, David Ormsby, 198 [Pg. 198 includes portions of Doc. 76 and Doc. 77]

Greenfield, James L., 144 [Pg. 144 is part of Doc. 55]

Gregory, Gene and Ann, 410n [Pg. 410 is part of Doc. 184]

Gullion, Edmund A., 133 [Pg. 133 includes portions of Doc. 50 and Doc. 51], 140 [Pg. 140 is part of Doc. 52]

Halberstam, David, 329n [Pg. 329 is part of Doc. 135], 335n [Pg. 335 includes portions of Doc. 137 and Doc. 138], 470 [Pg. 470 includes portions of Doc. 209 and Doc. 210], 472 [Pg. 472 is part of Doc. 211]-473 [Pg. 473 includes portions of Doc. 211 and Doc. 212], 530 [Pg. 530 is part of Doc. 238], 557 [Pg. 557 includes portions of Doc. 247 and Doc. 248], 584 [Pg. 584 is part of Doc. 257], 589 [Pg. 589 is part of Doc. 259], 622 [Pg. 622 is part of Doc. 277], 638 [Pg. 638 is part of Doc. 289]

Hannah, Norman B., 122n [Pg. 122 includes portions of Doc. 41 and Doc. 42]

Harkins, Gen. Paul D.: Air Force, Vietnamese, training for, 298 [Pg. 298 is part of Doc. 123]

Ap Bac, battle of, 2 [Pg. 2 is part of Doc. 1]-3 [Pg. 3 includes portions of Doc. 1 and Doc. 2]

ARVN reorganization, 119 [Pg. 119 is part of Doc. 41]-120 [Pg. 120 is part of Doc. 41]

Buddhist crisis, 352n [Pg. 352 includes portions of Doc. 150 and Doc. 151]

Civil Guard, 266 [Pg. 266 is part of Doc. 107], 297 [Pg. 297 is part of Doc. 123]

Civilian Irregular Defense Group program, 298 [Pg. 298 is part of Doc. 123], 330 [Pg. 330 includes portions of Doc. 135 and Doc. 136]

Command autonomy for, 7 [Pg. 7 includes portions of Doc. 3 and Doc. 4]-8 [Pg. 8 is part of Doc. 4], 11 [Pg. 11 is part of Doc. 4], 95 [Pg. 95 is part of Doc. 27], 97 [Pg. 97 is part of Doc. 29], 113n [Pg. 113 is part of Doc. 36], 114 [Pg. 114 is part of Doc. 37], 195 [Pg. 195 includes portions of Doc. 73, Doc. 74, and Doc. 75]-196 [Pg. 196 is part of Doc. 75]

Communist insurgency: Decline in activity, 119 [Pg. 119 is part of Doc. 41]

Infiltration routes, 463 [Pg. 463 is part of Doc. 207]

Laos, drive to conquer, 327 [Pg. 327 includes portions of Doc. 134 and Doc. 135], 328 [Pg. 328 is part of Doc. 135], 329 [Pg. 329 is part of Doc. 135]

Communist surrender program, 266 [Pg. 266 is part of Doc. 107]

Comprehensive Plan for South Vietnam, 37 [Pg. 37 is part of Doc. 18]-38 [Pg. 38 is part of Doc. 18]

Congressional testimony, 280 [Pg. 280 includes portions of Doc. 113 and Doc. 114]

Counterinsurgency operations: Air power used in, 186 [Pg. 186 includes portions of Doc. 70 and Doc. 71]-189 [Pg. 189 includes portions of Doc. 71 and Doc. 72], 247n [Pg. 247 includes portions of Doc. 99 and Doc. 100]

Assessments of, 118 [Pg. 118 is part of Doc. 41]-122 [Pg. 122 includes portions of Doc. 41 and Doc. 42], 186 [Pg. 186 includes portions of Doc. 70 and Doc. 71]-189 [Pg. 189 includes portions of Doc. 71 and Doc. 72], 296 [Pg. 296 includes portions of Doc. 122 and Doc. 123]-300 [Pg. 300 is part of Doc. 123]

Border control and surveillance, 267 [Pg. 267 is part of Doc. 107]

Ca MauPeninsula operation, 12 [Pg. 12 is part of Doc. 5]

“Cautious” approach of Vietnamese, 113 [Pg. 113 is part of Doc. 36]

Clear and hold operations, 12 [Pg. 12 is part of Doc. 5]

Communications system, 297 [Pg. 297 is part of Doc. 123]

Intelligence capabilities, 296 [Pg. 296 includes portions of Doc. 122 and Doc. 123]-297 [Pg. 297 is part of Doc. 123]

Napalm use, 12 [Pg. 12 is part of Doc. 5]-13 [Pg. 13 is part of Doc. 5]

National Campaign Plan, 13 [Pg. 13 is part of Doc. 5], 118 [Pg. 118 is part of Doc. 41], 120 [Pg. 120 is part of Doc. 41], 121 [Pg. 121 is part of Doc. 41], 267 [Pg. 267 is part of Doc. 107], 328 [Pg. 328 is part of Doc. 135], 329 [Pg. 329 is part of Doc. 135], 468 [Pg. 468 is part of Doc. 209], 470 [Pg. 470 includes portions of Doc. 209 and Doc. 210]

Victory, prospects for, 608 [Pg. 608 is part of Doc. 270]-609 [Pg. 609 is part of Doc. 270]

Weapons systems, 298 [Pg. 298 is part of Doc. 123]

Coup against Diem, U.S. support for Generals’ plan, 642 [Pg. 642 is part of Doc. 290], 648 [Pg. 648 is part of Doc. 295], 655 [Pg. 655 includes portions of Doc. 299 and Doc. 300]-657 [Pg. 657 includes portions of Doc. 300 and Doc. 301], 668 [Pg. 668 includes portions of Doc. 305 and Doc. 306]-670 [Pg. 670 is part of Doc. 306], 675 [Pg. 675 includes portions of Doc. 308 and Doc. 309]

Crop destruction and defoliation, 163 [Pg. 163 is part of Doc. 63], 164 [Pg. 164 is part of Doc. 63]

Farmgate operation, augmentation of, 33 [Pg. 33 is part of Doc. 16]

Honolulu Conference, 265 [Pg. 265 is part of Doc. 107], 266 [Pg. 266 is part of Doc. 107], 267 [Pg. 267 is part of Doc. 107]

Initiative, lack of, 9 [Pg. 9 is part of Doc. 4]-10 [Pg. 10 is part of Doc. 4]

Joint Counterinsurgency Fund, 186 [Pg. 186 includes portions of Doc. 70 and Doc. 71],

214, 301 [Pg. 301 is part of Doc. 124]

Laos, reconnaissance missions into, 12 [Pg. 12 is part of Doc. 5]

Martial law, 607 [Pg. 607 is part of Doc. 270]-610 [Pg. 610 includes portions of Doc. 270, Doc. 271, and Doc. 272]

Press briefings issue, 101n [Pg. 1 is part of Doc. 1]

Press relations, 90 [Pg. 90 is part of Doc. 26], 533 [Pg. 533 is part of Doc. 239]

Rowny’s assessment of, 9 [Pg. 9 is part of Doc. 4]-10 [Pg. 10 is part of Doc. 4]

RVNAF paramilitary forces, training for, 266 [Pg. 266 is part of Doc. 107]

Self Defense Corps, 266 [Pg. 266 is part of Doc. 107], 297 [Pg. 297 is part of Doc. 123]-298 [Pg. 298 is part of Doc. 123]

Strategic hamlet program: Assessment of, 298 [Pg. 298 is part of Doc. 123]-299 [Pg. 299 is part of Doc. 123]

Growth of, 118 [Pg. 118 is part of Doc. 41]

Overextension of, 316 [Pg. 316 includes portions of Doc. 132 and Doc. 133]

U.S. economic assistance to Vietnam, 225 [Pg. 225 includes portions of Doc. 88 and Doc. 89]

U.S. information programs and policies in Vietnam: “Confiding in newsmen” policy, 263 [Pg. 263 includes portions of Doc. 105 and Doc. 106]-264 [Pg. 264 is part of Doc. 106]

Military-press contacts, 68 [Pg. 68 is part of Doc. 24]

U.S. medical program for Vietnam, 266 [Pg. 266 is part of Doc. 107]

U.S. military assistance to Vietnam, jets, provision of, 26n [Pg. 26 includes portions of Doc. 12 and Doc. 13], 27 [Pg. 27 is part of Doc. 13]

U.S. military involvement in Vietnam: Advisers, 462 [Pg. 462 is part of Doc. 207]

Weapons systems, value of, 265 [Pg. 265 is part of Doc. 107]

Vietnamese officials, relations with, 87 [Pg. 87 is part of Doc. 26]

Harriman, W. Averell, 112 [Pg. 112 includes portions of Doc. 35 and Doc. 36]-113 [Pg. 113 is part of Doc. 36] ANZUS Council meeting, 358 [Pg. 358 includes portions of Doc. 153 and Doc. 154]-359 [Pg. 359 includes portions of Doc. 154 and Doc. 155]

Buddhist crisis, 432 [Pg. 432 is part of Doc. 195], 451 [Pg. 451 includes portions of Doc. 204 and Doc. 205]-452 [Pg. 452 is part of Doc. 205] Madame Nhu’sattacks on Buddhists, 557n [Pg. 557 includes portions of Doc. 247 and Doc. 248]

Nolting’s statement on religious persecution, 550 [Pg. 550 is part of Doc. 243]

Resolution of crisis, U.S. recommendationsre, 381n [Pg. 381 includes portions of Doc. 166 and Doc. 167]

U.S. disassociation from Vietnamese policy, threatened, 443n [Pg. 443 includes portions of Doc. 198 and Doc. 199], 448 [Pg. 448 is part of Doc. 202]

Chuong and, 142 [Pg. 142 includes portions of Doc. 53 and Doc. 54], 143 [Pg. 143 is part of Doc. 54]-144n [Pg. 144 is part of Doc. 55]

Communist insurgency: Infiltration, evidence of, 165 [Pg. 165 includes portions of Doc. 63 and Doc. 64]

Infiltration routes, 454n [Pg. 454 is part of Doc. 206]

Troop strength, 194 [Pg. 194 is part of Doc. 73]

Counterinsurgency operations, 189n [Pg. 189 includes portions of Doc. 71 and Doc. 72] Air power used in, 173n [Pg. 173 includes portions of Doc. 65 and Doc. 66]

Movement and population control measures, 194 [Pg. 194 is part of Doc. 73]

Coup against Diem: Generals’ plan, U.S. support for, 628n [Pg. 628 includes portions of Doc. 280 and Doc. 281], 635 [Pg. 635 includes portions of Doc. 285 and Doc. 286], 638 [Pg. 638 is part of Doc. 289], 657 [Pg. 657 includes portions of Doc. 300 and Doc. 301]-658 [Pg. 658 includes portions of Doc. 301 and Doc. 302], 675n [Pg. 675 includes portions of Doc. 308 and Doc. 309]

Nhu as planner of, 488n [Pg. 488 includes portions of Doc. 219 and Doc. 220]

Crop destruction and defoliation, 149 [Pg. 149 includes portions of Doc. 57 and Doc. 58], 232n [Pg. 232 includes portions of Doc. 93 and Doc. 94], 237n [Pg. 237 is part of Doc. 96], 274n [Pg. 274 includes portions of Doc. 109 and Doc. 110]

GAO report on Vietnam, 161 [Pg. 161 includes portions of Doc. 61 and Doc. 62]

Joint Counterinsurgency Fund, 221 [Pg. 221 is part of Doc. 87]

Lodge’s relations with Washington officials, 604 [Pg. 604 includes portions of Doc. 267 and Doc. 268]

MACV, command autonomy for, 113n [Pg. 113 is part of Doc. 36], 195 [Pg. 195 includes portions of Doc. 73, Doc. 74, and Doc. 75]-196 [Pg. 196 is part of Doc. 75]

Mansfield report, 68 [Pg. 68 is part of Doc. 24]-69 [Pg. 69 is part of Doc. 24], 70 [Pg. 70 is part of Doc. 25]

Martial law, 604n [Pg. 604 includes portions of Doc. 267 and Doc. 268]

Media coverage of Vietnam, 34n [Pg. 34 includes portions of Doc. 16 and Doc. 17] Diem’s relations with press, 193 [Pg. 193 is part of Doc. 73]

Nhu’sremoval from power, U.S. demand for, 625 [Pg. 625 includes portions of Doc. 277 and Doc. 278], 627 [Pg. 627 is part of Doc. 280], 628n [Pg. 628 includes portions of Doc. 280 and Doc. 281]

Special Group for Counterinsurgency, 201 [Pg. 201 is part of Doc. 78], 279 [Pg. 279 is part of Doc. 113], 315 [Pg. 315 is part of Doc. 132], 389 [Pg. 389 includes portions of Doc. 170 and Doc. 171]

Strategic hamlet program, 130 [Pg. 130 includes portions of Doc. 47 and Doc. 48]

Thompson, meeting with, 193 [Pg. 193 is part of Doc. 73]-195 [Pg. 195 includes portions of Doc. 73, Doc. 74, and Doc. 75], 205 [Pg. 205 is part of Doc. 79]

U.S. ambassadorship, 133 [Pg. 133 includes portions of Doc. 50 and Doc. 51]

U.S. information programs and policies in Vietnam, 96 [Pg. 96 is part of Doc. 28], 169 [Pg. 169 is part of Doc. 65] Combat activities, media coverage of, 116n [Pg. 116 is part of Doc. 39], 128n [Pg. 128 includes portions of Doc. 45 and Doc. 46]

Crop destruction and defoliation, 144n [Pg. 144 is part of Doc. 55], 145n [Pg. 145 includes portions of Doc. 55 and Doc. 56]

Feature articles, encouragement of, 69 [Pg. 69 is part of Doc. 24]

Military-press contacts, 68 [Pg. 68 is part of Doc. 24]-69 [Pg. 69 is part of Doc. 24]

Press briefings by officials, 66 [Pg. 66 is part of Doc. 23]

Vietnamese restrictions on press and, 67 [Pg. 67 includes portions of Doc. 23 and Doc. 24]-68 [Pg. 68 is part of Doc. 24]

U.S. military assistance to Vietnam, jets, provision of, 26 [Pg. 26 includes portions of Doc. 12 and Doc. 13], 27n [Pg. 27 is part of Doc. 13], 28n [Pg. 28 is part of Doc. 14], 260n [Pg. 260 is part of Doc. 104]

U.S. military involvement in Vietnam, 117n [Pg. 117 is part of Doc. 40]

U.S. official visits to Vietnam, 63 [Pg. 63 includes portions of Doc. 20 and Doc. 21]

Vietnam, Republic of: Change of government, possible, 394n [Pg. 394 includes portions of Doc. 174 and Doc. 175], 481 [Pg. 481 is part of Doc. 215]

Opposition parties, U.S. contacts with, 65 [Pg. 65 includes portions of Doc. 22 and Doc. 23], 105 [Pg. 105 includes portions of Doc. 32 and Doc. 33], 126 [Pg. 126 includes portions of Doc. 44 and Doc. 45], 132 [Pg. 132 includes portions of Doc. 49 and Doc. 50], 133 [Pg. 133 includes portions of Doc. 50 and Doc. 51]

Political allegiance of people, 193 [Pg. 193 is part of Doc. 73]

Harwood, Ralph, 256 [Pg. 256 includes portions of Doc. 101 and Doc. 102]

Heavner, Theodore J. C.: Buddhist crisis: Agreement of June 16, 426n [Pg. 426 is part of Doc. 191]

Control operations by government, 553n [Pg. 553 is part of Doc. 245]

Demonstrations by Buddhists, 283n [Pg. 283 includes portions of Doc. 114 and Doc. 115], 348

Madame Nhu’sattacks on Buddhists, 557n [Pg. 557 includes portions of Doc. 247 and Doc. 248], 564n [Pg. 564 includes portions of Doc. 251 and Doc. 252]

Poison gas issue, 349n [Pg. 349 includes portions of Doc. 148 and Doc. 149]

Resolution of crisis, U.S. recommendations re, 518n [Pg. 518 includes portions of Doc. 230 and Doc. 231], 522n [Pg. 522 includes portions of Doc. 232 and Doc. 233]

Commercial Import Program, 281 [Pg. 281 is part of Doc. 114]-283 [Pg. 283 includes portions of Doc. 114 and Doc. 115]

Counterinsurgency operations: Air power used in, 173n [Pg. 173 includes portions of Doc. 65 and Doc. 66]

Economic and social projects, funding for, 280 [Pg. 280 includes portions of Doc. 113 and Doc. 114]-281 [Pg. 281 is part of Doc. 114]

Coup against Diem: Nhu as planner of, 488n [Pg. 488 includes portions of Doc. 219 and Doc. 220]

U.S. policy re, 523n [Pg. 523 includes portions of Doc. 233 and Doc. 234]

Crop destruction and defoliation, 237n [Pg. 237 is part of Doc. 96], 274n [Pg. 274 includes portions of Doc. 109 and Doc. 110]

Joint Counterinsurgency Fund, 185n [Pg. 185 is part of Doc. 69], 195n [Pg. 195 includes portions of Doc. 73, Doc. 74, and Doc. 75]

RVNAF, political tendencies within, 262 [Pg. 262 is part of Doc. 105]-263 [Pg. 263 includes portions of Doc. 105 and Doc. 106]

Special Group for Counterinsurgency, 315 [Pg. 315 is part of Doc. 132]

U.S. information programs and policies in Vietnam, 116n [Pg. 116 is part of Doc. 39], 125n [Pg. 125 is part of Doc. 44], 313n [Pg. 313 is part of Doc. 130]

U.S. military assistance to Vietnam, 102n [Pg. 102 includes portions of Doc. 30 and Doc. 31], 197n [Pg. 197 is part of Doc. 76]

U.S. military involvement in Vietnam: Diem’s endorsement of U.S. presence, 309n [Pg. 309 includes portions of Doc. 128 and Doc. 129]

Force reductions, proposed, 294n [Pg. 294 is part of Doc. 122], 303 [Pg. 303 includes portions of Doc. 124 and Doc. 125]-306 [Pg. 306 includes portions of Doc. 125 and Doc. 126]

Vietnam, Republic of: Change of government, possible, 262 [Pg. 262 is part of Doc. 105]

Opposition parties, U.S. contacts with, 65 [Pg. 65 includes portions of Doc. 22 and Doc. 23]

Political situation, 261 [Pg. 261 includes portions of Doc. 104 and Doc. 105]-262 [Pg. 262 is part of Doc. 105]

Heinz, Rear Adm. Luther C.: Crop destruction and defoliation, 274n [Pg. 274 includes portions of Doc. 109 and Doc. 110]

Honolulu Conference, 270 [Pg. 270 includes portions of Doc. 107 and Doc. 108]

Joint Counterinsurgency Fund, 195n [Pg. 195 includes portions of Doc. 73, Doc. 74, and Doc. 75]

U.S. information programs and policies in Vietnam, 116n [Pg. 116 is part of Doc. 39]

U.S. military involvement in Vietnam, proposed force reductions, 294n [Pg. 294 is part of Doc. 122], 295n [Pg. 295 is part of Doc. 122]

Helble, John J.: Buddhist crisis: Control operations by government, 343 [Pg. 343 includes portions of Doc. 143 and Doc. 144]-344 [Pg. 344 includes portions of Doc. 144 and Doc. 145], 346n [Pg. 346 includes portions of Doc. 145 and Doc. 146], 367 [Pg. 367 is part of Doc. 160]-368 [Pg. 368 is part of Doc. 160]

Demonstrations by Buddhists, 277 [Pg. 277 is part of Doc. 112]-278 [Pg. 278 is part of Doc. 112], 284 [Pg. 284 is part of Doc. 116]-286 [Pg. 286 is part of Doc. 117], 340 [Pg. 340 includes portions of Doc. 141 and Doc. 142], 341n [Pg. 341 is part of Doc. 142], 367 [Pg. 367 is part of Doc. 160]

Poison gas issue, 348n [Pg. 348 is part of Doc. 147], 349n [Pg. 349 includes portions of Doc. 148 and Doc. 149]

Mansfield report, Vietnamese reaction to, 124 [Pg. 124 is part of Doc. 43]

Helms, Richard, 279 [Pg. 279 is part of Doc. 113], 569 [Pg. 569 includes portions of Doc. 255 and Doc. 256], 638 [Pg. 638 is part of Doc. 289], 659 [Pg. 659 includes portions of Doc. 302 and Doc. 303]

Herald Tribune, 566n [Pg. 566 is part of Doc. 253], 567n [Pg. 567 is part of Doc. 254]

Herz, Gus, 130 [Pg. 130 includes portions of Doc. 47 and Doc. 48]

Hieu. See Ngo Trong Hieu.

Higgins, Marguerite, 566n [Pg. 566 is part of Doc. 253], 567n [Pg. 567 is part of Doc. 254]

Hill, Amb., 566 [Pg. 566 is part of Doc. 253]

Hilsman, Roger, Jr., 112n [Pg. 112 includes portions of Doc. 35 and Doc. 36], 235n [Pg. 235 includes portions of Doc. 94 and Doc. 95], 527 [Pg. 527 is part of Doc. 236], 529 [Pg. 529 includes portions of Doc. 237 and Doc. 238], 569 [Pg. 569 includes portions of Doc. 255 and Doc. 256], 661n [Pg. 661 is part of Doc. 303] Buddhist crisis, 342n [Pg. 342 is part of Doc. 143], 366 [Pg. 366 includes portions of Doc. 159 and Doc. 160], 432 [Pg. 432 is part of Doc. 195], 451 [Pg. 451 includes portions of Doc. 204 and Doc. 205]-452 [Pg. 452 is part of Doc. 205] Agreement of June 16, 426n [Pg. 426 is part of Doc. 191]

Background report on, 366n [Pg. 366 includes portions of Doc. 159 and Doc. 160]

Cambodia’s position, 404n [Pg. 404 includes portions of Doc. 181 and Doc. 182]

Control operations by government, 553n [Pg. 553 is part of Doc. 245]

Coup against Diem and, 554 [Pg. 554 is part of Doc. 246]-555 [Pg. 555 is part of Doc. 246]

Demonstrations by Buddhists, 348n [Pg. 348 is part of Doc. 147]

Madame Nhu’sattacks on Buddhists, 557n [Pg. 557 includes portions of Doc. 247 and Doc. 248], 564n [Pg. 564 includes portions of Doc. 251 and Doc. 252]

Nolting’s statement on religious persecution, 550 [Pg. 550 is part of Doc. 243]

Poison gas issue, 349n [Pg. 349 includes portions of Doc. 148 and Doc. 149]

Resolution of crisis, U.S. recommendations re, 381n [Pg. 381 includes portions of Doc. 166 and Doc. 167]

Truce agreement of June 5, 356 [Pg. 356 includes portions of Doc. 152 and Doc. 153], 359 [Pg. 359 includes portions of Doc. 154 and Doc. 155]

U.S. disassociation from Vietnamese policy, threatened, 433n [Pg. 433 is part of Doc. 196], 443n [Pg. 443 includes portions of Doc. 198 and Doc. 199], 448 [Pg. 448 is part of Doc. 202]

Women’s Solidarity Movement resolution on, 363n [Pg. 363 includes portions of Doc. 157 and Doc. 158]

Communist insurgency: Laos, drive to conquer, 327 [Pg. 327 includes portions of Doc. 134 and Doc. 135]

Troop strength, 5 [Pg. 5 includes portions of Doc. 2 and Doc. 3]-6 [Pg. 6 is part of Doc. 3]

Counterinsurgency operations: Air power used in, 173n [Pg. 173 includes portions of Doc. 65 and Doc. 66]

Economic and social projects, funding for, 280 [Pg. 280 includes portions of Doc. 113 and Doc. 114]

Mekong Delta situation, 589 [Pg. 589 is part of Doc. 259]

“Security for villages” strategy, 189 [Pg. 189 includes portions of Doc. 71 and Doc. 72]-192 [Pg. 192 is part of Doc. 72]

Task Force assessment of, 568 [Pg. 568 is part of Doc. 255]

Coup against Diem: Generals’ plan, U.S. support for, 628n [Pg. 628 includes portions of Doc. 280 and Doc. 281], 631 [Pg. 631 is part of Doc. 282], 633n [Pg. 633 is part of Doc. 284], 635 [Pg. 635 includes portions of Doc. 285 and Doc. 286], 638 [Pg. 638 is part of Doc. 289], 639 [Pg. 639 is part of Doc. 289], 640 [Pg. 640 is part of Doc. 289], 641 [Pg. 641 is part of Doc. 289], 646n [Pg. 646 is part of Doc. 293], 647n [Pg. 647 is part of Doc. 294], 657 [Pg. 657 includes portions of Doc. 300 and Doc. 301]-658 [Pg. 658 includes portions of Doc. 301 and Doc. 302], 664 [Pg. 664 is part of Doc. 303], 667n [Pg. 667 is part of Doc. 305], 675n [Pg. 675 includes portions of Doc. 308 and Doc. 309]

U.S. policy re, 452 [Pg. 452 is part of Doc. 205], 453 [Pg. 453 is part of Doc. 205], 523n [Pg. 523 includes portions of Doc. 233 and Doc. 234]

U.S. prevention of, proposed, 192 [Pg. 192 is part of Doc. 72]

Crop destruction and defoliation, 237n [Pg. 237 is part of Doc. 96], 274n [Pg. 274 includes portions of Doc. 109 and Doc. 110]

Honolulu Conference, 265n [Pg. 265 is part of Doc. 107]

Joint Counterinsurgency Fund, 185n [Pg. 185 is part of Doc. 69], 195n [Pg. 195 includes portions of Doc. 73, Doc. 74, and Doc. 75], 215 [Pg. 215 includes portions of Doc. 83 and Doc. 84], 259n [Pg. 259 is part of Doc. 103]

Mansfield report, Vietnamese reaction to, 124 [Pg. 124 is part of Doc. 43]

Martial law: Control of government issue, 604n [Pg. 604 includes portions of Doc. 267 and Doc. 268], 605 [Pg. 605 includes portions of Doc. 268 and Doc. 269]

U.S. response to, 601 [Pg. 601 includes portions of Doc. 264 and Doc. 265], 602 [Pg. 602 includes portions of Doc. 265 and Doc. 266]

Montagnards, disarming of, 6 [Pg. 6 is part of Doc. 3]-7 [Pg. 7 includes portions of Doc. 3 and Doc. 4]

Nhu’sremoval from power, 611n [Pg. 611 includes portions of Doc. 272 and Doc. 273], 613n [Pg. 613 is part of Doc. 274], 625 [Pg. 625 includes portions of Doc. 277 and Doc. 278], 627 [Pg. 627 is part of Doc. 280], 628n [Pg. 628 includes portions of Doc. 280 and Doc. 281], 640 [Pg. 640 is part of Doc. 289]

Strategic hamlet program, 4 [Pg. 4 is part of Doc. 2], 7 [Pg. 7 includes portions of Doc. 3 and Doc. 4]

Thompson and, 205 [Pg. 205 is part of Doc. 79]

U.S. ambassadorship: Lodge’s appointment, 415n [Pg. 415 is part of Doc. 187]

Replacement of Nolting, proposal for, 291 [Pg. 291 is part of Doc. 120]

U.S. economic assistance to Vietnam: Commercial Import Program, 360 [Pg. 360 includes portions of Doc. 155 and Doc. 156]

Madame Nhu’scriticism of, 225 [Pg. 225 includes portions of Doc. 88 and Doc. 89]

U.S. information programs and policies in Vietnam, 169n [Pg. 169 is part of Doc. 65], 313n [Pg. 313 is part of Doc. 130] Chinese People’s Republic-Democratic Republic of Vietnam relations, propaganda re, 271 [Pg. 271 is part of Doc. 108]-272 [Pg. 272 includes portions of Doc. 108 and Doc. 109], 354 [Pg. 354 is part of Doc. 152], 355n [Pg. 355 is part of Doc. 152]

U.S. military assistance to Vietnam, jets, provision of, 197 [Pg. 197 is part of Doc. 76], 260 [Pg. 260 is part of Doc. 104]-261 [Pg. 261 includes portions of Doc. 104 and Doc. 105]

U.S. military involvement in Vietnam: Diem’s endorsement of U.S. presence, 309n [Pg. 309 includes portions of Doc. 128 and Doc. 129]

Force reductions, proposed, 243 [Pg. 243 includes portions of Doc. 96 and Doc. 97], 294n [Pg. 294 is part of Doc. 122], 295n [Pg. 295 is part of Doc. 122], 303 [Pg. 303 includes portions of Doc. 124 and Doc. 125]

U.S. official visits to Vietnam, 63n [Pg. 63 includes portions of Doc. 20 and Doc. 21]

Vietnam, Democratic Republic of, possible U.S. attacks on, 191 [Pg. 191 is part of Doc. 72]-192 [Pg. 192 is part of Doc. 72]

Vietnam, Republic of: Change of government, possible, 316 [Pg. 316 includes portions of Doc. 132 and Doc. 133], 394n [Pg. 394 includes portions of Doc. 174 and Doc. 175], 481 [Pg. 481 is part of Doc. 215]

Opposition parties, U.S. contacts with, 105n [Pg. 105 includes portions of Doc. 32 and Doc. 33]

Political situation, 6 [Pg. 6 is part of Doc. 3], 402n [Pg. 402 is part of Doc. 181]

Vietnam visit: Anthis, meeting with, 15 [Pg. 15 is part of Doc. 7]-16 [Pg. 16 includes portions of Doc. 7 and Doc. 8]

Conclusions and assessments, 16 [Pg. 16 includes portions of Doc. 7 and Doc. 8]

Country Team meeting, 12 [Pg. 12 is part of Doc. 5]-13 [Pg. 13 is part of Doc. 5]

Diem, meeting with, 14 [Pg. 14 is part of Doc. 6]

First impressions, 3 [Pg. 3 includes portions of Doc. 1 and Doc. 2]-5 [Pg. 5 includes portions of Doc. 2 and Doc. 3]

Nolting and Trueheart, meeting with, 5 [Pg. 5 includes portions of Doc. 2 and Doc. 3]-7 [Pg. 7 includes portions of Doc. 3 and Doc. 4]

Report on, 49 [Pg. 49 includes portions of Doc. 18 and Doc. 19]-62 [Pg. 62 is part of Doc. 19]

Rowny, meeting with, 7 [Pg. 7 includes portions of Doc. 3 and Doc. 4]-11 [Pg. 11 is part of Doc. 4]

Hilsman-Forrestal Report, 49 [Pg. 49 includes portions of Doc. 18 and Doc. 19]-62 [Pg. 62 is part of Doc. 19]

Ho Chi Minh, 156 [Pg. 156 includes portions of Doc. 60 and Doc. 61], 271 [Pg. 271 is part of Doc. 108], 418 [Pg. 418 is part of Doc. 188]

Ho Tan Quyen, Capt., 475 [Pg. 475 is part of Doc. 212], 577 [Pg. 577 is part of Doc. 256], 580 [Pg. 580 is part of Doc. 256]

Ho Tieu, Maj., 579 [Pg. 579 is part of Doc. 256], 582 [Pg. 582 is part of Doc. 256]

Hoang Van Lac, Col., 257 [Pg. 257 is part of Doc. 102]

Holyoake, Keith, 358 [Pg. 358 includes portions of Doc. 153 and Doc. 154]

Honolulu Conference (May 1963), 264 [Pg. 264 is part of Doc. 106]-270 [Pg. 270 includes portions of Doc. 107 and Doc. 108] Krulak’s report on, 279 [Pg. 279 is part of Doc. 113]

Summary report on, 590 [Pg. 590 includes portions of Doc. 259 and Doc. 260]-594 [Pg. 594 is part of Doc. 260]

Hughes, Thomas L., 405 [Pg. 405 is part of Doc. 183]-409 [Pg. 409 includes portions of Doc. 183 and Doc. 184], 614n [Pg. 614 includes portions of Doc. 274 and Doc. 275], 633n [Pg. 633 is part of Doc. 284], 647n [Pg. 647 is part of Doc. 294]

Huyen Quang, bonze, 391 [Pg. 391 is part of Doc. 172]

Huyhn Van Le, bonze, 553n [Pg. 553 is part of Doc. 245]

Huynh Huu Hien, Col., 580 [Pg. 580 is part of Doc. 256]

Huynh Ngoc Diep, Maj., 579 [Pg. 579 is part of Doc. 256]

Huynh Van Cao, Brig. Gen., 573 [Pg. 573 is part of Doc. 256], 576 [Pg. 576 is part of Doc. 256], 580 [Pg. 580 is part of Doc. 256], 584 [Pg. 584 is part of Doc. 257], 654 [Pg. 654 is part of Doc. 299]

India (see also International Control Commission), 674 [Pg. 674 is part of Doc. 308]

International Control Commission (ICC), 197 [Pg. 197 is part of Doc. 76], 260 [Pg. 260 is part of Doc. 104] Chemical warfare issue, 272 [Pg. 272 includes portions of Doc. 108 and Doc. 109]-274 [Pg. 274 includes portions of Doc. 109 and Doc. 110]

Iran, 674 [Pg. 674 is part of Doc. 308]

Italy: Criticism of Diem, 672 [Pg. 672 includes portions of Doc. 307 and Doc. 308], 673 [Pg. 673 is part of Doc. 308]

Economic assistance to Vietnam, 24 [Pg. 24 is part of Doc. 12]

Jackson, Rear Adm. Andrew McG., 73 [Pg. 73 is part of Doc. 26]

Janow, Seymour J., 25 [Pg. 25 is part of Doc. 12], 107 [Pg. 107 is part of Doc. 34], 150 [Pg. 150 includes portions of Doc. 58 and Doc. 59], 201 [Pg. 201 is part of Doc. 78], 283 [Pg. 283 includes portions of Doc. 114 and Doc. 115], 301 [Pg. 301 is part of Doc. 124]-303 [Pg. 303 includes portions of Doc. 124 and Doc. 125]

Jantzen, 279 [Pg. 279 is part of Doc. 113]

Japan: Criticism of Diem, 673 [Pg. 673 is part of Doc. 308]

Economic assistance to Vietnam, 24 [Pg. 24 is part of Doc. 12], 25 [Pg. 25 is part of Doc. 12]

John XXIII, Pope, 364 [Pg. 364 includes portions of Doc. 158 and Doc. 159]

Johnson, Robert H., 390n [Pg. 390 is part of Doc. 171]

Johnson, U. Alexis, 26n [Pg. 26 includes portions of Doc. 12 and Doc. 13] Coup against Diem, 488n [Pg. 488 includes portions of Doc. 219 and Doc. 220]

Farmgate operation, augmentation of, 34n [Pg. 34 includes portions of Doc. 16 and Doc. 17]

MACV, command autonomy for, 196n [Pg. 196 is part of Doc. 75]

Special Group for Counterinsurgency, 28 [Pg. 28 is part of Doc. 14], 30 [Pg. 30 includes portions of Doc. 14 and Doc. 15], 103 [Pg. 103 includes portions of Doc. 31 and Doc. 32], 150 [Pg. 150 includes portions of Doc. 58 and Doc. 59]

U.S. medical program for Vietnam, 29 [Pg. 29 is part of Doc. 14]-30 [Pg. 30 includes portions of Doc. 14 and Doc. 15]

U.S. military involvement in Vietnam, 260n [Pg. 260 is part of Doc. 104]

Joint Air Operations Center (JAOC), 85 [Pg. 85 is part of Doc. 26]-86 [Pg. 86 is part of Doc. 26]

Joint Chiefs of Staff (OCS): Ap Bac, battle of, 2 [Pg. 2 is part of Doc. 1]

Civilian Irregular Defense Group program, 330 [Pg. 330 includes portions of Doc. 135 and Doc. 136]

Comprehensive Plan for South Vietnam, 35 [Pg. 35 includes portions of Doc. 17 and Doc. 18], 37n [Pg. 37 is part of Doc. 18] Assessment of, 133 [Pg. 133 includes portions of Doc. 50 and Doc. 51]-136 [Pg. 136 includes portions of Doc. 51 and Doc. 52]

Crop destruction and defoliation: Results, reports on, 230 [Pg. 230 is part of Doc. 93]-232 [Pg. 232 includes portions of Doc. 93 and Doc. 94]

Test operations, 206 [Pg. 206 includes portions of Doc. 79 and Doc. 80]-207 [Pg. 207 includes portions of Doc. 80 and Doc. 81]

Farmgate operation, augmentation of, 32 [Pg. 32 includes portions of Doc. 15 and Doc. 16], 33 [Pg. 33 is part of Doc. 16], 145 [Pg. 145 includes portions of Doc. 55 and Doc. 56]-147 [Pg. 147 is part of Doc. 56]

MACV, command autonomy for, 113n [Pg. 113 is part of Doc. 36]

RVNAF paramilitary force levels, 131 [Pg. 131 includes portions of Doc. 48 and Doc. 49]-132 [Pg. 132 includes portions of Doc. 49 and Doc. 50]

U.S. military assistance to Vietnam: Funding for, 292 [Pg. 292 is part of Doc. 121]

Jets, provision of, 261n [Pg. 261 includes portions of Doc. 104 and Doc. 105]

U.S. military involvement in Vietnam: Force reductions, proposed, 590 [Pg. 590 includes portions of Doc. 259 and Doc. 260]-591 [Pg. 591 is part of Doc. 260]

Helicopters, rules of engagement for, 117 [Pg. 117 is part of Doc. 40]

Wheeler Mission report, 73 [Pg. 73 is part of Doc. 26]

Joint Counterinsurgency Fund: Compromise agreement, 254 [Pg. 254 is part of Doc. 101]-256 [Pg. 256 includes portions of Doc. 101 and Doc. 102], 259 [Pg. 259 is part of Doc. 103] Announcement of, 307 [Pg. 307 includes portions of Doc. 126 and Doc. 127]-308 [Pg. 308 includes portions of Doc. 127 and Doc. 128]

Criticisms of, 301 [Pg. 301 is part of Doc. 124]-303 [Pg. 303 includes portions of Doc. 124 and Doc. 125]

Diem’s reconsideration of, 216 [Pg. 216 includes portions of Doc. 84 and Doc. 85]-218 [Pg. 218 is part of Doc. 85], 227 [Pg. 227 is part of Doc. 91]-228 [Pg. 228 is part of Doc. 91]

Diem’s rejection of, 183 [Pg. 183 includes portions of Doc. 67 and Doc. 68]-184 [Pg. 184 is part of Doc. 68], 207 [Pg. 207 includes portions of Doc. 80 and Doc. 81]-213 [Pg. 213 includes portions of Doc. 81 and Doc. 82] Nolting’s reaction, 213 [Pg. 213 includes portions of Doc. 81 and Doc. 82]-214 [Pg. 214 is part of Doc. 82]

U.S. response, possible, 214 [Pg. 214 is part of Doc. 82], 215 [Pg. 215 includes portions of Doc. 83 and Doc. 84]-216 [Pg. 216 includes portions of Doc. 84 and Doc. 85], 218 [Pg. 218 is part of Doc. 85]-219 [Pg. 219 includes portions of Doc. 85 and Doc. 86]

Expenditures, 158 [Pg. 158 is part of Doc. 61]

Fund Agreement, 157 [Pg. 157 is part of Doc. 61]-158 [Pg. 158 is part of Doc. 61]

Implementing agreements, 158 [Pg. 158 is part of Doc. 61]

Negotiations, 185 [Pg. 185 is part of Doc. 69], 186 [Pg. 186 includes portions of Doc. 70 and Doc. 71], 195 [Pg. 195 includes portions of Doc. 73, Doc. 74, and Doc. 75]

NSC meeting on, 221 [Pg. 221 is part of Doc. 87]

Priority Piaster Program, 159 [Pg. 159 is part of Doc. 61]-161 [Pg. 161 includes portions of Doc. 61 and Doc. 62]

Sources of financing, 157 [Pg. 157 is part of Doc. 61], 236 [Pg. 236 is part of Doc. 95]

U.S. initial proposal, 156 [Pg. 156 includes portions of Doc. 60 and Doc. 61]-161 [Pg. 161 includes portions of Doc. 61 and Doc. 62]

Vietnamese contribution, 159 [Pg. 159 is part of Doc. 61], 180 [Pg. 180 is part of Doc. 67]

Vietnamese control, proposed increase in, 216 [Pg. 216 includes portions of Doc. 84 and Doc. 85], 219 [Pg. 219 includes portions of Doc. 85 and Doc. 86]

Joint Operations Center (JOC), 76 [Pg. 76 is part of Doc. 26]

Jorden, William, 104 [Pg. 104 is part of Doc. 32], 201 [Pg. 201 is part of Doc. 78], 271n [Pg. 271 is part of Doc. 108], 354 [Pg. 354 is part of Doc. 152] Communist insurgency, report on, 165 [Pg. 165 includes portions of Doc. 63 and Doc. 64]-168 [Pg. 168 is part of Doc. 64]

Media coverage of Vietnam, 169 [Pg. 169 is part of Doc. 65]-171 [Pg. 171 is part of Doc. 65], 203 [Pg. 203 includes portions of Doc. 78 and Doc. 79]

Special Group for Counterinsurgency, meeting with, 202 [Pg. 202 is part of Doc. 78]-203 [Pg. 203 includes portions of Doc. 78 and Doc. 79]

U.S. information programs and policies in Vietnam, 171 [Pg. 171 is part of Doc. 65]-173 [Pg. 173 includes portions of Doc. 65 and Doc. 66]

Judd, Walter, 137 [Pg. 137 is part of Doc. 52]

Junior Country Team, 6 [Pg. 6 is part of Doc. 3]

Junk Force, Vietnamese, 131 [Pg. 131 includes portions of Doc. 48 and Doc. 49]-132 [Pg. 132 includes portions of Doc. 49 and Doc. 50], 265 [Pg. 265 is part of Doc. 107]

Kalischer, Peter, 472 [Pg. 472 is part of Doc. 211]-473 [Pg. 473 includes portions of Doc. 211 and Doc. 212]

Karamessines, 150 [Pg. 150 includes portions of Doc. 58 and Doc. 59]

Kattenburg, Paul M., 517n [Pg. 517 is part of Doc. 230], 522n [Pg. 522 includes portions of Doc. 232 and Doc. 233], 523n [Pg. 523 includes portions of Doc. 233 and Doc. 234], 527 [Pg. 527 is part of Doc. 236]-528 [Pg. 528 includes portions of Doc. 236 and Doc. 237], 529n [Pg. 529 includes portions of Doc. 237 and Doc. 238], 553n [Pg. 553 is part of Doc. 245], 554n [Pg. 554 is part of Doc. 246], 557n [Pg. 557 includes portions of Doc. 247 and Doc. 248], 564n [Pg. 564 includes portions of Doc. 251 and Doc. 252], 568 [Pg. 568 is part of Doc. 255]-569 [Pg. 569 includes portions of Doc. 255 and Doc. 256], 620n [Pg. 620 includes portions of Doc. 275 and Doc. 276], 661n [Pg. 661 is part of Doc. 303]

Kaysen, Carl, 132 [Pg. 132 includes portions of Doc. 49 and Doc. 50], 142n [Pg. 142 includes portions of Doc. 53 and Doc. 54]

Kennedy, John E, 94 [Pg. 94 includes portions of Doc. 26 and Doc. 27], 97 [Pg. 97 is part of Doc. 29], 264 [Pg. 264 is part of Doc. 106] Ap Bac, battle of, 2 [Pg. 2 is part of Doc. 1]

Buddhist crisis, 451 [Pg. 451 includes portions of Doc. 204 and Doc. 205]-452 [Pg. 452 is part of Doc. 205], 559 [Pg. 559 is part of Doc. 249] Cambodia’s position, 392 [Pg. 392 is part of Doc. 173], 404 [Pg. 404 includes portions of Doc. 181 and Doc. 182]

Counterinsurgency operations, impact on, 496 [Pg. 496 includes portions of Doc. 224, Doc. 225, and Doc. 226]

Diem’s efforts to keep his promises, 661 [Pg. 661 is part of Doc. 303]

Media coverage of, 472 [Pg. 472 is part of Doc. 211]

Nolting’s statement on religious persecution, 550n [Pg. 550 is part of Doc. 243]

Pagodas, raids on, 597 [Pg. 597 includes portions of Doc. 261 and Doc. 262]

Poison gas issue, 352n [Pg. 352 includes portions of Doc. 150 and Doc. 151]

Resolution of crisis, U.S. recommendations re, 386n [Pg. 386 is part of Doc. 169]

U.S. disassociation from Vietnamese policy, threatened, 447 [Pg. 447 includes portions of Doc. 201 and Doc. 202]

Counterinsurgency operations: Air power used in, 4n [Pg. 4 is part of Doc. 2]

Buddhist crisis, impact of, 661 [Pg. 661 is part of Doc. 303]

Mekong Delta situation, 589n [Pg. 589 is part of Doc. 259]

Progress made by, 306n [Pg. 306 includes portions of Doc. 125 and Doc. 126]

Coup against Diem, U.S. support for Generals’ plan, 628n [Pg. 628 includes portions of Doc. 280 and Doc. 281], 631 [Pg. 631 is part of Doc. 282], 634 [Pg. 634 includes portions of Doc. 284 and Doc. 285], 638 [Pg. 638 is part of Doc. 289], 639 [Pg. 639 is part of Doc. 289], 640 [Pg. 640 is part of Doc. 289], 641 [Pg. 641 is part of Doc. 289], 649 [Pg. 649 is part of Doc. 296], 658 [Pg. 658 includes portions of Doc. 301 and Doc. 302], 663 [Pg. 663 is part of Doc. 303], 664 [Pg. 664 is part of Doc. 303], 665 [Pg. 665 includes portions of Doc. 303 and Doc. 304]

Crop destruction and defoliation, 149 [Pg. 149 includes portions of Doc. 57 and Doc. 58], 199 [Pg. 199 is part of Doc. 77], 226 [Pg. 226 includes portions of Doc. 89 and Doc. 90], 245 [Pg. 245 includes portions of Doc. 97 and Doc. 98]

Diem, foreign critieism of, 672 [Pg. 672 includes portions of Doc. 307 and Doc. 308]

Hilsman-Forrestal Report, 49 [Pg. 49 includes portions of Doc. 18 and Doc. 19]

Krulak report, 455n [Pg. 455 includes portions of Doc. 206 and Doc. 207]

Lodge, briefing for, 567 [Pg. 567 is part of Doc. 254]

Martial law, 606 [Pg. 606 includes portions of Doc. 269 and Doc. 270], 608n [Pg. 608 is part of Doc. 270], 610 [Pg. 610 includes portions of Doc. 270, Doc. 271, and Doc. 272], 626 [Pg. 626 is part of Doc. 279]

Media coverage of Vietnam, Manning’s report on, 531 [Pg. 531 is part of Doc. 239]

Nhu’s removal from power, U.S. demand for, 625 [Pg. 625 includes portions of Doc. 277 and Doc. 278], 627 [Pg. 627 is part of Doc. 280], 634 [Pg. 634 includes portions of Doc. 284 and Doc. 285], 640 [Pg. 640 is part of Doc. 289]

Nolting attitude toward, 453 [Pg. 453 is part of Doc. 205]

Nolting’s return to Vietnam, 486n [Pg. 486 is part of Doc. 218]

Thompson, meeting with, 198 [Pg. 198 includes portions of Doc. 76 and Doc. 77]-200 [Pg. 200 is part of Doc. 77], 204 [Pg. 204 is part of Doc. 79]-205 [Pg. 205 is part of Doc. 79]

U.S. ambassadorship, 291 [Pg. 291 is part of Doc. 120]

U.S. information programs and policies in Vietnam, 66 [Pg. 66 is part of Doc. 23] “Confiding in newsmen” policy, 263n [Pg. 263 includes portions of Doc. 105 and Doc. 106]

U.S. military assistance to Vietnam, 185n [Pg. 185 is part of Doc. 69]

U.S. military involvement in Vietnam: Force reductions, proposed, 295 [Pg. 295 is part of Doc. 122]

Helicopters, rules of engagement for, 117n [Pg. 117 is part of Doc. 40]

U.S. official visits to Vietnam, 63 [Pg. 63 includes portions of Doc. 20 and Doc. 21]

U.S. policy in Vietnam: Bowles’ recommendation re, 136 [Pg. 136 includes portions of Doc. 51 and Doc. 52]

Mansfield’s views on, 585 [Pg. 585 is part of Doc. 258]

Vietnam, Republic of, commitment to, 503 [Pg. 503 is part of Doc. 226], 504 [Pg. 504 is part of Doc. 226]

Wheeler Mission, 63 [Pg. 63 includes portions of Doc. 20 and Doc. 21], 73n [Pg. 73 is part of Doc. 26]

Kennedy, Robert F., 103 [Pg. 103 includes portions of Doc. 31 and Doc. 32], 117n [Pg. 117 is part of Doc. 40], 201 [Pg. 201 is part of Doc. 78], 279 [Pg. 279 is part of Doc. 113], 315 [Pg. 315 is part of Doc. 132], 389 [Pg. 389 includes portions of Doc. 170 and Doc. 171], 659 [Pg. 659 includes portions of Doc. 302 and Doc. 303]

Kent, Col.J. R., 148n [Pg. 148 is part of Doc. 57], 235n [Pg. 235 includes portions of Doc. 94 and Doc. 95], 259n [Pg. 259 is part of Doc. 103], 275n [Pg. 275 includes portions of Doc. 110 and Doc. 111], 333n [Pg. 333 includes portions of Doc. 136 and Doc. 137]

Khiem. See Tran Thien Khiem, Gen. Khmer tribe, 250 [Pg. 250 is part of Doc. 100]

Khoi. See Dang Duc Khoi.

Khrushchev, Nikita S., 454n [Pg. 454 is part of Doc. 206]

Kim. See Le Van Kim, Brig. Gen. Kirk, Alan G., 196 [Pg. 196 is part of Doc. 75]

Korea, Democratic People’s Republic of, 673 [Pg. 673 is part of Doc. 308]

Korea, Republic of, 673 [Pg. 673 is part of Doc. 308]

Koren, Henry L. T., 26n [Pg. 26 includes portions of Doc. 12 and Doc. 13], 28 [Pg. 28 is part of Doc. 14], ISO, 185n [Pg. 185 is part of Doc. 69], 201 [Pg. 201 is part of Doc. 78], 279 [Pg. 279 is part of Doc. 113], 315 [Pg. 315 is part of Doc. 132], 389 [Pg. 389 includes portions of Doc. 170 and Doc. 171], 390 [Pg. 390 is part of Doc. 171], 404n [Pg. 404 includes portions of Doc. 181 and Doc. 182]

Krulak, Maj. Gen. Victor H., 263 [Pg. 263 includes portions of Doc. 105 and Doc. 106], 569n [Pg. 569 includes portions of Doc. 255 and Doc. 256] Buddhist crisis, 460 [Pg. 460 is part of Doc. 207]-461 [Pg. 461 is part of Doc. 207], 661 [Pg. 661 is part of Doc. 303]

Communist insurgency: Decline in activity, 150 [Pg. 150 includes portions of Doc. 58 and Doc. 59]

Infiltration routes, 463 [Pg. 463 is part of Doc. 207]

Troop strength, 464 [Pg. 464 is part of Doc. 207]

Communist surrender program, 461 [Pg. 461 is part of Doc. 207]-462 [Pg. 462 is part of Doc. 207]

Counterinsurgency operations: Assessment of, 103 [Pg. 103 includes portions of Doc. 31 and Doc. 32]-104 [Pg. 104 is part of Doc. 32]

Buddhist crisis, impact of, 661 [Pg. 661 is part of Doc. 303]

Mekong Delta situation, 584 [Pg. 584 is part of Doc. 257], 589n [Pg. 589 is part of Doc. 259]

National Campaign Plan, 458 [Pg. 458 is part of Doc. 207]-460 [Pg. 460 is part of Doc. 207]

Coup against Diem, U.S. support for Generals’ plan, 630 [Pg. 630 is part of Doc. 282]-631 [Pg. 631 is part of Doc. 282], 633n [Pg. 633 is part of Doc. 284], 638 [Pg. 638 is part of Doc. 289], 647n [Pg. 647 is part of Doc. 294], 675n [Pg. 675 includes portions of Doc. 308 and Doc. 309]

Honolulu Conference, 270 [Pg. 270 includes portions of Doc. 107 and Doc. 108], 279 [Pg. 279 is part of Doc. 113]

Martial law, 601 [Pg. 601 includes portions of Doc. 264 and Doc. 265]-602 [Pg. 602 includes portions of Doc. 265 and Doc. 266]

Media coverage of Vietnam, 465 [Pg. 465 is part of Doc. 207]

Special Group for Counterinsurgency, 150 [Pg. 150 includes portions of Doc. 58 and Doc. 59], 279 [Pg. 279 is part of Doc. 113], 315 [Pg. 315 is part of Doc. 132], 389 [Pg. 389 includes portions of Doc. 170 and Doc. 171]

Strategic hamlet program, 457 [Pg. 457 is part of Doc. 207]-458 [Pg. 458 is part of Doc. 207]

Thuan, meeting with, 463 [Pg. 463 is part of Doc. 207]-464 [Pg. 464 is part of Doc. 207]

U.S. military assistance to Vietnam, 333n [Pg. 333 includes portions of Doc. 136 and Doc. 137]

U.S. military involvement in Vietnam: Advisers, 462 [Pg. 462 is part of Doc. 207]

Force reductions, proposed, 464 [Pg. 464 is part of Doc. 207]-465 [Pg. 465 is part of Doc. 207]

Vietnam visit, report on, 455 [Pg. 455 includes portions of Doc. 206 and Doc. 207]-465 [Pg. 465 is part of Doc. 207]

Wheeler Mission, 73 [Pg. 73 is part of Doc. 26]

La. See Nguyen Van La, Maj. Gen. Lam Son. See Phan Dinh Thu, Col. Lansdale, Maj. Gen. Edward G., 527 [Pg. 527 is part of Doc. 236]-528 [Pg. 528 includes portions of Doc. 236 and Doc. 237], 647n [Pg. 647 is part of Doc. 294] Coup against Diem, 665 [Pg. 665 includes portions of Doc. 303 and Doc. 304]-666 [Pg. 666 is part of Doc. 304]

Laos: Chinese policy toward, 420 [Pg. 420 is part of Doc. 188]-421 [Pg. 421 is part of Doc. 188]

Communist drive to conquer, 327 [Pg. 327 includes portions of Doc. 134 and Doc. 135]-330 [Pg. 330 includes portions of Doc. 135 and Doc. 136]

Communist infiltration through, 30 [Pg. 30 includes portions of Doc. 14 and Doc. 15]-31 [Pg. 31 is part of Doc. 15], 166 [Pg. 166 is part of Doc. 64], 454 [Pg. 454 is part of Doc. 206]-455 [Pg. 455 includes portions of Doc. 206 and Doc. 207], 463 [Pg. 463 is part of Doc. 207]

Communist sanctuaries, 92 [Pg. 92 is part of Doc. 26]

Partitioning of, proposed, 519 [Pg. 519 is part of Doc. 231]-521 [Pg. 521 includes portions of Doc. 231 and Doc. 232]

Reconnaissance missions into, proposed, 12 [Pg. 12 is part of Doc. 5], 94 [Pg. 94 includes portions of Doc. 26 and Doc. 27]

Soviet policy toward, 420 [Pg. 420 is part of Doc. 188], 421 [Pg. 421 is part of Doc. 188]

Vietnam, Democratic Republic of, and, 417 [Pg. 417 is part of Doc. 188], 420 [Pg. 420 is part of Doc. 188]-421 [Pg. 421 is part of Doc. 188]

Vietnam, Republic of, relations with, 326 [Pg. 326 is part of Doc. 134]

Le Nguyen Khang, Lt. Col., 579 [Pg. 579 is part of Doc. 256]

Le Quang Tung, Col., 224 [Pg. 224 is part of Doc. 88], 376 [Pg. 376 includes portions of Doc. 164 and Doc. 165], 580 [Pg. 580 is part of Doc. 256], 597 [Pg. 597 includes portions of Doc. 261 and Doc. 262], 606 [Pg. 606 includes portions of Doc. 269 and Doc. 270], 617 [Pg. 617 is part of Doc. 275], 654 [Pg. 654 is part of Doc. 299], 657 [Pg. 657 includes portions of Doc. 300 and Doc. 301], 669 [Pg. 669 is part of Doc. 306], 671 [Pg. 671 includes portions of Doc. 306 and Doc. 307]

Le Van Kim, Brig. Gen.: Coup against Diem: Generals’ plan, 653 [Pg. 653 includes portions of Doc. 298 and Doc. 299], 656 [Pg. 656 is part of Doc. 300]

Nhu as planner of, 489 [Pg. 489 is part of Doc. 220], 490 [Pg. 490 is part of Doc. 220], 491 [Pg. 491 is part of Doc. 220]

Martial law, 616 [Pg. 616 is part of Doc. 275]

Nhu’s removal from power, support for, 613 [Pg. 613 is part of Doc. 274]-614 [Pg. 614 includes portions of Doc. 274 and Doc. 275]

Succession crisis, possible role in, 581 [Pg. 581 is part of Doc. 256], 582 [Pg. 582 is part of Doc. 256]

Le Van Ty, Gen., 468 [Pg. 468 is part of Doc. 209], 469 [Pg. 469 is part of Doc. 209]

Lebanon, 674 [Pg. 674 is part of Doc. 308]

Lend-Lease program for Vietnam, proposed, 501 [Pg. 501 is part of Doc. 226]-502 [Pg. 502 is part of Doc. 226]

Levy, Col. Robert M., 74 [Pg. 74 is part of Doc. 26]

Liem, Lt. Col., 352 [Pg. 352 includes portions of Doc. 150 and Doc. 151]

Lockhart, Frank P., 34n [Pg. 34 includes portions of Doc. 16 and Doc. 17]

Lodge, Henry Cabot, Jr., 467 [Pg. 467 is part of Doc. 208] Appointment as ambassador, 414n [Pg. 414 is part of Doc. 186], 415 [Pg. 415 is part of Doc. 187], 416 [Pg. 416 includes portions of Doc. 187 and Doc. 188], 453 [Pg. 453 is part of Doc. 205]

Arrival in Vietnam, 606n [Pg. 606 includes portions of Doc. 269 and Doc. 270]

Buddhist crisis, 611 [Pg. 611 includes portions of Doc. 272 and Doc. 273]

Coup against Diem, U.S. support for Generals’ plan, 628 [Pg. 628 includes portions of Doc. 280 and Doc. 281], 634 [Pg. 634 includes portions of Doc. 284 and Doc. 285]-635 [Pg. 635 includes portions of Doc. 285 and Doc. 286], 642 [Pg. 642 is part of Doc. 290], 646 [Pg. 646 is part of Doc. 293], 650 [Pg. 650 includes portions of Doc. 296 and Doc. 297]-651 [Pg. 651 includes portions of Doc. 297 and Doc. 298], 668 [Pg. 668 includes portions of Doc. 305 and Doc. 306]-671 [Pg. 671 includes portions of Doc. 306 and Doc. 307]

Diem, initial meeting with, 644 [Pg. 644 is part of Doc. 292]-645 [Pg. 645 is part of Doc. 292], 649 [Pg. 649 is part of Doc. 296]

Kennedy’s briefing for, 567 [Pg. 567 is part of Doc. 254]

Mansfield’s support for, 585 [Pg. 585 is part of Doc. 258]

Martial law: Control of govemment issue, 604 [Pg. 604 includes portions of Doc. 267 and Doc. 268], 605 [Pg. 605 includes portions of Doc. 268 and Doc. 269]-606 [Pg. 606 includes portions of Doc. 269 and Doc. 270], 620 [Pg. 620 includes portions of Doc. 275 and Doc. 276]-621 [Pg. 621 includes portions of Doc. 276 and Doc. 277]

U.S. response to, 601 [Pg. 601 includes portions of Doc. 264 and Doc. 265]

Mau’s resignation, 610 [Pg. 610 includes portions of Doc. 270, Doc. 271, and Doc. 272]

Nhu, initial meeting with, 651 [Pg. 651 includes portions of Doc. 297 and Doc. 298]-653 [Pg. 653 includes portions of Doc. 298 and Doc. 299]

Nhu’s removal from power, 611 [Pg. 611 includes portions of Doc. 272 and Doc. 273]-612 [Pg. 612 is part of Doc. 273], 613 [Pg. 613 is part of Doc. 274]-614 [Pg. 614 includes portions of Doc. 274 and Doc. 275], 621 [Pg. 621 includes portions of Doc. 276 and Doc. 277], 627 [Pg. 627 is part of Doc. 280], 636 [Pg. 636 includes portions of Doc. 287 and Doc. 288]-637 [Pg. 637 is part of Doc. 288]

Press relations, 623 [Pg. 623 is part of Doc. 277]-625 [Pg. 625 includes portions of Doc. 277 and Doc. 278]

U.S. economic assistance to Vietnam, 544 [Pg. 544 is part of Doc. 240]

U.S. information programs and policies in Vietnam: “Confiding in newsmen” policy, 530 [Pg. 530 is part of Doc. 238]

Credibility crisis in, 621 [Pg. 621 includes portions of Doc. 276 and Doc. 277]

Press involvement in reassessment of Vietnam situation, 541 [Pg. 541 is part of Doc. 239]-542 [Pg. 542 is part of Doc. 239]

Press relations, responsibility for, 567 [Pg. 567 is part of Doc. 254]

Washington officials, relations with, 604 [Pg. 604 includes portions of Doc. 267 and Doc. 268]

Loikow, Sgt. Maj. George E., 74 [Pg. 74 is part of Doc. 26]

Luong. See Bui Van Luong.

Luu Van Tinh, 582 [Pg. 582 is part of Doc. 256]

Ma Viet Bang, Capt., 580 [Pg. 580 is part of Doc. 256]

Mackaday Zone D operations, 14 [Pg. 14 is part of Doc. 6]

Macmillan, Harold, 392n [Pg. 392 is part of Doc. 173]

Maechling, Charles, Jr., 17n [Pg. 17 is part of Doc. 9], 129n [Pg. 129 includes portions of Doc. 46 and Doc. 47], 201 [Pg. 201 is part of Doc. 78], 315 [Pg. 315 is part of Doc. 132]

Mai Huu Xuan, Brig. Gen., 580 [Pg. 580 is part of Doc. 256]-581 [Pg. 581 is part of Doc. 256], 616 [Pg. 616 is part of Doc. 275]

Malaya, 673 [Pg. 673 is part of Doc. 308]

Manell, Abram E., 116n [Pg. 116 is part of Doc. 39], 152 [Pg. 152 is part of Doc. 60], 308n [Pg. 308 includes portions of Doc. 127 and Doc. 128], 313n [Pg. 313 is part of Doc. 130], 522n [Pg. 522 includes portions of Doc. 232 and Doc. 233]

Manfull, Melvin L., 247n [Pg. 247 includes portions of Doc. 99 and Doc. 100], 375n [Pg. 375 is part of Doc. 164] Defoliant operations, 272 [Pg. 272 includes portions of Doc. 108 and Doc. 109]-274 [Pg. 274 includes portions of Doc. 109 and Doc. 110]

Farmgate operation, augmentation of, 32 [Pg. 32 includes portions of Doc. 15 and Doc. 16]-34 [Pg. 34 includes portions of Doc. 16 and Doc. 17]

Manhart, Maj. Gen. A. H., 206 [Pg. 206 includes portions of Doc. 79 and Doc. 80]-207 [Pg. 207 includes portions of Doc. 80 and Doc. 81]

Manning, Robert J., 66 [Pg. 66 is part of Doc. 23], 152n [Pg. 152 is part of Doc. 60] Diem, meeting with, 511 [Pg. 511 is part of Doc. 227]-514 [Pg. 514 includes portions of Doc. 227 and Doc. 228]

Media coverage of Vietnam: Expulsions of reporters, 506 [Pg. 506 is part of Doc. 226]

Harassment campaign against reporters, 504 [Pg. 504 is part of Doc. 226], 513 [Pg. 513 is part of Doc. 227], 539 [Pg. 539 is part of Doc. 239]-540 [Pg. 540 is part of Doc. 239]

Press conferences by Vietnamese offidaIs, 512 [Pg. 512 is part of Doc. 227], 513 [Pg. 513 is part of Doc. 227]

Report on, 531 [Pg. 531 is part of Doc. 239]-543 [Pg. 543 is part of Doc. 239]

Reporters, caliber of, 512 [Pg. 512 is part of Doc. 227], 532 [Pg. 532 is part of Doc. 239]-535 [Pg. 535 is part of Doc. 239]

Nhu, meeting with, 496 [Pg. 496 includes portions of Doc. 224, Doc. 225, and Doc. 226]-510 [Pg. 510 is part of Doc. 226]

Nhu’s press relations, 505 [Pg. 505 is part of Doc. 226], 506 [Pg. 506 is part of Doc. 226]

U.S. information programs and policies in Vietnam, 313n [Pg. 313 is part of Doc. 130] “Confiding in newsmen” policy, 529 [Pg. 529 includes portions of Doc. 237 and Doc. 238]-530 [Pg. 530 is part of Doc. 238]

Government’s press relations, efforts to improve, 530 [Pg. 530 is part of Doc. 238]

Political perspective on media coverage, 503 [Pg. 503 is part of Doc. 226]-504 [Pg. 504 is part of Doc. 226], 510 [Pg. 510 is part of Doc. 226], 511 [Pg. 511 is part of Doc. 227]-512 [Pg. 512 is part of Doc. 227]

Positive media coverage, methods to obtain, 507 [Pg. 507 is part of Doc. 226]

Recommendations for, 541 [Pg. 541 is part of Doc. 239]-543 [Pg. 543 is part of Doc. 239]

Vietnam, Republic of, U.S. public attitude toward, 502 [Pg. 502 is part of Doc. 226]-503 [Pg. 503 is part of Doc. 226], 504 [Pg. 504 is part of Doc. 226], 509 [Pg. 509 is part of Doc. 226]

Mansfield, Mike (see also Mansfield report), 68n [Pg. 68 is part of Doc. 24], 136 [Pg. 136 includes portions of Doc. 51 and Doc. 52], 564n [Pg. 564 includes portions of Doc. 251 and Doc. 252] U.S. policy in Vietnam, premise of, 585 [Pg. 585 is part of Doc. 258]-588 [Pg. 588 is part of Doc. 258]

Vietnamese attitude toward, 155 [Pg. 155 is part of Doc. 60]

Mansfield report, 68 [Pg. 68 is part of Doc. 24]-69 [Pg. 69 is part of Doc. 24] Chuong’s assessment of, 142 [Pg. 142 includes portions of Doc. 53 and Doc. 54]-143 [Pg. 143 is part of Doc. 54]

Principal points, 122 [Pg. 122 includes portions of Doc. 41 and Doc. 42]-123 [Pg. 123 is part of Doc. 42]

Vietnamese reaction to, 124 [Pg. 124 is part of Doc. 43], 152 [Pg. 152 is part of Doc. 60]-156 [Pg. 156 includes portions of Doc. 60 and Doc. 61]

Wood’s assessment of, 70 [Pg. 70 is part of Doc. 25]-72 [Pg. 72 is part of Doc. 25]

Marine Corps, Vietnamese, 77 [Pg. 77 is part of Doc. 26]-78 [Pg. 78 is part of Doc. 26], 576 [Pg. 576 is part of Doc. 256]

Martial law: Control of government issue, 602 [Pg. 602 includes portions of Doc. 265 and Doc. 266], 604 [Pg. 604 includes portions of Doc. 267 and Doc. 268]-608 [Pg. 608 is part of Doc. 270], 609 [Pg. 609 is part of Doc. 270], 614 [Pg. 614 includes portions of Doc. 274 and Doc. 275]-615 [Pg. 615 is part of Doc. 275], 620 [Pg. 620 includes portions of Doc. 275 and Doc. 276]-621 [Pg. 621 includes portions of Doc. 276 and Doc. 277], 626 [Pg. 626 is part of Doc. 279], 628 [Pg. 628 includes portions of Doc. 280 and Doc. 281]

Counterinsurgency operations and, 608 [Pg. 608 is part of Doc. 270]

Declaration of, 595 [Pg. 595 is part of Doc. 261]-597 [Pg. 597 includes portions of Doc. 261 and Doc. 262], 600 [Pg. 600 is part of Doc. 264], 616 [Pg. 616 is part of Doc. 275]

Diem’s justification for, 645 [Pg. 645 is part of Doc. 292]

Don’s assessment of, 608 [Pg. 608 is part of Doc. 270]

Harkins’ assessment of, 607 [Pg. 607 is part of Doc. 270]-610 [Pg. 610 includes portions of Doc. 270, Doc. 271, and Doc. 272]

Military chain of command, 616 [Pg. 616 is part of Doc. 275]-617 [Pg. 617 is part of Doc. 275]

Nhu’s strategy re, 612 [Pg. 612 is part of Doc. 273]

Reports for Kennedy on, 610 [Pg. 610 includes portions of Doc. 270, Doc. 271, and Doc. 272], 626 [Pg. 626 is part of Doc. 279]

U.S. response to, 601 [Pg. 601 includes portions of Doc. 264 and Doc. 265]-602 [Pg. 602 includes portions of Doc. 265 and Doc. 266]

Martin, Edwin M., 330 [Pg. 330 includes portions of Doc. 135 and Doc. 136]

Martin, Pepper, 530 [Pg. 530 is part of Doc. 238]

Martin, Robert, 170 [Pg. 170 is part of Doc. 65]

Mat Hien, bonze, 288 [Pg. 288 is part of Doc. 118]

Mat Nguyen,bonze, 286 [Pg. 286 is part of Doc. 117], 288 [Pg. 288 is part of Doc. 118], 383n [Pg. 383 includes portions of Doc. 167 and Doc. 168]

Mau. See Vu Van Mau.

Maynard, Len, 256 [Pg. 256 includes portions of Doc. 101 and Doc. 102]

McCloskey, Robert J., 34n [Pg. 34 includes portions of Doc. 16 and Doc. 17], 116n [Pg. 116 is part of Doc. 39]

McCone, John A., 189n [Pg. 189 includes portions of Doc. 71 and Doc. 72], 625 [Pg. 625 includes portions of Doc. 277 and Doc. 278] Special Group for Counterinsurgency, 28 [Pg. 28 is part of Doc. 14], 103 [Pg. 103 includes portions of Doc. 31 and Doc. 32], 150 [Pg. 150 includes portions of Doc. 58 and Doc. 59], 201 [Pg. 201 is part of Doc. 78], 279 [Pg. 279 is part of Doc. 113], 315 [Pg. 315 is part of Doc. 132], 389 [Pg. 389 includes portions of Doc. 170 and Doc. 171]

McGann, Eleanor G., 550n [Pg. 550 is part of Doc. 243]

McHugh, Gen. Godfrey T., 2 [Pg. 2 is part of Doc. 1]

McNamara, Robert S.: Air Force, Vietnamese, training for, 268 [Pg. 268 is part of Doc. 107]

Buddhist crisis, 600 [Pg. 600 is part of Doc. 264]

Communist surrender program, 266 [Pg. 266 is part of Doc. 107]

Comprehensive Plan for South Vietnam, 133 [Pg. 133 includes portions of Doc. 50 and Doc. 51]

Counterinsurgency operations, 189n [Pg. 189 includes portions of Doc. 71 and Doc. 72] Air power used in, 269 [Pg. 269 is part of Doc. 107]

Mekong Delta situation, 584 [Pg. 584 is part of Doc. 257], 589n [Pg. 589 is part of Doc. 259]

Coup against Diem, U.S. support for Generals’ plan, 640 [Pg. 640 is part of Doc. 289], 641 [Pg. 641 is part of Doc. 289], 659 [Pg. 659 includes portions of Doc. 302 and Doc. 303], 660 [Pg. 660 is part of Doc. 303], 664 [Pg. 664 is part of Doc. 303], 665 [Pg. 665 includes portions of Doc. 303 and Doc. 304], 667n [Pg. 667 is part of Doc. 305]

Crop destruction and defoliation: Results, reports on, 230 [Pg. 230 is part of Doc. 93]

Test operations, 206 [Pg. 206 includes portions of Doc. 79 and Doc. 80]

Farmgate operation, augmentation of, 145 [Pg. 145 includes portions of Doc. 55 and Doc. 56]

Honolulu Conference, 264 [Pg. 264 is part of Doc. 106]-270 [Pg. 270 includes portions of Doc. 107 and Doc. 108]

Joint Counterinsurgency Fund, 302 [Pg. 302 is part of Doc. 124]

Krulak report, 455n [Pg. 455 includes portions of Doc. 206 and Doc. 207]

Nhu’s removal from power, U.S. demand for, 640 [Pg. 640 is part of Doc. 289]

Republic of Vietnam Armed Forces: Force structure, 267 [Pg. 267 is part of Doc. 107]

Paramilitary forces, 131 [Pg. 131 includes portions of Doc. 48 and Doc. 49], 132n [Pg. 132 includes portions of Doc. 49 and Doc. 50], 266 [Pg. 266 is part of Doc. 107]

Thompson and, 205 [Pg. 205 is part of Doc. 79]

U.S. medical program for Vietnam, 266 [Pg. 266 is part of Doc. 107]

U.S. military assistance to Vietnam: Funding for, 268 [Pg. 268 is part of Doc. 107], 275 [Pg. 275 includes portions of Doc. 110 and Doc. 111]-276 [Pg. 276 is part of Doc. 111]

Jets, provision of, 26 [Pg. 26 includes portions of Doc. 12 and Doc. 13], 27 [Pg. 27 is part of Doc. 13], 261n [Pg. 261 includes portions of Doc. 104 and Doc. 105]

U.S. military involvement in Vietnam: Advisers, 269 [Pg. 269 is part of Doc. 107]-270 [Pg. 270 includes portions of Doc. 107 and Doc. 108]

Force reductions, proposed, 193 [Pg. 193 is part of Doc. 73], 243 [Pg. 243 includes portions of Doc. 96 and Doc. 97], 244 [Pg. 244 is part of Doc. 97], 245 [Pg. 245 includes portions of Doc. 97 and Doc. 98], 268 [Pg. 268 is part of Doc. 107], 276n [Pg. 276 is part of Doc. 111], 590 [Pg. 590 includes portions of Doc. 259 and Doc. 260]

Helicopters, rules of engagement for, 117 [Pg. 117 is part of Doc. 40]

Weapons systems, value of, 265 [Pg. 265 is part of Doc. 107]

Vietnam, Republic of, economic situation, 270 [Pg. 270 includes portions of Doc. 107 and Doc. 108]

Mecklin, John, 10 [Pg. 10 is part of Doc. 4], II, 144n [Pg. 144 is part of Doc. 55], 173 [Pg. 173 includes portions of Doc. 65 and Doc. 66], 374n [Pg. 374 is part of Doc. 163], 511 [Pg. 511 is part of Doc. 227] Buddhist crisis, media coverage of, 471 [Pg. 471 is part of Doc. 210]

Coup against Diem, 642 [Pg. 642 is part of Doc. 290]

Manning’s attitude toward, 537 [Pg. 537 is part of Doc. 239] Mansfield report, Vietnamese reaction to, 152 [Pg. 152 is part of Doc. 60]-156 [Pg. 156 includes portions of Doc. 60 and Doc. 61]

Media coverage of Vietnam: Expulsions of reporters, 508 [Pg. 508 is part of Doc. 226]

Nhu’s press relations, 505 [Pg. 505 is part of Doc. 226]

Reporters, assessments of, 534 [Pg. 534 is part of Doc. 239], 624 [Pg. 624 is part of Doc. 277]-625 [Pg. 625 includes portions of Doc. 277 and Doc. 278]

U.S. information programs and policies in Vietnam: “Confiding in newsmen” policy, 263n [Pg. 263 includes portions of Doc. 105 and Doc. 106]

Credibility crisis, 621 [Pg. 621 includes portions of Doc. 276 and Doc. 277]-625 [Pg. 625 includes portions of Doc. 277 and Doc. 278]

Press briefings by officials, 64 [Pg. 64 is part of Doc. 21]

U.S. Lend-Lease program, proposed, 502 [Pg. 502 is part of Doc. 226]

U.S. military involvement in Vietnam, 117n [Pg. 117 is part of Doc. 40]

Media coverage of Vietnam (see also U.S. information programs and policies in Vietnam; under Buddhist crisis): Ap Bac, battle of, 2 [Pg. 2 is part of Doc. 1]-3 [Pg. 3 includes portions of Doc. 1 and Doc. 2], 98 [Pg. 98 includes portions of Doc. 29 and Doc. 30]

“Bad rumors,” sources of, 498 [Pg. 498 is part of Doc. 226], 499 [Pg. 499 is part of Doc. 226]-500 [Pg. 500 is part of Doc. 226]

Crop destruction and defoliation, 240 [Pg. 240 is part of Doc. 96]-241 [Pg. 241 is part of Doc. 96]

Diem’s assessment of, 511 [Pg. 511 is part of Doc. 227]-514 [Pg. 514 includes portions of Doc. 227 and Doc. 228] Diem’s press relations, 58 [Pg. 58 is part of Doc. 19], 193 [Pg. 193 is part of Doc. 73], 326 [Pg. 326 is part of Doc. 134], 532 [Pg. 532 is part of Doc. 239], 535 [Pg. 535 is part of Doc. 239]

Editorials, 170 [Pg. 170 is part of Doc. 65]-171 [Pg. 171 is part of Doc. 65]

Expulsions of reporten, 506 [Pg. 506 is part of Doc. 226]-507 [Pg. 507 is part of Doc. 226], 508 [Pg. 508 is part of Doc. 226], 535 [Pg. 535 is part of Doc. 239], 540 [Pg. 540 is part of Doc. 239]

Government’s press relations, 89 [Pg. 89 is part of Doc. 26]-90 [Pg. 90 is part of Doc. 26], 93 [Pg. 93 is part of Doc. 26], 99 [Pg. 99 is part of Doc. 30]-100 [Pg. 100 is part of Doc. 30], 101 [Pg. 101 is part of Doc. 30] Complaints about press, 220 [Pg. 220 is part of Doc. 86]

Press conferences, 512 [Pg. 512 is part of Doc. 227], 513 [Pg. 513 is part of Doc. 227]

U.S. efforts to improve, 96 [Pg. 96 is part of Doc. 28], 171 [Pg. 171 is part of Doc. 65], 313 [Pg. 313 is part of Doc. 130], 530 [Pg. 530 is part of Doc. 238]

Harassment campaign against reporters, 470 [Pg. 470 includes portions of Doc. 209 and Doc. 210]-473 [Pg. 473 includes portions of Doc. 211 and Doc. 212], 504 [Pg. 504 is part of Doc. 226]-505 [Pg. 505 is part of Doc. 226], 513 [Pg. 513 is part of Doc. 227], 539 [Pg. 539 is part of Doc. 239]-540 [Pg. 540 is part of Doc. 239]

Helicopters, rules of engagement for, 117n [Pg. 117 is part of Doc. 40]

Jorden’s assessment of, 169 [Pg. 169 is part of Doc. 65]-171 [Pg. 171 is part of Doc. 65], 203 [Pg. 203 includes portions of Doc. 78 and Doc. 79]

Krulak’s assessment of, 465 [Pg. 465 is part of Doc. 207]

Lodge’s press relations, 623 [Pg. 623 is part of Doc. 277]-625 [Pg. 625 includes portions of Doc. 277 and Doc. 278]

Manning’s report on, 531 [Pg. 531 is part of Doc. 239]-543 [Pg. 543 is part of Doc. 239]

Mekong Delta situation, 584 [Pg. 584 is part of Doc. 257], 589 [Pg. 589 is part of Doc. 259]-590 [Pg. 590 includes portions of Doc. 259 and Doc. 260]

Nhu’s assessment of, 498 [Pg. 498 is part of Doc. 226]-501 [Pg. 501 is part of Doc. 226], 505 [Pg. 505 is part of Doc. 226]-508 [Pg. 508 is part of Doc. 226]

Nhu’s press relations, 505 [Pg. 505 is part of Doc. 226]-506 [Pg. 506 is part of Doc. 226], 508 [Pg. 508 is part of Doc. 226], 535 [Pg. 535 is part of Doc. 239]-536 [Pg. 536 is part of Doc. 239], 540 [Pg. 540 is part of Doc. 239]

Nolting’s assessments of, 34 [Pg. 34 includes portions of Doc. 16 and Doc. 17]-35 [Pg. 35 includes portions of Doc. 17 and Doc. 18], 98 [Pg. 98 includes portions of Doc. 29 and Doc. 30]-102 [Pg. 102 includes portions of Doc. 30 and Doc. 31]

Political perspective on, 503 [Pg. 503 is part of Doc. 226]-504 [Pg. 504 is part of Doc. 226], 510 [Pg. 510 is part of Doc. 226], 511 [Pg. 511 is part of Doc. 227]-512 [Pg. 512 is part of Doc. 227]

Reporters, caliber of: Manning’s assessments of, 512 [Pg. 512 is part of Doc. 227], 532 [Pg. 532 is part of Doc. 239]-535 [Pg. 535 is part of Doc. 239]

Mecklin’s assessments of, 534 [Pg. 534 is part of Doc. 239], 624 [Pg. 624 is part of Doc. 277]-625 [Pg. 625 includes portions of Doc. 277 and Doc. 278]

Reporters’ suspicions re U.S. officials, 533 [Pg. 533 is part of Doc. 239]

U.S. combat activities, 101n [Pg. 101 is part of Doc. 30], 116 [Pg. 116 is part of Doc. 39], 128 [Pg. 128 includes portions of Doc. 45 and Doc. 46]-129 [Pg. 129 includes portions of Doc. 46 and Doc. 47]

U.S. officials’ attitudes toward reporters, 536 [Pg. 536 is part of Doc. 239]-537 [Pg. 537 is part of Doc. 239]

U.S. public opinion, impact on, 89 [Pg. 89 is part of Doc. 26]

Vietnam story, approach to, 98 [Pg. 98 includes portions of Doc. 29 and Doc. 30]-99 [Pg. 99 is part of Doc. 30]

Wheeler’s assessment of, 113 [Pg. 113 is part of Doc. 36]

Mekong Delta military situation, 584 [Pg. 584 is part of Doc. 257], 589 [Pg. 589 is part of Doc. 259]-590 [Pg. 590 includes portions of Doc. 259 and Doc. 260]

Melvin, George, 256 [Pg. 256 includes portions of Doc. 101 and Doc. 102]

Meyers, Howard, 17n [Pg. 17 is part of Doc. 9]

Michaud, 370 [Pg. 370 is part of Doc. 161]

Military Assistance Advisory Group (MAAG), 85 [Pg. 85 is part of Doc. 26], 92 [Pg. 92 is part of Doc. 26], 246 [Pg. 246 includes portions of Doc. 98 and Doc. 99]

Military Assistance Command, Vietnam (MACV) (see also Harkins, Gen. Paul D.; U.S. military assistance to Vietnam; U.S. military involvement in Vietnam): Buddhist crisis, control operations by government, U.S. involvement in, 351 [Pg. 351 includes portions of Doc. 149 and Doc. 150], 352n [Pg. 352 includes portions of Doc. 150 and Doc. 151]

Civilian Irregular Defense Group program, 330 [Pg. 330 includes portions of Doc. 135 and Doc. 136], 332 [Pg. 332 is part of Doc. 136]-333 [Pg. 333 includes portions of Doc. 136 and Doc. 137]

Command autonomy for, 7 [Pg. 7 includes portions of Doc. 3 and Doc. 4]-8 [Pg. 8 is part of Doc. 4], 11 [Pg. 11 is part of Doc. 4], 95 [Pg. 95 is part of Doc. 27], 97 [Pg. 97 is part of Doc. 29], 113n [Pg. 113 is part of Doc. 36], 114 [Pg. 114 is part of Doc. 37], 195 [Pg. 195 includes portions of Doc. 73, Doc. 74, and Doc. 75]-196 [Pg. 196 is part of Doc. 75]

Command control situation, 85 [Pg. 85 is part of Doc. 26]-86 [Pg. 86 is part of Doc. 26], 92 [Pg. 92 is part of Doc. 26]

Counterinsurgency operations, air power used in, 251 [Pg. 251 is part of Doc. 100]-252 [Pg. 252 is part of Doc. 100]

Credibility crisis, 622 [Pg. 622 is part of Doc. 277]

Farmgate operation, augmentation of, 4 [Pg. 4 is part of Doc. 2], 32 [Pg. 32 includes portions of Doc. 15 and Doc. 16]-33 [Pg. 33 is part of Doc. 16]

Press briefings, 100 [Pg. 100 is part of Doc. 30]-101 [Pg. 101 is part of Doc. 30]

Public Information personnel, 172 [Pg. 172 is part of Doc. 65]

Research and development, control of, 93 [Pg. 93 is part of Doc. 26], 94 [Pg. 94 includes portions of Doc. 26 and Doc. 27]

Military assistance to Vietnam. See Third country military assistance to Vietnam; U.S. military assistance to Vietnam.

Miller, R. H., 247n [Pg. 247 includes portions of Doc. 99 and Doc. 100]

Momyer, Maj. Gen. William w., 74 [Pg. 74 is part of Doc. 26]

Montagnards, 250 [Pg. 250 is part of Doc. 100] Arming and training of, 49 [Pg. 49 includes portions of Doc. 18 and Doc. 19]-50 [Pg. 50 is part of Doc. 19], 104 [Pg. 104 is part of Doc. 32]-105 [Pg. 105 includes portions of Doc. 32 and Doc. 33]

Bordercontroland, 167 [Pg. 167 is part of Doc. 64]

Communists’ use of, 166 [Pg. 166 is part of Doc. 64]-167 [Pg. 167 is part of Doc. 64]

Diem’s assessment of, 14 [Pg. 14 is part of Doc. 6]

Disarming of, 6 [Pg. 6 is part of Doc. 3]-7 [Pg. 7 includes portions of Doc. 3 and Doc. 4]

Government programs for, 82 [Pg. 82 is part of Doc. 26]-83 [Pg. 83 is part of Doc. 26]

Strategic hamlet program and, 440 [Pg. 440 is part of Doc. 197]

Thompson’s assessment of, 194 [Pg. 194 is part of Doc. 73]

U.S. assistance for, 390 [Pg. 390 is part of Doc. 171]

Montgomery, James M., 17n [Pg. 17 is part of Doc. 9], 259n [Pg. 259 is part of Doc. 103], 262 [Pg. 262 is part of Doc. 105], 274n [Pg. 274 includes portions of Doc. 109 and Doc. 110], 280n [Pg. 280 includes portions of Doc. 113 and Doc. 114]

Moore, Daniel E., 96 [Pg. 96 is part of Doc. 28]

Murrow, Edward R.: Coup against Diem, 664 [Pg. 664 is part of Doc. 303]

Crop destruction and defoliation, 144 [Pg. 144 is part of Doc. 55]-145 [Pg. 145 includes portions of Doc. 55 and Doc. 56], 237n [Pg. 237 is part of Doc. 96], 274n [Pg. 274 includes portions of Doc. 109 and Doc. 110]

Diem, foreign criticism of, 672 [Pg. 672 includes portions of Doc. 307 and Doc. 308]-675 [Pg. 675 includes portions of Doc. 308 and Doc. 309]

Special Group for Counterinsurgency, 28 [Pg. 28 is part of Doc. 14], 103 [Pg. 103 includes portions of Doc. 31 and Doc. 32], 150 [Pg. 150 includes portions of Doc. 58 and Doc. 59], 151 [Pg. 151 is part of Doc. 59], 201 [Pg. 201 is part of Doc. 78], 279 [Pg. 279 is part of Doc. 113], 315 [Pg. 315 is part of Doc. 132], 389 [Pg. 389 includes portions of Doc. 170 and Doc. 171]

U.S. information programs and policies in Vietnam, 65 [Pg. 65 includes portions of Doc. 22 and Doc. 23] Chinese People’s Republic-Democratic Republic of Vietnam relations, propaganda re, 271 [Pg. 271 is part of Doc. 108], 354 [Pg. 354 is part of Doc. 152]-355 [Pg. 355 is part of Doc. 152]

Crop destruction and defoliation, 144 [Pg. 144 is part of Doc. 55]-145 [Pg. 145 includes portions of Doc. 55 and Doc. 56]

Single spokesman in Vietnam, proposed, 151 [Pg. 151 is part of Doc. 59]

VOA broadcast capabilities, 355 [Pg. 355 is part of Doc. 152]-356 [Pg. 356 includes portions of Doc. 152 and Doc. 153]

National Campaign Plan (NCP). See under Counterinsurgency operations.

National Intelligence Estimates: NIE 53 [Pg. 53 is part of Doc. 19]-63 [Pg. 63 includes portions of Doc. 20 and Doc. 21], 232 [Pg. 232 includes portions of Doc. 93 and Doc. 94]-235 [Pg. 235 includes portions of Doc. 94 and Doc. 95]

National Security Action Memoranda: 217 [Pg. 217 is part of Doc. 85] (Jan. 25, 1963), 63 [Pg. 63 includes portions of Doc. 20 and Doc. 21]

National Security Council (NSC) meetings: April 10, 1963, 221 [Pg. 221 is part of Doc. 87]

Navy, Vietnamese, 77 [Pg. 77 is part of Doc. 26], 298 [Pg. 298 is part of Doc. 123] Change of government and, 577 [Pg. 577 is part of Doc. 256]

Force structure, 41 [Pg. 41 is part of Doc. 18]

Junk Force, 131 [Pg. 131 includes portions of Doc. 48 and Doc. 49]-132 [Pg. 132 includes portions of Doc. 49 and Doc. 50], 265 [Pg. 265 is part of Doc. 107]

Nepal, 560 [Pg. 560 includes portions of Doc. 249 and Doc. 250]

New York Times, 240 [Pg. 240 is part of Doc. 96], 335 [Pg. 335 includes portions of Doc. 137 and Doc. 138], 393 [Pg. 393 is part of Doc. 174], 510n [Pg. 510 is part of Doc. 226], 557n [Pg. 557 includes portions of Doc. 247 and Doc. 248], 558 [Pg. 558 is part of Doc. 248]“, 565 [Pg. 565 includes portions of Doc. 252 and Doc. 253], 584 [Pg. 584 is part of Doc. 257], 589 [Pg. 589 is part of Doc. 259], 622 [Pg. 622 is part of Doc. 277], 635 [Pg. 635 includes portions of Doc. 285 and Doc. 286]

New Zealand: Economic assistance to Vietnam, 25 [Pg. 25 is part of Doc. 12]

Military assistance to Vietnam, 358 [Pg. 358 includes portions of Doc. 153 and Doc. 154]

Newsweek, 506 [Pg. 506 is part of Doc. 226]

Nghe, Gen., 328 [Pg. 328 is part of Doc. 135]

Nghiep, bonze, 492 [Pg. 492 is part of Doc. 221]

Ngo Dinh Can: Buddhist crisis, 285 [Pg. 285 includes portions of Doc. 116 and Doc. 117], 347 [Pg. 347 is part of Doc. 146], 477 [Pg. 477 is part of Doc. 212]

Diem’s death, possible response to, 321 [Pg. 321 is part of Doc. 133]

Nhu and, 573 [Pg. 573 is part of Doc. 256]-574 [Pg. 574 is part of Doc. 256]

Ngo Dinh Diem (see also Coup against Diem; Change of government, possible under Vietnam, Republic of): Advice from Americans, problems with, 154 [Pg. 154 is part of Doc. 60]-155 [Pg. 155 is part of Doc. 60]

Buddhist crisis: Agreement of June 16, 398 [Pg. 398 includes portions of Doc. 178 and Doc. 179], 411 [Pg. 411 is part of Doc. 185]-412 [Pg. 412 is part of Doc. 185], 422 [Pg. 422 includes portions of Doc. 188 and Doc. 189], 477 [Pg. 477 is part of Doc. 212]

Assessments of, 314 [Pg. 314 is part of Doc. 131], 445 [Pg. 445 is part of Doc. 200]-446 [Pg. 446 includes portions of Doc. 200 and Doc. 201]

Commission on, 353 [Pg. 353 is part of Doc. 151]

Conciliatory policy of government, 377n [Pg. 377 is part of Doc. 165], 525 [Pg. 525 is part of Doc. 235], 561 [Pg. 561 is part of Doc. 250], 563 [Pg. 563 is part of Doc. 251]-564 [Pg. 564 includes portions of Doc. 251 and Doc. 252], 565 [Pg. 565 includes portions of Doc. 252 and Doc. 253]-566 [Pg. 566 is part of Doc. 253]

Conciliatory speech, 479 [Pg. 479 includes portions of Doc. 213 and Doc. 214]-480 [Pg. 480 is part of Doc. 214], 494 [Pg. 494 includes portions of Doc. 223 and Doc. 224]-495 [Pg. 495 is part of Doc. 224], 514 [Pg. 514 includes portions of Doc. 227 and Doc. 228]-515 [Pg. 515 includes portions of Doc. 228 and Doc. 229]

Control operations by government, 367 [Pg. 367 is part of Doc. 160]-368 [Pg. 368 is part of Doc. 160], 546 [Pg. 546 includes portions of Doc. 240 and Doc. 241]

Demonstrations by Buddhists, 386 [Pg. 386 is part of Doc. 169]

Five demands, 309 [Pg. 309 includes portions of Doc. 128 and Doc. 129], 310 [Pg. 310 is part of Doc. 129]

Madame Nhu’s attacks on Buddhists, 560 [Pg. 560 includes portions of Doc. 249 and Doc. 250]-561 [Pg. 561 is part of Doc. 250], 562 [Pg. 562 includes portions of Doc. 250 and Doc. 251], 563 [Pg. 563 is part of Doc. 251]

Media coverage of, 471n [Pg. 471 is part of Doc. 210], 512 [Pg. 512 is part of Doc. 227], 513 [Pg. 513 is part of Doc. 227]

Meetings with Buddhists, 340 [Pg. 340 includes portions of Doc. 141 and Doc. 142], 345 [Pg. 345 is part of Doc. 145], 356 [Pg. 356 includes portions of Doc. 152 and Doc. 153], 526 [Pg. 526 is part of Doc. 235]

Negotiations, 389n [Pg. 389 includes portions of Doc. 170 and Doc. 171]

Nolting’s personal involvement, Vietnamese desire for, 449 [Pg. 449 includes portions of Doc. 202 and Doc. 203]-450 [Pg. 450 includes portions of Doc. 203 and Doc. 204]

Pagodas, raids on, 595 [Pg. 595 is part of Doc. 261], 596 [Pg. 596 is part of Doc. 261], 616 [Pg. 616 is part of Doc. 275]

Personal impact, 487 [Pg. 487 is part of Doc. 219]

Promises to U.S., efforts to keep, 661 [Pg. 661 is part of Doc. 303]-662 [Pg. 662 is part of Doc. 303]

Kesolution of crisis, U.S. recommendations re, 335n [Pg. 335 includes portions of Doc. 137 and Doc. 138], 385 [Pg. 385 is part of Doc. 169]-386 [Pg. 386 is part of Doc. 169]

Speeches on (see also Conciliatory speech above), 360 [Pg. 360 includes portions of Doc. 155 and Doc. 156]

U.S. disassociation from Vietnamese policy, threatened, 433 [Pg. 433 is part of Doc. 196], 446 [Pg. 446 includes portions of Doc. 200 and Doc. 201]-447 [Pg. 447 includes portions of Doc. 201 and Doc. 202]

Women’s Solidarity Movement resolution on, 363n [Pg. 363 includes portions of Doc. 157 and Doc. 158], 367 [Pg. 367 is part of Doc. 160], 369 [Pg. 369 includes portions of Doc. 160 and Doc. 161], 371 [Pg. 371 includes portions of Doc. 161 and Doc. 162], 372 [Pg. 372 is part of Doc. 162]

Chuong’s assessment of, 143 [Pg. 143 is part of Doc. 54]

Communist surrender program, 18 [Pg. 18 is part of Doc. 10]-19 [Pg. 19 includes portions of Doc. 10 and Doc. 11], 229 [Pg. 229 includes portions of Doc. 91 and Doc. 92]

Counterinsurgency operations, 14 [Pg. 14 is part of Doc. 6] “Cautious” approach of Vietnamese, 113 [Pg. 113 is part of Doc. 36]

Economic and social projects, funding for, 280 [Pg. 280 includes portions of Doc. 113 and Doc. 114]

Harkins’ assessments of, 118 [Pg. 118 is part of Doc. 41], 296 [Pg. 296 includes portions of Doc. 122 and Doc. 123]

Crop destruction program, 403n [Pg. 403 is part of Doc. 181]

Death, possible consequences of, 321 [Pg. 321 is part of Doc. 133]-322 [Pg. 322 is part of Doc. 133]

“Defeats,” attitude toward, 9 [Pg. 9 is part of Doc. 4]

Delegation problem, 13 [Pg. 13 is part of Doc. 5], 58 [Pg. 58 is part of Doc. 19]

Elections, 229 [Pg. 229 includes portions of Doc. 91 and Doc. 92]

Foreign criticism of, 672 [Pg. 672 includes portions of Doc. 307 and Doc. 308]-675 [Pg. 675 includes portions of Doc. 308 and Doc. 309]

Hilssman, meeting with, 14 [Pg. 14 is part of Doc. 6]

Joint Counterinsurgency Fund: Compromise agreement, 307 [Pg. 307 includes portions of Doc. 126 and Doc. 127]

Reconsideration of, 216 [Pg. 216 includes portions of Doc. 84 and Doc. 85]-218 [Pg. 218 is part of Doc. 85], 227 [Pg. 227 is part of Doc. 91]

Rejection of, 183n [Pg. 183 includes portions of Doc. 67 and Doc. 68], 184 [Pg. 184 is part of Doc. 68], 207 [Pg. 207 includes portions of Doc. 80 and Doc. 81]-214 [Pg. 214 is part of Doc. 82]

Lodge, initial meeting with, 644 [Pg. 644 is part of Doc. 292]-645 [Pg. 645 is part of Doc. 292], 649 [Pg. 649 is part of Doc. 296]

Manning, meeting with, 511 [Pg. 511 is part of Doc. 227]-514 [Pg. 514 includes portions of Doc. 227 and Doc. 228] Mansfield report, reaction to, 124 [Pg. 124 is part of Doc. 43], 154 [Pg. 154 is part of Doc. 60]

Martial law: Control of govemment issue, 607 [Pg. 607 is part of Doc. 270], 608 [Pg. 608 is part of Doc. 270], 609 [Pg. 609 is part of Doc. 270], 614 [Pg. 614 includes portions of Doc. 274 and Doc. 275]-615 [Pg. 615 is part of Doc. 275]

Declaration of, 595 [Pg. 595 is part of Doc. 261], 597 [Pg. 597 includes portions of Doc. 261 and Doc. 262], 616 [Pg. 616 is part of Doc. 275]

Media coverage of Vietnam: Assessment of, 511 [Pg. 511 is part of Doc. 227]-514 [Pg. 514 includes portions of Doc. 227 and Doc. 228]

Harassment campaign against reporters, 513 [Pg. 513 is part of Doc. 227]

Press conferences by Vietnamese officials, 513 [Pg. 513 is part of Doc. 227]

Relations with press, 58 [Pg. 58 is part of Doc. 19], 193 [Pg. 193 is part of Doc. 73], 326 [Pg. 326 is part of Doc. 134], 532 [Pg. 532 is part of Doc. 239], 535 [Pg. 535 is part of Doc. 239]

Reporters, calibre of, 512 [Pg. 512 is part of Doc. 227]

Madame Nhu: Defense of, 644 [Pg. 644 is part of Doc. 292]

Relationship with, 615 [Pg. 615 is part of Doc. 275]

Reprimand of, 612 [Pg. 612 is part of Doc. 273]

Montagnards, 14 [Pg. 14 is part of Doc. 6]

Nhu, relationship with, 615 [Pg. 615 is part of Doc. 275], 663 [Pg. 663 is part of Doc. 303]

Nhu’s removal from power, U.S. demand for, 640 [Pg. 640 is part of Doc. 289]

Nolting’s departure, 566 [Pg. 566 is part of Doc. 253]

Personal life, 615 [Pg. 615 is part of Doc. 275]

Political prisoners, 229 [Pg. 229 includes portions of Doc. 91 and Doc. 92]

Political reform and, 234 [Pg. 234 is part of Doc. 94]-235 [Pg. 235 includes portions of Doc. 94 and Doc. 95], 262n [Pg. 262 is part of Doc. 105], 411 [Pg. 411 is part of Doc. 185], 427 [Pg. 427 is part of Doc. 192]-428 [Pg. 428 is part of Doc. 192]

Province committees for dispensing of government funds, 217 [Pg. 217 is part of Doc. 85]-218 [Pg. 218 is part of Doc. 85]

Provincial tours, 306 [Pg. 306 includes portions of Doc. 125 and Doc. 126]-307 [Pg. 307 includes portions of Doc. 126 and Doc. 127]

Retirement, possible, 320 [Pg. 320 is part of Doc. 133]

Strategic hamlet program, 209 [Pg. 209 is part of Doc. 81], 438 [Pg. 438 is part of Doc. 197]

Thompson’s assessment of, 198 [Pg. 198 includes portions of Doc. 76 and Doc. 77], 202 [Pg. 202 is part of Doc. 78] Tung and, 224 [Pg. 224 is part of Doc. 88]

U.S. ambassadonhip, Lodge’s appointment to, 414 [Pg. 414 is part of Doc. 186]

U.S. contacts with opposition parties, 106 [Pg. 106 is part of Doc. 33]

U.S. economic assistance to Vietnam, 228 [Pg. 228 is part of Doc. 91]

U.S. loss of confidence in, 444 [Pg. 444 is part of Doc. 199]

U.S. military involvement in Vietnam: Advisers, 209 [Pg. 209 is part of Doc. 81]-210 [Pg. 210 is part of Doc. 81], 213 [Pg. 213 includes portions of Doc. 81 and Doc. 82], 217 [Pg. 217 is part of Doc. 85], 227 [Pg. 227 is part of Doc. 91]-228 [Pg. 228 is part of Doc. 91]

Endorsement of U.S. presence, 308 [Pg. 308 includes portions of Doc. 127 and Doc. 128]-309 [Pg. 309 includes portions of Doc. 128 and Doc. 129]

Force reductions, proposed, 246 [Pg. 246 includes portions of Doc. 98 and Doc. 99]-247 [Pg. 247 includes portions of Doc. 99 and Doc. 100]

U.S. military officials, relations with, 87 [Pg. 87 is part of Doc. 26]

U.S. “Protectorate” concern, 208 [Pg. 208 is part of Doc. 81], 212 [Pg. 212 is part of Doc. 81]

Ngo Dinh Nhu, 58 [Pg. 58 is part of Doc. 19] Advice from Americans, problems with, 154 [Pg. 154 is part of Doc. 60]-155 [Pg. 155 is part of Doc. 60]

Buddhist crisis, 356 [Pg. 356 includes portions of Doc. 152 and Doc. 153] Agreement of June 16, sabotage of, 409 [Pg. 409 includes portions of Doc. 183 and Doc. 184]-410 [Pg. 410 is part of Doc. 184], 411 [Pg. 411 is part of Doc. 185], 429 [Pg. 429 is part of Doc. 193], 431 [Pg. 431 is part of Doc. 194], 433 [Pg. 433 is part of Doc. 196], 444 [Pg. 444 is part of Doc. 199], 446 [Pg. 446 includes portions of Doc. 200 and Doc. 201], 448 [Pg. 448 is part of Doc. 202], 450 [Pg. 450 includes portions of Doc. 203 and Doc. 204]-451 [Pg. 451 includes portions of Doc. 204 and Doc. 205], 452 [Pg. 452 is part of Doc. 205], 477 [Pg. 477 is part of Doc. 212]

Conciliatory policy of government, 526 [Pg. 526 is part of Doc. 235], 556 [Pg. 556 is part of Doc. 247]

Conciliatory speech by Diem, 494 [Pg. 494 includes portions of Doc. 223 and Doc. 224]

Control operations by government, 553 [Pg. 553 is part of Doc. 245]

Demonstrations by Buddhists, 652 [Pg. 652 is part of Doc. 298]

Madame Nhu’s attacks on Buddhists, 556 [Pg. 556 is part of Doc. 247]-557 [Pg. 557 includes portions of Doc. 247 and Doc. 248], 561 [Pg. 561 is part of Doc. 250]

Meeting with Buddhists, 350 [Pg. 350 is part of Doc. 149]

Pagodas, raids on, 553 [Pg. 553 is part of Doc. 245], 554 [Pg. 554 is part of Doc. 246], 556 [Pg. 556 is part of Doc. 247], 595 [Pg. 595 is part of Doc. 261], 597 [Pg. 597 includes portions of Doc. 261 and Doc. 262], 612 [Pg. 612 is part of Doc. 273], 613 [Pg. 613 is part of Doc. 274], 616 [Pg. 616 is part of Doc. 275], 620 [Pg. 620 includes portions of Doc. 275 and Doc. 276]

VOA report on, 651 [Pg. 651 includes portions of Doc. 297 and Doc. 298]-65 [Pg. 65 includes portions of Doc. 22 and Doc. 23]

Can and, 573 [Pg. 573 is part of Doc. 256]-574 [Pg. 574 is part of Doc. 256]

Chuang’s assessment of, 143 [Pg. 143 is part of Doc. 54]

Communist insurgency, 327 [Pg. 327 includes portions of Doc. 134 and Doc. 135]-329 [Pg. 329 is part of Doc. 135]

Communist leader, contacts with, 327 [Pg. 327 includes portions of Doc. 134 and Doc. 135]

Counterinsurgency operations: Economic and social projects, funding for, 280 [Pg. 280 includes portions of Doc. 113 and Doc. 114]

“Maginot line” defensive measure, 225 [Pg. 225 includes portions of Doc. 88 and Doc. 89]

National Campaign Plan, 328 [Pg. 328 is part of Doc. 135], 329 [Pg. 329 is part of Doc. 135]

Coup against Diem: Expectation for, 603 [Pg. 603 is part of Doc. 266]

Possible involvement in, 488 [Pg. 488 includes portions of Doc. 219 and Doc. 220]-491 [Pg. 491 is part of Doc. 220], 572 [Pg. 572 is part of Doc. 256]

Diem, relationship with, 615 [Pg. 615 is part of Doc. 275], 663 [Pg. 663 is part of Doc. 303]

Diem’s death, possible response to, 321 [Pg. 321 is part of Doc. 133], 322 [Pg. 322 is part of Doc. 133]

Don’s opposition to, 619 [Pg. 619 is part of Doc. 275]

Educational system in Vietnam, 223 [Pg. 223 is part of Doc. 88]

Joint Counterinsurgency Fund, 184 [Pg. 184 is part of Doc. 68], 208 [Pg. 208 is part of Doc. 81]

Lodge, initial meeting with, 651 [Pg. 651 includes portions of Doc. 297 and Doc. 298]-653 [Pg. 653 includes portions of Doc. 298 and Doc. 299]

Manning, meeting with, 496 [Pg. 496 includes portions of Doc. 224, Doc. 225, and Doc. 226]-510 [Pg. 510 is part of Doc. 226]

Mansfield report, reaction to, 124 [Pg. 124 is part of Doc. 43], 153 [Pg. 153 is part of Doc. 60]

Martial law, 605 [Pg. 605 includes portions of Doc. 268 and Doc. 269], 610 [Pg. 610 includes portions of Doc. 270, Doc. 271, and Doc. 272], 612 [Pg. 612 is part of Doc. 273], 615 [Pg. 615 is part of Doc. 275], 626 [Pg. 626 is part of Doc. 279], 628 [Pg. 628 includes portions of Doc. 280 and Doc. 281]

Media coverage of Vietnam, 101 [Pg. 101 is part of Doc. 30] Assessment of, 488 [Pg. 488 includes portions of Doc. 219 and Doc. 220]-501 [Pg. 501 is part of Doc. 226], 505 [Pg. 505 is part of Doc. 226]-508 [Pg. 508 is part of Doc. 226]

Expulsions of reporters, 506 [Pg. 506 is part of Doc. 226]-507 [Pg. 507 is part of Doc. 226], 508 [Pg. 508 is part of Doc. 226]

Harassment campaign against reporters, 504 [Pg. 504 is part of Doc. 226]-505 [Pg. 505 is part of Doc. 226]

Relations with press, 505 [Pg. 505 is part of Doc. 226]-506 [Pg. 506 is part of Doc. 226], 508 [Pg. 508 is part of Doc. 226], 535 [Pg. 535 is part of Doc. 239]-536 [Pg. 536 is part of Doc. 239], 540 [Pg. 540 is part of Doc. 239]

Military’s attitude toward, 573 [Pg. 573 is part of Doc. 256]

Presidency for, possible, 262 [Pg. 262 is part of Doc. 105], 320 [Pg. 320 is part of Doc. 133], 321 [Pg. 321 is part of Doc. 133], 323 [Pg. 323 is part of Doc. 133]-324 [Pg. 324 includes portions of Doc. 133 and Doc. 134], 485 [Pg. 485 is part of Doc. 217] CIA assessment, 571 [Pg. 571 is part of Doc. 256]-574 [Pg. 574 is part of Doc. 256], 582 [Pg. 582 is part of Doc. 256]

Psychological and political warfare consciousness, 223 [Pg. 223 is part of Doc. 88]

Public relations policies, 497 [Pg. 497 is part of Doc. 226]-500 [Pg. 500 is part of Doc. 226], 502 [Pg. 502 is part of Doc. 226]

Removal from power: Diem’s resistance to, 640 [Pg. 640 is part of Doc. 289]

Kim’s position, 613 [Pg. 613 is part of Doc. 274]-614 [Pg. 614 includes portions of Doc. 274 and Doc. 275]

Lodge’s position, 621 [Pg. 621 includes portions of Doc. 276 and Doc. 277]

Thuan’s position, 611 [Pg. 611 includes portions of Doc. 272 and Doc. 273]-612 [Pg. 612 is part of Doc. 273]

U.S. position, 452 [Pg. 452 is part of Doc. 205], 625 [Pg. 625 includes portions of Doc. 277 and Doc. 278], 627 [Pg. 627 is part of Doc. 280], 628 [Pg. 628 includes portions of Doc. 280 and Doc. 281]-629 [Pg. 629 is part of Doc. 281], 634 [Pg. 634 includes portions of Doc. 284 and Doc. 285]-635 [Pg. 635 includes portions of Doc. 285 and Doc. 286], 636 [Pg. 636 includes portions of Doc. 287 and Doc. 288], 665 [Pg. 665 includes portions of Doc. 303 and Doc. 304]

VOA report of U.S. demands, 636 [Pg. 636 includes portions of Doc. 287 and Doc. 288]-637 [Pg. 637 is part of Doc. 288], 640 [Pg. 640 is part of Doc. 289], 649 [Pg. 649 is part of Doc. 296]

“Revisionist” thinking in government, 222 [Pg. 222 is part of Doc. 88]

Strategic hamlet program, 5 [Pg. 5 includes portions of Doc. 2 and Doc. 3], 257 [Pg. 257 is part of Doc. 102], 464 [Pg. 464 is part of Doc. 207], 652 [Pg. 652 is part of Doc. 298], 653 [Pg. 653 includes portions of Doc. 298 and Doc. 299]

Tung and, 224 [Pg. 224 is part of Doc. 88]

U.S. economic assistance to Vietnam: Advisers, 325 [Pg. 325 is part of Doc. 134]

Assessment of, 223 [Pg. 223 is part of Doc. 88]

Lend-Lease program, proposed, 501 [Pg. 501 is part of Doc. 226]-502 [Pg. 502 is part of Doc. 226]

U.S. military involvement in Vietnam: Advisers, 210 [Pg. 210 is part of Doc. 81], 324 [Pg. 324 includes portions of Doc. 133 and Doc. 134]-325 [Pg. 325 is part of Doc. 134], 462 [Pg. 462 is part of Doc. 207]

Force reductions, demand for, 223 [Pg. 223 is part of Doc. 88]-224 [Pg. 224 is part of Doc. 88], 246 [Pg. 246 includes portions of Doc. 98 and Doc. 99], 294 [Pg. 294 is part of Doc. 122]-296 [Pg. 296 includes portions of Doc. 122 and Doc. 123], 303 [Pg. 303 includes portions of Doc. 124 and Doc. 125]-306 [Pg. 306 includes portions of Doc. 125 and Doc. 126], 309 [Pg. 309 includes portions of Doc. 128 and Doc. 129]

Rotation program for personnel, 509 [Pg. 509 is part of Doc. 226]

U.S. officials, cooperation with, 329 [Pg. 329 is part of Doc. 135]

U.S. “Protectorate” concern, 224 [Pg. 224 is part of Doc. 88]

Vietnamese self-sufficiency, promotion of, 324 [Pg. 324 includes portions of Doc. 133 and Doc. 134]-325 [Pg. 325 is part of Doc. 134]

Ngo Dinh Nhu, Madame, 58 [Pg. 58 is part of Doc. 19], 89 [Pg. 89 is part of Doc. 26], 153 [Pg. 153 is part of Doc. 60] Buddhist crisis: Agreement of June 16, sabotage of, 409 [Pg. 409 includes portions of Doc. 183 and Doc. 184], 411 [Pg. 411 is part of Doc. 185], 429 [Pg. 429 is part of Doc. 193], 431 [Pg. 431 is part of Doc. 194], 433 [Pg. 433 is part of Doc. 196], 441 [Pg. 441 includes portions of Doc. 197 and Doc. 198], 450 [Pg. 450 includes portions of Doc. 203 and Doc. 204], 452 [Pg. 452 is part of Doc. 205], 477 [Pg. 477 is part of Doc. 212]

Attacks on Buddhists, 553 [Pg. 553 is part of Doc. 245], 556 [Pg. 556 is part of Doc. 247]-558 [Pg. 558 is part of Doc. 248], 559n [Pg. 559 is part of Doc. 249], 560 [Pg. 560 includes portions of Doc. 249 and Doc. 250]-561 [Pg. 561 is part of Doc. 250], 563 [Pg. 563 is part of Doc. 251], 564 [Pg. 564 includes portions of Doc. 251 and Doc. 252]

Women’s Solidarity Movement resolution on, 362 [Pg. 362 includes portions of Doc. 156 and Doc. 157], 363 [Pg. 363 includes portions of Doc. 157 and Doc. 158]-364 [Pg. 364 includes portions of Doc. 158 and Doc. 159], 368 [Pg. 368 is part of Doc. 160], 371 [Pg. 371 includes portions of Doc. 161 and Doc. 162], 372 [Pg. 372 is part of Doc. 162]

Can and, 573 [Pg. 573 is part of Doc. 256]

Coup against Diem, expectation for, 603 [Pg. 603 is part of Doc. 266]

Diem, relationship with, 615 [Pg. 615 is part of Doc. 275]

Diem’s defense of, 644 [Pg. 644 is part of Doc. 292]

Diem’s reprimand of, 612 [Pg. 612 is part of Doc. 273] Nolting’s assessment of, 466 [Pg. 466 is part of Doc. 208]

Press relations, 535 [Pg. 535 is part of Doc. 239]

Secret police squad, 563 [Pg. 563 is part of Doc. 251]

U.S. economic assistance to Vietnam, criticism of, 225 [Pg. 225 includes portions of Doc. 88 and Doc. 89]-226 [Pg. 226 includes portions of Doc. 89 and Doc. 90], 228 [Pg. 228 is part of Doc. 91]

U.S. removal of, possible, 452 [Pg. 452 is part of Doc. 205]

U.S. reporters, attacks on, 377 [Pg. 377 is part of Doc. 165]

Women’s Solidarity Movement and, 225 [Pg. 225 includes portions of Doc. 88 and Doc. 89], 228 [Pg. 228 is part of Doc. 91], 427 [Pg. 427 is part of Doc. 192]-428 [Pg. 428 is part of Doc. 192]

Ngo Trong Hieu, 18 [Pg. 18 is part of Doc. 10], 309 [Pg. 309 includes portions of Doc. 128 and Doc. 129], 310 [Pg. 310 is part of Doc. 129], 340 [Pg. 340 includes portions of Doc. 141 and Doc. 142], 369 [Pg. 369 includes portions of Doc. 160 and Doc. 161], 372 [Pg. 372 is part of Doc. 162], 376n [Pg. 376 includes portions of Doc. 164 and Doc. 165], 530 [Pg. 530 is part of Doc. 238], 538 [Pg. 538 is part of Doc. 239]

Nguyen Cao ky, Lt. Col., 580 [Pg. 580 is part of Doc. 256]

Nguyen Dinh Thuan: Buddhist crisis, 311 [Pg. 311 is part of Doc. 129], 337 [Pg. 337 includes portions of Doc. 139 and Doc. 140]-338 [Pg. 338 is part of Doc. 140], 486 [Pg. 486 is part of Doc. 218] Agreement of June 16, 409 [Pg. 409 includes portions of Doc. 183 and Doc. 184]-410 [Pg. 410 is part of Doc. 184], 413 [Pg. 413 includes portions of Doc. 185 and Doc. 186]-414 [Pg. 414 is part of Doc. 186], 422 [Pg. 422 includes portions of Doc. 188 and Doc. 189], 429 [Pg. 429 is part of Doc. 193]-430 [Pg. 430 includes portions of Doc. 193 and Doc. 194], 441 [Pg. 441 includes portions of Doc. 197 and Doc. 198]-442 [Pg. 442 is part of Doc. 198], 477 [Pg. 477 is part of Doc. 212]

Commission on, 339 [Pg. 339 includes portions of Doc. 140 and Doc. 141], 353 [Pg. 353 is part of Doc. 151], 372 [Pg. 372 is part of Doc. 162]

Communist involvement issue, 351 [Pg. 351 includes portions of Doc. 149 and Doc. 150], 429 [Pg. 429 is part of Doc. 193]

Conciliatory policy of government, 376 [Pg. 376 includes portions of Doc. 164 and Doc. 165]-377 [Pg. 377 is part of Doc. 165], 525 [Pg. 525 is part of Doc. 235]

Conciliatory speech by Diem, 479 [Pg. 479 includes portions of Doc. 213 and Doc. 214]-480 [Pg. 480 is part of Doc. 214], 494 [Pg. 494 includes portions of Doc. 223 and Doc. 224], 495 [Pg. 495 is part of Doc. 224]

Demonstrations by Buddhists, 370 [Pg. 370 is part of Doc. 161], 372 [Pg. 372 is part of Doc. 162], 386 [Pg. 386 is part of Doc. 169], 493 [Pg. 493 includes portions of Doc. 222 and Doc. 223]

Diem’s meetings with Buddhists, 340 [Pg. 340 includes portions of Doc. 141 and Doc. 142], 526 [Pg. 526 is part of Doc. 235]

Madame Nhu’s attacks on Buddhists, 561 [Pg. 561 is part of Doc. 250], 562 [Pg. 562 includes portions of Doc. 250 and Doc. 251]-563 [Pg. 563 is part of Doc. 251]

Media coverage of, 370 [Pg. 370 is part of Doc. 161], 471n [Pg. 471 is part of Doc. 210], 525 [Pg. 525 is part of Doc. 235]-526 [Pg. 526 is part of Doc. 235]

Negotiations, 383 [Pg. 383 includes portions of Doc. 167 and Doc. 168]-384 [Pg. 384 is part of Doc. 168], 388 [Pg. 388 is part of Doc. 170]-389 [Pg. 389 includes portions of Doc. 170 and Doc. 171], 391 [Pg. 391 is part of Doc. 172], 395 [Pg. 395 includes portions of Doc. 175 and Doc. 176]

Nhu’s meeting with Buddhists, 350 [Pg. 350 is part of Doc. 149]

Nolting’s personal involvement, Vietnamese desire for, 449 [Pg. 449 includes portions of Doc. 202 and Doc. 203]-450 [Pg. 450 includes portions of Doc. 203 and Doc. 204]

Pagodas, raids on, 595 [Pg. 595 is part of Doc. 261]

Poison gas issue, 350 [Pg. 350 is part of Doc. 149]-351 [Pg. 351 includes portions of Doc. 149 and Doc. 150], 352 [Pg. 352 includes portions of Doc. 150 and Doc. 151]

Truce agreement of June 5, 356 [Pg. 356 includes portions of Doc. 152 and Doc. 153]-358 [Pg. 358 includes portions of Doc. 153 and Doc. 154], 359 [Pg. 359 includes portions of Doc. 154 and Doc. 155]-360 [Pg. 360 includes portions of Doc. 155 and Doc. 156]

U.S. officials’ contacts with Buddhists, 547 [Pg. 547 is part of Doc. 241]

Women’s Solidarity Movement resolution on, 362 [Pg. 362 includes portions of Doc. 156 and Doc. 157], 371 [Pg. 371 includes portions of Doc. 161 and Doc. 162], 372 [Pg. 372 is part of Doc. 162]

Change of government and, 581 [Pg. 581 is part of Doc. 256]

Communist insurgency, 327 [Pg. 327 includes portions of Doc. 134 and Doc. 135]

Counterinsurgency operations: Economic and social programs, funding for, 289 [Pg. 289 is part of Doc. 119]

National Campaign Plan, 463 [Pg. 463 is part of Doc. 207]-464 [Pg. 464 is part of Doc. 207]

Elections in Vietnam, 414 [Pg. 414 is part of Doc. 186]

Joint Counterinsurgency Fund, 156 [Pg. 156 includes portions of Doc. 60 and Doc. 61], 159n [Pg. 159 is part of Doc. 61] Compromise agreement, 254 [Pg. 254 is part of Doc. 101]-256 [Pg. 256 includes portions of Doc. 101 and Doc. 102]

Diem’s reconsideration of, 216 [Pg. 216 includes portions of Doc. 84 and Doc. 85]-218 [Pg. 218 is part of Doc. 85]

Diem’s rejection of, 183 [Pg. 183 includes portions of Doc. 67 and Doc. 68]-184 [Pg. 184 is part of Doc. 68], 208 [Pg. 208 is part of Doc. 81]

Krulak, meeting with, 463 [Pg. 463 is part of Doc. 207]-464 [Pg. 464 is part of Doc. 207]

Nhu’s removal from power, position on, 611 [Pg. 611 includes portions of Doc. 272 and Doc. 273]-612 [Pg. 612 is part of Doc. 273]

Political reforms in Vietnam, 401 [Pg. 401 is part of Doc. 180]

Province committees for dispensing of government funds, 217 [Pg. 217 is part of Doc. 85]-218 [Pg. 218 is part of Doc. 85]

U.S. ambassadorship, Lodge’s appointment to, 414 [Pg. 414 is part of Doc. 186]

U.S. military assistance to Vietnam, 26 [Pg. 26 includes portions of Doc. 12 and Doc. 13], 103 [Pg. 103 includes portions of Doc. 31 and Doc. 32], 115 [Pg. 115 is part of Doc. 38]

U.S. military officals, relations with, 87 [Pg. 87 is part of Doc. 26]

Nguyen Khanh, Maj. Gen., 609 [Pg. 609 is part of Doc. 270] Coup against Diem, 583 [Pg. 583 is part of Doc. 256], 603 [Pg. 603 is part of Doc. 266] Generals’ plan, 633 [Pg. 633 is part of Doc. 284]-634 [Pg. 634 includes portions of Doc. 284 and Doc. 285], 642 [Pg. 642 is part of Doc. 290], 643 [Pg. 643 includes portions of Doc. 290 and Doc. 291], 647 [Pg. 647 is part of Doc. 294], 649 [Pg. 649 is part of Doc. 296], 653 [Pg. 653 includes portions of Doc. 298 and Doc. 299], 654 [Pg. 654 is part of Doc. 299], 656 [Pg. 656 is part of Doc. 300]

Nhu as planner of, 489 [Pg. 489 is part of Doc. 220], 490 [Pg. 490 is part of Doc. 220]-491 [Pg. 491 is part of Doc. 220]

Martial law, 616 [Pg. 616 is part of Doc. 275]

Nguyen Ngoc Khoi, Lt. Col., 579 [Pg. 579 is part of Doc. 256], 582 [Pg. 582 is part of Doc. 256]

Nguyen Ngoc Le, Maj. Gen., 491 [Pg. 491 is part of Doc. 220], 616 [Pg. 616 is part of Doc. 275], 653 [Pg. 653 includes portions of Doc. 298 and Doc. 299]

Nguyen Ngoc Tho: Buddhist crisis, 309 [Pg. 309 includes portions of Doc. 128 and Doc. 129], 339 [Pg. 339 includes portions of Doc. 140 and Doc. 141]-340 [Pg. 340 includes portions of Doc. 141 and Doc. 142], 350 [Pg. 350 is part of Doc. 149], 486 [Pg. 486 is part of Doc. 218] Agreement of June 16, 400 [Pg. 400 is part of Doc. 180], 429 [Pg. 429 is part of Doc. 193], 477 [Pg. 477 is part of Doc. 212]

Commission on, 353 [Pg. 353 is part of Doc. 151], 372 [Pg. 372 is part of Doc. 162], 546 [Pg. 546 includes portions of Doc. 240 and Doc. 241]-547 [Pg. 547 is part of Doc. 241]

Madame Nhu’s attacks on Buddhists, 561 [Pg. 561 is part of Doc. 250], 564n [Pg. 564 includes portions of Doc. 251 and Doc. 252]

Negotiations, 387 [Pg. 387 includes portions of Doc. 169 and Doc. 170], 391n [Pg. 391 is part of Doc. 172]

Truce agreement of June 5, 359 [Pg. 359 includes portions of Doc. 154 and Doc. 155]

U.S. officials’ contacts with Buddhists, 547 [Pg. 547 is part of Doc. 241]

Coup against Diem, 654 [Pg. 654 is part of Doc. 299], 657 [Pg. 657 includes portions of Doc. 300 and Doc. 301], 670 [Pg. 670 is part of Doc. 306]-671 [Pg. 671 includes portions of Doc. 306 and Doc. 307]

Diem’s death, possible response to, 321 [Pg. 321 is part of Doc. 133]

Laos, proposed partitioning of, 520 [Pg. 520 is part of Doc. 231]

Mansfield report, reaction to, 124 [Pg. 124 is part of Doc. 43]

Nhu’s quest fOf presidency and, 571 [Pg. 571 is part of Doc. 256], 572 [Pg. 572 is part of Doc. 256]

Political reforms in Vietnam, 400 [Pg. 400 is part of Doc. 180]-401 [Pg. 401 is part of Doc. 180]

Presidency fOf, possible, 323 [Pg. 323 is part of Doc. 133]-324 [Pg. 324 includes portions of Doc. 133 and Doc. 134], 394 [Pg. 394 includes portions of Doc. 174 and Doc. 175], 407 [Pg. 407 is part of Doc. 183]-408 [Pg. 408 is part of Doc. 183], 467 [Pg. 467 is part of Doc. 208], 474 [Pg. 474 is part of Doc. 212]-475 [Pg. 475 is part of Doc. 212], 532 [Pg. 532 is part of Doc. 239], 574 [Pg. 574 is part of Doc. 256]-575 [Pg. 575 is part of Doc. 256]

Regional programs, 325 [Pg. 325 is part of Doc. 134]-326 [Pg. 326 is part of Doc. 134]

U.S. economic assistance to Vietnam, 326 [Pg. 326 is part of Doc. 134]

Nguyen Ton Hoan, 184 [Pg. 184 is part of Doc. 68], 618 [Pg. 618 is part of Doc. 275]

Nguyen Van Ba, Maj., 579 [Pg. 579 is part of Doc. 256]

Nguyen Van Binh, Paul, 396 [Pg. 396 is part of Doc. 177]

Nguyen Van La, Maj. Gen., 657 [Pg. 657 includes portions of Doc. 300 and Doc. 301], 669 [Pg. 669 is part of Doc. 306]

Nguyen Van Thien, Col. (Buddhist), 57 [Pg. 57 is part of Doc. 19]

Nguyen Van Thien, Col. (Catholic), 58 [Pg. 58 is part of Doc. 19]

Nguyen Van Tinh, Capt., 580 [Pg. 580 is part of Doc. 256]

Nhu. See Ngo Dinh Nhu.

Niebuhr, Reinhold, 430n [Pg. 430 includes portions of Doc. 193 and Doc. 194]

Nitze, Paul H., 275 [Pg. 275 includes portions of Doc. 110 and Doc. 111], 333 [Pg. 333 includes portions of Doc. 136 and Doc. 137]-335 [Pg. 335 includes portions of Doc. 137 and Doc. 138]

Nolting, Frederick E., Jr., 4 [Pg. 4 is part of Doc. 2], 5 [Pg. 5 includes portions of Doc. 2 and Doc. 3], 112n [Pg. 112 includes portions of Doc. 35 and Doc. 36], 203 [Pg. 203 includes portions of Doc. 78 and Doc. 79] Ball, meeting with, 466 [Pg. 466 is part of Doc. 208]-467 [Pg. 467 is part of Doc. 208]

Buddhist crisis: Agreement of June 16, 466 [Pg. 466 is part of Doc. 208], 486 [Pg. 486 is part of Doc. 218]

Assessments of, 487 [Pg. 487 is part of Doc. 219]-488 [Pg. 488 includes portions of Doc. 219 and Doc. 220], 662 [Pg. 662 is part of Doc. 303]-663 [Pg. 663 is part of Doc. 303]

Buddhist request for U.S. assistance, 492 [Pg. 492 is part of Doc. 221]

Commission on, 546 [Pg. 546 includes portions of Doc. 240 and Doc. 241]-54 [Pg. 54 is part of Doc. 19]

Conciliatory policy of government, 525 [Pg. 525 is part of Doc. 235], 528 [Pg. 528 includes portions of Doc. 236 and Doc. 237]-529 [Pg. 529 includes portions of Doc. 237 and Doc. 238], 556 [Pg. 556 is part of Doc. 247], 561 [Pg. 561 is part of Doc. 250], 563 [Pg. 563 is part of Doc. 251]-564 [Pg. 564 includes portions of Doc. 251 and Doc. 252], 565 [Pg. 565 includes portions of Doc. 252 and Doc. 253]-566 [Pg. 566 is part of Doc. 253], 662 [Pg. 662 is part of Doc. 303]

Conciliatory speech by Diem, 494 [Pg. 494 includes portions of Doc. 223 and Doc. 224]-496 [Pg. 496 includes portions of Doc. 224, Doc. 225, and Doc. 226], 515 [Pg. 515 includes portions of Doc. 228 and Doc. 229]-516 [Pg. 516 is part of Doc. 229], 522 [Pg. 522 includes portions of Doc. 232 and Doc. 233]

Control operations by government, 311 [Pg. 311 is part of Doc. 129]-312 [Pg. 312 is part of Doc. 129], 546 [Pg. 546 includes portions of Doc. 240 and Doc. 241]

Demonstrations by Buddhists, 310 [Pg. 310 is part of Doc. 129]-311 [Pg. 311 is part of Doc. 129], 492 [Pg. 492 is part of Doc. 221], 493 [Pg. 493 includes portions of Doc. 222 and Doc. 223]

Diem’s assessment of, 314 [Pg. 314 is part of Doc. 131]

Diem’s efforts to keep his promises, 661 [Pg. 661 is part of Doc. 303]-662 [Pg. 662 is part of Doc. 303]

Diem’s meetings with Buddhists, 526 [Pg. 526 is part of Doc. 235]

Five demands, 309 [Pg. 309 includes portions of Doc. 128 and Doc. 129]-310 [Pg. 310 is part of Doc. 129]

Madame Nhu’s attacks on Buddhists, 556 [Pg. 556 is part of Doc. 247]-557 [Pg. 557 includes portions of Doc. 247 and Doc. 248], 560 [Pg. 560 includes portions of Doc. 249 and Doc. 250]-563 [Pg. 563 is part of Doc. 251]

Media coverage of, 512 [Pg. 512 is part of Doc. 227]-513 [Pg. 513 is part of Doc. 227], 525 [Pg. 525 is part of Doc. 235]-526 [Pg. 526 is part of Doc. 235]

Pagodas, raids on, 556 [Pg. 556 is part of Doc. 247], 662 [Pg. 662 is part of Doc. 303]-663 [Pg. 663 is part of Doc. 303]

Personal involvement, Vietnamese desire for, 449 [Pg. 449 includes portions of Doc. 202 and Doc. 203]-450 [Pg. 450 includes portions of Doc. 203 and Doc. 204]

Radicals and activists in leadership roles, 493 [Pg. 493 includes portions of Doc. 222 and Doc. 223]-494 [Pg. 494 includes portions of Doc. 223 and Doc. 224]

Religious persecution, statement on, 550 [Pg. 550 is part of Doc. 243]

Resolution of crisis, U.S. proposals for, 521 [Pg. 521 includes portions of Doc. 231 and Doc. 232]-522 [Pg. 522 includes portions of Doc. 232 and Doc. 233]

U.S. disassociation from Vietnamese policy, threatened, 433n [Pg. 433 is part of Doc. 196], 448 [Pg. 448 is part of Doc. 202]

U.S. officials’ contacts with Buddhists, 547 [Pg. 547 is part of Doc. 241]

VOA broadcast on, 652 [Pg. 652 is part of Doc. 298]

Cambodia, 6 [Pg. 6 is part of Doc. 3], 13 [Pg. 13 is part of Doc. 5]

Communist insurgency: Future developments, 108 [Pg. 108 includes portions of Doc. 34 and Doc. 35]-109 [Pg. 109 is part of Doc. 35]

Infiltration, evidence re, 111 [Pg. 111 is part of Doc. 35]-112 [Pg. 112 includes portions of Doc. 35 and Doc. 36]

Infiltration capabilities, 109 [Pg. 109 is part of Doc. 35]-110 [Pg. 110 is part of Doc. 35]

Communist surrender program, 18 [Pg. 18 is part of Doc. 10]-19 [Pg. 19 includes portions of Doc. 10 and Doc. 11]

Comprehensive Plan for South Vietnam, 36 [Pg. 36 is part of Doc. 18], 38 [Pg. 38 is part of Doc. 18] Country Team assessment, 178 [Pg. 178 includes portions of Doc. 66 and Doc. 67]-183 [Pg. 183 includes portions of Doc. 67 and Doc. 68]

Counterinsurgency operations: Air power used in, 178n [Pg. 178 includes portions of Doc. 66 and Doc. 67], 186n [Pg. 186 includes portions of Doc. 70 and Doc. 71], 247 [Pg. 247 includes portions of Doc. 99 and Doc. 100]-253 [Pg. 253 is part of Doc. 100]

Buddhist crisis, impact of, 661 [Pg. 661 is part of Doc. 303]

CIA assessments of, 551 [Pg. 551 is part of Doc. 244]

Economic and social projects, funding for, 289 [Pg. 289 is part of Doc. 119]-290 [Pg. 290 is part of Doc. 119]

Infiltration, actions against, 110 [Pg. 110 is part of Doc. 35]-111 [Pg. 111 is part of Doc. 35], 112 [Pg. 112 includes portions of Doc. 35 and Doc. 36]

Movement and population control measures, 141 [Pg. 141 is part of Doc. 53]-142 [Pg. 142 includes portions of Doc. 53 and Doc. 54]

Napalm use, 12 [Pg. 12 is part of Doc. 5]

Progress made by, 306 [Pg. 306 includes portions of Doc. 125 and Doc. 126]-307 [Pg. 307 includes portions of Doc. 126 and Doc. 127]

Coup against Diem: Generals’ plan, U.S. support for, 641 [Pg. 641 is part of Doc. 289], 663 [Pg. 663 is part of Doc. 303]-664 [Pg. 664 is part of Doc. 303], 665 [Pg. 665 includes portions of Doc. 303 and Doc. 304]

U.S. policy re, 453 [Pg. 453 is part of Doc. 205], 528 [Pg. 528 includes portions of Doc. 236 and Doc. 237], 529 [Pg. 529 includes portions of Doc. 237 and Doc. 238]

Crop destruction and defoliation, 162 [Pg. 162 includes portions of Doc. 62 and Doc. 63]-165 [Pg. 165 includes portions of Doc. 63 and Doc. 64], 548 [Pg. 548 is part of Doc. 242]-549 [Pg. 549 is part of Doc. 242]

Departure from Vietnam, 566 [Pg. 566 is part of Doc. 253]

Diem’s delegation problem, 13 [Pg. 13 is part of Doc. 5]

Diem’s press relations, 58 [Pg. 58 is part of Doc. 19]

Diem’s provincial tours, 306 [Pg. 306 includes portions of Doc. 125 and Doc. 126]-307 [Pg. 307 includes portions of Doc. 126 and Doc. 127]

Farmgate operation, augmentation of, 32 [Pg. 32 includes portions of Doc. 15 and Doc. 16]-33 [Pg. 33 is part of Doc. 16]

GAO report on Vietnam, reaction to, 161 [Pg. 161 includes portions of Doc. 61 and Doc. 62]-162 [Pg. 162 includes portions of Doc. 62 and Doc. 63]

Honolulu Conference, 269 [Pg. 269 is part of Doc. 107]

Joint Counterinsurgency Fund: Compromise agreement, 254 [Pg. 254 is part of Doc. 101]-256 [Pg. 256 includes portions of Doc. 101 and Doc. 102], 301 [Pg. 301 is part of Doc. 124], 307 [Pg. 307 includes portions of Doc. 126 and Doc. 127]

Diem’s reconsideration of, 216 [Pg. 216 includes portions of Doc. 84 and Doc. 85]-218 [Pg. 218 is part of Doc. 85], 227 [Pg. 227 is part of Doc. 91]-228 [Pg. 228 is part of Doc. 91]

Diem’s rejection of, 183 [Pg. 183 includes portions of Doc. 67 and Doc. 68]-184 [Pg. 184 is part of Doc. 68], 207 [Pg. 207 includes portions of Doc. 80 and Doc. 81]-214 [Pg. 214 is part of Doc. 82]

Diem’s rejection of, U.S. response to, 214 [Pg. 214 is part of Doc. 82], 218 [Pg. 218 is part of Doc. 85]-219 [Pg. 219 includes portions of Doc. 85 and Doc. 86]

Negotiations, 186 [Pg. 186 includes portions of Doc. 70 and Doc. 71]

U.S. initial proposal, 156 [Pg. 156 includes portions of Doc. 60 and Doc. 61]-161 [Pg. 161 includes portions of Doc. 61 and Doc. 62]

Vietnamese control, proposed increase in, 219 [Pg. 219 includes portions of Doc. 85 and Doc. 86]

Kennedy’s endorsement of, 453 [Pg. 453 is part of Doc. 205]

Madame Nhu, assessment of, 466 [Pg. 466 is part of Doc. 208] Mansfield report, Vietnamese reaction to, 153 [Pg. 153 is part of Doc. 60]

Martial law, U.S. response to, 601 [Pg. 601 includes portions of Doc. 264 and Doc. 265]

Mau and, 326 [Pg. 326 is part of Doc. 134]-327 [Pg. 327 includes portions of Doc. 134 and Doc. 135]

Media coverage of Vietnam, 34 [Pg. 34 includes portions of Doc. 16 and Doc. 17]-35 [Pg. 35 includes portions of Doc. 17 and Doc. 18], 58 [Pg. 58 is part of Doc. 19], 98 [Pg. 98 includes portions of Doc. 29 and Doc. 30]-102 [Pg. 102 includes portions of Doc. 30 and Doc. 31], 511 [Pg. 511 is part of Doc. 227]

Montagnards, disarming of, 6 [Pg. 6 is part of Doc. 3]

Nhu and, 324 [Pg. 324 includes portions of Doc. 133 and Doc. 134]-325 [Pg. 325 is part of Doc. 134] Nhu’s removal from power, U.S. demand for, 665 [Pg. 665 includes portions of Doc. 303 and Doc. 304]

Press relations, 623 [Pg. 623 is part of Doc. 277]-624 [Pg. 624 is part of Doc. 277]

Replacement as ambassador, 61 [Pg. 61 is part of Doc. 19], 64 [Pg. 64 is part of Doc. 21], 133 [Pg. 133 includes portions of Doc. 50 and Doc. 51], 140 [Pg. 140 is part of Doc. 52], 291 [Pg. 291 is part of Doc. 120], 414n [Pg. 414 is part of Doc. 186], 415 [Pg. 415 is part of Doc. 187] Request for replacement, 196 [Pg. 196 is part of Doc. 75]

Return to Vietnam, 432 [Pg. 432 is part of Doc. 195], 448 [Pg. 448 is part of Doc. 202], 453 [Pg. 453 is part of Doc. 205], 486n [Pg. 486 is part of Doc. 218]

Rowny’s assessment of, 10 [Pg. 10 is part of Doc. 4]

Strategic hamlet program: Corruption in, 209 [Pg. 209 is part of Doc. 81]

Military funds shifted to, proposal for, 214 [Pg. 214 is part of Doc. 82]

Tho and, 325 [Pg. 325 is part of Doc. 134]-326 [Pg. 326 is part of Doc. 134]

Thompson’s U.S. visit, 203 [Pg. 203 includes portions of Doc. 78 and Doc. 79]

U.S. economic assistance to Vietnam: Madame Nhu’s criticism of, 225 [Pg. 225 includes portions of Doc. 88 and Doc. 89]-226 [Pg. 226 includes portions of Doc. 89 and Doc. 90], 228 [Pg. 228 is part of Doc. 91]

Reassessment of, proposed, 544 [Pg. 544 is part of Doc. 240]-546 [Pg. 546 includes portions of Doc. 240 and Doc. 241]

U.S. information programs and policies in Vietnam, 67 [Pg. 67 includes portions of Doc. 23 and Doc. 24], 69 [Pg. 69 is part of Doc. 24], 100 [Pg. 100 is part of Doc. 30]-102 [Pg. 102 includes portions of Doc. 30 and Doc. 31] “Confiding in newsmen” policy, 263 [Pg. 263 includes portions of Doc. 105 and Doc. 106]-264 [Pg. 264 is part of Doc. 106]

U.S. military assistance to Vietnam: Jets, provision of, 26 [Pg. 26 includes portions of Doc. 12 and Doc. 13], 34 [Pg. 34 includes portions of Doc. 16 and Doc. 17], 115 [Pg. 115 is part of Doc. 38]

Phase-out plan, 182 [Pg. 182 is part of Doc. 67]

U.S. military involvement in Vietnam: Advisers, 227 [Pg. 227 is part of Doc. 91]-228 [Pg. 228 is part of Doc. 91], 269 [Pg. 269 is part of Doc. 107]

Force reductions, proposed, 295 [Pg. 295 is part of Doc. 122]“

Vietnam, Republic of: Change of government, possible, 316 [Pg. 316 includes portions of Doc. 132 and Doc. 133]-317 [Pg. 317 is part of Doc. 133], 466 [Pg. 466 is part of Doc. 208], 467 [Pg. 467 is part of Doc. 208], 481 [Pg. 481 is part of Doc. 215]

Elections, 660 [Pg. 660 is part of Doc. 303]

Opposition parties, U.S. contacts with, 126 [Pg. 126 includes portions of Doc. 44 and Doc. 45]-128 [Pg. 128 includes portions of Doc. 45 and Doc. 46]

Province committees for dispensing of government funds, 217 [Pg. 217 is part of Doc. 85]-218 [Pg. 218 is part of Doc. 85]

Nuttle, Dave, 203 [Pg. 203 includes portions of Doc. 78 and Doc. 79]

Oai. See Tran Tu Oai, Gen. Odom, Maj. Louie W., 74 [Pg. 74 is part of Doc. 26]

“Open arms” amnesty program. See Communist surrender program.

Operation Farmgate. See Farmgate operation.

Operation Sunrise, 8 [Pg. 8 is part of Doc. 4], 457 [Pg. 457 is part of Doc. 207]

Operation Switchback. See Civilian Irregular Defense Group program.

Pakistan, 674 [Pg. 674 is part of Doc. 308]

Parker, Lt. Gen. Theodore W., 73 [Pg. 73 is part of Doc. 26]

Pell, Claiborne, 68n [Pg. 68 is part of Doc. 24]

Perruso, Dolores P., 657n [Pg. 657 includes portions of Doc. 300 and Doc. 301]

Perry, John, 256 [Pg. 256 includes portions of Doc. 101 and Doc. 102]

Pham Huy Quat, 581 [Pg. 581 is part of Doc. 256]

Pham Khac Suu, 582 [Pg. 582 is part of Doc. 256]

Pham Ngoc Thao, Lt. Col., 474 [Pg. 474 is part of Doc. 212]

Pham Van Binh, 474 [Pg. 474 is part of Doc. 212]

Pham Xuan Chieu, Gen., 653 [Pg. 653 includes portions of Doc. 298 and Doc. 299]

Phan Dinh Thu, Col., 581 [Pg. 581 is part of Doc. 256], 582 [Pg. 582 is part of Doc. 256]

Phan Van Tao, 18 [Pg. 18 is part of Doc. 10], 154 [Pg. 154 is part of Doc. 60], 471 [Pg. 471 is part of Doc. 210]

Philippines, 673 [Pg. 673 is part of Doc. 308]

Phillips, Richard I., 651 [Pg. 651 includes portions of Doc. 297 and Doc. 298]“

Phillips, Rufus, 10 [Pg. 10 is part of Doc. 4], II, 62 [Pg. 62 is part of Doc. 19], 113 [Pg. 113 is part of Doc. 36], 255n [Pg. 255 is part of Doc. 101], 256 [Pg. 256 includes portions of Doc. 101 and Doc. 102]-258 [Pg. 258 is part of Doc. 102], 301 [Pg. 301 is part of Doc. 124], 611 [Pg. 611 includes portions of Doc. 272 and Doc. 273]-612 [Pg. 612 is part of Doc. 273], 613 [Pg. 613 is part of Doc. 274]-614 [Pg. 614 includes portions of Doc. 274 and Doc. 275]

Pike, James A., 430n [Pg. 430 includes portions of Doc. 193 and Doc. 194]

Plei Mrong operation, 14 [Pg. 14 is part of Doc. 6]

Poats, R., 235n [Pg. 235 includes portions of Doc. 94 and Doc. 95], 259n [Pg. 259 is part of Doc. 103]

Press problem. See Media coverage of Vietnam; U.S. information programs and policies in Vietnam.

Province rehabilitation program. See Strategic hamlet program.

Pushkin, Georgi M., 31 [Pg. 31 is part of Doc. 15]

Quang Due, bonze, 374n [Pg. 374 is part of Doc. 163], 375 [Pg. 375 is part of Doc. 164]

Radford, Adm. Arthur w., 137 [Pg. 137 is part of Doc. 52]

Radhakrishnan, 392n [Pg. 392 is part of Doc. 173]

Ranger Companies, 297 [Pg. 297 is part of Doc. 123], 576 [Pg. 576 is part of Doc. 256]

Read, Benjamin H., 531n [Pg. 531 is part of Doc. 239]

Republic of Vietnam Armed Forces (RVNAF) (see also Air Force, Vietnamese; Army of the Republic of Vietnam; Marine Corps, Vietnamese; Navy, Vietnamese): Buddhist chaplains, 364 [Pg. 364 includes portions of Doc. 158 and Doc. 159]

Command and control situation, 86 [Pg. 86 is part of Doc. 26]

Criticisms of, 1 [Pg. 1 is part of Doc. 1]

Force structure, 40 [Pg. 40 is part of Doc. 18]-42 [Pg. 42 is part of Doc. 18], 76 [Pg. 76 is part of Doc. 26], 267 [Pg. 267 is part of Doc. 107]

Intelligence program, 78 [Pg. 78 is part of Doc. 26]-81 [Pg. 81 is part of Doc. 26], 92 [Pg. 92 is part of Doc. 26]

Joint Operations Center, 76 [Pg. 76 is part of Doc. 26]

Leadership, quality of, 78 [Pg. 78 is part of Doc. 26]

Multiplicity of separate annies, 54 [Pg. 54 is part of Doc. 19]-55 [Pg. 55 is part of Doc. 19]

National Campaign Plan and, 468 [Pg. 468 is part of Doc. 209]-469 [Pg. 469 is part of Doc. 209]

Paramilitary forces. See Civil Guard; Civilian Irregular Defense Group program; Self Defense Corps.

Political tendencies within, intelligence re, 262 [Pg. 262 is part of Doc. 105]-263 [Pg. 263 includes portions of Doc. 105 and Doc. 106]

Psychological and political warfare consciousness, 223 [Pg. 223 is part of Doc. 88]

Ranger Companies, 297 [Pg. 297 is part of Doc. 123], 576 [Pg. 576 is part of Doc. 256]

Training for, 42 [Pg. 42 is part of Doc. 18]-44 [Pg. 44 is part of Doc. 18], 47 [Pg. 47 is part of Doc. 18], 76 [Pg. 76 is part of Doc. 26]

Republican Youth Organization, 194 [Pg. 194 is part of Doc. 73], 409 [Pg. 409 includes portions of Doc. 183 and Doc. 184], 425 [Pg. 425 is part of Doc. 190], 427 [Pg. 427 is part of Doc. 192], 428 [Pg. 428 is part of Doc. 192], 613 [Pg. 613 is part of Doc. 274]

Rice, Edward E., 26n [Pg. 26 includes portions of Doc. 12 and Doc. 13], 102n [Pg. 102 includes portions of Doc. 30 and Doc. 31], 128n [Pg. 128 includes portions of Doc. 45 and Doc. 46], 130n [Pg. 130 includes portions of Doc. 47 and Doc. 48], 169n [Pg. 169 is part of Doc. 65], 185n [Pg. 185 is part of Doc. 69], 195n [Pg. 195 includes portions of Doc. 73, Doc. 74, and Doc. 75], 197n [Pg. 197 is part of Doc. 76], 235n [Pg. 235 includes portions of Doc. 94 and Doc. 95], 243n [Pg. 243 includes portions of Doc. 96 and Doc. 97], 260n [Pg. 260 is part of Doc. 104], 271n [Pg. 271 is part of Doc. 108], 283n [Pg. 283 includes portions of Doc. 114 and Doc. 115], 342n [Pg. 342 is part of Doc. 143], 393n [Pg. 393 is part of Doc. 174], 402n [Pg. 402 is part of Doc. 181], 415n [Pg. 415 is part of Doc. 187], 488 [Pg. 488 includes portions of Doc. 219 and Doc. 220]-489 [Pg. 489 is part of Doc. 220], 517n [Pg. 517 is part of Doc. 230], 522n [Pg. 522 includes portions of Doc. 232 and Doc. 233]

Richardson, John H., 327 [Pg. 327 includes portions of Doc. 134 and Doc. 135], 329 [Pg. 329 is part of Doc. 135]

Riddleberger, James W., 23 [Pg. 23 is part of Doc. 12]

Riley, Adm. Herbert D., 630 [Pg. 630 is part of Doc. 282], 631 [Pg. 631 is part of Doc. 282]

Robinson, James, 506 [Pg. 506 is part of Doc. 226], 508 [Pg. 508 is part of Doc. 226], 530 [Pg. 530 is part of Doc. 238], 535 [Pg. 535 is part of Doc. 239], 540 [Pg. 540 is part of Doc. 239]

Rostow, Walt W., 390n [Pg. 390 is part of Doc. 171], 454 [Pg. 454 is part of Doc. 206]-455 [Pg. 455 includes portions of Doc. 206 and Doc. 207]

Rowny, Maj. Gen. Edward L., 7 [Pg. 7 includes portions of Doc. 3 and Doc. 4]-11 [Pg. 11 is part of Doc. 4]

Rusk, Dean: Buddhist crisis, 342 [Pg. 342 is part of Doc. 143]-343 [Pg. 343 includes portions of Doc. 143 and Doc. 144] Background report on, 366 [Pg. 366 includes portions of Doc. 159 and Doc. 160]

Burial of Buddhist martyr, 393 [Pg. 393 is part of Doc. 174]-394 [Pg. 394 includes portions of Doc. 174 and Doc. 175]

Conciliatory speech by Diem, 518 [Pg. 518 includes portions of Doc. 230 and Doc. 231]

Control operations by government, 342 [Pg. 342 is part of Doc. 143]-343 [Pg. 343 includes portions of Doc. 143 and Doc. 144]

Demonstrations by Buddhists, 283 [Pg. 283 includes portions of Doc. 114 and Doc. 115], 348 [Pg. 348 is part of Doc. 147]

Madame Nhu’s attacks on Buddhists, 564 [Pg. 564 includes portions of Doc. 251 and Doc. 252]-565 [Pg. 565 includes portions of Doc. 252 and Doc. 253]

Negotiations, 393 [Pg. 393 is part of Doc. 174]

Poison gas issue, 349 [Pg. 349 includes portions of Doc. 148 and Doc. 149]

Political motives of Buddhists, 365 [Pg. 365 is part of Doc. 159]

Resolution of crisis, U.S. recommendations re, 335 [Pg. 335 includes portions of Doc. 137 and Doc. 138]-336 [Pg. 336 includes portions of Doc. 138 and Doc. 139], 364 [Pg. 364 includes portions of Doc. 158 and Doc. 159]-365 [Pg. 365 is part of Doc. 159], 381 [Pg. 381 includes portions of Doc. 166 and Doc. 167]-383 [Pg. 383 includes portions of Doc. 167 and Doc. 168], 517 [Pg. 517 is part of Doc. 230]-518 [Pg. 518 includes portions of Doc. 230 and Doc. 231]

“Vacation” for Diem and, 565 [Pg. 565 includes portions of Doc. 252 and Doc. 253]

Women’s Solidarity Movement resolution on, 363 [Pg. 363 includes portions of Doc. 157 and Doc. 158]-364 [Pg. 364 includes portions of Doc. 158 and Doc. 159]

Communist insurgency, 454 [Pg. 454 is part of Doc. 206]

Comprehensive Plan for South Vietnam, 148 [Pg. 148 is part of Doc. 57]-149 [Pg. 149 includes portions of Doc. 57 and Doc. 58]

Counterinsurgency operations: Air power used in, 173 [Pg. 173 includes portions of Doc. 65 and Doc. 66]-178 [Pg. 178 includes portions of Doc. 66 and Doc. 67]

Buddhist crisis, impact of, 661 [Pg. 661 is part of Doc. 303]

Mekong Delta situation, 589n [Pg. 589 is part of Doc. 259]

Movement and population control measures, 129 [Pg. 129 includes portions of Doc. 46 and Doc. 47]-130 [Pg. 130 includes portions of Doc. 47 and Doc. 48]

“Security for villages” strategy, 189 [Pg. 189 includes portions of Doc. 71 and Doc. 72]

Coup against Diem: Buddhist crisis, relation to, 523 [Pg. 523 includes portions of Doc. 233 and Doc. 234]-524 [Pg. 524 is part of Doc. 234]

Generals’ plan, U.S. support for, 640 [Pg. 640 is part of Doc. 289], 641 [Pg. 641 is part of Doc. 289], 646 [Pg. 646 is part of Doc. 293], 663 [Pg. 663 is part of Doc. 303], 664 [Pg. 664 is part of Doc. 303], 665 [Pg. 665 includes portions of Doc. 303 and Doc. 304], 667 [Pg. 667 is part of Doc. 305]-668 [Pg. 668 includes portions of Doc. 305 and Doc. 306], 675n [Pg. 675 includes portions of Doc. 308 and Doc. 309]

Nhu as planner of, 488 [Pg. 488 includes portions of Doc. 219 and Doc. 220]

U.S. policy re, 523 [Pg. 523 includes portions of Doc. 233 and Doc. 234]-524 [Pg. 524 is part of Doc. 234]

Crop destruction and defoliation, 214 [Pg. 214 is part of Doc. 82]-215 [Pg. 215 includes portions of Doc. 83 and Doc. 84], 403 [Pg. 403 is part of Doc. 181]

Joint Counterinsurgency Fund: Funding sources, 236 [Pg. 236 is part of Doc. 95]

Negotiations re, 185 [Pg. 185 is part of Doc. 69], 195 [Pg. 195 includes portions of Doc. 73, Doc. 74, and Doc. 75]

Mansfield report, 122 [Pg. 122 includes portions of Doc. 41 and Doc. 42]-123 [Pg. 123 is part of Doc. 42]

Martial law, 606 [Pg. 606 includes portions of Doc. 269 and Doc. 270]

Mau, meeting with, 219 [Pg. 219 includes portions of Doc. 85 and Doc. 86]-220 [Pg. 220 is part of Doc. 86]

Media coverage of Vietnam, 34 [Pg. 34 includes portions of Doc. 16 and Doc. 17]-35 [Pg. 35 includes portions of Doc. 17 and Doc. 18], 220 [Pg. 220 is part of Doc. 86]

Nhu’s removal from power, U.S. demand for, 637n [Pg. 637 is part of Doc. 288], 640 [Pg. 640 is part of Doc. 289]

SEATO Ministerial meeting, 215 [Pg. 215 includes portions of Doc. 83 and Doc. 84]

Thompson and, 205 [Pg. 205 is part of Doc. 79]

U.S. information programs and policies in Vietnam, 96 [Pg. 96 is part of Doc. 28], 169n [Pg. 169 is part of Doc. 65] Combat activities, media coverage of, 116 [Pg. 116 is part of Doc. 39], 128 [Pg. 128 includes portions of Doc. 45 and Doc. 46]-129 [Pg. 129 includes portions of Doc. 46 and Doc. 47]

U.S. military assistance to Vietnam, 26 [Pg. 26 includes portions of Doc. 12 and Doc. 13], 102 [Pg. 102 includes portions of Doc. 30 and Doc. 31]-103 [Pg. 103 includes portions of Doc. 31 and Doc. 32]

U.S. military involvement in Vietnam: Advisers, 235 [Pg. 235 includes portions of Doc. 94 and Doc. 95]

Diem’s endorsement of U.S. presence, 308 [Pg. 308 includes portions of Doc. 127 and Doc. 128]-309 [Pg. 309 includes portions of Doc. 128 and Doc. 129]

Force reductions, proposed, 294 [Pg. 294 is part of Doc. 122]-296 [Pg. 296 includes portions of Doc. 122 and Doc. 123]

Vietnam, Republic of: Change of government, possible, 394 [Pg. 394 includes portions of Doc. 174 and Doc. 175]-395 [Pg. 395 includes portions of Doc. 175 and Doc. 176]

Opposition parties, 220 [Pg. 220 is part of Doc. 86], 394 [Pg. 394 includes portions of Doc. 174 and Doc. 175]

Political reforms, 402 [Pg. 402 is part of Doc. 181]-404 [Pg. 404 includes portions of Doc. 181 and Doc. 182]

Russell, Bertrand, 240 [Pg. 240 is part of Doc. 96]

Salinger, Pierre, 65 [Pg. 65 includes portions of Doc. 22 and Doc. 23], 66 [Pg. 66 is part of Doc. 23], 144 [Pg. 144 is part of Doc. 55], 263n [Pg. 263 includes portions of Doc. 105 and Doc. 106], 531n [Pg. 531 is part of Doc. 239]

Schlesinger, Arthur, Jr., 133 [Pg. 133 includes portions of Doc. 50 and Doc. 51]

Self Defense Corps: Force structure, 42 [Pg. 42 is part of Doc. 18], 131 [Pg. 131 includes portions of Doc. 48 and Doc. 49]-132 [Pg. 132 includes portions of Doc. 49 and Doc. 50]

Improvements in, 78 [Pg. 78 is part of Doc. 26], 297 [Pg. 297 is part of Doc. 123]-298 [Pg. 298 is part of Doc. 123]

Training for, 266 [Pg. 266 is part of Doc. 107]

Serong, Col., 315 [Pg. 315 is part of Doc. 132]-316 [Pg. 316 includes portions of Doc. 132 and Doc. 133]

Sheehan,Neil, 2 [Pg. 2 is part of Doc. 1], 370 [Pg. 370 is part of Doc. 161], 377 [Pg. 377 is part of Doc. 165], 470 [Pg. 470 includes portions of Doc. 209 and Doc. 210], 472 [Pg. 472 is part of Doc. 211]-473 [Pg. 473 includes portions of Doc. 211 and Doc. 212]

Shepard, Capt. Tazewell T., 226n [Pg. 226 includes portions of Doc. 89 and Doc. 90]

Sihanouk, Prince Norodom, 153 [Pg. 153 is part of Doc. 60], 326 [Pg. 326 is part of Doc. 134] Buddhist crisis, 375n [Pg. 375 is part of Doc. 164], 392 [Pg. 392 is part of Doc. 173], 404 [Pg. 404 includes portions of Doc. 181 and Doc. 182]

Laos, proposed partitioning of, 520 [Pg. 520 is part of Doc. 231]

Silver, Solomon, 156n [Pg. 156 includes portions of Doc. 60 and Doc. 61]

Smith, Benjamin A., 68n [Pg. 68 is part of Doc. 24]

Smith, Lt. Col. Bill G., 73 [Pg. 73 is part of Doc. 26]

Smith, Bromley, 221 [Pg. 221 is part of Doc. 87], 226n [Pg. 226 includes portions of Doc. 89 and Doc. 90], 659 [Pg. 659 includes portions of Doc. 302 and Doc. 303]

Sorensen, Thomas C., 144n [Pg. 144 is part of Doc. 55]

Southeast Asia, regional programs in, 325 [Pg. 325 is part of Doc. 134]-326 [Pg. 326 is part of Doc. 134]

Southeast Asia Treaty Organization (SEATO) Ministerial meeting (April 1963), 215 [Pg. 215 includes portions of Doc. 83 and Doc. 84]

Souvanna Phouma, 30 [Pg. 30 includes portions of Doc. 14 and Doc. 15]-31 [Pg. 31 is part of Doc. 15], 220 [Pg. 220 is part of Doc. 86]

Soviet Union: Cambodia, arms for, 197 [Pg. 197 is part of Doc. 76]

China, People’s Republic of, dispute with, 416 [Pg. 416 includes portions of Doc. 187 and Doc. 188]-422 [Pg. 422 includes portions of Doc. 188 and Doc. 189]

Communist infiltration through Laos and, 454 [Pg. 454 is part of Doc. 206]-455 [Pg. 455 includes portions of Doc. 206 and Doc. 207]

Communist insurgency, policy on, 421 [Pg. 421 is part of Doc. 188]-422 [Pg. 422 includes portions of Doc. 188 and Doc. 189]

Diem, criticism of, 674 [Pg. 674 is part of Doc. 308]

Laos, policy toward, 420 [Pg. 420 is part of Doc. 188], 421 [Pg. 421 is part of Doc. 188]

Vietnam, Democratic Republic of, relations with, 416 [Pg. 416 includes portions of Doc. 187 and Doc. 188]-422 [Pg. 422 includes portions of Doc. 188 and Doc. 189]

Vietnam policy, 109 [Pg. 109 is part of Doc. 35]

Special Forces, U.S., 246 [Pg. 246 includes portions of Doc. 98 and Doc. 99]-247 [Pg. 247 includes portions of Doc. 99 and Doc. 100]

Special Group for Counterinsurgency: Meetings, 28 [Pg. 28 is part of Doc. 14]-30 [Pg. 30 includes portions of Doc. 14 and Doc. 15], 103 [Pg. 103 includes portions of Doc. 31 and Doc. 32]-105 [Pg. 105 includes portions of Doc. 32 and Doc. 33], 150 [Pg. 150 includes portions of Doc. 58 and Doc. 59]-151 [Pg. 151 is part of Doc. 59], 201 [Pg. 201 is part of Doc. 78]-203 [Pg. 203 includes portions of Doc. 78 and Doc. 79], 279 [Pg. 279 is part of Doc. 113]-280 [Pg. 280 includes portions of Doc. 113 and Doc. 114], 315 [Pg. 315 is part of Doc. 132]-316 [Pg. 316 includes portions of Doc. 132 and Doc. 133], 389 [Pg. 389 includes portions of Doc. 170 and Doc. 171]-390 [Pg. 390 is part of Doc. 171]

Third country economic assistance to Vietnam, report on, 23 [Pg. 23 is part of Doc. 12]-26 [Pg. 26 includes portions of Doc. 12 and Doc. 13]

Special National Intelligence Estimates: SNIE 14.3-63 [Pg. 63 includes portions of Doc. 20 and Doc. 21], 416 [Pg. 416 includes portions of Doc. 187 and Doc. 188]-422 [Pg. 422 includes portions of Doc. 188 and Doc. 189]

SNIE 53-2 [Pg. 2 is part of Doc. 1]-63 [Pg. 63 includes portions of Doc. 20 and Doc. 21], 483 [Pg. 483 includes portions of Doc. 216 and Doc. 217]-485 [Pg. 485 is part of Doc. 217]

Springsteen, George 5., 466 [Pg. 466 is part of Doc. 208]

Sprouse, Phillip D., 392n [Pg. 392 is part of Doc. 173]

Stephens, Orem, 672n [Pg. 672 includes portions of Doc. 307 and Doc. 308]

Stoneman, Walter G., 129n [Pg. 129 includes portions of Doc. 46 and Doc. 47], 148n [Pg. 148 is part of Doc. 57], 195n [Pg. 195 includes portions of Doc. 73, Doc. 74, and Doc. 75], 235n [Pg. 235 includes portions of Doc. 94 and Doc. 95]

Strategic hamlet program, 49 [Pg. 49 includes portions of Doc. 18 and Doc. 19], 134 [Pg. 134 is part of Doc. 51], 194 [Pg. 194 is part of Doc. 73], 652 [Pg. 652 is part of Doc. 298], 653 [Pg. 653 includes portions of Doc. 298 and Doc. 299] Administration of hamlets, 130 [Pg. 130 includes portions of Doc. 47 and Doc. 48]

Communist reaction, 438 [Pg. 438 is part of Doc. 197]-439 [Pg. 439 is part of Doc. 197], 440 [Pg. 440 is part of Doc. 197]

Corruption in, 209 [Pg. 209 is part of Doc. 81]

Cost of, 130 [Pg. 130 includes portions of Doc. 47 and Doc. 48]-131 [Pg. 131 includes portions of Doc. 48 and Doc. 49]

Democratization plans and, 427 [Pg. 427 is part of Doc. 192]-428 [Pg. 428 is part of Doc. 192]

Denney’s assessment of, 434 [Pg. 434 includes portions of Doc. 196 and Doc. 197]-441 [Pg. 441 includes portions of Doc. 197 and Doc. 198]

Elections in hamlets, 82 [Pg. 82 is part of Doc. 26]

Funding for (see also Joint Counterinsurgency Fund), 213 [Pg. 213 includes portions of Doc. 81 and Doc. 82]-214 [Pg. 214 is part of Doc. 82], 301 [Pg. 301 is part of Doc. 124]-303 [Pg. 303 includes portions of Doc. 124 and Doc. 125]

Government’s approach to, 257 [Pg. 257 is part of Doc. 102]-258 [Pg. 258 is part of Doc. 102]

Growth of, 118 [Pg. 118 is part of Doc. 41], 315 [Pg. 315 is part of Doc. 132]-316 [Pg. 316 includes portions of Doc. 132 and Doc. 133]

Harkins’ assessment of, 298 [Pg. 298 is part of Doc. 123]-299 [Pg. 299 is part of Doc. 123]

Inadequacies of, 4 [Pg. 4 is part of Doc. 2], 54 [Pg. 54 is part of Doc. 19]

Interministerial Committee on Strategic Hamlets, 464 [Pg. 464 is part of Doc. 207]

Krulak’s assessment of, 457 [Pg. 457 is part of Doc. 207]-458 [Pg. 458 is part of Doc. 207]

Local control issue, 438 [Pg. 438 is part of Doc. 197]

Military funds shifted to, proposal for, 214 [Pg. 214 is part of Doc. 82]

Montagnards and, 440 [Pg. 440 is part of Doc. 197] Nhu’s support for, 5 [Pg. 5 includes portions of Doc. 2 and Doc. 3]

Origins and development of, 437 [Pg. 437 is part of Doc. 197]-438 [Pg. 438 is part of Doc. 197]

Police forces, 4 [Pg. 4 is part of Doc. 2], 7 [Pg. 7 includes portions of Doc. 3 and Doc. 4], 54 [Pg. 54 is part of Doc. 19]

Political impact of, 82 [Pg. 82 is part of Doc. 26]

Strategic hamlet program-Continued

Progress reports on, 256 [Pg. 256 includes portions of Doc. 101 and Doc. 102]-258 [Pg. 258 is part of Doc. 102], 267 [Pg. 267 is part of Doc. 107], 439 [Pg. 439 is part of Doc. 197]-440 [Pg. 440 is part of Doc. 197], 457 [Pg. 457 is part of Doc. 207]-458 [Pg. 458 is part of Doc. 207]

Reinforcement for hamlets under attack, 57 [Pg. 57 is part of Doc. 19]

Serong’s assessment of, 315 [Pg. 315 is part of Doc. 132]-316 [Pg. 316 includes portions of Doc. 132 and Doc. 133]

Strategic hamlet kits, 42 [Pg. 42 is part of Doc. 18]

Strategy of, 39 [Pg. 39 is part of Doc. 18]-40 [Pg. 40 is part of Doc. 18], 435 [Pg. 435 is part of Doc. 197]

Sunrise operation, 457 [Pg. 457 is part of Doc. 207]

Typical hamlet, 436 [Pg. 436 is part of Doc. 197]-437 [Pg. 437 is part of Doc. 197]

U.S. direction of, 6 [Pg. 6 is part of Doc. 3]

U.S. economic assistance, 458 [Pg. 458 is part of Doc. 207]

Villagers’ attitudes toward, 51 [Pg. 51 is part of Doc. 19]-52 [Pg. 52 is part of Doc. 19], 53 [Pg. 53 is part of Doc. 19]

Wheeler’s assessment of, 113 [Pg. 113 is part of Doc. 36]

Sullivan, William H., 193 [Pg. 193 is part of Doc. 73]

Sully, Francois, 535 [Pg. 535 is part of Doc. 239]

Sunrise, Operation, 8 [Pg. 8 is part of Doc. 4], 457 [Pg. 457 is part of Doc. 207]

“Surrender” policy. See Communist surrender program.

Switchback, Operation. See Civilian Irregular Defense Group program.

Sy, Maj., 284 [Pg. 284 is part of Doc. 116]-285 [Pg. 285 includes portions of Doc. 116 and Doc. 117], 311 [Pg. 311 is part of Doc. 129]

Sylvester, Arthur, 66 [Pg. 66 is part of Doc. 23], 144n [Pg. 144 is part of Doc. 55], 263n [Pg. 263 includes portions of Doc. 105 and Doc. 106]

Szulc, Tad, 557 [Pg. 557 includes portions of Doc. 247 and Doc. 248], 565 [Pg. 565 includes portions of Doc. 252 and Doc. 253]

Tam Chau, bonze, 391 [Pg. 391 is part of Doc. 172], 474 [Pg. 474 is part of Doc. 212], 478 [Pg. 478 includes portions of Doc. 212 and Doc. 213]-479 [Pg. 479 includes portions of Doc. 213 and Doc. 214], 550n [Pg. 550 is part of Doc. 243]

Tao. See Phan Van Tao.

Tay Ninh operations, 12 [Pg. 12 is part of Doc. 5], 14 [Pg. 14 is part of Doc. 6]

Taylor, Barney, 128 [Pg. 128 includes portions of Doc. 45 and Doc. 46]

Taylor, Gen. Maxwell D., 30 [Pg. 30 includes portions of Doc. 14 and Doc. 15] Comprehensive Plan for South Vietnam, JCS assessment of, 133 [Pg. 133 includes portions of Doc. 50 and Doc. 51]-136 [Pg. 136 includes portions of Doc. 51 and Doc. 52]

Counterinsurgency operations, 84n [Pg. 84 is part of Doc. 26]

Coup against Diem, U.S. support for

Generals’ plan, 628n [Pg. 628 includes portions of Doc. 280 and Doc. 281], 631 [Pg. 631 is part of Doc. 282], 639 [Pg. 639 is part of Doc. 289], 640 [Pg. 640 is part of Doc. 289], 641 [Pg. 641 is part of Doc. 289], 648 [Pg. 648 is part of Doc. 295], 655 [Pg. 655 includes portions of Doc. 299 and Doc. 300], 658 [Pg. 658 includes portions of Doc. 301 and Doc. 302], 664 [Pg. 664 is part of Doc. 303], 667n [Pg. 667 is part of Doc. 305], 675 [Pg. 675 includes portions of Doc. 308 and Doc. 309]

Crop destruction and defoliation, 230 [Pg. 230 is part of Doc. 93]-232 [Pg. 232 includes portions of Doc. 93 and Doc. 94]

Farmgate operation, augmentation of, 145 [Pg. 145 includes portions of Doc. 55 and Doc. 56]-147 [Pg. 147 is part of Doc. 56]

Joint Counterinsurgency Fund, 221 [Pg. 221 is part of Doc. 87] Krulak report, 455n [Pg. 455 includes portions of Doc. 206 and Doc. 207]

MACV, command autonomy for, 195 [Pg. 195 includes portions of Doc. 73, Doc. 74, and Doc. 75]-196 [Pg. 196 is part of Doc. 75]

Martial law, 606 [Pg. 606 includes portions of Doc. 269 and Doc. 270]-607 [Pg. 607 is part of Doc. 270]

Special Group for Counterinsurgency, 28 [Pg. 28 is part of Doc. 14], 30 [Pg. 30 includes portions of Doc. 14 and Doc. 15], 103 [Pg. 103 includes portions of Doc. 31 and Doc. 32], 150 [Pg. 150 includes portions of Doc. 58 and Doc. 59], 201 [Pg. 201 is part of Doc. 78], 279 [Pg. 279 is part of Doc. 113], 280 [Pg. 280 includes portions of Doc. 113 and Doc. 114], 315 [Pg. 315 is part of Doc. 132], 389 [Pg. 389 includes portions of Doc. 170 and Doc. 171]

U.S. military assistance to Vietnam, 26 [Pg. 26 includes portions of Doc. 12 and Doc. 13]

U,S. military involvement in Vietnam: Force reductions, proposed, 590 [Pg. 590 includes portions of Doc. 259 and Doc. 260]-591 [Pg. 591 is part of Doc. 260]

Helicopters, rules of engagement for, 117 [Pg. 117 is part of Doc. 40]

Rotation program for personnel, 509 [Pg. 509 is part of Doc. 226]

Thailand: Criticism of Diem, 673 [Pg. 673 is part of Doc. 308]

Vietnam, Republic of, relations with, 326 [Pg. 326 is part of Doc. 134]-327 [Pg. 327 includes portions of Doc. 134 and Doc. 135]

Thien Hoa, bonze, 359 [Pg. 359 includes portions of Doc. 154 and Doc. 155]

Thien Minh, bonze, 356 [Pg. 356 includes portions of Doc. 152 and Doc. 153], 357 [Pg. 357 is part of Doc. 153], 358 [Pg. 358 includes portions of Doc. 153 and Doc. 154], 359 [Pg. 359 includes portions of Doc. 154 and Doc. 155], 368 [Pg. 368 is part of Doc. 160], 383n [Pg. 383 includes portions of Doc. 167 and Doc. 168], 391 [Pg. 391 is part of Doc. 172], 474 [Pg. 474 is part of Doc. 212]

Thien Sieu, bonze, 288 [Pg. 288 is part of Doc. 118]

Thiet, Maj., 370 [Pg. 370 is part of Doc. 161]

Third country economic assistance to Vietnam, 23 [Pg. 23 is part of Doc. 12]-26 [Pg. 26 includes portions of Doc. 12 and Doc. 13], 29 [Pg. 29 is part of Doc. 14]

Third country military assistance to Vietnam: ANZUS and, 358 [Pg. 358 includes portions of Doc. 153 and Doc. 154]-359 [Pg. 359 includes portions of Doc. 154 and Doc. 155]

U.S. Embassy’s views on, 17 [Pg. 17 is part of Doc. 9]

Thompson, Brig. Robert G. K., 185 [Pg. 185 is part of Doc. 69] Communist insurgency, 199 [Pg. 199 is part of Doc. 77] Terrorism, 200 [Pg. 200 is part of Doc. 77]

Troop strength, 194 [Pg. 194 is part of Doc. 73]

Communist surrender program, 18n [Pg. 18 is part of Doc. 10], 194 [Pg. 194 is part of Doc. 73], 200 [Pg. 200 is part of Doc. 77]

Counterinsurgency operations, 199 [Pg. 199 is part of Doc. 77] Air power used in, 195 [Pg. 195 includes portions of Doc. 73, Doc. 74, and Doc. 75], 200 [Pg. 200 is part of Doc. 77]

Infiltration, actions against, 201 [Pg. 201 is part of Doc. 78]

Long-range patrolling, 202 [Pg. 202 is part of Doc. 78]

Movement and population control measures, 194 [Pg. 194 is part of Doc. 73]

Success, measurement of, 202 [Pg. 202 is part of Doc. 78]

Crop destruction and defoliation, 199 [Pg. 199 is part of Doc. 77], 241 [Pg. 241 is part of Doc. 96]

Diem, assessment of, 198 [Pg. 198 includes portions of Doc. 76 and Doc. 77], 202 [Pg. 202 is part of Doc. 78]

Diem’s press relations, 193 [Pg. 193 is part of Doc. 73]

Harriman, meeting with, 193 [Pg. 193 is part of Doc. 73]-195 [Pg. 195 includes portions of Doc. 73, Doc. 74, and Doc. 75], 205 [Pg. 205 is part of Doc. 79]

Kennedy, meeting with, 198 [Pg. 198 includes portions of Doc. 76 and Doc. 77]-200 [Pg. 200 is part of Doc. 77], 204 [Pg. 204 is part of Doc. 79]-205 [Pg. 205 is part of Doc. 79]

Montagnards, 194 [Pg. 194 is part of Doc. 73]

Special Group for Counterinsurgency, meeting with, 201 [Pg. 201 is part of Doc. 78]-202 [Pg. 202 is part of Doc. 78]

Strategic hamlet program, 5 [Pg. 5 includes portions of Doc. 2 and Doc. 3], 194 [Pg. 194 is part of Doc. 73]

U.S. military involvement in Vietnam, 193 [Pg. 193 is part of Doc. 73], 201 [Pg. 201 is part of Doc. 78]

Vietnam, Republic of: Civil service personnel, 194 [Pg. 194 is part of Doc. 73]

Police services, 107 [Pg. 107 is part of Doc. 34]

Political allegiance of people, 193 [Pg. 193 is part of Doc. 73]

Thuan. See Nguyen Dinh Thuan.

Thuong, Lt. Col., 310 [Pg. 310 is part of Doc. 129]-311 [Pg. 311 is part of Doc. 129]

Tien Hoa, bonze, 391 [Pg. 391 is part of Doc. 172]

Tien Khiet, bonze, 359 [Pg. 359 includes portions of Doc. 154 and Doc. 155], 550n [Pg. 550 is part of Doc. 243]

Time magazine, 558 [Pg. 558 is part of Doc. 248]

Times of Vietnam, 433n [Pg. 433 is part of Doc. 196], 441 [Pg. 441 includes portions of Doc. 197 and Doc. 198], 450 [Pg. 450 includes portions of Doc. 203 and Doc. 204], 477 [Pg. 477 is part of Doc. 212], 480 [Pg. 480 is part of Doc. 214], 559n [Pg. 559 is part of Doc. 249]

Ton That Dinh, Brig. Gen., 603 [Pg. 603 is part of Doc. 266], 606 [Pg. 606 includes portions of Doc. 269 and Doc. 270], 669 [Pg. 669 is part of Doc. 306] Coup against Diem, 474 [Pg. 474 is part of Doc. 212], 576 [Pg. 576 is part of Doc. 256], 580 [Pg. 580 is part of Doc. 256], 597 [Pg. 597 includes portions of Doc. 261 and Doc. 262], 608 [Pg. 608 is part of Doc. 270], 647 [Pg. 647 is part of Doc. 294], 654 [Pg. 654 is part of Doc. 299], 657 [Pg. 657 includes portions of Doc. 300 and Doc. 301], 671 [Pg. 671 includes portions of Doc. 306 and Doc. 307], 672 [Pg. 672 includes portions of Doc. 307 and Doc. 308]

Martial law, 616 [Pg. 616 is part of Doc. 275]-617 [Pg. 617 is part of Doc. 275]

U.S. advisers, complaints about, 224 [Pg. 224 is part of Doc. 88]

Ton That Xung, Col., 576 [Pg. 576 is part of Doc. 256]

Tran Kim Phuong, 582 [Pg. 582 is part of Doc. 256]

Tran Kim Tuyen, 474 [Pg. 474 is part of Doc. 212], 475 [Pg. 475 is part of Doc. 212], 580 [Pg. 580 is part of Doc. 256], 583 [Pg. 583 is part of Doc. 256], 603 [Pg. 603 is part of Doc. 266], 611 [Pg. 611 includes portions of Doc. 272 and Doc. 273]

Tran Le Quang, 582 [Pg. 582 is part of Doc. 256]

Tran Le Xuan. See Ngo Dinh Nhu, Madame.

Tran Quoc Buu, 581 [Pg. 581 is part of Doc. 256], 658 [Pg. 658 includes portions of Doc. 301 and Doc. 302]

Tran Son, Gen., 328 [Pg. 328 is part of Doc. 135]

Tran Thien Khiem, Gen., 327 [Pg. 327 includes portions of Doc. 134 and Doc. 135] Coup against Diem, 634 [Pg. 634 includes portions of Doc. 284 and Doc. 285], 642 [Pg. 642 is part of Doc. 290], 643 [Pg. 643 includes portions of Doc. 290 and Doc. 291], 647 [Pg. 647 is part of Doc. 294], 653 [Pg. 653 includes portions of Doc. 298 and Doc. 299]-655 [Pg. 655 includes portions of Doc. 299 and Doc. 300], 656 [Pg. 656 is part of Doc. 300]

Martial law, 615 [Pg. 615 is part of Doc. 275], 616 [Pg. 616 is part of Doc. 275], 617 [Pg. 617 is part of Doc. 275]

Tran Trung Dung, 581 [Pg. 581 is part of Doc. 256]

Tran Tu Oai, Gen., 18 [Pg. 18 is part of Doc. 10], 612 [Pg. 612 is part of Doc. 273], 653 [Pg. 653 includes portions of Doc. 298 and Doc. 299]

Tran Van Chuong, 142 [Pg. 142 includes portions of Doc. 53 and Doc. 54]-143 [Pg. 143 is part of Doc. 54], 561n [Pg. 561 is part of Doc. 250], 619 [Pg. 619 is part of Doc. 275], 665 [Pg. 665 includes portions of Doc. 303 and Doc. 304]-666 [Pg. 666 is part of Doc. 304]

Tran Van Dinh, 666 [Pg. 666 is part of Doc. 304]

Tran Van Don., Maj. Gen., 223 [Pg. 223 is part of Doc. 88], 606 [Pg. 606 includes portions of Doc. 269 and Doc. 270], 634 [Pg. 634 includes portions of Doc. 284 and Doc. 285]

Buddhist crisis: Pagodas, raids on, 616 [Pg. 616 is part of Doc. 275], 617 [Pg. 617 is part of Doc. 275]-618 [Pg. 618 is part of Doc. 275]

Poison gas issue, 352 [Pg. 352 includes portions of Doc. 150 and Doc. 151]

Refugee priests issue, 618 [Pg. 618 is part of Doc. 275]

Cabinet “house cleaning,” 632

Coup against Diem, 474 [Pg. 474 is part of Doc. 212], 491 [Pg. 491 is part of Doc. 220], 583 [Pg. 583 is part of Doc. 256], 607 [Pg. 607 is part of Doc. 270] Generals’ plan, 618 [Pg. 618 is part of Doc. 275]-620 [Pg. 620 includes portions of Doc. 275 and Doc. 276], 642 [Pg. 642 is part of Doc. 290], 643 [Pg. 643 includes portions of Doc. 290 and Doc. 291], 653 [Pg. 653 includes portions of Doc. 298 and Doc. 299]-654 [Pg. 654 is part of Doc. 299], 656 [Pg. 656 is part of Doc. 300], 657 [Pg. 657 includes portions of Doc. 300 and Doc. 301]

Diem’s personal life, 615 [Pg. 615 is part of Doc. 275]

Martial law, 608 [Pg. 608 is part of Doc. 270] Control of government issue, 614 [Pg. 614 includes portions of Doc. 274 and Doc. 275]-615 [Pg. 615 is part of Doc. 275]

Declaration of, 616 [Pg. 616 is part of Doc. 275]

Military chain of command, 616 [Pg. 616 is part of Doc. 275]-617 [Pg. 617 is part of Doc. 275]

Nhu, opposition to, 619 [Pg. 619 is part of Doc. 275]

Officers’ loyalty to, 613 [Pg. 613 is part of Doc. 274]-614 [Pg. 614 includes portions of Doc. 274 and Doc. 275]

Tran Van Huu, 220 [Pg. 220 is part of Doc. 86]

Tran Van Khiem, 563 [Pg. 563 is part of Doc. 251]

Tran Van Lam, 581 [Pg. 581 is part of Doc. 256]

Tran Van Minh, Maj. Gen., 580 [Pg. 580 is part of Doc. 256], 581 [Pg. 581 is part of Doc. 256]

Tran Van Tu, 617 [Pg. 617 is part of Doc. 275]

Tri Quang, bonze, 284 [Pg. 284 is part of Doc. 116], 285 [Pg. 285 includes portions of Doc. 116 and Doc. 117]-286 [Pg. 286 is part of Doc. 117], 288 [Pg. 288 is part of Doc. 118], 341 [Pg. 341 is part of Doc. 142], 344 [Pg. 344 includes portions of Doc. 144 and Doc. 145], 347 [Pg. 347 is part of Doc. 146], 383 [Pg. 383 includes portions of Doc. 167 and Doc. 168], 431 [Pg. 431 is part of Doc. 194], 473 [Pg. 473 includes portions of Doc. 211 and Doc. 212]-474 [Pg. 474 is part of Doc. 212], 476 [Pg. 476 is part of Doc. 212], 618 [Pg. 618 is part of Doc. 275]

Trueheart, William C., 4 [Pg. 4 is part of Doc. 2] Buddhist crisis: Agreement of June 16, 398 [Pg. 398 includes portions of Doc. 178 and Doc. 179]-399 [Pg. 399 is part of Doc. 179], 400 [Pg. 400 is part of Doc. 180], 409 [Pg. 409 includes portions of Doc. 183 and Doc. 184]-414 [Pg. 414 is part of Doc. 186], 422 [Pg. 422 includes portions of Doc. 188 and Doc. 189], 429 [Pg. 429 is part of Doc. 193]-430 [Pg. 430 includes portions of Doc. 193 and Doc. 194], 431 [Pg. 431 is part of Doc. 194], 441 [Pg. 441 includes portions of Doc. 197 and Doc. 198]-442 [Pg. 442 is part of Doc. 198], 446 [Pg. 446 includes portions of Doc. 200 and Doc. 201], 450 [Pg. 450 includes portions of Doc. 203 and Doc. 204]-451 [Pg. 451 includes portions of Doc. 204 and Doc. 205]

Background report on, 366n [Pg. 366 includes portions of Doc. 159 and Doc. 160]

Buddhist motives and tactics, 378 [Pg. 378 includes portions of Doc. 165 and Doc. 166]-379 [Pg. 379 is part of Doc. 166]

Buddhist request for U.S. protection, 478 [Pg. 478 includes portions of Doc. 212 and Doc. 213]-479 [Pg. 479 includes portions of Doc. 213 and Doc. 214]

Commission on, 338 [Pg. 338 is part of Doc. 140], 339 [Pg. 339 includes portions of Doc. 140 and Doc. 141], 353 [Pg. 353 is part of Doc. 151], 372 [Pg. 372 is part of Doc. 162]

Communist involvement issue, 351 [Pg. 351 includes portions of Doc. 149 and Doc. 150], 429 [Pg. 429 is part of Doc. 193]

Conciliatory policy of government, 376 [Pg. 376 includes portions of Doc. 164 and Doc. 165]-377 [Pg. 377 is part of Doc. 165]

Conciliatory speech by Diem, 479 [Pg. 479 includes portions of Doc. 213 and Doc. 214]-480 [Pg. 480 is part of Doc. 214]

Control operations by government, 343 [Pg. 343 includes portions of Doc. 143 and Doc. 144]-344 [Pg. 344 includes portions of Doc. 144 and Doc. 145], 346 [Pg. 346 includes portions of Doc. 145 and Doc. 146]-347 [Pg. 347 is part of Doc. 146], 367 [Pg. 367 is part of Doc. 160]-368 [Pg. 368 is part of Doc. 160], 370 [Pg. 370 is part of Doc. 161], 379 [Pg. 379 is part of Doc. 166]-380 [Pg. 380 is part of Doc. 166]

Control operations by government,U.S. involvement in, 351 [Pg. 351 includes portions of Doc. 149 and Doc. 150]-352 [Pg. 352 includes portions of Doc. 150 and Doc. 151], 360 [Pg. 360 includes portions of Doc. 155 and Doc. 156]

Demonstrations by Buddhists, 340 [Pg. 340 includes portions of Doc. 141 and Doc. 142]-341 [Pg. 341 is part of Doc. 142], 367 [Pg. 367 is part of Doc. 160], 370 [Pg. 370 is part of Doc. 161], 372 [Pg. 372 is part of Doc. 162], 374 [Pg. 374 is part of Doc. 163], 375 [Pg. 375 is part of Doc. 164]-376 [Pg. 376 includes portions of Doc. 164 and Doc. 165], 386 [Pg. 386 is part of Doc. 169], 429 [Pg. 429 is part of Doc. 193], 430 [Pg. 430 includes portions of Doc. 193 and Doc. 194]

Demonstrations by students, 396 [Pg. 396 is part of Doc. 177]-397 [Pg. 397 includes portions of Doc. 177 and Doc. 178]

Diemls assessment of, 445 [Pg. 445 is part of Doc. 200]-446 [Pg. 446 includes portions of Doc. 200 and Doc. 201]

Diem’s meetings with Buddhists, 340 [Pg. 340 includes portions of Doc. 141 and Doc. 142]

Divisions among Buddhistsl 430-431 [Pg. 431 is part of Doc. 194]

Exploitation by government opponents, 337 [Pg. 337 includes portions of Doc. 139 and Doc. 140]-339 [Pg. 339 includes portions of Doc. 140 and Doc. 141]

Media coverage of, 370 [Pg. 370 is part of Doc. 161], 470 [Pg. 470 includes portions of Doc. 209 and Doc. 210]-471 [Pg. 471 is part of Doc. 210]

Military’s attitude toward, 377 [Pg. 377 is part of Doc. 165]-378 [Pg. 378 includes portions of Doc. 165 and Doc. 166]

Negotiations, 383 [Pg. 383 includes portions of Doc. 167 and Doc. 168]-384 [Pg. 384 is part of Doc. 168], 387 [Pg. 387 includes portions of Doc. 169 and Doc. 170]-389 [Pg. 389 includes portions of Doc. 170 and Doc. 171], 391 [Pg. 391 is part of Doc. 172], 395 [Pg. 395 includes portions of Doc. 175 and Doc. 176], 396 [Pg. 396 is part of Doc. 177]

Nhu’s meeting with Buddhists, 350 [Pg. 350 is part of Doc. 149]

Nolting’s personal involvement,Vietnamese desire for, 449 [Pg. 449 includes portions of Doc. 202 and Doc. 203]-450 [Pg. 450 includes portions of Doc. 203 and Doc. 204]

Pagodas, raids on, 595 [Pg. 595 is part of Doc. 261]-597 [Pg. 597 includes portions of Doc. 261 and Doc. 262]

Poison gas issue, 350 [Pg. 350 is part of Doc. 149]-351 [Pg. 351 includes portions of Doc. 149 and Doc. 150], 352 [Pg. 352 includes portions of Doc. 150 and Doc. 151]

Refugee priests issue, 599 [Pg. 599 is part of Doc. 263]

Religious freedom issue, 336 [Pg. 336 includes portions of Doc. 138 and Doc. 139]-337 [Pg. 337 includes portions of Doc. 139 and Doc. 140]

Resolution of crisis, U.S. recommendations re, 380 [Pg. 380 is part of Doc. 166], 385 [Pg. 385 is part of Doc. 169]-387 [Pg. 387 includes portions of Doc. 169 and Doc. 170]

Truce agreement of june 5, 356 [Pg. 356 includes portions of Doc. 152 and Doc. 153]-358 [Pg. 358 includes portions of Doc. 153 and Doc. 154], 359 [Pg. 359 includes portions of Doc. 154 and Doc. 155]-360 [Pg. 360 includes portions of Doc. 155 and Doc. 156]

U.S. disassociation from Vietnamese policy, threatened, 433 [Pg. 433 is part of Doc. 196], 442 [Pg. 442 is part of Doc. 198]-443 [Pg. 443 includes portions of Doc. 198 and Doc. 199], 446 [Pg. 446 includes portions of Doc. 200 and Doc. 201]-447 [Pg. 447 includes portions of Doc. 201 and Doc. 202]

Women’s Solidarity Movement resolution on, 362 [Pg. 362 includes portions of Doc. 156 and Doc. 157]-363 [Pg. 363 includes portions of Doc. 157 and Doc. 158], 367 [Pg. 367 is part of Doc. 160], 369 [Pg. 369 includes portions of Doc. 160 and Doc. 161], 371 [Pg. 371 includes portions of Doc. 161 and Doc. 162], 372 [Pg. 372 is part of Doc. 162]

Commercial Import Program, 360 [Pg. 360 includes portions of Doc. 155 and Doc. 156]-362 [Pg. 362 includes portions of Doc. 156 and Doc. 157]

Communist insurgency: Laos, drive to conquer, 327 [Pg. 327 includes portions of Doc. 134 and Doc. 135]-330 [Pg. 330 includes portions of Doc. 135 and Doc. 136]

Troop strength, 5 [Pg. 5 includes portions of Doc. 2 and Doc. 3]-6 [Pg. 6 is part of Doc. 3]

Counterinsurgency operations: Economic and social programs, funding for, 289n [Pg. 289 is part of Doc. 119]

National Campaign Plan, 468 [Pg. 468 is part of Doc. 209]-470 [Pg. 470 includes portions of Doc. 209 and Doc. 210]

Coup against Diem, 642 [Pg. 642 is part of Doc. 290]

Honolulu Conference, 267 [Pg. 267 is part of Doc. 107]

Joint Counterinsurgency Fund, 254 [Pg. 254 is part of Doc. 101]

Martial law, 595 [Pg. 595 is part of Doc. 261]-597 [Pg. 597 includes portions of Doc. 261 and Doc. 262]

Montagnards, disarming of, 6 [Pg. 6 is part of Doc. 3]

Praise from superiors for, 482 [Pg. 482 includes portions of Doc. 215 and Doc. 216]

Strategic hamlet program, 6 [Pg. 6 is part of Doc. 3], 267 [Pg. 267 is part of Doc. 107]

U.S. information programs and policies in Vietnam, 125 [Pg. 125 is part of Doc. 44]

Vietnam, Republic of: Change of government, possible, 399 [Pg. 399 is part of Doc. 179]

Elections, 414 [Pg. 414 is part of Doc. 186]

Opposition parties, U.S. contacts with, 399 [Pg. 399 is part of Doc. 179]

Political situation, 6 [Pg. 6 is part of Doc. 3], 400 [Pg. 400 is part of Doc. 180]-401 [Pg. 401 is part of Doc. 180], 402 [Pg. 402 is part of Doc. 181], 411 [Pg. 411 is part of Doc. 185]

Truman, Harry S., 586 [Pg. 586 is part of Doc. 258]

Trumbult Bob, 170 [Pg. 170 is part of Doc. 65]

Truong Buu Khanh, 497 [Pg. 497 is part of Doc. 226], 511 [Pg. 511 is part of Doc. 227]

Truong Vinh Le, 571 [Pg. 571 is part of Doc. 256]

Tu Dieu, 474 [Pg. 474 is part of Doc. 212]

Tuch Khiet, bonze, 383n [Pg. 383 includes portions of Doc. 167 and Doc. 168], 391 [Pg. 391 is part of Doc. 172], 396 [Pg. 396 is part of Doc. 177]

Tull, james N., 34 [Pg. 34 includes portions of Doc. 16 and Doc. 17]

Tung. See Le Quang Tung, Col.

Tuong Van, bonze, 288 [Pg. 288 is part of Doc. 118]

Tuthill, John W., 23 [Pg. 23 is part of Doc. 12]

Tuyen. See Tran Kim Tuyen.

Ty. See Le Van Ty, Gen.

U Thant, 392n [Pg. 392 is part of Doc. 173]

United Kingdom, 204 [Pg. 204 is part of Doc. 79] Criticism of Diem, 673 [Pg. 673 is part of Doc. 308]-674 [Pg. 674 is part of Doc. 308]

Military assistance to Vietnam, 24 [Pg. 24 is part of Doc. 12]

United Nations, Buddhist crisis and, 392n [Pg. 392 is part of Doc. 173]l 560

Unna,Warren, 184 [Pg. 184 is part of Doc. 68], 185 [Pg. 185 is part of Doc. 69], 205 [Pg. 205 is part of Doc. 79], 294 [Pg. 294 is part of Doc. 122], 309 [Pg. 309 includes portions of Doc. 128 and Doc. 129]

U.S. ambassadorship: Lodge’s appointment, 414 [Pg. 414 is part of Doc. 186]-416 [Pg. 416 includes portions of Doc. 187 and Doc. 188], 453 [Pg. 453 is part of Doc. 205] Arrival in Vietnam, 606n [Pg. 606 includes portions of Doc. 269 and Doc. 270]

Replacement of Nolting: Proposal for, 61 [Pg. 61 is part of Doc. 19], 64 [Pg. 64 is part of Doc. 21], 133 [Pg. 133 includes portions of Doc. 50 and Doc. 51], 140 [Pg. 140 is part of Doc. 52], 291 [Pg. 291 is part of Doc. 120]

Nolting’s request for replacement, 196 [Pg. 196 is part of Doc. 75]

U.S. economic assistance to Vietnam (see also Joint Counterinsurgency Fund): Advisers: Nhu’s attitude toward, 325 [Pg. 325 is part of Doc. 134]

Tho’s attitude toward, 326 [Pg. 326 is part of Doc. 134]

Commercial Import Program (CIP), 281 [Pg. 281 is part of Doc. 114]-283 [Pg. 283 includes portions of Doc. 114 and Doc. 115], 360 [Pg. 360 includes portions of Doc. 155 and Doc. 156]-362 [Pg. 362 includes portions of Doc. 156 and Doc. 157], 544 [Pg. 544 is part of Doc. 240]

Lend-Lease program, proposed, 501 [Pg. 501 is part of Doc. 226]-502 [Pg. 502 is part of Doc. 226]

Madame Nhu’s criticism of, 225 [Pg. 225 includes portions of Doc. 88 and Doc. 89]-226 [Pg. 226 includes portions of Doc. 89 and Doc. 90], 228 [Pg. 228 is part of Doc. 91]

Nhu’s assessment of, 223 [Pg. 223 is part of Doc. 88]

Piaster support, 48 [Pg. 48 is part of Doc. 18]

Reassessment of, proposed, 544 [Pg. 544 is part of Doc. 240]-546 [Pg. 546 includes portions of Doc. 240 and Doc. 241]

Reductions in, proposed, 304 [Pg. 304 is part of Doc. 125]

Rural development program, 62 [Pg. 62 is part of Doc. 19]

Strategic hamlet program and, 458 [Pg. 458 is part of Doc. 207]

U.S. Information Agency (USIA) (see also Voice of America): Chinese People’s Republic-Democratic

Republic of Vietnam relations, propaganda re, 354 [Pg. 354 is part of Doc. 152]-355 [Pg. 355 is part of Doc. 152]

Communist surrender program, 229 [Pg. 229 includes portions of Doc. 91 and Doc. 92]

Crop destruction and defoliation, 237n [Pg. 237 is part of Doc. 96], 241 [Pg. 241 is part of Doc. 96]

U.S. information programs and policies in Vietnam: Balance in stories, emphasis on, 172 [Pg. 172 is part of Doc. 65]-173 [Pg. 173 includes portions of Doc. 65 and Doc. 66]

Casualty information, handling of, 542 [Pg. 542 is part of Doc. 239]

Chinese People’s Republic-Democratic

Republic of Vietnam relations, propaganda re, 271 [Pg. 271 is part of Doc. 108]-272 [Pg. 272 includes portions of Doc. 108 and Doc. 109], 354 [Pg. 354 is part of Doc. 152]-355 [Pg. 355 is part of Doc. 152]

Combat activities, media coverage of, 101n [Pg. 101 is part of Doc. 30], 116 [Pg. 116 is part of Doc. 39], 128 [Pg. 128 includes portions of Doc. 45 and Doc. 46]-129 [Pg. 129 includes portions of Doc. 46 and Doc. 47]

“Confiding in newsmen” policy, 279 [Pg. 279 is part of Doc. 113]-280 [Pg. 280 includes portions of Doc. 113 and Doc. 114], 313 [Pg. 313 is part of Doc. 130], 529 [Pg. 529 includes portions of Doc. 237 and Doc. 238]-530 [Pg. 530 is part of Doc. 238] Country Team support for, 263 [Pg. 263 includes portions of Doc. 105 and Doc. 106]-264 [Pg. 264 is part of Doc. 106]

Formulation of, 263n [Pg. 263 includes portions of Doc. 105 and Doc. 106]

Credibility crisis, 621 [Pg. 621 includes portions of Doc. 276 and Doc. 277], 625 [Pg. 625 includes portions of Doc. 277 and Doc. 278]

Crop destruction and defoliation, 144 [Pg. 144 is part of Doc. 55]-145 [Pg. 145 includes portions of Doc. 55 and Doc. 56], 240 [Pg. 240 is part of Doc. 96]-241 [Pg. 241 is part of Doc. 96]

Embassy handling of press, 172 [Pg. 172 is part of Doc. 65], 536 [Pg. 536 is part of Doc. 239]-537 [Pg. 537 is part of Doc. 239]

Feature articles, encouragement of, 69 [Pg. 69 is part of Doc. 24]

History of, 531 [Pg. 531 is part of Doc. 239]

Interdepartmental group for public relations, 541 [Pg. 541 is part of Doc. 239]

Jorden’s recommendations, 171 [Pg. 171 is part of Doc. 65]-173 [Pg. 173 includes portions of Doc. 65 and Doc. 66]

Lodge in charge of official press relations, 567 [Pg. 567 is part of Doc. 254]

Manning’s recommendations, 541 [Pg. 541 is part of Doc. 239]-543 [Pg. 543 is part of Doc. 239]

Military-press contacts, 68 [Pg. 68 is part of Doc. 24]-69 [Pg. 69 is part of Doc. 24], 100 [Pg. 100 is part of Doc. 30]-101 [Pg. 101 is part of Doc. 30], 113 [Pg. 113 is part of Doc. 36], 125 [Pg. 125 is part of Doc. 44]-126 [Pg. 126 includes portions of Doc. 44 and Doc. 45]

National Campaign Plan and, 126 [Pg. 126 includes portions of Doc. 44 and Doc. 45]

Political perspective on media coverage, 503 [Pg. 503 is part of Doc. 226]-504 [Pg. 504 is part of Doc. 226], 510 [Pg. 510 is part of Doc. 226], 511 [Pg. 511 is part of Doc. 227]-512 [Pg. 512 is part of Doc. 227]

Positive media coverage, methods to obtain, 28 [Pg. 28 is part of Doc. 14]-29 [Pg. 29 is part of Doc. 14], 59 [Pg. 59 is part of Doc. 19], 65 [Pg. 65 includes portions of Doc. 22 and Doc. 23]-67 [Pg. 67 includes portions of Doc. 23 and Doc. 24], 102 [Pg. 102 includes portions of Doc. 30 and Doc. 31], 507 [Pg. 507 is part of Doc. 226]

Press briefings by officials, 64 [Pg. 64 is part of Doc. 21], 66 [Pg. 66 is part of Doc. 23]-67 [Pg. 67 includes portions of Doc. 23 and Doc. 24], 96 [Pg. 96 is part of Doc. 28], 313 [Pg. 313 is part of Doc. 130]

Press involvement in reassessment of Vietnam situation, 541 [Pg. 541 is part of Doc. 239]-542 [Pg. 542 is part of Doc. 239]

Single spokesman in Vietnam, proposed, 151 [Pg. 151 is part of Doc. 59]

U.S. officials’ press relations, improvement of, 543 [Pg. 543 is part of Doc. 239]

Vietnamese Government’s press relations, efforts to improve, 96 [Pg. 96 is part of Doc. 28], 171 [Pg. 171 is part of Doc. 65], 313 [Pg. 313 is part of Doc. 130], 530 [Pg. 530 is part of Doc. 238]

Vietnamese restrictions on press and, 67 [Pg. 67 includes portions of Doc. 23 and Doc. 24]-68 [Pg. 68 is part of Doc. 24]

Vietnamese soldiers, improved image for, 126 [Pg. 126 includes portions of Doc. 44 and Doc. 45]

U.S. Information Service (USIS): Communist surrender program, 19 [Pg. 19 includes portions of Doc. 10 and Doc. 11]

Manning’s assessment of, 537 [Pg. 537 is part of Doc. 239]

U.S. medical program in Vietnam, 29 [Pg. 29 is part of Doc. 14]-30 [Pg. 30 includes portions of Doc. 14 and Doc. 15], 266 [Pg. 266 is part of Doc. 107]

U.S. military assistance to Vietnam (see also Military Assistance Command, U.S.): Communications systems, 75 [Pg. 75 is part of Doc. 26]-77 [Pg. 77 is part of Doc. 26]

Construction program, 46 [Pg. 46 is part of Doc. 18]-47 [Pg. 47 is part of Doc. 18]

Cost data on, 45 [Pg. 45 is part of Doc. 18]-49 [Pg. 49 includes portions of Doc. 18 and Doc. 19]

Funding for: 1964, 268 [Pg. 268 is part of Doc. 107]

1964-1969, 276 [Pg. 276 is part of Doc. 111]-277 [Pg. 277 is part of Doc. 112], 292 [Pg. 292 is part of Doc. 121]-294 [Pg. 294 is part of Doc. 122], 333 [Pg. 333 includes portions of Doc. 136 and Doc. 137]-335 [Pg. 335 includes portions of Doc. 137 and Doc. 138]

Intelligence program, 78 [Pg. 78 is part of Doc. 26]-79 [Pg. 79 is part of Doc. 26]

Jets, provision of, 26 [Pg. 26 includes portions of Doc. 12 and Doc. 13]-27 [Pg. 27 is part of Doc. 13], 34 [Pg. 34 includes portions of Doc. 16 and Doc. 17] U.S. decision against, 102 [Pg. 102 includes portions of Doc. 30 and Doc. 31]-103 [Pg. 103 includes portions of Doc. 31 and Doc. 32], 115 [Pg. 115 is part of Doc. 38], 197 [Pg. 197 is part of Doc. 76]-198 [Pg. 198 includes portions of Doc. 76 and Doc. 77], 260 [Pg. 260 is part of Doc. 104]-261 [Pg. 261 includes portions of Doc. 104 and Doc. 105]

Lend-Lease program, proposed, 501 [Pg. 501 is part of Doc. 226]-502 [Pg. 502 is part of Doc. 226]

Phase-out plan, 182 [Pg. 182 is part of Doc. 67]-183 [Pg. 183 includes portions of Doc. 67 and Doc. 68]

Positive impacts, 50 [Pg. 50 is part of Doc. 19]

Reductions, proposed, 185n [Pg. 185 is part of Doc. 69], 214 [Pg. 214 is part of Doc. 82], 215 [Pg. 215 includes portions of Doc. 83 and Doc. 84]-216 [Pg. 216 includes portions of Doc. 84 and Doc. 85], 218 [Pg. 218 is part of Doc. 85]

U.S. military involvement in Vietnam (see also Military Assistance Command, Vietnam): Advisers: Diem’s criticisms of, 209 [Pg. 209 is part of Doc. 81]-210 [Pg. 210 is part of Doc. 81], 213 [Pg. 213 includes portions of Doc. 81 and Doc. 82], 217 [Pg. 217 is part of Doc. 85]

Improvements in advisory system, 227 [Pg. 227 is part of Doc. 91]-228 [Pg. 228 is part of Doc. 91], 235 [Pg. 235 includes portions of Doc. 94 and Doc. 95]

Increase in number of, 75 [Pg. 75 is part of Doc. 26]

Local-level advisers, 59 [Pg. 59 is part of Doc. 19]

Nhu’s attitude toward, 324 [Pg. 324 includes portions of Doc. 133 and Doc. 134]-325 [Pg. 325 is part of Doc. 134], 462 [Pg. 462 is part of Doc. 207]

Reduction of, proposed, 235 [Pg. 235 includes portions of Doc. 94 and Doc. 95], 269 [Pg. 269 is part of Doc. 107]-270 [Pg. 270 includes portions of Doc. 107 and Doc. 108]

Vietnamese attitudes toward, 462 [Pg. 462 is part of Doc. 207]

Vietnamese military’s complaints about, 224 [Pg. 224 is part of Doc. 88]

Air interdiction missions (see also Farmgate operation), 175 [Pg. 175 is part of Doc. 66], 177 [Pg. 177 is part of Doc. 66]

Ceiling on forces, 135n [Pg. 135 is part of Doc. 51], 244 [Pg. 244 is part of Doc. 97]-245 [Pg. 245 includes portions of Doc. 97 and Doc. 98]

Cost data on, 45 [Pg. 45 is part of Doc. 18]-49 [Pg. 49 includes portions of Doc. 18 and Doc. 19]

Diem’s endorsement of U.S. presence, 308 [Pg. 308 includes portions of Doc. 127 and Doc. 128]-309 [Pg. 309 includes portions of Doc. 128 and Doc. 129]

Domestic U.S. opposition, 430 [Pg. 430 includes portions of Doc. 193 and Doc. 194], 510 [Pg. 510 is part of Doc. 226]

Force reductions, proposed, 243 [Pg. 243 includes portions of Doc. 96 and Doc. 97]-245 [Pg. 245 includes portions of Doc. 97 and Doc. 98], 268 [Pg. 268 is part of Doc. 107], 276n [Pg. 276 is part of Doc. 111] Comprehensive Plan and, 44 [Pg. 44 is part of Doc. 18]-45 [Pg. 45 is part of Doc. 18]

Felt’s plan, 591 [Pg. 591 is part of Doc. 260]-594 [Pg. 594 is part of Doc. 260]

Krulak’s position, 464 [Pg. 464 is part of Doc. 207]-465 [Pg. 465 is part of Doc. 207]

Limiting factors, 293 [Pg. 293 is part of Doc. 121]

Nhu’s demand for reductions, 223 [Pg. 223 is part of Doc. 88]-224 [Pg. 224 is part of Doc. 88], 246 [Pg. 246 includes portions of Doc. 98 and Doc. 99]-247 [Pg. 247 includes portions of Doc. 99 and Doc. 100], 294n [Pg. 294 is part of Doc. 122]

Nhu’s demand for reductions, U.S. response to, 294 [Pg. 294 is part of Doc. 122]-296 [Pg. 296 includes portions of Doc. 122 and Doc. 123], 303 [Pg. 303 includes portions of Doc. 124 and Doc. 125]-306 [Pg. 306 includes portions of Doc. 125 and Doc. 126], 308 [Pg. 308 includes portions of Doc. 127 and Doc. 128]-309 [Pg. 309 includes portions of Doc. 128 and Doc. 129]

Thompson’s position, 193 [Pg. 193 is part of Doc. 73], 201 [Pg. 201 is part of Doc. 78]

Helicopters, rule of engagement for, 88 [Pg. 88 is part of Doc. 26], 117 [Pg. 117 is part of Doc. 40]

Mansfield’s warning about, 587 [Pg. 587 is part of Doc. 258]

Media coverage of combat activities, 101n [Pg. 101 is part of Doc. 30], 116 [Pg. 116 is part of Doc. 39], 128 [Pg. 128 includes portions of Doc. 45 and Doc. 46]-129 [Pg. 129 includes portions of Doc. 46 and Doc. 47]

Performance of personnel, 93 [Pg. 93 is part of Doc. 26]

Rotation program for personnel, 509 [Pg. 509 is part of Doc. 226]

Vietnamese attitude toward, 175 [Pg. 175 is part of Doc. 66]-176 [Pg. 176 is part of Doc. 66]

War footing, possible, 71 [Pg. 71 is part of Doc. 25]

Weapons systems, value of, 265 [Pg. 265 is part of Doc. 107]

Van Thanh Cao, Brig. Gen., 489 [Pg. 489 is part of Doc. 220]-490 [Pg. 490 is part of Doc. 220]

Vann, Lt. Col. John P., 1 [Pg. 1 is part of Doc. 1]

Vien. See Cao Van Vien, Col.

Viet Congo See Communist insurgency.

Vietnam. See: Civil Guard

Civilian Irregular Defense Group program

Communist insurgency

Communist surrender (Chieu Hoi) program

Comprehensive Plan for South Vietnam

Coup against Diem

Crop destruction program

Defoliant operations

Farmgate operation

Martial law

Media coverage of Vietnam

Military Assistance Command, Vietnam

Montagnards

Self Defense Corps

Strategic hamlet program

Third country economic assistance to Vietnam

Third country military assistance to Vietnam

U.S.information programs and policies in Vietnam

U.S.medical program in Vietnam

U.S.military involvement in Vietnam

Vietnam, Democratic Republic of

Vietnam, Republic of

Vietnam, Democratic Republic of (DRV): China, People’s Republic of, relations with, 416 [Pg. 416 includes portions of Doc. 187 and Doc. 188]-422 [Pg. 422 includes portions of Doc. 188 and Doc. 189] U.S. propaganda re, 271 [Pg. 271 is part of Doc. 108]-272 [Pg. 272 includes portions of Doc. 108 and Doc. 109], 354 [Pg. 354 is part of Doc. 152]-355 [Pg. 355 is part of Doc. 152]

Communist insurgency, support for, 31 [Pg. 31 is part of Doc. 15]

Crop destruction and defoliation, propaganda re, 240 [Pg. 240 is part of Doc. 96], 242 [Pg. 242 is part of Doc. 96]

Diem, criticism of, 673 [Pg. 673 is part of Doc. 308]

Domestic situation, 417 [Pg. 417 is part of Doc. 188]

Laos, policy toward, 417 [Pg. 417 is part of Doc. 188], 420 [Pg. 420 is part of Doc. 188]-421 [Pg. 421 is part of Doc. 188]

Soviet Union, relations with, 416 [Pg. 416 includes portions of Doc. 187 and Doc. 188]-422 [Pg. 422 includes portions of Doc. 188 and Doc. 189]

Strategic hamlet program, propaganda about, 438 [Pg. 438 is part of Doc. 197]-439 [Pg. 439 is part of Doc. 197], 440 [Pg. 440 is part of Doc. 197]

U.S. attacks on: Hilsman’s position, 191 [Pg. 191 is part of Doc. 72]-192 [Pg. 192 is part of Doc. 72]

Wheeler Mission recommendation for, 73n [Pg. 73 is part of Doc. 26], 91 [Pg. 91 is part of Doc. 26]-92 [Pg. 92 is part of Doc. 26], 94 [Pg. 94 includes portions of Doc. 26 and Doc. 27]

War objectives, 417 [Pg. 417 is part of Doc. 188]

Vietnam, Republic of (see also Buddhist crisis; Counterinsurgency operations; Martial law; Republic of Vietnam Armed Forces; U.S. economic assistance to Vietnam; U.S. military assistance to Vietnam): Cabinet “house cleaning,” 632

Catholics in government, 467 [Pg. 467 is part of Doc. 208]

Change of government, possible (see also Coup against Diem): Bowles’ endorsement of, 482 [Pg. 482 includes portions of Doc. 215 and Doc. 216]-483 [Pg. 483 includes portions of Doc. 216 and Doc. 217], 518 [Pg. 518 includes portions of Doc. 230 and Doc. 231]-519 [Pg. 519 is part of Doc. 231]

CIA assessment of, 569 [Pg. 569 includes portions of Doc. 255 and Doc. 256]-583 [Pg. 583 is part of Doc. 256]

Constitutional provisions, 569 [Pg. 569 includes portions of Doc. 255 and Doc. 256]-570 [Pg. 570 is part of Doc. 256]

Crisis indicators, 319 [Pg. 319 is part of Doc. 133]-320 [Pg. 320 is part of Doc. 133]

Nhu as possible successor, 262 [Pg. 262 is part of Doc. 105], 320 [Pg. 320 is part of Doc. 133], 321 [Pg. 321 is part of Doc. 133], 323 [Pg. 323 is part of Doc. 133]-324 [Pg. 324 includes portions of Doc. 133 and Doc. 134], 485 [Pg. 485 is part of Doc. 217], 571 [Pg. 571 is part of Doc. 256]-574 [Pg. 574 is part of Doc. 256], 582 [Pg. 582 is part of Doc. 256]

Nolting’s views on, 466 [Pg. 466 is part of Doc. 208], 467 [Pg. 467 is part of Doc. 208]

Persons likely to be involved, 318 [Pg. 318 is part of Doc. 133]-319 [Pg. 319 is part of Doc. 133], 578 [Pg. 578 is part of Doc. 256]-583 [Pg. 583 is part of Doc. 256]

Scenarios for, 320 [Pg. 320 is part of Doc. 133]-322 [Pg. 322 is part of Doc. 133]

SNIE on, 483 [Pg. 483 includes portions of Doc. 216 and Doc. 217]-485 [Pg. 485 is part of Doc. 217]

U.S. contingency planning, 262 [Pg. 262 is part of Doc. 105], 316 [Pg. 316 includes portions of Doc. 132 and Doc. 133]-324 [Pg. 324 includes portions of Doc. 133 and Doc. 134], 394 [Pg. 394 includes portions of Doc. 174 and Doc. 175]-395 [Pg. 395 includes portions of Doc. 175 and Doc. 176], 399 [Pg. 399 is part of Doc. 179], 481 [Pg. 481 is part of Doc. 215]-482 [Pg. 482 includes portions of Doc. 215 and Doc. 216], 555 [Pg. 555 is part of Doc. 246], 574 [Pg. 574 is part of Doc. 256]-578 [Pg. 578 is part of Doc. 256]

Civil service personnel, 194 [Pg. 194 is part of Doc. 73]

Defense agreement with U.S., proposed, 293 [Pg. 293 is part of Doc. 121]

Economic situation, 544 [Pg. 544 is part of Doc. 240]-545 [Pg. 545 is part of Doc. 240] Budget deficit, 181 [Pg. 181 is part of Doc. 67]

Improvements in, 83 [Pg. 83 is part of Doc. 26]

Piaster shortage, 270 [Pg. 270 includes portions of Doc. 107 and Doc. 108]

Planning, need for, 55 [Pg. 55 is part of Doc. 19]-56 [Pg. 56 is part of Doc. 19]

Educational system, 83 [Pg. 83 is part of Doc. 26], 223 [Pg. 223 is part of Doc. 88]

Elections, 229 [Pg. 229 includes portions of Doc. 91 and Doc. 92], 414 [Pg. 414 is part of Doc. 186], 660 [Pg. 660 is part of Doc. 303]

Foreign policy, 57 [Pg. 57 is part of Doc. 19], 60 [Pg. 60 is part of Doc. 19], 326 [Pg. 326 is part of Doc. 134]-327 [Pg. 327 includes portions of Doc. 134 and Doc. 135], 375 [Pg. 375 is part of Doc. 164]

Importance to U.S., Mansfield’s assessment of, 585 [Pg. 585 is part of Doc. 258]-588 [Pg. 588 is part of Doc. 258]

Imports, 281 [Pg. 281 is part of Doc. 114]-283 [Pg. 283 includes portions of Doc. 114 and Doc. 115], 360 [Pg. 360 includes portions of Doc. 155 and Doc. 156]-362 [Pg. 362 includes portions of Doc. 156 and Doc. 157]

Kennedy’s commitment to, 503 [Pg. 503 is part of Doc. 226], 504 [Pg. 504 is part of Doc. 226]

Opposition parties, government attitude toward, 220 [Pg. 220 is part of Doc. 86]

Opposition parties, U.S. contacts with: Contingency planning and, 319 [Pg. 319 is part of Doc. 133], 394 [Pg. 394 includes portions of Doc. 174 and Doc. 175], 399 [Pg. 399 is part of Doc. 179]

Forrestal’s position, 105 [Pg. 105 includes portions of Doc. 32 and Doc. 33]-106 [Pg. 106 is part of Doc. 33], 132 [Pg. 132 includes portions of Doc. 49 and Doc. 50]-133 [Pg. 133 includes portions of Doc. 50 and Doc. 51]

“No contact” policy, 65 [Pg. 65 includes portions of Doc. 22 and Doc. 23]

Nolting’s position, 126 [Pg. 126 includes portions of Doc. 44 and Doc. 45]-128 [Pg. 128 includes portions of Doc. 45 and Doc. 46]

Police and security services, 107 [Pg. 107 is part of Doc. 34]-108 [Pg. 108 includes portions of Doc. 34 and Doc. 35], 577 [Pg. 577 is part of Doc. 256]

Political allegiance of people, development of, 81 [Pg. 81 is part of Doc. 26]-83 [Pg. 83 is part of Doc. 26], 193 [Pg. 193 is part of Doc. 73], 234 [Pg. 234 is part of Doc. 94]-235 [Pg. 235 includes portions of Doc. 94 and Doc. 95]

Political prisoners, 229 [Pg. 229 includes portions of Doc. 91 and Doc. 92]

Political situation, 31 [Pg. 31 is part of Doc. 15] Alienation within government, 6 [Pg. 6 is part of Doc. 3], 57 [Pg. 57 is part of Doc. 19]-58 [Pg. 58 is part of Doc. 19]

CIA assessment of, 423 [Pg. 423 includes portions of Doc. 189 and Doc. 190]-425 [Pg. 425 is part of Doc. 190]

Democratization plans, 82 [Pg. 82 is part of Doc. 26], 427 [Pg. 427 is part of Doc. 192]-428 [Pg. 428 is part of Doc. 192]

Diem as obstacle to reform, 234 [Pg. 234 is part of Doc. 94]-235 [Pg. 235 includes portions of Doc. 94 and Doc. 95]

U.S. promotion of reform, 261 [Pg. 261 includes portions of Doc. 104 and Doc. 105]-262 [Pg. 262 is part of Doc. 105], 400 [Pg. 400 is part of Doc. 180]-404 [Pg. 404 includes portions of Doc. 181 and Doc. 182], 411 [Pg. 411 is part of Doc. 185]

Province chief-government relationship, 222 [Pg. 222 is part of Doc. 88]-223 [Pg. 223 is part of Doc. 88]

Province committees for dispensing of government funds, 217 [Pg. 217 is part of Doc. 85]-218 [Pg. 218 is part of Doc. 85]

Public relations policies, 497 [Pg. 497 is part of Doc. 226]-500 [Pg. 500 is part of Doc. 226], 502 [Pg. 502 is part of Doc. 226]

Regional programs, 325 [Pg. 325 is part of Doc. 134]-326 [Pg. 326 is part of Doc. 134]

Religious Council, proposed, 314 [Pg. 314 is part of Doc. 131], 365 [Pg. 365 is part of Doc. 159], 382 [Pg. 382 is part of Doc. 167]-383 [Pg. 383 includes portions of Doc. 167 and Doc. 168]

Self-sufficiency for, 324 [Pg. 324 includes portions of Doc. 133 and Doc. 134]-325 [Pg. 325 is part of Doc. 134]

Trade union movement, 106 [Pg. 106 is part of Doc. 33]

U.S. ambassadorship, 414 [Pg. 414 is part of Doc. 186]-416 [Pg. 416 includes portions of Doc. 187 and Doc. 188], 453 [Pg. 453 is part of Doc. 205], 606n [Pg. 606 includes portions of Doc. 269 and Doc. 270]

U.S. criticism, government reaction to 161-162 [Pg. 162 includes portions of Doc. 62 and Doc. 63]

U.S. influence with government officials, 87 [Pg. 87 is part of Doc. 26]

U.S. public attitude toward, 502 [Pg. 502 is part of Doc. 226]-503 [Pg. 503 is part of Doc. 226], 504 [Pg. 504 is part of Doc. 226], 509 [Pg. 509 is part of Doc. 226]

Village cult committees, 365 [Pg. 365 is part of Doc. 159]

Vo Van Hai, 620n [Pg. 620 includes portions of Doc. 275 and Doc. 276]

Voice of America (VOA), 241 [Pg. 241 is part of Doc. 96], 354 [Pg. 354 is part of Doc. 152], 355 [Pg. 355 is part of Doc. 152], 561n [Pg. 561 is part of Doc. 250] Broadcast capabilities, 355 [Pg. 355 is part of Doc. 152]-356 [Pg. 356 includes portions of Doc. 152 and Doc. 153]

Buddhist crisis, broadcasts on, 618 [Pg. 618 is part of Doc. 275], 619 [Pg. 619 is part of Doc. 275], 629n [Pg. 629 is part of Doc. 281], 635 [Pg. 635 includes portions of Doc. 285 and Doc. 286], 636 [Pg. 636 includes portions of Doc. 287 and Doc. 288], 651 [Pg. 651 includes portions of Doc. 297 and Doc. 298]-652 [Pg. 652 is part of Doc. 298]

Nhu’s removal from power, broadcast of U.S. demand for, 636 [Pg. 636 includes portions of Doc. 287 and Doc. 288]-637 [Pg. 637 is part of Doc. 288], 640 [Pg. 640 is part of Doc. 289], 649 [Pg. 649 is part of Doc. 296]

Vu Van Mau, 547 [Pg. 547 is part of Doc. 241] Buddhist crisis, 396n [Pg. 396 is part of Doc. 177] Madame Nhu’s attacks on Buddhists 561

Refugee priests issue, 599 [Pg. 599 is part of Doc. 263]

Diem’s relations with press, 326 [Pg. 326 is part of Doc. 134]

Resignation, 610 [Pg. 610 includes portions of Doc. 270, Doc. 271, and Doc. 272], 660 [Pg. 660 is part of Doc. 303]

Rusk, meeting with, 219 [Pg. 219 includes portions of Doc. 85 and Doc. 86]-220 [Pg. 220 is part of Doc. 86]

Vietnam’s foreign policy, 326 [Pg. 326 is part of Doc. 134]-327 [Pg. 327 includes portions of Doc. 134 and Doc. 135]

Washington Daily News, 117n [Pg. 117 is part of Doc. 40]

Washington Post, 2 [Pg. 2 is part of Doc. 1], 113 [Pg. 113 is part of Doc. 36], 184 [Pg. 184 is part of Doc. 68], 294n [Pg. 294 is part of Doc. 122], 301 [Pg. 301 is part of Doc. 124], 309n [Pg. 309 includes portions of Doc. 128 and Doc. 129], 558n [Pg. 558 is part of Doc. 248]

Weede, Maj. Gen. Richard G., 327 [Pg. 327 includes portions of Doc. 134 and Doc. 135]

Wheeler, Gen. Earle G., 3 [Pg. 3 includes portions of Doc. 1 and Doc. 2], 29 [Pg. 29 is part of Doc. 14], 96 [Pg. 96 is part of Doc. 28], 270 [Pg. 270 includes portions of Doc. 107 and Doc. 108] Counterinsurgency operations, 113 [Pg. 113 is part of Doc. 36]

MACV, command autonomy for, 113n [Pg. 113 is part of Doc. 36]

Media coverage of Vietnam, 113 [Pg. 113 is part of Doc. 36]

Mission report, 73 [Pg. 73 is part of Doc. 26]

Strategic hamlet program, 113 [Pg. 113 is part of Doc. 36]

U.S. information programs and policies in Vietnam, 113 [Pg. 113 is part of Doc. 36]

Wheeler Mission, 30 [Pg. 30 includes portions of Doc. 14 and Doc. 15], 31 [Pg. 31 is part of Doc. 15]-32 [Pg. 32 includes portions of Doc. 15 and Doc. 16], 63 [Pg. 63 includes portions of Doc. 20 and Doc. 21]-64 [Pg. 64 is part of Doc. 21] Appointment of, 3 [Pg. 3 includes portions of Doc. 1 and Doc. 2]

Report of, 73 [Pg. 73 is part of Doc. 26]-94 [Pg. 94 includes portions of Doc. 26 and Doc. 27]

White, Lincoln, 367n [Pg. 367 is part of Doc. 160]

Williams, Ogden, 107 [Pg. 107 is part of Doc. 34]

Wilson, Charles, 137 [Pg. 137 is part of Doc. 52]

Wilson, Donald M., 28 [Pg. 28 is part of Doc. 14], 65 [Pg. 65 includes portions of Doc. 22 and Doc. 23]-67 [Pg. 67 includes portions of Doc. 23 and Doc. 24], 96 [Pg. 96 is part of Doc. 28], 201 [Pg. 201 is part of Doc. 78], 279 [Pg. 279 is part of Doc. 113]-280 [Pg. 280 includes portions of Doc. 113 and Doc. 114], 315 [Pg. 315 is part of Doc. 132], 672n [Pg. 672 includes portions of Doc. 307 and Doc. 308]

Women’s Solidarity Movement, 194 [Pg. 194 is part of Doc. 73], 225 [Pg. 225 includes portions of Doc. 88 and Doc. 89], 228 [Pg. 228 is part of Doc. 91], 427 [Pg. 427 is part of Doc. 192]-428 [Pg. 428 is part of Doc. 192] Buddhist crisis, resolution on, 362 [Pg. 362 includes portions of Doc. 156 and Doc. 157]-364 [Pg. 364 includes portions of Doc. 158 and Doc. 159], 367 [Pg. 367 is part of Doc. 160], 368 [Pg. 368 is part of Doc. 160], 369 [Pg. 369 includes portions of Doc. 160 and Doc. 161], 371 [Pg. 371 includes portions of Doc. 161 and Doc. 162], 372 [Pg. 372 is part of Doc. 162], 397 [Pg. 397 includes portions of Doc. 177 and Doc. 178]

Wood, Chalmers B., 129n [Pg. 129 includes portions of Doc. 46 and Doc. 47], 193 [Pg. 193 is part of Doc. 73], 198 [Pg. 198 includes portions of Doc. 76 and Doc. 77], 235n [Pg. 235 includes portions of Doc. 94 and Doc. 95], 428n [Pg. 428 is part of Doc. 192], 429n [Pg. 429 is part of Doc. 193], 466 [Pg. 466 is part of Doc. 208] Buddhist crisis, 342n [Pg. 342 is part of Doc. 143], 442n [Pg. 442 is part of Doc. 198], 487n [Pg. 487 is part of Doc. 219], 488n [Pg. 488 includes portions of Doc. 219 and Doc. 220] Agreement of June 16, 451n [Pg. 451 includes portions of Doc. 204 and Doc. 205]

Background report on, 366n [Pg. 366 includes portions of Doc. 159 and Doc. 160]

Cambodia’s position, 404n [Pg. 404 includes portions of Doc. 181 and Doc. 182]

Demonstrations by Buddhists, 348n [Pg. 348 is part of Doc. 147]

Media coverage of, 472n [Pg. 472 is part of Doc. 211]

Negotiations, 393n [Pg. 393 is part of Doc. 174]

Poison gas issue, 349n [Pg. 349 includes portions of Doc. 148 and Doc. 149]

Religious freedom issue, 335n [Pg. 335 includes portions of Doc. 137 and Doc. 138]

Resolution of crisis, U.S. recommendations re, 381n [Pg. 381 includes portions of Doc. 166 and Doc. 167]

U.S. disassociation from Vietnamese policy, threatened, 433n [Pg. 433 is part of Doc. 196], 443n [Pg. 443 includes portions of Doc. 198 and Doc. 199]

Women’s Solidarity Movement resolution on, 363n [Pg. 363 includes portions of Doc. 157 and Doc. 158]

Comprehensive Plan for South Vietnam, 148n [Pg. 148 is part of Doc. 57]

Counterinsurgency operations, 131 [Pg. 131 includes portions of Doc. 48 and Doc. 49], 173n [Pg. 173 includes portions of Doc. 65 and Doc. 66]

Crop destruction and defoliation, 150 [Pg. 150 includes portions of Doc. 58 and Doc. 59]

Farmgate operation, augmentation of, 32 [Pg. 32 includes portions of Doc. 15 and Doc. 16], 34n [Pg. 34 includes portions of Doc. 16 and Doc. 17]

Joint Counterinsurgency Fund, 195n [Pg. 195 includes portions of Doc. 73, Doc. 74, and Doc. 75], 212n [Pg. 212 is part of Doc. 81], 215n [Pg. 215 includes portions of Doc. 83 and Doc. 84], 255n [Pg. 255 is part of Doc. 101], 259n [Pg. 259 is part of Doc. 103]

Lodge’s appointment as ambassador, 415n [Pg. 415 is part of Doc. 187]

Mansfield report, 70 [Pg. 70 is part of Doc. 25]-72 [Pg. 72 is part of Doc. 25], 122n [Pg. 122 includes portions of Doc. 41 and Doc. 42]

Media coverage of Vietnam, 34n [Pg. 34 includes portions of Doc. 16 and Doc. 17], 100n [Pg. 100 is part of Doc. 30]

RVNAF paramilitary force levels, 131n [Pg. 131 includes portions of Doc. 48 and Doc. 49]

Special Group for Counterinsurgency, 28 [Pg. 28 is part of Doc. 14], 103 [Pg. 103 includes portions of Doc. 31 and Doc. 32], 201 [Pg. 201 is part of Doc. 78]

Strategic hamlet program, 130 [Pg. 130 includes portions of Doc. 47 and Doc. 48]-131 [Pg. 131 includes portions of Doc. 48 and Doc. 49]

Thompson’s U.S. visit, 203 [Pg. 203 includes portions of Doc. 78 and Doc. 79]-206 [Pg. 206 includes portions of Doc. 79 and Doc. 80]

U.S. information programs and policies in Vietnam, 169n [Pg. 169 is part of Doc. 65] Chinese People’s Republic-Democratic Republic of Vietnam relations, propaganda re, 271n [Pg. 271 is part of Doc. 108], 355n [Pg. 355 is part of Doc. 152]

Combat activities, media coverage of, 116n [Pg. 116 is part of Doc. 39], 128n [Pg. 128 includes portions of Doc. 45 and Doc. 46]

Military-press contacts, 125 [Pg. 125 is part of Doc. 44]-126 [Pg. 126 includes portions of Doc. 44 and Doc. 45]

U.S.military assistance to Vietnam, provision of jets, 26 [Pg. 26 includes portions of Doc. 12 and Doc. 13]-27 [Pg. 27 is part of Doc. 13], 102n [Pg. 102 includes portions of Doc. 30 and Doc. 31], 197 [Pg. 197 is part of Doc. 76]-198 [Pg. 198 includes portions of Doc. 76 and Doc. 77]

U.S.military involvement in Vietnam: Ceiling on forces, 243 [Pg. 243 includes portions of Doc. 96 and Doc. 97]-245 [Pg. 245 includes portions of Doc. 97 and Doc. 98]

Force reductions, proposed, 243 [Pg. 243 includes portions of Doc. 96 and Doc. 97]-245 [Pg. 245 includes portions of Doc. 97 and Doc. 98]

Helicopters, rules of engagement for, 117n [Pg. 117 is part of Doc. 40]

Vietnam, Republic of: Change of government, possible, 317 [Pg. 317 is part of Doc. 133]-324 [Pg. 324 includes portions of Doc. 133 and Doc. 134], 394n [Pg. 394 includes portions of Doc. 174 and Doc. 175]

Political reforms, 261 [Pg. 261 includes portions of Doc. 104 and Doc. 105], 402n [Pg. 402 is part of Doc. 181]

Woolf, Donald t., 259n [Pg. 259 is part of Doc. 103]

Wright, Adm. Jerauld, 196 [Pg. 196 is part of Doc. 75]

Wright, Marshall, 497 [Pg. 497 is part of Doc. 226], 511 [Pg. 511 is part of Doc. 227]

Y, Col., 546 [Pg. 546 includes portions of Doc. 240 and Doc. 241]

Yuen Tse Kien, 566 [Pg. 566 is part of Doc. 253]
